Municipium Ecclesiasticum, OR, THE Rights, Liberties, and Authorities Of The
Christian Church: Asserted against all Oppressive Doctrines, and Constitutions.

Occasioned by Dr. Wabe's Book, concerning the Authority of Christian Princes
over Ecclesiastical Synods, etc.

Hilar. in Psalm. 52. Et plerumque nos tanquam pro debiti ossicii Religione pie
adulari Regibus existimamus quia in corpus nostrum sit aliquid Potestatis:
quibus nihil ultra in nos licet quam febri, quam incendio, quam naufragio, quam
ruinae. His enim casibus corporum pro summa potestate desaeviunt, and propter
brevem dolorem Libertatem Ecclesiae, spei nostrae fiduciam, confessionem Dei
addicimus -- Inutilis est humanae gratiae and irreligiosa sectatio.

Cypr. Ep. 40. Sect. 4. Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegum est quodcunque
humano furore instituitur, ut dispositio divina violetur, and Ep. 63. Sect. 11.
Neque hominis consuetudinem sequi oporter, sed Dei veritatem.

Printed and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London, and Westminster, 1697.

TO THE Reverend Dr. Wake, Chaplain in Ordinary To His Majesty.
THE Irreligious World is not so dull, as to need information what ways are
most effectual to the suppression of Christianity. A popular contempt of the
Mysteries, and a radical aversion to the Authority of the Church does the
business smoothly, and without hazard. By Ambition and Avarice, by Fanaticism
and Sedition, the latter is wholly extinct; and on the sense hereof Infidelity
and Heresy have made their insolent advances against the former. In condolence
whereat, the Letter to a Convocation-Man seems to have been offered to the
World for the use and freedom of the Convocations, against the present
Impieties in Religion, and rigorous Opinions in matter of Law. 'Twas natural
hereupon to expect the insurrection of the Insidels and Heretics against the
Proposals and Power of a Convocation, to prevent their Censure, as well as an
assertion of the Laws and Judgments herein from the hands of Lawyers. But who
would have dreamed that any Clergyman of Dignity and Value in the Church
should lift up his heel against her? The wounds of Adversaries, how sharp
soever, are never mortal to the Church, The judgment of Lawyers is ambulatory,
according to the prevalency of Times and Powers, they being only Interpreters
of what the Kingdom admits or constitutes for Right and Law. And therefore when
the Princes and the Nation submitted to the Pope, the Courts acknowledged and
acted upon his Right or Claim of Supremacy; and when the Nation could shake it
o^, and the King grasp it, then past the Judgments and Rules of Court
accordingly. Nor can they be blamed herein, for so their Office determines
them. But when the great Laminaries of the Church shall sign the Theta upon her
Rights, Liberties, and Authorities, Divine, and Humane, and this voluntarily,
and without any Bribe offered, or Menace denounced, the Concession is taken for
sincere, and for that cause just; so that the Church of England suffers more by
your Book herein, than by all other Lay or Law Oppositions whatsoever. And it is
not improbable, but that it may animate the Secular Powers, not only to lay
greater restrictions on the Church, but even to abolish all the remainder of
her legal Rights and Powers, and put us out of all our Interest in the great
Charter of the Land. For the Lay Powers, how strongly soever they desire to
settle themselves over all interests, yet generally have such a modesty toward
what is Divine or Sacred, as to attempt nothing no^oriously violent without the
concession of the Church, or her most Eminent Doctors. So K. H. VIII of Famous
Memory, notwithstanding all his Claims at common Law, and his interest in his
Parliament, through Power, and the Rewards by Abbey and Church Lands, could not
have made himself so absolute in Ecclesiasticals, had he not procured before
the submission of the Clergy; nor could he have compassed that, but through the
terror of a Praemunire, under which they had fallen, and upon which he was
resolved to follow his blow, and so to bend or break them. And yet this Act of
a Popish, Unreformed, and well nigh Outlawed Convocation extorted for fear of
ruin, and through ignorance, and non-suspicion of the Acts consequent upon it,
prejudges more against our Liberties than all Secular constitutions could
pessibly have done without it. And must we now consecrate all those procedures,
the results of which we seel in the total ruin of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and Christian Piety, by our voluntary Pleas and Acclamations; and to gratisie
the Civil Powers to an Arbitrary utmost, violate the most important Truths of
Principles and Histories, treat the Synods of the Church with spite and
contumely, and recommend the greatest slavery of her to the appetite of Civil
Powers? How much more Honorable had it been, under a Prince, whose peculiar
Province has ever been at the perpetual hazard of his Life to relieve the
Oppressed, to have presented him with such Draughts and Schemes of the Divine
Rights, Liberties, Authorities, and Discipline of the Church, as might inflame
him to a resolution for her rescue; and to add this last Divine (...) at the
top of all his Glories, as an Eucharistical Duty and Oblation so God, for all
his wonderful Providence in his Preservation and Achievements.

For which cause you have made it absolutely necessary that your Book should be
discussed, and its dangerous Errors laid open, to the end that the Public may
be under no temptation from such a work, (inscribed to the Metropolitan) to
proceed to further Resolves against the Powers Hierarchical, but may take
occasion to review those Laws, through which the Church is fallen under her
present Impotency; except you, and wiser Heads can show, which way a Spiritual
Discipline may be otherwise restored to a freedom of doing her Duty toward God,
in the cleansing the Church, and the renovation of Men's Hearts unto Piety and
Devotion.

I have therefore designed an Examination thereof in three Parts. The first
concerning the Divine Powers of the Churches of Christ. The second concerning
Matters of Fact in Ecclesiastical History. The third concerning the Exigences
for a present Convocation.

In the mean time I wish you no more hurt, than a perpetual increase of Merit,
Honor, and Promotion here; and that which is the only valuable Prospect, a
Blessed Inheritance in the Life to come.

Municipium Ecclesiasticum: OR, THE Rights, Liberties and Authorities OF THE
Christian Church Asserted, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Divine Right of Synods.
SECT. I.

THE Letter to a Convocation-man does not only suppose that the Words of the
Statute of Submission, are interpreted to too great a Restriction of the
Convocation, but goes much deeper for a much larger Liberty to the Church
herein, upon the Supposition of a Divine Right to all Churches and Synods for
Affairs Christian. The Doctor, on the contrary, denies such Divine Authority of
Synods, as being but mere prudential Clubs under Heathen Princes, and servile
Conventions under Christian ones.

The Letter,
Distinguishing all Power into Spiritual and Temporal, founds both of them in
God, which no Christian will deny of the Ecclesiastical Authority; That this
can be Rightly Exercised among Christians only; not as enclosed within any
Civil State or Community, but as Members of a Spiritual Society, of which
Christ Jesus is the Head, who has also given out Laws, and appointed a standing
Succession of Officers under himself, for the Government of this Society, which
continued near 300 Years before any Civil Governors embraced Christianity. So
that the Spiritual Authority is not in its own Nature simply dependent on the
Temporal. That when supernatural means of Governing the Church, were thought by
its Founder to be no more necessary to its continuance, it was left to the best
ordinary means of Conduct, and Preservation; viz. assembling, debating, and by
Majority of Voices, deciding, concerning the Rules and Principles of
Government. That the Law of this Society is made to their hands, not to be
altered, added, or diminished; but the applying thereof to particular Cases,
explaining Doubts upon it, deducing Consequences from it in things not
explicitly determined already by that Law, and enforcing Submission and
Obedience to their Determinations, are the proper Objects of their Power. That
this Society can better claim an inherent and unalterable Right to the exercise
of this Power, than any Sect among us, it not being Lost by Magna Charta, by
its Giving the Church a Legal Freedom. Thus the Letter, p. 17, 18, 19, 20.

The Doctor.
The Case stated on each side.
Is by no means satisfied, that the Church has any Command, or Authority from
God to assemble Synods; he is not aware, that either in the Old or New
Testament, there is so much as one single direction given for its so doing. And
excepting the singular Instance of Acts XV. he knows of no Example that can
with any show of Reason be offered of such a Meeting. And whether that were
such a Synod, as of which the Question is, may justly be doubted. The
Foundation of Synods in the Church, in his Opinion, is the same as that of
Councils in the State. The Necessities of the Churches, when they began to be
enlarged, first brought in the One, as those of the Commonwealth did the other.
And therefore when men are incorporated into Societies as well for the service
of God, Then, it seems, the Church is not sociated, till incorporated with the
civil State, to spiritual as well as temporal Ends.
and salvation of their souls, as for their Civil Peace and Security, these
Assemblies are to be as much subjost to the Laws of the Society, and to be
regulated by them, as any other Public Assemblies are. Nor has the Church any
inherent Divine Right to set it at liberty, from being concluded by such Rules,
as the Governing part of every Society shall prescribe to it, as to this
matter. -- As for those Realms, in which the Civil Power is of another
Persuasion, Natural Reason will prompt the Members of every Church to consult
together the best they can how to manage the Affairs of it, and to agree upon
such Rules and Methods, as shall seem most proper to preserve the Peace and
Unity of it, and to give the least Offense that may be to the Government under
which they live. And what Rules are by the common consent of every such Church
agreed to, ought to be the Measure of assembling and acting of Synods in such a
Country. Thus the Doctor, p. 365, 366, etc.

. 2. The Doctor's Tergiversation.
This is what the Doctor replies about the Affairs of Ecclesiastical Synods to
the Letter. Wherein any Man may plainly see, that he shuffles, and turns his
Back in the vety Fundamental Article in Controversy, not daring professedly to
refute the Hypothesis of the Letter by any good Proof from Reason or Authority,
nor yet ingenuously confessing those well-laid Truths, which he was not able to
oppose; but to steal away the Reader, from observing this Impotency, he is
fobb'd off with a poor, precarious, and not so much as evasive a Scheme of
Imaginations, for which he can hardly find any Church-Advocate, nor any
Credentials from any Divine, or valuable Humane Writings.

. 3. Terms explained.
But before we come to winnow these Elements of Independent, or rather Erastian
Divinity, (for there is a mixture of these Contraries, in which Erastiaenism
much preponderates) it is necessary that we six the principal Terms of Matters
Fundamental in his Enquiry. Authority what.
And first for Authority in Matters of Government, it is known to signify
either a just or rightful; or at least lawful Power to rule the Subjects
according to Equity, and Laws of Justice, or else an uncontrollable Freedom and
Impunity only of acting, which is the privilege of all Supreme Governors, as
being above all Legal and Judicial Coercion with their Subjects. Right.
Now all Acts of Authority in the former and proper Sense, appear in themselves
Good and Right, and no Powers or Persons whatsoever can have any opposite Good
and Lawful Authority. But the mere Exercises of an uncontrollable Domination,
Uncontrollable Domination.
tho called by the specious name of Authority, cannot vacate any Just and Valid
Rights, Liberties and Authorities of any Subject, Persons or Societies. For it
must be noted, that an Inherent Right and Valid Title cannot be legally
extinguished by any External Violations of Breedom, or Obstructions of its
Fruition or Practice, which, tho not accountable for at any Domestic Tribunal,
shall yet fall under the Sentence and Condemnation of God; the present Civil
Impunity giving no Right to any injurious measures, nor Exemption from that
divine Bar. Secondly, We are to define an Ecclesiastical Council or Synod;
Synod what.
wherein I will take the Doctors Definition, namely, it is literally a Meeting
of Ecclesiastical Persons (I mean Ministers) upon an Ecclesiastical Affair. p.
60.
And it is either subordinate, The sorts of Synods.
consisting of one or more Bishops, and inferior Ministers, or Coordinate,
consisting only of one equal Order, either of Bishops alone, or Inferior
Ministers alone. For in want of a Bishop Cyp. Ep. 3 and Ep. 18.
the Inferior Clergy are the Council for the vacant Church, according to the
limits and powers of their Order. A Convention of Clergy Cyp. 26 Sect. 4, and
Ep. 31. Sect. 5.
under their proper Bishop, for Ecclesiastical Consultations or Acts, we now
should call a Diocesan Synod. A Convention of a College of Bishops for a
Province we may call a Provincial Synod, which generally ever was attended with
the Service of Inferior Orders. Councils called General are of the fame Nature
in themselves, tho of a larger extent, and not of a Canonical originally, but
of Imperial Collection. Other extraordinary and unusual Conventions of Select
Bishops and Ministers, not delegated so much by the Church upon her regular
Constitutions, as convened by the Will only of Princes, may be called Synods,
tho of themselves they have no Canonicol Authority for their Acts, which must
either stand or fall by the consequent Reception or Refusal of the Church,
notwithstanding all the Ratifications that the Temporal Powers give them; a
mere Ecclesiastical Commission from a Prince, Ecclesiastical Commissioners of
Princes no Canonical Synod.
being not of the same sort of Efficacy and Authority, as a free Convention of
the Powers Ecclesiastical. Tho therefore such Commissioners may Grammatically
be called a Synod, yet Canonically a Synod is a Convention of the State or
Powers Ecclesiastical on their own Right and Authority, whosoever calls them to
the Exercise thereof. Thirdly, we are to consider the. Attribute of Christian,
as given either to Princes or private Persons. Now Eusebius. reekons two lay (...)
properly a Christian is a Person baptized into, and continuing in the
Christian Faith; but loosely, and improperly Heretics claim, and use the
Character, which also may improperly be given to such as profess a Belief
thereof, before ever they are admitted to any Ordinance; or Station of the
Church, for so Constantine the Great, Them. ev. l. 2. c. 4. Sect. 38. So Origin
con. Cells. l. 3. Ambr. de Myster. initiand. c. 4. Aug. in Joh. c. 2.3. Tract.
11.
and Constantius, etc. have been reputed Christian Emperors, tho not Baptized,
nor so much as admitted Catechumens, or Competents, till a little before their
Death. Which Preliminary Explications will be found of great Use in this
present Controversy.

4. Being thus harnessed, we will consider the strength of the Doctor's
Hyyothesis first, before we come to justisie that of the Letter. The Doctor's
Principle worse than the Independents.
First then he makes a Synod under Heathen Powers to be but an independent
huddle of Christians in common, contriving their Affairs, by no Authority, but
that of Humane Prudence. But then I shall say, that if this be a Synod, such a
Concourse of mere Lay-Christians may be a Synod, and determine the common
Process of their Conduct. For he places this Care simply in the Natural Reason
of the Members of every Church, not the Governors nor Powers therein
constituted; for he does not suppose it a regular Society, till incorporated
with the Civil State. Nor will it help to say, that he defines a Synod a
Meeting of Ecclesiastical Persons upon an Ecclesiastical Affair, for all
Members of the Church may with Grammatical Propriety be called and accounted
Eccle jastica^ Persons in distinction from Aliens, or absolutely; tho Custom
has given this Title as a distinctive of the Clergy from the Laity. So that,
tho I, in assuming the Doctors Definition of a Synod, do by Ecclesiastical
Persons mean the Clergy, yet it is not certain that the Doctor intends so,
except only of Synods called by Christian Princes; but rather these Members of
the Church under Heathen Powers must be the Ecclesiastical Persons, convened in
Synod under them, without any Distinction of Orders, or Authorities among them.
And, if we will but add one Pastor among them, here we have the true form of an
Independent Church, or Congregation, which is its own constant Synod at all
Meetings; only the Independent Principle claims a Divine Right, and relies not
alone upon mere humane Inauthoritative Prudence, and so is nearer to Truth and
Reason, than the Doctor's. But if the Doctor's Principles be true, that such
Synods are Conventions of Church Members upon Prudence only, without any
inherent Right or Authority, wherein they are to give the Insidel Powers the
least Offense that may be, I doubt that Prudence will oblige them not to
convene at all. For certainly we are not in Prudence to give Insidel Powers, or
any Persons whatsoever any needless Offense at all. But certainly Subjects
having no Authority to convene, yet convening against the Laws of Civil Powers,
do incur their great Offense, which natural Reason cannot prompt Men to. For if
Christians should be called by such Infidel Powers to account for such
prohibited Conventions, by what Authority they do such things, if they should
set forth a good Divine Authority, this would be a good, though not perhaps a
successul Plea, but if they should say, we have no Authority for it, but only
natural Reason and Prudence, how can that direct a Man to disobey Laws, which
destroy no Man's Authority or Right? Nor can it be shifted here, that they have
Right, but not Authority; for, tho even a mere Right to synodize, is enough to
the jus divinum asserted by the Letter, yet a Right to synodize is a Right to a
public Conduct by Rules and Methods to preserve the Peace and Unity of the
Church, and that is Authority, tho never so democratical. And if they have
natural Reason for this Conduct, that Nature that has given them just Reason
has given them just Right to it; for in such Matters Right and Reason is the
same, doing Men Right, being properly called doing Men Reason. If then they
have natural Reason, they have natural Right, and if natural Right, natural
Authority to convene for their public Conduct; and that is a good Plea against
the Laws of Infidel Powers. But on the contrary, if they have no Authority so
to do, they have no Right, and if no Right, no Reason, and if no Reason, how
can this be done without Offense against the Civil Powers that forbid it, and
have just Right indeed to forbid all Assemblies, which have no Authority,
Right, or Reason. But to conclude, the Dr. has given these Synods a more
fundamental Authority than he was aware of, when he tells us, that the
necessities of the Church when it began to be enlarged, Commonwealth did.
brought them into the Church as the necessities of the Councils of State. Very
well; and a good Parallel: but are not Councils of State endued with Authority
founded on that popular Necessity? The Doctor dares not say No to the State,
because the Leviathan is not safely to be angered; but why then should not the
Councils of the Church be authoritative for its Conduct and Preservation upon
the same bottom of equal Necessity, and that under the Heathen Powers? For it
appears, that on this Necessity Synods were held in the Church in full Vigor
and Spiritual Authority, before there were any Christian States for heir
Incorporation. And therefore the necessity was the greater, and by these the
Doctor's Rules the Authority should be so too, tho yet he allows them no
Authority, because no Society till their Civil Incorporation, which is (tho the
Doctor sees not the necessary Consequence) to deny the Unity of the Catholic
Church, and its Constitution under Spiritual Governors of its own, for the
three first Centuries of Christianity.

. 5. But he further tells us, Incorp.
that the Incorporation of the Church into the State, being an Association for
the saving of their Souls, as well as Secularities, subjects them as much to
the Laws and Regulations of Civil Societies, as any other Public Assemblies.
This is a bold stroke indeed; for it will put the Constitution of the
Hierarchy, and all its Functions, into what Hands, under what Conduct, Times,
and Places, etc. the Civil Powers please. They shall enable a Layman to ordain,
and Minister Sacraments, to Preach, Excommunicate, Absolve, Consecrate, and
degrade, and do all things by an Arbitrary Legislation and Government
thereupon; and well then may this Incorporation into Society promote the Se^^^^
of God and Salvation of Men, with all Secular Heavens upon Earth (...). But I
pray what is this Incorporation? Is it making the Church one of the National
Estates to concur in the Acts of Legislature? and all her Ratified Canons not
only Canon, but Law too, and of Civil Consequences upon the Subject? Or is it
only the Protection of the Law from Injuries or Oppressions? or the addition of
several Privileges, Honors, and Encouragements? If the first of these only,
then was the Church never incorporated into the State under the Roman Empire;
(for it was no part of the Legislature) and consequently not thereupon subject
to the Laws of the Empire in Matters of Ecclesiastical Conduct. If the second
Favor be an Incorporation, then the incorporating Powers have a Right to
govern the Religion of all other Societies which they tolerate, all Schisms and
Heresies whatsoever, exempt by Law from Violences and Oppressions; so that an
Orthodox Christian Emperor tolerating, Novatians, Meletians, Arians,
Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, and all other Clans of Heresies, had full
Right, and good Authority to govern all their several respective Counsels, and
Discipline, and to ratisie all their Synodical Acts, Canons, and Sentences. O
Sanctas Gentes! What a mighty Supremacy would this be indeed, wherein every
Prince so indulgent would be another Solomon, and reside not only over God's
Church at Jerusalem, but over those of Chomesh, Milchom, Ashtoreth, etc. a
Supremacy I must needs confess more than divine! And yet I doubt it would not
be casily admitted either in Holland, or the emulous England; where, tho the
public Indulgence is to save their Souls, as well as their Temporals, yet will
not the Sectaries part with their Souls to these Indulgent Saviors, nor endure
the Thoughts of their Presidency and Conduct in their little Religious
Politics, but demand an Exemption as entire as the Chapels of foreign
Factories, or Ambassadors. Nor can in the third place an Accumulation of all
Encouragements, Privileges and Honors, prevail upon them hereunto; most of
them being against a National Church, all of them against a National Religion,
i. e. confined to the Laws of a Civil State. And commend me to Scotland, who
have acquired all Secular Privileges and Franchises they desired, and yet
scorn that a King shall so much as be a Door keeper to their Holy of Holies,
notwithstanding all these their Incorporations; and if the Dr. should preach up
his Maxims but on the other side of the Tweed, they world quickly bring him to
the stool of Repentance, for teaching their People, or their Sovereign, that
Right of Supremacy over Holy Kirk, which they are so far from owning in all
Princes, that it is with them the most Funda nental Heresy to allow them any at
all; as appears by their perpetual Remonstrances upon all Occasions in their
Synods.

6. Wheve tho Prince is of a different Religion.
But it is nor impossible that a Sovereign may contract a Religion contrary and
destructive to that which is recieved and c^^blished among his People, and
which it is not in his Power by Force or Legislative Authority presently to
Abolish: As Izates King of the Adiabenes turning Jew; and, to omit others, King
James the Second, Roman Catholic. How graceful in such a Case would it be, to
see a King of England of Jewish, Popish, Socinian, Presbyterian, Anabaptist,
Independent, Quaker, or M^ggletonian Principles, or Profession, convening a
Church of England Convocation, presiding in it in Person, or a VicarGeneral of
his own persuasions, upon Matters of alteration in the Liturgy and Canons, or
any other Expedients for the good of the Church of England, and always twitting
the Synods with Caveats of that Holy Statute of Praemunire, not to speak one
would nor syllable to any purpose whatsoever, till such Prince pleases to allow
you of his mere grace and motion, as being only of Counsel to this Head of the
Church of England; who is however to be presumed wiser, to know all times and
matters expedient for the Church (which yet by his Religion he is in Conscience
bound to abhor and destroy) than whole Convocations, and to prescribe to these
his Counselors herein, as being fitter to be of Counsel unto them, whose
Resolves after all, he has Wisdom enough, as well as Authority to ratify,
alter, rescind, or aunull; so that not what they, but what he shall bind, or
loose on Earth, shall be bound or loosed in Heaven; and reason good upon such
an Heavenly Authority and Design. By this Ecclesiastical Supremacy which K.
James himself abjured, did he most advantageously for the Church of England
erect his Ecclesiastical Commission, for the saving of this Church from the
Encroachments of the Papal Supremacy. So that by our Incorporation alone, we
are all safe Soul and Body, with Lawyers, and CourtFlatterers, let our Supreme
Head be of what Religion he pleases. But Lawyers indeed cannot be blamed for
any inconvenienties which may happen from 2 positive Law, and they are obliged
to interpret and judge according to the Letter; but for Clergy-Min to attribute
Divinity to Humane Laws, whatsoever the results of them be, this this -- But
will not here the same Right of Natural Reason come in, which the Dr. asserts
to the Chuach, where the Civil Power is of another Persuasion, to Consult
together the best they can, and to that end Aslemble in Synods Ecclesiastical.
This Reason, this Right, and Rule, by the wording of it in general terms of
quother persuasion, will reach the Case of Churches, not only under Heathen
Powers, but Christian Powers of different Communion and Principles from the
pure Church that is in subjection. And it seemed Calculated for the Case of the
French Protestants, or the Vandoise for Comprehension sake. Now though I know
this to be no Rule of Common or Statute Law here in such Cases, yet will the
Dr. allow a Natural Right and Reason for such Liberty, even in opposition to
our Laws, when our King shall be of another persuasion? shall the Church lean
upon her own Authority and Wisdom, not His? This his own determination says as
much in Generals, and yet I believe his Design will not permit him to say so
for us, no not in our Case under the late K. James. And if he shall make any
Reply upon this Book, I do desire him to speak home like a Man to this
Supposition, and the Case and Demand raised on it.

. 7. Supposing then, according to the Dr's Concession, that under Princes of
another Persuasion, the Church has Right and Reason to hold Synods and
Consults, who must of Office appoint such Conventions in the Church? Are they
all Equals, and so must run higly-pigly on Occasions, as People do to quench an
House on fire? Or are there any Superiors, or Hierarchical Rulers in it, in
whom the Conduct is chiefly lodged for all Ecclesiastical Concernments? If this
latter be the Constitution of a Church simply in it self, then will I ask,
whether the Superiors are to Assemble themselves alone, or others with them,
by virtue of their Superiority, or are the Inferiors to give Rule to their
Superiors? I am not willing to believe, that for the sake of a feeble
Hypothesis the Dr. will overturn the Order of things, especially in the Church,
that subsists, as all other Bodies Politic do, by Order; but we'll presume,
that the right of Convention is lodged in such a State in the Supreme Order.
But then by that Authority, whence they derived that Order; have they Power to
Convene Synods over that Church, which by the Constitution of an Hierarchy
becomes of it self a Divine and Sahred Society, and is therefore called the
Kingdom of God, and needs no Incorporation with Civil States, for the Service
of God, or Salvation of Souls. And this I think will reduce the Dr. to a
necessity of granting the Church to be a Divine Society under Orders, who have
a Divine Authority to hold Synods to the preservation thereof, where the Prince
is of another Persuasion.

CHAP. II. Of the Rights, Liberties, and Authorities of Several, as well
Secular, as Sacred Societies, under the Supremacy of Civil Powers.
1. HAving thus Discussed the Virtue of the Dr's own positive Sense of the
Churches State and Powers, we will in the next place proceed to examine what he
has seemed willing to deny as to the Hypothesis of Divine Right asserted in the
Letter. And in order hereunto, we will be at the pains to descend into the
bottoms of Ecclesiastical and Civil Powers, to try whether these were intended
by their Providential Author, entirely to swallow up the former, (as the Dr.
teaches us) in all particulars, not excepted in God's word by a special reserve.

2. All Society then is either Subordinate between Superiors and Subjects,
Societies distinguished.
or Coordinate between Persons or Communities, free and independent of each
other. And each of these is either Natural only, from the mere obligations of
Nature, or Positive by voluntary Contract or Constitution. Now of all these,
the first and most Fundamental Society, is the Natural Society between God and
Man, Natural Society with God.
maintained by the Offices of Natural Religion on our part, Tul. de leg. l. 1.
Positive Society with God.
and the Acts of God's Paternal Providence on his. Next hereunto, and
immediately hereupon, succeeded a positive and Faederal Society between them,
Apud Cyp. Ep. 30. Sect. 2. Qui a Deo, cui sociari quaerit discrepat, --
privilegium societatis amittat.
by the Law and Communications of the Divine Presence given in Paradise; which
Communications and Presence (though the Law of Paradise determined by Man's
ejection out of Paradise) still continued, and were designed for continuance to
Posterities, Ripening into an Ecclesiastical form.
admitting the Mystical Worship of Sacrifices, as well as the Duties of Natural
Piety, to maintain this double Consociation. And herein was laid the first
foundation of Ecclesiastical Society and Communion with God, which more
formally ripened into public and Canonical form; In the days of Enosh.
when, the Generations of Men increasing under this double Union in the days of
Enosh, Men began to call on the Name of the Lord, Genesis 4.26. in public
Assemblies. For then those, whom under this preccedent course of Divine
Communion God had Educated by his own immediate institution, Under Prophetic
Patriarchs.
he after constituted Prophets, and Preachers of Righteousness to the Families
so Ecclesiastically consociated under God; and of these Ministers he founded an
Order and Succession, Of which Noah the Eighth from Enosh.
in which Noah was the Eighth from Enosh, Genesis 5. 2 Pet. 2.5. Where these
Families and Generations so consociated under God, and the Sacred Authority and
Conduct of these Prophetic Patriarchs, were a formal Church, or Ecclesiastical
Society, and were called under a Sacred Character, Sons of God.
the Sons of God, Gen 6 2. Now this Society Ecclesiastical, founded not only in
Nature, Continuance of this state to the Flood.
but God's positive Constitution also, contioned through all that vast tract of
time, between the Creation (from its Originals, and from the days of Euosh) and
the Flood, (as far as appears, or is probable, without the support of the Civil
Sword or Magistracy, according to the concurrent Traditions of the very
Heathens herein, that in the Golden Age Men lived uprightly of their own accord
without need of Judges, and without fear or apprehensions of Bonds and
Punishment.

. 3. Matrimonial Society.
The second sort of subordinate Society is the Matrimonial, Aug. in Genesis
Quaest. 143. Est enim ordo naturalis in hominibus, ut serviant saeminae viris,
etc filii parentibus; quia est illic justicia est haec, ut infirmior ratio
serviat fortiori.
founded in the Structure of the Sexes, and difference in the inward Vigours
and Powers of the Soul, and so constituted by a positive determination and
Ordination of God, first in the State of Paradise in a less, and after the Fall
into Sin, in a greater degree of Subordination, Genesis 2. Genesis 3. And herein God
laid a Corporal Foundation and Original of all other Societies to come, for all
the Ends and Reasons of the Creation and Providence. And hereupon, as the Right
of this Ordinance is Universal and Perpetual in God's intention and
establishment, so has it continued (though not without abuses) as the
acknowledged Foundation and Rule of Lawful Succession through all Nations.

. 4. Oeconomical Society.
The Third Sort of Subordinate Societies, succeeding the former, is the
Oeconomical, and is either Natural between Parents and Children, or positive,
as between Tutors, and Pupils, Masters, and Servants.

. 5. Civil Society.
The last General Sort of Subordinate Societies, fundamentally designed by
God's Providence for the conservation of Mankind, is the Civil, entrusted with
the Power of the Sword, in defense against all Violences and Oppressions,
Domestic or Foreign, for the preservation of those Rights and Liberties, which
are necessary to the good order and well being of Mankind in all its forms of
Society, which God himself has founded by Nature, Constitution, or Providence,
for a regular and undisturbed L^se. For thus St. Paul says, God's Ordinance
for the good of Mankind, though not always actually fulsilling Gods design.
they are God's Ordinance, and, as such his Ministers, bearing the Sword for
our good, to the punishment of Evil Doers, and to the praise of them that do
well, Romans 13.1, etc. Though therefore they may not always in fact execute the
design of God their Founder, upon a just Authority lodged in them by the design
of Providence, yet they are the intentional Ordinance of God hereunto, and
hereunto only, against which God's bare Negative, i. e. Nonrestrictive
permissions, in the course of his Providence, of those disorders, into which
many times their Eminency, and Lusts consequent upon it, do too fatally hurry
them, is no valid Argument, because, though not reducible to any account here,
they are obnoxious to God's Judgments hereafter.

. 6. Coordinate Society Natural, or Positive.
The second Sort of Society is the Coordinate, and that either by the tics of
Nature alone unto all the natural Offices of Justice and Charity, or by
Contract, as in Friendships, Factories. Artificial Fraternities, and Commerces,
between either Men, or Nations, Cities, Villages, etc. And the general Nature
of these Societies is by the intention of God, The Originals of Civil Society.
of a precedent design before Civil Powers, as being also in the Fundamental
Reasons of the Civil Superstructure. For Families multiplying Co-ordinately,
Sociated themselves first into Vicinities, and Villages, Families multiplying
into Villages, and thence into Cities, Corporated at last under Princes, as
Trustees, to preserve their Rights in Peace.
from smaller to greater, for the benefit of mutual succors, beneficences, and
intercourse; and from these Rudiments increasing continually, they grew up into
Cities, and so Incorporated into forms Political, and falling either into the
affectation, or under the Calamity of War from without, or the common and usual
Discords among multitudes within, they were led by Providence to admit the
Civil and Military Sovereignty, as necessary to their peaceable cohabitation
and security, in which the common. Felicity was reposed as an inviolable Trust;
and though we in this Age, and part of the World do think it the greatest madness
to repose such a considence in single Sovereigns, as was generally done in the
first collections into Cities, yet the natural Equity and Humanity of Men was
not so far then vitiated, as to render the Integrity of the Prince suspicious;
from whence there appears such a Recorded Unanimity of those Kings and their
People, that now to us does almost seem impossible. I know indeed the late
Celebrated Oracle of all Political Villainy has taught Men out of their very
Senses, Admission of Sovereigns do not import a quitting the Rights of the
Community.
that in the admission of Sovereigns they surrender up to them all their former
Rights; but the voice of nature, and the Oracles of God have taught us far
otherwise; and by these I think all wise and good Men will, and must abide.

. 7. Civil Society not to devour its Originals.
Civil Power was therefore superinduced at last upon all the other substrate
forms of Society, not to destroy and devour, but to defend them to the common
felicity, except we shall think it the most unnatural Monster, made to devour
its own Parents, and Originals. And as to the Laws and Rights Mankind
universally has in Matrinonial, Oeconomical, Fraternal, Amicable, and Factoral
Communications and Societies, no Man does or will doubt but that they are
exempt from all right of extinction by Civil Society, which cannot stand or
exist but upon those Fundamentals. And can it be then imaginable, that it has
a greater right of Dominion over the Ecclesiastical Society with God, which
being the Immediate Unitive in this Life between God and us, and so a medium to
an Everlasting Happiness in another, was the great End on this side Heaven, for
which we were first Created, and for which the other Societies next consequent
upon it were designed? Matrimonial Society being for the propagation of Issues,
Oeconomical for the Government of there, and other Minors, and Servants in it;
the Coordinate for common Beneficences and mutual support here, but all that
those Sons of Men may hereby subsist to the Communion with God here, as a
pledge of a nearer fruition of him in a State of Eternity. And this general
Consideration, that all these forms of Society are God's Ordinances, and of
these, the Religious Society with God the first in Nature, Diguity, and Time,
it cannot be imagined, that God should be divided against himself, in setting
up Ordinance against Ordinance, and the meaner and the latter against the first
and highest, Gods Ordimances not destructive of, each other.
especiully since the Nature of the Society by God ordained, imports a
perpetual necessity, and therefore a design of perpetnity in them all. And
hereupon it is, that Religion in general, though corrupted and disguised, has
yet continued among all Nations, as perpetual and universal, as the other
Societies, and carried the most public preeminence, as being the presumed
means of a Divine Society; and this, not by the bare policy of Secular Powers;
(since perhaps in Princes Courts it has ever had the least estimation, and true
Religion is what the Lust of Men (especially great Men) are most averse to, and
false Religion too gross to impose a credulity upon their acute apprehensions)
but (an internal disposition of the Mind, universally promoting Men to the
culture of Religion, against all the prejudices and aversions of Sesuality, is
an Argument of a Divine Foundation thereof, which as no Hypocrisy could
advance, so no Artifices nor Oppositions can suppress; but it will continue,
whether Civil Powers will or no; since these are not able to extirpate a Zeal
of Superstition, much less then those Fundamental Principles of Religion, upon
which not only a frame of true Religion, but even Superstition it self must be
built, and which Principles will in all Men have some Productions toward
either a true or false Worship of, and Society with a Deity.

. 8. Now though all these are Truths so very clear, and Fundamental to the
welfare of Mankind, I desire the Dr. to say out, whether he finds them all
express in Scripture, or no. For if he does, then he must grant an
Ecclesiastical Society antecedent to, and the Rights thereof maintainable by
Civil Powers, which he does not allow in his Hypothesis; or if he will allow it
the Divine Right of an Ecclesiastical and Canonical Society, this will import
an Authority of Consulting, and Assembling to Consult independently on the
Superinduced Civil Powers, as shall be made out in due place; but if he finds
not these Maxims in express terms of Scripture, by a reserve from the
Occupations of Civil Power, will he abdicate therefore all these Rights to it,
to dissolve all the Laws, and Liberties, and Authorities of the Matrimonial,
Oeconomical, and Co-^din^te Societies? Or if he be not so unmerciful toward
these Carnal Societies, can he with Conscience, or so much as a pretense of
Reason, give up all the Powers of the Divine Society to the Civil Dominion and
Pleasure? It Is therefore only necessary to prove a Society Divinely founded by
a full and fair Evidence, The proof of a Divinely constituted Society Ipso
facto, asserts its fundamental liberty.
and then all the Forms, Rights, and Powers, necessary to its good Conduct and
Conservation, are ipso facto asserted against all exterior Rapes and
Usurpations whatsoever.

. 9. Now to the Eviction hereof at full, it will be necessary to enquire into
all the actual Ordinances of God, either by Nature only, or by a positive
Constitution supernatural. To which End, in the first place, it is the voice
and dictate of Nature, Liberty to do good a fundamental right of the innocent.
that Liberty, Time, and Place to do good, are the Primitive, Universal,
Eternal, Fundamental, and Unalienable Rights of the Innocent; and in the next
place, that the Consociation of Men to the true and public Worship of God is
an act of the highest good, God's Public Worship the greatest good upon Earth.
practicable and enjoyable upon Earth, whether we consider its Dignity, in
relation to God, and our Nature framed in the likeness of God, to be preserved
hereby; or the benesits that result unto them that live in it. But then such a
Society cannot do its Offices regularly, This requires the conduct of the Wise
and Good.
without the Conduct of the Wise, nor keep it self Holy without the government
of the Good; Wisdom and Goodness being necessary to all Government (and this
most chiefly in Matters Holy and Divine) to prescribe Directions to the
Ignorant, to encourage the Good, and Correct or Cashier the Evil. This
therefore must be laid as a Catholic Rule for all Religious Society, simply
and in general by the Law of Nature. But we are further to consider, what
actual Society Nature it self has formed for the adoration of, and Communion
with God in Offices of Religion. In Families therefore the Master, Masters
Bishops of their Families.
by the Ordinance God in Nature and Providence, is the designed and rightful
Governor of Religion in his Family; for which by the Law of Nature he is
obliged to qualify himself with as much Wisdom and Piety as he can; Aug. in
Joh. c. 12. Tract 50. Suos omnes admoneat, doceat, hortetur corripiat, impendat
benevolentiam, exerceat disciplinam. Ita in domo sua Ecclesiasticum, and
quodummodo Episcopale implebit officium, ministrans Christo, ut in aeternum sit
cum ipso.
not only for his own Conversation, but the Conduct also of his House, the
little Temple of God, as indeed every House should be. This therefore from the
beginning is the Natural Episcopacy and Care of Parents and Masters toward
their Children and the other Members of the Family; A succession of them to be
maintained by Education.
not only as at present they are Subjects and Disciples, but as it is to be
expected, that in succession of a few years these also will commence Masters
and Bishops of their proper Families, and are therefore by their own present
Parents or Masters to be prepared by good Institutions thereunto, and so
downward for ever to all Generations.

And this natural Right and Duty extends it self to the instruction and
enforcement of the whole will and purpose of God, as far as it is known, or may
be known to the Master, either by Reason only, or Revelation also. Families to
be instructed as well in revealed as natural Religion by the Law of Nature.
For tho Divine and Supernatural Revelation be a positive Ordinance of Gods
free purpose, and so under no Eternal Law of Nature, yet they, that by the Law
of Nature are Teachers and Rulers in Matters of Piety, are by that Law obliged
to propose all that God has discovered for the promotion of in. For, tho all
Graces are positive Gifts, yet when given, the Law of Nature requires the
culture and improvement of them to good uses, as well as the temporal Blestings
o^ Gods outward Providence. For tho no Law of Nature requires me to be Rich,
yet i^^^am Rich, the Law of Nature obliges me to a suitable munisicence. This
then is most certainly the Law and Ordinace of Nature in the Oeconomical
Conduct of Piety and Society with God, tho Men's Apostasy unto Vice has
dissolved the practice, by destroying the Appetite and Faculties of most
Parents for this Conduct of Religion. For let Men's Manners and Circumstances
vary as they will, or may, yet herein, as in all things else, the Laws of
Nature alter not. So that tho an ignorant or irreligious Parent cannot execute
the Offices of his Station in Matters Religions, while so unqualified, yet is
he obliged still to quit his Vices, and to prosecute the Studies of a Religious
Wisdom; which, when acquired, w^ll qualify him for his Charge. From all which
it appears, that the Matrimonial Consociation being designed for the production
of Families, to be consociated under the Muster into a Communion with God, as
the chiefest End and Reason of their production, it follows, that the
Oeconomical Powers have no Authority to dissolve the Religious Society of the
Families with God, as being ordained purely for the maintenance and fruition of
it. And then Civil Powers supervening upon a conglobation of numerous Families,
having no Right or proper Lawful Authority, as Gods Ordinance, to destroy the
Oeconomical Structure and Society on which they are founded and subsist, they
cannot extinguish the Power nor inhibit the exercise of an Oeconomical
Communion in the service of God, and the Offices necessary thereunto.

. 10. Coordinate Societies of Villages, etc.
From the Subordinate Societies of Families, multiplied into Fraternal or
Collateral Vicinities, there arose at first the Coordinate Society of
Villages, in which Men settled together for common uses and benesicences, to
supply their mutual defects and appetites. For Necessity and Convenience, and
above all the natural Love of Society inclined Men unto Neighborhood, ank this
to some common agreements and measures of Justice and Kindness for the
convenience of Co-habitation; so that Men, thus prompted by Nature, cement
themselves together by such a Foederal form of Coordinate Society. But the
same Reasons that cast them into this mould, require also common Schools of
Education. For tho every Master of a Family should be of right sit for this
Office in all necessary Principles, Schools of Reli^ion.
yet since in fact many are not, the sense of this defect suggests an
obligation upon it to procure that Education from another, which is necessary
in it self, and cannot be had in every home. Now since Principles of true
Religion are the most important Matter for Education, it is a right of Nature in
all Vicinities to have such Schools for Pious Institution, not to be justly
denied by any Powers upon Earth. I do not say that the Law of Nature requires
every Village to have a public School of Piety, tho Nature it self commends
it; but that which Nature commends, acquires thereby such a Right, if Men
please to use it, which cannot justly be denied them. Schools subordinate
Societies.
But then every School is a subordinate Society; and if it be a School of
Divinity, it is a Society with God, to be Celebrated with Prayers and Devotions,
Doctrines, and Precepts, and the Rules of Discipline, and Rectoral Conduct.
But, besides particular Schools, Vicinities to be p^eserved by Religion.
thus of Right erigible in all Vicinities so foederally and equally sociated,
the conscience of God being the only tie to that mutual Justice and
Benevolence, which they have contracted to observe, the Law of Nature does
require the solemn acknowledgement of that God as a fundamental Principle of
their Union, and consequently if not require, as I believe it will, where there
is no other superior and better provision, yet extremely recommend our common
Worship and Adoration of God, for his blessing upon that Society contracted
upon Conscience toward God, together with those Instructions and Remembrances
of the Principles of Piety, as may oblige their Consciehc^s to its more
effectual and avowed observation. This is the more to be r^^^ed on, because as
all good ought to be open and diffusive, so the Majesty of God, All God to be
public and diffusive.
as well as the Duty and Inte^e of Mankind, require true Religion to be the
most public and unconsined, as being the most noble, excellent, and superlative
Good, resembling its Divine and Infinite Object and Author in its Purity, and
why not ^^en in its Universal and Public Appearance and Authority in all
public^ Societies whatsoever? From hence I am sure Nature will justifie^ Right
unto all such Societies to procur^ for themselves a public Worship of God in a
mere Stat^ of Natucal Religion, which simple no Civi^ Powers supervening have
any Right or Reason to deny. But th^n such public Worship in public Assemblies
mu^^ b^ under grave and ^o^y Conduct, Public Worship to be under Conduct and
Authority.
and this requires Authority, which originally will lodge in the Heads of every
Family, Heads of Families the Common Conucil for mere natural Religion in
villages till they surren (...) it up to other Powers; under which they retain
a Right to frequency of worshipping the true God.
as a standing Council to convene, and consult in Sy^od, for the Conduct of
such public Worship, till the^ yield up this natural privilege to any other
Power; under which however they have a Right to some public Religious Local
Society with God and themselves, and to frequency of public Devotions in ir;
which if their Super^ors will neglect or obstruct, their former Right and
Liberty reverts to them again to agree for, and in God's public worship,
whether their Superiors will or no, it being still to be remembered that public
Society with God is a fundamental Right and Duty, far greater than all others.
So that from the days of Bell or Nimrod, (whose very Names denotes his Rebellion
and Usurpation of God's Dominion) tho Princes set up theldolatrous Worship of
Creatures, and magical Priesthoods for the Conduct thereof, prohibiting the
true Worship of the true God, vet any Men, Families, Villages, and Cities,
might have federally maintainted an Uniformity in Offices of Natural Religion
publicly in the Face of those Idolatrous Powers; their Powers being indeed the
Ordinance of God, but not to any lawful ^rection of Superstitions, not to the
Extinct on of his own public Worship, which all Societies whatsoever are
obliged to advance.

Time, Places, Conveniences of Worship claimable under all Powers.
. II. In virtue of these Rights, if the Sovereign^, under which they are, will
^ot assign them just Tim^s, sit Places, and Conveniences f^r such Solemn and
Sacred Service of God, and Offices of Religion, the subject People may out of
their own Prop^^ties provide them for themselves, and ^^^er them unto God's
S^rvice. And since every Subject has Right unto Time, the Ground, and Houses,
etc. which he by any right forms acquires, be ^ay devote what he can spare of
it to his God; and natural Religion requires some Tribute of all we have, as in
Tenancy under the areat Lord of all. So that whatsoever is thus from a good
Secular Ti^e devoted unto God, becomes his, Ambros Valentine Jun. Imp. Ep. ad
Marcelliuam seror.
and cannot be taken away without the Sin of Sacrilege, since a Subject's
private House or Vineyard is not liable to any Arbitrary Domum privati nullo
potes jure temerare; Domum Dei existimas auserendam.
Seizure, as in the Case of Naboth. By this natural Right the Jews built
Synagogues, Schools, and Houses of Prayer; without any positive Precept from
God, or order from their supreme Rulers, that we read of. Upon on the same
Originals of Nature they did the like in all their Colonies and Dispersions,
Right of Jewish Synagogues, etc.
without any Ordinance, that we know of, from the Heathen Powers. And if we
will presume leave asked, and granted, (for which presumption there is no great
or probable Reason) yet such Petition, and grant of leave does not import a
want of antecedent Right in the Petitioners to be given by the Petitioned,
Reasons of asking leave.
but only a care for their security in using their Right, by obtaining a
permission and impunity in so doing, from those Powers, who before the
Crucisixion of Christ, and the determiuation of the Mosaic Covenant thereupon,
had indeed no right to deny them Synagogues, etc. for the teaching the true
Law, and the proper Devotions in them lawfully used, but only an uncontrollable
force to have oppressed them in these Rights as well as others. So that
Caution, Decency, and Peace might incline them in Prudence to petition a
liberty in what they had an antecedent Right to without Petition or Concession.
And to make this clear, the M^rtyrs, or Caemeteries, the Basilicae, and the
Schools of the Christian Church, crected and used under Heathen Powers, were
voluntarily set up and employed in the Christian Worship, upon this Natural
Right, without any derived from the Enemy-Powers; Buseb. Eccl. Hist. 1.8. c.
28. (...).
Who did indeed of mere necessity sometimes connive at these unpetitioned
usages, but would never have endured the affront of a Petition to erect Houses
of that Worship, which was designed to the extinction of all the then
established and received Superstitions; so that it is to be presumed, that had
they depended upon Petitions, they would never have had one Chapel in those
Ages in the whole World.

. 12. So much then for the Natural Right and Liberties of Public Society with
God in the Offices of Natural Devotion, Religious Service, and Society with
God; which I think are made appear valid and unalienable, tho there be no
express reservations of them for the uses of Natural Religion apparent in the
word of God.

CHAP. III. Of the Authorities Rights and Liberties of Mystic Religion.
. 1. Mystic Religioni^s foundations, Ministers Rights, etc.
FROM the mere Naturally Rational Body of Religion, considered abstractly from
all supposed positive Revelation (at least miraculously supernatural) pass we
to the consideration of the Mystic part of Religion; upon what Authority that
is founded, by what Ministers it is Celebrated, and what Rights, Powers, and
Liberties they have in the administration of it.

Divine Institution.
2. First then, all the Authority of Mystic Religion must be founded in Divine
positive Institution in order to a Mystical and Foederal Consociation with God.
For none can prescribe Rights of such Communion, but he that is the Founder
thereof. So that all Mysteres invented by Men in order to such Mystic Commerce,
either with true or false Gods, are Impostures, and Sorceres, of which yet the
Priests own not themselves to be the Inventers, but the Numen, with whom they
pretend to have and procure a Society; confessing thereby, that all true and
Holy Foederal Mysteries are, and can only be of Divine Institution, without
which no Solemnities in Religion could merit or procure a Sacred Reverence and
Reception. But being once received amongst the Heathens as Divinely ordered
Mysteries, they, Mysteries and Priests inviolable.
and their Priests were hold inviolable by the Civil Powers, who subimitted the
Conduct of their Wars and Chief Assairs to their Mystic Interpretations and
Responses.

3. Since then Mystic Institutes of Society and Communion with God, must be
purely of Gods positive Ordinance, so by that must they be designed to be under
Order and Conduct, which no Man also can by any Humane or Natural Right assume,
Priest of Divine Ordinance.
the delegation of God being as necessary to Authorize the Minister, as the
Institution of God to the Ministry, and therefore in the Law and Gospel both
are ordained together. And even before the Law, even from the beginning of
Public Worship, the Patriarchs were of God made Prophets, Friests, Patriar^hs
by Divine Ordinance.
and Preachers of Righteousness, to the An^^diluvian World, and offered
Sacrisices in order to a Mystic Communion and Foedoral Society with God. For
thus Noah immediately after the Flood, by virtue of his Prophetic Priesthood,
which he had before it, offered a B^rnt Offering for expiation, and and a
siveet favor, to render God propitious, Noah as a Priest and Prophet, a grand
Type of Christ.
not only to his then little Family, but to all future Generations, as the then
great Priest and Mediator for all Posterities to come, and therein a Type of
the High Priest of our Salvation, who after he had founded his Church as an Ark
on the Baptismal Waters, afterward Sanctified it with his Blood, us one final
propitiation for the World, never from thence to experience or need another
Baptismal lustration but the Christian. And in like manner the other Mystical
Rites, Laws, and Sacrifices of the other Patriarchs, carried in them a Typical
reference to Mysteries hid under them from Generations, and unveiled under the
Gospel, Successive Orders from a Prophetic Original.
which therefore (being Prophetical and presigurative) must be first at least
Ministered by Prophets, though their continuance might descend by Order of
Succession in them which were no Prophets; but then however the Order, owing
its Original to a Prophetic Ordinance, still juscifies this truth, that the
Ministers of Mystic Offices in Religion, must be such as derive Authority
herein from a Divine Ordination. And tho at first sight the succession of the
Priesthood seems to have generally descended to the Firstborn, very probably
according to the Jewish Traditions, Sacred Succession in the First Born no
natural Right of Primogeniture, but of Gods positive Ordinance.
which seem well grounded in the Mosaic History, yet the certain Right of such
Sacred Succession was not founded in the Natural Right of Primogeniture, but
the Ordinance of God adorning it with such a Sanctity; tho I know St. Augustine
and others are willing to believe the Antediluvian Patriarchs not to be the
Firstborn, because of the great Age of their Parents, before they begat the
Patriarchs descending from them; but upon this I think there is no dependence
either way, nor Matter neither, since at last it comes all to one, viz. That
their Sacred Patriarchate was the positive Ordinance and Gift of God, and was
so therefore in all Successors whatsoever without exception. At length it was
transferred by God from the Phylarchal Successors in the Families of Jacob to
the House of Levi, The Succession translated to the Tribe of Levi, etc.
inalienably.
and the Sons of Aaron; from which Tribe and Family it was never alienable by any
Kings of their own or Foreign Nations, upon this Principle above set, that a
Society of Divine Constitution cannot be rightly dissolved or aliened but by
him that founded it. Nor do the frequent Changes of the Highpriests under
Heathen Powers conclude against this Truth, because God's having before
destroyed the Succession, and the Genealogies by his Provdences tending
gradually to a dissolution of that State, according to Gods own Will, and he
ratifying however for the time the intruded by the Spirit of Prophecy, shows
those changes to be valid, not upon bare humane presumption, but the Divine
purpose. The arbitrary changes of Highpriests on what grounds admitted.
And as the Law of God rendered the Rights of the Priesthood inalienable by any
Civil Constitution, so the like imagined Sanctity of the Heathen Priesthoods
rendered them unobnoxious, Sanctity of Heathen Priests
as being the supposed Secretaries of their Gods. And indeed so great was ever
the luster of the Priesthood with Princes and People, that probably the Priests
who had led the People to an apostasy from God in the design at Babel, Priests
from the dispersion at Babel becoming the first Kings.
under their Chief Leader Nimrod, did upon their dispersions share the before
one Kingdom of God into many, which they severally assumed to themselves, and
became the first Kings, according to the old Custom of the same Persons being
Kings and Priesis; as, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phabique Sacerdos. For so
Melchisedek, Melchisedek Priest and King.
Priest of the most High God in his yearly days was King of Salem; and if there
be any Argument from the Antitype Christ Jesus to the Type, it is certain, that
in his humane Nature he performed his Priestly Office, in offering himself up a
Sacrifice for us, before he sat down on the Throne of Majesty on high; and by
proportion Melchisedek his grand Type might be a Priest first in order of
reason, (if not time) before he was King, the Priesthood being most certainly
planted by God among Men before any Kingly Power. Kingly Power then arising
after the Priestly, and lodged at first in the dispersed Priests over their
respective partitions; Kingly Power arising out of Priestly.
no wonder, when after the Dignities were divided into different Subjects, that
yet the Highpriests retained the same Honors as before, even with the Lay
Princes, not exorbitating into open Tyranny, which their violation was ever
accounted to be, and to call for Divine Vengeance, as in the Tyranny of
Agamemnon on old Chryses the Priest of Apollo. Hence the Priest of On (or
Heliopolis) his Daughter was thought the greatest and sit Match for Joseph,
Joseph's Wife 4 Priests Daughter.
that next unto Pharaoh sat Lord over all the Land of Egypt; Priests Lands
Sacred and inalienable.
nor were the Priests Lands touched by Joseph or Pharaoh under the Exigences of
that Famine, while all the Land else was sold unto him for Bread; but they were
all fed on the Royal Stores at free Cost. And as Philo and Josephus magnify the
Jewish High Priesthood above rather than under Royalty, Priests Prior to Kings
in point of sanctity posterior in point of power.
so do the Profane Histories of the Heathens in point of Sanctity give
Priesthood the Priority, tho in point of Power they give it to the Regale. And
it is the more to be wondered this in Heathens, who being altogether Carnalized,
one should have thought would have given all to the armed Prince, and no more
than his Grace had pleased to the Sacrisicing Hierophant. Nay, tho Humility be
one of the dictinctives of Christianity, and so ought most signally to appear
in its Priests, against all, even the slightest arrogances, or self
Reflections; yet we find, when the assertion of the Sanctity has been necessary
to take off Imperial insolence, several the best of Catholic Fathers have
imitated St. Paul, Christian Priests magnifying their Office against Kingly
Usurpations.
in magnifying their Office to the vindication of their Liberty; for instances
of which, there will be occasion in due place.

. 4. To assert therefore the inviolable Right and Authority of a Divine
Ordinance or Commission against the Powers and Designs of Kings, I could here
well allege Elias his dealing with Baal's Prophets at Mount Carmel, before
Abab's eyes, and against his will; the assembling of the Elders of Judah and
Israel under the first Babylonish Captivity before Ezekiel, to consult their
common Affairs against the interests of the King of Babylon, and all the
opposition of Prophets made against wicked Princes. But letting these pass,
Jeroboam's Case.
the singular and extraordinary Case of Jeroboam will not be content to be
omitted. By the Constitution of the Law ( Exodus 23.14, 15, 16, 17. and 34, 23,
24.) all the Men Children of the twelve Tribes were to appear before God three
times in the year, at the place of his Residence, which in Jeroboams time was
in Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem. Now Jeroboam by particular Prophecy and
Providence became King of the Ten Tribes, that revolted from Rehoboam the Son
of Solomon. But Jerusalem was the very Metropolis of Rehoboams Kingdom; so that
fearing that by this observation of the Law in all his Males appearing three
times a year to Worship at Jerusalem, his People would return to the House of
David, he turned them away from that form of Religion and Society with God at
Jerusalem, to the Calves he had set up as the Symbols of God's presence at Dan,
and at Bethel. And because the Tribe of Levi would not be with him, he himself
became a Priest, and made such as he could get, every one that would, of the
meanest People. And now if Worldly Policy, and Civil Counsels will excuse a
deflexion from Divine Ordinances, here were all imaginable Pleas for excuse, or
justification herein. But God, that gave this Law for such appearances at the
place of his presence, had backed it with a promise to prevent all fears of a
Surprise. No Man, says God, shall desire thy Land, when thou shall go up to
appear before the Lord thy God thrice in the year. But because Jeroboam might
perhaps take this Promise only to respect, or intend a security against Aliens,
not their fellow Tribes, therefore God sent him a Prophet to Bethel, with a
miraculous Power to reclaim him from his diffidences to the observation of the
Law; which not working upon the King, this thing became a Sin and Snare to him,
his House, and his People, to their utter excision; a Document for ever to all
Earthly Powers, not to entail upon themselves, Jeroboam's Case exemplary to all
Kings.
their Posterities, and their People the Curse of the Almighty, in the
violation of his Ordinances.

But to conclude all with some general Considerations on Christianity, I do not
at all doubt, but that the Dr. will assert to us Christians, a Right and
Liberty, Right of frequent Christian Worship on Holy Day, and o^ her frequent
days, and hou^^, with other Us^g^^.
both Natural and Divine, to Assemble often in Public Worship, and Holy
Services of the Church, not only on the Lords Day and at our Festivals, Fasts
and Vigils; but every day, two, three, or more times a Day, if we can have
leisure, though our Princes should forbid us these Times and Frequences. I may
well add; that we may do these Devotions in Consecrated Places, and several
Catholic Appendages of Devotion, though for these there be no express Command in
Scripture, and for most of them no Instances. The Ancient Church owned several
Usages in the Church for Canons Apostolical, Canons Apostolical.
and not a few of that Collection, which we have under that Character,
descended from the Apostolical Age and Practice, as the Traditions of the most
Ancient Fathers evince, and the Substrate Reasons of them, will still be of
very great Use, and Eternal Convenience. And must we be bound to quit all these
(even not Mystic) Institutions at the Arbitrary pleasure of Civil Powers,
while yet Constantine Constant. Mag. ad Synod. Tyr. ap. Ensch. de vit. Co^d. l.
4. c. 42. and l. 3 c. 57.
(beyond whom I thought no Clergy man would prescribe or claim Prerogative, for
all Christian Princes) thought himself obliged to Revere, and Submit to such
Traditional Canons, which were by the Catholic Church, received as of
Apostolical Age or Original?

CHAP. IV. Of the Divine Right of Christian Synods.
1. NOW if we have a Divine Right of Convening for Worship in popular
Assemblies, with an unalienable Authority of using many unscriptural Usages,
and convenient Appendages in this Service, why should not our Spiritual
Governors have Authority to Assemble in Consultation for the good Conduct of
the Common Assemblies, or what Prerogative is violated by this Liberty? But
because a positive Constitution of God is what Time-servers, and
Anti-Hierarchists do so particularly demand from us (though very unwilling that
you should so squeeze and torment their pretenses to a Divine Title) I will
however, to gratify even the peevish, endeavor to do the Church, and them too,
Reason in this Point.

2. As then our Faith is a Mysterious Doctrine, Our Faith and Sacraments
Mysterious.
discovered originally to certain Christian Patriarchs, and Preachers of
Righteousness, whose Doctoral Office and Order, has descended by Ecclesiastical
Ordinations to the whole Church, so our Sacramental Ordinances are Priestly and
Hallowing Mysteries, committed also by Divine Ordinance, Committed by God to
set Orders.
to proper Priests; and lastly, the Mystic Powers of the Hierarchy, of the
Keys, Hierarchial Powers.
of binding and loosing, of remitting and retaining of sins in Earth, to be
ratified above by Christ in Heaven, was deposited in the Apostles, the first
Fundamental Bishops under Christ, and derived down to all their Successors,
with whom he promised his presence, even to the end of the World, that so the
Gates of Hell might not prevail over the Church committed to their Charge;
Consecration by Mystical Imposition of Hand
to which end, among others, they are by a Mystical Imposition of Hands,
blessed and consecrated unto such Measures of the Holy Spirit, as are suitable
to so high and holy a Function, and such Mystic Offices. Now, if this in Fact
be so, then our Rule holds good, that none can attempt these Powers, but by
Divine Commission, either Original, or Successive; the Divine Maxim of the
Author to the Hebrews ( c. 5.4.) holding true of these Priesthoods, as well as
those in the House of Aaron, Priesthood not assumable but by Divine Commistion.
That no Man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron. Now to secure this Truth and Matter of Fact, we have St. Paul's
Testimonies to the full, in several places; namely, That Christ has placed in
the Church Pastors, Powers Ilicr^rchi^^l instincted by Christ.
Teachers, Governments, in which, they that Rule are to Rule well, and with
diligence, and to be therefore accounted worthy of, or assigned double Honor,
and to be obeyed and submitted to, as they that watch for our Souls, for which
they must give Account, as Stewards of God, Mysteries, 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.8.
1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor. 4.1. from whence it is as clear as Noon day,
that the Christian Laity are by Divine Ordinance under Governors Hierarchical;
And being so, are in a Subordinate state of Ecclesiastical Society with God
under their Spiritual Rulers, and being antecedently so before, are therefore
independently so consociated as to Civil Societies, according to the Doctrine
of the Letter.

3. But this is not all that deserves observation in this matter; But, beside
the different Orders of Governors, the Unity of the Catholic Church is to be
much considered under these several Governors, either as one Divine School of
Christian Piety under many Doctors; The Catholic Unity of the Church a^ (...)
^^chool A^^^y, or ^olity under several Principal Governors. The Twelve and the
Seventy
or of one Army in many Partitions under their respective Head Officers or
Lieutenants General under Christ the great Captain of our Salvation; or as one
Polity under many Optimates. For first our Savior came as a Doctor sent from
God, and gathered under him Disciples, of these he ordained twelve chief
Doctors, and seventy Inferiors to collect more unto, and instruct them in this
School, when collected. Now a collection of Disciples into one Society is but
one School, how large soever it grows, and how many Teachers soever the
Enlargements do required. So many Tutors there are in one College, and many
Colleges in one University. Since then also the whole Catholic Church of
Christ is but one general School of his Foundation, though the Doctors that teach
it have their several Rooms and Mansions for their particular Shares, these
Partitions for Convenience do not divide the general Society into Independent
Separations. No Independencies in Christ's Church.
The same sort of Unity is to be maintained in the Notion of an Army, or Church
Militant, by Sacramental Vow under Christ's Banner, under the conduct of its
general Officers. And lastly, if we consider it as the one City, or Kingdom of
God, committed by its Prince (during his abscence) to several Viceroys assigned
their respective Districts and Jurisdictions, these are the Bishops succeeding
in this Authority to the Apostles. So that this One School, One Army, One City,
though distributively to be governed by the several Rulers as to particular and
local Offices, yet as to the Interests of the common Unity and Preservation it
must be governed Aristocratically by common Council and Unanimous Authority.
Conciliar Assemblies necessary to an Aristocracy.
And as no Monarch can well Govern without a set of Counselors to Advise, such
as the Clergy, or Chapter of a Diocese ought to be to a Bishop in his District;
So the Optimates of an Aristocracy cannot not only not Wisely, but not
Authoritatively act without Conciliar Forms and Methods, and they are therefore
themselves one standing, fundamental Council for the whole Subject Body. And
hence is the Right of Provincial Synods, The Catholic Right and Primitive use
of Provincial Synods.
to be held all over the Catholic Church, fundamentally necessary to the
Catholic Uniformity of Conduct, and Unity depending thereupon; to the end,
that what each Council resolves, may be transmitted to the rest, and so
mutually treated of, if need be, by the intervention of Legates, or ratified,
if there be no doubt or need of discussions; which was the original form of
Catholic Government and Communion in the Christian Church, before the Empire
set up Christ's Banner; and was received as of Apostolical Canon. So that, if
the Visible Unity of the Catholic Church, as one common Society and Community,
No need of Scriptural Record for requiring such forms of Government.
be of Divine Structure, the very Truth and Faith hereof immediately imports an
Aristocracy, and that a Right of Conciliar Assemblies and Legations. So that
there needed no Scriptural Record requiring this, while the Frame and Order
hereof was before laid in the first Structure of the Church, and Universally
known as Established in it before any Scriptures of the New Testament were
conceived or lodged in the Archives of the Church, as is confessed by the
instances of this Conciliar form of Government extant in these Scriptures, to
be by and by alleged. For it is further to be considered, that the Convention
of these Synods is not universally of constant and indispensably necessary
frequency, Synods mostly upon emergencies.
to be fixed to stated times, but upon emergencies mostly, which yet are
frequent enough, and in the days of Persecution, it is as inconvenient many
times to the Spiritual, as dangerous to the Temporal Interests of Christians;
'twas therefore fitter to leave the exercise of that Authority free to the
public Ecclesiastic Prudence, Not to be held constantly in times of danger.
as to the actual exercise and menage thereof, than to confine it to particular
Rules, Times, and Limits, Cyp. Ep. 56. 3. Nec quisquam, cum populunmostrum
fugari conspexerit metu persecutionis, and spargi, con^urbetur, quod collection
fraternitatem non videat, nec tractantes Episcopos andiat, etc.
by Express and Canonical Precept, without reserve to a necessary Liberty. Nor
need this be thought strange, since the Assemblies for Doctrine and Worship,
though apparently of Divine Right, as to daily use and practice, and under
absolute Obligations unto ordinary and public frequency, yet are under no
Sabbatical rigor, nor indispensable precept of Stationary days, being left to
the imitation of the Original and Primitive Practices, as much as Times, and
Occurrences will permi^, or direct, for the best Spiritual Service of the
Church. And therefore much more may the convention of Synods be left at
Liberty, for whose stated Returns there are no constant nor fixed Reasons, nor
Examples in the Scriptures, nor the Writers of the next Succession to the
Apostles, even as to times of Peace, much less as to times of Persecution.

4. But further yet, to recommend the reasonableness hereof, let it be
considered, that a great deal of the Hierarchical Rules of Order and Polity is
truly of Apostolical Prescription, Catholic Right for placing Bishops in
Cities.
and Catholickly received for such in, and through all the first Ages, for which
however we have no Catholic Laws, or Canons in Scripture. The General and
Primitive Practice of placing Bishops in every City was of Apostolical
Direction and Practice, Cyp. Ep. 52. 16. Cum jampridem per omnes provincias,
etc per urbes singulas ordinati sint Episcopi, etc. vide Praeced.
but without a Preceptive Obligation upon the whole Church for ever; some whole
Countries having but one Bishop; some one Bishop to two Cities, and elsewhere a
Village Bishop. Yet no doubt the Catholic Church has a divine Right of placing
Bishops in every City, for upon that Right St. Paul ordered Tit us to do so in
Crete, that order not being the first Charter of the Catholic Right herein,
(for it was but a Personal, and Local Order for Tit us, and Crete) but grounded
upon a general Right in the Apostles, and by them left to their Suffragans and
Successors, to place the Clerical Orders, where they saw most convenient, which
according to all Reason was chiefly and principally to be done in Cities, The
Convenicacies in the Empire observed for the Government of the Church.
observing those conveniences for the public Government of the Church, which,
being found by experience useful in the Exarchates and Provinces of the Empire,
appeared in general to the Apostles and their Successors, as useful to the
Catholic Hierarchy. Wherefore where a Right is Divinely constituted, the use
whereof ought to be left to Freedom and Prudence, it is not only needless, but
incongruous and hurtful to tie up the exercises of such Right to precise
Limits, which is I think a good account why Synods in Scripture are not under
precept.

CHAP. V. Of Scripture Synods or Councils.
. 1. THE grounds of Synodical Authority being duly laid in a Divine Charter, it
is necessary now to proceed to the Instances hereof in Holy Scripture; matters
of Fact, allowed good upon Record, being very good Illustrations in Law of that
Right on which they were practiced and received. This is what also I am more
particularly obliged to, since the Doctor is loath to own any Instances of this
kind; not willingly that of Acts xv. for such a Synod as he was speaking of. In
which I confess he is not alone, but accompanied with a great crowd of
Anti-Hierarchical Critics, and other poorer Scriblers, which cannot merit that
Character. But if the practice of the Catholic Church, as well as the formal
reason of the thing it self, evinces, that an Ecclesiastical Council or Synod
is an Assembly of Ministers in Consult for the Spiritual Conduct of the Church,
The Desinition of a Council or Synod, p. 60.
or according to the Doctors more unaccurate definition, a meeting of
Ecclesiastical Persons upon an Ecclesiastical affair, I believe the Doctors
second thoughts will set him at Rights, that there manifestly appear several
Sessions properly Conciliar, with their Acts Synodical, in the New Testament.

2. That our Savior instituted two Colleges of Doctors, one of the Twelve,
and the second of the Seventy, Christ's two Colleges of Doctors.
cannot I think be doubted; under whom the Lay Disciples constituted were the
first Rudiments of the Catholic Church, r^presented by the Princes of the
Twelve Tribes, and the Seventy Elders of Israel, which later were no doubt a
Society Ecclesiastical in their first unrecorded Originals, since they appear
to be so in the two Convocations of them by Moses, Exodus 24. Nam. 11. Ignat. ad
Philadelph. -- (...)
and in other places of an obscurer intimation of such a College. Nor can it
be doubted before Moses his days, but that each Tribe had its (...), all which
were concerned in the common Conduct of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, to which
our Saviors Promise to the College of the Twelve has relation, when he says,
they should sit upon Twelve Thrones, The Twelve Apostles one College.
Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel as one common Society. Now the Twelve
Apostles are herein too to be taken for a College, because it appears, that
St. Peter by St. Matthew is, Mat. 10.
called the first in order, and appears, in all Conferences of the Twelve
whatsoever, St. Peter Prolocutor.
to be the Prolocutor. So neither the Twelve, nor the Seventy, though sent out
first two by two throughout Jewry, were yet several only, and Incoherent herent
Ministers, but were Sociated into two Colleges or Fraternities, and to appear
as such in all their Conventious.

3. Christ then a little before his Ascension, being Assembled with Eleven
Apostles, commands them not to depart from Jerusalem till the illapse of the
Holy Chost at Pentecost. A Council for electing an Apostle in the Room of Judas.
This they observed accordingly, and gathered to themselves about an ^^o
Disciples, a number held sufficient for a Synagogue. In this Interyal St.
Peter, the constant Prolocutor of the Upper College, proposes the Substitution
of a Successor to the Apostleship, from which Judas by Transgression fell, by a
consulted Recommendation of two fit Persons unto God, of which two the Divine
Lot was to determine the Successor. Here then being a Session of Eleven
Apostles in an Assembly of 120 Disciples, putting them all upon Council and
Consideration, for a Successor to Judas, an affair Fundamentally
Ecclesiastical, Act. 1. I hope will appear to the Doctor to be a Council, if
not a Synod Ecclesiastical, in which there can be no other difference but this,
that a Synod, Difference between a Synod and Council.
is so called in respect of their Convening together from their several proper
Seats, but it is called a Council from their actual Session, speaking properly.
After the Effusion of the Holy Spirit, and the intrease of the Church, by the
Accession of both Jews and Greeks, the Greeks murmured against the Hebrews,
that their Widows were neglected in the daily Ministrations. A Council for the
Election of 7 Deacons.
Whereupon the Twelve called the multitude of the Disciples unto them, and bid
them Recommend seven Men of honest Report, and full of the Holy Spirit, to whom
they might commit that Diaconate, by their Apostolic Imposition of Hands,
which was done accordingly. So here was a Meeting of Ecclesiastical Persons
upon an Ecclesiastical Affair, and so a Matter of Synodical Polity, under
Authority Apostolical, Acts 6. Upon the Persecation, St. Cyprian says, that
the Apostles sent Philip to Samania. Ep. 73.^8.
which began in the stoning of S^ Stephen, there followed a dispersion of the
Church from Jerusadem; but they that were scattered abroad, went every where
preaching the Word, and Philip the Deacon, made a vast Conversion at Samaria;
of which, when the Apostles which, were still at Jerusadem, heard, they sent
unto them Peter and John, Mission an Act of Conciliar Authority.
to lay their Hands upon them, for the Reception of the Holy Spirit. Here was
most formally a Mission from the Apostolic College de propaganda fide, of two
the most Eminent of their Body, and was an Act of Conciliar Form, Authority,
Government, and Communication, Acts 8.14, 15. To the Authority of which
College, St. Peter accountable to the College of Apostles
in public Council, St. Peter himself was forced to give an account at his
return, for his having Preached to, and Baptized the Gentiles, Acts 11.1, 2,
etc. Upon the same Persecution several preached the Gospel to the Jews alone,
in Phenice, Cyprus, and Antioch; in which last, some also preached to the
Greeks, and turned great numbers of them to the Lord; and when Tidings thereof
came to the Church at Jerusalem, they send forth Barnabas to Antioch, which
Mission must be ordered Conciliarly by the Apostles, of which three only had
departed from the College, Peter, John, and Barnabas, and Peter had returned
before this Mission of Barnabas, Acts 11. though after Herod had killed the
Apostle, James Major, and Imprisoned Peter to the same end, by the Conduct of
an Angel, Peter went off a second time, Eldersunder the Apostles in the College
at Jerusalem.
Acts 12. Nor were there only Apostles still presiding at Jerusalem, but Elders
also under them, to whom, when Earnabas and Saul returned to give Account of
their Ministry, they delivered the Collection made for the Brethren of Judea,
Acts 11.30. Which Elders were a second Clerical Order in that standing Council.
The 24 Elders in the Revelation, represented as a College.
What the Twenty four Elders in the Revelation were particularly intended to
represent, it is not Material to Conjecture; it is only observable here, that
they are represented as in one Assembly. When some from Judea came to An^ioch,
and Preached to the Gentiles the necessity of Circumcision, and were Opposed by
Paul and Barnabas herein 3 The Church there was resolved to Consult the
Determination of the highest Authority, The College of Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem, the S^preme Authority.
which then was in the College of Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, who from
that Metropolis, yet jointly and Synodically Governed all Ecclesiastical
Matters, needing their Determination. The Legates therefore from Antioch, being
received by this College, and having given an Account of their Affairs in
Public Assembly, certain of the believing Pharisees at Jerusalem, urged the
necessity of Circumcising the Gentiles. Whereupon the Apostles and Elders came
together to consider of this Matter; The Session at Jerusalem about
Circumcision.
among whom the Old Prolocutor, Peter first, next Paul and Barnabas, and last
of all James Minor, (afterward probably the Bishop of that Place, upon the
dispersion of the rest Apostles) delivered their Senses and Resolutions for the
Negative, in which the whole Council Acquiesced. And so it pleased the
Apostles, and Elders, and the whole Church, to send Synodical Legates and
Epistles to the Gentile Churches in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, letting them
know. That it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Them, to lay upon them no
more than four necessary Things, to abstain from Meats offered to Idols, from
Blood, from things strangled, and from Fornication; assuring them withal, that
those Circumcisionists from Jerusalem, had not that in Commandment from the
College of Apostles and Elders, to impose the Doctrine of Circumcision on
them. Whereby is imported, that that Council, or College, had a Commanding
Power on Missionaries; though in virtue of that they had given these Zealots, no
such Circumcising Commandment. Syned. Afiicara ad Cornel. ap. Cyp. Ep. 54.
placuit nel is Spiritu Sarcio suggerente, and Domino per visiones multas and
manifestas admonente, etc.
This was so very formal a Synod, and the Acts and Concerns thereof so formally
Synodical, that hence all Synods, Convened upon Religious Questions and
Debates, have acted in prescription from this, as their Platform, or Original
Pattern. And yet the Dr. tells us, That whether this were such a Synod, as he
and the Letter was then speaking of, may very justly be doubted. Now what sort
of Synod the Dr. intends his then Speech about, I cannot tell. p. 60.
If his General Definition of a Synod will do, this was certainly such, as
fully as ever any was; or if he means such a Synod as the Churches usually were
directed by; I am sure he can find no essential Reason or Form wanting. But if
^e means one of Hen. the Eight his Convocations, there indeed we must fail him.
But to such a one as this, the Letter pretended no Divine Constitution or
Example; and therefore it is not about such a Synods Divine Right, that the
Dispute lies; nor would the Dr. have opposed a Divine Right, to such a Model,
that would so ^^^ctually have Consecrated his enslaving Hypothesis. No, no;
it is not this sort, for which the Letter lays Divine Foundations; (...) it is
for such a freedom of Synods, which our Religious Prince has deprived us of.
So that the Doctors Exception properly is, either that this of Jerusalem was
not an Ecclesiastical or Canonical Council, or if it were, that it was not sice
and exempt from Civil Coercion. An exact Man here would have laid out all his
force, and have set forth on what sort of Synods the Debate is, with a
description of its Constituent Forms, in distinction from others, to have been
as accurately described. Nor will a Man's haste, nor avocations Excuse such
Omissions, by which Divines, Students, and Learners may be blindly led into
dangerous Errors. Which defect, therefore, I hope, he will supply in the next
Edition, and Vindication of his Book. But to go on; Elders of Asia convened
from Ephesus to Miletus.
The Elders of the Church of Asia, being together at Ephesus, (as the Bishops
and Deacons were at Philippi, Phil. 1.1.) were all Convened by St. Paul to
Miletus, to receive his Apostolical Order against those ravening Wolves, that
should after his departure, arise, to pervert the people from the Faith, and to
draw Disciples after them; against whom he bids them Watch, taking heed unto
themselves, and to the Flock, of which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops;
viz. the whole Church of Asia under the Metropolis of Ephesus. And can we
think, that this was a precept of separate watches, and not rather common and
united Cares, there being many of them fixed in that one Provincial Church of
Asia? But if they were obliged to joint Cares, it must be by joint Counsels,
and such will justify, and require Conferences, and Synods, thereunto, such as
even this at Miletus was, being a Meeting of Ecclesiastical Persons upon an
Ecclesiastical Affair, Presbyterys
Acts 20. Presbyteries further are a Synod or Council of Elders; and such there
were in those days, such as Convened unto James, their Bishop at Jerusalem,
where Paul found them Assembled at his last being there, Acts 21. And that
Presbytery, by which Timothy was ordained, was such an Ecclesiastical
Convention, as quadrates with the Drs. Definition, 1 Timothy 4.14.

3. Besides in Judicial Processes, St. Paul's Censures in Public.
as St. Paul did pass Censures in the most solemn and public Conventions of
Churches, (as that of Corinth, wherein no doubt there was an Hierarchical
College) either in Person, or by Deputy, upon Epistle, or Mandate; and thereby
deliver wicked Men over unto Satan, when out of the Protection of Gods Grace,
in the Communion of the Church; so does he give order to Bishops, by him
Constituted, thus to govern all inferior Orders by Judicial Discipline; to the
Authority whereof, as every Bishop has a Divine Right, Presbyters of Council to
the Bishops.
so all Bishops, that have not the miraculous Spirit of discerning, do need
many times a Council of their Elders, as to assist their Authority, and greaten
the Solemnity, so to advise them in Casuistical and Doubtful Questions, in
order to a Just and Convincing Determination, where as single and unconsulted
Procedures, Unconsulted Procedures.
as they are liable to many real Obliquities, so do they lie open to far more
Suspicions and Calumnies, than it is possible for a fair and well established
Judgment to do. A Method therefore always observed (where it could be) in the
primitive Ages, as being no doubt of Canon Apostolical. But because by mere
Divine Right of Order all Bishops, are of equal Power, and consequently no one
singly, has any judiciary Authority over another, Cyp. ad Sreph. Ep. 67.
iccirco copiosam corpus est sacerdotum concordiae mu^^ae ^utino atque uni^atis
vinculo cop^latum ut siquit ex collegio nostro haeresin facere and gregem
Christi lacerare and vastare ^entaverit, subveniant caeteri.
therefore to the examination and Censure of a disorderly Bishop, and his Acts,
whether public or private, upon Informations or Appeals, a Synod of Bishops
has been ever thought, and Convened as necessary, and of Divine Right, as well
as Apostolical Canon.

CHAP. VI. Of Cathedral Synods, in the three first Centuries, and their
Authority.
1. WHether the loss of the Alexandrian Library, be worthy the Complaint of the
Christian World, I leave to the Judgment of the Curious, and Admirers of the
Heathen Rarities. But, though the bulk of those Christian Monuments, which are
lost in the Calamities of the three first Genturies, was not very great, as far
as we can Judge by Eusebius, and other Authors, and Catalogists; yet the want
of their Testimonies and Senses about Matters Ecclesiastical, convinces us,
that the loss of them, is one of the greatest Misfortunes and Damages, that we
have reason to bewail from the Ruins of time. And as the enjoyment of those
Memorials would have given greater Authority to our Doctrines, and Usages,
which the ignorant or wanton World, now controverts, so particularly we had had
thence a vast light in the Matter before us, concerning the Doctrine,
Authority, Forms, Rules, Uses and Venerations of the Primitive Synods,
especially in the Volumes of their Acts and Epistles, of which very little now
remains in the Writings that are preserved.

2. However, Presbyteries under the Bishop.
notwithstanding these Invaluable Losses, yet so much appears in what we have
left us, that every Bishopric was a Polity, consisting of a Bishop with his
Subordinate Presbyters and Deacons, to Consult, Advise, and Assist the Bishop,
and to Execute his Decrees, upon the Result of their common Considerations. And
not only so; Metropolitans and Primates.
but that Bishops were consociated into Provincal Systems, under the Priority
of their Metropolitans and Primates, chiefly in the Sees of Apostolical
Foundation, and above all others, that of Jerusalem over the Churches of the
Circumcision, till the last Ruin of the Jews, and that City under Adrian, and
Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch in the Gentile World.

3. To offer proofs for this to the Dr. or any professed Member of the Church
of England, is an unnecessary and impertinent Trouble. And the more needless,
because the Truth thereof has been made illustriously appear in many Volumes,
written for the Episcopal Hierarchy, against all its Modern Enemies, of what
Character or Extraction soever. But some little Strictures and Notices, that
may more appositely quadrate with the Matter of the present Debate, I must beg
the Doctor his patience to admit.

4. And first concerning the State of Sees Episcopal, it is not only evident,
that there were in the Succession from the Apostles, Presbyters under the
Bishop, if the Sea were full, but these were Concorporated into Colleges, for
Counsel to the Bishop for the respective Bishoprics. Vide Origin. con. Cells.
l. 3.
And he that in this Age gives us the clearest Account of the Prelacy, i. e.
Ignatius the Martyr, gives us the like of these Conciliar Colleges, which he,
on that very Notion, collectively calls Presbyteries. Had he only named them
Plurally and Masculinely Elders, I could not have laid so much Stress upon it;
but when he calls them, as in one System, neutrally a Prethytery, and a
Synedrium or Council, this convinces every Man, that admits the Medicean Copy
for Genuine, (wherein they are so Styled) that they were a Council for the Sea,
or Bishopric, Represented and Recommended by this Father as a Polity of Divine
Constitution. Ign. ad Ephesians. (...) (V. G. (...)) (...)
Thus he suggests to the Ephesians, that an obedience to their Bishop and the
Presbytery, is necessary to their Sanctification; which therefore must suppose
a Divinely Instituted Subjection hereto, as to an Ordinance of Divine
Authority, no Humane Coalitions upon mere Rational Prudence, being of any so
high a Virtue as to Sanctify. So he enjoins them to Assemble in one Faith.
Ibid. (...)
-- To obey tho Bishop and the Presbytery, with an indiscerpible Resolution;
which therefore must be the Effect and Consequence of one Faith, and
consequently of Divine Intention, as being stated under the Bishop, (...) etc.
Vide. Id. ad Magnes. (...)
as the Synedrium of the Apostles under God: So for the Magnesians; he calls
the Presbytery the Spiritual Corona of the Bishop, not the Prudential. Nor were
these little Occasional Transports, but fixed Senses in the Holy Martyr, Ep. ad
Trall. (...) (V. G. (...) vid. Ep. ad Smyr. (...) (vide plura ap. V. G.) --
(...) -- Ep. ad Philad. (...), etc. -- (...) Ep. ad Polycarp. (...) etc. Vide
plura ejusmodi in Psendepig. Ign. and Inscriptionem Epist. Polycarp. ad
Philippens. Cypr. Ed. 34. 4. Presbyterii honorem, etc. -- sessuri nobiscum,
etc. ita Ep. 35, 42. 2, 3.
as appears by their frequent repetitions, requiring an Obedience still to the
Presbyteries as to the Apostles, which had been extravagant to a Miracle, had
not Presbyteries been of Divine Institution; on Faith of which he calls it the
Council of God, without which, whosoever Acts any thing Ecclesiastical, is not
of a pure Conscience; as being Concorporated for the Unity of the Church, there
being but one Lords Supper, and one Altar of God, as there is but one Bishop
together with his Presbytery, to unity, with which all penitent Schismatics,
must return in order to the remission of their Sins. So that such a System of
Presbyteries in every Bishopric appears, by this Disciple of the Apostles, and
Bishop of their Consecration, to be of Divine Ordinance for a Council to the
Bishop and the Bishopric, in all its occasions. So that so many places,
attesting such a Systematick Consociation of Presbyteries in every See, will
bid a fair Interpretation for all those other places, which require observance to
Elders, plurally only named, See in the mean time, Ep. 6. 5. Solus rescribere
nibil potui -- nibil sine consilio vsstro, etc. Ep. 18. and 24.
but collectively understood as an Ecclesiastic Council; and so of the Deacons
the same is most probable, because they are generally set with the Bishop and
the Presbytery in these Rules of Hierarchical Discipline and Union, according
to the forms of those Synods of St. Cyprians which generally contained the
Deacons as well as Presbyters gathered together in the face of the whole
Church, in affairs that did concern all the Orders thereof, of which more will
be spoken, when we come to particulars.

5. In the vacancy the Clergy of Council for the Bishop rick.
Nor were they only of Counsel and Sub Society to the Bishop while the Sea was
full, but they were a Council for the Vacant Bishopric during the Interval, to
inspect and conduct the public state thereof, and to give and receive Letters
of Communion between other Churches. For though in the Vacancies Presbyters were
not able to do all Episcopal Offices in their own Right, as Ordination,
Anathematizing, Absolution, etc. yet all things preparatory hereunto were in
their power, as Examination, Regulation, Suspension, Injunctions of Penance,
etc. in which the vacant Bishopric was to be Canonically Subject and Obedient,
reserving higher Procedures to the higher Authorities of, either the
neighboring Bishops, at the present, or their proper Bishop next to succeed.
Ign. ad Romans
For though Ignatius tells the Romans, (...) Ep. ad Antiochen. (...)
that his Church in Syria at Antioch, had now in his steed Christ, and Christ
only for her Pastor and Bishop; yet in that ascribed to him sent to his own
Antiochians, he charges the Presbyters to feed the Flock, till God should give
them a Governor, and the People in the mean time to be subject to the
Presbyters and Deacons. And though this is indeed an Apocriphal Epistle, yet it
is an unexceptionable Canon specisied in it, and far from an Imposture, that
the Clergy should Govern the Laity in the Vacancy. So Polycarp in his Epistle
to the Church at Philippi, then, as it seems, Polycarps ad Philippens charges
the(...) that is, the Laity, (...) Vide Cypr. Ep. 35. (...) etc.
without a Bishop, (for otherwise the Canon required him to have mentioned him
in the first place) directs the Presbyters to be Merciful, Visiters of the
Needy, Converters of them that Err, forbearing Wrath, Partiality, Unjust
Judgment, Severity, etc. the Laity to be subject to them. And when it shall be
considered, that in these days the several Presbyters had not several
Congregations apart to themselves, but were all one common College over one
People in every See, and the Rule of the Government and Obedience setin this
Epistle, is to the Elders in common without any distributive appropriation, it
will then be as clear, that they were a Council for the Church in the Vacancy,
as a Council to the Bishop in the Plenarty; To which the express Testimonies of
the Epistles reciprocated between Bishops and Vacant Sees, under the Conciliar
Conduct of the Clergy, are full and convincing. Cler. Romans Clero. Carthag. int.
Epist. Cypr. Ep. 3. 1. and cum incumbat whis, qui videmur praepositi esse, and
vice pastor is custodire gregem, etc. spoken of the Clergy of both Sees.
Thus the Clergy at Rome writing under their Vacancy to the Clergy at Carthage
under the absence of St. Cyprian, looked upon it as a duty incumbent upon them,
in the absence or want of the Bishops, to supply their places, in what their
Order would admit, in the custody of the Flock. And they therefore, having
received Letters from the Clergy of Carthage of the Recess of St. Cyprian the
Bishop by Clement the Carthaginian Subdeacon and Messenger, send back this
their Epistle by their Agent Bassianus to the Clergy of Carthage, Ibid. Harum
literarum exemplum ad quoscunque poteritis transmittere per idoneas occasiones,
etc. vid. Cyp. ad Cler. Ep. 6. 2.
and desired them to communicate it, by all means and opportunities possible,
to other Churches. Which were plainly acts of Form and Nature Conciliar, and
such as they looked on as matter of Duty, and not Prudence only. It Is true,
where Bishops were only absent, it may be presumed, that the Presbyteries did
act by the direction of the Absent Bishop; but then it is as certain, Cyp. ad
Cler. Ep. 6. Vice mea fungamini cirea gerendaca, quae administratio religiosa
deposcit. vid. Ep. 5. 1.
that the Absent Bishop was Canonically obliged so to Authorize, or concede
that vicarious administration, which they upon their own Right before such
actual Commission might assume; for it was the disobedience of some proud
Consessors to the Authority and Conduct of the Deacons and Presbyters, Cyp.
ibid. 4. Quando audio quosdam -- nec a Diaconis aut presbyteris regi posse.
that occasioned St. Cyprians sixth Epistle to Authorize the Clergy, that could
safely stay at Carthage under the then persecution, in his Stead, Name, and
conceded Authority, to carry on the Ecclesiastical Administrations. Which was
not the first Original of the Clergies Authority in the absence of the Bishop,
but a valid and doubling Confirmation, Cyp. Ep. 15. ad Cler. Romans 2.
Presbyteris and Diaconibus non defuit Sacerdotis vigor. -- Ep. 37. ad Cler. 1.
officium meum vestra diligentia repraesentet.
or express ratification of that Antecedent Authority of the Clergy, which the
exorbitant took upon them, for want of the Bishops Presence, to despise; there
being the same reason, though not the same degree of Want in the Absence, as the
Death of a Bishop, and the proper vacancy of the Sea thereupon. And therefore,
though in the denying Communion to Gaius Diddensis a Presbyter, and his Deacon,
without his antecedent Sentence, only on the Counsel of some of St. Cyprians
fellow Bishops, Cyp. Ep. 28. ad Cler. Integre and cum disciplina fecislis, --
quod consilio collegarum meorum, qui praesentes erant, Gaio Diddensi
presbytero, and Diacono ejus, censutstis non communicandum.
they acted on their own Authority, yet are they commended by St. Cyprian, as
having acted with great Integrity, and according to the Rules of Ecclesiastic
Discipline. It appears then that by a Primitive and Catholic Polity, founded
at least upon Divine Right, if not Precept, wherever Episcopal Sees were fully
sixed, there was also a Council of Presbyters, with Deacons and Officers under
them, for the Conduct of the Bishopric; and, upon absence or Death of the
Bishop, for Synodical Communications with other Churches.

6. Which being pre-established, it may not be amiss to consider some of those
procedures, in which the Primitive Bishops were wont to convene their Clergy;
in which I mean them alone in one Diocese, without the aggregation of other
Bishops for the Government of affairs. And first, if any Person under his
Bishop promoted new, or false Doctrines in Religion, this became matter for the
Care of the Bishop, and the Counsel of his Clergy, and many times the presence
of the Laity infected, or in danger of infection. Dionys. Alex. ap. Euseh;
Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 25.(...) (Nepotis, dicbum Elenchium Allegoristarum) (...)
and after a moderate discussion of the matter had by all, (...) etc.
Thus in the Arsinoire Region under the Primacy of Alexandria, one Coracion had
disseminated the Doctrine of Nepos (an Egyptian Bishop) concerning a Carnal
Millennium, which had spread far and wide, to the subversion of much people.
Whither therefore Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria coming, called together the
Village Presbyters and Teachers in the presence of all the Laity, that had a
mind to be there, and to have a public Discussion of that Doctrine of Nepos.
And after three days public Canvas of Nepos his Book, made with much
moderation by all persons, the affair ended successfully in the Conversion of
Coracion, the Ringleaders of the Millenaries. If then Authority to Convert Men
from Errors be Divine, and Convocations of Clergymen by their Bishop be
necessary or Expedient thereto, (as 'twas in this case) it follows, that such
Synods under a Bishop are of Divine Right, and it is as much the Bishops Divine
Authority as Duty to convene them.

7. Cypr. ad Cler. Ep. 10. 2. Nam cum in minoribus piece at is agant peccatores
prenitentiam justo tempore, and secundum disciplinae or dinem ad exomolegesin
veniant, and per imposstionem manus Episcopi and Cleri jus communicationis
accipiunt; nunc crudo tempore -- Offertur nomen little; and nondum pruitentia,
acta, nondum ex^mologesi facta, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo and Clero imposita,
Euch iristia illis datur. vid. Ep. 11. 1. Ep. 12. 1.
Another Instance of Convening the Clergy by their Bishops in these Ages, was
for reconciling public Penitents by Imposition of Hands of the Bishop and
Clergy, upon Consession first made publicly before, in order to a recovery of
the right of Communication Ecclesiastical and Eucharistical, as also for the
Censure of such as should presumptuously violate the Laws, Order, Union, and
Discipline of their Church, and for Ordinations of the Clergy, or less Orders.
All which are Acts Synodical, Ibid. 4. Acturi and apud Nos, (the Bishop and
Clergy) and apud confessores -- Causam suam, etc. Ep. 24. quos jam pridem
communi consilio Clero proximos feceramus, quando cum Presbyteris doclioribus
lectores diligenter probaremus.
and grounded upon the Authority of the Bishop, and the Reason of the Causes,
both which herein most certainly were as Divine, as for such they were then
received. If a Man would be here accurate in traversing such intimations, as
may be picked up herein among the Ancients, one might swell this chapter to a
greater largeness than is necessary; but taking for granted that these are
uncontestable and apposite evidence, I leave these Presbyteries and their
Divine Powers on their own Divine Foundations, and proceed to the second sort
of Episcopal or Provincial Synods.

CHAP. VII. Of Episcopal and Provincial Synods in the three first Centuries,
and their Authority.
1. THAT there were Synodical Conventions, and Provincial Councils of Bishops,
and such Presbyters under them as the Bishops brought with them, or called to
them in the First Centuries, will not I suppose be denied by any owner of
Episcopacy, and the Volumes of the Ancient Fathers. So that our present enquiry
is not into, or concerning their actual being, but their Frequency, Right,
Authority, and Uses, for which they were wont so often, so vigorously to
assemble.

2. Tertull. De Jejun. Aguntur praecepta per Graecias illus certis in locis
Concilia ex universis Ecelesijs; per quae and altiora quaeque incommune
tractantur, and ipsa repraesentatio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione
celebratur. Et hoe quam dignum side auspicanti undique congregari ad Christum?
-- Conventus autem isti stat ionibus prius and jejunationibus operati, dolere
cum dolentibus, and ita demum congaudere gaudentibus norunt. vid. Alexand.
Alexandrin. Episc. Epist. ad Cath. Eccl. Epis. ap. Socr. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 5.
And first as to their general frequency, Tertullian, the most ancient of all
our Latin Authors, tells us, that through all the Greek Countries, where
Christianity had so universally spread it self, Councils were by command or
precept convened out of all Churches, through, or in which Councils all arduous
matters were publicly treated of, and in them the Reverence of the Christian
Character solemnly celebrated, it being the highest dignity thus every where to
be convened unto Christ, and that with severe Stations and Fastings for the
sanctification of them. Where we see he asserts the practice and devotion to be
of the very highest and divinest Dignity imaginable, and consequently of the
like Authority equal to that Dignity, in which it is either fundamentally
lodged, or to which it is inseparably concomitant. Nor does the Dignity only,
but the necessities of affairs also recommend or enforce the exercise, as well
as Institution of this Polity, and that in great and continual frequency.

3. To the eviction whereof I will not urge the nature and general Forms and
Concerns of Aristocracy, requiring an united Counsel and Strength, to support
it self against common dangers, but specify particular Cases, which they
judged necessary Conciliarly to set Right, and thereby to give credit to their
determinations in their formed Letters to other Churches, which generally, if
not always, was the concluding Office of those Councils.

4. Now of these Episcopal Synods some were but Partial, others Plenary. A
Partial Synod of Bishops was such as consisted of some Bishops, only in a
Province upon occasion, design or necessity. A P^^nary Synod was such as
consisted of a Full or General Convention of the Bishops of a Province under
their Metropolitan.

5. The first and most Sacred as well as constant Office of such Episcopal
Synods was that of providing Bishops for vacant Sees; Councils for Ordaining
Bishops.
for which the most Canonical Rule most generally observed, and to be observed
in time of Peace in these Ages, was that which St. Cyprian and his Colleagues
assert as of Divine Tradition, Ep. 68. -- Diligenier de traditione divina and
Apostolica observatione observandum est and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque and
fere apud provincias universas tenetur, ut ad ordinationes ritd celebrandas ad
eam plebem, cui Praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem provinciae proximi
quique conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur plebe praesente, etc. vide. Item.
Ep. 68. 6. ubi etiam exemplum ponit in electione Sabin^ vice Basilidis, etc.
( viz. as to the substrate reasons, and parallel instances) and Apostolical
Observation, viz. that the nearest Bishops of the Province should repair to the
vacant See, and the Bishop be chosen in the presence of the People, according
to the same form of old observed at Jerusalem Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 10
(...)
by the Provincials of Palaestine in filling that See with Successors, as in
the case of Narcissus retiring upon a perjurious Defamation; which I mention in
fact more than others, because it is an early instance in that Church, which
was the Mother of all Churches, and a Presumption that this Custom was begun
there in the constitution of James, and was continued there in all their
Successions, and from thence became a Platform for the like Canon every where
else throughout the Primitive Church. In which Synods the Clergy, and the
people, that stood in the Faith, Unity, and Order of the Church, were present,
their Desires, Thoughts, and Counsels examined, and upon a fair and calm
agreement (of which in those days they hardly ever failed, under the moderation
of the Praesiding Bishops) the Election was Ratified, and the Person
Consecrated by the Bishops present; and hereupon either the New Bishop alone,
(when there was no contrary Pretension) or the rest convening Bishops with him,
Cyp. ad Cornel. Ep. 55. 10.
sent the Letters of Communion to all other Churches, immediately, or
mediately, according to the Forms in use under the Orders of Metropolitans and
Primates. Cypr. ad Antonian. Ep. 52. 16. vid. etiam 4. Factus est autem
Cornelius Episcopus de Dei and Christi cjus judicio, etc. vid. praec. and seqq.
and Ep. 58. 2. Cyp. Ep. ad Cornel. 55. 6.
Thus was Cornelius made Bishop of Rome by a Synod of Sixteen Bishops after the
same manner, from whence his Divine Right in that Bishopric is asserted by
virtue of that Conciliar Ordination. So was St. Cyprian constituted Bishop of
Carthage, Ibid. 12.
to the assertion of the same Divine Right and Authority. And to pretend the
same his Rival Fortunatus his Party gave out at Rome, that he was Ordained for
Carthage by twenty five Bishops, as falsely, as they beforehand had threatened
to Convene so many thereunto. And this custom was hereupon looked on as so
Sacred and Necessary, that in time of Persecution they suffered the Sees to lie
long vacant, till a calm Season gave them opportunity for such solemn
Conventions, which were judged of the Divinest Virtue and Anthority, and not
mere Cabals of Prudence only.

6. Other sorts of Reasons, why they met in Councils or Synods, were the
preservation of Unity in the Catholic, and particular Churches, by reclaiming,
by censuring the irreclaimable, by making Canons for good Order and Uniformity;
for mutual Advices and Assistances with Sister-Churches, and Composures in
matters of Difference, For Discipline on Sinners, either before, or during, or
after their Repentance, and particularly those that lapsed into Idolatry. So
when Eusebius. E. H. l. 6. c. 33.
Beryllus Bishop of Bostra in Arabia preached the same Doctrine with him that
now presideth over the City of Waters, and the Faith was like to be disturbed,
and the Peace broken, there met a Council of Bishops in which Origin reclaimed
him: When E. H. l. 7. c. 30. Athan. de Syn. Arim. and Seleue. and de Syn. Nic.
Decr. and Dionys. Alex. ap Eusebius. E. H. l. 6. c. 46.
Paulus Samosatenus and Sabellius appeared, Councils convened against them.
When the Novatian Schism began to attack the Peace of the Church at Antjoch,
Helenus Bishop of Tarsus in Cilicia with his Provincials, Firmilian of
Cappadocia, and Theoctistus of Palestine invited Dionysius of Alexandria to
meet in Synod at Antioch, to repress Novatianism, which Schism gave occasion
also to many Synods in Africa, Cyp. Ep. 41. 1, 2. Ep. 45. 1, 2. Ep. ^2. 6. Ep.
67. 2.
as did that Schism also of Felicissimus, who with his Accomplices attempted to
set up Fortunatus at Carthage. When the varying Customs of Churches, Cyp. 42.
5. Ep. 55. 1.9. Ep. 12. 4.
and the acknowledged reasons of them, occasioned, or required Ecclesiastical
conferences between such Churches, they were then wont to convene Provincial or
Domestic Synods, and after their Domestic Decisions to send them with their
Legates to the others for Examination and Reception, wherein if they agreed,
this Uniformity repressed not only Schism it self, but the occasions of it; but
if not, yet the differences of their Canonical Resolves by virtue of these
Conferences were prevented from creating breaches in Communion; or if the Peace
had been violated by any hasty Passion or Prejudice, things were generally
healed by these Synodical commerces. Thus in the time of Pope Victor many
Synods were held about Easter Day in order to an Uniformity, Eusebius. E. H. l. 5.
c. 23. Council. Carthagin. Epis. 87.
which not being to be procured all over the Catholic Church, Cyp. cum colleg
Ep 70. 1. Ep. 71. 1, 4. Ep. 72. 1, 2. Ep. 73. 1, 3. Ep. 75.
Victor broke the Communion between his Church and the Churches of Asia under
Polycrates Metropolitan of Ephesus; but the other Churches would by no means
endure a Rupture of Peace upon a difference of exterior usages. So the Question
of Rebaptization from Heresy was Conciliarly determined different ways in
several Churches, Firmil ad Cyp. 6, 17. Dionys. Ale^. ad. Xyst. Pap. ap Eus. E.
H. l. 7. c. 5. etc. 7. Cyp. cum coll. ad Fid. Ep. 59. 1., etc.
without any breach of Catholic Communion, till Pope Stephen began the Rupture
with the African, Phrygian, Galatian, Cilician, and Cappadocian Churches; which
yet other Churches would by no means consent to; each Church determining
according to its best Judgment, Rules, and Customs; but the most moderate
taking care in the midst of this diversity, Cyp. Ep. 62. ^ etc. Cyp. ad Called.
Ep. 38. 2. Ep. 42. 5.
to keep the Unity of Spirit in the Bond of Peace. So a Council of 66 African
Bishops determine the questions made them by Fidus concerning the
reconciliation of one Victor a lapsed Presbyter by Therapius a Bishop, before
Canonical Examination and Season, as also of the liberty of Baptizing Infants
as soon as born, before they were Eight Days old; as also of the Offenceless
way of living to be practiced by the Virgins. And as they did Conciliarly
provide to prevent, so did they to correct Evils, particularly the Vices,
Violences, and Immoralities of all Orders, as in the Presbyter Felicissimus,
not only for his Schism, but for his Lusts; especially concerning the Penances
and Indulgences to the Lapsed, for which, in times of Persecution, and the
dispersions of the Episcopal College the Criminals were required to stay, Cyp.
Ep. 12. 2. Ep. 14. 2. Ep. 26. 4. Ep. 28. 2. Ep. 31. 5. Ep. 32. Ep. 40. 3, 7.
Ep. 52. 2, 3, 6. Ep. 53. 2. Ep. 54. Ep. 55. 13.
and wait for peace to the Church, before it was decent for them, or allowed to
them to claim their own; which was to be determined in Councils of their
Bishops, Clergy and standing Laity. All which, whosoever looks into the quoted
places, will find to be thought not only expedient, but necessary for the good
of the Church, and the persons concerned, and for the Authority of their Acts,
which was universally and uncontestedly taken for Divine, upon grounds taken
out of Scripture, Cyp. Ep. 55. 13. Firm. int. Cyp. Ep. 75.
which therefore they held frequently, and in some places annually, from which
they sent Synodical Letters and Messages, with authentic Deputations and
Powers, not only by the Sub-Clerical Orders, Ep. Cyp. 41. 1. Ep. 42. 1. Ep. 45.
1. 2.
but by Deacons, Priests, nay and by Bishops also, according as the nature of
the affair did require, and Junctures of Time and Season would permit, being
herein as much concerned for a general Negotiation in Spirituals, not only each
Church within it self, but abroad with all others, and for all Christian Uses,
as the Civil States and Sovereignties are for Domestic Conduct, and foreign
Embassies, and Treaties with more remote, or more nearly adjacent Countries,
and with as fair (to say no fairer) ground of Authority from God and Nature.
Upon all which I make these concluding Remarks, that if such Synods had not
been thought of Divine Right and Duty too, those that were Convened, and
Censured by them, would have denied the Authority; the Lapsed Penitents would
have disclaimed their Necessity, the Apostates would have proclaimed the
Imposture of a pretended Divine Authority, and the Churches would never have
been at that vast Fatigue and Charge of Synodical procedures; especially
against the Edicts of Secular Powers, had they not judged these to be Acts of
an Ecclesiastical Duty to, and Authority from God. But here being none, the
least Exception from the offended, nor any possible Inducement upon the Church
to quit the claim and practice of such Authority, I think here is an undeniable
presumption hereupon, that it was as uncontestable, as it was actually
uncontested.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Authority of Civil Powers and Laws in general, against the
Liberty of Ecclesiastical Synods.
. 1. AFter the Knowledge of all this, which I am sure the Dr. well knew, before
ever he dreamed of Writing upon this Subject, it is a matter of astonishment to
me, that he should look upon Synods under Alien Powers, to have been, and still
to be, but prudential Clubs, without any Authority from God, or Man. And yet
upon this confidence it is strange, that he should not wholly deliver them up to
the full Authority of all Heathen, or Alien Powers, against which, where there
is no right, no Human Reason, or Prudence can warrant any popular Frequences or
Councils. So that by his granting them Reason, he seems to grant them Right,
and by g^a^ting them Right to grant them Authority to hold Synods under Alien
Powers. And yet he is unwilling, even to allow what he grants, and floats up
and down in his Doubts hereupon, and casts an unlucky glance upon the Primitive
Synods, as scarce capable of Excuse, and more hardly of Justisication. It has
been (says he) ever looked upon as one great part of the Princes Prerogative,
p. 13.
that no Societies should be Incorporated, nor any Companies be allowed to meet
together, without his Knowledge and Permission. The Roman Law was especially
very severe as to this Matter. And though after the Conversion of the Emperors to
the Faith of Christ, a Provision was made for the Public Assemblies of the
Church for Divine Service; yet Tertullian, who understood these Matters as well
as any one of his Time, though he excused their Meetings upon all other Accounts,
could not deny, but that they fell under the Censure of the Law; and that
having not the Princes Leave to meet together, they were in the Construction of
the Law, guilty of Meeting against it.

. 2. This brings one therefore to an Enquiry, Conventions Necessary, Innocent,
Hurtful.
What Meetings are of right obnoxious to the prohibitions and penalties of
Humane Laws. The Conventions therefore of Men are of three sorts; either
Necessary, or Innocent, or Hurtful. And first, such as are Necessary no Man
whatsoever can have a rightful Authority to restrain; for Necessity; being a
Law from God, cannot be vacated by any positive Law of Man. Nor, Secondly, can
Innocent Meetings be rightfully denied in themselves, but under the
apprehensions of hurt or danger upon Time, Place and Circumstances. But Hurtful
Meetings, in the Third Place, may not only, but ought of Right to be restrained
by the Magistracy. Yet what Princes have no Rightful Authority to do, that they
may irresistibly do upon an uncountroulable Domination and Impunity. Upon
which, when they presume to Repress our Rights and Liberties, if it be in
Matters Necessary, they are to be disobeyed in Fact, and submitted to as to
their Legal Processes without resistance; if in Matters barely Innocent, there
Prudence will direct, but no bare Conscience of Duty to the Tyrannical Law
alone, will oblige to observation, though it will to Patience, under Legal
Sufferings. For an Innocent Liberty is an Vnalienable Franchise of our Nature,
and all prohibitions of it, as such simply, are mere Nullities, as to the Rule
of practical Conscience. And if so, how extremely wide of Truth is it, at
large, to say, That it has ever been looked upon as one principal part of the
Princes Prerogative, that no Companies be allowed to meet together without his
knowledge and permission? Where I must take Permission to be Voluntary, and
such as the Prince may rightly deny, or else it is nothing to the purpose. For
if a Prince only permit, because he has no right to deny a privilege, the
enjoyed privilege depends not on the Right of his Princely Permission. The Dr.
I suppose, will be loath to extend this Rule to the Restriction of Gossipings
among the Good Wives of our Parishes, or of Gentlemen to their Innocent Sports,
Hospitalities and Entertainments, the Concourse of People to Fairs, and
Markets, or places of Commerce, or to Coffee Houses to hear what News comes or
flies Abroad, concerning the Affairs of the World, while in these there are no
Apprehensions of Danger. But if it be said, that the Apprehensions of Danger
are the presumed Cause of such restraining Laws; Necessary Meetings liable to
no Restriction upon false Fears.
I Reply, That if, in truth, the Powers have such Apprehensions of Meetings
barely Innocent, they have just Right, upon such fears, to restrain them,
because apprehended not as Innocent, but at least dangerous; and the Subject,
Knowing, or presuming this to be the Reason of the prohibition, ought in Duty
to obey it. Tertul. Apologet. Cum probi, own boni coeunt, cu^t pii, cum casti
congregantur, non est factio dicenda, sed curia.
But this Rule will not hold in Meetings necessary, whatever the Public
Apprehensions of them be. For a necessary Duty cannot give place to false and
unnecessary Fears. But now, in all Meetings not prohibited, nor prohibitable by
the Prince, if the Prince must have always actual Knowledge of such Meetings to
discharge them from Guile not only Majesty would hereby be rendered Ridiculous,
but the Wearers of is be oppressed with inrodes of People for giving in such
Informations and Petitions for Leave. But if the Dr. had set it thus; That such
Meetings as the Prince shall by Law require Notice of to be given to himself,
or his Vicegerents in that behalf, in any, or every place, in order to leave
hereupon to be given or denied, Leave not necessary to be asked without a Law
requiring such Petition.
according to Right, or Pleasure, he had spoken much more correctly. For in
such Case it is fit application should be made, not to obtain a Right, but to
secure the Peace and Honor of the Prince, who, though he has no right to deny
the Meeting, yet has to be secured from all dangers thereof. Now the
Christians, having no such command as this from the Heathen Powers, to ask
leave for their Assemblies, but instead thereof, being absolutely prohibited,
were under no Obligation of Law or Conscience to give Knowledge of their
Meetings (which would not have been a means to procure leave, but persecution)
nor yet to obey the irreligious Law of Prohibition. Had Heathen Princes set
them such a Rule of Leave and License, there is no doubt but the Christians
would have gratefully accepted, and as constantly have observed it, and have
given all manner of security for their Innocence. From whence it follows, That
the Roman Laws, as designed and pointed against Christians, Assembling on
Necessary Causes, and a Divine Right, were Nullities as to the Precept, and
Tyrannies as to the Sanctious, and that Severity, which the Dr. adduces as a
Weight of Authority, Cyp. Ep. 25. 2. Humanis by sacrilegis ^e ibus, etc. vid.
inter omnes Prudentium Peristephanon.
does in truth, nothing else but reproach their Cruelty. What was it then that
Tertullion so sagaciously knew? Was it, that the Christians deserved the
Censure of those Laws, which he, as well as all other Primitive Advocates, do
Arraign of Inhismanity and Impiety? Or was it, that they actually fell under
the Censure of those Laws at the Roman Tribunals? This did not require so great
a sagacity to discern, since all the Heathen Mob, that had been trained up to
cry out Christianos ad Leonem, knew this as well as he. Now then, why was this
Instance against the Liberty of Christian Assemblies brought? Was it to
justify the Roman Laws, and to condemn the practices of Christians as Illegal?
If not, it is Impertinent; if it be, Lord! what an Advocate for Christianity is
here; or would he have been in these Holy Ages? Or was it to deny the Christian
Church to be then, Tertul. Apologet. Corpus sumus de Conscientia Religionis and
disciplinae veritate, and spei faedere. Coimus in caetum, and Congregationem.
-- disciplinam praeceptorum inculcationibus densamus; ibidem etiam
Castigationes, and censura Divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum pondere, ut apud
certos de Dei conspectu. Summu^^que futuri judicii praejudicium est siquis ita
deliquerit, ut a communicatione orationis and conventus and onmis sancti
commerciirelegetur. Praesident probatiquoque Seniores, etc.
either in Right, or Fact, Incorporated? Not so surely; since the very self
same Tertullian asserts such a Corporation in Fact, and Divine Right; even in
Apology to these very Heathen Powers, whom he did not hereby design to enrage,
but mollify; and so might have taught the Dr. to have laid by this invidious
way of pleading, and to have looked upon the Church The Church a Society of it
self.
as a Society of Divine Constitution and Authority, without any Civil
Incorporation, into Secular States, and when the Dr. shall reflect upon this
Insinuation, he will find it drives the point beyond his intention, to the
denying, not only the Conciliar Synods, but even the Assemblies of Christian
Worship, to be of a Divine Right and Authority; for the Roman Laws were as much
against one as the other. And therefore, I hope this was none of those Matters
in Argument, that challenge the precedent approbation of my Lord of Canterbury,
Ep. Dedic.
who, if the Dr. could persuade him from caring for Convocations, yet can never
admit an Hipothesis or an Argument, that will oppress the Right of daily
Worship also.

3. It will hereupon be seasonable to examine, what Authority Princes,
Supremacy of Heathen Princes.
merely Secular or Heathen, have over Christian Assemblies of what Kind or
Nature soever, that thereby we may prepare a way for discovering the Supremacy
of Princes espousing Christianity.

4. First then, To require Fidelity.
all Princes may require fidelity to all their Civil Duties from all Christian
Persons, Assemblies, or Synods, and consequently to offer at nothing in
prejudice to any Civil Prerogatives or Rights whatsoever; and for this they may
(if they doubt) demand such reasonable Security as can be had, or as is usually
given in like Cases.

5. Secondly, To punish Christians for not living by their own Rules.
They may require them to live by their own Rules, and punish them Temporally,
if they break them: a Falsity in a Religious Profession being Criminal at any
Bar whatsoever.

6. Thirdly, To call Assemblies upon Protection.
They may require any Christian Assemblies or Synods to inform, and instruct
the Prince, or any of his People in Matters Christian, on the engagement of
Public Protection.

7. Fourthly, Of being present, except in matter of Communion.
Every Prince has a Right of Presence in any Christian Assemblies, except in
Matters of Christian Communion, peculiar only to the Initiated. For all
Religion Mystical requires a peculiar Society of its Votaries, and admits no
Aliens whatsoever; but in all things, without that Communion, even a Secular
Prince may appear in peaceable and friendly manner.

8. Fifthly, Of Inspection and Caution over Assemblies, etc
Every Prince may appoint all ways of Inspection, and Caution to preserve the
Peace, against all disorders, that may be suspected, or occasioned in such
Synods, upon Pretenses or Transactions of Religion (as being the public
Guardian of all Secular Justice and Peace) by Virtue of Civil Laws, Sanctions
and all Processes of Legal Government. But if a Prince breaks in upon
Authorities, elsewhere lodged by God, this may be done indeed with impunity,
but not with Right and may oblige to patience under Legal Sufferings, but not
to any practical Obedience or Observation.

CHAP. IX. Of the Authority of Christian Princes over Ecclesiastical Synods in
point of Reason.
. 1. WE have above prescribed for a Divine Right in the Catholic Church to
hold Ecclesiastical Synods by the Authority of her Spiritual Governors; and in
them freely to Deliberate, Consult, Act, Determine, and Decree in Matters of
Doctrine, and Discipline, and Communion, to a Spiritual Obligation unto
Canonical Obedience, in all the Subject Members. The Foundations hereof we have
laid in the Scriptures, and deduced an Universal Succession of this Practice
upon a Continued and Catholic Uncontested Claim of a Divine Authority in the
Church for the three first Centuries; We have also adjusted the True Bounds of
Supremacy in mere Heathen or Infidel Princes, over such Christian Assemblies;
We are now to go on, and consider the Ecclesiastical Sovereignty of Christian
Princes over Ecclesiastical Synods, how far it reaches, and on what grounds it
stands.

2. And first, it must be granted, Prince, to lose (...) Authority by being
Christian
that the Authority of a Christian Sovereign must comprehend that of all others
in it self, there being no Reason, that Princes should lose any Prerogatives of
their Crowns by becoming Christian; it being for the benefit of Mankind, that
their Princes should be all Christian, and therefore not sit that they should
suffer any Diminution by that, whereby the World receives so vast a Benefit.
But because this alone is not like to give content, we will sum you up the
Prerogatives of Dr. Wake, taken from our Crown here, and ascribed equally to
all other Sovereign Princes, professing Christianity, what, where, and
whenever.

3. By the Submission of that most Holy, The (...) of the Submission of the
(...). VIII.
Undefiled, Humbled and Orthodox Convocation under K. (I had almost said St.)
Henry VIII. and the Statute thereupon, it is fixed, that our Convocations are
not to convene without the Kings. Writ, nor attempt to Make, Enact, Promulge,
or Execute any Canon, etc. without Royal License, etc this being but an
Affirmance of an Antecedent Right at Common Law, which the Dr. deduces down by
Historical Accounts from the first Christian King of the English Saxons; and
not content therewith, he extends the Supremacy beyond the Letter of the Law,
and Lodges it in the very formal Right, and Reason of the Christian Magistracy;
precluding hereby all possible hopes of any the least relief from our present
Ties, notwithstanding all our old Franchises, our present Merits, and our
future Dangers. For the ill Consequences of a Local and Positive Law, might
have had remedy; but the Fundamental and General Laws of Sovereignty admit not
the least Correction or Alteration.

4. Now the Doctrine of the Dr. briefly consists in these Aphorisms; 1. That
under the Dominion of the Christian Magistrate, 1. p. 14, 41, 48, 76.
the Church has no inherent Right or Authority, to convene in Synods, but what
it derives from the express Concession of the Christian Prince. 2. For that all
Synods are but of Counsel to the Prince, 2 p. 84, 85, 136, to 139, 289, 38, 286.
and entirely in his Hands; and so 3. Not any to be sent to the Synod, 3. p.
28, 39, 40, 103, 104, 105.
but such as he shall allow; nor, 4. When convened to Sit, 4. p. 79, to 83,
106, 107, 110, 112, etc. 132.
Debate, Propose, Deliberate, Conclude, or Decree any Matter of Doctrine or
Discipline whatsoever. 5. Nor in any Method, Form, 5. p. 44, 53, 54, 71.
or Manner whatsoever, save what the Prince admits, and that 6. The Prince may
Ratify, 6. p. 81 to 86, 133.
Annihilate, or Alter all their Acts and Procedures, or as many of them as he
pleases; and 7. Suspend the Execution of all, 7. p. 85 to 89, 125, 126.
and any of their Canons and Sentences; 8. The Authority of their Acts being
entirely and only his; 8. p. 288.
and Lastly, 9. That no Synod has Right to dissolve its self, 9. p. 77 to 79.
without the Kings License.


Where we may Note, that all these are Articles Negative of all those
Liberties and Authorities of the Church under the Christian Princes, which she
claimed of Divine and Vncontested Right, under Heathen Powers, for the three
first Centuries of Christanity, immediately lost, and to be swallowed up of
every Prince, as soon as he commences Christian. Wherefore it is necessary to
look to the bottom of this Matter, upon which the Dr. builds this overthrow of
all the Churches Authorities under Christian Powers. Now his Arguments are of
two Classes, the first seated in the Substrate Reasons and Equity hereof; the
second derived from the General and Uniform Claim and Practice of all Christian
Princes.

5. The Des Arguments, from Reason.
As for the former sort of Arguments, which would have been the chiesest, most
convincing, and most satisfactory, the Dr. has not collected them into any
proper Order or Sections, in order to a set illustration of his Principles, as
it had been to have been wished; but only by light touches and glances here and
there, seldom and consusedly Interspersed, given us little hints and
intimations of them. Now herein perhaps he has bespoken our excuse, (...) 7.
for that his have and interfering Avocations, would not allow him to be exact.
But hereupon, to set things off in the clearest light and view I can, I will
corrade those Reasons, on which he Bottoms the Right of Christian Princes to
these Anthorities: These are therefore of two sorts; one relating to the welf
are of the Church; the other to that of the Civil State.

6. And first, with relation to the Church, the Christian Prince is the
Guardian of it, P. 44.
and consequently Supreme Governonr in order to that Protection, which the
Church expects or enjoys from him, p. 79.
and that such Synods hereby may become Legal Assemblies. p. 18.
Secondly, In reference to the Civil State, such a plenitude of Regal Power
over Ecclesiastical Synods, is necessary to the ends of Civil Government, p.
42, 57, 70, 73.^, p. 81.
and Peace, particularly to prevent in them Proceedings prejudicial to the
Regal Power. Now, if from these Reasons, there be a necessity, that the Divine
Rights and Authorities of the Catholic Church in the Convention, Freedom and
Acts of Synods, should thist their former Sebjects and Depositaries, and pass.
over into the hands of Christian Princes; then is the Argumentation hence
hereunto suggested by the Dr. good; but if all these Reasons, Ends, and
Purposes, may consist with the Permanency of these Liberties and Powers in the
Church, as they stood Authorized by God for the three first Centuries, then,
whatsoever others may be brought, these will not, I doubt, appear to the Author
of the Letter to be valid necessary, or cogent Reasons for the alienation of
these Powers from the Hierarchy.

7. Protection from Heathen Powers.
We begin then with those Reasons that are drawn from the Benesit of the
Church, under the Guardianship of Princes, the Protection of the Faith, and the
Legalizing our Synods. Now here it is to be noted, That Heathen Princes may do
all this for the Christian Church, as well as Christian Princes. For though they
do not believe Christianity themselves, either in whole, or in part, yet they
may give the Church a Legal Toleration to all its Offices, and Assemblies, and
this Legalizes them. He may also add other Immunities and Charters to his
Christian Subjects, and so not only protect but promote them. And this was in
great measure done by all Non-persecuting Emperors, and the Persecutors too,
when ceasing to persecute by the Revocation of the cruel Edicis and Laws, and
giving new Edicts for their Security. But will the Dr. thereupon conclude, that
those Heathen Emperors have, or had Night to all those Church Powers, which he
hereupon arrogates to the Christian Sovereigns, in the abovenamed Aphorisms?
If so, I must needs say, that he must condemn all the Synods held, during times
of Peace (which were perhaps the only times) in the three first Centuries, as
Violations of the Imperial Authorities, without whose License they Convened,
Sat Deliberated, Debated, Promulged, and Executed Decrees, Canons, Seatences,
on their own Divine Right, and in the Name of the Lord. No ground for such
Authority over Synods.
And such an Inference, as would follow upon this supposed Ground of Legal
Protection from Heathen Powers, I need not expose, by upbraiding the ridiculous
Guise of an Heathen Prince, actually ordering, and directing all the Synodical
Consults and Polity of the Christian Church, and Ratifying, Annulling, and
Altering their Decrees, Acts, and Sentences, as he Judges best for the good of
the Pupil Church, of which he, not the Synod, is to be Judge. But I think a
mere Edict to this purpose, would be very Pretty and Congruous; as for
Diversion and Example, T. V. Caes. Aug. etc. To all Christian Churches within
our Empire, Greeting; Know ye that of our especial Grace and Compassion, we
have taken upon us to be your Guardian, to protecs you in the Freedom of your
Religion, and to Legalize your Synods; Upon which Consideration, you have no
Right nor Liberty of your selves, to Convene in Synods, nor to Sit, Deliberate,
Act, Decrce or Resolve any Matters of your Faith, Doctrine or Discipline, by
Canon, or Sentence, without the Authority of our General or Particular License,
to every your Particular Act and Method of Acting, nor Enact, Promulge, or
Execute any Thing or Ordinance, without our Ratisication; who can, of Right,
Annul, Rescind, Vacate or Alter all, or any Thing you shall do in Synod, which
only is of Council to us in the Conduct of the Church, which we protect, being
wholly dependent on us, and in our hands, its Conciliar Acts being wholly ours,
and all their Validity from our Imperial Authority. To this we require your
Synodical Submission, on fear of a Praemunire otherwise incurred, that
thereupon we may put out an Edict of Praemunire, upon all the Clergy that shall
attempt any the least Violation of this our Ecclesiastical Headship or
Supremasy. Yet as odd as this sounds in all Christian Ears, it is as
justifiable as in any Christian Prince, if such Protections, as are aforesaid,
are the alone true Reason for this Supremacy, for there is no differencing
Cause assigned in the Reasons. It Is true indeed, a Christian Prince looks more
likely to protect us, than an Alien, and has one peculiar actually Federal.
Obligation by his Baptism, to support the Communion of the Church, by all his
powers; but so is every private Christian too; and it is possible for a
Christian Prince to ornit this Care, or to be disabled in it, while elsewhere,
the Humanity of an Heathen Prince may do more for it voluntarily, without any
Federal Ties of Christianity; and consequently, if the Ecclesiastical Supremacy
be Founded on such Protection, and Squared in its Measure by the proportion
thereof, I believe many Heathen Princes had more' though unknown, Right in the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, than many Modern Princes professing Christianity; it
being possible, that Princes may freely protect Subject Societies, which they
are not federally, or otherwise bound to (as Jewish Synagogues now are in their
States of Pilgrimage) which they, that are especially bound to, may oppress
under the very color of that Supremacy, that is thus Founded on the Right of
Protection; Though, speaking generally upon the Law of Nature, all rinces are
thereby equally bound to protect all the Fundamental Rights of the Innocent,
and consequently those of the Christian Church; so that the Right and Reason of
our protection under Princes, is not Founded in their Christianity, but the
Churches Innocence, and the Right She has to the Royal Protection in doing
good, by any Acts, or Operations Synodical, or other. Toleration not founded on
the Right of all Rehgioas tolerated but upon other exterior Reasons.
Nor will this assert a Right of Protection to all pretended Religions; for,
though the Ignorance of a Prince, in the distinction of true Religion from bad,
may occasion him in mistake, actually to persecute the Right, and cherish the
Wrong, to avoid which, under that Ignorance, he ought to tolerate that wherein
he can see no hurt, yet really nothing but real Truth has a real Right to any
Protection or Countenance; and the Connivances or Encouragements given to false
Religions, must be excused, or justified, not on the Right of the Errors (which
is none) but on other Reasons exterior, either of State, Peace, or other
insuperable dissiculties; nor can such mistaken, or enforced Protections, give
the Protector an Ecclesiastical Headship over all those Systems of different
Religions, to act them all, as Dr. Wake allows them to Act the Church, because
there is no Right bottomed upon Error, (See Chap 1. Sect. 5.) and because many
times they are exempt from his Jurisdiction, as in the Chapels of Ambassadors,
and Foreign Factories. whose Protection is not Founded upon a supposed
possibility of Truth, but upon the Reasons of Commerce and Negotiation.

8. Incorpon on dissers from Protection.
But if the Dr. shall here make Protection only to consist in an Incorporation
of the Church into the State, and her Canons into the Laws, as this is quire
another thing from bare Protection, and thought to be of a more transcendent
Elevation; so it will then appear, that none of the Christion Roman Emperors
did so instate the Church, which consequesitly must then be out of Protection,
and so free from their Supremacy, the Exercise whereof therefore must have been
an Usurpation and a Nullity.

9. But we shall by and by discern a little better, the Form and Nature of a
Protection of the Church. For if the Catholic Church had a Divine Right in the
Liberties and Authorities Synodical, continued universally inviolate and
unquestioned for 300 Years, downward from the Apostles, how can this Body be
protected by any Magistrate or Powers, that shall claim off in point of Title,
and take it away thereupon in point of Fact, any or all of these Divine
Privileges, Protection inconsistent with violation of Right.
given by God, and granted to her Priests for her Conduct and Conservation? and
this under a pretense of Protection? while the Churches Constitution is
apparently ruined, and her Synods, heretofore free, declared now for Criminal,
if not held in Villenage? This is so contrary to the very Dictates of Nature,
in the Reason and Form of Protection, that all Systems and Factions of
Religion, disclaim such Bondage, and challenge a liberty as presubstrate and
praevious to Protection, which is otherwise inconceivable, and the pretense
thereof, a mere sham upon humane Understanding. The Jews therefore, as busy as
they are to be enfranchised in their several Dispersions, yet would never
endure the Civil Powers thereupon, so to prescribe all the Polity of the
Synagogue, and to Null, Cancel, Ratify or Alter their Methods; and an attempt
of this Nature upon them, would appear as dreadful a persecution as Caius his
erecting his Image in their Synagogues. Jews, Papists, Sectaries, all for
Ecclesiastical Liberty.
Not only the Romish Church, but all other Sectaries, and the Scotch Kirk
illustriously scorns to admit any servitude, notwithstanding not only the
National Protection but Promotion, being all sensible that a Liberty of
Religious Government and Church Discipline is more valuable than all worldly
Wealth, or Interests, and without which they cannot apprehend any Protection to
Religion, or the Societies that profess it. And to close up all, since in all
Ecclesiastical History, those Synods have been most injurious, or injuriously
dealt with, that were least free, and their Authority thereby vacated with all
Churches for ever, I wonder what reputation the Dr. will secure to a Provincial
or National Synod with Neighbor Churches, Liberty necessary to validity and
reputation.
whether Popish or Reformed, or with future Generations, should it be in Fact
so managed by a Prince, as the Dr. avers, it may rightly be in all its Motions
and Issues? Or how can we blame the Popes Management of the Council of Trent,
and such others, if we will justify ten tiems a greater Bondage in the Councils
called by Princes? What security is there for Uniformity in Doctrine,
Regularity of Discipline, and Authority with the Christian Church, if all be to
be done only ad nutum P -- pis? The Dr. tells us of Bp. p. 115. King Charles
the first and A. B. Land.
Lands Concurrence with K. Charles the First his Writ for, and License to the
Convocation; Very well, and that King, and that Prelate too, might do so in
observing the Forms, which could not be altered without Act or Rupture of
Parliament; but does it follow, that they were either of them of the Drs.
Enslaving Principles under Sovereignty in General? When that Great Primate
declares against Fisher, a free General Council to be the supremest Judicatory
in the Catholic Church; and would he not then think the same of a Provincial
Council, for a Provincial Church? though both convened and permitted to sit by
the Will and Order of Princes? Men may Act under the Forms of those Laws, when
not actually Executed to our injury, which they do not simply approve of in
themselves; and against such a Prosecution of which Laws they would openly and
avowedly Complain, as did the Council at Ariminum, etc. And I take it, that it
must pass for an eternal Rule, Truth and Piety free Principles.
that as Truth and Piety are freeborn Principles, so are the Depositaries or
Trustees of them also to be free in the Culture and Propagation of them. And
they, that withdraw the Necessary freedom of these Trustees, withdraw their
Protection from the Principles themselves; Not to be committed to Slaves.
they being too noble and glorious to be committed to the Care and Conduct of
Slaves or Vassals.

10. Having thus enquired into the first reason for this Alienation of
Synodical Powers from the Mitre to the Crown, The forms of alienation improper.
let us in the next place examine the Form of it hereupon, which must consist
in a Devolution, Occupation. or Contract with the Spiritual Powers. If by
Devolution, this must be founded, either in the Original Ordinance and
Constitution of God, or from the Natural Right of Sovereigns over all Persons
of the same Religion. The first ground hereof I want and can, I doubt, be no
where found; and we shall have occasion hereafter to make Experiment, whether
it can or no. And as to the second, I shall readily yield it, if it can be made
our, that in all Religion, Natural and Revealed, the Prince, that is of it,
shall have the entire Conduct of it. For then indeed it must rest in the
Hierarchy only, till they get a King of their Faith, to whom then they must
turn over all their Powers. But why should this Divine Charter Devolve over to
Princes, any more than that of a little Borough? This of the Borough was
granted by Kings. Be it so; though it is not necessarily so; for that popular
States may so six themselves, and after admit a King to protect them, but
without any Devolution. But be it so. Can then our King be denied a Devolution
of a Charter in a Town which he Protects, because a former King founded it,
though in a mere Secular Interest and Government, and must a Charter founded by
the King of Kings Devolve to a Temporal Prince out of those Hands, and that
Society in which it was vested, in a matter quite different from the Secular
Polity? I do desire a proof hereof, as weighty and important as the Matter and
Consequences hereof are. What then, is it liable to a Despotick Occupation?
This again is what a Borough will not yield upon a Quo Warranto, but will be
ready to make a Counter demand of Quo Warranto from their Prince. In vain would
he plead for it on the Right of Protection, while he strikes at all their
Municipal Rights and Liberties. Be sure except the English Church here.
But we we only are the Poor, Tame, Dispirited, Drowsy Body, that are in Love
with our own Fetters, and this is the only scandalous part of our Passive
Obedience, to be not only silent, but content with an Oc -- n of our P -- rs,
which are not forfeited nor forfeitable to any Worldly Powers whatsoever. And
as to any Contract, it is neither pretensible, nor pretended by the Doctor; though
too much in truth in latter Ages has been exchanged by the Church for Worldly
Interests, wherein mainly lies the great Ruin of Christianity.

11. But now we descend to the second Cause, in which this unlimited Supremacy
of Princes is by the Doctor founded; namely, Civil Interests, as of Peace, and
the Princes Prerogative. To both which I for my own part am willing to
surrender all, if it be necessary. But before this however, I would fain know,
how do the Laws of Peace require a Violation of those Rights, which God has
lodged in the Hierarchy as a means to reconcile all in one Body, unto a common
Peace with God, and each other? If the Clergy use their Powers to that End, who
has Right to hinder them? Who to break the Peace with them? But if they do not,
there are other just ways of securing them from doing wrong, than by disabling
them from doing Good, that very Good, which God has set them apart, and
sanctified them to do. And these ways are in the Power and Sovereignty of an
Heathen Prince, Chap. 8.
as is above manifested, and therefore are sufficient to the same ends in the
Authority of a Christian Prince, from whose Coercion in matters of Crime, the
Priesthood, how much soever to be revered by Princes, ought not to be made a
Shelter or Protection. Under these Powers of Heathen Princes the Christian
Synods made no Rupture on the Peace or Prerogative of the Empire, Church
Ordinances innocent in all States.
though as undeservedly accused for this by the Heathens, as we are suspected of
it now; Why should the same Spiritual Liberties within a Christian Kingdom, be
thought more dangerous than they were to Heathens? I will not speak out how the
Churches of Christendom have been crushed between the Upper and the Nether
Milstones; but sure I am, hence are all the Confusions, both under the Papacy
and the Reformation; Be sure here by all means to except England.
Nor is it possible to make any true and signal Conversions to the better, as
long as there is a common Slavery upon the Hierarchical Powers; for as we hate
the Bondage of Rome, so they hate the Bondage of the Church under Secular
Domination, and so hereby is maintained a perpetual and irreconcilable
aversion, which no illustrious Piety can extinguish, while the Powers thereof
are Chained down to mere Politic Ends and Services.

12. So that as there is no necessity, No Expediency in the Slavery of the
Church.
so neither is there any expediency to recommend any such unlimited Domination.
For as Things and Persons Consecrated to God are to be treated with a Respect
and Reverence suitable to that Sanctity and Relation to God, so a Prostitution
of them under Secular Contempt is no small Impiety toward God, and no small
Guilt, Blemish, and Indecency in thern that cause it. Now of all things under
the Sun, nothing is so hated, feared, and despised as Servitude; and no
Servitude more reproachful than that of Priests, which were from the beginning
a most Noble, Free, and Honorable Order in all Nations not excepting the very
Barbarous: Nor yet of all sorts of Slavery is there any so Indecorous, and
Grieving as that, which oppresses the Sanctity, Authority, and Operation of
their very Functions; for maintenance of which, the Bishops of the Primitive
Church were chiefly sought out unto Martyrdom. And yet as hateful as such
Vassallage is in it self, it is less Odious under an Heathen than a Christian
Prince. For from an open Enemy it is natural enough, and no new thing to expect
Oppressions, but when a Prince has been Consecrated by God's Priests into the
Communion of the Catholic Church, he is thereby federally engaged to assert
all the Rights and Authorities of that Divine Communion vested by our Lord in
the Christian Hierarchy, as much as every common Christian, or Priest himself;
our Salvation in common being promoted by the Conduct of them, Can then a claim
of an Oppressive Supremacy, be deemed a Glorious Jewel in a Christian Crown,
which if exercised, must of necessity forfeit the Kings Salvation? And is it
not a dangerous Complaisance it Priests, to fan such an Ambition, as must end
in the Ruin of the Church, the Priesthood, and the Soul of the Prince, which
the Liberties, and Powers Hierarchical were designed to Convert, Direct, and
Preserve? It is not perhaps without an especial Providence, that Eusebius has
preserved the Memory of this Artificial kind of Persecution, practiced upon the
Church by the Emperor Licinius, Lecinius his crasty Persecution.
Who prohibited the Bishops from Visiting the Neighbor Churches, or to hold
Synods, Consultations, and Advices concerning matters profitable; -- that so
either by disobeying his Law, they might be subjected to Punishment, or by
obeying his Order, dissolve the Laws of the Church; For that it is no otherwise
possible to set great Concerns at Right, but by Synods; by which he attempted
to break that Concordant Harmony in the Church. A place well worth every
Princes and Doctors deep and most affective Consideration, that under pretense
Peace there may be no Licinius set up over the Hierarchy, within the Communion
of the Christian Church. For besides the Domestic Cares and Exigencies of
every Church, requiring a constant Watch, and frequent Consultations, the
concerns of the whole Catholic Church under Heaven, ought to affect every
Province and Bishop^ick thereof, to a frequent course of Communications, in
order to a general Union and Uniformity in all the principal matters of
Christianity, a duty never to be performed, but by a liberty of Synods in order
thereunto, in which the Rights of the Catholic Church run a parallel with
those of Civil Powers. It Is true indeed this Communication is actually broken
off; but the Right and Duty thereof is m^^a^colled, and eternal, obliging all
Churches to re^tore it, and I believe, all Princes to p^rmit and assist the
restitution. Let therefore the Church be bound in all humility, by an express
Law, to acquaint the Sovereign Prince with her Desires, Reasons, Places,
Seasons, and Necessaries of Convening, to Petition his Leave and Favor, his
Inspection, Assistance, and Succor to the Piety of their Designs, and to
secure him her Fidelity to all his proper Honors and Interests, to keep within
Ecclesiastical concerns, and do all things openly to the Glory of God, and the
Good of Souls in the Unity, Order, and Purity of the Church, preserved by the
Rules of Catholic and Canonical Communion, and this under the Guard and Watch
of Temporal Powers, this surely will be so far from endangering Mutinies in
States, that there is no way so like to preserve the Peace of all Christian
Nations, Ecclesiastical Liberty the best means to the Peace of the World.
as that which will maintain the common Peace and Unity of their Churches; for
that all Princes truly Christian, will be very tender of breaking the Civil
Peace, whereby the Sacred Communion, so necessary to the preservation of
Christianity, must be obstructed, if not utterly violated. And as such a
Communion, founded on such a Liberty, would prevent most National Wars, so
would it also most Intestine Seditions. For the Authority of a Priesthood,
shining in its due and proper Luster, supported by the Secular Powers, would
overawe most popular Insolences, or however the Influence of Christian
Communication from Churches abroad, reduced to their Primitive Union, must in
all Humane probability sooner quench the Calamity, than can be expected in a
state of general Division, and the insignificancy of an Oppressed and Despised
Clergy. But the fatal Envy, Jealousy, and Hatred against the Priesthood,
occasioned by the accursed Frauds and Tyrannies of the Church of Rome, Still
except England, and Omnia been.
is such an extreme in most parts of the Reformation, as obstructs their Piety,
and thereupon Gods Blessing, and their own Happiness, it being intolerable for
such People, that are so zealous for their Civil Liberties, to be so averse to
the just Rights and Immunities of a Priesthood, that is clean and pure from all
corrupt or abusive Principles whatsoever; and therefore no wonder if the
Reformation makes no greater Progress, nor Figure in the World; but goes
backward apace both in its Esteem and Interest. For a mere mistrust from
instances of corrupt and unreformed Churches is not warrantable against those,
that are Reformed, even in those Principles, which gave the past Offenses, and
continue the present Jealousies. And whether we will or no, we do trust our
Souls with these Men to whom God has committed their Trust and Care, and it is
strange, that we should not allow them liberty, well to discharge that Trust,
in Jealousy that they will abuse us in the freedom necessary to the
performance thereof, while yet we have a full Temporal Right: and Power to
suppress and punish all Injurious Exorbitances of the powers Hierarchical.

CHAP. X. Of the Authority of Christian Princes over Synods from Exemplary
Practices.
1. The Drs. three sorts of precedent Examples.
HAving thus discussed the Importance of the Drs. Reasons in the Protection of
the Church and Civil Interests; we proceed to his Arguments, drawn from
Examples, which are indeed the only sort he professedly insists upon, and lays
the whole stress of his cause. These Examples he ranges into three Orders;
First, Those of the Jewish Kings in Scripture; Secondly, Those of the Roman
Empire; And Thirdly, Those of the Princes, who, upon the Inundations of the
Barbarous Nations over Europe, succeeded in the several Kingdoms and
Principalities thereof, and particularly those of our own Country, from the
first Conversion of the Saxons.

2. Now before we come to Traverse the Matters of Fact, it will be necessary
before hand to try the force and legal Concludency of such Argumentations unto
Right. The use of Examples in Legal Pleas for Right.
In all Legal therefore and Judicial Enquiries, Examples are alleged for one
of these two Purposes, either to Aver or Explain the Sense of an Extant Act, as
Law, Contract, or Constitution; or to prescribe a presumption for such Act,
etc. where it appears not. For first, Where the Originals of a Legal Practice
are Extant, they mutually assert each others certainty of Sense and Right,
which might otherwise have been dubious, if no Customary Practice had followed
on that First Foundation, the Sense and Knowledge of Words Altering and Growing
Obsolete in themselves many times in long Tracts of Years or Ages. On the other
side, it being so easily possible in Nature, and frequent in Fact, that Records
are buried in the Ruins of Time, on which the Rights and Duties of Persons and
Societies, have been long and of old Founded; therefore upon the Nonappearance
of such Originals, Customary Judgments Recorded, and Prescriptions Immemorial
well Arrested, do generally pass for good Presumptions of a valid.
Constitution, Things inquirable in prescriptions.
now lost or disappearing. But upon Matter Arrested, the Court Enquires into
two Qualifications, First, If the Matter in Prescription be consistent with
Common Justice, in its own Nature and Design; for otherwise the Court will
presume there was no such Constitution, Injustice and too notorious Novity,
vacate Prescription.
or however, Naught and Null in its self, and so condemn it. Secondly, The
Court will consider, whether the Immemorial Practice could however have been as
Ancient, as its supposed or pretended Original must have been, and so was in
Fact; i. e. whether they of that Age to whom the Prescription refers its
Presumptions, could have had such a Concern before them. For if Inventions,
notoriously new and late, because they have continued longer than any Man's
Memory or Life, shall hereupon pretend themselves Founded in an Ordinance of
Ages fore-past, in which it is certain no such Inventions or Matters yet were;
this will discover such Imposture, and vacate such Presumption, as if a Man
would prove Tobacco to have been in Use here before the Saxon Times, because it
has been used for time now Immemorial. Whereupon the Dr. by alleging
Instances, must by them intend, either to explain, or affirm the Sense of an
Extant Law, or Act for all these his Rights and Powers of the Regal Supremacy
in all Christian Princes as such, which Law or Act, must then be previously set
forth, and produced as the most especial Matter in Evidence, to be affirmed by
the constant succeeding Practice thereupon grounded and vouched; or else he
must, by his Instances, prescribe for a Supposition and valid Presumption of
such Law or Act, as their Legal Original, and defend it against all charges of
Intrinsecal Injury, or of a Novity, notoriously much later than the supposed
Original could be, besides what ought to be added, the proof of a perpetual
uninterrupted Uniformity in the practice, beyond all Epochas, or Memory.

3. Prescriptions from the practices of an uncontrollable force, no Arguments
of Right in the Court of Conscience.
But here is one thing more to noted in prejudice to the Rectitude of
Prescriptions, taken from the practice of Sovereign and Uncontrollable Powers,
that by Virtue (or what else you will call it) of that unaccountable Eminency,
they may, and many times do, go beyond the Lines and Measures of Right
appertaining to them, and who is there that shall say to any such Prince, What
do thou? So that prescription, though it will actually carry it in such a
Kings Courts, where the Judges are at his own choice and pleasure, yet is not a
safe nor certain Criterton of real Right, before free and equal Judgments, as
would appear in other Courts, or by the Resolution of Foreign Lawyers, where
their Judgments are not subjected. And therefore that Prescription for Kings,
which will and must pass with Lawyers, in foro for Prerogative, must not
presently be taken for infallible Right by all Men, and particularly by
Divines, till the whole Nature of the Matter and the Reasons of the Royal
Interest appear equal. For the verification hereof, I need not go back so far
as the Licentiousness of the Cesars, nor so far off as to the Mahometans
Kingdoms; let us but look over the Southern Lake, and see how Prerogative
prescribes over the miserable Subjects there, and every where else, where the
Sword is Arbitrary; and think the Observation will appear very well bottomed.
So that when the Dr. would argue for all his Exorbitant Powers of Princes over
Synods, from their customary Claims and Practices, to the convincing of Men's
Minds of the Rectitude of them, he ought all along, or by a general Set of
Reason, once for all; to have set forth the unexceptionable Equity, as well as
Custom of such Practices; for otherwise the customary Practices of a Boundless
Power, will not ipso facto prove their own Equity, nor be fair presumptions for
it alone, with free and unsubjected Judgments.

4. To show the reasonableness of these Cautions and Exceptions, let us but
consider, how great and large a Prescription Mahometism has in those Infidel
Countries, and Popery in great part of Christendom, and Heathen Idolatry once
had, from almost the Tower of Babel till Constantine's Days, over the General
World, under the support of the Princes Prerogatives; and yet we see all those
were, and are mere Nullities, because there is no equal bottom for them, but
the certain iniquity vacates all that Right of Prescription, which yet did, and
still does pass in Law through all the abused Countries; so that prescription is
rather a Rule of Right among Subjects, than in Sovereigns.

5. The Dr. heeded not to any good Originals for his prescriptions.
Now the Dr. is so far from pretending to any Express Law or Constitution for
the general Right of all Princes in those Powers, which he has so liberally
assigned them, that he does not so much as suggest, nor seem to consider the
presupposition of any such as the Original of these Prescriptions. Only in
Fact, such things have been done, pretended and claimed by Christian Princes,
and never by others without their Concession, and so concludes therefore, it
was, and is their Right as Christian Magistrates, without any reference to, or
supposition, expressed of any Legal Original, no not so much as indefinitely
and generally; whereas it was to have been expected, that he should have
definitely Specified some Law or Act, as the supposable Original or Foundation
of them, either the Law of Nature, or Providence, or some Divinely Revealed
Law, Grant, or Prophecy; or the Law of Nations, or Common Charter of Christian
Nations as such, or Canons Ecclesiastical, or Contract between the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Powers, or at least, and at last, some Original
Imperial Law over the Roman World, whence all the lesser Princes of the divided
Empire retain the Right so Founded. An exact Lawyer would have laid some or
other of these Foundations for the prescribed practice; but the Dr. was
sensible it was a dangerous adventure to assign Originals, and so let it pass;
but by thus slipping it over, he shows it impossible to be done, and so fixes a
fatal prejudice against the Truth and Credit of his Reasonings; since he shows
no Original Cause, Reason or Equity, presumable for the Right of such a
Prescription. And therefore, since he so fatally fails at the bottom, we cannot
expect any great success or assurances from his mere Historical Allegations.

5. We will therefore go on with him, and make Experiment of his most Ancient
and most Divine Instance in the Jewish Kings. Jewish Princes. p. 10.
There is, says he, no one so great a Stranger to the Holy Scriptures, as not
to know what Authority the Jewish Princes, under the Law, pretended to, as to
this Matter. What that Matter is, he just before declares in generals; A Right
not only to Exercise Authority over Ecclesiastical Persons, but to Interpose in
the ordering of Ecclesiastical Affairs too. And then adds; How far the first
Christian Emperors followed their Examples, were other Authors silent, yet that
one Assertion of Socrates, would not suffer us to be ignorant, where he
Affirms, that ever since they became Christians, H. H. Praf. l. v. p. 259. C.
the Affairs of the Church have depended on them, and the greatest Synods have
been Assembled by their Order, and still (says he) continue to be so Assembled.

6. We are not now to examine in this Part the History and Facts of Christian
Emperors, in managing the Synods, save only by the by, it is Observable, that
the Dr. has cited Socrates against himself. For the Dr. asserts, Content. p. X.
Chapter 1. 6.
That all Synods whatsoever, were Assembled by Princes, but Socrates says only
the greatest, as well knowing, that most of the lesser Synods Convened, and
Acted all without the Imperial Knowledge or Concurrence. But to return to the
proper Matter of the present Enquiry; it seems to the Dr. that the Emperors
herein followed and copied after the Platforms of the Jewish Princes, herein
manifest to every one that Reads their History in Scripture, Synagogue Forms
not extant in Scripture.
as if the Scriptures had given us a Draught and Model of the Synodical Polity,
and Forms under Jewish Kings. This had been a fine thing indeed, an happy
Scheme for Church Government; but there is none so great a Stranger to the
Scriptures, as not to know, that they mention nothing hereof, nor of any
Pretensions their Princes made to it. Here are no Frames of the Great
Sanhedrim, no Tables of their City-Councils, no Platforms of their Synagogues,
nor their Synodical Conduct, under their Princes exhibited to us. So that 'twas
so far impossible in Fact, that the Christian Emperors herein exactly followed
the Jewish Patterns, that there were no Jewish Patterns in Gods Word, to be
followed at all, much less with exactness; nor is it probable, that the
Christian Emperors did so much as think of these Jewish Kings in their
Synodical Councils, or had the Forms been certain, that they could have had
such a value for the Synagogue, as to think its Constitutions Fundamental to
the Church, or such an Imperial Authority over it; much less when the
Scriptures give the Polity of the Synagogue none the least mention, much less
Recommendation and Authority to prescribe Law to the Christian Church for ever,
but by its Absolute and Total Silence herein, seem to intend, that that Polity
should, instead of such prescriptive Power, together with the Law, be nailed to
our Saviors Cross, and be afterward decently buried in an Eternal Oblivion.
And hence, though Men of Rabbinic Learning, are very fond to derive our Forms
from their Patterns, yet we find no such Conceptions hereof, among the
Ancients, as no shades of it in the Scriptures, nor Authority for it any where.

7. But supposing the Jewish Princes had managed the Synods of the Synagogue,
according to the Drs. Aphorisms, and pretended a rightful Authority so to do,
does it follow that they really had that Right, which they pretended to? If
bare Pretenses of Princes will create a Right, the dispute is over; but then I
must tell the Dr. he had never had any opportunity, or inducement to have
written his Book for this sort of Supremacy. But if bare pretenses alone,
create no Right, and the Christian Emperors exactly followed them herein, then
Christian Princes have hereupon, only pretense for this their Authority. So
that the Drs. Cause required stronger Assertions of Right in the Jewish Kings,
Assigned in the Laws and Constitutions of God, Mishpat Hammelech.
by which they were very particularly constituted. But herein there is the
profoundest Silence, I Sam. 8.11, to 19.
and that little that is said of the Mishpat Hammelech, the manner of the King,
which they wickedly craved instead of God, though it imports a Domination, Cyp.
Ep. 65. 1. Et ut hoc ulcisceretur, excitavit eis Saul Regem, qui eos injuriis
gravibus afligeret, and per omnes contumelias and paenas superbum populum
calcaret et premeret, ut contemptus Sacerdos de superbo populo divina ultione
vindicaretur.
yet does not so much assert a Right, as denounce it an uncontrollable
oppression in punishment to their contempt of God and Samuel. But yet God, that
was resolved so to deliver them up upon their own desires, yet limits the
oppressions to Matters Secular only, not permitting the insolence to rage also
over their Sacred and Religious Liberties, that there might from hence be no
ground for any such barbarous and impious Prescription for any Princes
Arbitrary lusts herein whatsoever.

8. But to be as Concessive to the Dr. as it is possible, suppose this
Domination to have extended to their Religious Polity and Liberties also, will
he hence prescribe from the malice of Jewish Kings, permitted by God in
punishment to a Rebellious People, for the Right of such Practices in Princes
upon the Christian Church, and the same Christian Princes too? And yet
excepting this, he has nothing in the Bible that looks like any Ordinance for
the suppression of the Popular Liberties, and none at all for the Hierarchical.

9. Since then there is no Law, nor Praecedent in the Old Testament for this
sort of Ecclesiastical Power or Authority in either Jewish or Christian
Princes; let us consider what other Law or Constitution can be sound out, or
supposed for its legal Original. And first we must consider the State of the
Question in the first Christian Emperors, who are said to Claim, Use, The
Original of Censtantiaes Supremacy.
and to be rightly Invested with this Authority, and particularly in
Constantine the Great. Now he, being supposed to claim all these Prerogatives
as his Right, antecedent to the actual Exercise thereof, must sound it in one,
or other of those Originals above summed up 4. and yet I believe none of these
will quadrate with the Hypothesis. For first, if it be founded in the Natural
Law of Sovereignty simply, then all Sovereigns, Heathens, Turks, Jews, would
simply have it; and all Acts of Synods otherwise managed would not only be
Nullities, but Rebellious Seditions; which yet I presume no Doctor will allow.
Not in any express Revelation of God, for there is none such in either
Testament; not in any G^^^ral Laws of Nations, as being antecedent to, and more
general than Christianity, and in Interests Temporal only; not in any Common
Charter of Christian Nations as such, for such Charter, and such Nations there
were none before Constantine; not in any Canons Ecclesiastical, for all those
before Constantine's time had no respect to any Temporal Powers; not in any
Contract of his with the Church; for such is no where mentioned in his History,
which yet had been the most signal thing in it; nor at last in any Law of his
own making; for no man can make a right or valid Law, but by some antecedent
Authority vested in him so to do; and of this the Question properly lies. Now
since here are none of the Originals extant in History, or Nature, or
Revelation, the only remaining Plea must be prescription from immemorial
precedents, that might warrant a legal presumption for some of these Originals.
But Constantine had not one instance before him for this his Synodical
Supremacy, for the three first Centuries after Christ, and the Plantation of
the Powers Ecclesiastical; but all the prescription throughout those Ages was
for the Hierarchy, in whose hands Constantine at his Conversion found it lodged
in full Vigor and Authority, and is known and recorded to have owned it for
Divine, as will appear in the second part. So that the Right, that is
attributed by our Laws to our Kings, The Legal Original of our Kings Supremacy.
belonged not to Constantine the Great, and therefore must be lodged in some
other Constitution, viz. the same as that of all our Common Laws, and Original
Contract between the King and the Estates of this Realm, and that upon a Civil
Incorporation of the Church, and its Powers, and Ordinances into the Civil
State and Secular Authority. But if any man shall think, that the Churches
Authorities were given by God in order to Church Duties, and that the Church
can no more part with one than the other, as being inseparable and conservient
to Divine ends, and so make an invidious objection about our Frame, I hope no
man will expect, that (...) should be such a Fool to expose my self to a
Middlesex Jury; and so leaving this matter to God, and the Sense of all that
love his Church, I am their Humble Servant; but as to Constantine the Great, I
dare swear he never dreamed of the business.

10. Nay there was in his time a very obvious prejudice against such an
Opinion, viz. that God, whose Ways are not as ours, Why Kings were not made the
first Apostles.
nor his Thoughts like those of the Sons of Men, seeing the ineptitude of the
Emperors, immersed in Secular Cares, to engross all Holy Authorities to
themselves, and the Suspicion of Imposture in Religions, inlaid with the Power
of the Sword, the Merchandise the Hypocrites would make of it, Athan. ad
Orthodox. Tom. 1. P. 944. D. (...) (to set up Bishops by Kingly force) (...)
before its Divine Credit could be thoroughly established in the Hearts of
Mankind, and the Reproaches consequent against it there upon; did not think sit
to call many Mighty, or many Noble, Wise, or great at first to the Profession
of Christianity, nor permit any Princes by his Providence to exercise any
formal Authority in the least over the Church for 300 years, though Abgarus,
Mamaea, and Philip Gordius are said to have been Christian; that the
propagation of the Christian Church and Faith might not be attributed, nor
attributable to the Power of Man, but of God only. Else it had been as easy,
and as miraculous for our Lord to have made Princes his first Converts and
Apostles, and founded this Supremacy in them, and their Successors beyond all
Question for ever. But that it might never in time to come fall under the
reproachful Imputation and Character of a State Engine, he lodged the Spiritual
Powers elsewhere for three Centuries entirely, that hereupon the Church might
be emboldened, as upon sure grounds, to assert her proper Powers unalienated
and pure against all Atheistical Calumnies whatsoever through all Ages; that so,
though they were to be subject to Civil Powers to the enforcement of their
Duties, and for repression of Enormities, yet not to the Omission of their
Duties and Cares, to which God has called them; which is the general Rule and
Standard of Subjection in all Countries, Ages, and Nations Universally, and
forever.

11. The Christian Character of the first Princes in the Prescription.
But there is one thing more to be considered in the two first Emperors
instanced by the Doctor for this universal Domination of Princes over Synods,
and that is, their Christian Character, to qualify them for this Omnipotency.
For though the Doctor in his few interspersed Reasons for it, gives no
distinctive grounds for an higher and interior Supremacy in Christian, than in
Heathen Princes; yet for a good Grace, Praef. p. 5.
he tells us, That whatever Privileges do belong herein to the Christian
Magistrate, p. 94, 96.
they belong to him as such, which must, I suppose, be the Rule of Interpreting
other Places, where he more loosly omits the Christian Qualification. But here
I would fain know, what it is shall denominate a Prince Christian, and that in
order to this Authority? Internal Authority in Societies grounded upon an
Internal Right of Communion.
For all Internal Authority in all Powers presupposes a right to Communion more
or less, as the ground of Authority, in all Societies whatsoever. And therefore
the Authorities asserted by the Doctor to all Christian Princes must suppose a
right to Communion in all the matters subject to that Internal Authority. For
he that has no right to receive Sacraments, has no Internal Right of Authority
to make Laws about them; he who is not within the Communion, has no Right to
pass Sentence for the Ejection, or the Restitution of others. He may presume to
do it upon an uncontrollable Force and Tyranny, and the reasons pretended for
it may be in themselves good and necessary, and so be admitted and observed by
the Church at the Command of an Usurping Power, not in Conscience of his just
Authority, but for the reason of the thing, and for the avoiding unnecessary
Persecution. But a Right Internal there is none to them that are without. Now
though Constantine and Constantius so much concerned themselves about Church
Synods, yet were they not yet Baptized into the plenary Communion of Saints in
the Christian Church, nor so much as made Competents or Catechumens by
Imposition of Hands, and consequently what they did, about Ecclesiasticals, was
not of an Office or Nature Internal to Ecclesiastical Polity or Communion, but
common only to the Prerogative of Princes in General; or if it was of Internal
importance, 'twas Usurpation, and a Nullity in it self. Had they been
Catechumens or Competents, a pretense might have thereupon been formed, that
they alone might make Ordinances for those preliminary Statious; but not surely
for Baptism, Consirmation, Lords Supper, Holy Orders, Anathemas, Absolutions,
etc. Had they been Baptized, and so qualified for Confirmation and the
Eucharist, it might not have looked so odd in them to have set Rules for such
Sacraments, and the common Laity in their Celebration, but for Ordinations, and
Hierarchical Powers of the Spirit over the Souls of the Laity, and Clergy, how
incongtuous must it have been in any Emperor to assume the whole Legislature
and Ordinance? In these therefore the Laws of Princes may well follow
Ecclesiastical Constitutions by the Sanction of Secular Penalties; but the
Constitutions of Sacred Canons ought not to be taken sway from the Hierarchy,
and lodged only in a Lay-hand that holds a long Sword, and for no other Reason,
but this, that the Sword is in it, least they that use it Sacrilegiously,
perish by it Eternally. Constantius his want of Right over Synods.
For as to Constantius, whom most accuse to be aresolute Heretic, and they,
that speak most sostly of him, represent him as Patron of Heresy through
simple Ignorance, he thereby became, not a Guardian of the Church, or the
public Peace thereupon, hereby to sound his Right of Supremacy, but a very
great Persecutor and Embroiler of the Catholic Church even by managing Synods,
which no doubt in an Unbaptized state of Heresy he had no true Right, nor
proper Authority to do; for whatsoever Right a mere Alien Prince may have,
while he professes no Enmity, no doubt a Professed Enemy has no Lawful
Authority to manage that Divine Society, and its Principles, which he designeth
to destroy by that very management. And so I resolve, that Constantius having
declared himself against the Homoonsion had no Authority to call or manage any
Synod at all, and that no Obedience or Conformity to his Calls were due in
Conscience to his Power, though it might be in Duty ^to God, and Care for his
Soul, as well as the Souls in general of the whole Church, the whole Authority
of meeting being in the Catholic Bishops, but none at all in him or his
Arians. I might here add, that the Fathers might. Convene upon his Call, for
fear of Persecution, not in Conscience of Duty to it; but I think this did not
so far enslave them as to obey, but the hopes they had of doing him and the
whole Church the useful Services of true Faith and Piety. And hence it was,
that when upon their Petition he would not in answer concede their Dissolution.
at Ariminuns, Right of Dissolution.
they dissolved themselves, not thinking themselves guilty of any sin of
Disobedience, (for who could imagine so of the Conscience of 400 Catholic
Bishops, suffering for the Faith under Constantius his Tyranny?) though the Dr.
so charges them; p. 77
notwistanding the resentments of the Emperor at their Dissolution. Which when
he mentioned, I wonder he did not see the Contradiction of. so vast a Council
of Orthodox Bishops, against his Proposition, laid down in the immediately
precedent page, p 66.
That the Clergy have ever acknowledged it for a Right of Christian Princes,
that no Synods can dissolve themselves, nor depart from any such Council,
without the License of the Christian Prince, as he accounts Constantius to have
been; nor does he think any thing of the different Opinions of the Romish,
Greek, and Eastern Clergy, whose unanimous suffrage, I suppose he has not in
this Matter.

Sequntur quaedam Testimonia Veterum Athan. cont. Arian. Orat. 1. Tom. 1. p.
295. Synodonum Libertas.
de Patribus Nicaenis. (...)

Synod. Alexandrin. ap. Athan. Apolog. Tom. 1. p. 728. Synodus Tyriens con.
Athan.
C. De Pseudo-Synodo Tyri cont. Athan. coacta (...) etc. vide -- ibid. p. 730.
(...) Athan. ad Solitar. vir. agentes. Tom. 1. p. 831. D. de Paulino
Trevirensi, Lucifero Sardiniae, Eusebio Vercellensi, and Dionysio Mediolanensi
con. sulentibus Conslantio; (...) p. 832. A. (...) ibid. p. 833. A. Liberius
Epise. Romans ad Constantii Spadon. (...) ibid. p. 839. D. Hosius Constantio de
Constante Imperatore. (...) p. 840. A. (...) ibid. p. 862. B. (...) Nazian. in
tertio Irenico. (...) Deinde ad Magnates and Rectores.(...)

Ambrosius. Lib. 5. Ep. 32. ad Valentin. Jun. Imper. Augustae memoriae pater
tuus, non solum sermon respondit, sed etiam legibus suis sanxit, in causa
fidei, vel ecclesiassici alicujus Ordinis, cum judicare debere, qui nec munere
impar sit, nec jure dissimilis; -- hoc est Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus voluit
judicare. Quinetiam si alias quoque argueretur Episcopus, and morum esset
examinanda causa, etiam hanc voluit ad Episcopale judicum pertinere. -- Quando
audisti, clementissime Imperator, in causa fidei Laicos de Episcopo judicasse?
Ita ergo quadom adulatione curvamur, ut sacerdot alis juris simus immemores,
and quod Dens ^onavit mihi, hoc ipse aliis putem esse credendum, si docendus
est Episcopus a Laico, quid sequetur? Laicus ergo disputet, and Episcopus
audiat; Episcopus discat a Laico, At certe si vel Scripturarum seriem
divinarum, vel vetera tempora retractemus, quis est qui abruit in causa sidei,
in causa, inquam, sidei Episcopos solere de Imperatoribus Christianis, non
Imperatores de Episcopis Judicare? Eris, Deo favente, etiam Senectutis
Maturitate provectior, and tunc de hoc censebius, quali^ ille Episcopus sit,
qui laicis jus Sacerdotale substernit. Pater tuus, Deo favente, vir maturioris
aevi dicebat, non est meum judicare inter Episcopos, tua nunc dicit Clementia,
ego debeo judicare? Et ille baptizatus in Christo inhabilem se ponderi tanti
putabat esse judicii; clementia tua, cui adhuc emerenda baptismatis Sacramenta
servantur, arrogat de fide jndicium, cum sidei ipsius Sacrament a non noverit?
-- Si tractandum est, tractare in Ecclesia' didici, quod majores fecerunt mei;
si conferendum de fide; sacerdotum debet esse illa collatio; sicut factum est
sub Constantino Angustae memoriae Principe, qui nullas Leges ante praemisit sed
liberum dedit judicium Sacerdotibus. Pactum est etiam sub Constantio August ae
memoriae Imperatore, paternae dignitatis haerede. Sed quod been cepit, aliter
consummatum est. Nam Episcopi sinceram primo scripserant fidem: sed dum volunt
quidam de side intra palatium judicare, id egerunt, ut circumscriptionibus illa
Episcoporum judicia multarentur, qui tamen inslexam statim revocavere
sententiam.

Et Ep. l. 5. Orat. in Auxent. etc. -- videte quanto pejores Aniani sunt quam
Iudaei: Illi quaerebant utrum solvendum putaret Caesari jus tributi: Isti
Imperatori dare volunt jus Ecclesiae. -- Tributum Caesaris est, non negatur:
Ecclesia Dei est: Caesari utique non debet addici. Quia jus Caesaris esse non
potest Dei Templum. Quod cum honorificentia Imperatoris nemo dictum potest
negare. Quid enim honorificentius quam ut Imperator Ecclesiae silius esse
dicatur? Quod cum dititur, sine peccato dicitur; cum gratid dicitur. Imperator
enim bonus intra Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam est. Bonus enim Imperator
quaerit auxilium Ecclesiae; non refutat, etc. Idem. Ep. 32, ad Marcellin.
Soror. Convenior ipse a comitibus and tribunis, ut basilicae sieret matura
traditio, dicentibus Imperatorem jure suouti, eo quod in potestate ejus essent
omnia, Respondi -- ea quae divina Imperatoriae potestati non esse subjecta --
Allegatur Imperatori licere omnia; illius esse universa; Respondeo, noli te
gravare Imperator, ut putes to in ea quae divina sunt, imperiale aliquodjus
habero. Noli te extollere, sed s^vis diutius imperare, esto Deo subditus. -- Ad
Imperatorem Palatia pertinent, ad Sacerdotem Ecclesiae Publicorum tibi maenium
jus commissum est, non sacrorum.

Remarks upon the Book.
IT is a great absurdity to found the Title of our Kings on the pretended Right
and Practice of the Emperors, since under the Emperors Synods acted simply as
Ecclesiastical Councils, and (though the Dr. is pleased most falsely to say the
contrary) asserted the Canonical validity of their Acts, whether the Prince
would or no, though those Councils, which the Emperors called, gave them account
of their Procedures, and for Peace (not Rights) sake, desired their
Approbation, Concurrence, and Assistance. But the Councils of our Land, and
those of the Neighboring Nations, originally were made also Councils of State,
by a Contract between the Kings, and the Church, and the Barons, and so became
a part of the Civil Legislature, and their Canons to be made Laws by the Royal
Assent. Upon which Constitution to such Ends, the Kings Assent and
Ratification, became essentially Necessary. This appears all along from the
Doctors own Account and Deduction of History, and therefore it is not only a
false, but an absurd way of Arguing, from two different States of the Church,
to assert the same Legal Rights to both. Of which, God willing, we shall
discourse more fully and particularly in the second designed Part.

Arguments from Fact.
These are all that he uses for his unlimited Domination of all Princes over
their Ecclesiastical Synods, and avers them as Legal Precedents; but when the
Instances in Fact for the freedom of the Clergy are considered, these he denies
to be evictions of Right.

Chap. 5. 21.
Page 295. The Ancient Emperors, we are well assured, tied up their Councils to
very strict Rules -- They sent Commissioners to sit with the Bishops, that so
they might take care to keep them within Bounds, and see that they acted
according to the Rules they had prescribed to them.

P. 296. It Is true the Clergy in those days did take the Liberty to Transact
many things in their Convocations, without any particular License from the
King; -- but that they did take upon them to do this, is no proof that they had
a Right to do it.

How this agrees with it self, or with the design of proving the Rights of
Kings from Matter of Fact and Usage, I know not; nor with what he asserts in
Fact. Chap. 2.. 23. p. 47, 48. This is certain, that as the calling of such
Assemblies, has always depended upon the Consent and Authority of the Prince;
so when they were Assembled, the Subject of their Debates has been prescribed
them by the same Power, and they have deliberated on nothing, but what they
have been directed or allowed by the Prince to do.

Book. Chap. 2. 2. p. 10, 11.
It was a famous. Saying of Constantine, the First Christian Emperor, to his
Bishops, That they indeed were Bishops in things within the Church, but that he
was appointed by God to be Bishop as to those without.

Remark.
This Saying is directly against that universal Right and Authority in Synods
Ecclesiastical, which the Dr. so frankly gives all Christian Princes; if
Constantine was a Bishop in things only without the Church.

Of Synods less than general.
Contents p. 10. He asserts all lesser Synods under the Roman Emperors, to have
been actually called by the Emperors Authority, and so accordingly, Book Chap.
2. 6. p. 16.

These also (viz. lesser Synods) were convened by them, or were summoned by
some Authovity, that was derived from them. p. 17. They suffered not any
Assemblies of the Clergy to be made, but by their leave, and according to their
direction. So 13. p. 29, and 19. p. 41.
But Chap. 2. 2. p. 10. he cites Socrates Saying, the greatest Synods have been
Assembled by their Order, and still continue to be Assembled by them. Which
plainly shows lesser Ones usually were not. And 26. p. 62. he reports, that
John of Antioch Arriving at Ephesus, after the Council there had condemend
Nestorius, formed another Synod there, of about thirty Metropolitans, that came
thither with him, and deposed Cyril President of the Imperial Council, etc.
vide. So 36. p. 86. He mentions two Provincial Synods, one at Rome under
Celestine, and another at Alexandria under Cyril, condemning Nestorius before
the Council of Ephesus; yet neither of these were called by the Imperial
Authority. And ibid. p. 88. he relates another Synod at Rome, held by Pope Leo,
rejecting the Acts of the second Ephesine Council, under Dioscorus, Called and
Supported by the Emperor; which Roman Synod therefore could not be Called, nor
Authorized by the Emperor.

Chap. 2. 4. p. 14.
It was necessary that, in order to their meeting lawfully, the express
Command, or Allowance, of the Emperor, should be had for their so doing. 19.
p. 41 -- They cannot lawfully meet, but as they are Commanded, or Allowed of by
them. That they (Princes) and not the Clergy, are Judges when it is proper to
Convene them.
But p. 43. he thus yields, When ever the civik Magistrate shall so far abuse
his Authority, as to render it necessary for the Clergy, by some extraordinary
Methods, to provide for the Churches Welfare, that necessity will warrant that
taking of them And Chapter 5. 4. p. 267, 268. When the Exigences of the Church
call for a Convocation, then I do confess the Church has a Right to its
sitting; and if its Circumst ances be such, as to require their frequent
Sitting, during those Circumstances, it has a Right to their frequent Meeting
and Sitting, and. Vide.

Remark.
But if the Church has no Right to Judge of the time proper for their sitting,
what benefit, or use is there to be had of their Right, or what extraordinary
Methods of Session can they pretend to in provision for the Churches welfare?
especially if that be true, which he says, Chapter 2. 14. p. 32. That the greatest
Bishops of the Church in Constantius his days ( which he reckons absurdly among
the best times, 15. p. 34.) did think it unlawful to hold a Council against the
Princes Will; so that being forbidden by an Heretical Emperor, and that against
all Right and Justice, on purpose that he might oppress them, so to do, they
yet submitted to his Commands, and chose rather to suffer by their Obedience (I
suppose rather not to suffer by Obedience) than to Vsurp an Authority, which
they were sensible, did not belong to them. See p. 34.

Remark.
Now if this had been spoken only of General Councils, it had been agreeable to
Church History, and our 21 Article; but the applying this against the Right of
all Councils and Conventions whatsoever, is what comports, neither with truth,
nor with his other fore quoted Concessions.

Chap. 2. 2. p. 19.
When the Vandals had overrun the greatest part of Africa, and by their
Authority set up the Arrian Heresy in opposition to the Catholic Faith; which
beforce prevailed in those parts; Hunericus their King, at the desire of the
Arrian Bishops, summoned a general Convention of all the Catholic Bishops to
meet at Carthage; -- and accordingly upon his Summons, they all came thither,
and refusing to renounce the terms of the Council of Nice, they were deprived
of their Bishoprics, and sent into Banishment by him.

Remark.
It is a strange inadvertency to bring an Arian Instance for a proper Authority
in matters of Christianity, nay, and against the Catholic Faith too, against
which no Princes have Authority to set up Heresy against the greater Authority
of God: yet that Arian Prince had as good Authority to depose the Faith, as he
had to Convene and Depose the Catholic Bishops, that is none at all, it being
all a perfect unllity. B^^ every act of un controulable Tyranny passes with the
Dr. under the reputation of Authority.

Chap. 2. 15. p. 34.
I believe, it would be difficult in those best and most early times of the
Church to find out any Instance, wherein the Orthodox Bishops have ever
departed from this Rule, or (which is much the same thing) have ever been
justified by the Church, in those cases, in which they have departed from it.

Remark.
This is in effect a Revocation of his former avowed Assertion, that no lesser
Synods were ever convened without the allowance of the Emperors. For though he
says, it will be hard to find any contrary Instance; yet having himself given
four in John of Antioch, Caelestine, Cyril, and Leo, and there being infinitely
more such to be produced out of the Histories of the Empire; he was forced in
Conscience hereof to say, That they were never justified for departing from
this Rule, and that is much the same thing with not having departed from it.
But not so, good Sir: for in a confessed Right there is no need of a
Justification; but it is sufficient in such, and so very many Synods held
without any reference to Emperors, that there was no Rule or Law against them,
nor ever any Censure of Irregularity past upon them; If the Prince was angry at
it, he might call another to review the matters; but he never could condemn the
Provincial Conventions, merely, for being made without his License.

Of the Total Authority.
This in all Acts Synodical he avowedly attributes to the Prince yet unhappily
falls sometimes into contrary instances and concessions unawares, as for
example; chap. 2. 24. p. 55. He says, That in the sixth Council of Toledo, we
find the very Constitutions themselves in some measure drawn by up the Order of
Cinthilus their King, and only Confirmed by the Synod. Now where the Right of
Confirmation was, there was the chief Internal Synodical Authority. Again, chapter
2. 36. p. 87. He says of the first Council at Ephesus, That they appointed the
Emperors Order (for suspending the Sentence of Celestine, and Cyrils to
Provincial Synods) to be inserted into their Acts, and thereby gave a kind of
Conciliary Authority to it. But if Councils in themselves have all their
Authority Conciliary from the Prince, how could that Council give any to his
Order? Or how was it pertinent to the Doctors Principle, chapter 2. 25. p. 56. to
allege Receswinthus, magno precatu deliberationis exhortantem, exhorting the
eighth Council of Toledo with great entreaty, to consider the matters he laid
before them?

Of the Princes Ability to Judge matters Theological. chapter 2. 31. p. 71, 72.
The Arguments given for this are very languid, and repugnant to common
experience, and may as well be applied to the Reputation of a Beggars Judgment
in Matters Divine. But yet it must be allowed, that before a Prince gives the
Definitions of a Synod a Legal Sanction, or his own recommendatory Suffrage,
it is fit he should understand them; but the Spiritual Authority lies not in the
Prince, but in the Spiritual Truth in matter of Faith enforced by the Canonical
Order of Ecclesiastic Ministries; though the Doctor ascribes the Authority of
imposing belief on the Subjects to the Confirmations of the Kings. lb. p. 75. I
hope, says he, they will think it to be their Duty, in order to his consirming
their Decrees with a good Conscience, to convince him of the Truth of them, and
not expect, that he should not only believe himself, but should oblige others
to BELIEVE, what neither he, nor they see any reason to believe. The Fathers,
that scouted the second Sirmian Creed (that dated it self in the Presence of
Constantius, and under the Consulship of Flavius Ensebius, and Hypatius in the
tenth of the Calends of ^nne) for ascribing so late a beginning in but the
Presence of a Prince, how would they have blessed themselves, had they heard
any man ascribe to Princes an Anthority of making Subjects believe, or had they
read any such paslage as this; chapter 2. ^3. p. 79. It is, I conceive, allowed on
all bends, that their Definions are no further obligatory, than as they are
rulified and confirmed by the Civil Authority. For though the Faith of Christ
neither depends upon the Authority of Man, nor is subject to the Power, either
of Synods, or Princes, as to what concerns the truth of it: Yet what that Faith
is, which shall be allowed to be professed in every Community by the Laws of
it, and receive not only Protection, but Encouragement from the Civil Power,
must be left to the Prince to determine. (So far it is tolerable well) And the
Definitions of Synods in favor of it will signify very little, till what they
have determined to be the Right Faith, be also allowed by the Civil Magistrate
to the publicly Professed and Taught; and be received into his Favor, and
under his Patronage as such? Suit the Doctor forgot the three first Centuries,
and all other times of Princely Persecutions; under which the Synodical
assertions of the Faith signisied more to the convincing Men to Faith Ten
Thousand times, than all the Encouragement of Christian Princes ever could,
did, or will. And therefore whatsoever liking any other Archbishop might have
had to this Doctrine of the Doctors, I hope this is none, for which the Doctor
will challenge his present Graces approbation:

Of Ecclesiastical Censures.
These the Dr. makes all annihilable by the Will of Princes. But how then shall
what they bind on Earth, be bound in Heaven, and their sins be retained, which
they retain; if they are Repealable by an Earthly Prince? Has this Earthly
Potentate a Commission to bind and loose, remit and retain in Earth and Heaven
too, as the Church had, and has still, except he can take it away? The Doctor
should have considered here, that Kings are only concerned in Church Censures,
as by the Laws they are to have a Civil effect, not as to their Spiritual
validity before God in Heaven.

Of the Right of Summons.
Chapter 3. 5. p. 107.
They have Right to nothing but a Summons; and it were no great matter, whether
they had a Right to that, or no.

Chapter 3. 25. p. 141.
Yet I humbly conceive, that so ancient and settled a Custom ought to be held
to. What! though it is no matter, whether they had this Right or no?

Of the Bottom of the Regal Supremacy.
This he solemnly and universally places in the Sovereignty of all Christian
Princes, as such; but chapter 3. 25. p. 144. he lodges it in the Trust reposed and
granted by the People. The Government has entrusted him (our King) with the
Power of giving them leave to sit, and act, when he pleases; and when he
pleases, he may deny them to do either. This is indeed the Truth, and only
Truth in this matter; it is a concession and trust of the Estates to our Princes
established by Common and Statute Law; which whether God approves, or no, must
be left to his Judgment at last, when Men shall be called to account for what
they have done herein, or hereupon. But in the mean time this Truth is a
prejudice against that universal Right of all Christian Sovereigns herein by
mere virtue of their Sovereignty.

Of the Parallel of Counselor and Jury. Chap. 5. 15. p. 289.
Will not their Resolutions be their own, because the King declared to them the
general Matter upon which they were to consult? Is a Counselor at Law of no
Use, or has he no freedom of Opinion, because his Client puts his Case to him?
Or does our Law unfitly call the answer of a Petit-Jury its Verdict, because
the Judge, summed up the Evidence to them, and directed them, not only upon
what points, but from what proof they were to raise it? What strange Notions
must, etc. But what strange Notions must that Man have, that thinks a Synod to
have only a freedom of Opinion, like a Counselor, without any Decisive
Authority, and yet compare that very freedom of Opinion to the Verdict of a
Jury, which is Authoritatively Decisive? To compare the King to a Client, and a
Synod to his Counselor; and in the same breath to make the King a Judge, and
so of Counsel to the Jury? Whatsoever esteem the rest of this Book may acquire
among the learned of the Law, I do not pretend to Divine, but I believe this
will raise no extraordinary Transports, and so let it pass.

And now I have done with my Remarks upon the Doctors Incongruities; which,
though necessary to show the weakness of the Work, that a false Reputation may
not recommend the ill Principles, I had never offered to public notice, had he
not used his Generous Adversary, not only with extreme Spite, but undeserved
Contempt, insulting over him as a Man of no Honesly, Logic, Law, or History,
etc. I could have added a great many more such absurdities, but the employ is
uneasy, and so I quit it; and shall only wish that the Doctor may humble
himself to God for the wrongs he has done to the Church, and when he has done
so, he will quickly endeavor to make her Reparation.

FINIS.

