His Most Sacred MAJESTY'S, And His Most Honorable Privy Councils LETTERS,
Relating to the College of Physicians.

As likewise, A SHORT ACCOUNT Of the Institution, Use and Privileges of that
Royal Foundation.

By His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1688.

JAMES R.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well. We having lately Graciously given
to you, the President and Commonalty of Our College of Physicians in London,
Our Letters Patents, confirming all former Grants of Our Royal Progenitors,
together with other Privileges, and more ample Authority, for suppressing all
Illiterate and Illegal Practisers of the Art of Physic, in Our City of London,
and seven Miles distance; We have thought fit, for the prevention of the great
Damages and Inconveniences which our loving Subjects may be exposed to in their
Healths, and otherwise, by the Unskillfulness of the said Practisers, to Will
and Require You, the President and Censors of Our said College, and your
Successors, in Pursuance of Our said Letters Patents, as also of the Laws and
Statutes of Our Realm, forthwith to do your utmost Diligence to Prosecute and
Suppress all such Unlearned and Unlawful Practisers of Physic, as shall
presume to act contrary to Our said Letters Patents, and to the Laws of the
Realm in that Case provided; And, for your Encouragement therein, We do require
all our Judges, Justices of the Peace, and others whom it may concern, to
Countenance and Assist you, the President and Censors, in your Prosecution of
such Offenders according to Law: And, for the more effectual doing thereof, you
are, as occasion shall offer, to demand the Aid and Assistance of the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of Our City of London, whom by Our Letters We have required
to give you all Countenance and Assistance in the Execution of this Our Royal
Will and Command; Not doubting, but that you will be careful to Suppress such
Offenders, and Answer the Trust in this Case committed to you: And so We bid
you farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor, the Third day of July, 1687. in the Third Year
of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Sunderland P.

To our Trusty and Well-beloved, the President and Censors of Our College of
Physicians in London.
JAMES R.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well. Whereas, in the Reigns of Our
Royal Progenitors of famous Memory, sufficient Provision and Power has been
given and granted by several Charters and Acts of Parliament of Our College of
Physicians in London, for the Reforming and Suppressing all Unlawful and
Unlearned Practisers of the Art of Physic in London, and within seven Miles
distance thereof; And, We having of late in Our Princely Wisdom, thought fit to
confirm and enlarge the said Charters by Our Royal Patent granted to the said
College; and, resolving to see the said Charters and Acts of Parliament duly
put in Execution, have thought fit by these Presents to charge you, the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Justices of the Peace, within Our said City and the
Precincts thereof, that with all readiness you do Aid and Assist the President
and Censors for the Time being, of Our said College, or such Officers as the
President of the said College shall appoint, in the doing of all such things,
as by the said Acts of Parliament or Charters ought to be done, for the
Suppressing of all and every such Person or Persons, as contrary to the said
Royal Charters and Acts of Parliament shall dare to adventure in the Practice
of Physic, upon any of Our Subjects in the City of London, or the Suburbs and
Precincts of the same: And, to the Intent, that this Our Purpose, tending to
the Safety of Our Subjects, and the Suppression of Unlawful and Ignorant
Practicioners, may with more Diligence and Authority be effected, We do Will
and Command you, the Lord Mayor of Our City of London, that at your next
Sessions, these Our Letters may be so read and published, that all Justices of
the Peace, as well within Our said City, as also the Suburbs and Precincts of
the same, may take knowledge of this Our Pleasure and Command: And so We bid you
farewell.

Given at Our Court of Windsor, the Third day of July, 1687. and in the Third
Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Sunderland P.

To the Lord Mayor of Our City of London.
WHEREAS, by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, Power is given to the
President and Commonalty of the Faculty of Physic in London, or to such, as
they the said President and College for the Time being, shall according to the
Statutes in that behalf made, Authorize to have the Fine, Search, Correction
and Government of all Persons using the Faculty of Physic in London, and the
Suburbs thereof, and seven Miles distance, and to punish all such as shall
Unlawfully Use or Practice the said Faculty within the said Precincts, contrary
to the true Intent and Meaning of the Statute in that Case made; with this
further Authority, That all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
and other Ministers and Officers within the City of London and Precincts
aforesaid, upon Request to them made, should Help, Aid and Assist the President
of the said College, and all Persons by the said President and Commonalty from
time to time Authorized for the Execution of the Acts and Statutes in that
behalf made, upon Pain, for not giving such Aid, Help and Assistance, to run in
Contempt of the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Successors; And, whereas there
are sundry Vunskilful Persons within the Precincts and Limits aforesaid, who do
use and practice the said Faculty, contrary to the Statutes of this Realm in
that Case provided, and to the great Peril and Danger of the Lives of many of
His Majesty's Subjects; These are to Will and Require you, and in his Majesty's
Name straightly to Charge and Command you, that henceforth at all time and times,
you, according to the Tenor of the said Act, be Aiding and Assisting unto the
said President, and to those that shall be Authorized by the said President and
College, for the Apprehending of all such persons, as shall Unlawfully Use and
Practice the said Faculty within the Limits aforesaid, contrary to the Intent
and Meaning of the Statutes aforesaid, when they or any of them shall given you
Notice of, and require it; and thereupon to bring them before the said
President, or those Authorized, as aforesaid, to their College, there to be
Examined and Proceeded against, as to the Law in that Case shall appertain.
Whereof fail you not, as you, or every of you, will answer the Contempt in that
behalft made.

Dated at the Court at Hampton Court, the Sixteenth day of July, 1687. Jefferys
C. Sunderland P. Arundell C. P. S. Albemarle Peterborow Bath Middleton Craven
Dartmouth Ormond Powis Mulgrave Phil. Musgrave.


To all Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailifs, Constables, Head boroughs, and all
other His Majesty's Officers and Ministers, to whom this shall or may
appertain, within the City of London, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and the
Limits within mentioned, and to every and either of them.
A short Account of the Institution and Nature of the College of Physicians,
London.
THE College of Physicians in London (first Founded and Constituted by the
Charter of King Henry VIII. in the Tenth Year of his Reign, and afterward
confirmed and enlarged in its Privileges and Jurisdictions by several Acts of
Parliament, and Charters granted by Himself and Royal Successors,) consists of
a President, Fellows, Candidates, Honorary Fellows, and Licentiates.

1. The FELLOWS

Are Doctors of Physic, chosen out of the Candidates, who have been always
limited to a certain Number, and are now confined to the Number of Fourscore,
by His present Majesty's Gracious Charter: Out of these are chosen the
President, Elects, Censors, and other Officers of the College, who, with the
rest of the Fellows, are solely concerned in the Governing Part of the College,
and have a Voice in the making and rescinding any Statutes, Orders, or Bylaws,
relating to Physic and the Practice thereof.

2. CANDIDATES

Must be Doctors in Physic, admitted to that Degree in one of our Own
Universities, must not be Foreigners, and ought to have practiced Physic Four
Years before they are admitted into that Order; out of these, as the Seminary,
the Fellowships are filled up, as they become vacant, in a perpetual Succession.

3. HONORARY FELLOWS

Are such Doctors in Physic, as by reason of their being Foreigners, or having
taken their Degrees in some University beyond the Seas, are not incorporated
into either of Ours; or, for some other reason (having not been Candidates) are
not of the Number of those who have Votes in the Affairs of the College.

4. LICENTITATES

Are such other Persons Skilled in Physic, who by reason of their being
Foreigners, or their not being admitted Doctors in one of Our Universities, or
for their not being Eminently Learned, or by reason of their too great Youth,
or such like Causes, are not capable to be Elected into the Number of the
Candidates; yet may, notwithstanding, be serviceable to the Public in taking
Care of the Health of the King's Subjects, at least in some particular Disease.

NOW, of all these several Ranks and Degrees of Practisers in Physic, none of
them is confined to any certain Number but the Fellows and Candidates; so that
the Rest being wholly unlimited, no Person can be excluded out of the College,
or debarred from Practice, but such as are so wholly illiterate and unskilful,
that they dare not adventure to submit themselves to the Examination and
Judgment of the President and Censors of the College, either as to the Goodness
of their Medicines, or their own Skill in all, or any Part of Physic; though
the President and Censors be Men strictly sworn to do justice to all Persons,
who shall present themselves, or their Medicines, to their Scrutiny and
Examination.

From hence it manifestly follows, That the College of Physicians is very far
from being a Monopoly, since it cannot reject any of the King's Subjects who
are duly qualified for the Exercise of all, or any Part of Physic; and
therefore, all Pretenders to Secret Medicines, or to the Practice of Physic,
without License first had from the College, are justly prosecuted and punished
as Public Cheats and Impostors (conscious to themselves of Fraud in their
Medicines, and Insufficiency in their pretended Skill in Physic) according to
the just and wholesome Laws in that Case provided; For which purpose, and for
the Encouragement of Legal and Learned Practicers in Physic, the College of
Physicians is invested with several Powers and Privileges, partly by the
express Laws of the Land, and several Royal Charters; and partly by such
Statutes and Orders of the College, as have been made in Pursuance thereof. An
Account of some of which are here Printed, for the more Public Information of
all the King's Subjects, so that none may hereafter pretend Ignorance in these
Matters.

1. The Censors of the College are entrusted with the Government, Scrutiny,
Correction and Supervision of all Persons practicing Physic within the City of
London, and Seven Miles Compass, together with all their Medicines, Bills and
Prescriptions whatsoever; so as that they may punish Offenders by Fines,
Amerciaments, Imprisonments, and other reasonable Methods.

2. No Person in the Country (except Graduates in Physic in either of Our
Universities) can have a License to practice Physic from the Lord Bishop of
the Diocese, till he be first examined approved by the President and Three
Elects of the College, and receive their Letters Testimonial for that Purpose.

3. All Persons practicing Physic in the City of London, and Seven Miles
Compass, without License first had of the College of Physicians, after due
Examination, whether mere Empiricks and Unlearned Persons, or any other
whatsoever, are to be prosecuted at Law, and upon Conviction to pay Five Pounds
for every Months Practice proved against them; and, if they happen to be
Apothecaries, may also (according to the ancient Practice, and laudable Custom
of the College, enforced by a former, as likewise by a late Statute) be
discommun'd; so that no Member of that Society ought, upon Notice thereof, to
suffer any of his Bills or Prescriptions to be sent to any such Apothecary.

4. Any Person practicing Physic Illegally, that is, without License first had
from the College of Physicians, if his Patient shall happen to dye under his
Hands, is indictable at Common Law for the Loss of one of the King's Subjects.

5. Upon Complaint made by any Person to the President and Censors against any
Practiser of Physic, within the City of London, and Seven Miles Compass,
whether he be a Licensed Physician or not, for having prescribed any Unfitting
or Unwholesome Medicine to his Patient; the said President and Censors have full
Power and Authority to receive any such Complaint, to summon the Person
offending to appear before them at their Board; to summon, and examine
Witnesses, and to hear and determine the Matter; and, if the Person accused be
found guilty of Ill Practice, they have Power to set a Fine upone him to any
Sum not exceeding Twenty Pounds, and by the Warrant of the Censors to commit
him to any Prison of the City (except the Tower of London) till he shall have
paid the aforesaid Fine, and made due Submission to the College; so that all
Persons who are injured in their Bodies and Healths by Unskilful Practisers,
may there have certain and speedy Redress.

6. By the King's late Gracious Charter, the sole Power of Licensing all Books,
Papers, etc. relating to Physic and Surgery, and the Practice thereof, is,
after the Expiration of the Act of Printing, granted to the President and
Censors of the College of Physicians; And, in the mean Time, is by them
exercised by Favor of his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, who has been
pleased to give them his Deputation for that Purpose; by which Means, frivolous
and useless Books in Physic and Surgery, will for the future be in great
measure Prevented, and the Scandalous Bills of Empiricks and Impostors in that
Faculty stifled and suppressed.

7. Any Physician Licensed by the College, may exercise the Science of Physic
in all and every of its Parts, any Act, Statute or Provision made to the
contrary notwithstanding; so that he may, as often as he pleases, practice
Surgery and Pharmacy, or the making and compounding Medicines for the Use of
any of his Patients.

THESE are some of those Privileges and Powers, which the Royal Wisdom of our
Princes, by their Charters and in their Parliaments, have thought fit to grant
unto the College of Physicians, for the better Reformation of diverse Abuses
and Enormities happening to the Commonwealth, by the evil using and undue
Administration of Physic: And therefore, since the College was first Founded
for that very Purpose, and afterward (almost in every Princes Reign)
strengthened and armed with fresh Powers and Authority to the same Intent; since
all the Members of the College have given their Faith, or solemnly sworn that
they will do their utmost Endeavors to suppress all Illiterate and Illegal
Practicioners; since not only by former Acts of Parliament, and Royal Charters,
but also by that of His present Majesty, and by his Particular Letters
Mandatory we are strictly commanded so to do: We should be eminently guilty,
not only of the greatest Remissness, and most supine Negligence, but also of
open Breach of our solemn Oaths and Faith, and manifest Disobedience to our
Prince, if we should not exert the Authority committed to us, for the
vindicating of the Practice of Physic out of the Hands of Ignorant Mechanics,
and other Illegal Invaders of that Liberal Faculty. And whereas, in all Trades
and Corporations of this City, constituted for Private Benefit, not for Public
Use, and that by Charter only, not by the Statute-Laws of the Land, do without
Blame or Envy inform against any Intruders, so as not to suffer any
neighboring Trade to break in upon them, but that by severe Mulcts and Fines
constantly imposed upon Offenders, they vigorously maintain their respective
Bounds and Limits; I cannot be thought hard and unreasonable in the College of
Physicians alone (being constituted of men of generous and liberal Education,
and instituted for Public Benefit, confirmed not only by repeated Charters,
but several Acts of Parliament, out of which no Person of sufficient Capacity
and Learning can be excluded) to assert its Own Constitution and Privileges, by
legally punishing such Persons as shall boldly invade the Liberties of that
Society; especially, when so precious a thing as the Healths and Lives of the
King's most eminent Subjects, residing in and about this City, are herein
concerned. For the Discharge therefore of that Duty incumbent upon them, viz.
to preserve the Healthful State of the King's Subjects, etc.) the present
College have taken all imaginable Care so to regulate the Practice of Physic,
as that no Person may be neglected or aggrieved: The known Poor and Meaner
Families are abundantly and prudently provided for, by a late Order for that
Purpose. It is well known, that in Families of Middle Rank, the Physicians are
moderate in their Expectations and Demands; and for those that are Rich and
Noble, Liberality is inseparable from their Quality and Breeding. We are also
fully resolved, for the Public Good, to encourage and protect those two
necessary Instruments of Physic, the Surgeons and the Apothecaries (the
latter of which owe their Charter and Knowledge of Medicines to the Favor of
the College) so long as they shall contain themselves withing the Limits of
their own Professions; and, in short, to do all other things necessary for the
vindicating and perpetuating of the Faculty of Physic, that so the Young
Students in our Universities, may not be discouraged from applying themselves
to the Study of a Science, so useful to the Commonwealth; nor that Profession
be invaded by the Vulgar, which has been the usual Support of the Younger Sons
of the Gentry of this Kingdom.

FINIS.

