THE HISTORY OF MADEMOISELLE DE St, Phale, Giving a Full Account of The
Miraculous Conversion Of a NOBLE French Lady And her Daughter, TO THE Reformed
Religion.

WITH The Defeat of the Intriegues of a JESUIT their Confessor.

Translated out of French.

LONDON. Printed by J. A. for J. Hancock, and are to be Sold by most
Booksellers in London and Westminster, 1691.

TO MADAM Gerthrude Rodd, OF WARE near EXON.
MADAM,
THE satisfaction you were pleased to express on the perusal of some Sheets of
this History, has emboldened me to present you with the whole. Nor could I put
it into better hands than yours, who so exactly Harmonize with its i^ lustrious
subject, in the best part of her Character. And if a Co^formity in
Dispositions, be the Groun^ and Cement of ^ffection, I know no^e with whom she
may find (...) surer protection or a better Welcom^ than with you. I co^fess,
Madam the Dress in which the following H^story is clothed, and some. Passage
in it, have somewhat of the Air of a Romance, and I may possibly be censured
for busying my self i^ Translating, as its Author was for Composing a Piece of
such a Nature; but as this was my Employment or rather Diversion, during an
undesirable Leisure from more serious Work, so, had I not been well assured of
the truth of the most material and substantial passages in it, I should never
have been induced to have taken pains about it, much less have presumed to
present you with it. Its Author is a Person that has gotten some reputation by
his Writings, which I can hardly persuade my self he would willingly Hazard, by
Imposing Fictions on the World: And that Sincerity he has discovered in his
other Works (by which he has Exposed himself, not only to the Rage of a Party,
as malicious as powerful, but to the displeasure of his Friends, by that just
severity and Freedom he uses in reproving their Miscarriages,) may
sufficiently secure us, against the Apprehensions of Falsehood in this. The
Author indeed confesses he has made use of Feigned Names, which he was
obliged to do, because some of the Persons concerned had resolved a Journey
into Erance incognito, to recover if possible somewhat of their Estates, which
had been ravished from them by the unparalled Tyranny of their King, and his
bloody Counselors the Jefuits, and of which they had chosen to make shipwreck,
rather than of a good Conscience.

Having given this account of the Piece it self, I beg the Liberty to Give you,
and by you, others, an account of the Motive that Induced me to make it public
in our own Language: Besides the earnest Requests of some Friends at whose
desire I first translated it, the Consideration of the good Effect it had
whilst in Manuscript, in opening the Hearts and Purses of many to the
bounteous Relief of those poor but Generous Confessors of Christ, the French
Refugies (whereof I could produce several Witnesses in this City,) has been my
chief Encouragement. If it has the same Effect from the Press, I shall judge
any self abundantly recompensed for the pains I have taken in it: However this
Advantage I shall have by its publication, an opportunity to declare my ardent
Vows for the Blessing of God on your self and Family, and to assure you that I
am,

Exon. Sept. 15th. 1690. MADAM, Your most Humble Servant, B. S.

Book (...), and are to be sold by John Hanco^^^^ (...) the Royal Exchange.
EIght Bo^^^^ lately published by Mr. Tho. Brooks, la^^ Preacher of the Gospel
at Margarets New-Fish-str^^^^ (...)

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices, or Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores: being a Companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ.

2. Heaven on Earth: Or a serious Discourse touching a Well grounded Assurance
of Man's Everlasting Happiness.

3. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ, held forth in 22 Sermons.

4. Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women, or the happiness of being good
betimes.

5. A String of Pearls: or the best things reserved till last.

6. The Mute Christian under the smarting Rod, with Sovereign Antidotes against
the most miserable Exigences.

7. The Privy Key of Heaven: or a Discourse of Closet-Prayer.

8. A Cabinet of choice Jewels, or a Box of precious Ointment: containing
special Maxims, Rules and Directions, in order to the clearing up of a Man's
Interest in Christ, and his Title to all the Glory of another World.

The Godly Man's Ark, in several Sermons. To which is added Mrs. Mo^^s Evidences
for Heaven: By Ed^und Calamy, B. D^at Aldermanbury.

Christ's Communion with his Church Militant: by Nicholas ^^o^y^^.

Sin the Plague of Plagues: by Ralph Venning.

A true Narrative of those two never to be forgotten Deliverances. One from the
Spanish Invasion 88, the other from the Hellish Powder Plot: Nov. 5. 1605: by
Mr. Sam. ^lark. To which is newly added a brief Account of the late Horrid
Plot. discovered 16^8, with a Relation of other Popish Cruci^ies, here and
beyond Sea.

Short-Writing, the most Easy, Exact, Lineal and Speedy method that has ever
yet been obtained, as Thousands in the City and elsewhere, can from their own
Experience te^^fie: by Theophilus Metcalf.

Also a Book called a Schoolmaster to it, explaining all the Rules thereof.

A Word of Advice to Saints; or a choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ.

A Copy-book of the Newest and most useful Hands, with Directions for Spelling
and Cyphering.

Vennings Remains. being the Substance of many Sermons: by Mr. Ralph Venning,
prepared by himself for the Press a little ^^fore hi^ Death.

Comae Bereni^is, or the hairy Comet: being a Prognostic of malignant
Influences from the many Blazing Stars wandering in our Horizon.

Gospel-love, Heart-purity, and the flourishing of the Righteous: being the
last Sermons of that Eminent Divine Mr. Joseph Caryl.

The Young man's Guide to Blessedness, or seasonable Directions for Youth, in
their unconverted estate: by R. Maybew, Minister of the Gospel.

Causa Dei, or an Apology for God: wherein the perpetuity of Infernal Torments
is evidenced, and both his Goodness and Justice defended: Also the Nature of
Punishments in general and of Infernal ones in particular displayed: by R.
Burthogge.

The Legacy of a dying Mother to her mourning Children, being the Experiences
of Mrs. Susanna Bell: published by Tho Brooks.

King James his Counterblast to Tobacco: To which is added a learned Discourse
touching Tobacco, by Dr. Maynwaring: wherein men may see whether Tobacco be
good for them or no.

Strength in Weakness: being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Martha
Brooks, late Wife to Mr. Tho. Brooks, Minister of the Gospel: to which is added
some Experiences of the Grace and dealing of God, observed and gathered by a
near Relation of the said Mrs. Brooks.

A discourse of Christ's coming, and the Influence which the expectation thereof
has on all manner of Holy Conversation and Godliness. By Theophilus Gale.

The Shepherds Legacy, or forty Years Experience of the Weather.

The Young Man's Conflict with, and Victory over the Devil by Faith: Or a true
and perfect Relation of the Experiences of Tho. Powel, begun in the Fifteenth,
and continued till the Seventeenth Year of his Age.

Christ's ce^tain and sudden Appearance to Judgment. By Sam. Malbon.

A brief Description of New York, and the places thereto adjoining, with
D^^ections and Advice to such as shall go thither, by D. Denton.

A Cry for Laborers in Gods Harvest, being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Mr. Ralph Venning, by R. Brag, Minister of the Gospel.

Christian Directions, showing how to walk with God all the day long, by Tho.
Gouge.

Conscience the best Friend upon Earth, or the happy effects of keeping a good
Conscience: By Henry Stubbes.

Mr. Stubb's Directions for making peace with God, and his true last Speeches.

Orthodox Paradoxes, Theoretical and Experimental, or a Believer clearing Truth
by seeming Contradictions. With an Appendix of the Triumph of Assurance over
the Law, Sin, World, Wants, etc.

To which is added, The New Command Renewed, or Love one another. With Ten
Rules for the right understanding of Scripture: by R. Venning, A. M.

An Awakening Call from the Eternal God to the Unconvertrd, with seasonable
Advice to them that are under Convictions, to prevent their miscarrying in
Conversion, by Sam. Corbin, A. M.

The Triumph of Mercy in the Chariot of Praise: a Treatise of preventing,
secret and unexpected Mercies, with some mixed Reflections, by S. Lee.

The best Friend standing at the Door, or Christ's awakening and affectionate
Call, both to Professors and secure Sinners, for Entrance into the House, in
several Sermons, by John Ryther.

Israel Redux: Or, the Restoration of Irael; an Essay upon probable Grounds,
that the Tartars are the Ten Tribes of Israel, by G. F. With some Scripture
Evidences of their future Conversion and Establishment in their own Land;
together with two Discourses on the mournful state of the Church, with a
Prospect of her dawning Glory, by S. Lee.

Beams of the Spirit, Enlivening, Enlightening, and Gladding the Soul. Imp. Jos.
Caryl.

The absolute Accomptant, or London-Merchant, containing Instructions and
Directions for a Methodical keeping of Merchants Accounts, after the most exact
and concise way of Debtor and Creditor. By Tho. Brown, Accomptant.

The true and only way of Concord of all the Christian Churches, the
Desireableness of it, and the Detection of false dividing Terms opened: By
Richard Baxter.

A true Believers Choice and Pleasure, instanced in the Exemplary Life of Mrs.
Mary Cox, the late Wife of Dr. Tho. Cox: Preached for her Funeral by Richard
Baxter.

A Narrative, and Impartial Discovery of the Horrid Popish Plot; carried on for
the burning and destroying the Cities of London and Westminster, with their
Suburbs, etc Setting forth the several Consults, Orders, and Resolutions of the
Jesuits concerning the same. And diverse Depositions and Informations relating
thereunto, never before printed. By Capt. William Bed^oe, lately engaged in
that Horrid Design, and one of the Popish Committee for carrying on such Fires.

A Narrative of unheard of Popish Cruelties toward Protestants beyond Seas or,
a new Account of the Bloody Spanish Inquisition. Published as a Caveat to
Protestants. By M. Dugdale.

The Plot in a Dream, or the Discoverer in masquerade, fully and truly relating
the History of the present Popish Plot, from it is Original to this time, with
several Pictures to illustrate the Design

The Second part of the Non-conformists Plea for Peace, being an Account of
their Principles about Civil and Eccle^^astical Authority and Obedience: in 4
to. By R. Baxter.

A Treatise of the Souls Union with Christ, wherein is declared, what this
Union with Jesus Christ is, and many false grounds of Union discovered, in 8
vo. by I. L.

Gods call to England for thankfulness after Gracious deliverances, wherein is
showed, that our deliverances, not Answered with Reformation, will be followed
with sorest destruction, in 12. by Tho. Gouge.

A Sermon preached Oct. ^0. at the Funeral of Mr Tho Brooks, who departed this
Life, Sept. 27. 1680. By John Reeve.

THE HISTORY OF Mademoiselle de St. Phale.
CHAP. I.
Gentlemen and Ladies,
YOU may possibly promise your selves a great deal of Pleasure in the Account
of my Life, but lest I should frustrate your Expectations, must assure you,
you will find but little that is diverting (...) it, it being almost wholly made up
of such acci^ents as are sad and tragical: This I thought fit to in^^rm you of,
that you might not reproach me after^ards with having deceived you.

I was born in the Duchy of Burgundy, of a Family ^at had Professed the
reformed Religion for above 150 ^ears, whose Nobility was sufficiently ancient.
My Fa^^ers Name was Monsieur d' Ombreval, who had been ^amp-Master, and enjoyed
many Offices, and might, (...) may be, have been advanced to the highest, had
he ^een, as many others, less scrupulous about Religion. ^e was generally
accounted as eminent in Prudence, Wisdom and Piety, as most in France: He had
performed such things as made him considerable; yet none excelled him in
mildness and sweetness of Carriage in his Family. My Father had never but one
Sister, for whom he had always an extraordinary love, and this Sister is styled
Madam de Prosses, who is here with me; and though my Mother were still living,
yet I am more obliged to my Aunt than to my Mother, as you will hereafter see.

Love, which sometimes delights to show its force on the wisest spirits, made
my Father himself do what he would certainly have disliked in another. For he
fell in love with my Mother, who was in her time one of the handsomest and
compleatest Ladies in all the Province, and was besides of a very Noble and
Rich Family; but that would have made no Impression at all on him, had his Mind
been free. At first he only loved out of Gallantry, that he might not differ
from all other young men, who have always, some Inclination; but at length his
Love got such a victory over him, and made him so Earnest in his suit, that he
engaged my mothers affections toward him, who heard him universally commended,
and their Marriage was discoursed of.

Love has indeed in it somewhat very wonderful, it finds Expedients for all
things, and easily surmounts the greatest difficulties. My Father was always,
even to his Death, so resolute an Huguenot, as that the Flames were not capable
of altering him. My Mother was a most obstinate Catholic: Both were so far
from embracing each others Religion, as that they would fain have had each
other take up their own. But at length some Mediators (whereof Love was the
chief) made up an Agreement between them on these three Conditions, viz. That
they should be married first by a Priest, and afterward by a Minister. That
they should never discourse of Religion. And, That of the Children they should
have, the Sons should be educated in the Religion of their Father, and the
Daughters in that of their Mother. All these Articles were very punctually
observed on both sides, especially that of silence in matters of Religion, out
of prudence to prevent Contentions and Heats, each knowing the other to be
resolved ^n that Point.

The first Year of this Marriage gave Birth to the only Brother which I have,
and the fourth to me; There were other Children, but God was pleased to ^ake
them all away in their Infancy. My Father ^ook a great deal of Care in the
Education of my ^rother, especially to get him well Principled in Matters of
Religion, and to this end got him a Tu^or, who instilled the Principles of
Religion into him (...) he learnt to read and write. My Mother was as ^^reful
of me, to get me educated in the Romish Re^^gion, and provided a Governess for
me that was an ^^complished Hypocrite. My Brother from his In^^ncy discovered a
great aversion and abhorrence of ^e Romish Religion, and although he most
tender^^ loved me, could not sometimes forbear calling me ^^tle Idolater: Once
he got into my Closet, where (...) had diverse Pictures of Saints of both Sexes,
on ^^ich he made Beards, Asses-Ears, and Horns; some^^es he would play a
thousand tricks with my Be^ds, ^owing them from one end of the Chamber to the
^^er, and making such sport with them, as had the ^ther Maimbourge seen it, he
would certainly have ^^ed out, See how the Spirit of Heresy shows it self
(...) his Childhood: I might quarrel with him as long (...) I would, but were
sure to get nothing by it, 'till length he was surprised by my Mother in the
dis^^se of a Jesuit, who so dealt with him as that he ^^^st not come thither
for three days after. In a ^^^rd, one would have thought that how young so^^^r
he was, he had a design to render the Catho^^^ Religion contemptible to me.

These first Follies of his Childhood being over, he ^^fited so well by the
Instructions he had received, ^^t at twelve Years of Age he could read, write,
speak the Latin and the German Tongues indifferently well, so that my Father
being fully satisfied with his Inclinations, and his Tutors love, resolved to
send the^ both to Saumur, with a Servant to wait on them, when I shall leave
him to speak of what concerned my sel^ My Mother educated me exactly according
to the Prescriptions of her Confessor; I shall not relate all tha^ was daily
done and said to me, nor all the Arge^ments nor stories that they made use of
to prejudi^ me against Calvinism. My Mother often entertaine^ thoughts of
placing me in a Convent, Paying for m^ Table; but knowing that I could learn
nothing the^ suitable to my Quality, she laid that Design aside.

I shall not spend more time in giving an accou^^ of what befell me 'till I
came to the Age of seventee^ when I attained the Stature I now have, and were
very passable Catholic. It Is true, I began to ha^^ many Doubts, which I durst
not reveal to any, bo^^ about the Eucharist, the Merit of Works, Purgato^ and
Auricular Confession, and though I did all th^^ I could, I found it impossible
to submit either to the Authority of the Church or of the Curate; and (...)
Mother knowing me to be somewhat curious, a^^ fearing least my Curiosity should
lead me to kno^^ more than was convenient for those of the Rom^ Religion,
thought it necessary to find some Impl^^ment for my spirit, she therefore
caused me to lea^^ to Dance, Sing, Play on the Claricords or Harpsic^^^ and to
draw; made me read Romances, Comed^^ and Poetry, and suffered me to wait on her
in all (...) Visits she made to such as were most eminent (...) quality near
our House. After this my Mother ga^^ me leave to take a Journey to Paris, my
Father c^^senting to it, to see all the Curiosities that the Co^^^^ afforded. I
returned with my Aunt and Cousins ab^^^ the beginning of Winter, and my Mother
seeing have a more free and genteel Carriage than before loved me the more, and
made me her Confident (...) matter sufficiently pleasant.

My Brother having been six Years at Saumur, where ^e had made a good Progress
in the Languages and Philosophy, my Father resolved to send him to another
Place, where he might learn to ride the great ^orse, and be exercised in fears
of Arms, and also ^et an insight into the Mathematics: My Brother ^ecame
accomplished in these things in six Months, after which he desired leave of my
Father to go in^o the Army; who knowing that should he deny it, ^e was of
sufficient Years to take it himself, granted ^is desire; and having given him
Money for his Ex^ences, sent him away with one of our near Relati^^ns, who gave
him many good Instructions, which ^^y Brother so exactly followed, that in a
short time ^e was accounted by the whole Army to be a Man ^f Courage, Virtue,
Honor and Merit.

My Father had constant News brought him of the ^eputation my Brother had
gotten, and of the offers that were made him of an Office, very honorable or a
young Man, on condition he would change his ^eligion, which my Brother
generously refused; but ^ur Relation doubting least he might be at last
overcome by the Violence of the Temptation, sent him ^ack to his Father. Thus
my Brother returned home after ten Years absence, and you may easily guess at
^e joy and satisfaction we had to see him, adorned ^^th the many excellent and
genteel Qualities he had ^equired. My Brother also discovered an obliging (...)
prize to find me what I were, and we soon re^ewed that affection to which the
nearness of our blood obliged us, which was much increased by a ^^utual esteem
we had for each other.

On the other hand my Brother was very exact in is Carriage toward my Mother,
which was full of ^^^gular respect and tenderness. 'Twas here that I ^ound that
the Love of Mothers is more toward their ^ons than their Daughters, for my
Mother could ^ardly endure my Brother out of her sight, but con^ersed with him
with the greatest familiarity and freedom, yet durst not speak one word to him
about Religion, for fear of violating the agreement made with my Father, and of
encouraging him by her example, to do the same thing to me; yet this extorted
some s^ghs from her, as I observed when I was with her about 15 days after my
Brothers return, who at that time humbly withdrew.

The Familiarity of my Mother with me, emboldened me to demand the Cause of her
Affliction: I am, said she, one of the happiest Women in France, I only want
one thing, which yet is not impossible, but I dare not hope it. Madam, replied
I, this is so mysterious a Riddle, that I cannot comprehend it. I believe so,
said she, but I^ll tell you its meaning: You know how tenderly I love your
Father and Brother, and indeed their excellent Qualities command the Affections
both of a Wife and of a Mother; but when I think that they are both Heretics,
and have no Part in the Catholic Church, out of which there is no Salvation,
and that if they dye in the Estate in which they are, they are Eternally
damned, it breaks my very Heart, and my Compassion is augmented by the
Consideration of their Merit and Virtue, so that I could wish them l^ss good
than they are, that I might be dispensed with from loving them as I do, for
then the Affliction would be less sensible and grievous to me: As for your
Father, the Assurance that I have of his Obstinacy in his Error, does in a
great measure silence my Complaints, but is there no way left to draw your
Brother, who is yet young and tender, out of this Gulf in which he is? And a
little after, fixing her Eyes earnestly upon me, Will not you, said she, assist
me in this matter, and speak to your Brother? for neither your Father nor I
dare violate the solemn Oaths that we have made, though my Confessor has often
Promised me a Dispensation. But Mother, said I, my Brother is Learned, and
should I discourse with him about this, we must come to a Dispute, in which he
would soon put me to a nonplus. Enter not my Daughter, said she, into Dispute
with him, but only Propose to him some Worldly Advantages, and you will see what
he will say to you.

Though my Mother was a Woman of spirit, yet she did not penetrate into the
Consequences of this business, which were yet visible enough, for by my urging
my Brother to change his Religion, I gave him opportunity to make me the same
Proposals, and he had this advantage over me, in that he could speak what he
knew, (for he had diligently studied both Religions) which I could not do,
because they had taken more Pains to fill my mind with Prejudices against the
Hugonots, than to fortify me with solid and powerful Reasons against them. The
same day we had a singular Conversation, for my Brother who conversed
familiarly only with my Mother and my self, spent whole days in our Company,
and if I were in my Chamber, would come thither to seek me, where we either
played at Chess, or discoursed on variety of Subjects; for, as for my Father,
his Gravity and Seriousness was such, that we durst not familiarly Converse
with him. My Brother found me reading over my Horary; What are you doing
Sister? said he, I am, (answered I,) Praying God for your Conversion: That Is
well done indeed, (replied he) there is a good Sister that takes Care of her
Brother's Salvation; but, added he, with a kind of mocking smile, In what
Language is it, good now, that you Pray? Is it in Latin or in French? and
taking my Book out of my Hand, he found that all my Prayers were indeed in
Latin; whereupon he said, I doubt not Sister but you speak Latin, since you
read it; and f^ll a speaking of what seemed to me perfect Gibberish: Despite
and Shame hindered me from returning any Answer, for I must Confess, that this
Praying in an unknown Tongue, was the first abuse I took notice of in the Roman
Communion, and ^o^d never get my self heartily to approve of it.

I would (sa^d I) pray God for your Conversion, but I k^ow that 'twould be an
offense to the Divi^e Majesty to pray for a Scoffer, for which reason I forbear
it as a great sin. My Brother saw well enough that I was displeased with him,
yet this did not hinder him from proceeding in his jo^^^e manner. My dear
Sister, said he, I am obliged to you for your Care of my Salvation, yet beware
least while you imagine you are endeavoring the Salvation of my Soul, you do
not ruin it; ^^t I hope God will not hear such Requests, as should they be
granted, would prove fatal to me. B^^ Sister, continued he, that I may not for
my part t^^^ my self defective in Charity, I earnestly beg God that he would
to^ch your Heart, that you ^^y no longer persist in the Superstitions in which
you have been bred. He spoke these last words with so much seriousness, that I
had no Power to re^^^, ^^r did he give me time to do it.

I mu^t, added he, speak freely to you, as to a Sister whom I dearly love: What
do you mean in Praying to God in Latin? think you that he is better pleas^d
with this Language than with your own Mother Tongue? Why was it that our
Savior caused his Holy Spirit to descend on his Apostles in the form of
Tongues of Fire, but to show us that his Name might be invoked, and his Praise
sung in all Languages? what then makes your doting Doctors prescribe us a Model
of Prayers, and a form of Worship all in Latin? certainly the Jews have better
reason than the Catholics, for they say their Prayers in Hebrew, which is the
Holy Tongue which God himself used; but as for the Latin; we have no reason in
the World to believe it better pleasing to God than any other Language.

I see Brother, said I, that I am far from Converting you, and yet (added I,
smiling) this Task is imposed upon me: And who imposed it, (said her) She that
gave you Life, (said I) and would fain give you Eternal Life if it were
possible. It Is then my Mother, (replied he) who disdaining to ^mploy her own
Learning against me, thinks it enough to send her Daughter to convince me: But
Sister, added he, laughing out ^loud, take Courage, execute the Commission that
has been given ^ou; quote me the Explication of the Fathers on the Scripture,
the Decrees of General Councils, the Hi^^^ry of all Ages; bring Aristotle and*
Desca^tes into the Field, and if you will, all the Schoolmen; show me by
convincing Arguments that your Church is the true Church, and I shall account
it my Honor to obey you.

At the^e words my Passion grew so violent, that I could not master it, and
striking him a smart blow on the fingers with my busk, I Will teach you, said I,
to jear ^e. Well done Sister, said he, bursting out into a Laughter, I see well
that you have learned to imitate the Persecutors of our Churches, who when ^^ir
artifice and cunning fails them, have recourse to force. This gentle reproach
filled me with Contusion, which might easily be read in my Countenance. This is
nothing, said he, I pardon you with ^^l my heart, but you must tell me plainly
all that my Mother said to you. My Mother (^eplyed I) ^^^eves that you may one
day become a good Cath^^ck, provided a little care be taken of you: And what*
said ^e, could induce her to think so? That which you have said your self,
answered I, that too ma^^ of the Ceremonies were laid aside in the Refo^^^ed
Church, and this makes her believe that you are much d^^gusted with the
Religion of Calvin. Alas good Woman! (cried he) how ^ast her imagination ^^^^es
n^r! how easily does she believe what she de^^es! But (added he) did she
command you to u^ge me in this Point, and did you promise her to do it? I
promised that I would spe^k to you about it, and that I would not amuse my self
to dispute with you. You intend then Sister, said he, to make me yield without
an Engagement, which I Will never do either in temporals or spirituals. You may
dispute against me if you please; I Will not dispute at all, (said I) I had
rather leave you in your Error. Ah (said he) if you will not dispute with me,
I Will dispute with you, and therefore now prepare to defend your self.

Immediately, without giving me time to answer, he took up a little Crucifix
that was on the Table, what do you intend to do with this? Of what use is it?
It brings my Savior (replied I) to my mind; is it possible, (answered he) that
you need such helps as these to mind you of your Savior? Cannot you think on
him without having a Crucifix before your Eyes? indeed your Devotion must needs
be at a low ebb, if you cannot mind God unless you have this before you: But you
know (said I) that our mind is apt to be distracted, and to run out after
variety of things, and that we must often reduce it to its proper Object by the
sight of such things as fix its thoughts. I shall turn (said he) your own
Argument upon your self. It Is the Crucifix that you look on, that distracts you
in your contemplation of Jesus Christ: For Sister (added he) when you behold
the Crucifix, you cannot choose but say in your self, there is the Image of Jesus
Christ, and when you think on the Image, you think not directly on Jesus
Christ. And, as you know, it is impossible at once to look upon a man and his
Picture; so it is impossible to have an Image before your Eyes, and yet to think
only on the Original. If you cannot think on Jesus Christ unless you have a
Crucifix before you, it is a plain Evidence that your Piety is very miserable,
since it owes its support and maintenance to such wretched means. It Is as much
as if you had said, that you stand in such absolute need of an Image, that you
cannot awaken your Zeal without it: But if you pretend that your spirit is
carried out after your Savior, that you do not at all mind the Image; of what
use then is it? Could you not without it do what the Word of God Commands, (
viz.) Worship God in Spirit and in Truth? Think you that a Marmouser, or Image
can inspire you with such thoughts as are necessary for your Salvation? and
have not you reason to expect from converse with God in Spirit by means of
Prayer, such blessings as are much more great and singular? Come then to your
self, and be ashamed of using what Christ never approved of, and which disturbs
the mind in, and turns it from its best Meditation.

Such things as are the Objects of sense, and have an External resemblance
given them, which depend on the will or skill of the Painters or Engravers, are
far more capable of sinking man into vain and frivolous Imaginations, than of
freeing them from them. Thus we see that most Catholics do insensibly suffer
their Devotion to run out after the Image rather than the Original. You say
what you please Brother, (said I) and charge us with such things as are very
remote from our true sentiments; I Will charge you (said he) with nothing but
what I Will prove. Is it not certain, that amongst all the Images of Jesus Christ
and Crucifixes, some are more honored than others? You see great Crucifixes in
Churches, before which every Body prostrate themselves; these are great Lords
in comparison of the poor Crucifixes, that are on Brigdes and highways, who
are happy enough, if one amongst a thousand moves his Cap at them.

If all Crucifixes serve to represent to you your Savior nailed to the Cross,
they have all one and the same dignity, nor ought you to show more respect to
some, than to others; seeing their dignity results not from the matter whereof
they are made; nor the skill of the Workman, who gives them what Figure he
pleases; why then do you make so great a difference between them, that you will
scarce youchsafe some of them so much as a look, when you fall on your knees
before others? what answer will you make to this? I say (replied I) if we make
any distinction between these Images, it is because some of them do more
naturally and livelily represent our Savior, than others do, and consequently
are more capable of warming our Zeal: So that (replied he scoffingly) your Zeal
depends in part on the hand of Carver or Painter; I believe (added he) you your
selves would laugh at such reasons: But know, that if it be good to make use of
Images, as helps of Devotion, according to your Principles the same honor must
be rendered to all: To those whose workmanship discover least skill as well as
others; because, as I said before, their dignity results not from their Matter
or Figure, but from the Original, whose Images they are, or rather from the End
men aimed at in setting them up, to represent Jesus Christ: So that if you make
any difference between Images, either as made of more excellent materials, or
with greater Art, and if you honor some more than you do others, you thereby
show that your mind is more fixed upon the Image, than on the Original, and
consequently cannot free your selves from being guilty of a kind of Idolatry.

Idolatry, said I, (interrupting him,) I am not yet so ignorant, but I know the
difference between Images and Idols; and I believe none can justly charge me
with Idolatry, for having before me the Image of my Savior, when I adore him.
They are Idolaters who believe there is some Deity in the Images themselves;
but for such who regard them only as representations, and whose mind tend only
to the Original, they certainly cannot deserve this Name. Many Catholics,
(replied my Brother,) yea even most, believe that there is an hidden Virtue in
some Images, whether Crucifixes or others, which work Miracks, which others
don't do. Every body runs after these Miracle-working Images, whereas the
others are comparatively but little regarded. I ask on now, whether such as
flock to these Images, don't ^deed believe that they have some divine Virtue,
or ^se reverence them only as simple Images? If they say ^at God has chosen
th^se Images to manisest his ^ower by rather than others. God looks on Images
on^^ as wood* stone, or any other matter, and it is injurious ^o his Infinite
Majesty to make him accompany with ^is eff^^^cy dead things, the works of men's
hands, and such as men's hands can also destroy: And whence said I come the
Miracles which are wrought by ^em? Most of them (answered he) are mere cheats,
(...) I might prove by innumerable Examples, and as ^r others, God suffers them
to happen as Evidences (...) his wrath against a People given up to a repro^te
Spirit, and the Efficacy of Error, as he suffer^^ the Magicians of Pharaoh to
work Miracles: I am ^ling to believe that some Crucifixes have wept, ^hers have
spoken, others have laughed, and others ^ve bowed their heads. The Devil is the
Author (...) all these operations, and not God; for when ^od discovers any
miraculous work, he makes no ^e of Images or Idols made by men, unless it be
(...) cause them to fall to the ground, as he did Da^^ before the Ark of the
Covenant. But he snows (...) power on men themselves, making them accord^^g to
what they are, whether proud or humble, (...) Objects of his terrible Justice,
or else of his In^^e Mercy.

'T has been always the Devils great design to esta^sh Idolatry in the World,
and this design he ma^geth according to what he finds men to be, whe^r more
refined, or gross and blockish. At pre^t seeing that men are grown more subtle
than ^er, he proposes to them an Idolatry more de^ate and disguised. I scruple
not to affirm, that ^e Guides of the Church of Rome, concur to pro^^te the
Devils work: For what do they so ear^stly press the People to the worship of
Images* but only to hinder them from forming an Idea (...) a Religion that is
purely Spiritual? For according t^ their Maxim, Men's minds must be kept low,
th^^ they may be the better governed, and may the more quietly and without
contradiction bear the Tyranny of their Spiritual Rulers: And this is the Devi^
Maxim too, And seeing that People are grow^ more refined than ever they were,
he would not often them so gross an Idolatry as reigns amongst the barbarous
Pagans, but a subtle Idolatry, which is acted under another Name, and in
different ways, and consists i^ the worship of Images, as it is practiced in the
Church of Rome: For the Spirit of darkness very well knows th^^ the Spirit of
Man is too weak of it self to attain to (...) Spiritual Worship, and that on
the contrary it is e^^sie to make it embrace a grosser Worship, by d^guising
things under other shapes. And 'twas f^^ this End that he introduced the
worship of Image^ pretending at first that he only offered them as help^
whereby men might be enabled to serve God t^^ more easily, but he well knew
that Images wou^^ certainly pr^ve a stumbling block; so that m^^ would
insensibly pass from the adoration of Go^ and from his worship to the adora^^on
and wors^^^ of Images. directly and simply, without ever min^ing the Original.

The Church of Rom^ deals with the People, ju^^ as Nurses do with Children,
busying them with Ba^^bies and Poppets. Thus it amuseth the People wi^^ Images,
as though there were some Deity enclosed (...) them, or that God chose to
man^^est his Power (...) such Organs. And indeed those Biggots of bo^^ Sexes
that are mad after these follies, deserve (...) be dealt with as Children are.
Oh my Sister, (a^ded he) did you know how God acts by his Wor^ and how it
raises our Souls up to Heaven to see (...) Christ, who reigns there eternally,
you would no^ delay one moment to burn your Crucifixes, and (...) your Images.

Burn them! (said I, startling at the very expres^on,) that is Devilish advice
indeed, and well be^oming an Heretic; who ever spoke of burning the ^icture of
him whom he honored, respec^ed, and ^ved above all others? what greater
affront to Je^^s Christ than this? Yes Sister, added he, burn 'em, (...) say,
burn 'em, and let not this alarm you. Ought ^^e not to get rid of that-which
knits and ties our ^pirits to m^ater, and so to get rid of it, as never ^ore to
see it? Has not our Lord said, If thy right ^and offend thee cut it off, and
if thy right eye offend thee ^^ck it out? Much more ought we to cast away ^^ose
stones of offense, if they are any wise the oc^asions of sin: and we need not
fear offending God (...) so doing, under pretense that the Images we destroy ^e
his, for God never commanded us to make these ^mages, or to worship him by
them; Men have ^ade them according to their own Fancies and Ima^nation, and
have set them them up, not for the ^lory of God, but for their own secret
designs, and ^e ought to destroy all that is contrary to God's ^lory.

You have doubtless heard of that wonderful bra^en Serpent, which God himself
caused to be made ^^r the cure of those that were bitten by the fiery ^erpents:
for upon their looking toward it, all that ^ere bitten were immediately cured.
This Serpent ^ad three great Prerogatives, which none of your ^mages ever had;
for first it was made by Gods ex^ress Command, which can be said of no other
I^age; then by means of it many great Miracles, in^ubitable Miracles were
wrought in the sight of all ^^e People, after an easy and effectual manner;
for ^was but to look upon it, and they were immediate^y cured of what was in it
self very painful and grie^ous, and would otherwise have been in its
conse^uences very fatal. The finest Crucifix that ever ^as made, can do nothing
worthy to be compared with this. Lastly, 'twas a Type of Jesus Christ himself,
by looking on whom by Faith, we are delivered from the real fiery Serpe^^s: For
thus says S. Jon^ in the 14^h Chapter of his Gospel, As Moses litte^ up the
Serpent in the de^art, so must also the Son (...) man be lifted up.

These Reasons seem to plead strongly not only for its preserva^ion in M^m^ry
of the past Miracles, and to be an Ima^^ (...) ^im th^^ wa^ to come; but also
for its being ^everenced. A (...) the People of Israel seeme^ more (...) us^^^e
in ad^^ring (...) than you are in adoring your Cru^isixes because it was to them
an Image of hi^^ of whom ^^ey ^ad a v^ry imperfect Knowledged; whereas now
Christ is come, and we have a much more perfect kn^^ledge of him than the
Ancient Jews had, an^ therefore have no need of a material Image to represent
to u^ our Sa^^our? But what became of this braze^ Serpent' ^^z ^^ias who was a
good Princ^ a Prince fearing God, ^^^ing that the People offered inc^nse to it*
broke it and s^a^^ed (...) t^ powder; had he done ill* he would have ^een
punish^d, ^r at lea^^ ^ep oved, wh^re is on the contrary his ^eign was (...)
happy* and blessed of God* because without amusing himself wit^ the s^^^^les o^
^he Vulgar, he had taken away from this People the subject or occasion of
Idolatry. We may lea^n hence how good it is to destroy all that may cause us to
err, not sp^ring i^ (...) any reason, or specious pretense whatever.

God was pleased to manifest his pres^nce in a p^^^^ar manner in his A^k of the
Covenant; so tha he caused the wonders of his Majesty to appe^ where ever it
was carried; he divided Riv^rs, threw down the Walls of Cities, caused the
Idols to fall before it, smote thousands of those that durst look into it,
afflicted the Philistin^^ with grievous and shameful Distempers, slew such as
presumed only to touch it, and blessed those with whom it was lodged: Yet that
he might remove every thing that might occasion any breach in the true Devotion
of his People, especially when ^^e G^spel was to be preached, he suffered this
Ark (...) perish in the burning of Jerusalem, that the Jews ^i^ht not have any
thing to hinder them from em^acing the Gospel.

Yet Sister (added he) I don't say these things (...) persuade you to burn your
Crucifixes and Images, ^ut only to justify the expression I made use of; for
^is unreasonable to burn any thing, unless we have ^eason to fear it may cause
our fall; we may keep ^^em as things that are indifferent, and I cannot ap^rove
of the indiscreet Zeal of some Hugonots, that ^usie themselves in breaking in
pieces all the Images ^^d Statues they meet with. True Piety shows not (...)
self outrageous, it contents its self with withdraw^g its own foot, without
^candalizing the weak. ^is true, God often inspired his People to cast away
^^ch things as might cause them to err, according (...) the Prophecy of
Isaiah, Chapter 2. v. 20. In that day (...) man shall cast his Idols of silver, and
bis Idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the
^^^^es, and to the Bats. This Prophecy was fulfilled ^hen the darkness of
Paganism began to be dissipa^ed, I may also say, when the true light caused the
^^adows of Popery to f^ee away.

My Brother seeing that I took a singular delight (...) hearing him, and that I
were somewhat touched ^ith his Discourses, was about to have continued, ^hen we
heard a noise at our Chamber door, a^ which I looked pale with fear; for had my
Mother ^^ard us, I must have paid dear for our Discourse, ^^d perhaps my
Brother too. But he being* more ^old than I, w^nt to open the door, and found
that ^was my Father, who came into the Chamber with (...) smiling Countenance:
I confess, my Children, said ^e, that I made you very much afraid, but I am ^ot
come to disturb you, nor to break off a Conver^^tion with which I am extremely
delighted. Af^^rwards, turning to me, I am, said he, very well plea^ed with
your Brother for what he hath-said, and with you for hearing him; I shall only
add this on^ word: If God by his means touch your heart, don'^ kick against the
Pricks, nor be obstinate against the Holy Spirit, when he speaks to your
Conscience* Your Brother does what I ought to have done were it not for the
solemn Oath I kave too rashl^ taken, Never to discourse of Religion with my
Daughters, with which I might well dispense, did I no^ consider that God has
given me a Son who hat^ Knowledge and Zeal enough for the performanc^ of this
Duty.

Indeed Father, (said my Brother,) you may we^^ allow me this Liberty, seeing
my Mother commanded my Sister to tempt me to change my Religion Then you
conspire, Justine, with your Mother (sai^ my Father) to seduce your Brother; I
am ver^ glad I know it, we will make use of Reprisals: Bu^ my Children, use
more prudence another time wh^^ you discourse, for had your Mother heard you,
(...) she might have done, there would have been (...) dreadful ado, and
Ferdinand would have had n^ more reason to boast of his Mothers Favor. After
this my Father retired, leaving us to discourse i^quiet; in the mean time my
Brother placed the Chess-board on the Table, with some Verses which he took out
of his Pocket.

This Precaution was not needless, for my Mothe^ had her Spies, who informed
her that both my Father and my Brother were in my Closet; she who^ was
distrustful enough in matters of Conscience, feared least in attempting to gain
my Brother she should lose me, and therefore came to listen to o^^ Discourse;
but my Brother having left the Door o^ my Closet open, I could easily discover
all that cam^ nto my Chamber; and seeing my Mother, I gav^ my Brother notice of
it by signs, who seemed eng^ed in Play: my Mother seeing that she was
discovered, came into my Closet, and said to us smiling, Ah Youth, youth, can
you find nothing wherewith to employ your selves but Plays and Trifles? I
^^^i^ve (answered my Brother very readily,) that ^ou have made an agreement
with my Father to ^^ide us: And why did he chide you, (said she) he ^^med me
that I did nothing but lose my time, ^^d told me that in three days he would
send me (...) the Army; Did your Father say so, replied my ^other, but he shall
not be Master of his own Reso^tions. I have but one Son, and have been ten
^^ars without seeing him, and would he now he is (...) just returned snatch him
again out of my Arms; ^swear he shall never do it; and I would fain know that
he intends you should do in the Army, unless ^^ve your Brains knocked out.
Indeed your Father (...) very unnatural.

Ah, F^rdinand, Ferdinand, your Mother loves you (...) more tenderly; she would
not only have you ^e to be her Comfort, but would willingly give ^e better part
of her blood, that you might obtain ^other Life that endures for ever, which
you can ^ver hope for, while you remain what you are. I ^^ank you, Mother (said
he) with all my heart, for ^e Charity you discover toward me; it is enough ^y
Mother, that it is by you I enjoy this Life, as (...) the other I expect it from
him who has formed (...) Soul: But Son (said she) you are not in the ^^y to
obtain it. I understand you Mother, reply^^ he, you would persuade me that the
Roman Re^ion is the only Religion that leads to Heaven; but ^^w can you desire
me to believe it, since it or^ins all Catholics to be in a perpetual doubt of
^eir Salvation. I can never believe, that that will ^ing me to happiness, which
requires me to doubt ^^ether ever I shall partake of it.

Here my Mother was struck dumb, and though ^e was a Woman of spirit, yet she
could not carry ^f this stroke. And my Brother who saw that he ^^d spoken too
freely, began to mollify what ^e had said, by telling her that he would not
absolutely condemn the Catholic Religion, in which were many things that he
approved of, though they were much disliked by other Hugonots. On the contrary,
said he, the Religion of Calvin seems to me a little too N^ked and void of
Ceremonies. Hereupon some came to call my Mother, who then only said, I pray
God and the Holy Virgin to Enlighten you, and so left us. Yet seeing it was
somewhat late, we were forced to break off our Conversation for this time.

I thought fit, dear Ladies, said Mademoiselle de St. Phale, to rehearse these
things at large, to show you the means which it pleased God to make use of to
bring me to the Knowledge of his Truth what I have further to tell you, is more
curions than the beginning. I perceive, said Madamoisell Leonora, by what you
have already said, that the History of your Life must have somewhat very
singular in it, which I impatiently long to hear from you; but seeing it is
somewhat late, and you have spoken enough, I believe you would be willing to
Dine before you continue your charming Relation: Indeed Dinner was found to be
just ready, which was over in an instant. They walked some time after Dinner on
the Deck, and then returned into the Cabin, where Mademoiselle de St. Phale
continued her Relation.

CHAP. II.
I Could not once close my Eyes for sleep the whole Night after I had had this
Discourse with my Brother; I knew not what reason I had for my Religion, I was
convinced that he had some for his, and even before he had said any thing to
me, I was disgusted with many things in the Church of Rome. In the Morning I
fell into a short Nap, in which I had such a Dream as disturbed me more than
all the rest. Methought I saw my Father sick unto Death, who said unto me,
Justina, God who takes from you your earthly Father, will himself be a Father
to you, on Condition that you serve him in Spirit and Truth, which you cannot
do, whilst you make Profession of those Superstitions in which you have been
Educated; if you rencunce it, and sincerely embrace the Religion of our
Churches, you shall indeed be terribly Persecuted and stripped of your Estate,
but yet you shall end your days in happiness and tranquillity of spirit, and
when you leave this Life, shall enter on another, in comparison of which, the
choicest Enjoyments in this World are but Vanity and Emptiness: But if you
obstinately resist the Will of your God, you shall dye miserably, in the most
grievous Troubles and Despair, which shall be the forerunners of Eternal
Torments. These words methought were his last, Death preventing his speaking
any more. When I awoke, my Eyes were full of Tears, and I was terribly
disquieted for three days with this Dream, so that I resolved to get my self
instructed by my Brother, both in my own Religion, and in that of the Hugonots.

I was scarce got out of my Bed, before I saw my Brother coming into my
Chamber; as soon as I saw him, I sent my Waiting Gentlewoman on an Errand, and
he without losing any time, said Sister, I am come to wish you a good Morning,
not do I come empty handed, seeing I bring you what is more worth than the
Crown of our King. You are then (said I) much enriched this Night, receiving
his Present, which was the New Testament very neatly bound. You said yesterday,
(added he) that you Worshipped your Crucifix to excite^ Piery, lay aside your
Crucifix and read the Holy Scripture, you will soon find whether the Word of
God be not much more powerful than an impotent Image. I thanked him, and
promised to follow his Advice; after which he left me, to salute my Mother,
toward whom he was very exac^in his Carriage.

In the mean time I opened the New Testament, and found that he had Written in
the Frontispiece of the Book, these words of the Revelation, Behold I stand
(...) the Door and knock, if any one hear my Voice and open to me, I will come
in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. I well understood my Brothers
Intention in writing this Passage, which I soon applied to my self. After this
I withdren into my Closet, where I read the History of our Lord's Passion,
Death and Resurrection, as it is written in the twenty sixth, twenty seventh and
twenty eighth Chapters of St. Matthew. This reading so affected me, that I
never Prayed to God so heartily in all my Life. After my Prayer I continued to
read still, and I found that as I read, the Word made a passage into my Soul,
which filled me with unexpressible Joy. Hereupon my Brother came to me, to
Conduct me into my Mothers Chamber, who was astonished at my negligence, but
before I left my own Chamber, I carefully locked up my New Testament, which many
Reasons obliged me to keep safe.

My Mother as soon as she saw me, said unto ^e, You have been very sluggish to
day, and ^oking more earnestly upon me, What Langour said she) is that that I
see in your Eyes? I dare ^y a Wager that you have not slept, but have ^ent a
good part of the Night in reading some ^omance: I was very loath to undeceive
her, for which Reason I returned no Answer. Hereupon my ^^ther came to us,
inviting us into the Garden, ^here as he walked on the one side, my Brother ^^d
I walked on the other. 'Twas there that I ^inked him yet again for his Present,
and opened (...) Heart to him, declaring that I found many ^^ings in the Church
of Rome which I could not bear, (...) could not as yet resolve to forsake it.
Sister, re^^ed he, it is fit to examine things seriously before (...) forsake
any thing, especially in matters of Relion; hold fast your Religion in which
you have been ^ucated, till you are convinced that it is not the ^t, and that
there is another far more excellent, (...) then you cannot in Conscience adhere
to what (...) are perfwaded is more defective, and neglect ^at is more perfect.
This day we had a Discourse two hours, about Transubstantiation, and the day
^owing another about Justification by Works. (...) another day she spoke to me
about the Sacri^^ for the Living and the Dead, offered up by (...) hands of the
Priest; but that which he most ^^l endeavored to prove, was, That the Church
Rome could not be the true Church. 'Twould be (...) tedious, should I relate
all that he said to me, (...) the arguments which he urged to prove his
asser^s, which made me doubt least I were in the false ^^reh, and resolve to
enter into the true one.

Three week, passed in these Discourses, and when ^und any Arguments to oppose
against my Bro^s, I always resisted him; but he soon answered ^^n; at length I
declared to him the disposition of (...) Spirit, which much rejoiced him: Yet
he judged this business to be of such Importance, th^^ he thought fit to make
my Father acquainted wi^^ it, which he did: So that as my Mother was one day
employed in looking over some certain Accounts, my Father called me into his
Chamber where I found my Brother: Daughter, said he, hear some News that
pleases me extremely, man I believe it? Yes Father, answered I, and if yo^
please to hear me, I shall give you full satisfaction Hereupon he asked me
several Questions, to which I returned such Answers, as did not at all displea^
him. It Is enough (said he) for the present, return now to your Mother; yet my
Daughter, added he, if you constantly persist in this holy Resolution, I assure
you that come what will, the Bless^^ of God will never fail you, and your
heavenly Fath^^ will accomplish in Heaven the Prayers which yo^^ Earthly Father
has here made for you. The lo^^ and tenderness of these Expressions forced
te^^ from my Eyes. I find, answered I, that G^^ opens my understanding more and
more, I reco^mend my self to your good Prayers, that he wou^^ make fuller
discoveries of his Truth to me. Y^^ Justine, yes my Daughter, said he very
affectionated I Will go into my Closet to pray for you. But this not enough, you
your self must also address yo^ humble prayers to our good God, who abounds
Eternal Grace and Mercy, that he would finish (...) work in your Heart: And you
Ferdinand, fail (...) to do the same thing; and ascribe not to your (...) the
Glory of having converred your Sister, but gi^^ it all to God, who alone has
dominion over (...) Heart.

My Mother being still employed, I went is my Closet to perform what my Father
had commanded, and to recommend my self to God, which after I had finished, I
found my self more firm resolved, and more cheerful than I was before expecting
till God should give me a favorable ^ortunity to put my Design in Execution:
on the ^^ther hand my Mother was not idle, being earnesily ^ent on my Brothers
Conversion. My Brother who ^^d prudence and subtilty enough for the manage^ent
of such an Aff^ir, did not absolutely reject ^^is Proposition, nor did he
approve of it, but ^ffered her to entertain some hopes, that he might ^^e time
or other be wrought upon. How often ^^ve we laughed about this Intricate
adventure, in ^^at my Mother hoping to change her Son, made ^^e of her Daughter
to this end; and my Father ^ade use of his Son to convert his Daughter, which
(...) last suceeded, whereas all my Mothers designs ^^ned into smoke!

We had need to be very careful to hide all these ^^ings from my Mother, who
was a Woman of that ^^mper, that had she had the least notice of what ^^sled,
she would have caused me to have been carded away by force, and kept in a
Convent all my (...). There happened at that time two things, which ^^ped much
to deceive my Mother; one was, that Catholic Gentleman endeavored to get me
in ^^rriage. Although my Mother had resolved in her ^n Mind to bestow me on
him, yet she would ^^clude on nothing till she had made my Father quainted with
it, with whom she always lived in ^^at Love and Peace. My Father would not in
^s business act as Master; seeing (said he) my ^^ughter has been educated in
your Religion, I ^n mit the management of her wholly to you, you ^y do with her
what you please. Yet Madam, ^ing you are pleased to Consult me about this
^rriage, I shall freely declare my Judgment. The ^ung Man of whom you speak is
indeed of a good ^^mily, yet this Family is much in Debt: And I informed, That
this Young Man is too great a ^^a^chee for a Virgin of that worth as our
Daugh^^s who deserves a better Lot. Yet Madam* you are wholly Mistress of her;
she is entirely a^ your disposal, and I know that you will do nothing tha^ is a
disparagement to your Prudence, seeing that I freely consent to whatever you
shall judge requisite. Indee^ said my Mother, since you deal so freely with m^
in this matter, I assure you that you shall be Maste^ of her destiny, and
provided she marry a Catholic my Will shall be wh^ll^ resigned to yours. I had
(...) mind, answered my Father, to propose to you (...) Catholic Gentleman,
whose Manners, Wisdom and sweetness of Disposition extremely please me (...)
it is Madam the Son of your Cousin German, Mada^ de -- This was what my Mother
most desire^ for she tenderly loved this Gentleman her Cous^^ who indeed had
all the Qualities that comma^^ Esteem. I thank you, replied my Mother, that yo^
are pleased to prefer my Relations before other but since I see you have so
good an opinion of hi^ I desire that they may be Married as soon as pos^^ble. I
desire it as well as you, answered my Father but we must endeavor that he
first get some Off^^ in the Army; and to this end we must declare the we will
not give her to a simple Volunteer; and (...) Friends, whose Interest is very
great, will not fail (...) getting him some Employment. My Mother lik^ this
Advice extremely well, and resolved to confi^^ in my Father, more than ever she
had hithe^^ done.

The other thing was, that my Father seemed (...) make my Mother his Confident,
in some things (...) lating to my Brother. It much troubles me, sa^^ he, that
Ferdinand thus loses his time her^ and were it not for the respect which I see
y^^ have for him, I had sent him before now back i^to the Army, or into Germany
or England. At another time my Mother would have returned a ^^ry sharp Answer
to this Discourse, but my Fath^^ had showed so much complaisance for her, that
(...) ^urst not contradict him to his face. Sir, said she, I had ^ot seen my
Son these ten years, and would you ^ake ^^m from me again, when I have scarce
enjoyed his ^ompany two Months? No Madam, replied my ^ather, I will not take
him from you, but I am ^raid he will go away himself, for I see that this un^^ive
idle life which he leads in this Country, does ^ot at all suit with his humor:
It Is natural with him (...) be in action, and the contrary must needs be
tedi^^s; he cannot always Play, or Walk, or Hunt, or Dis^^urse, these things
serve to refresh the Mind, but ^^nnot satisfy it. Let me speak with him, said
my ^other, it may be I may induce him to change his ^ind; where is he? I^ll
talk with him by and by. ^hink, replied my Father, he is in the Garden.
^^mediately my Mother called me to walk with her (...) my Brother.

We found my Brother sitting near a Fountain, (...) a Prosound Meditation, for
he was considering the ^urse he ought to take to make me abjure the Er^urs of
the Church of Rome. We surprised him in ^s Posture, and my Mother raised him
from his ^ep study, by giving him a gentle blow on the ^oulder with her hand:
What are you thinking (...) Ferainand, said she, that you are in such a study.
(...) declare my Mind to you, (Mother said he,) ^^ugh I dare not do it to my
Father. I would (...) return to the Army, what would you have me (...) here to
pick Straws? Lay aside these thoughts, (...) my Mother, why would you return
thither to ^e your Brains knocked out, and make me the ^^st miserable of all
Mothers? What think you ^uld I do, should I lose my only Son, on whom (...)
best hopes are placed? 'Twere indeed some^^g if you had any grounds to expect
Preferment; (...) things are at that pass at present, that there (...) be
nothing hoped for in favor of those of your ^igion; for should you perform the
bravest Actions, and do the King all i^^^ina^le Service, 'twou^^ all be looked
on as nothing whilst you are an Hugo^^ My Brother replied only with a deep
sigh, wh^^ made my Mother believe she saw what was in (...) bottom of his
heart, but she was deceived. Y^^ sigh Ferdinand, said she, and say nothing, but
I (...) you once again, that as long as you are an Hugo^^ you will never get
any Advancement: But I Will d^^ course with you more to morrow Morning, fail
(...) to come to me to thy Chamber; go for the pres^^ and think on what I have
said to you.

When he had left us, my Mother said to m^ Your Brother dislikes several things
in the R^l^g^^ of Calvin, and approves of many things in o^^ moreover he is
somewhat ambirious, let us go (...) my Daughter, and strike whilst the Iron is
hot, (...) shall certainly make some impression on aim one (...) or other. 'Tw^
(...) b^ a difficult work, (answered (...) he is more s^xed than ^ou imagine.
No matter (...) plied my Mother) the merit of it will be (...) great before
God, and the honor before men; (...) you do ^our part, and I Will no mine; we
daily (...) Conversions wrought that seemed far more diff^^ than his; yea, were
at ^^rst accounted imposs^^ If your Brother will be guided by Reason, ra^^ than
by the Coun^^ls of your ^a^her, I ll set (...) Learned Men upon him, as must
needs conv^^ him: And if he has any Am^i^ion, I ll get h^^ discourse with
such, as have at present all the po^^ i^ their own hands, who will not sail of
m^king (...) Fortune, whereof the^^^ give him all the assurance (...) can
desire. Only let it be your endeavor to (...) him capa^le o^ good Advice, and
above all to (...) v^nt his giving my Father an Acc^unt of (...) p^ss^th.

In the mean time m^ ^^other, as so^n as he (...) lest us went into my Fathers
Appar^^e^t, and ^^ted all that my Mother had ^^^d to him; my Fa^^ To gave him
an account of that that passed between ^n and my Mother, to prevent her
discovering ^eir De^igns, adding, That he saw well enough ^^t this ^^od Woman
intended, but that by the ^ace of God all her Designs should come to no^^ing,
and his have their desired success. Some ^^rt time after as I returned from the
Garden with (...) Mother, seeing her busy in giving Orders about ^^e Concerns
of the Family, I ^an immediately to (...) F^thers Lodgings, where I found my
Brother* (...) ^^on as my Father saw me, So, said he to me, ^^u act in concert
with your Mother, for the Conver^n or rather perversion of your Brother: Two
Wo^^^ a^^wered I, are too weak to encounter one ^n; but my Mother resolves to
send some Doctors (...) my Brother, against whom he shall never be able (...)
defend himself, and hereupon I related all that (...) Mother had discovered of
her De^ign. You have ^e very well, said my Father, to inform us of this; (...)
now, added he, I would have you to return, (...) fear least your Mother should
perceive you have ^^ken with me. Thus my Father and Mother (...) ployed their
utmost artifice to deceive each ^^er; but in the end my Mother found her self
(...) taken in her reckoning. My Brother told me ^^e, that my Father seemed
somewhat troubled ^he Methods which my Mother resolved to follow: I ^^esee
(said he to my Brother,) that you will be ^osed to great temptations. I am not
so much said of the arguments of the Learned, as I am of ^se of such as are in
Power, when they shall re^^ sent to you the Offices, Prosperi^y and Pleasure
^^^ch you shall enjoy. if you embrace the Romish ^^^^n. You are young, and the
fumes of Ambi^^ more easily seize on the minds of such as are ^^ing, than of
theirs that are farther advanced in (...): Be not confident of your own
strength, but ^^^^t only in God. I know, said my Brother, that if I trust in my
own strength, I am the weakest of a I men, but if I place my confidence in the
Lord, I am stronger than the whole World. After this my Father gave him leave
to retire. Nothing more considerable happened this day.

But the next Morning my Brother went to my Mothers Appartment, and found her
in her Closet; she no sooner understood that he was come, but she commanded him
to come in and sit down by her, which he at first modestly refusing to do,
Ferdinand, said she, I now lay aside my Character of (...) Mother, to speak to
you as a Friend; and therefore without any more ado sit down by me, which my
Brother doing without returning any Answer; she shedding some tears, spoke thus
to him in a ton^ that argued a great deal of tenderness.

I can never, said she, look upon you without having my Heart agitated with
contrary Passions, when I consider that I have in you a Son, both Wise, Honest,
and Valiant; I cannot but rejoice and accoun^ my self the happiest of all
Women, this being a favor which God does not vouchsafe to all Mothers but when
I consider on the other hand, That th^^ Son whom I love, who is so proper a
Person, and (...) much esteemed by all, and who has such Nob^^ Inclinations;
has been brought up in a false a^^ Heretical Religion, and persists in it, it
extorts from me the bitterest tears, and it grieves me that I ev^^ brought you
into the World. O Ferdinand, Fer^^nand, did you know all that passed in my
Heart o^ this account, and the Compassion that I have for yo^ you would have
more Complaisance for me than no^ you have. More she could not speak, her sighs
stopping her Discourse.

Mother, replied my Brother, (who was touche^ to see her so much concerned)
there is not a te^ you shed but is worse than a Dagger to my Hear^ why do you
thus give way to your Sorrow. I kno^ Mother, that it is a maternal Compassion
which you have for me; but it may be it is a blind Compassion, that flows only
from your Prejudices: I wish you knew how far the respect your Son has for you
will carry him, and therefore I declare, That if any can convince me that I am
in a false Religion, I am ready to embrace the Religion which shall be proved
to be better, for I will not be led by Obstinacy, but by Reason: To this end I
now lay aside all my Prejudices which I may have taken up in favor of my
Religion, and against yours; and am ready to embrace freely your Religion if I
find it better, or ^o persist in my own, if it appears to be the true Religion.
My Mother was mightily well pleased at this Declaration, and said, I take you
to your word, ^emember to keep it: Yes Mother, (said he) I shall ^lwa^s
remember this, That if any can convince me that I am in an Error, I must not
rest in it: That (...), replied my Mother, that if I bring you a Man that shall
remove all your Doubts and Scruples, you ^ill come over to us. Yes Mother
(answered he) ^ith all my Heart; for I should be very unhappy, If ^nowing I
were in an evil way I would not be perwaded to leave it: If you will (added my
Mother) ^ll bring you acquainted with such as can advance ^ou, and bestow
honorable Offices on you, if you ^ill embrace our Religion: Every thing has
its ^roper season, (answered my Brother smiling) I ^ust not be exposed to so
many assaults at once. ^ereupon my Brother rose up, and paying his repects to
my Mother, left her abundantly satisfied ^ith this Conversation, for she
believed she had gotten (...) kind of Conquest over him; and flattered her ^elf
with hopes, that all that he said, was only that ^e might turn his Coat with a
better Grace, as those ^laces who expect the Canon before they Capi^late.

Nothing now remained to be done, but the ass^gning the day for the Dispute;
for the person whom my Mother had chosen to oppose my Brother, was her
confessor, the Father Matthew, a Jesuit, one that was Learned enough, but yet
bette^ s^ored with Malice than Learning. (I my self have f^lt some ^ffects of
his Malice, which is the reason why I hate the whole Order, and dealt so
roughl^ y^^t^^day with those two disguised Brothers). A^ l^^gth the day was
appointed, which was to be the Mo^^ow after my Father should go to Dijon to
fo^low a Suit he had depending before the Parliam^^^ of that P^ace; for my
Mother took special c^re (...) conceal all her Contrivances from my Father,
wh^^ for his part, was as careful to pretend that he kne^^ n^^hing of them: As
for my Brother and I, we d^^ ^^mbled our intention^ well enough. At length, the
E^ening before my Father was to take his Jou^n^^, as we were about to sit down
to Suppe^^ ^y Father said to my Brother, As soon as you ha^^ s^nt, put up such
things as will be necessary in yo^^ J^u^^ey, for you shall ride with me: My
Mothe^ ^^^ring this, was very much alarmed; How S^^ (said she) do you intend
that Ferdinand shall go wi^^ you? will you leave us all alone? It Is time, Mada^
sa^d my Father, that he be acquainted with the A^fairs of our Family, you know
of what Consequen^^ the Suit is that I go a^out, I must have some bo^^ to help
me. My Mother was struck dumb wi^^ these words, and knew not what answer to
mak^ Methinks Madam (said my Father) you are more co^^cerned at Ferdinand's
absence than at mine. I would answered she, comfort my self with the Son,
d^ring his Fathers Absence; but since you are resolve^ to carry him with you,
you may do what you thi^^ fit. Well Madam (replied he) I Will leave him wi^^ you,
since you so earnestly desire it; but one thing (...) charge you, that you
suffer him not to go from our hou^ ^^ill my return, for I will not have him
depart 'till (...) have d^scoursed more largely with him. After ^^^s we sa^e
do^n at Table, having a great mind to (...) at the Trouble which my Father's
Discourse ^ad caused m^ Mother.

Supper ^eing ended, my Mother withdrew into ^^r Chamb^r to write to Dijon,
where some of her R^l^^i^ns were Members of the Parliament, to whom ^he
re^ommended her Husbands Business; in the m^an t^^e my ^a her caused my Brother
and me to ^alk u^ i^^o his: When we were come before him, (...) s^ood some time
without speaking one word; at ^^ngth. My Ch^ldren, (said he) I am not ignorant
^f what is designed to be done in my House during (...) a^s^nce; I know,
Ferdinand, that your Perseve^ance will be tr^ed; you are walking in a Path in
which many Persons have fallen, and the falls of most ^ave proved deadly; they
will promise you Moun^^ns and Mi^acles, but know that Temporal advan^^ges as
well as Eternal Riches are in God's disposal. ^bove all, I advise you to humble
your self before ^im, begging him to instruct, assist and maintain ^ou, by the
invincible force of his Holy Spirit.

My Brother answered with a modest boldness, Father, said he, God has
vouchsafed me to enjoy the ^^ght by your means, and I believe he will give me the
Grace to imitate you in your Perseverance; and give ^^e leave to say, that
though you should be to me ^n example of Weakness as you are now of Constan^y,
I would no longer follow your Example, that (...) might follow those of my
Ancestors. Yes, my Son, (...) replied my Father) if God so far forsake me, I
^^eely permit you, not only not to follow me, but ^lso to hate me; but the
Spirit of God assures me, that this shall neither be mine nor your Case, and in
^his Hope I beg the Lord to bless you. Immedi^tely my Father went into his
Closet, and brought ^ut a Sword of Damascus Metal, whose Handle was enriched
with Stones, but its greatest Preciousness lay in the Excellency of the Steel
whereof it was made. After my Blessing, said he, this is the richest Present
that I can make you, it is my Sword, and it has been the Sword of your
Grandfather, and great Grandfather, with which they have gloriously served the
true Religion and the King, and have bathed it in the Blood of the Enemies of
the Faith and of the State; and I also have made some use of it with good
success in my time. Hereupon my Brother fell on his Knees, and my Father
drawing the Sword out of its Scabbard, said to him, I now give you this Sword
on the same Conditions on which I received it, viz. That you never use it but
in the Service of God and the King, your Master and lawful Sovereign: Follow
not the Course of those Teporizers and base Politicians, who abandon our poor
Churches; maintain them to the utmost of your power, and if they perish, perish
with them: But the Lord of Hosts grant that it may prosper in your hands, and
that it may be as honorably delivered into the Hands of your Children, as it
has been into mine, and as I have delivered it into yours. Hereupon he struck
him a soft blow with the flat side of the Sword on the Arm, and putting it up
into the Scabbard, delivered it to him, and abliged him to arise. My Brother
after having received it, drew it once again, and kissing the middle of the
Blade, laid it on the ground, and falling again on his Knees, said to my
Father, After the two Presents which you, Sir, have made me, you have no reason
to be surprised if I want words wherewith to thank you; suffer me therefore to
embrace your Knees, but my Father raising him from the ground, embraced him,
and afterward gave him some Advice relating to his Behavior.

I was present when all these things passed, and was much affected with them.
My Father fixing ^is Eyes on me, said to me, Be not jealous of the Present I
have made your Brother. I love my Brother too well (said I) to envy him the
Favor you are pleased to show him. I Will give you also my Blessing and a
Present, replied my Father, which (...) esteem no less than that I have
bestowed on your Brother; and immediately gave me a very curious Picture, drawn
in small, representing a Woman who ^n her time was an admirable Beauty, the Box
also ^n which 'twas kept was set with Diamonds. This (continued he) was the
Picture of my Mother, who was in her Life an Example of Virtue and Piety, and
(...) hope you will imitate a Grandmother of such great Merit: I must tell you
this of her, that she was Edutated in the Romish Religion as you have been, by
^n Aunt that brought her up, yet God having given ^er a penetrating Spirit, she
easily distinguished the Truth from Lies. I hope Daughter (added he) that you
will imitate her more ways than one, and that what I give you is well bestowed.
I intended ^o have fallen on my Knees to have received this Gift with the
greatest Respect, as my Brother had done, but my Father perceiving my Design,
would not suffer it, but embraced me most tenderly, gave me his Blessing and
some serious Advice.

Immediately after this Mystery was finished, my Mother entered the Chamber, and
pleasantly seemed ^o blame my Father with having fallen into the same ^ault for
which he had accused her, in not being ^ble to part with his Children. My
Father made ^s tho he had not heard her, and said to her, Will ^ou Madam, that
I take my leave of you this Night ^r to Morrow Morning: To Morrow Morning, said
^y Mother, for we'll Breakfast with you before you go: Be it so, answered my
Father. Thus he left ^is House, to give my Mother the opportunity of do^ing
what he very well knew, though he seemed to be ^gnorant of it.

My Father was not a Mile off, when my Mother sent for her Confessor, who
whilst my Mother, my Brother, and my self, were in the Garden, came to us.
Brother, said I, look well to your self, I doub^ you will hardly be able to
hold out against an ol^ Man, who has spent his Days in Disputations an^ Books.
Why should I not be able to do it? (replied my Brother;) David who was but a
Youth, an^ had nothing but a Sling and Stones, smote dow^ Goliath, who was a
Giant completely armed. Thi^ one Example is not enough to make a Rule, said I
it is a rare thing for the weak to overcome the strong but it is very ordinary
for the strong to vanquish the weak.

My Brother would have answered me, but the Jesuit prevented him, by coming to
salute him; ther^ were abundance of Civilities passed between them and the
Father who was well skilled in Flattery, spak^ the most obliging things in the
World to my Brother, who returned a modest Answer: But whe^^ his turn came, he
fell upon the Praises of the Father in so curious a manner, that the Jesuit
judged from that time, that his Conversion would co^^ him more Pains than he at
first imagined. My Mother seeing that the Place in which we were, wa^ not
proper for our Discourse, caused us to enter (...) little Summer-h^use, in
which were Seats, and a Table of Slate: She placed her self on the one side
with the Jesuit and my Brother, and I on the other. This was the Order of our
sitting in this famous Conference.

My Mother, as soon as we were settled in our Places, addressed her self to the
Jesuit; Father* said she to him, here is my Son, whom I bring to you, as a sick
Man to the Physician, for the recovery of his Health. I believe (said my
Brother) (...) am not sick in mind, and as for my Body, I am as you see, by the
Grace of God very well. Ther^ is no Distemper, said the Jesuit, more dangerous
or contagious than Heresy, which entirely infects the ^est Spirits, and
hurries them in^o Damnation. I ^nderstand your meaning, said my Brother; you
would prove that I am fallen into this horrible sickn^ss of the Soul, viz.
Heresy, and would have me b^l^^ve that you are able to deliver me from it, by
bringing me over to your Party. As for the former, I cannot see how you dare
call me Heretic; D^ I believe any thing that is not conformable to ^he Holy
Scripture, or that is Condemned by it? Neither I nor any other of the Reformed
could ever be Convicted of this.

You must not think (said the Father) that Here^icks are only such whose
Sentiments are Condemn^d by the Scripture, but also such as forsake the ^aith
of the Church; for the Church is the Sove^eign Judge of Heretics, and the
Scripture is a ^ead thing which Heretics wrest, giving it what ^ense best
agrees with their own Fancy, and out of which they sometimes take Pillars to
support their ^ost pernicious Opinions. But as for the Church, (...) is living,
it makes Orders and explains them her ^elf, and whoever departs from the
Foundations which she has laid, is an Heretic, and out of the ^ay o^
Salvation.

I see Father, said my Brother, that you are of the ^pinion of all Roman
Catholic Doctors, and that ^e Holy Scripture not being favorable to you, ^ou
will not accept of it as a Judge, but will ravish ^s Authority from it, to give
it to your Traditions, which after all are nothing else but Men's Inventions.

Hereupon the Jesuit made a long Discourse of ^raditions, and the unwritten
Word; he endeavour^d to prove that the Scripture was not perfect, and (...)
this end quoted the Scripture against it self; Je^^s wrought many Miracles
which are not written in this ^^ok; and again, There are many thing which Jesus
did, which had they been all Written, I suppose the World it self could not
contain the Books that should be written: Hence he passed to the Citation of
the Ancient Doctors of the Church, as Tertallian, Cyprian, Hierom, and diverse
others: He proceeded so far as to say, that the Church was above the Scripture,
whose Books are only Authentic, said he, because she has declared them so;
from whence he came to draw this Conclusion from the Principle he had lai^
down, That if the Church had Power to Authorize a Doctrine, to distinguish it
from what is Apocryphal or Profane, and to give it all its Force and Virtue,
much more has she a right to interpret it, and therefore there needs no other
Interpretation of the Scripture than what is found in the Church. The Father
urged so many Arguments to prove what h^ said, that I cannot remember them, but
as for m^ Brothers Answer, which I heard with a great de^ of Pleasure, and
which he afterward gave me in Manuscript, so that I often read it, I have it
now almo^^ by heart.

Father, said he to the Jesuit, you have spoken as much as you please, nor
have I at all interrupte^ you in your Discourse; I now beg the same Liberty I
protest (said he) against all the things that yo^ have said, and maintain that
those Holy Book^ i^ which the Word of God is written, are the foundations of
Salvation; and the Church ought to dra^ all its Instructions out of this
Fountain, as having i^ themselves and of themselves sufficient Authority (...)
decide all Differences and Controversies. I shall sa^ more, that the Scripture
carries with it its sole an^ true Interpretation, which it is not lawful to seek
an^ where else: This, Father, I intend to prove by A^thority, History and
Reason, after which you m^^ draw what Conclusion you please.

God himself speaks thus in Deuteronomy: You sh^^ add nothing to the Word that
I have Commanded y^^ neither shall you take away any thing from it: All that I
^a^e Commanded you, you shall observe to do it; you shall (...) and nor take
away any thing. Certainly these ^^e terrible Words, and has not your Church
act^d against them? the Doctors of the Church of Rome ^ave just Cause to hang
their Heads and to be cover^^ with shame and confusion, when they see that
^^eir Predecessors had added not only one Iota, not (...) single Article, but a
Third Table to the Law of ^od, and have composed a fifth Gospel, and for one
^^gle Passage have Canonized such Books as are ^pocryphal, and contrary to the
Holy Spirit; but let (...) hear how this Divine Spirit expresses it self in
St. (...); He whom God sent, declared the Words of God, (...) God gave him not
his Spirit by Measure. And Je^^s Christ says in the same Place, I receive not
Wit^^ss from Men; which Passage as a Cannon-shot over^^rns at once all that can
be said in favor of Tra^^tions: See also what our Lord says after Isaiah the
^^ophet; This People draws nigh unto me with their ^^uth, and honors me with
their lips, but their heart is (...) from me: In vain do they worship me,
teaching for ^^ctrines the Traditions of Men; which shows, that it is ^^t only
now that Men endeavor to bring Traditi^^s into the Church, but they have
always been re^^ted. I remember that I have read an excellent lord in the
Proverbs on this Subject; All the Word (...) God is pure, it is a Buckier to all
that hope in it; ^^d not to this Word, least the Lord reprove thee, and ^^u be
jound a Liar. And what will you (Gentle^^n) who are Advocates for Tradition,
say to that ^^atbema of St. Paul, who Writing to the Galathians, ^^th, If we or
any other Preach any other Gospel than ^^at we have preached, let him be
Anathema? Must (...) say here that the Doctors of the Church have ^^eater power
than St. Paul had, for they Preach (...) other Gospel than this great Apostle
of the Nati^^s did? It Is in vain to pretend that St. Paul Anathematizeth such
as preach a contrary Gospel, for he only says, Another Gospel; that is to say,
a different Gospel, as those do who relate Miracles, and ascribe them to Jesus
Christ, although we find n^ mention at all of them in the Gospels. In fine, St^
Peter whom you qualify with the Title of Prince o^ the Apostles, and to whom
you pretend the Lord gave a supreme Authority, says, that The Prophe^^ came
not of old time by the Will of Man, but holy men (...) God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost. This Father, is express, this is clear and plain, and
th^^ great Apostle was persuaded that what was pronounced by the Holy Spirit,
could not be Authorized by men, as some pretend to give Authority (...) the
Scriptures, by their Glosses and Approb^tions.

It Is notoriously evident, that the Apostle never believed, that 'twas lawful
for men, how many, ho^ Learned and Wise soever they were, to add to t^^
Scripture; and certainly, if the Doctors have the Privilege, the Apostles who
were the Basis an^ Pillars of the Church, had a far better pretense (...) it;
yet they never claimed it, but looked on such a^ Attempt as both impious and
sacrilegious. Ho^ guilty then are such, who coming after the Ap^stles, and
having neither the Dignity nor the Me^sure of the Spirit which the Apostles
had, have (...) made bold to carry their follies into the Sanctuar^ and join
humane Imaginations to the Holy Word (...) God! There Is no Man in the World who
is able (...) keep Servants, that will suffer them to add to, (...) take from
his Commands as they please; and yet m^ thinks you would have us believe that
God did (...) well mind all that he ought to have said for our Savation; and
that in his Law he forgot some Article which he afterward left to Men's good
Intention^ Is this, Father, to be suffered? The Holy Spi^^^ says, that All the
Wisdom of Man is but folly b^^^ God; that God has confounded it: And yet God
it ^ems suffers this humane Wisdom to interpret and ^^d Traditions to his Word,
and to judge sove^^ignly of it.

There are no Doctors in the World, how Learned ^ever they are, that can show a
reason for all the ^^r^umes, Sacrifices, and Purifications, which are at ^^ge
expressed in the Ceremonial Law, and yet ^^^se are but the smallest matters:
How then can ^^e who are utterly in the dark about the least things ^^^^ch God
has commanded, presume to dispose (...) ^h^se that are the greatest? For the
Roman Church ^ublished these Traditions only to enlarge her Pow^^, and so
establish what she pleased; for having ^^^^^n this Point, she built an Infinity
of things upon (...): for she disposes of the Habitations of souls af^^r
Death, puts a price upon their Punishments, ^^ts Salvation to sale, and offers
Paradise to him ^^at bids most for it; and all this, because for^^oth it
pleases us, and we have thus invented (...); we must have the Holy Scriptures,
spite of them, ^onfirm and ratify.

The Disproportion between the sublimity and ex^^llency of the Holy Scriptures,
and the weakness (...) our understandings, is so great, that we can find
nothing in the World to parallel it: Can thou by ^a^ching find out God? can
thou find out the Almighty (...) p^r^^tion? It is higher than Heaven, what
can (...) know? it is deeper than Hell, what can thou do? ^his is sp^ken in
the Book of Job, concerning Di^^ne Providence; I may say the same thing of the
lord of God, which we ought not to pretend to ^^^^etrate, much less to judge of
it.

I have often been astonished at that Impu^ence and Blasphemy, which our
Enemies are guilty ^f, in saying that the Word of God is not perfect. (...)
will only produce two Examples to show its per^ection, the one taken from the
Law of Rigor, the other from the Law of Grace. The first are t^^ Ten
Commandments contained in two Table^ the second is the Lords Prayer, contained
in six A^ticles. What Man amongst all the Church of M^^ durst pretend to
authorize this? For we plainly s^ that God alone could be the Author of such a
wor^ and that were all the ^^gislators of the World together, they could never
have composed a Law, consisting only of Ten words, and comprehending all t^^
sins of the World. And all the Doctors of the U^^ verse together could never
have composed a Pra^er, in which in six Articles are contained all the D^sires
that can enter into a reasonable Soul; and wh^ ever heard that the greater
received his Authori^^ from the less?

I know you will plead that the Church is inspired (...) the Spirit of God, and
therefore may judge wh^ Books are Canonical, and what are not: But Father that
which you call the Church is not always a^^ mated with the Divine Spirit; and
though it we^^ yet this would not prove her Power of judging t^^ Holy
Scriptures soveraignly, so as that there shou^^ be no Appeal from her Judgment;
the Spirit (...) not given her for this end, but that she may w^^ reverence
submit her self to them. The Spirit^ given her properly to prevent private
persons from judging whether a book be Authentic or no, s^ in this case we
must submit to the Judgment of the Church, who distinguishes the Books that
were d^ctated by the Spirit of God from those which m^^ would add to them,
which are called Apocrypha^^ and which she rejects. This is all the Authori^^
which the Church can have; nor must we ascrib^ to her a power of adding to the
Scriptures, but only of teaching the People which are Canonical an^ with that
of our Parliaments, who receive the Le^ters-Patents of his Majesty, and know
his signi^^ ^^d Seals; they publish them abroad to be really ^^e Kings Letters,
and they declare their contents to ^^e People. But they do not compose them,
they (...) not sign or seal them, they dare not add any ^^ing to them, whether
contrary or different: But ^^me men do that with respect to God, which no
^^uncil durst do to its Prince.

Tell me, Father, cannot Goldsmiths distinguish ^^ld from Copper? yet they
cannot make Gold to (...) Gold, for it is so already of its own Nature, with^^t
their assistance. They may indeed mix Siver (...) Lead with Gold, but they can
never make this ^^ver to become true Gold, because mixed with it. ^hus the
Church may indeed know what is the true ^^ld, the real Word of God, and what is
not; but ^e cannot make a new Word of God: Men may ^o compose Writings, and
have Impudence enough (...) add them to the Word of God; yet it does not ^low
that by so doing they give them the Charecter (...) the Word of God.

They preach amongst you, Father, with a great ^al of earnestness, that the
Church gives Authority (...) the Scriptures, and consequently that she must
(...) above them, so as to have Power to add her ^^aditions to the sacred
Writings: But when all is ^^ne, the Church has only Authority to declare (...)
the People, that what is called the Holy Scrip^^e is indeed the Word of God:
for as Gold would (...) cease to be Gold, though there should be none (...) say
this is Gold, so the Holy Scripture would not ^se to be the Word of God, and
Authentic, tho ^ere were no Church to tell men, that this Word ^^ich you read
is the Word of God. Moreover I say, ^^t the Canon of the Holy Scripture being
owned ^^d declared in the first Councils, we ought with^^t any hesitation or
difficulty to receive their de^minations; nor are we to question in the Church
^^e Authority of the Holy Scripture, but to submit our selves to its Decrees,
which are Truth and Righteousness its self:

Indeed Father, if the Church has Power (...) judge sovereignly of the
Doctrine contained in the Holy Scriptures, it must be supposed that in the
Church there are, and always will be men that are (...) full of the Holy Ghost
as those that wrote these s^cred Books, which is utterly false; for the
weakness blindness, ignorance and malice of those that oppo^^ the Holy
Scripture, shows that they have not the least spa^k of that Divine Spirit: So
that it belong (...) not to men (...) judge of the Doctrine, or to inte^pret
what is contained in those Hol^ Books. If yo^ say, that such as have re^eived
the Holy Spirit m^^ do it: I answer, that all those that have receive^ the Holy
Spirit in these latter times, show it by su^mitting themselves humbly to the
Word of God.

But Father, I have other Arguments of great^^ force than those already urged;
what likelihood (...) there that men who know themselves too weak to b^ saved,
should yet have Power togive Authority to tho^^ Books in which are contained
the means: of the^^ Salvation? has God who is jealous of his own Glo^^ given
Men his Word to be abandoned to their Di^cretion* to be controuled and
contested, and to have what they please added to it? Is it possible, or is
(...) lawful, that such as are ignorant should judge (...) Knowledge? Is it
proper for those that are bo^^ blind to discourse of the principles of Light?
would not every Body laugh at them should they attemp^ it? Much more ridiculous
is it for such as are blin^ and ignorant, to pretend to judge of the Heaven^^
light, and of the sublim^st of all sciences.

Is it not certain Father, that under the Old T^stament, God spoke once to his
People, but 'twas only to give them his Law; so that this Law being on^ given,
'twas not left to the People to add new Poin^ to it, but they were obliged to
yield obedience to (...) It Is true, the Levites preached this Law to the
People, but how did they do it? they consulted the ^aw it self to explain it,
without seeking Interpreta^ions in their own Brains, as they do amongst you.
And although this unbelleving Nation was often assu^^ed of the truth of Gods
Promises, and God had to this End sent them many great Prophets, which ^ere his
Ambassadors to bring them word of the coming of the M^ssiah, yet there was
never one that said to the People, Do this or that more than the Law ^^^^es:
because in it self it is no sufficient Remedy: But ^his was what they said;
Keep the Law and the Ordi^^^^ which the God o^ your Fathers gave to M^s^s his
^^^^ant. These great Men were all extraordinarily ^^sp red, yet they never
undertook to contest the (...) ^f ^od, nor to forge any new Commandments; (...)
pressed Obedience to the Law only. I say ^^i^ ^o an^^er those that say, that
the same Spirit which spoke by the mouths of those that spoke, and ^^^ded the
hands of those that wrote, does now al^^ animate the Doctors of the Catholic
Church, ^na^^ing them to pass a right Judgment on the Do^^r^ne of the Faith
con^ained in the Holy Scripture; (...) methinks they owe the same r^spect to
the Word (...) God which the Prophets show^d it, who never (...) touch a thing
so sacred, nor ever presumed to (...) an^ thing new to it.

I (...) say the same thing of the Gospel; God ha^i^^ spoken by his
Ambassadors, and by them re^^cal d his Will to the People, has withdrawn his
spirit of Reve^ation as well as the Power of working ^^^a^les, and ^ath left us
only the Spirit of Obedi^nce: (...) God knew the wicked Disposition of ^^n too
^^ll, to leave him the liberty of diminish^^g, adding, or changing what he
pleased. It Is cer^^^, that though there a e many Heres^es in the ^^^^ld, there
would be infinitel^ more if men had (...) to give A^thority to the Scripture,
s^eing they now have salsifyed it, corrupted it, and mad^ such Glosses on it as
are contradictory to the Text.

It Is true Father, the old Church of the Jews ha^ a Tradition; Eleazar,
Phineas, and all those wh^ had been Eyewitnesses of the wonders which Go^ had
wrought by the hand of Moses, informed the^ Children of them; and these things
were hande^ down from Father to Son, in those Families th^^ kept the true
Worship of God: But this Tradition had nothing new in it, nothing more than was
contained in the Law and the written Word of God: we^^ the Traditions of the
Church of Rome of the sam^ Nature with respect to the Gospel, they would n^^
have been so much disliked as now they are; y^^ as men cannot long handle any
thing without fouli^^ it, the Jews abused this Tradition of their Father and a
ided to it their own Inventions: So that 'tw^ extremely corrupted in the time
of our Lord Jes^^ Christ, for which we find that he often blames the^ in the
Gospel.

The Catholic Doctors do in my mind exactly im^tate the Ancient Rabbis,
Scribes, Pharisees, an^ Jewish Doctors; and as they boasted that they se^ved
God, not merely according to what God ha^ ordained in his Law, which they
judged too ligh^ a matter, and too easy a means to be saved, an^ had attained
that pitch of Presumption, that the^ thought it the greatest perfection to obey
God according to their Traditions; so according to the Doctors of the Church of
Rome, it is a small matte^ to embrace the Gospel, in which many materi^^ things
were omitted which they have added, an^ thereby rendered that work complete,
which S^ Paul, S. Peter, and all the other Apostles, ye^ Christ himself left
imperfect. What Impious absu^diry is it, to cry down the Holy Scripture, and
proclaim it imperfect, only to give the greater reputat^on to Tradition^!

My Brother intended not to have ended so soon, Though the Father would often
have interrupted ^im: But my Mother, who could no longer dissem^e her
displeasure against my Brother, discovered (...) by crying out, Must you have
all the Discourse? ^ust no Body speak but you? No Madam, (said ^ather Matthew)
let him say what he pleases, we ^ill answer him afterward: For my part I
seemed sleep during all, this Conference, which lasted from ^oon ^till near
four of the Clock, in which my Mo^^er was very well pleased, fearing least I
should ^^ve been taken with my Brother's Discourse; and (...) speak
ingenuously, I never in all my life heard ^y thing that pleased me better,
which (methought) ^^s too learned for my Brother; but I do not much ^^nder at
it, when I consider his love to Learning, ^e excellency and vivacity of his
Parts, and the ^re my Father took to get them improved. Thus, ^^dies, if I seem
more learned than Virgins usually ^e, ascribe it to the Happiness of my Memory,
and ^t to the strength of my Judgment.

The Father believing thereby the better to accom^sh his design on my Brother,
told my Mother, that (...) would fain discourse with him in private: As ^^ch as
you please, said my Brother, and thereup^^ they both arose, and spent two large
hours in ^eir Conference* In the mean time my Mother ^^aining in the
Summer House with me, said to (...), I^^t possible Justine (said she) ^ha^ you
should ^ar nothing of the Conference? A little, Madam, ^nswered I) of the
Beginning, but I desire no more (...) be present at it, because it is none of my
Business. ^^u have no reason (answered she) to speak ill of (...) for methinks
you have slept well enough at it. I ^ow not what to think of your Brother,
(added she) (...) Discourse does not accord well with the hopes (...) had given
me; besides, your Father has, in my and, made him study so hard, as though he
intended him for a Minister. Mother, answered (...) smiling, my Brother is too
good a Soldier to be (...) Minister, but Learning does no injury to any b^^
Women, whose brains it hurts.

I endeavored by Discourses of this Nature (...) all^y my Mothers displeasure
against my Brother, (...) reason of his freedom of speech, but the return (...)
the Jesuit spoiled all, who drew my Mother asid^ and discoursed with her for
near half an hour. (...) the mean time my Brother gave me an account of the
p^ivate Discourse he had had with the Jesuit, which he concluded, saying, We
shall have a fine ra^^^ by and by. Nor indeed was he mistaken, for (...) Mother
having conducted the Jesuit to the Gate (...) our house, returned immediately
to us, with a Co^tenance that bespake Fury. Her face was successi^ly red and
pale. I trembled to see her in this P^sture, but her words much increased my
disple^sure. Let us go into the house, Justine (said she and I forbid you ever
more to discourse with yo^ Brother; and I forbid you, Ferdinand, ever to co^^
into my Presence as long as I live; you have unha^pily deceived me, and this is
the least punishme^^ that your treachery against me deserves.

Though these were very bloody reproaches, y^^ my Brother seemed not much
surprised at the^ but without answering a word, respectfully reti^e^^ The same
Evening he lodged at a Farm, which b^longed to my Father, about a League from
us, (...) spent most of the next day in Hunting, not retu^ing to our Castle
'till the Evening, to play a Stra^g^m which had good Success.

My Mother when the first brush of her Anger (...) over, began to be troubled
for her Emportme^^ for the Affection she had for her Son was so stro^^ that it
soon got the Victory-over all other Passion Do you kno^, said she, what your
Brother dot^ he went hence on Horseback, with a Servant and (...) ^acquey, and
they have taken the Dogs with them, (...) believe he intends to hunt in the
Country. It Is ^ery well, (said she) seeming to be much better ^^eased than
indeed she was. We supped together without saying any thing one to another,
only she ^ontinually sighed, and for my part, my head was ^ontinually working
on variety of subjects.

I spent this Night in a great deal of Trouble. You may easily imagine that
^twas impossible* for one of any Sex, who had entertained so great a Des^gn,
that ^as like to have such troublesome Consequences, ^ot to be very much
astonished, when I saw my self ^eprived of all that was my support. My Mother
^ad her disquietudes as well as I; she would fain ^ave had my Brother make
application to her first, ^ut she had forced him away, and 'twas not likely
^^at he would expose himself to the danger of a new ^^front, and she judged it
a condescension much be^eath her to seek after him; she continued in Pain ^^l
the day. As for my Brother he returned to our ^astle in the Evening, with his
Servant, and instead (...) coming into the Dining Room, went immediately (...)
his own Chamber. My Mother sent me thither as ^e had done the day before, I
found him in his ^^amber with his Servant, his Boxes and Males all ^^en, his
Linen and Clothes taken out, and he ^^athing himself as though he designed
immediately ^r the Army, whilst his Servant assisted with a ^cquey, was packing
up such things as he intended (...) take with him. Well, said he, as soon as he
saw ^e, I was troubled to think how I should take my ^^ve of you, but now you
are here it is well enough. ^^w Brother, (said I hastily) what do you intend
(...) do? you will see that (replied he) by and by. Ah ^id I) will you leave us?
And immediately I went ^wn to carry the News to my Mother, toward ^^om I never
failed of respect in all my Life till now* ^ell Mother, (said I to her) you now
see the Effect of your Passion, my Brothers going, what will you say to my
Father when he shall require him at your hands, who charged you to keep him
with you till his return? You have broken the Promise you made my Father, never
to extort his Son to change his Religion, which when you could not prevail on
him to do, you have cruelly driven him from your Presence. Ah my Father has
far more religiously kept his Promise, for he never spoke to me of his
Religion, or mine.

My Mother, whilst I uttered these reproaches, seemed rather dead than alive. I
should have spoken more bitterly, but she was not in a Capacity o^ hearing
them. Immediately some came to call me, telling me, that my Brother desired to
speak with me. At my return I found his Servant that carried his Maile and
Pistols, just about to mount his Horse Friend, (said I) don t make so much
haste, stop ti^^ I have spoken with your Master. Do what I bid you cried my
Brother to his Servant in a seeming Passion: Hereupon I went up into his
Chamber, and found him accoutred for his Journey, and that (...) only staid to
speak with me. What do you me^ Brother (said I) by this Emportment? are you
resolved to leave us? be persuaded to change you Mind, I Will make your Peace
with my Mother; yo^ brag of more than you are able to perform (said (...)
Brother) with a kind of impatience, I know my Mother too well to hope for so
sudden a Change. Yo^ know Sister, that I gave her no provocation to spea^ what
she has said to me, or to treat me as she ha^^ done: But Sister, you see it is
late, I pray God (...) bless you; (added he, embracing me) and not bei^^ able
to speak a word more, he shook me off from him, who could not hold him, and
immediately l^^ the Chamber. My Mother who heard him, calle^ him, Ferdinand
said she, come hither to me. (...) presently obeyed her, and my Mother looking
(...) him, In what Equipage is it that I see you (said she?) ^hither are you
going? I am going so far (answer^d (...)) that you will have no reason to fear my
coming (...) into your presence, or that you will ever more have your Eyes
offended with a fight that is odious ^o you, though I have not deserved to be
so. Dare ^ou then (said she) go away without your Fathers ^ons^nt. My Father
(answered he) will easily par^on me when he knows what moved me to it, and ^ill
readily give his Consent that I leave these Parts; ^s for yours, you have given
it already, and that in ^^ch a manner as pierces my very Soul, for you ^ave
driven me from your presence with reproaches. (...) have therefore nothing more
to do in this Castle, which will henceforth be more dreadful than a Pri^on,
seeing I have lost the Affection of my Mother, ^^d it may be the love of my
Sister. If you will grant, ^e one Favor, give me leave to kiss your haud, it is ^e
last I shall ever ask of you.

No, said my Mother, pretending very unseasonably ^^at she was much more
displeased than indeed she was^^h Mother (said he) do you refuse me so small a
mat^^^? Yet continued he. I beg God to take you always to his Holy Protection,
and to inspire you with ^ore tender sentiments for my Sister; but I dare ^ear
it will not be thus, and that she will live very ^^serably with you: Yet
Mother, Heaven will one ^y require of you an account of your Children: Ha^^g
said this, he embraced me a second time, who ^s not able to speak one word, and
having made ^rofound reverence, he withdrew and went down ^o the Court. 'Twas
then that my Mother, who ^ing on a large Chair, abandoned her self to her ^ief,
being able to say nothing but O my God, ^^at shall I do? You are (said I) one
of the happi^^ Mothers that live, in having such a Son, and are (...) a little
time like to become the most miserable ^^d wetched. You know Mother, that you
have not done well, why should you refuse him that sma^^ Favor of Kissing your
Hand? At any other time durst not have spoken so freely, but I was now reduced
to that pass, that I did but little value my Mothers Anger. I did not stay for
any Answer, b^^ ran down into the Court, to use my last Endeavo^ to stop my
Brother: My Mo^ner arose hastily out (...) her Chair to the Window, where she
saw my Brother on Horseback, fitting his Stirrops, and crye^ out to the
Servants, Shut the Gates, hinder hi^ from going. My Brother, as though he had
no heard my Mother, said with a menacing Voice, if an^ one dares to oppose my
Passage, I Will trample him under my Horses Feet. By this time I was come in
(...) the Court, and laying hold on the Bridle, It shall (...) me then (said I)
that you shall thus deal with, se^ing I am resolved never to let go my hold.
Ha^^ Sister, my dear Sister, said he, shedding some Tea^ Let these Tears
suffice you; Judge you whether can possibly remain in this Castle. In the m^an
ti^^ my Mother came down into the Court her self, (...) Face covered with
Tears, forgetting all her Rese^ments; Are you not very unnatural, Ferdinand,
s^^ she, to leave me for a Word I spoke to you in (...) Passion? God's my
Witness (said he) that I le^^^ you with the greatest regret in the World; but
M^ther, you have very unjustly driven me away only (...) speaking according to
my Conscience.

'Twas on this delicate Point that this agreea^^ Narrative was Interrupted by
the Master of the Sh^^ who obliged us to go to Supper; for these sort (...) Men
do not abound with Complaisan^e. We wai^^ for the next Morning with a great
deal of Impatien^^ but the Consideration we had for Mademoiselle de (...)
Phale, made us vanquish our Curiosity.

CHAP. III.
THe next Morning, as soon as Mademoiselle de St. Phale, and the rest of our
Company were met together, she continued her History in this manner. (...) left
off last Night at the Answer which my Brother ^eturned my Mother. If you,
continued he, would ^ot have had me answer the Father Matthew, you ^ould have
told me so, and then I would have been ^^nt; but you gave me liberty to speak
freely, be^eving that he would easily stop my Mouth, but he ^iled of this, and
I made good my Ground against ^im, and this is all my Crime. It Is only for this
^^at you reproach me with having deceived you, and ^etrayed you; it is for this,
that you have forbidden ^e your Presence, and all Discourse with my Sister,
(...) though I were the greatest Criminal in the World. and indeed, Mother,
it is for ever that I leave you, ^^at I lea^e this Land, that I renounce all my
Pre^nsions in France, of which I now take an eternal ^arewell. Grant me only
the Favor of kissing your ^and, which I cannot forbear to beg, though you
^ave already refused it me. My Mother fell not now ^^^o the fault she had
committed before, but held ^^^th her hand, saying, My Son, you have over^^me
me; May not she who has driven you away, ^ll you back? Is it not possible for
me to soften ^our hard Heart? Intend you to seek a Reparation (...) your Honor
on her that bare you, or would ^ou have her beg your Pardon on her Knees? She
^^d hardly finished these words before my Brother ^^pt off his Horse, cast
himself at my Mothers Feet, ^^dewed them with his Tears, and embraced them,
without being able to say any thing; but my Mother ^on raised him from the
ground, and emb^aced him. All those of the Family that were in the Court could
not forbear Weeping any more than we that were immediately concerned. We
thought that the whole business had been at an end, and I who had all the while
held the Horse by the Bridle, delivered it to a Servant, commanding him to
return it to the Stable: Stop, cried my Brother; Why so? said my Mother; what
means this? I must, answered he, either leave this House for ever, or the
Father must; choose which of us two you will retain, and which you will banish.

You urge me too far, Ferdinand, said my Mother, altering both her Voice and
Countenance: Insolent that you are, dare you propose that I drive away my
Confessor? you abuse my* tenderness and tears but you shall not always abuse
them: And I, said my Brother, should I not leave a Mother that p^^^ no
difference between a pernicious Jesuit and a^ ^^^dient Son? Ah! I have staid
too long in this House, said he, as he remounted his Horse. For my part, I
despaired of any agreement, when I saw how my Mother dealt with him, and
therefore I (...) go my hold in the B^idle. Go Brother, said I, your resentment
is just, be gone from the Place where you are so unworthily treated, for my
part I Will no^ be long behind you, I Will soon be in a Convent. N^^ Sister. (said
he) do you stay to be a Comfort (...) my Father; It may be my Mother becoming
sensible of her fault, will not deal with the Daughter a^ she has dealt with
the Son. Farewell my Friends said he to the Waiting-Gentlewomen, and Serving
Men and Maids, and Lacqueys, who all fell on their Knees before the Horse, and
made so lamentable (...) cry, that I never heard any like it; for my Brothe^
was very well beloved. Be gone, Children, (said he) I should be sorry to hurt
you now, having never do^^ you ought but good; my Horse may chance to injure
some of you. Be gone, (said I in a Passion) would you have my Brother stay to
be daily affronted, whilst a damnable Jesuit is here absolute Master?

When I spoke these Words, my Mother earnestl^ looked upon me with Eyes that
discovered that her Soul was divided between two contrary and violent Passions.
She called me to her, and I, though I doubted not but that she would deal
severely with me, yet went to her. Justine, (said she) I Pardon what you have
said, but Counsel me, What shall I do? I do not hesitate between your Brother
and the Confessor, as though I knew not which to choose, but Daughter, I know no
Confessor alive can better direct me in the way of Salvation than this Father
can: On the other side the Voice of Conscience and Nature make me most cruel
Reproaches for suffering my Son to depart for so slight a matter. I will not
advise you Mother, (said I) but if you please I Will whisper my Brother what you
say, it may be it may win upon him. Do (said she) what you think fi^. My
Brother came the second time off his Horse, and went to my Mother, and
discoursed with her in private, none being admitted to hear it but my self.

You know Son (said she) how delicate I am in what regards Conscience, you
would have me to banish immediately either my Confessor or you: I would sa^n
keep you both: But, Ferdinand, you will have me declare my Resolution: The
Voice of Nature pleads for you, and the Voice of Conscience for the Father.
Advise me what to do, Ferdinand; I have asked your Sisters Advice, but she
refuses to give it me; speak to me as a disinteressed Person, as though you
were not concerned, and speak rather as a Friend than as a Son. Mother, replied
he, to conform my self to your Will, I shall tell you, that in the general it is
better to hear and obey the Voice of Conscience than that of Nature; but as it
often happens that Conscience is guided by pr^^dice rather than Justice, ^o
it is often more safe to hear the Voice of Nature than that of Conscience.

To come to the Father Matthew, you would retain him because he seems necessary
for the Direction of your Conscience. Certainly the Condition of Men must be
very miserable. when they believe that their Salvation depends on the W^ll of
certain men* and on the Caresses that they make them. There are some ^ick
People over whose Spirits-their Ph^sitians have gotten such an absolute Empire,
that they believe their Life or Death lies in their hands* We may justly term
such Physicians as these the Tyrants of the Sick, as we may most Confessors the
Tyrants of the Conscience. The Father Matthew is one of those, he has got the
ascendant of your mind, so that you receive his savings as so many Oracles, and
you are afraid of falling out with him, because you imagine him to be God's
great Friend and Favorite.

But Mother, (continued he) if you will give me leave to speak, your Conscience
ought not to be entangled for a man who himself has no Conscience at all. For
besides that be is a Jusuite, which very word contains a multitude of
mischiefs: Was it not he that suggetted part of what you said to me, and
advised you to banish me your Presence? To sow Discord between a Mother and her
Son is the true Work of the Devil; so that Mother, you will find, that your
Conscience, if you will Consult it as you ought, will exhort you to rid your
Hands of so dangerous a Person: And if you will be advised by me, take for a
Confessor one that is no Jesuit, for these Gentlemen are never satisfied 'till
they have imposed an intolerable Yoke on Men's Consciences, which is all the
good Fruit of your Auricular Confessions; because knowing all that a Person
does or thinks, it is easy for them to turn him to their Pleasure, and to (...)
on him what burdens they think fit.

Whether my Mother was really convinced by my D^^^^^ers Arguments, or only
seemed to be so, is un^^r (...); yet she promised my Brother to turn off the
Father Matthew, and at the sa^^e time sent to him to acquaint him with this
Resolution. In the m^^^n time we: ^^turned to the House. where as soon (...)
^^y Brother had plucked off his Boots, he came to (...) Mother who knew no
bounds either of Ha^^^^ or love, caresled my Brother at such a rate as (...)
ex^^ed^d his Expectations: And as for you, (...) she to me, I remember all that
you have ^ind, and m^thinks you ought rather to have taken (...) your Mother
than with your Brother; but I (...) you for his sake.

During all the Supper my Brother entertained my ^^^^her with D^^course
concerning the Mischiefs wrought by Confessore in ^amilies, Cities and
Kingdoms. I (...) Confes^ said he, that the Confession of Sins and Infirmities
in the Ears of a Priest was (...) in the P^^^^^tive Church, but 'twas abolished
al^^st throughout all the East by Nectarius, Patriarch of ^or^^^^^^e, because
of a Deacon, who hearing the Confessions of a young Widow, and knowing (...)
Infirmities, took occasion thence to seduce her: Nor is there any reason to
doubt, but a Woman who discovers all her sins and Passions to a Priest, is in a
ready way to be seduced by him. On the other hand, Confessions serve to draw
what the Priest will cut of Families for the Building of Religious Houses, and
the singing of Masses, and many other things of the like Nature, as also the
Prying into the secrets of Kings, which the Confessors use for their own
adver^ge. My Mother was well enough satisfied of the Truth of what my Brother
said: if you will Mother, added he, follow my Advice, though I am your Son, and
of a contiary Religion, Never make any Jesuit your Confessor more, but content
your self with the Curat, as many others, who have tried both, have at last
done.

Here the Discourse of Mademoiselle de St. Phale was interrupted by the coming
of several Gentlemen into the Room where the Conversation was held, she not
being willing to give an Account of her Life before so many witnesses.

CHAP. IV.
ALL the Company whom Mademoiselle de St. Phale honored with the History of
her Life, being again met, she thus continued her Relation.

My Brothers Discourse had made such Impression on my Mother, that she was
almost persuaded to make choice of another Confessor. And had he but pursued
his design, he had certainly accomplished it; But Love, which at this time
seized on his heart, made him neglect so advantageous an Enterprise, and the
Consequence of this Neglect proved very mischievous and fatal, and has forced
me out of France.

My Father having in fifteen days finished his business at Dijon to his
satisfaction, wrote us the day on which he resolved to leave that place, and
our Castle being but three good days Journeys from it, we expected him on the
fourth: But he neither coming then, nor the fifth, nor the sixth, nor the
seventh, my Mother and I began to be very much concerned, and my Brother
resolved to ride to seek him. But on the eighth day, my Brother having rode out
Early in the Morning, we saw both him and my Father enter the Court about Noon,
at which we very much rejoiced; and I leave it to you judge, whether for my
part I had not reason, considering the dispositions of my Spirit. After our
Caresses were over, my Mother desi^ed to know the Cause of his stay. He told
her that at Dijon he had met with one of his old Acquaintance in the Army, who
living but a short days journey from Dijon, and being better acquainted with
the ways than I were, said my Father, undertook to be my Guide, and in one day
we came to his Castle, and he earnestly pressed me to lodge there, which at
length with some regrett I comented to: He seeing that I were somewhat
unwilling to stay with him, said, I Will show you somewhat that you have seen
before, and which you will not be troubled to see again. The Castle was well
seated, adorned and furnished, so that I was much pleased at the sight of it.
This is not, said Monsieur De Roche Blanch, (for so was this Gentleman named)
What I intend to show you; and being informed that his Wife was in the Garden,
and desiring to surprise her before the had any notice of our coming, we went
thither together.

We found her in a Walk that had Maples on both sides of it, with her Son, and
three of her Daughters. I confess I was much surprised to see her so fresh and
beautiful, having Children which were marriageable, but much more when I saw
somewhat in her Face, that I seemed, I had seen before. For her part, she
beh^ld me with the same attention, and it may be with the same surprise.
Monsieur de Roche Blanch, laughed heartily to see us viewing each other with a
profound filence, which at length my Father broke: Monsieur de Roche Blanch,
faid he, had reason to promise me to show me that which I should never tepent
having seen. The Lady answered that Gallantry with a great deal of Civility,
and her Husband, after having sufficiently entangled both of them by this
Interview, and diverted himself, resolved to tell each of them, who the other
was. Ah Sir, said he to my Father, is it possible that you have forgotten
Mademoiselle de Grassans, and you Madam, Monsieur De Ponsins, (which was my
Fathers Name in his Youth, and my Brothers also, which he left but eight or
nine months since, to take that of Ombreval.) These words awakened both
Mademoiselle De Roche Blanch and my Father out of their surprise, so that
presently knowing one another, they began to embrance and Compliment each
other; but my Father was interrupted by the Civilities of the Son and Daughter
of Monsieur De Roche-Blanche.

To explain this Mystery, you must know, that my Father during the Wars in
Catalonia, where he performed his first feats of Arms, being in his Winter
Quarters, fell acquainted with Mademoiselle de Grassans, who was then one of
the most Eminent Personages of the Religion in all Guyenne, and who, not to
speak of her great Estate, had without dispute a perfect Beauty, with other
wonderful Qualities above her Sex. My Father loved her, and it may be his Love
would have been accepted if this Lady had not disposed of her Heart before to a
Man of great merit. Yet she still retained a great deal of Esteem and
Friendship for my Father; which length of time could not destroy, as she had
often told her husband, who knowing how acceptable it would be to her, brought
my Father to his house, to renew this Ancient Friendship. For although Mounsier
de Roche-Blanche was of Poiton, yet he came to live in Burgundy, because of a
great Estate which his Uncle had left him, who made him his Heir. And the
reason why my Father and he were not acquainted, as Gentlemen use to be,
especially when they are of one Religion, was because they they had both
changed their Names.

My Father was nobly entertained in this house four days, nor was this Journey
without any effect, for he was so much taken with the Son and Daughter of
Mounsier de Roche-Blanche, that he resolved on somewhat in their favor, which
yet he did not declare, ^^ause he expected to see them at his own house; (...)
M^^^si^^r de Roche-Blanche resolved in a short time (...) a Kinswoman, whose
Lands were but two (...) from ours, and to carry his Son and Daughter (...)
him* and at their return promised to be with us.

My Brother, in a short time was more in favor (...) my Mother than ever, and
was still urging her (...) c^ange her Confessor. I had also now much more (...)
than before, for I spent whole days in my Father Closet, who fully persuaded me
to renounce (...) Romish Superstitions, in which he proved unan^^rably there
was the greatest Folly and Impiety; ^^d seeing that I delighted much in
reading, would (...) give me the Key of his Closet, where I used to ^ad whole
days together, in the Books of Martyrs, (...) Mother thinking all the while
that I played at ^^ess with my Father and Brother, which indeed I ^^metimes
did. The Book of Martyrs fixed me in (...) design of embracing the reformed
Religion.

My Father perceiving me very earnest one day in (...) reading of this Book,
said to me, You may there (...) admirable Examples of Constancy, not only in
Men (...) Age and Resolution, but God has also perfected ^s Praise in the
weakness of Women and Children. ^^oung Virgins, such as you now are, who it may
be ^^ve been more tenderly educated than you have ^^en, and of higher Quality,
have joyfully endured ^^e most cruel Deaths; neither the heat of Flames ^or the
sharpness of Swords could overcome the ^agnanimity of their Hearts: Would you,
were you ^^lled to it, be as constant as those Young worthy ^adies were?
Father, answered (...), I confess I look upon Death as somewhat most dreadful
and horrible, specially a Death in the midst of Flames; and there is (...) Heart
so Generous, or Spirit Philosophical, but ^ust needs tremble at the thoughts of
such a Punish^ent: 'Twas not therefore by their own strength that these young
Virgins conquered Death and all (...) horrors, but by the Assistance of the
Holy Spirit so that Father, said I, how weak and fearful soe^^^ I am, yet I
firmly trust in our Lord, that if he c^ll (...) to such sufferings, he will give
me strength to overco^^ them all. Yes, my Daughter, answered he, yo^ reply is
very good, for we have seen that most lea^^ed Doctors and Bishops have basely
fallen, when po^^ Pesants, Women and Children have stood it out. Forth former
pres^ming too much on themselves, and the^ own strength, being left to
themselves have fallen whereas the others trusting only on their Saviou^ have
been maintained and strengthened, because the^ were built upon a rock.

It Is good, continued he, to be prepared for the mo^^ cruel sufferings; for
besides that when we are prepare^ for the greatest evils, we shall find them
less, and mo^^ tolerable when they are come upon us, than we im^^gin'd; we
shall also be thereby the better enabled (...) bear those lesser evils, which
would appear very gre^^ and dreadful if they found us unprepared. I foresee
th^^ you will be exposed to great temptations, you will be a^tacqued on the one
hand by the Flatteries, Caresses a^^ Tears of a Mother that loves you, and on
the oth^^ hand by the Persecutions of your Relations, Miseri^^ Imprisonment, or
Banishment, and it may be De^^^ it self, for all these things are the Lot of
new Co^verts. You will leave those Crosses of Gold, Silve^ Wood and Stone which
you now adore, to bear th^^ true Cross of the Lord, the Afflictions and
Reproaches of this World. I hope, said I, that God wh^^ has wrought in me this
Holy Desire, will not lea^^ his work imperfect, but will carry it on to his
Glo^^^ and my Salvation. This was all the Conversation w^^^ had at that time,
only my Father told me, that (...) wished that he could discourse with me again
abo^^ these things, but added, that he could not be able (...) do it so soon as
he desired; for, said he, I am co^^^ned for your Welfare more ways than one.
Here^^on^ withdrew, without making any reflection on ^ese last words. The mean
while the time passed ^^ay very insensibly, till the day came, which to (...)
pr^ved very fatal.

One day the Weather being very fair, my Father ^^d Mother went to walk in the
Garden, and invited ^^y Brother and me to accompany them, which we ^^d; and as
my Father and Mother were discour^^g of some new Knots and ^eds to be made in
the ^^^rden, we not much minding this discourse, left ^^em, and went to walk in
some of the shaded Al^^s; and after having talked of diverse things, the heat
^^o^ing insupportable, we went toward a Summer^^use that stood at the lower
end of the Garden, which my Father had been very careful to adorn ^^th variety
of curious Pictures, and in one Frame ^^ere was my Brothers Picture in the
habit of a War^or, and mine in that of an Amazon; nor could any Pi^^ures be
more exactly drawn than these were. We ^ere just about to have entered the
house, when we ^eard two Persons discoursing together, but their ^oice was
unknown to us. Our Curiosity led us to ^earken, and we immediately heard the
voice of a ^^an saying, Don't you remember the Painter that ^^dged at our
house, that told us he had drawn Moun^^^r de Ponsins, and Mademoiselle de St.
Phale, like a Warrior and an Amazon? What say you, Sister, of ^hese Eyes, of
this Mouth, of the Majestic air of all ^he Countenance? If your liberty
(answered a most ^harming voice) be lost by the sight of a Picture, what will
become of you when you have seen the Original, I believe you will certainly dye at
the first ^iew of it. But observe also the Picture of the Bro^her, which is no
less worthy to be taken notice of than that of the Sister. I believe, answered
the man's voice, the Picture of the Brother has had no less influence on you,
than that of the Sister has had on me; and if you dye not at the sight of it,
you (...) least be shrewdly wounded by it. You are not (...) wise, replied the
other voice, they are both in (...) Garden, and it may ^e hear all that we say,
let (...) go h^nce, least they surprise us busy about trifle You should never,
answered the Brother, draw (...) from th^^ lovely Picture, if I were not sure
to fi^^ the Original in the Garden; after which they imm^diately left the
house, and we made as though (...) had not heard a word of what passed.

In the mean time my Brother and I had a gre^^ desire to laugh and ra^lly each
other on what we ha^^ heard; we went not into the house as we at first
designed, but continued our walk, at length we percei^ed at the end of another
Ally, a Young Man lea^^ing a Damsel, both very richly clad, and of a mo^^
illust^^ous Gate and Carriage? this surprising re^counter, though at a
considerable distance, cause us all four to stop for some time, being under
(...) great Astonishment; after which we went forward and the nearer we
approached each other, the m^^^ lovely the new Comers appeared to us; at
length my Brother and the strange Gentleman doubled the^^ p^ce, and leaving us
both behind them, met in th^^ midst of the Alley where admiring each other,
(...) thousand Caresses and Civilities passed betwee^ them. In the mean time
the Lady and I aso me^^ and the more I looked on her the more beau^iful (...)
found her; and she also considered me very attentively, but we were
interrupted, she by my Brother, and I by hers, who came to salute us. What wa^
said by these Gentlemen, was spoken with so much disorder that we ea^^ly
perceived it; but for the Ladie^ part and mine, we accosted each other though
with much tenderness and sincerity, yet with more readiness of Spirit.

It Is easy to divine, that these two were Mo^^sier de Haut-Cour, and
Mademoiselle de Garisolles his Sister, the Son and Daughter of Mounsier and
Madam (...)-Blanc^e. I shall say nothing of these two (...) but only that
Mademoiselle de Garisolles is the ^e Picture of her Mother, in Beauty, Spirit,
and (...). As for the Brother, besides that he is a very (...) Person, having
nothing in his Carriage but what (...). Noble, and is loved and esteemed by all
that (...) him; I believe that we shall see him at Ham^^^^; for which reason I
shall not give you a more (...) description of him, and it may be should I do
(...) ^^u^n^^y judge me guilty of partiality.

We continued our Walk, without minding the (...) which was then extreme; My
Brother, who at ^^e first rencounter was smitten with the most vio^^^t Passion
in the World, as he since confessed, en^^^^n'd himself with Mademoiselle de
Garisolles, as (...) de Haut-Cour did with me; we had hardly ^^^un a discourse,
before a La^quey came to call us (...) the rest of the Company: I cannot
express the Ca^^^^es which Mounsier and Madam de Roche-Blanche ^^de me, nor the
Civilities that passed between them ^^d my Brother. My Mother was extremely
ra^hed at the sight of such admirable Persons as Moun^^^r de Haut-Cour and his
Sister were; this latter she ^^ssed an hundred times, and spoke the most
obli^^ng things in the World, to which Mademoiselle de ^^^^^^s always replied
like a Person of Spirit, and ^od sense.

Never was there more joy, or greater Union among ^^ght Persons, the Fathers
and Mothers laying aside (...) i^ Gravity, returned to the old Pastimes of
their ^^u^h, such as Dancing, Music and Plays, and by (...) ^^mulation, which
one would have thought con^^^^, but it was not, Mounsier de Haut-Cour
endea^^ured to insinuate into my Mothers Favor, and ^^^^ded, and my Brother
was very much respected (...) Madam de Roche-Blanche, with whom he had much
^^course in private. As for Mounsier de Roche-Blanche and my Mother, they were
presently gre^^ Friends, by the knowledge which they had in (...) secrets of
Nature. Mounsier de Roche-Blanche, (...) had been a great Traveller, and had
read much; (...) had also a very penetrating Spirit, informed my M^ther of many
curious Secrets; so that they resol^^^ to maintain a correspendence by Letters,
to imp^^^^ their secrets to each other, and resolve the Dou^^^ that might arise
about them; My Father also (...) Madam de Roche-Blanche had many long
Conversati^^ together: So that there was none of us but was (...) employed, and
took a great deal of Pleasure (...) be so.

I shall not give you a particular Account of all (...) Diversions we had for
an whole week together, (...) of the Masque that we played, in which Mounsier
Haut-Cour and his Sister appeared under the Fig^^ of Apollo and Diana, the
first in Cloth of Gold, (...) the latter in Cloth of Silver: My Brother
represe^^ed the God Mars, and I the Goddess of Arts (...) Sciences, for we had
those Habits in our house (...) fresh as they were the first day they were man
though that were in the days of Henry the 4th. A^^ my Father whom I had always
seen very Grave, (...) the first that put us upon these sports.

Yet were not the Hearts of all so filled with joy as hinder my Father, and
Madam de Roche-Blanche fr^^ contriving something in which we can never be too
^^^rious, which Mademoiselle de Garisolles and I thus di^^vered: Our two
Brothers and Lovers, I may well te^^ them so, one day rose very early in the
Morning ride a Hunting, so that we saw them not till towa^^^ the Evening. In
the mean time my Father intend to regale his Guests in a Grotte which was in
(...) Garden, where my Mother with Mounsier de Ro^^^-Blanche were, whilst his
Wife was with my Fath^^ in a green Cabinet on the other side. Madamois^^^ de
Garisolles and I walking by chance near the gre^^^ (...), I distinctly heard my
Fathers voice, and she (...) well knew that of her Mother. A sudden Cu^^^os^ty
of hearing their Discourse seized us both at (...), and being in a private
place we silently listened ^^^d heard my Father speak thus:

As for my Son (said he) I have no reason to be ^^^^^tis^yed with him; he has
Judgment and Spirit ^^ough, and his Inclinations lead him to Justice and
^^r^de, and to confess the Truth. I would fain see (...) provided for as soon
as possible, both because (...) my only Son, whom I would have married (...)
his Life: And because I fear least the Relati^^^ of my Wife engage him in a
Match I should (...) approve of. You know Madam with what Pas^^on I once loved
you, but Divine Providence has ^therwise disposed of us, but it may be it will
bless ^^d prosper what I am about to propose, viz. The ^arriage of my Son with
Mademoiselle your Daugh^^r. Your Proposal replied Madam de Roche-Blanche (...)
too advantageous, not to be accepted; and I be^^eve you will find a great deal
of comfort in having ^^^r with you. Yes Madam, answered my Father, ^^^e Virtues
of the Mother shine forth in the Daugh^^r; and this is what has made me desire
her to be (...) my house, and the inseparable Companion of my ^^on. It^^ay be,
Madam, in these times of Misery ^ou were at a loss how to find out a suitable
Match ^^^r her* You are in the right, (answered she) and ^^ou have fr^ed me
from a great deal of Care and ^rouble, the Lord bless our good Intentions; and
^ereupon they struck hands in token of Agreement, (...) Madam de Roche-Blanche
engaged her Husband (...) ^a^i^ie: And my Father promised the like for (...)
Wife: And shall we not, said my Father, discover ^is to our Children, who are
the Parties concerned? I ^elieve, answered Madam de Roche-Blanche, they are
^^^re troubled how to get our consent, than they will ^^e to find that we have
engaged them without discour^^ng them about it.

During this Discourse, which Mademoiselle de G^risolles and I distinctly
heard, she blushed extremely which much added to her Beauty, and fixed h^^ Eyes
in the ground, being ashamed to look me in the Face: But I drew her cut of this
surprise, by (...) bracing her, saying, My dear Sister let me give yo^ the
first kiss, she also embraced me, but with some confusion. But the Curiosity we
had to hear the rest of Madam de Roche-Blanche's Discourse, oblige^ us to break
off our Caresses for the present.

You have made me one Proposal, continued she I Will now make you another, about
another Marriage I understand what you mean, (said my Father (...) and consent
to it with all my Heart; it is of Monsieu^ your Son, with my Daughter; but in
this Ensine^^ we must use a great deal of circumspection. M^ Daughter is, as I
have told you, of the Reforme^ Religion in her Heart, but her Mother is a
bigotte^ Roman Catholic; I expect only a favorable opportunity to make my
Daughter declare her se^^ and in this I beg you to help me as need require^
with your Counsel and Assistance. The Relations (...) my Wife are powerful, and
she is almost Mad in the^ Point of Religion, but it may be we may find mea^ to
get her Consent. Although you did not engag^^ me, replied Madam de
Roche-Blanche, by the hop^ you give me, yet I were obliged to this as a
Christian, and let Madam your Wives Relations be a^ powerful, and have as much
Authority as they wi^^ they shall find that neither Monsieur de Haute-Cour no^
I will show our selves base in this matter, and her^ they struck hands again.

Well, my double Sister, said Mademoiselle de G^^rissolles to me, we have
nothing now wherewith (...) reproach each other, and you blush as well as I;
these words were followed with a second Embrace, afte^ which we found so
strange an Inclination to laug^^ that we were forced to leave the Place we were
(...) ^eft we should be discovered by the noise. As soon (...) we were gone a
considerable distance, and were (...) full liberty, we had a hundred pleasant
discourses ^n what we heard. In the mean time our two Bro^hers being returned
from Hunting, came to seek us (...) the Garden, where they found us. As soon as
we ^^w them, we had much ado to forbear breaking ^ut into another laughter,
however we conquered ^ur Inclination for the Present, and promised each ^ther
to discover nothing of what we knew; which ^romise you may easily guess how
well we kept.

My Brother taking Mademoiselle de Garissolles by ^^e ha^^^ walked into another
Alley, and left me ^ith M^e^eur de Haute-Cour, who looking earnestly ^^on
(...)* You are very pleasant, Modemoiselle, said ^e; how happy should I be, if
you could commu^^cate to me a little of that Joy that shines in your ^^es! Ah!
Monsieur, answered I, I cannot commu^ica^e this Joy to you only by seeing me:
If this were ^^ssible, (said he, interrupting me) I might also ^^mmunicate to
you what passes in my heart, but ^^u are so happy, and I so miserable, that
you cannot partake of my Melancholy, nor I of your Joy. ^ut (said I) since my
Joy has no other Founda^on but a Trifle, it may be your Melancholy is
oc^^sioned by somewhat of no greater Importance; so ^at you have no reason to
judge me very happy, ^^r your self very miserable. I feel (answered he) ^ine
own Misery, and none besides can be sensible (...) its Greatness. Yet (said I)
you are jocose, you ^^ng, you dance, you hunt, you perform a thousand ^easant
Actions; your Melancholy must either be ^ery bashful, not daring to show it
self; or a very ^^pocrite, that knows so well to conceal it self. It Is (...)
^ruelty of my Fate (said he) that I must laugh, ^^ng and Dance, whilst my
Heart groans under its ^ons, yet am I not so unhappy now as I shall be, ^^en I
have left this Castle. In the first Moment that I saw you, I loved you, and
Protested to do (...) Eternally. This is what I was willing to inform yo^ of,
it being but just that you should know before my departure for the Army, that
you are the fir^^ Person to whom I have given my Heart, and th^^ you shall be
the last; for either you must accept (...) my Vows, or the invisible Dangers of
the War, wi^ soon take me out of the World.

This Plain Declaration, abated the pleasant H^mour that I was in, in an
instant; and I could na^ for my life prevent discovering it. Is it, answered
(...) boldly, is it to Mortify me that you speak thus (...) but assure your
self that your Railleries (...) ^all never rob me of my good Humor: If, sai^
(...) wh^^ I have spoken offend you, I am sorry for (...), but (...) cannot
repent my having spoken it. I assure you (...) speak with as great sincerity as
ever any Heart wa^ possessed of: Do me the favor to believe it, it is (...)
that I ask at present, and if you find one word (...) what I have said to be
false, judge me eternally u^ (...) worthy of your Presence. I loved you as soon
a ever I saw your Picture, the sight of your admirabl^ Person augmented in my
heart a Passion that w^ never be Extinguished, and the Consideration of yo^
Virtue perfected what your Beauty had begun.

I had a great mind to seem angry; but the knowledge which I had of the
agreement between (...) Father and Mademoiselle de Roche Blanch, the gre^^
Love my Brother had for Mademoiselle de Garissoll^^ and the excellent qualities
of Monsieur de Haute-Cor^^ disarmed me in a moment, and left me quite sile^^^
You Will not speak to me, said he, with a passionate A^^ What would you have me
to say? (said I, looki^^ fixedly on him) since you tell me things so ne^ that I
am quite surprised at them: Let it soffi^^ you, that you are the only Man in
the World tha^ durst thus speak to me without angring me, th^^ esteem that I
have for your Person forces me t^^ keep within the bounds of Moderation, and
were (...) Soul capable of any Passion, you were him of all ^^ers to whom I
would give the preference in my ^art: But Madamoiss^lle, said he, may I hope
that any touch your illustrious Heart, it shall be me? I ^e you, said I, leave
to put the most favorable ^ce you please on my Words, after this ask no
far^^r. He would have cast himself at my Feet, the ^^ter to express his
thankfulness, but he was afraid being seen in this Posture. Indeed at that very
^^ant we perceived those four Persons, to whose ^thority we were subject, which
made us join

Brother and Madamoisselle de Garissolles; as soon we came together, we viewed
each other, and ^ged we had all been engaged in the same Ad^ture, nor could we
hinder our selves from smiling.

Brother who was more airy than Monsieur de (...)-Cour: Ah, said he, I imagine
why you laugh, ^^at our Cost, but this is not generous. We were (...) about to
have replied, when Monsieur and Ma^^ne de Roche-Blanche, my Father and Mother
came (...) to us: Though, said my Mother, the Discourses (...) have together,
may possibly give you some sa^^^tion, yet they are but Crude Meats; and
hereup^^e all walk into the House.

Never was there more good humor discovered at (...) Table than now, and I may
say, that the Parents passed their C^ildren. After all was ended, Mon^^ de
Roche B^^^^he, who was naturally of a chear^^ temper, I (...) and he, with
Monsieur and Ma^^ d' Ombreva^^ (...) ^ntertain my self at present (...)
Mademoiselle de St. (...): Agreed, said my Mo^^r, provided you leav^ (...)
Monsieur de Haut-Cour, (...) which he readily consented. Since, said my Fa^^^r,
you thus choose your Company, I Will take Ma^^oiselle de Garissolles, I know
^^shall displease some ^^ly, but I cannot help it. There are none left, (...)
Madame de Roche-Blanche to my Brother, but we two, shall I enjoy your Company?
I should be, reeplyed he, a very degenerate Son, should I not fin^ a singular
satisfaction in having the Honor of a Persons Company, for whom my Father has
had su^tender sentiments. After this Division we all wall^ed in an Alley of
Maples which encompassed the Ga^den, at a sufficient distance from each other,
an^ 'twas there that Monsieur de Roche-Blanche discourse^ me thus.

Mademoiselle, said he, as soon as ever I saw yo^ I could but frame two Wishes,
the one is, That yo^ would abjure the Superstitions of Rome, and the other is a
Wish so rash, and you may judge it selfis^ that I scarce dare speak it. As for
the first Wish^ answered I, it is Sir half accomplished, for I have such
advantageous Sentiments for the Religion which you profess, that I desire to
dye in it; and seein^ the Hour of Death is uncertain, I desire from th^^ very
moment to enter into your Church: As for your other wish, I can return no
answer to it, because I know not what it is. I am exceeding glad said he, to
hear your good Inclinations, which emboldens me to declare to you the other
part of my desire.

My Son, continued he, must want Eyes if he di^ not observe those Perfections
which I see in you, an^ I should never Pardon him a Fault so great, as 'two^^
be to refuse you the homage of his Heart, a Fa^^ of which I believe him
incapable of being guilty And I who am his Father, assure you, that what (...)
most passionately desire in the whole World, is th^^ you would accept of his
Vows. Daughter, added h^^ for it is impossible for me to call you otherwise, yo^
shall always find me a second Monsieur d' Ombrev^^ who shall be as tender of
you as it is possible for h^^ to be. Whilst he discoursed thus, I perceived th^^
blushes had seized my Face. Ha Daughter, (sa^^ he, smiling) pray tell me,
whether this blush whi^^ I see painted on your Face, be favorable to my
Intentions or no? You well know Sir, answered I, that I am not at my own
disposal, but depend on my Father and Mother, to whose Will I am obliged to
yield an entire Obedience. Well Daughter, (replied he) if those on whom you
depend, consent to what I desire, will you Obey them without any repugnance? Ah
Sir, answered I, you press me too hard. I Confess my Fault, (said he) I
earnestly desire to see you in my House; your Virtue, Prudence and Sweetness
have charmed me much more than your Beauty, Birth and Estate, so that I dare
promise you by God's assistance you will find there Pleasure and Peace all your
Life. Were it proper for a Father to boast of his Children, I might tell you
that my Son has all the qualities of a well-born Gentleman, nor would I say so
if the Public did not witness it; and I shall do that for him for your sake,
which I would not were he to Marry any other.

I being much entangled by this Discourse, were willing to divert it, and to
speak in favor of my Brother. You have no need, said Monsieur de Ro^he-Blanche
to speak for him; and I am extremely pleased with the Passion he has for my
Daughter, and I wish my Son were in as fair a ^a^ for the Establishment of his
Happiness as my Daughter is; but I have too long pryed into ^he secrets of your
Heart; but this was not the ^^nes Reason that made me desire to Discourse ^i^h
you; but this, Your Father having inform^d me of your Good Inclinations to
reject the ^^nish Errors, I offer you my Person, my House, (...) E^^ate, my
Family, and my Son for your assist^^ce in this matter; make as soon as you can
(...) A^juration, which cannot but turn much to ^o^r Advantage. After this we
had much other ^^^ourse, and he gave me a great deal of good Counsel, for which
I was very much obliged to him. At length we joined the rest of the Company,
and immediately after Mounsieur and Madan de Ro^he-Blanche, my Father and
Mother, left us, to Discourse among themselves, at which none of the younger
Persons were at all ^ro^bled.

I shall not repeat all that passed between us four, nor what Mounsi^ur de
Haute-Cour said to me but I must not pass over in silence a Discourse I had in
the Evening with my Mother, when every Body was retired to their Chambers. Well
Justine, said she, Monsieur de Haute-Cour loves you, and without doubt has not
failed of declaring it to you. My Mother had a mind to try whether I would not
be moved at so close a Question, but I had this day heard things so new both to
my Ears and Heart, that nothing was capable of purting me out of Countenance.
Monsieur de Haute-Cour (said I) is a Man both Gallant and Handsome, and thinks
it his Duty to show his Gallantry to all those of our Sex. And what Answer did
you give him, said she? An Answer (said I) so little serious, as assured him
that I was none of those Girls that suffer themselves to be easily transported
with Flatteries. You (replied my Mother) give me a Character of Monsieur de
Haute-Cour quite different from the Idea I had of him: I judged him wise and
honest, and found in him by that Discourse I have had with him all the
Characters of a M^^ of Spirit and Parts, and you would have me believe by the
Picture you draw of him, that he i^ one of those Impertinent Fools that Court
ever^ one they see: I am sure you now speak against your own sentiments. Such
as he is, (answere^ I coldly) are wise with the wise, and young wit^ the young.
My Mother returned no answer, bu^ only snook her Head and smiled. I took my
leav^ of her, and was about to withdraw, which she seeing, said, I have one
word more to say about Monsieur de Haute-Cour, whom I sind so honest and so
well qualified, that were it not for his Religion, I should wish him for your
Husband above all others in France. Mother, said I, don't you remember that you
have disposed of me already in favor of your Cousins Son? Ah, replied she, if
Monsieur de Haute-Cour would but turn Catholic, my good Kinsman of whom you
speak, should soon be forced to look out for another Match. At that instant an
untoward Fancy took me to abuse my Mother, which succeeded well enough. I Will
tell you one thing, Mother, added I, Monsieur de Haute-Cour is indeed a Man of
worth, and has an extreme Passion for me, and would do any thing to get me,
even what is in its self most difficult, and I have a great Esteem for him, but
I neither can, nor ever shall be able to love him, though he should turn Roman
Catholic for my sake: It may be I might have loved him, but my knowing that
you have destined me for your Re^ation, makes me very indifferent as to any
other Men but him: You have declared your Resolution, that I should in this be
Obedient to your Will, nor can my Inclinations turn as the Wind does. What say
you, Mademoiselle Justine, (replied my Mother in a rage?) know Insolent, that
I Will teach you to conform to my Intentions; Get out of my Presence, lest I make
you feel to what degree you have enraged me. Which I did, without re^urning a
word of Answer, for I knew her well enough.

Immediately I went to Bed, having my mind silled with the Idea's of those
things that this day happened unto me: I shall not relate all the Motions of my
Heart, the Principal of which was Love, to which my Soul now began to yield.
The admirable Qualities of Mounsieur de Haute-Cour made an impression on me;
the Knowledge that I had of my Fathers Will* and of my Mothers, the Passion of
my Brother, all these things together made me entertain an affection, which
otherwise I should not so soon have done: Besides, I saw that as Affairs stood
with me at present, I must dispense with some forms of Love. Nevertheless, I
had indifferent good rest this Night, the multitude of my thoughts did not
disturb my sleep, which they would have done, had I been under the Power of one
single Person.

I was but just awake when I saw my Mother come into my Chamber; Mother, said
I, I believe you are come to chide me for being so sluggish: No J^s^ine, said
she, I would have you lie still, and having commanded my waiting Gentlewoman to
leave the Chamber; Yesterday said she, you put me into a little Passion, but
let that pass; you spoke somewhat concerning Mounsier de Haute-Cour, which I
have thought on all this Night, you said that he loved you passi^nately, and
would do any* thing to get you. Do you think (said my Mother) that the Love he
has for you is capable of making him to embrace, the Catholic Religion? I
cannot (replied I) give you a positive answer in this matter, but I know that
his Love is as fervent as ever any was; and that he is not so obstinate an
H^gonot as my Father or Brother, I can assure you that he is one that will
hearken to good Counsel. Well Daughter (said she) seeing it is so, would you
not be glad to be Instrumental in saving so illustrious a Person as Mounsier d^
Haute-Co^r is? How meritorious will it be in the sigh^ of God, to be engaged in
bringing him into the true Church! On the other hand, how happy will you be in
having such a Husband as he is! Have you no Eye^ to see that Mounsier de Mass
(that was the Name of her Rela ion) has nothing that comes near Monsieur de
Haute-Cour? I have considered all these things faid I; but the Opinion which I
had that you designed me for Monsieur de Mass, makes me look on him in another
manner than I did on any other Man: but now I know your mind, favor me so far
as to tell me how I may please you? Ah Daughter, (replied my Mother) this is
not the Insolence that provoked me Yestrrday. This therefore is what I would
have you to do, to carry it so toward your Lover, that he may never lose the
Love he bears you; so that to get you, he may do whatever you would have him.
Go, think well of what I have said, and be sure keep it secret: Having said
thus, she embraced me, and left my Chamber.

My Brother was gotten into my Chamber I know not how, and hid himself behind
the Hangings, from whence he came forth as soon as he perceived my Mother had
left the Chamber: And is it thus, Sister (said he) that you are an Instrument
in perverting of Souls? Know, that what you are ordained to do ^s but the part
of a Spiritual Bawd, it is so indeed; but what Name shall we give it. when the
Spiritual Bawd must deliver her self Corporally, or to speak ^ut, must be
Married to him whose Mind she has Debauched from the Truth? Stay (Monsieur
Impudent, said I) till I am up, and we shall then see whether you will dare talk
as now you do, in the mean ^ime leave my Chamber: Ha Sister (said he) he that
^id not know you would think you very Angry, but (...) am not come hither to
quarrel with yo^. Me^hinks knowing my Natural Temper, you should ^ave put a
better interpretation on my words, than ^o take them as though they had been
spoken out ^f Malice. I am come to take you for my Confident, and to be yours.
We^^l discourse of that by and by ^^d I, this Chamber is not proper for such a
Con^ersation, do you be in the lower Hall, and I Will meet ^ou there in a short
time: my Brother hearing this, ^ent out of my Chamber the same way that he came
in. Immediately my waiting Gentlewoman came to dress me, after which I went
down to the Hall, where I found my Brother expecting me.

As soon as he saw me, he said, I must confess that since the coming of
Mounsier de Roche-Blan^h^ and his Family, I have found a great alteration in my
Person. I believe, (said I) smiling, it is only Madamoise^le de Ga^i^olles has
wrought this change, her Father and Mother having contributed nothing to it.
It Is true, said he, but do you think that it is only the Beauty of this Charming
Girl, that has capt^vated me, her Spirit, her Humor, and a thousand other
rare qualities which she possesses, have conqu^red me; and so conquered me
too, that if I am not united to her in an indissoluble Bond, I shall never
enjo^ any Contentment in this World. As far as I see (answered I) I know more
good News re^ating to you, than you do your self: And why, said he, wicked
Creature that you are, did you not tell it me? And why, said I, are you grown
so proud, that since you have had a Mistress, you disdain to remember that you
have a Sister; and immediately I told him all that I had heard in the Garden.
And Mademoiselle de Garisolles, said he, was she with you? Yes Brother, said I*
she was: And what said the, (said he) with a kind of Transport? Mademoiselle de
Gariolles* said I, heard all the Discourse, as a Person of much Merit and
Virtue.

I had no sooner spak^ these last words, but she came into the Hall with her
Brother; Ah, (said she,) I have surprised you both in a very earnest
Conference. It Is true, said my Brother, my Sister has told me some things so
pleasant, and in which I am so much concerned, that any other besides your self
would have very much disobliged me to have interrupted me. Then we^ll withdraw
again, said she* no Mademoiselle by no means, (replied my Brother) I must
impart our secret to you, though you knew it long before I did. You have done
amiss, said she to me: I have done like a good Sister, said I, who could no
longer forbear to assure a Brother whom she loves, of his happiness; my
greatest trouble was how to do it conveniently: But -- But said Mounsier de
Haute-Cour, interrupting us, I have a Sister as good and faithful as Mounsier
de Ponsins. Mademoiselle Garisolles and I looked on each other, and should
possibly have reproached each other, had we not been both guilty: At length we
judged it the best way to pardon each other mutually. We renewed our Amity, and
our Brothers swore an Eternal Union: for my part, I could no longer conceal my
sentiments for Moun^^er de Haute-Cour. And the beautiful Eyes of Mademoiselle
de Garrisolles, spoke so plainly in favor o^ my Brother, that 'twas easy for
him thence to judge of the Motions of her Heart.

I shall not relate all the Discouse that passed this day, which was the last
of Mounsieur and Madam de Roche-Blanche's abode with us. My Brother had a
private Conference with Mounsieur de Haute-Cou^, concerning the Method they
ought to take to deceive my Mother. He was with her about an hour and half in
the Afternoon, and she seemed very well satisfied with the Conversation she had
with him. We all of us went into the Garden, but were nothing so cheerful as
formerly, the thoughts of a separation spoiling all our Mirth. My Mother had
another Discourse with Mounsieur d^ Haute-Cour, and one with Mounsieur de
Roc^-Blan^he. My Father e^tertuned himself with Mademoiselle de Garisolles and
^e, and my Brother with Madam de Roche-B^an^ ^; what passed it is not worth
relating. The next Morning being come, our dear Guests, after many tender
Adieu's took Coach to return, and left u^ v^ry well satisfied with their
Company, but very much ^fflicted at their departure.

My B^other having acquainted my Father with my Mothers d^gsins on Mounsieur de
Haute-Co^^, ^e judg^d the c^njunc^ure very favorable, and th^^ 'twas si^ ^o
an^use her with some such hopes, with the d^i^g o^ which I were entrusted. My
Brothe^ h^d communicated his thoughts to Mounsieur (...) Ha^^^-^o^r, who acting
in concert, wrote me such Passiona^e Letters, as though he would have stuck at
not^ing to obtain me. My Brother on the other hand, al^hough be was assured of
my Fathers Consent with respect to Mademoiselle de Ga^i^^^; yet he prayed my
Mother to speak of it to my Father, who returned a favorable answer In a word,
all things went well enough, when I sound my se^f u^^erly s^ript in a moment,
of all that Tran^^^ity which I enjoyed, expecting a favorable opp^^^^^i^y ^o
make my Declaration.

This stroke so sad, that I have reason for ever (...) lament it, was the Death
of my Father, with w^om I may truly say, all my Joy oved too, and a^l my
pl^a^ures are buried. He sell sick some (...) after the departure of Mounsieur
de Rocht-(...). His Distemper was so sharp and violent, that we begun to doubt
of his Life almost ^as ^^on as he c^mplained; and the first day that he ^^^k
his Bed, he foretold that he should never rise m^re. This sudden and violent
Sickness so overwhe^^^d my Mothers Spirit, that we thought she would have
accompanied my Father, who in the height of his Distemper, discoursed always
with the same Moderation and Judgment that he used when he was in perfect
Health. My Mother was so weakened, that she could be carried but twice to see my
Father, and that with all imaginable Inconveniences; yet she would have me
always with him, to serve him; and I believe that God ordained it should be
thus, that I might have opportunity to discourse more familiarly with my
Father, who spoke such things as I shall never forget. Particularly on a
certain day when he saw me by his Bedsside, he spoke thus:

My dear Daughter, I should joyfully leave this Life, if I saw your Body out of
the sink of Superstition, as your Mind is. I always thought God would have made
use of me in so good a Work, but I now see that in his Eternal Council he has
decreed to finish this great Work by another hand, f^r which I bless his H^ly
Name, as indeed we ought to bless him for all things: And because I feel my
Life stealing away by little and little, and that in a short time you will see me
only a dead Carcass, take care to remember and profit* by what you shall now
hear.

Never had any one the design that you have, and persisted in it, but found
himself surrounded with a multitude of Calamities. When men resolve to embrace
the Truth, they must also resolve to enter into a vale of Tears, and into a
Path covered with Thorns; that is to say, they must resolve to bear such hard
and cruel Trials and Afflictions, as that ^twere impossible to bear them
without the special Grace of God. This has made many who began to walk in the
way of Truth, withdraw upon the sight of the many Labors, Miseries, and
Reproaches wherewith they must encounter, and return to their old course of
Mirth and Pleasure, whose End is yet wee^ing and gnashing of teeth.

How many things must you suffer, before you can put your good Design in
Execution! It may be it will be discovered; it may be your Mother when she once
hears of it, will cause you to be carried by ^orce into a Nunnery, besides
other severities which ^hee^l use toward you. It may be also your Relations
will try by all imaginable Flattery and Kindness to turn you from your
Re^olution, and will not have recourse unto rigor, till they find all their
promises and allurements uneffectual. Try your self, J^stine, whether you are
able to resist this variety of temptations; for if you find you cannot bear
these Trials, 'twere better for you to abide what you are, than after having
embraced the Truth to Apostatize from it, by which* you would far more
grievously scandalize men, and offend God.

But suppose you escape all those Miseries and Violences wherewith you are
threatened by the Papists, yet you must undergo others from the Reformed, which
are no less terrible and inevitable: Don't expect that the Integrity of their
Manners should always correspond with the Holiness of their Religion. You Will
find amongst them neither that Piety nor Charity, nor Modesty nor Patience, nor
Weanedness from the World, which you may fancy they have. Very few amongst them
will take notice of what you have done; and such as do, will yet do it with so
much feebleness, coldness* and as it were constraint, that you I be in great
danger of being scandalized to see their hearts so destitute of Zeal as they
are.

You* (my Daughter) have been tenderly Educated in ^^ur Fathers House, of a
very Ancient and Illustrious Family in Provence, nor were you in likelihood to
have left your Fathers House, unless to enter into that of an Husband worthy of
you: But ala^, I ^^ar you^l find it very hard to be forced from your Country
and Inheritance, to go into strange Countries, where you may be attacqued with
Misery or Sickness, or the persecutions of your Relations, or it may be with
all these Evils together. Can your Heart which has been used to Grandeur,
Delicacy, and P^ea^ures, endure to be in Contempt, by reason of that Want and
Indigence to which you may be reduced? will it not regrett the Oynions and
Fleshpots of Egypt? Have you Resolution enough to bear the being thrown from
the highest Prosperity, into the lowest Abyss of Adversity in a moment? Speak,
Justine, are you re^lved to bear all these, and it may be such evils as ^re yet
more terrible, which it may please God to ^y you with?

One of the first Reflections (said I) that I ever ^ade after I began to read
the Holy Scripture, was, That I must prepare to bear the Cross of the Lord
jesus, if I would follow him* and although I repre^ented to my Mind all the
Tribulations which may ^efall us, under the most terrible Idea's in the world,
^et they could not hinder me from desiring to be ^oyned to our Lords Invisible
and Catholic Church.

God strengthen you (continued my Father) in ^his Holy Resolution, and support
you by the effi^acy of his Holy Spirit. If you earnestly pray un^o him* he will
bestow on you such Consolations as ^i^l make you regard all your Afflictions as
light and easy. Remember Daughter, that nothing can be more honorable than to
abandon the Pomps and Pleasures of the World, to follow Jesus Christ in
Reproach and Shame; and nothing can be so ex^e^lent and lovely as to range your
self under his Conduct, in a time when such as are his seem about ^o leave him.
Let no difficulties discourage you, and though your whole Life should be spent
in Contempt and Misery; yet your Troubles are but ^or a Moment, compared to
that Glorious Immor^alit that waits for you.

I repre^^nt these things to you in their blackest Colors, to prepare your
Spirit for Constancy under ^h^ most terrible Afflictions, but it may be God
^ill graciously prevent your being exposed to them, ^et it is good to be
prepared for whatever may hap^en* You have often found a great deal of Plea^ure
in reading the History of the Martyrs, it is the ^est Book you can read next the
Holy Scriptures. Continue still to read it, you will therein find what will
instruct and confirm you in the Truth; you^l also find Examples of all sorts of
Persons, to help yo^ to persevere in the true Religion to the death.

During this Discourse of my Father, I fell on my knees and kissed his hands,
not being able to spea^ a word: But my Father went on, and laying h^^ right
hand on my Head, gave me his Blessing in these words. My Daughter, said he, God
who bestows excellent favors on such dying persons as be loves, has in a
manner absolutely Incomprehensible to Flesh and Blood, revealed to me, That you
will accomplish all my hopes concerning your entire Conversion, and your
perseverance in that Truth which you have already internally embraced;
wherefore I beseech our good Lord, abounding in Eternal mercies, that he would
bless you with Spiritual Blessings through Jesus Christ our Lord; that his
Power may shine forth in your Infirmities, and his Praise in your Weakne s;
that he would make you victorious over all the S^^a^agems and Ambushes, and all
the open Violences of your Enemies; that he would be ^our Father, and his Holy
Spirit your Guide in al^ your ways, to the end that you may finish your l^f^ to
the Glory of your God. Heavenly Father, (said ^e, lifting up his hands,) I
recommend to thy Protection this poor Sheep, which thou have begu^ to draw to
thy self. Deliver her from the Mouths of ravenous Beasts; she is thy Creature,
she is thine Image; she has been redeemed by the precious Blood of thy
well-beloved Son, leave not thy work imperfect, but vouchsafe her an entrance
into thy Spiritual Sheepfold, that she may have an assurance of entering into
thy Glory. Hear, O Lord, the Prayers of thy dying Servant, who calls on thy
Name through the Merits of thine only Son our Savior.

When my Father had ended, I again kissed his hand, and had only Power to say
thus. Monsieur, said I, I will not (said he) have you call me thus, I am your
Father. Father, then said I, I am so entirely resigned to your Will, that I am
ready to o^ey you immediately, without any farther delay or precaution, happen
what will. No, my Child, (said he) you must know that true Piety does not make
Persons rash in their Actions: I Will give your Brother such Directions as I
judge fit, do you obey him, and you will do well enough.

At this very instant my Brother came into the Chamber: I am very glad to see
you, said my Father, to recommend your Sister to your Care, to whom you must
for the future be a Father, whatever it cost you. Mounsieur and Madam de Roche
Blanch will assist her in making her Abjuration, which as soon as she has
done, take care to send her into Germany to our Relations there. I know your
Mother will be mightily enraged at it, but it is better to obey God than Men.
Use such secrecy in what you do, as a business of this importance requires;
especially let none know which way your Sister is gone, nor where she is: I
have taken Care that you shall be sufficiently provided with Money for this
Expedition: In other things follow your own judgment. Above all, beg God that
he would direct you to such means as are most proper for the accomplishment of
this Design. As for other Affairs, follow my Directions; especially show all
imaginable respect to your Mother, as your own Duty, her Virtue, and that
tender Love she has for you requires.

My Father would have continued his Discourse, but was seized with a fainting
Fit, without doubt occasioned from his speaking beyond his strength. I was so
affrighted at it, that I cried out so loud that all the Servants of the House
ran to our assistance. At length he revived again, and required that a Minister
might be called. I have (said my Brother) sent for one, but he cannot possibly
be here this Night: Well (said my Father) this shall not hinder my dying like a
good Christian. He desired to see my Mother, and I went to call her, and she
came into my Father's Chamber so pale and disorder d, that I thought she would
have Dyed before him. Madam, (said he) this is the time, the Moment of our
Separation, after having lived a long time very happily together: I desired to
see you for two Reasons, the one to thank you for the Care you have taken of
me, and that Affection you have shown me; and the other that you might be a
Witness of my Death, and that you may judge whether it be possible that such as
dye in the Lord, as I am sure through Grace I shall, should be damned, as your
Confessors oblige you to believe.

My Mother could not hear these sad words without sinking down on my Father's
Bed, through Grief: Alas, Sir, said she, may I not Dye with you! What should I
do in this World, having Iost you, after having lived so sweetly with you! I
Conjure you, Sir, (said she) if I have failed in serving you according to your
Merit, that you would Pardon my Ignorance. I have, Madam, (said (...) Father)
no reason at all to complain of you; on the contrary, I have been very happy in
you, and therefore I Command my Children to obey you to the Death, (saving in
Matters of Conscience) and if they do otherwise, they shall be d^prived of my
Blessing. But, Madam, I must end this Discourse to think on what is much more
important, for time is very precious; and remaining f^^nt for some time, and
having taken a small draught of a Cordial Potion, he with an intelligi^le Voice
Prayed thus, after he had desired my Mother to be attentive to it, and not to
be displeased with his words.

A Lorighty God, and Merciful Father of our Lord J^^^s Christ, I humbly
prostrate my self before (...) ^^^ine Majesty, to thank thee for the many
Fa^o^s ^ods and Protections thou have vouchsafed me during ^he whole Course of
my Life, so that I have nothing else (...) say, but O Lord thy Blessings are
upon me, what shall I render thee for all thy Mercies; and yet O my God I have
offended thee a thousand ways, my sins ex^^ed been a continual series of
Iniquities; I have sinned against thee, O Lord, even against thee, and have
de^^^ed to have languished under the severest strokes ^^^^^y ^igour; if thou
should deal with me as thou (...) Justice might do; I must necessarily
bear in my So^y and Soul the marks of thy most dreadful Anger and Wrath: Yet
though my sins have abounded, thy Grace does much more abound, and has
surpassed thy Justice: Wherefore what terror soever my sins cause in ^^e, yet I
trust that through Jesus Christ my Savior, they shall all be pardoned, and
remembered no more; ^^at the Blood of thy Son shed on me shall cleanse me ^om
all my filthinesses, and that I shall with boldness appear before thy Throne,
which will be to me a Throne of Grace, and my Heart anticipating my Deliverance
from this Prison of the Body of Death, flies toward thee:

O, God of Hosts, how pleasant are
The Tabernacles of thy Grace!
How full of most refreshing Joy
Lord is thy glorious Dewlling Place!
My Soul does long, yea faints for
The Courts and Dwellings of the Lord,
My Heart and Flesh cry after thee,
The living and the Holy God.
Break those feeble B^nds, O my God, that bind (...) yet to the World, raise up
my Soul to thee, and let the sacred Inspirations of thy Holy Spirit accompli --

He would have gone on, but could not then: He only said to my Brother,
Ferdiaand, read me the 17th. Chapter of St. John, with the 25th, 26th, 27th.
Psalms, in prose, and as my Brother read these words of the 27th. Psalm, Seek
my Face, says the Lord, my Father rendered them in Verse after him:

My Heart O God runs after thee,
I humbly beg thy Grace;
Then seek my Face, said thou to me,
Lord, I will seek thy Face.
Immediately his Speech and Life left him. My Brother who had 'till now
suppressed his Grief, gave himself up to it, and fainted under it, as also did
my Mother and I: Some of the Servants that were come into the Chamber, used
their utmost whole House was full of nothing but grief and sorrow. My Father
governed his House with such Order and severe Sweetness, that all the Servants
loved him, and yet trembled in his Presence: They were therefore exceeding
sorrowful for the loss of so good a Master: But besides, they saw the Wise
little different from her Husband, and the Son and Daughter from their Father.
My Brother being of the strongest Nature, was the first that recovered, and
came to himself, and took a special Care of my Mother, and also of me, who was
longer reason to be, for I had been happy, had I dyed that very moment.

Never was there greater desolation than that my Fathers Death caused in our
Family; my Mother spent whole Days and Nights in Complaints, my Brother who was
of a very active Spirit, seemed ^o have lost all his Vivacity, and for my part
I led (...) very languishing Life, hoping that in the end I should be
overwhelmed with Grief, and thereby ^scape the Miseries which my Father had
foretold, those Predictions the event fully confirmed. In ^he mean time my
Brother took Care for my Fa^hers Funeral, which was a very honorable one, and
at which were many persons of the highest Quality, whom my Fathers Virtue and
Integrity had ^ade his Admirers.

This was but the beginning of my sorrows, for I ^on sound my self in a
Labyrinth of such pressing ^siscries, that it is a kind of Miracle, that I could
^ear up under them; for I found my self at once ^eprived of my Father by Death,
of my Brother (...) Absence, and separated from my Mother by an ^mplacable
hatred which she had conceived against ^^e, which it seemed probable she would
never ^y aside.

My Mother had provided me with a Waiting-^aid that was a Gatholick, and
withal the most wic^ed and dangerous Hypocrite in all the Kingdom. ^y Father
and Brother had often advised me to be^are of her, which I did, so that she
could never now what passed between my Father, my Brother ^^d me, what
diligence soever she used to pry into (...) which vexed her exceedingly; for my
Mother ^^d placed her with me as a Spy over all my acti^^s, and had promised
her a large Reward if she ^ould discover what she knew, both concerning me
(...) particular, and all the rest of the House. Yet was ^once so imprudent as
to lock up some Papers in ^er sight in a little Box, (with the Key of which
would never trust her) which Papers were written with my Brothers hand, and
contained the Discourse^ that he had with the Father Matthew, and some Notes on
diverse points of Controversy.

When I was sick my Maid resolved to steal m^ Key from me, and I was so low,
that I neglected a^^ my ordinary Precautions, nor did I when I opene^ my Box
observe that any thing had been taken ou^ of it. In the mean time this cunning
Slut Soubrett^^ knowing that should she have carried these Paper^ to my Mother
during the height of her affliction^ she should not at all please her, did what
was fa^ more devilish, carrying these Papers her self to the Father Matthew,
adding what she thought fit b^ word of Mouth. The Father having these Papers
resolved to lose no time, to revenge himself on my Brother, and to prevent me
from Executing my designs.

The first thing he did was to visit my Mother and only discoursed her in the
General, and at (...) distance, without discovering all that he had in h^^
mind. My mother took but little notice of what he said, whilst he was with
her, but having better considered it after his departure, sent to desire his
Return; and the Good Father, who Expected such a message, would not let slip
the opportunity, but made a full discovery of what he knew. If I knew my mother
aright, I believe that she had made him acquainted with all that she was
resolved to do especially about my Marriage with Monsieur de Haute-Cour, and
being very well assured that the Father Matthew was an old crafty Fox, I
believe that h^ she wed my Mother that she was abused. Yet because I cannot be
positive in this. I shall only discourse (...) the Consequences of this affair.

I observed, that my mother did not seem so much afflicted as she used to be,
and that she converse not with me or my Brother with her ordinary (...)
miliarity, and that she would sometimes enter hasti^^ into my Chamber, and view
all places in it, and that she had frequent discourses with my maid. All these
things made me open my Eyes, and begat in me a suspicion lest I were betrayed
by this Wretch. My Brother also was gone from home, being obliged to look after
the affairs of the Family, so that I had none that I could confide in. At
length I was desperately allarmed by one of our servants, who came to me and
said, I know not, Mademoiselle, what mischief is contriving in this Castle, I
see some preparations which don't please me; and your Waiting-mard was heard to
say, That within three days we should see a Great alteration here. At the first
hear^ng of this, I was terribly surprised, and knew not what to say, but at
length I said to this Person, Thou know where my Brother is, take the best
Horse in the Stable and go after him, and whatever business he is about, let
him lay it all aside, and return immediately hither. If you please (said ^he)
to write a Note to him, it will be better; upon which I hastened into my
Chamber to write ^t, which I did in these words.

My most Dear Brother,
YOur presence is so necessary at this time, that if you delay your Return but
one Hour, you hazard the ^osing a Sister that loves you better than her Life.
Adieu my Brother, I have more need of your assistance than ^ou have of my
words; nor have I time to tell you all ^hat's done in this place.


I had left the Door of my Chamber open, and my Traitress seeing that I wrote,
hid her self, ^o see what I would do after I had written, and seeing that I
delivered a Billet to the Servant, ^ho was ready to take Horse when I brought
it him, she ran and acquainted my Mother with it, who sent after him
immediately to stop and search him; but he was gone too far, so that 'twas to
no^ purpose When my Mother saw this, she doubted lest I had discovered some of
her Designs, for which reason she looked athwart on me for a long time without
saying a word to me: She had also fresh Discourses with my Maid, who did such
things in my Presence that I had but too much reason to suspect that I was just
upon the brink of ruin I spent this Day in a great deal of perplexity;
foreseeing the Afflictions that were like to befall me, which made me employ
all my time in reading the Holy Scriptures and in Prayer.

About Sunset my Mother sent for me into the Garden to speak with me there.
This Message filled me with trembling and terror, yet I went down to her. I
found my Mother alone in one of the Alleys, as soon as she saw me, she looked
on me with Eyes that seemed to sparkle with Indignation, yet said nothing to
me, as neither did I to her; so that for some time we both were silent. At
length, your heart is very proud, Mademoiselle Justine, said she, to oblige me
to speak first. Oh good God, (said I) what may this mean! is it my part,
Mother, to speak before you? or not rather to expect your pleasure? She made no
reply, but continued on her Walk, and I with her. But immediately I saw two Men
enter the Garden, whom I knew not, (whereof one seemed of a good Carriage.) as
also my Maid with some other men, bringing with them such things as belonged to
me.

I saw all these things without being able to gue^ what they meant, when my
Mother asked the^ aloud, whether all things were ready? Yes Madam answered the
Gentilest, they are. Then my Mother turning toward me, spoke to me in such term
as were most bitter and cruel. Ungrateful and per^dious Daughter, said she, You
have made it you business to deceive your Mother, the day is comin which I Will
revenge me on you, for all the Treasons which you and your Brother have acted
against me, and hinder your damnable Projects. An Iron Grate shall secure you,
and answer for all your actions during your life. Go, follow those Men, to whom
I have given Orders what to do, unless you would have them dragg you to the
place where I would have you be. The Passion that seized me on these ^ast
words, quite transported me. Drag me! said (...), your Anger, Madam, has
blinded you; and ^ifting up my hand to Heav^n, I said, I call God (...) witness
of the perfidiousness and treachery which has been acted against me, and I
pray him to de^iver me out of your hand, which I hope he will do. ^arewell
Madam, after this baseness the worst place ^n the World will be better to me
than to be with ^ou: And having said thus, I turned about, and gave my hand to
the Gentilest of the two, and went out of the Garden by a Gate that led toward
^he Highway, where I found a Coach with four Horses, and four Troopers to
guard it: I went into the Coach with my Maid and the two Men. It ^as above two
hours after before I spoke one word, and I was so overwhelmed with weariness,
vexati^n and rage against my Ravishers, that I did not ^oncern my self to
enquire who they were, nor what ^^d obliged them to take my Mothers part, and
be^ome the Ministers of her Violence.

My Maid was grown so impudent, that she durst ^sult over my Miseries, laughing
at my very face. ^ake Courage, Mademoiselle, (said she) your con^tion is not
not so bad as you imagine. It Is bad to ^tremity answered I coldly, in that I am
obliged (...) have before my Eyes such a Traiteress as you ^e; and which it may
be has not her like in all ^e World. See (said she) what Persons get by ^ing
their Duty! they are abused for doing good, ^u are only enraged against me
because. I opposed your Intentions, which would have ruined your So^^ If (said
I) you make not this insolent Wretch ho^^ her Tongue, I Will throw my self out of
the Coa^^ though it cost my Life. Ah Mademoiselle, said she* you speak very
loftily, as though you were still (...) Ponsine, it may be you would not do
amiss to use your self to other Language. The insolence o^ these words made me
turn pale with Anger, which one of the Men perceiving, imposed silence on
So^brette, If you hold not your Tongue, (said he to her) I shall find a means
to force you to it, which you^ may repent of: This threatening stopped her mouth.

During this, the Night grew so dark, that in (...) Wood through which we were
to pass, the Coachman mistook his way. The Troopers that guarde^ us called on
all sides, to find some House where the^ might refresh themselves; but none
answered their Calls but the Echo of the Wood: At length 'twas resolved to
spend the Night where we were; the two men had the discretion to leave the
Coach* after having shut it fast, rather to prevent my flight, than to secure
me from the injuries of the Cold and Wind as they pretended. I had this day
endured so many fatigues, and had taken so little rest some Nights before, that
I slept very soundly till the Morning, when our Atteddants were in (...)
greater trouble than before, seeing themselves in (...) unknown Country in the
midst of a vast Forest, the Weather very misty, the ways exceeding bad,
without Guide or Victuals, and without hopes of being able to reach to any
other place.

They unharnessed the Horses of the Coach, and unbridled those of the Troopers,
who were mo^ happy than their Masters in that they had when with to fill their
Bellies. This Accident rejoiced me exceedingly in my Troubles: Well, my Friend^
(said I) you have carried me away by force to (...) me with hunger: I shall
take my Death very p^tiently, for I desire nothing else but to have you ^eep me
Company; this I am sure goes against the ^^ain with you. My Maid was upon the
point of ^espair; in the mean time I had the comfort of in^lting over her in my
turn. Wretch that thou art, ^^d I. thou art the cause of my Death, but
righte^us Heaven will that thou dye with me; and where^s I shall receive
Consolation and Joy, thou art to ^xpect nothing else but the Torment due to thy
Treasons.

These words filled her with Confusion and Depair, for she had not a word to
answer. After some ^^me we again set forward; but 'twas past Noon by ^^y Watch,
when we found our selves in the same ^^ace, and the mist was so thick that we
could dis^ern our way no better than in the Night. At length was resolved to
send our four Troopers into four ^arts of the Wood to enquire the way, and to
get (...) some Victuals. Three of them returned to us, ^^ter having rid a great
way, and taken a great deal ^f Pains to no purpose, 'Twas then that I believed
(...) earnest that we should be all starved; and having ^ten but little for two
days before, I was so very weak ^at I sainted, and they had a great deal of
trou^^e to bring me to my self, though they threw ^undance of water on my Face.

Just as I was recovered, the fourth Trooper re^rned* and told us that about a
League and half off, ^e should find a good Village; whereupon I went ^^to the
Coach again, but not having strength to (...) upright, I was forced to lie
along; those that ^ept me Company placed themselves as well as they ^uld, that
they might not incommode me; and (...) the end of some Hours we came to the
Village, (...) the great joy of all our Company besides my ^f. In this Village
we had some New Adventures, ^^t you must give me leave to deferr the Relati^n
of them 'till another time.

CHAP. V.
THe whole Company being again met, one (...) them desired Mademoiselle de St.
Phale to pursue her History; for, said she, we left you in (...) Wood, dying
for Hunger, favor us so far as to acquaint us how you recovered your Life and
Liberty.

There are some, answered she, that take such (...) Delight in relating their
Miseries, that when they find no Men to hear them, will utter their Complaint^
to inanimate Creatures: I am not of this Humor, for it is to me a doubling of
my Afflictions to relate them; yet I will deny my self to please you, if you
can indeed find any pleasure in hearing that which so little deserves to be
heeded by you.

The fourth Trooper that was sent to enquire the way, had indeed better success
than the other three, but was so imprudent as not to take with him any
Victuals, or a Guide to direct us, which (...) knews not whether to call an
Happiness or Misery, because I rather desired Death than feared i^ I lay in the
Coach employed only in Prayers and spiritual Meditations. Be of good Courage
Mademoiselle, said the elder of those two to whom m^ Mother had committed me,
we are told there i^ a Village within a League and half, in which yo^ may rest
and refresh your self. I hope, said (...) I shall dye before I come thither,
and that thereby God will del^ver me from my Mothers Valence, and you from the
reproach of being its Ministers. Madam d^ Ombreval, answered he, loves yo^
tenderly, and what she has done is only o^t^^ fear, least you should ruin your
self, and she d^^^ires nothing else but to place you where you may entertain
better Thoughts than those you had, and which have obliged her to use you as
she does. Though these words were somewhat insolent, yet I contented my self
with saying, That God is righteous, and will sooner or later reward men
according to their wicked Designs.

Possi^ly you may wonder that my Mother should have so far lost her reason, as
to abandon an only Daughter to the discretion of two men, four Troopers, and a
Chambermaid whose damnable wickedness she well knew. I must say thus much in
her ^ustification, that these two men were in a sense al^^d to our house, that
the Elder had always a great ^eal of passion for my Mothers interest, who for
^er part loved him and did him many kindnesses: (...) that he whose Name was
Monsieur de Rabours, ^aving but a mean Estate, and being driven to ^ome
straits, had reason to keep in m^ Mothers Fa^our, who paid him well for his
Services. My Mo^her sent for him, discovered her Design to him, and furnished
him wi^h necessary Directions and Pro^sion for carrying me into a Cloister till
further ^rder. The Younger was a very honest Youth, (...) a good Car^iage, and
the others Nephew, and ^ould ^ain have discoursed with me, had I not been (...)
carefully watch'r by his Uncle and my Maid

The Evening approaching, my Maid left the ^ach, and the Uncle went to give
some Direction to ^e Troopers and the Coachman for their being ready ^e next
Morning, which gave the young Rabours ^e opportunity of speaking thus. I^ you,
Mada^o^^elle (said he) have been deceived, so have I, (...) I could never have
imagined that they had e^^ged me in so base an action as this is. To con^^ce
you of my Repentance, command me any ^^g in which I may serve you, and I Will
readily do ^as become a Man of Honor. Do you, said I, speak sincerely? for
after such baseness I have reason to distrust the whole World. If I deceive
you, said he, may Heaven crush me with its Thunder, but my Actions shall free
you from suspecting my sincerity. And for my part, said I, if God be so
gracious to me as to free me out of these Troubles by your Means, I promise you
as great an acknowledgment as you can expect from a Virgin of my Birth. Go, do
the best you can, I give you full power to take what Course you can for my
Deliverance.

We had hardly ended this short Discourse, when my Maid returned, and
immediately after the Old Rabours, and a Countryman with him. Here Is a good
Man said he, which is as it were an Angel sent from Heaven, who offers to guide
us to the Town of -- will you go thither to Night (said he?) You know, (said I
very coldly) that I have no will left me, do what you please. I believe,
Mademoiselle, (said the Nephew) that we had best go thither this Evening, and
am certain that all of us shall be better there than here: Do what you will,
said (...) you have no power ever me but what God has given you, and which he
can also take from you. Hereupon the Uncle and the Nephew discoursed together
some short time, and the result of their Consultation, was, That the Troopers
were commanded to bridle their Horses which fed at large, and the Coachman to
harness his, which was all done in (...) quarter of an hour. When every thing
was read^ the Countryman who perfectly knew all the tur^ings of the Forest,
got upon the Coach, and a^^ that a small wind had dissipated the Fogg, the Moo^
s^^ne very bright, so that all things seemed to co^cur for our Deliverance, out
of what seemed to (...) an enchanted Forest.

We had an hours riding before we could (...) the Village; but when we were
on^^^ o^ out of (...) Wood, every one of us seemed somewhat comforted, in the
hopes we had of refreshing our selves when we came to our Quarters, whither at
length we came, though 'twas after Eleven at Night. As soon as we were come, I
fell into a deeper swoon than ever; so that they could not bring me to my self,
either by throwing water on my face, or by any torment they inflicted on me. At
length we arrived at the Gate of the best Inn in the whole Place, where the old
Rabours demanded whether there were any Lodgings for us: the Landlady of the
House replied, That all her Chambers were taken up by the Company of another
Coach, except two, which, if we liked them, were at our service, and invited us
to see them: For my part, (said the Nephew) I judge it best to take any that we
can have; for seeing she now lies in a swoon, if she should happen to dye under
our hands, we shall be accused of being her Murderers; and her Mother who has
committed her to you, will not fail of requiring the Life of her Daughter of
you, and make her self a Party against you. You say well, Cosen, said the
Uncle, (as I was since told) let us carry her up, her indisposition is caused
only by weariness, fasting, and the fatigues that she has endured; one moments
rest and refreshment will recover her, and to morrow we will continue her Journey.

Having said thus, they took me out of the Coach, more like a dead Person than
a living, and laid me on a Bed, where I found my self as soon as I revived,
encompassed with a great many People, who were very earnest to help me; amongst
others there were two very beautiful Ladies that sat on my Bedside, and a Lady
that seemed to be their Mother. I looked upon them with a great deal of
disturbance, which Persons use to be under upon their recovery out of a swoon:
Is it possible (said I) that I am yet alive? Oh how much better for me is Death
than Life! Mademoiselle, said the old Lady, consider I pray you, that seeing we
are ignorant of what God has determined concerning us, it is the Duty of a
Christian to resign her self entirely to his Will, and to follow the Example of
Jesus Christ our Lord, and to say with him, Not my Will, but thy Will be done.

Madam, (answered I,) I am extremely obliged to you, for your Civilities
toward a poor Stranger, who was the day before yesterday, happy amongst all
those of her Birth and Quality, and whom you now see to be a wandering Vagabond,
ready to dye under the Cruelty of her Mother, who intends to force her into a
Convent: But Madam, added I, may I know to whom I am obliged for the care you
have taken of me, for methinks you speak not the Language of Roman Catholics.
No Mademoiselle, replied she, neither I nor my two Daughters do, nor by Gods
assistance ever shall speak it. Blessed be the Lord, said I. that has made me
meet with some of the ^^oushold of Faith, such as are enlightened by his Truth.
Hereupon I remembered what I had heard my Father say on his Deathbed. Oh the
depth of the Riches, of the Wisdom, and of the Knowledge of God! How wonderful
are his Judgments, and his ways past sl^^^ng not! I have been hurried out of my
Fathers House to be cast into an Abyss, out of which I am hardly escaped; and
God has by his good Providence cast me into such Company, as were capable of
returning me into the way of Life, had I s^raved from it.

In the mean time the Uncle and the Nephew look's on each other with some
surprise: At length the Uncle impatient of any further delay, and vexed at our
discourse, Mademoiselle, said he, I believe you are now strong enough to eat,
for we must go hence in two hours. And for my part, said I, I am weary of
traveling by N^ght, and declare that I will not leave this place ti^l the
M^^ning. Mademoiselle, said he, I shall only tell you, that I dare not
transgress the Orders your Mother has given me. Has my Mother (said I in a
Passion,) has my Mother commanded you to kill me with Misery and Hunger on the
Road? and has she obliged you to be my Executioner, as you have almost been
al^eady? I cannot (replied he with some heat) be your Executioner, since I
endure the same fatigue that you do, your swooning excepted. But to tell you
plainly, know, that I have Orders not to stop in any place where there are any
H^gono's, and I am resolved not to transgress them; wherefore, Mademoiselle,
prepare your self for your Journey, in two hours at farthest. If you drag me
hence, said I, you shall do it by piecemeal, for I had ra^h^r dye than be any
longer in the hands of such a Fruit a^ you are.

The Nephew hearing this Discourse, Uncle, (said he) you must not too strictly
follow the Orders, which Madam d' Ombreval gave you, who never imagned that
such Acciden^s would have befallen her Daughter. There are certain occasions in
which we must be governed by Prudence. Monsieur Nephew, (said the old Rabours,
with a kind of forced smile) you are but a Young Man it is not your part to give
Counsel, neither will I take it. 'Twill appear in the end (said the young
Rabours) who will have most thanks: Hereupon he arose and left the Chamber for
a quarter of an hour.

Whilst he was out of our Company, he went into a lower Room where the Troopers
were, who eat and drank very heartily, thereby endeavoring to make amends for
their former trouble. They did not ^^a^l observe him so that he took their
Carbines and Pistols, and made the Powder that was in their (...) ^o were, that
'twere impossible to discharge them without a Miracle. He would also have
seized on their Hungers, but he could not find them. Having done thus, he
returned toward the Chamber, and met at the Stair-head a Gentleman that said
thus unto him: Is it possible, Sir, that this Lady is the Daughter of Monsieur
d' Ombreval, formerly Camp-Master, who dyed some months since? The very same,
Sir, said the Nephew: If so, said the Gentleman, your Life or mine shall go,
before you shall carry her any where against her Mind. There Is no need of that,
said the young Rab^urs, and if you are a Person of Honor, I desire your
^ssistance. Explain your self (replied the Gentleman): I Will explain my self in
this Chamber (answered he,) and immediately they came both into the Chamber
where we were.

He found his U^kle, who still earnestly urged me to arise, I don't know what
he would have done at length, but the sight of his Nephew, who came and sat at
my B^ds foot, stopped his mouth. Mademoiselle, (said the Nephew to me) set your
mind at rest. I assure you I will dye at your feet before th^^ shall offer you
any Violence. I have been drawn in to be a Partner in a base Action; I was
utterly ignorant of the Design, but now I plainly see the injustice they have
done you, I a^ resolved to make a reparation for a fault that I have against my
Will committed. Then I am delivered, cried I, with a transport of Joy, I see
how God does from time to time provide means for my assistance. You don't know
all, said he, for Mounsieur here (showing me the Gentleman) was about to have
fought me, thinking that I had been one of your Ravishers. Immediately the
Gentleman came to salute me, and made me many obliging Protestations, whom I
answered with such Civilities as were suitable to my present Necessity, and as
so generous a Gentleman deserved In the mean time the old Rabours left the
Chamber, and his Nephew believed that he was gone to work no ordinary mischief,
which caused him to have a secret Conference with this Gentleman and another
that was his Companion, a man of great honesty and bravery: The result was,
that the Ladies were to retire into a Chamber, where they might be free from
all Insults. The old Lady was afraid some mischief would be done, but Ra^^^rs
assured her, that all the mischief would be ^^me ^^ise and a vain fear, and
that he had taken sufficient care to prevent all other. They led me therefore
into their Chamber, the Door of which we bolted, where instead of going to Bed,
we fell to Prayers, that God would prevent the Misery wherewith I was threatened.

We were but just gone away when the old Ra^^^rs came up the Stairs, followed
by the four Tro^pers, with their Pistols at their Girdles, and their Carbines
in their Hands, in^ending to carry me away by force, and to kill all that
should oppose their Design; they found the young Rabo^^s, to whom the Gentlemen
had lent a Pistol, which he held in one hand, with his Sword drawn in the
other, and the two Gentlemen were in the same Posture: They had left the Door
open, so that they might freely enter; the old Rabours rushed in first, asking
for me: She is, (said one of the Gentlemen named Mounsier d' Arbaux,) gone to
her rest, with Persons of honor, with whom it is fitter she should be than with
such as you. If she comes not immedlately and go with me, assure your selves
that it shall cost you dear, be you what you will, especially that Traitor
there, (pointing to his Nephew.) We have had to do with worse Lads than you
are, (said the Gentleman very boldly) and you are not such as we should be
afraid of.

The old Rabours stayed not to return any Answer, but presenting his Pistol to
his Nephews Breast, Rask^^, said he, bring me Mademoiselle de St. Phale, or
thou art a dead Man. Uncle, replied the Nephew pray address your self to some
body else, for I would not have the honor of fighting with you. This scorn^^^
Answer enraged the old Rabours beyond meas^^^ so that be endeavored to have
discharged h^s Pistol on his Nephew; but as the young Rabours kn^w very well
before, it took not fire. However this Attempt of his Uncle so enraged him,
that he fell upon him, threw him to the ground, and wrested his Sword out of
his hand. The Troopers endeavored to assist the Uncle, but the Gentlemen
hindered them, which forced him to cry out, Fire ^ou cowardly R^skals, fire
upon them. They needed not many words to move them to this, but im^^d^^^^ly
attempted to discharge their Carbines, (...) had no m^^^ effect than if they
had been loade^ and pr^m^d with Shot, which made them bet^^^ ^^^^^elves to
their Pistols, but the thing was ^^ll the same. The Gentlemen irritated with
th^se affronts, gave them many blows with the ^^^s of their Swords, threw them
to the ground, and ^rod them under their Feet; all which they did with ease, as
having to do with Persons that were half Drunk; they also took from them their
Carbines and Pistols: In a word, the young Rabours told me the next Morning,
that there was never seen a more furious Combat without any Blood shed.

The old Rabours, who was much more vexed for having l^st me, than for all the
ill success of his Enterprise, knew not what measures to take: for my Mother,
on whose Charity he lived, he concluded would for ever banish him her presence;
and this was what he feared more than any thing else in the World. He found the
Landlady of the House, and enquired of her what the Name of the Judge of that
Village was, but he happened to be from home. This mock-fight being over, as I
have related it, the three Gentlemen came laughing into our Chambers, and
showed us the prey they had gotten from their Enemies. After they had been with
us for some time, the Old Lady said to us, Let us not laugh yet, for I am still
afraid of some unhapp^^^^^ of this business; not that those who attacqu^d you
can do us any injury, but Madam d' Om^^^^^ will certainly arm all the whole
Church of R^^e against us, to revenge this Affront, as soon a^ she shall hear
of it. You have no reason to fear (^^^d I) for none of them knows my
Deliverers: And if the storm must fall on any Body, 'twill be on the young
Rabours, whom yet I hope to find a (...) to secure from it. Let us only
consider (said M^^sieur d A^bau^) what course to take to mor^^^ ^^r
Madamois^lle de St. Phale must, if she a^p^^ve it, go with us. This offer was
too advant^^^ us to be refused, so that I embraced it with a^ my heart.

Whilst we were discoursing of these things, one of the Troopers came up to our
Chamber, desiring to speak with the young Rabours, who would not ^ear him, but
in the presence of all the Company, to which he consented, and confessed that
he had been unhappily engaged in a shameful Action; and that if he would
restore his Carbines and Pistols, ^e would immediately retire to his own home.
And why should we take your word, answered he? have we not just reason to
believe, after the Attempt you have made on us, that should we deliver ^ou your
Arms, you would employ them against us: I confess, replied the Trooper, you
have reason to suspect me; but if I immediately return home, I believe you are
generous enough to send them me, and in this hope I leave them with you.

Methought the Troopers offer was very reasonable, so that I answered in
Rabours his stead, that he should certainly have his Arms restored, if he would
keep his Promise. I also fancyed that this Trooper might be of farther use to
me; and therefore, Friend, (said I) how much were you promised for your Pains?
tell me freely. Mademoiselle, (answered he) I Will conceal nothing from you:
Madam your Mother promised each of us four Louis d'ors, whereof we received one
in hand, besides all Charges, which were to be paid by Monsieur Rabours. You
know, (said I) that not having carried me to the place appointed, you will be
frustrated of the rest of your payment, and God grant that she deal not more
severely with you, for you may easily imagine that now you shall never carry me
with you, and hat those who have delivered me out of the hands of Rabours, will
defend me from his Violence I have told you already, Mademoiselle, (replied the
Trooper,) and I again assure you, that I Will not ^e any more concerned with
them, but immediately retire home: And to convince you that I truly repent of
the Crime I have committed, I am ready, if occasion offer, to spend my Life in
your Defense.

I thank you, said I, yet I have thought upon a way in which you may
advantageously serve me, without exposing your self to any danger, and I assure
you, you have reason to promise your self a better gratuity from me, than you
could expect from my Mother, though you had succeeded in your project. Go to
your Companions, show them the impossibility of carrying me hence; and that
consequently they must expect no further Reward from my Mother, but assure them
that if they will all of them return home, they shall receive the four Louis
d'ors from my Brother, to whom I Will write in their Favor; and for my own part
I promise you six, besides what you may expect from my Liberality. My
Companions (said he) are so drunk and mad, that they talk of nothing but of
burning the house, to revenge themselves of the Affront which they have
received; but were they once come to themselves, I might possibly work somewhat
upon them. You may assure them, that my Brother will not fail of pursuing us,
according to the Advice that I have given ^im; who, if he find them before they
have ma^^ their peace with me, will deal with them without any mercy.

Indeed, Mademoiselle, replied the Trooper, you have brought a very pleasant
Stratagem into my head, and which may have good success. Let some one of the
Gentlemen that are with you, feign himself to be sent from Monsieur de Ponsins,
and let him enquire at this house whether you are, or have been here, or any
can discover where you are gone? I Will ^n^^r^^^^ the Landlady in what she ought
to say, and i^ the Gentleman ask for you, come to your Chamber Door and answer
him according to his Demands. In the mean time I Will place my Companions in a
place where they shall hear all that passes, and I Will so terrify them with
the coming of Monsieur de Ponsins, that they shall immediately take Horse and
fly with all imaginable speed, leaving Monsieur Rabours with the Coach in pawn
for the reckoning.

This Device was very well approved of by all our little Assembly, and
something also was added to it, and one of the Gentlemen offered to act the
part of the Trooper that was to be sent out upon the Enquiry; he immediately
drew on his Boots, and fitted himself for the Journey, and having gotten his
Horse in a readiness, he went down by a private pair of Stairs, mounted, and
having fetched a compass, about Daybreak he returned by the Highway to the
House in which we were, where being come, he desired to speak with the
Landlord, upon which the Landlady appearing, Madam, (said he) is there not a
Coach lately come to your House? There are two, answered she: But is there not
one, (replied the pretended Trooper) in which is a young Lady clothed in
mourning, accompanied with two Men and a Chambermaid, and guarded with four
Troopers? There is such a one, (said the Landlady,) but would to God I had
never seen it, it has caused such uproars in my House. What, (said he) have
these People been guilty of any Disorder? hereupon the Landlady gave him a full
Account of what he knew very well before, with many pleasant Exaggerations.
Madam, answered Monsieur de Chables, (for so was the Gentleman called,) don't
trouble your self, they shall pay for the damage they have done you; and if you
have any resentment against these Wrete^es, you shall have the pleasure within
these two Hours to see your self fully revenged on them: You but jest with me,
(said she.) To convince you (answered he) that I speak sincerely, know that I
belong to Monsieur de Ponsins, the Brother of Mademoiselle de St. Phale, who is
but a little way off with a number of Troopers, whom he has sent into all
Parts to enquire for the Coach which he seeks; I have been so happy as to find
it, and will now return to inform him of it. But I would first speak one word
with Mademoiselle de St. Phale, you can hardly do that Sir, (said the
Landlady,) she is in Red, and I dare not disturb her. My Business to her (said
the Trooper) is of the greatest importance, hold, there is a Crown for you, do
me this favor. The Landlady made him a low reverence, and readily taking the
Crown, said, she would do what she could: All these things were contrived
before; so that I was up, and seemed very willing to discourse with the
Trooper, who came up the Stairs, taking his Pistols with him, and met me at my
Chamber door. I am (said he) beyond expectation happy to find you and discourse
with you. Your Brother is but two short Leagues off, well accompanied: So that
if you can but retard your Journey two hours, you will be absolutely delivered.
I be^ieve, (answered I) that those who have so generously assisted me in my
need, will not leave so ^^^^^urable an Action imperfect, but will continue
^^eir assistance till that time; but yet I beg you let ^ere be no delay. No
Mademoiselle, said he, you (...) ^re no need to fear that: After this he went
(...), remoun^ed his Horse, and returned by the (...) ^e came a swif^ Gallop;
and having fetch d a (...) Compass came into the backdoor of the House, ^^ere
a Servant waited for him, plucked off his ^^^^s, and came up to the Chamber
where we ^^e^e, by the private Stairs, none perceiving any ^^^ng of this farce
but those that were made acquain^^^ with it.

In the mean time Gonjou played his Game well (...) ^he other hand, (for so was
the repenting Troop^^^ ^^^ed) for he took care to make his Compani^^ hear the
Dialogue between Monsieur de Chables (...) the Landlady, and afterward that
between (...) and me, for we spoke aloud on purpose. The ^^^dlady told me, when
I spoke to the pretend^^ Trooper, that I need not be afraid the other ^^^^pers
would hear me, for said she, being drunk ^^e P^ggs, they will sleep like Piggs.
Yet they hear^^ned very attentively, the first vapors of their ^^^ne being
spent, so as they were capable of Rea^^n* and it may be of Fear. For my part,
said (...), I Will be gone, I am not mad to wait the com^^g of Monsieur de
Ponsins, 'twill be dreadful to ^^eet him when he is in a rage: I am sure if I
can ^^id meeting him here, I shall make my peace ^^th him; but if I should meet
him here, I shall (...) dealt worse with than I have already been. Fare^^ll my
Friends, I Will advise you nothing, you know ^^at you have to do; for my part, I
am resolved (...) retire while I may, without staying any longer (...) the
Storm.

These words spoken by the bravest of the four, ^^uck them all with amazement,
and made them resolve to be gone. But how shall we do this? (said one of the
three^ we have not only lost all hope of the four I^^^^s (...) ^s, but they
have taken also from us our Carb^^es and P^^^^^^: I dare not return after such
an A^^ront. I ha^ r^ther tarry till Mons^^ur de Pon^^^ comes, though I hazard
my Life by it. We man do what is much better* said ^onjou, Mademoiselle d^ St
P^a^e is Good and Generous, let us beg her Pardon* and submi^ our selves to her
Will* we can get ^o ^^rt b^ doing thus Let'^ go, said the other, my m^nd gives
m^ all will ^e ^ell^* he two other Troop^rs rea^^y emb^aced this Advice; so
that Go^^^ who ^^^ught them to me, and who spa^e the ^e^t of the four, spoke
for all the rest, as near as I can remember in these words. Mademoiselle, said
he* here are we four penitent Crimina s, come to implore ^our Mercy: We confess
we have done a ^^ss, and those that sedu^ed u^ never told us that we were to ^e
Assistants in so ^ase a Violence much les^ ga^nst a Per^^n of your Merit. But
though we mig^^ ^ather have recourse to your Clemency, and beg y^^ to pa^don
us, and we shall immediately re^urn to our own homes, it you please to order
our Arms to be restored to us.

I would not (said I) do you any hurt for what you have done against me, both
because you were seduced, and because you never lost the respect you owed me,
but when you were not your selves, so that I pardon you with all my heart. Your
Pistols shall be restored you, but for your Carbines, you are not to expect
them till you are a^vour own homes, Prudence obliges me to deal thus with you.
I assure you also of my Brothers Pardon, who will pay you more than my Mother
promised you, for which I pass my word before all these worthy Persons present
They seemed very well satisfied with wha^ I said. After this they withdrew, and
went to see the Old Rabours, who was almost mad at this Change. They quarrelled
some time about the Reckoning; but I sent them ^^^d that they should be gone,
and that I would d^^^^rge^t, and keep the promise I had made them. They
therefore left us about s^x in the Morning, it ^eing day all a^road.

H^therto all things went well, ^ut the excess of my happ^ness had like to have
caused me greater troub^e than that which I had escaped. My Brother was indeed
in the Country making a dil^gent search for us* accompanied with Monsieur de
Haute-Cour, and twelve Troopers, who were all of them either of ^he Reformed
Relig^on, or extraordinary Admirers ^f my Brother They foun^ out the wa^ that
we ^ad taken, and hav^ng Guides they passed through the Wood without los^^g
themselves as we ^ad done, they rode hard all N^ght* and were but a quarter of
a League from this fatal Village, when they met our four Troopers, who were
surrounded with their twelve, and Monsieur de Haute-Cour and m^ Brother were
about to have sacrificed them to their Fury; which Gonjou seeing Monsiour de
Ponsin^, (said he) I ^eg you not to follow the first motions of your Anger, but
hear me. We are going back by Mademoiselle de St Phales leave, who is at
Liberty, and has promised us, upon Condition that we would leave her* to make
our peace with you. And where is my Sister? (said my Brother,) She is
(continued Gonjou) in the Vi^lage that is before you in very good Company. If
you please we will guide you thither. Yes (answered my Brother) you shall go with
us, either freely or by constraint; for, said he, if you have given her the
least reason to complain, or have lost that respect you owed her, your Lives
shall answer it. We are very well pleased (said Gonjou) with what you say,
we will go with you with all our hearts. Hereupon they were all four placed in
the midst of the t^elve Troopers, and making what convenient haste they c^uld
toward the Village* came thither just as we were about to break our Fast, we
having had no great de^^^e to eat any thing in so trou l^some^ Night. As s on
as (...) heard the noise of the Hor^^s in the Court, I l^oked ou^ at the
Window, and saw Monsieur de Haute-Cour and my Brother. I immediatel^ made the
greatest haste imaginable do^n, and ran to embrace my Brother: Al^ S^s^^r,
(said he) are you at liberty? Yes Brother, (sa^d I) thanks be to God I am. At
this very instant Monsieur de Haute-Cour came up to me, and discovered by his
Joy the terrible fear he had been under of los^ng me, at which I was extremely
pleased

In the mean time the two Gentlemen who had so gen^rously defended me, together
with the O^d Lady and (...) t^o Daughters, came down to us: I presen^ed th^^ to
m^ Brother and Lover, and gave them an acc^^nt of their kindn^ss toward me, to
which they re^urned the most obliging answers in the World. The young Rabours
thought not fit to appear with them; ^ut I declared his Carriage toward ^e,
which so touched them, that they were imp^^ie^t till they saw him. At length he
came, and my Brother and Lover affe^tionat^ly embraced and thanked him for his
Nobl^ and Generous Actions, with many sincere Protestations never to forget
them as long as they lived.

All this while the Old Rabours lay upon a Bed, having his Mind tormented with
a thousand cruel imaginations, he had not served my Mother according to her
Expectations, and had mortally offended my Brother and me; not to mention
Monsieur de Haute-Cour who had reason to be enraged with him; and his fear was
increased, when he understood that my Brother, with all his Company, was come
to the house in which we were. The Young Rabours entreated for him, that my
Brother would pardon him: For your sake, said my Brother, I ^^u^d do harder
things than this, though he has ^^^^^amly f^rgot himself and his Duty; but
seeing God ha^h been pleased to restore my Sister, I am ^^^^ent to pass by all.
You are at Liberty, my Friends, (said he) to the Troopers, whom he had (...) to
come ba k with him. But there is more (...) done, said I; I promised them four
Louis d ors (...) if they would go home, and leave me at Li^^^^, which they
did. Well Sister, I Will add to wh^t ^^u have promised them, and give each of
t^^^ Six. If (said I) you give them six a piece, (...) must have ten; upon
which I gave him an a^^^^nt of the Industry and Artifice which Gonjou ^^d made
use of in serving me. I Will our bid you ^n^e more, Sister, (said my Brother) he
shall have t^^^ve. But this is not all yet, said I, I must beg your Pardon for
my waiting Maid. Indeed, answered; my Brother, ^tis against her that I am most
enraged; this Wretch to whom you have shown so much kindness, and on whom you
have laid so ^any o^l^gations, has yet been so wicked to bet^ay you, I can
hardly resolve to pardon so base a C^^a^ure; yet since you desire it, I will do
it, how^ver, I am resolved to terrify her a little for my ^a^i^faction.

As soon as we first came to this Village, this Wretch gat her immediately into
the Kitchen, and ^^d so heartily on what first came to hand, that she ^^ver
thought on me; afterward find^ng her self, ^^^ewhat sleepy, she thr^w her self
upon a Bed, ^o that I saw her no more: She slept so heartily ^^at she heard
nothing of all the disorders of the ^^ght. The People of the house showed us
the Lam^^r in ^h ^h she lay, into which we should ^^^^e gone, had not the Young
Rabours, who went (...) s^^k his Uncle, brought him to us, partly wil^^gly, and
partly by force. He was as pale as a Malefactor, that every minute expects the
stroke of Death -- I perceived the Confusion he was under, and pityed him;
Monsieur de Rabours, (said I to him) lay aside your fear, my Brother has
already Pardoned you, and is disposed to bestow on you greater marks of his
Generosity than ever you received from my Mother. Hereupon my Brother spoke to
him thus:

Monsieur de Rabours, said he, God who knows the secret of my Heart, is my
witness, that I now have no grudge against you. It Is enough for me that I see
your Designs frustated, as they were unhappily con^eived. What did you think
when you made your self the Instrument of my Mothers Fur^, to act this V^ol^nce
against my Sister, and drag her (as it were) against her Consent into a
Convent? Where were those Principles of Generos^ty that ought to reign in a
Gentleman, when you undertook an Action that many P^sants would have abhorred
as unworthy and base? It Is true, you did nothing against the Daughter, but by
the Mothers Order; but should you not have considered, that there are some
Comman^s which Justice obliges us not to obey? What right had ^ou in my
Sister, that ^ou should presume to imprison her during her Life, or at least so
long as her Mothers rigor ^h^uld endure? What benefit could you ex^e^t from
this? possi^ly some recompense from my Mother. But ^ad ^^u not reason to
believe that in time her displeasure would give place to the voice of Nature;
and that when my Mother should come to her self, she would be extremely
t^oubled a^ what she had done, and vent all her rage on th^se that had been too
prompt and offi^ious in serving her in it? What a shame is it that Monsieur
you^ Nephew should teach you your Duty, and that he should be the first that
was sensible of the Injury he did, in pursuing so base an Enterprise? I Will say
no more of this mat^er, bu^ I assure you for your Comfort, that you ^^^a^
promise ^our self more kindness from me, ^^^^n ev^r my Mother showed you: And
having said ^^u^, my Brother gave him his hand in token of (...) p^rfec^
Reconciliation.

The ^^d Rabours would have returned an Answer, ^ut my Brother perceiving the
trouble he was under, s^^pt him, saying, I Will hear you another time.
^mmed^ately he went into the Chamber, where my ^^^^d lay asleep; he had with
him my Lover, ^^^r of his Troopers, and the Landlady of the (...) use: This
Wretch was still in a deep sleep, when (...) Brother awaked her, pulling her
violently by the Arm, Traiterous Wretch, said he, Where Is my S^^^er* Upon this
she started up, and was for some ^^^e not able to speak a word: Speak, said my
Brother, Where Is my Sister? unless thou will be immediately put upon the Back,
and have thine accursed Life torn from thee by Violence; I Will wait no l^nger;
Ropes there, presently; I am resolved to have the Pleasure of seeing the
wickedest Creature the Sun ever saw, dye in the midst of Torments. Ah
Mounsieur, (cried she) she is at rest in a ^hamber here by. No, Mistress, said
the Landlady, you are our in that, she went away above three hours ag^e, in the
Coach with the Gentlemen that ^^me wi^h her, and the four Troopers: And why
(^^^d she weeping) did no Body call me, that I might have gone with them? The
old Mounsieur de Rabours, replied the Landlady, told me, that he had Orders
from Madam d' Ombreval, to leave you in the first Quarters they should lodge
at, and to con^inue their Journey without you; it is true* they paid for you,
so that you may go where you will, I have nothing to demand of you.

It may be (said my Brother) you may have nothing to demand of her, but I have,
I Will force her to tell me where my Sister's gone, for she knows the place to
which they have carried her. No, Mounsieur, said she, I Will swear I know nothing
of it. Thou will not tell me, thou Wretch, (said he) bind her fast, I Will extort
it from her by force; hereupon the Troopers came toward her with Ropes and red
hot Pincers, which she seeing, screeche out aloud, wept, fell down at my
Brothers Feet, embraced the Knees of my Lover, rolled her self on the ground,
tare her Hair, Cursed her Destiny and Wickedness, which had reduced her to so
much Misery. Confess, treacherous Wretch, said my Brother, where is thy
Mistress. Alas, Mounsieur, (said she) I cannot tell: If you are resolved to
kill me, yet what will it profit you to torment me, to force me to Confess what
I do not know. I believe indeed (said the Landlady) that she does not know, for
the Reasons I have already told you. I am inclined to think so too, said my
Brother, but she shall dye, she shall be hanged at the first Tree we come to,
let some Body call: Priest to Coufess her. This Sentence filled her with
Despair. Alas, my God, (said she) I have betrayed those that confided in me,
and never did me any Injury, and I am betrayed by those whom I trusted; as I
dealt with my good Mistress so am I now dealt with: Ah, Mademoiselle de St.
Phale, Ah my good Lady, wherever you are, I beg you to believe, that I dye
with infi^^^e ^^gret for having betrayed you: Alas, you said but two days ago,
that God is just, and that he would reward me according to my Deserts; I mocked
you then, but I see now it is not good mocking any, especially those that have
the Gift of Prophecy.

Mounsieur de Haute-Cour and my Brother were forced to turn away their Faces,
to hinder themselves from laughing; for my part, I heard all from the next
Chamber, which was only parted from hers by a Cieling of Boares, and I laughed
as heartily as ever I did in my Life. Madam de Guard, her two Daughters, and
the Mounsieurs d' Arbaux and de Chables, were of the same Humou^^ At length I
could hold no longer, but cried out aloud, Pardon, Pardon. Ah, cried the
Cr^minal* it is the Voice of (...) good Mistress: For God's sake Mademoiselle de
St. Phale, come to my assistance, for I hope only ^n you (...) Look* said
Mounsieur d' Arbaux, you are made a Saint while you are alive, notwithstanding
^ou are an Hugonot, you cannot but assist a Devoto that Pra^s with so much
earnestness, you will have ^o Cust mers if you neglect the first invocation
that is addressed to you. I did not tarry to return (...) Answer to this
raillery, but went immedra^^ly unto the Chamber where my Brother and m^ ^over
^ere. As soon as my Maid saw me, the washed (...) ^ee with her Tears, she
kissed them, and made me ^n hundred Prayers, which I answered ma^f^^ words.
(...) I would not, said I, speak for thee till now, be^use I was sure they
would do thee no other In^^ but aft^^ght thee, though indeed I might justly
^^venge me on thee: But God ^orbid that I should ^^over any Animosity against
any one, on a day (...) which he has miraculously delivered me out of (...)
Enemies han^is. I pardon thee, and I do it sin^^trely, I am sorry that thou
have made thy sel^ in^^able of living with me, 'twere a breach of Pru^^ce ever
to trust thee more; but I Will give thee ^he Testimony not only of my Goodness,
but also (...) my La^^^ral^ry. You are my Good Mistress, an^^e^ed she, you can
do nothing but what is Good (...) Generous, I now feel my self sensibly touched
(...) an extreme regrert for having offended you, a grett that will eternally
abide with you. I cau^^ her to arise from the Ground, where she lay (...)
^ra^e; afterwaads she begg^d my Brothers and (...) Lovers pardon; they both
pityed her and gave (...) Money: I also opened a Coster which I had, and gave
her somewhat of a good value, with (...) promise that I would give her more
hereafter.

During these and some other passages, dinner wa^ ready, which if it were not
very delicate in it self yet the good Stomachs which we all had, made i^ seem
to be so. There were two Tables, at the largest of which sat the sixteen
Troopers, my Brother having strictly charged all that came with hi^^ not to say
any thing to the others about what had pased, for fear of some new disorder. At
the other Table were Madam de Guard, her two Daughters the two Gentlemen her
Sons in Law, viz. the Monsieurs d' Arbaux and de Chables, my Lover, Brother,
and my self, with the two Rabours. All the passages of the last Night were
buried in silence, for fear of rubbing upon those wounds which could not yet be
well healed.

After Dinner we were much concerned to thin^ what course we should take,
especially with resp (...) to me, where 'twas fit I should retire; and als^
with respect to the Old Rabours, what he should say to my Mother, who we knew
was not a Woman to be put off with bare pretenses.

As for what concerned me, Madam de Guard generously offered me her House,
where I might safely make my retreat, till we should have more lesure to take
new measures: This offer she made i^ such an obliging manner, that I could not
but a^cept it. Concerning the excuse of the Old Ra^^^ 'twas thought fit that he
should pretend that he ^fallen sick in a certain Village, and that during his
S^^^ness, I had made my escape in a Disguise; and (...) they could get no News
of me, notwithstanding (...) the Diligence they used. I confess I had some r^^^
pugnance at passing in the World for a Run-awa^ but my Brother told me that I
must go out (...) France Incognito, and that 'twas fit I should su^^mit to what
I knew in my Conscience to be ^^^innocent, to which at length I consented,
because my Brother and Lover approved of it, as done out of pure necessity.

After these Resolutions were taken, and all the Troopers except the four first
were sent back, and the reckoning discharged, we resolved to stop there all
that day and the Night following, to refresh and rest our selves. My Brother
had a Conversation with Madam de Guard, and her two lovely Daughters, (who were
the Wives of Monsieur d' Arbaux, and Mousieur de Chables,) who with the two
Rabours spent some time in play, so that Monsieur de Haute-Cour and I were left
alone.

My Lover was extremely glad to see me delivered, because he was terribly
afraid least he had lost me for ever, which he would have done, had they
carried me into the fatal Cloister where I was to have been buried alive. My
Joy was not, it may be, inferior to his, though I had a greater command over
my self than he had. Ladies (said Mademoiselle de St. Phale to the two
Gentlewomen of Hamburgh,) when your time to Love is come, possibly you will
excuse my Sentiments, it may you may be more a^^ficial Hypocrites than I am, in
denying them. I will not tell you, said Mademoiselle Leonora, what I would do; I
believe it, added Mademoiselle de St. Phale, for it may be you would do worse
than I did. P^ay Mademoiselle, replied the other, continue your Relation, and
afterward I Will answer you.

I shall not, (continued Mademoiselle de St. Phale) give you an account of all
that passed between us, for there is a certain sweetness in the Discourses of
such as are in Love, which cannot be found in such as are not under the power
of this passion. I shall (...) tell you, that depending on none but my Brother,
whose Consent I had as well as my Father s before his Decease, I was not so
Ceremonious with Monsieur de Haute-Cour, as I should have been, had we not been
engaged. It Is true, one thing much troubled me, that Monsieur de Haute-Cour
would not find those advantages with me, which he might have promised himself,
were not the Reformed in France so outraged as they are. I discovered my
regrett to my Love, who by his sincere words convinced me, that he only minded
the qualities of my Person, that would I suffer him, he would have followed me
wherever I went. He would also have given me indubitable Evidences of his
^idelity, but I would not receive them, satisfyi^^g (...) self with his word,
as he did with mine.

Our Conversation together was so long, that my Brother interrupted us,
inviting us to take a little Walk. Immediately we went into the Garden, where
my Brother taking Monsieur de Haute-Cour aside, discoursed a considerable while
with him and the Old Raboars, who discovered a great many things to him which I
could never persuade him to tell me, for fear of grieving me. Thus much only I
learned, that my Mother had resolved to leave me in the Convent during my Life,
to disinherit my Brother, and to bestow the greatest part of her Estate on the
Jesuits, all at the instigation of the Father Matthew, who had made himself
more absolutely than ever, Master of her Spirit.

This Resolution which my Mother had taken up against my Brother, vex't me more
than all that she had done to me, for methougt 'twas horribly unnatural. My
Brother heard it with a great deal of Indifferency, and (as he told me) made
only this reply, These are the ordinary effects of Bigottry, which makes
Persons rob their own Children to enrich Strangers, especially Counterfeit and
dissembling Monks. My Brother thanked Rabours for this Discovery, and was
resolved to take such measeres as might save his Paternal Rights. At length
Monsieur de Haute-Cour, who understands the Mystery of ^agaging men's minds,
discoursed the Old Rabours ^ith so much Affection and Reason, that he made him
as Zealous for mine and my Brothers service, as ^^e had formerly been for my
Mothers Interest.

The Evening we sup't together with greater cheerfulness than we had discovered
at Dinner. Madam de Guard and I contracted an inviolable amity. I ^^odged with
her in the same Bed, where she made me give her an account in what manner, and
by what means I had embraced the Reformed Religion, at the relation of which
she shed many Tears of joy and tenderness; and exhorted me to continue in the
good way into which I had entered, and to make my Declaration as soon as I
could, which I also resolved to do.

The next Morning my Brother gave our Land-Lady what she demanded: We sat out
very early, as we had need, because this days Journey was very long, so that
we could not reach the Castle of Madam de Guard till 'twas Night. At our
entrance she did us all possible honor, receiving us with respect, and a
thousand Caresses. I must confess that this house was a true School of Piety,
in which the Holy Scriptures was daily read, and the whole discourse was
employed about such things as are high and sublime. The Lady her self took a
great deal of delight in conversing with my Brother, who had not misspent his
time in the Academies. I abo^^ in this house fifteen days with much pleasure
(...) sweetness. Monsieur de Haute-Cour and my (...) ^ther, with the two
Rabours's, to the Elder of (...) I was perfectly reconciled, stayed but two
days with that As for the Troopers they were lodged at another Pl^^^o's At the
end of this time my Brother and L^^ minds turned to their own houses, the one
whereo^ fear; but two days Journey, the other three from (...) ^^dam de la
Gardes Castle, promising to m^^^ aga^^^^ in a short time, and return thither.
'Twas resolved that I should some days after write a Letter to my Mother, dated
from London, not so much out of hopes to re-obtain her favor, as to testify
the deference which I still had for her.

Mademoiselle de St. Phale would have proceeded farther in her Narrative, but
the approach of a Danish Vessel to that in which she was, obliged her to deferr
it till another time.

CHAP. VI.
THE little Society whom Mademoiselle de St. Phale was pleased to honor with
the Account of her Life, being again met, she continued her Relation in these
words:

I was (said she) in the Castle of Madam de la Guard, to whom I gave an account
of all the Accidents that had befallen me, before those whereof she was an
Eyewitness. This account augmented the tenderness which she and her two
illustrious Daughters had for me. I received such kindnesses from them as I
shall never forget, and had fresh Consolations every moment. I shall not relate
all that passed in my Heart, which, notwithstanding the Favors I received,
enjoyed but little rest and quiet. It Is enough that I tell you, (...) they
daily invented a thousand innocent plea^^ (...) to divert me, as walking,
hunting, Consorts (...) ^^ck, in which Madam de la Guard, and her (...)
^ughters bare a part, together with the Gen^^^ ^en her Sons in Law, who sung
Psalms every day (...) ^ther. I was extremely taken with this exer^^^ ^^^g
charmed with the force of the words, (...) sweetness of the Harmony, which
moved (...) read the Psalms, and get them by heart; and to study the Airs for
my own Consolation. But this Discourse of singing of Psalms, brings to my mind
a singular Adventure, which I cannot but give you an Account of.

About two short Leagues from Madam de la Gard's Castle, is a Mountain, famous
for the large Caves that are in it: We were resolved to see it, and to this end
ordered our Dinner to be sent early in the Morning, and by Ten a Clock in the
Forenoon we also came thither. We were provided with a Tinder-box and Torches
to see these Caves, and only made a short Collation, reserving our Dinner 'till
we should return. We entered into the Caves by the assistance of our Torches,
but before we had gone sixty Paces, going into the Mountain from one Cave to
the other, the Daughters of Madam de la Guard and I began to be afraid. Madam
de la Guard laughed at our fear, and continued on her way 'till we came to a
certain place, where there were so many Concavities, that many Eccho's repeated
the least noise that we made. The Primitive Christians, said Madam de la Guard,
Praised God in Caves and Holes of the Earth, in this we ought to imitate them,
being on the Point of being reduced to the same necessity; and having said
thus, she began to sing the 90th. Psalm, in which we all bare our parts.

Lord, thou have been our dwelling, thou
In Ages all our sure abode,
Before the Mountains were brought forth,
Or thou had formed the World and Earth,
From everlasting thou art God.
We made a short pause between every Verse, that we might have the pleasure of
Hearing the Eccho's repeat what we had sung, which so ravished our minds with
admiration, that we began to lay aside all sear; when we had sung this last
Verse,

From everlasting thou art God: we heard a miraculous Voice that came from a
Concavity aside of us, which finished the Couplet or Stave of the Psalm, and
distinctly sung this Verse --

And wilt be ever, Lord, as now. The fear that seized us was so terrible, that
I almost wonder we had not been Converted into Stones by it: Madam de la Guard,
as Courageous a Woman as she was, and our two Gentlemen, were struck dumb: But
we were awaked out of this Lethargy, by hearing the Voice again, which sung the
second Couplet of this Psalm.

Thou, Lord, by thine Almighty Power
Man to Destruction do turn,
And say, Men's Children turn to me,
For a thousand Years in thy sight be
As yesterday that is past and gone,
As Night-watch, or the shortest hour.
This second Singing removed the terrible apprehensions that we were under. We
have no need to fear (said Madam de la Guard) where the Praises of God are
sung; And yet I Pray thee, added she, whoever thou art, be thou an Angel or a
Man, to continue thy singing. The Voice answered this Request, by singing those
words of the 137 Psalm,

Alas what reason can us move
To sing the Praises of the God of Love,
In such a Land where we
But miserable Strangers be?
The more we heard of this Voice, the more were we ravished with it. Are we
(said I) in a Romantic Country, that we hear such Angelical Voices in Desert
Places? No, (said Madam de la Guard) Psalms, or the Praises of God are but
little minded there, which makes me confident that here must be somewhat very
mysterious, which I have an carnest desire to discover, so that I am resolved
to see from whence this Voice comes. She had no sooner said thus, but the Voice
began again, but in so doleful a Tune, as I fancyed capable of softning the
very Rocks.

Oh Lord in mine adversity
Draw near unto my Soul, and save
It from my Cruel Enemies,
Who still me persecuted have.
My shame, dishonor, and reproach.
Are known (O Lord my God) to thee,
Also my Bloody Enemies
And Foes, all in thy Presence be.
Reproach has broke my Heart, and I
Am full of Heaviness, I looked
For Pity, but there was not one
That on me any Pity took.
I sought for Comfort, but I found
None that would Comfort me at all;
They gave me Vinegar for Drink.
And for my Meat they gave me Gall.
This mournful Voice having sung these Words, we heard no more, except some
soft Groans and Sighs. I verily believe, said Madam de la Guard to me, that
this is some afflicted Christian of our Brethren, let us go and help him.
Hereupon we went toward the place whence the Voice seemed to come, where we
saw somewhat like a Man, of a proper Stature, clothed with such Garments as
appeared to have been once very genteel and handsome, but so torn and covered
with dust, that 'twas impossible for us to judge what Stuff or Color it was
of: The Countenance of this Apparition was lean, pale, and dejected; he had on
his Head a Cap, like those that are usually worn by Polanders, which covered
his gray Hairs, which were all ruffled, and a great Beard, grown quite our of
Fashion, of the same color with his Hait. In a word, every thing both in the
Person and Habit of this Solitary, was extraordinary and astonishing. We were
much afraid at the sight of him, and had it not been for Madam de la Guard, who
on this occasion had more Courage than the Gentlemen that accompanied us, we
had certainly fled; but our Fear vanished as soon as we heard him begin to
Discourse with Madam de la Guard.

Blessed be God, faid he, that being confined to this Cave for the rest of my
days, God has been so gracious to me as to give me the sight of some good
Christians, that have not bowed the Knee to the Roman Idols, nor been partakers
of their abominations: Indeed, added he, I had forgotten what Joy means, before
I saw you, but now my Heart is full of it, for I see that God has not forsaken
me, seeing I am visited by Persons that fear his Name, and call on him in
Purity and Truth.

Good God, replied Madam de la Guard, without making any other reflection on
what he said, methinks I should know your Voice, which much resembles that of a
Man of great worth of our Religian, who has been for some time lost, and was
thought to be made away privately, since none could give any Account of him.
She spoke these last words so low, that none but the Solitary could hear them.
I believe, Madam, answered he, that you know me, for I know you very well, you
are Madam de la Guard, a true Pattern of Virtue, Piety and Constancy to all
those of the Religion, and I am -- It Is enough, said she, interrupting him, not
suffering him to tell who he was, because of the Lacqueys that were present,
and bare the Torches: After which she took him aside, and they discoursed
together a large hour, during which we visited several of the little Caves, in
which we found nothing of Curiosity; so that we came back as soon as we heard
that Madam de la Guard had ended her Conversation with the Solitary, whom she
earnestly invited to eat with us; but he excused himself very handsomely, and
with much Civility, and returned to his dark Habitation.

As soon as we were out of the Cave, and Madam de la Guard had sent away the
Lacqueys, about some little business: You would never think, (my Children) said
she, that this poor Man I discoursed with but now, was not only famous once for
Zeal, Piety, Virtue and Charity, but also for his Riches and Reputation. We may
truly say, that he was the support of such poor men as were persecuted for
their Religion: Such as were spoiled of their Estates he maintained out of his
own; such as their Enemies endeavored unjustly to oppress he defended; the
Afflicted found a great deal of Comfort from him. He made good his Ground for a
long time against Doctors, Great Men and Soldiers, against Priests and Monks.
When the greatest Tempest began to arise against us, and the Pastor of his
Church being terrified with the Apprehensions of Danger, left it to the
Discretion of the wild Boars of the Forest, he alone stood fast, and bear the
shock of all the Assaults that were made upon this poor Flock. Insomuch that
the Rage of the Enemies of the Truth against him grew so great, that the least
Injury they did him was to take his Estate from him. He was forced to fly from
his home, and to wander many days in continual danger of being seized and
ruined. In the mean while the Members of his Church were scattered, many of
them fled, some into Holland, others into England, and some that were unsound
revolted from the Truth. For his part he was resolved not to tarry in France,
but to retire into Germany: And whilst the Clouds were ga hering, and the
Tempest, with which he was at last over^aken, was at a distance, he gathered a
pretty good sum of Money, which he took with him, resolving to go directly for
Germany, accompanied with a very honest, faithful young Man; but being somewhat
in^^mmoded on the way, in a place remote from all Habitation, he saw these
Caves, and retired into them; but 'twas not long e're this solitude to which
necessity had at first forced him, began to please him, so that he resolved to
spend the rest of his days in it. He found conveniences beyond his Expectation,
as certain Steps that lead up to the top of the Rock^ where he chose his
Lodging in a place that is dry and wholesome, whereas the Air of the lower part
of the Cave is moist and choking. As for his provisions the Young Man that is
with him, goes from time to time to buy them for him. But we will speak more
largely of him another time; cons^der it is late, and if we intend to dine to
day, it is time to begin.

In the mean time the Lacqueys took care to spread our Provisions on the Grass,
so that we dined after the Turkish Mode: And we should have been much inclined
to Mirth and Pleasure, had not the surprising adventure of the Solitary made us
serious. It Is indeed so rare a thing for Persons of the Reformed Religion to
retire from the World, after this manner, that one Example may pass for a
Miracle. You wonder at this, said Madam de la Guard, for my part I don't at
all. They use us as they formerly did the Primitive Christians; and is it
strange if some amongst us imitate those holy Persons, who retired into
Deserts, and holes of Rocks? May not the same Calamities inspire Persons with
the same Resolutions, how ridiculous soever they may seem to the Men of this
World.

Dinner being ended, Madam de la Guard, sent Monsieur d' Arbaux, and Monsieur
de Chables into the Rock, to see if they could meet with the Solitary, with
whom she earnestly desired to have another Conference. They soon met him, for
he hearing their voice, and even what they said, (the voice easily running from
one end of the Rock to the other,) came to them, and had the complaisance to
meet us at the entrance of the Cave, notwithstanding the disorder he was in.
Madam de la Ga^^^, as soon as as she saw him, sent away the Lacque^s, and begun
a discourse with him thus.

It Is not without Reason, said she, that Truth is said to be found in the
Deserts and Caves of the Earth, whilst falsehood too often establishes her
abode in the Palaces of Kings; since we see such as love the Truth, both in
Faith, and in Discourse, choose the most savage places to dwell in. It may be,
replied the Solitary, that Truth would be found in the Palaces of Kings, did
not the greatness of its splendour offend them, and disturb their quiet, they
would not have its beams so near; nor would they be told, that after all they
are but men, composed of the same materials, and as necessarily obnoxious to
Death as others are. How much less can they endure to be told of their Vices,
Debaucheries, Imperfections, Infidelity and Falsehood.

Do us the Favor, said Madam de la Guard, to give us an Account of the Motives
that have obliged you to embrace so strange a kind of Life as that you now
lead: That I shall willingly do, answered he. The first was the deplorable
Estate of our Churches. I reckon their Estate deplorable, not only because of
the Persecutions they suffer from without, but because of their own Infirmities
and Failures. I will not (Madam) act the Saint, nor make any Pictures to
Holiness; for I account my self a great Sinner, yet were I not able to behold
the Universal Corruption of Manners amongst us, without being filled with
Horror and Amazement: Alas, we have imitated the Children of this World, and in
some respects have outdone them too; Pride, Luxury, Dissoluteness, have
abounded amongst us, as amongst the Heathen; we have offered Incense to our
Revenge, our Animosities, our Covetousness, and our Ambition; yea a great part
of our Pastors have sollowed the same Course. Alas! Ladies, alas Gentlemen,
(added he with a deep sigh) is not this cause enough for a Man to wish for a
place far from so scandalous a Society? yet not making any Schism in the Faith,
or Worship that we profess.

How often have I said with the Prophet Jeremiah, Oh that I had a Co^tage of
Travelers in the Wilderness, there would I abide, and there would I bewail the
sins of the Daughter of my People. I would indeed have done so, had not my
Conscience told me, that 'twas no time to make a Retreat when we are called to
the Combat; no time to hide our selves when we ought to show our selves to
them that are weak in the Faith, to be to them Examples of Constancy and
Perseverance. I stayed therefore in the World, out of a design of serving
others; I made use of this time to warn, both Consistories, Pastors, and
People, that a dreadful storm was gathering, which would fall upon us e're we
were aware: But I was accounted a Phanatick, a Visionary, a Dreamer, a false
Prophet, an Enthusiast, and what else they pleased; yea, men were so far from
believing me, that they laughed at what I said.

Oh how willingly would I have spent all my Blood, that I might not have been a
true Prophet of the Desolation that is come upon us! But had I been silent, that
could not have prevented it. It Is not without very good reason that the Holy
Scripture calls men sometimes brutish, sometimes mad and Foolish; for although
they are told, that the danger is inevitable, that the hand is lifted up to
strike the deadly blow, unless they repent, yet they will still persevere in
their Iniquities, and add to the measure of their Crimes; they are not content
to walk leisurably to their ruin, but run headlong into it; and any one that
did but seriously consider their actions, would imagine that they were afraid
they should not be miserable soon enough. We have seen our Miseries coming upon
us by degrees. We have had time to have prevented them by our Tears and
Repentance, and yet we have been so brutish, so besotted, as that we have
neither wept nor repented.

At length those evils that threatened us are come upon us, and have as it were
seized us by the Throat when we least expected them. Our Churches are
demolished, and our Religious Assemblies interdicted in a thousand places where
they were before free. In a word, you know your selves all that has befallen
us, so that there is no need that I should make such a doleful recapitulation of
it. How often have I longed for Death, and envied the condition of those that
are at rest in the Lord! How often have I accounted those happy that are gone
home before the coming of our Anguishes! or those whom Death surprising in
their Cradles, has prevented from seeing those Afflictions wherewith we are at
present continually exercised!

Was not this enough to make me hate the world, and retire into some Desert
where I might shed tears in abundance, without fear of contradiction? For the
Cruelty we are at present under, is so great, that our very tears are made
Crimes. We are persecuted and dare not say so, nor make use of the term
Persecution, or Persecutors. We must look p^easantly in the midst of Torments,
and the bate saying that we are under Afflictions, and groan under them, is
enough to make us accounted bad Subjects: For my part, having my heart full of
Grief, I was forced to leave all commerce with men, and to seek in the thickest
Forests and darkest Caves, a place where I might freely complain of our
Miseries.

But that that was the immediate cause of this Voluntary Retreat, was a Journey
which I made to Court, about the Affairs of our Churches, and my own. I saw
such abominable Corruptions there, as were not exceeded under the Regency of
Katherin^ de Medices, who brought the Italians to act on this great Theater of
Europe, who filled the Court with the most horrible Vices that were ever heard
of. What vile Discourses did I hear from the highest Nobility of the Kingdom,
both at their Tables, and in their Walks, about their horrible and unuatural
Debaucheries. Ordinary Vices are at present accounted Virtues, while such
Crimes are perpetrated, as have formerly brought Torments of Fire and Brimstone
from Heaven upon a People; not to speak of those horrible Blasphemies that are
daily heard, such as the Devils themselves could never have invented, and a
thousand other Villainies which I shall not name, and would to God I had never
heard.

I was one day thinking upon these things, when a Gentleman came to make this
Proposal to me, That if I would abandon the Heresy of Calvin, and submit my
self to the true Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, I should not only
preserve mine own Estate, but should also be advanced to extraordinary
Dignities. He that made me this Proposal, was one of the greatest Debauchees of
all the Court: He pressed me much to a Compliance, remonstrating that the
advantage was very considerable, and that 'twould be my Prudence to embrace
this offer, whilst the Court was in so good an Humor. Though I were a
Catholic already (answered I) yet I would turn Protestant, that I might not ^e
of a Communion of which you are: What Is the meaning of this, (added I) that
you, who believe not in God, should exhort me to turn Catholic? I a^^ure you,
(said he) that the King will have but ^ne Religion in his Kingdom, and that
such as refuse to Conform to his Will, in embracing the Catholic Religion --

The King, (said I, interrupting him with an heat whereof I was not Master) the
King would do better, and act more for the advantage of his State, did he purge
it of an infinite number of Debauchees, Blasphemers, Atheists, and such like
Trash, than by dealing so severely with so great a number of good Subjects, who
are guilty of no other Crime but refusing to go to Mass.

These words were too sincere for the Age in which we live, and also exposed me
to much Danger, against which I had no other defense but flight. Oh how much
safer is it at present for men to reflect upon the Conduct of the Almighty God,
than on that of the Kings of the Earth! Every body knew my Accuser to be one of
the most Profane, the greatest Blasphemer, Atheist and Debauchee of all the
Court: Yet he had never received any check for his disorders, never was in the
least punished for them; but I, a poor Huguenot, could no sooner speak a true
and righteous word, but I presently found a Million of Enemies armed against
me: On the one hand, all the Libertines and Debauchees of the Court were
enraged against me, for presuming to reprove their way of living; these falsely
accused me for speaking irreverently of the King and Government: On the other
hand, the Society of the Jesuits were resolved to ruin me, making it a point
of Honor to do so, as being a most dangerous Heretic, whom 'twas fit to rid
the World of, in order to the accomplishing their Designs on others.

Yet I remained very secure at my own Lodgings, never imagining that I was
pursued with so much fury; the terri^lest of all disgraces was just ready to
overtake me, when I did not in the least suspect it; but a Billet* that I
received from an unknown hand awaked me out of this security, the Contents of
it were these:

AS soon as you shall have read this Billet, be gone without delay; so
formidable a Party is formed against you, that were you a Prince of the Blood,
you must needs fall under it: Of all the Countries in the World, none is so
dangerous for you as France, and of all the Places in France none can be more
fatal to you than Paris. If you are disco^ered here, I account you more
miserable than if y^^ were cast into the depth of the Sea. Farewell: Make use
of these few words. This (continued the Solitary) was a terrible Billet; yet
having made it my business to prepare my mind for the most cruel Events, I was
not much surprised at the greatest Threatenings. I prepared my self for my
departure with all imaginable Secrecy, taking leave of my most intimate
Friends, and returning to my Lodgings Incognito, where I staid some time, 'till
I could receive a Sum of Money, which I kept against a time of need, and
'till I had hid some Papers of great Importance; which having done, I resolved
to leave France as soon as I could, accompanied only with a young Man, in whose
Virtue and Fidelity I entirely confided.

I don't deny but 'twas some trouble to me to think of retiring amongst
Strangers, who though they make Profession of the same Religion with me, yet it
may be have no more Virtue or Piety than the Reformed in France: And I know by
several relations which I had from several Persons yet alive, their
^^kewarmness and indifferency with respect to the most pure religious Worship:
But what should I do? I must either resolve on Death or perputual Imprisonment
if I staid in France; or else leave it to secure my Life, or at least my
Liberty.

In a Town which I passed through in my Journey, dwelt a good Man of the
Reformed Religion, above fourscore and ten years of Age. I knew him by report,
as he also knew me, and therefore thought fit to visit him in my way, and
desire his Advice. If I were of your Age (said he) I would do as you do. I
would as carefully fly France, as Seamen do the Coasts of Algiers and Tunis:
Oh how happy are those that leave an house that is full of Cracks, and which
every blast of wind threatens with ruin. But Monsieur, replied I, France is at
present in so flourishing a condition, that it gives Laws to all Europe, its
power makes all her Neighbors trembles: But, (answered he) what more evident
and certain Tokens can you desire of approaching Destruction, than the
Universal Corruption that reigns in it, from the least to the greatest? Than
that insolent Pride, and that cruel persecution which is acted against the
Faithful. Assure your self, my Son, that one of these things has formerly
overturned Empires, that were more illustrious in their beginnings and rise,
than France can ever hope to be in the height of its Grandeur. Much more reason
has a State in which all those three things are sound, to believe its ruin to
be at the Door.

These words, said the Solitary, pierced my Heart, especially when the good Old
Man added this: You know, said he, that the Holy Scripture tells us, that the
Judgments of God begin at his own house. There Is no truth more fully confirmed
than this is, by innumerable and most Authentic Examples, whereof we have seen
some with our own Eyes. God inflicted his Rod on our Churches in the times of
our Fathers, which were miserably ravaged and desolated; but when once their
T^yal was over, God at length avenged himself on their Enemies* not only, on
the Heads and Authors of their Miseries, but also on all the People, punishing
the Children for the Iniquities of their Fa hers. When God had executed his
Judgments on his Church in the days of our Ancestors, who were exposed to
Massacres and Burnings; he turned his hand against our Enemies, and by a just
Decree we saw France punished by her self, for the Cruelties she had committed;
and there was no considerable Town in which Innocent Blood had been shed, but
was exposed to the terrible strokes of Plague, War, and Famine, and those who
had most cried out against the Hugonots, were the first that employed their
Force and Cruelty against their own Country, and at length God cast these Rods
of his Anger into the Fire. 'T had been but a small thing if only the Authors
of our Misery had suffered, all France was involved in the same punishment, in
the same Indignation of God.

Be confident of this, that the Corruption, the Insolence, and the Persecution
of the Clergy of France against our Churches, has a fixed Period, which when
it is once come, the long-suffering of God will be at an end, and he will no
longer bear with the Oppressors of his Saints, the Blasphemies of his Name, and
the Contemners of his Glory. As for this term which God has fixed, which must
expire before he will execute his Justice, none knows it; for there are some
Wretches to whom God puts a stop in the beginning of their Cariere, and there
are others whom he gives a longer scope and space, and seems to have forgotten
them, but in the end he will find them, so as to render the Vengeance he
executes upon them, glorious.

But not to amuse my self with Arguments, to prove what I say, I exhort you to
remember, that every wise Man, if he carefully consider the matter, must fl^e
out of France. Our Kingdom is sicker than we imagine, and the time in which we
may think it to be above all fear, may be for ought we know the very moment
that God will take to hum^^e it; and if once he lay his Rod on the French,
a^sure ^^ur self, the stroke will not be light, or i^'s duration short. As for
you, my Son, you do well to re^ire betimes, and to imitate those Birds, who
foreseeing a hard season, prepare themselves against it by changing their
Habitations. Go therefore, and the Lord go with you, for my part I am going the
way of all the Earth, and I hope that God will be so gracious to me as to take
me out of this World, before he executes his worst and last Vengeance upon us.

When I had (added the Solitary) taken my leave of my Old Man, whose words made
so great an Impression on my Spirit, that I could not but think on them day and
night, I happened to lose my way for want of minding it, and found my self
before the mouth of this Cave, into which a hard and long rain forced me to
enter, without any other des gn but that of sheltering my self from the Storm.
I found in it an honest Countryman, who was come thither out of the same
Design. He told me so many curious things concerning the Cave, that I had a
great mind to see it, and promised him a large recompense if he would accompany
me: My offers engaged him, and he immediately returned into the Village where
he lived, (which is but a quar^er of a League hence,) and brought back with him
some Torches, together with a Tinder-box, and also a line, which if there were
any need we might make use of, as Theseus did of Ariadnes thread.

With these Provisions we entered the Cave, which we visited on both sides, at
length he showed me a way where we saw the print of men's feet, we followed this
track, and by a kind of Private Stairs, which Art assisting Nature had made,
we, after many turnings, came to the top of the Rock, which we found open, and
sufficiently light. To this open place there was a door, which being shut
secured it against the injuries of the weather: There were also other less
holes, which were beaten out to admit the light, I imagined that this had been
the Habitation of some Hermit, that was weary of the world as I were, and had
fitted this place for his Accommodation. The Countryman confirmed me in this
Opinion, and told me, that he had heard his Grandfather say, That a Man who had
the Reputation of great Holiness had formerly dwelt there.

Immediately I had a Fancy, which the World it may be will judge somewhat
extravagant. I resolved to try whether I could bear such a kind of Life as the
Ancient Hermites led: I communicated my Design to the Countryman, who in all
his Discourses seemed more civil and judicious than such People ordinarily are.
I gave him ten Crowns, and conjured him to assist me; besides I promised him a
double or treble Reward for all the pains he should take for me, and he
ravished with his happiness, promised to do any thing that I should comm^nd
him. This Night I lodged at the Village where he dwelt, and told him all that I
would have him do for me.

He presently apprehended my meaning, and being an Industrious Man, returned
the next Morning with me to the Cave, where he took measure o^ the Door,
Windows, and the place for the Bed, and wrought so hard, with one of his
Companions, that at the e^d of two days he returned to put ^p the things that
he had made, and fixed a Lock ^o my Door. I^ a word, he wrought so well, that
(...) had no reason to complain of the cost: Besides, ^e bought me diverse
Provisions, and promised to ^eep my Counsel Inviolably, and in this he has
^een as good as his Word. He constantly comes ^^ice a week to see me, and if at
any other time I ^ant any thing, I send my Servant into the Village, ^o that I
am as well furnished with all Convenien^ies as I could desire.

It may pos^ible seem very rude and severe for a man to live as I do, separated
from the whole world, and from the Company of Friends: But it is no such ^^deed
Life as you may imagine; and when a man ^oth once give up his Spirit to Prayer,
to the Prai^es of God, and to Holy Meditations, he will find such ^leas^res, as
we can never comprehend whilst we ^re entangled in the Affairs of the World. As
for ^his Young Man who is obstinately resolved never ^o leave me, he suits his
Inclinations well enough ^ith mine, nor ^o I contradict him in his Innocent
^iversions. I suffer him to enjoy the Pleasures of ^unting and Walking, as well
knowing that when Devotion is not free, it is of no value, and does not ^^serve
the name of Devotion.

I never found the least inconveniency by this ex^^aordinary change of Life and
Lodging, which I ^ttri^ute to God^ particular assistance. I never re^^etted my
past enjoyments, if any thing afflicts ^^e, it is the remembrance of the Ancient
Prosperity ^f our Churches, and the consideration of their pre^ent misery. One
day, as I happened to be thinking ^ery seriously on his, I fell into so
profound a sleep, that (...) dreamed a Dre^m, which for its rarity I shall
never ^e able to forget, no more than another which I ^ad some days after. I
should, did I not fear being redious, rel^te them to you. You are so rare a
Person, replied Madam de la Guard, that yo^ very Dreams must have something
Mysteriou^ in them.

This Consideration induced me to recreate m^ mind, by painting in Enigmatique
Tables, the present State of our Churches and our Enemies, hoping, that I may
one day have an opportunity t^ put them into such hands as may make them
public; and that these Pictures may be of some use (...) such as see them.
How, said Madam de la Gard^ were you a Painter too; Yes Madam, answered he I
were formerly, with indifferent good success, though (...) curbed mine
Inclinations, judging it fit, that a Man wh^ has more Noble and Important
Employments, should only use this as a diversion. I had indeed left the use
(...) the Pencil for above twenty years, but since I became a Voluntary
Hermit, I reassumed this Employment to have a sensible Idea of my Meditations
I would desire you to see my Study: but since the way is troublesome, and
indeed dangerous, I Will g^^^ my self and fetch what I would show you. Here upon
he went into his Cave, and in a sho^^ time after returned to us, bringing with
him sever^^ Pictures rolled up together.

The first that he showed us, was the Prospect (...) a plain Country, in which
were nothing but Temples, very simple, and without E^lls. Some of the^^ were
standing, others were half ruined. and of other we could hardly discern the
place where they had on^ stood. Over against those Temples that were y^^
standing, we saw several Batteries of Cannons, the Equipage of the Cannoneers
was very pleasant, (...) some had Miters like Abbots, others had extra^gant
Garbs like Monks, and very many of the had three cornered Caps like Jesuits.
But the were rather employed about the Bombs and Mi^^^ than about the
Artillery. Amongst all those Ban^ries there was one Principal one, upon which
^^ritten, The Great Battery Royal; the Master-Cano^cers were known to resemble
the Father la Chaise, ^^d Mounsier the Archbishop of Paris.

The second Picture represented a Woman, that ^^emed to have been very
beautiful, but Affliction had ^tterly defaced a great part of her Beauty; she
was of a dark Complexion, and out of her Mouth came his Writing. Look not upon
me because I am black, ^^cause the Sun has looked upon me: Her Garments ^okt
as though they had once been very rich, ^ut they were now all rent and torn; in
her hands ^e held a great Book, whose Title was, THE WORD ^F GOD; several
Persons endeavored to snatch ^is Book from her, and tare it in pieces; but an
^and came out of Heaven, and smote them on he Fingers with a little Rod,
forcing them to let to their hold: Above the Head of this Woman ^as written,
The Pourtraict of the Christian Reformed ^^^^ch.

The third Picture represented a Tempest, so ex^ellently well, that the bare
sight of it was enough ^o fill any one with terror, herein supassing most other
Pictures; the Winds were drawn with swollen ^aces, blowing with such impetuosity,
that the Sea ^emed to be nothing but moving Mountains. I observed that these
Winds were drawn much after the same manner as they are described by the ^oets,
except that some of them had Miters, Hats, ^uare Caps, and Hoods; I perceived
that one of ^^em had a tripple Crown, who blew with all ima^^nable carnestness,
but produced not half the effect which another did that had a three-corner'd
Cap: (...) the midst of all this Tempest was a small Vessel, (...) which were
three or four Persons, she was without Oars, Sails, or Rudder, and round about
her was ^ritten thus, Save us, we perish! and in another Writ^^g which came
from a certain place of the Hea^as, which was perfectly clear, were these
words, Why are ye afraid, O ye of little Faith?

This third Table (said I) seems more obscure than the two former. This Vessel
which you seen replied the Solitary, is another Picture of the Christian
reformed Church: This Tempestuous Sea are the People and Nations of the Earth,
who are (...) the Holy Scripture set forth under the Notion (...) abundance of
Waters, which move not of themselves, unless agitated by the Winds, which make
them roar and pass their bounds; for the People would never so violently rise
up against the Church did not the Pope's Cardinals and all the Clergy
continually persuade them, that the most meritorious Action they can do, is to
rid the World of those whom they call Heretics. As for the Vesse^^ it self,
it is the Church, in which are the true Relievers, who yet are not perfectly
freed from the remainders of Unbelief, so that seeing themselves in danger,
they cry out, Save us, we perish: But what Jesus Christ said to St. Peter, may
be very well applied to them, O thou of little Faith! why art thou afraid?
Indeed, did we as firmly trust on Divine Assistance as our Fathers did, we
should no more than they want this Assistance.

The fourth Picture represented a beautiful and great Leopard, who having been
a long time kept chained, had at length broke his Chains. We also saw many
Hunters, who did all that possibly they could to take him. Most of these
Hunters were either clothed in the Habits of Jesuits, or at least bare some
Marks of their Devotion to that Order (...) some of them spread their Nets to
ensnare him, others compounded Mixtures to stupifie him, and cast him into a
sleep, but none durst venture to put the Chain about his Neck, which was in a
readiness to this end, for this dangerous Beast had strangled some of the
Hunters and Dogs that durst come near him. You Will easily imagine what this
Picture signifies, added the Solitary, when you understand that this Leopard is
nothing else but ^he Kingdom of England, which the Pope and ^esuites
Passionately desire to reduce to its form^^ Slavery.

The firth showed us two Fantastical Pictures: the first represented a very
beautiful Woman in ^ll respects, which had a Crown on her Head, and Scepter in
her Hand; she wore a Gown of blew ^attin, Embroidered with Flower-de-Luce's of
Gold, ^ut 'twas covered with a kind of Cloak of black ^loath, which reached
down to the ground, having (...) little Collar, like that worn by the Jesuits;
On (...) was this Inscription, France is become Jesuit. ^he other Figure is a
Jesuit, clothed in his pro^er Habit, except that instead of the Cloak they
^sually wear, he had a Cloak covered over with Flower-de-Luce's, on which was
this Inscription, The ^^uites are become French to make themselves Masters
(...) France.

The sixth Figure represented the present Pope, ^^eeping bitterly at the
Diminution of his Authority. He had with him some Cardinals, who en^eavoured to
Comfort him: He was preparing the ^hunder of Excommunication against France,
who ^xpected it with the greatest Scorn in the World; which obliged the Popes
Friends to remonstrate to ^m, that 'twould be in vain to have recourse to ^e
rigor of his Bulls, in a time when the World ^as no longer afraid of them,
which induced the ^od Father to lay them aside 'till a more favou^ble
opportunity. In the same Picture was re^^esented how the Jesuits abandoned the
Inte^^st of the Pope, to adhere to that of France, as ^^ing the strongest; nor
will they now any longer ^aintain their old Maxim, That Popes might depose
^^ings, and free their Subjects from their Oath of Alle^ance: Not that they
have altered their minds, or are become more Orthodox, but because they see the
Affairs of the Popes to be in so desperate a Condition, that they can never
hope to get any thing by them.

The seventh Figure represented Justice and Peace flying out of France with the
Reformed Religion, which were succeeded by a very dark Fog, out of which came
Lightning and Thunder in abundance. We saw also an hand coming out of Heaven,
pouring down a mighty Hall, which ruined the hopes of the Laborers, and caused
a dreadful Desolation in all the Country: This Figure had this Inscription,
Thus shall that Nation be dealt with, that tramples Divine Favors under its
Feet.

Madam de Brosses, the Aunt of Mademoiselle de St. Phale being seized with a
light Indisposition, caused a considerable Trouble to all the Company,
especially to her Illustrious Niece, and obliged her to deferr the Prosecution
of her Agreeable Narrative 'till another time.

CHAP. VII.
THe Company being again met and sat, Mademoiselle de St. Phale thus continued
her Relation.

I think, said she, I was the last time Discoursing of the Pictures which the
Solitary showed us.

The eighth Figure represented some Shepherds, who made a league with the
Wolves against certain peaceable Sheep, whom the Shepherds deprived of the best
Pasture, and would not suffer to drink of the clear Springs of Water, but would
oblige them to feed on certain bitter and unwholesome Herbs, and to drink of
stinking Water. In another part of the Table we saw the Shepherds, shearing,
killing, and devouring the Sheep: We observed certain Sheep that would not hear
their Voice, which so enraged the Shepherds, that they brake down their Folds,
and abandoned them to the Discretion of the Wolves, who made a cr^el slaughter
amongst them. In another part we saw the Wolves, who having no more Sheep, fell
upon and devoured the Shepherds themselves. This is in my Judgment, said I, a
very mysterious Emblem. I Will explain it to you, replied the Solitary These
Pastors are the Romish Bishops, the term Bishop signifying a Pastor; the Sheep
in general are their Flocks, whom they deprive of the Food and Water of life,
which are only to be found in the Holy Scripture; the unwholesome Herbs and
stinking Waters are the Traditions and Dogma's of the Church of Rome; the Sheep
that will not hear the Voice of these strange Shepherds, are the Reformed, who
look upon them only as Hirelings and Robbers. The Bishops being enraged that
these Sheep will not own them, break down the Sheepfold themselves, and
abandon them to the Wolves, which are the Jesuits, who soon reduce them to the
extremest misery: But these Wolves finding no more Sheep to devour, fail upon
the Bishops themselves and devour them, after having made them suffer a million
of Evils, which will sooner or later force them to repent their Cruelty against
the Reformed, and their having assisted the Jesuits in ruining them.

The ninth Picture showed us a great Crucifix, which was presented to a
multitude of poor People, who turned away their heads from it, that they might
neither adore, nor so much as look upon what they called a subject of Idolatry;
but as soon as some Crosses of Gold and Silver stamp't upon Money were shown
them, they were presently vanquished, and did all that they were desired, all
of them except some old People, on whom the Crosses of Gold had no more
Influence than those of Iron: upon this Picture was written in great Letters,
THE TRUE MIRACLES OF THE CROSS FOR THE CONVERSION OF HERETICS. In another part
of the Table we saw the Sieur de Marillas, Intendant and Great Converter, or at
least his Statue, which the Jesuits had erected in some of th^^r houses, he
was surrounded with Dragoons, Treasurers and Missionaries, and there was
carried before him, as the Cross uses to be before Legates, a Purse at the end
of a Staff, and large Patents, which promised such as should be Converts the
Purse for this Life, and Paradise for the other; for the performance of which
the Intendant himself would become Surety; but neither he nor his words were
much regarded. We ^aw also how the Sieur de Marillas suffered as it were by way
of Pastime, his Dragoons to torment the poor Country Hagonots, to force them to
go to Mass. We saw at a distance the Sieurs Maimb^urg and So^ller, like two
Asses in a Quagmire, very bu^^ly employed about the Justification of the
Intendants Conduct, or at least endeavoring to blot out the remembrance of it,
but all their time and pains were to no purpose.

The tenth Figure represented a great Fire kindled in the presence of abundance
of People, in which was a famous Book, Entit^led, The Critique Gen^^^ of the H
story of Calvinism. The fire was kindled and maintained by the Jesuits, and
this poor Book was cast into it with a great deal of Pomp and Ceremony, all to
appease the wrath of an angry old Fellow, which was the Sieur Maimb^urge: But
a^^ though the Book was burnt, and its ashes thrown into the Air, yet it still
appeared with this Inscription, O ye Fools and Distracted, think you to destroy
the Truth by burning of Books? At the same time we saw this same Book fall down
from Heaven, and was, with several others, carefully gathered up and preserved,
at which those that lighted the Fire seemed out of their senses, with rage and
Fury.

The eleventh Figure showed us an Old Man, with a sad and discontented
Countenance, sitting in his Study. The Solitary told us that 'twas the famous
Arr^^^. Do you see this Old Man, (said he)? he endeavors to make his
Conscience truckle to his Interest: He must of necessity resist the Jesuits,
and oppose the Hogonots, and the different method he is forced to follow,
entangles him cruelly. Besides, he is very far advanced in years, and his Life
hangs by a single thread, so that he dreads at once the Indignation of the
King, and of God, and would fain escape both, but he finds himself under a
necessity of being hated of the one or the other. Indeed it goes hard with him
with respect to both, for both he and the whole party of the Jansenists are
disgraced, and God cannot be well pleased-with such as are lukewarm Neuters or
Timorous. Above his head were written these words, taken out of the second
Epistle of St. Peter, and that of St. Jude. This is a Fountain without water, a
^^lo^d driven about with every wind, a Tree without (...), whose fruit, if he
has any, is corrupt. In a few moments he shall be cut down, and cast into the
Fire, (...) blackness of Darkness is eternally reserved for ^im.

The twelfth Picture represented somewhat very like to what is written in the
seventeenth of the Revelations, for we saw a Woman holding a Cup in her hand,
encompassed about with the Kings and Princes of the Earth, and vast multitudes
of People; she obliged them all to drink of this Cup, which made them quite
other Persons than they were before: Some of them seemed to be in an ecstasy,
others grew stupid, some grew mad and outrageous, all in general forgot their
Duty to God, to their Country, and to themselves, acting a thousand Cruelties
against the beloved of God; over her head was written these words of the
Revelations, This is the Great Whore, with whom the Kings of the Earth have
committed fornication, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth have been drunk
with the Wine of her Fornication. God has put it into the hearts of these
Kings to fulfill her Will, and to agree, and to give their Kingdom to the
Beast, till the words of God shall be fulfilled.

This Table, said the Solitary, deserves your minding more than any other, both
because it is taken out of the Holy Scripture, and because we see it
accomplished in our days; but especially I desire you to consider the force of
these words, That some of the Kings of the Earth do the pleasure of the Great
Whore, and agree in the same thing with her, and give their Kingdom to the
Beast. I desire you also to examine the present State of most Christian
Princes, and you will soon be able to judge whether the Revelation be not
accomplished in this Point.

There were several other Figures, which being not finished he did not show us.
I shall not give you a large Account of our whole Conversation, which would
have been much longer than it was, had we not seen that the Sun was near
setting, which obliged us to take our leave of the Solitary, whom we left with
a great deal of regrett, who also made us promise him to make him another
visit. We were so taken with his Discourse, that we promised him not only one,
but many. Madam de la Guard pressed him with much importunity to spend some
days at her House, where he might be as free as in his Cave; but he constantly
replied, That he would never leave his Solitude, till he saw an end put to the
Persecution of our Churches.

At length we parted, and in all our way homeward we discoursed of nothing but
the rarity of this Adventure, That going to visit unhabitable Caves, we should
there find a Man of Spirit, Worth, Quality and Religion, who had made choice of
this dwelling before any other, to enjoy rest and quiet of Conscience. Good
God, (said Madam de la Guard) to what a ^ad condition is France reduced at
present, that men prefer the Solitude of Deserts and Rocks, before its Towns
and Palaces! We have no reason (said I) to wonder at this, since in Deserts,
and the Caves of Rocks, we are free from those Enemies that inflict a thousand
Torments upon us, and are more cruel than wild Beasts or Highway Robbers. I am
of your Mind, (said Madam de la Guard) Highway Robbers are far more merciful
and Compassionate than the Gentlemen of the Clergy are to those of the Reformed
Religion, whom they persecute with the greatest Fury.

Whilst we were engaged in these and some other Discourses of the same nature,
we were insensibly come to the Castle, without perceiving that 'twas Night: As
soon as I was come out of the Coach, there came one to me that I knew belonged
to my Brother, and delivered me a Letter from him. I was somewhat surprised at
this, and he observed it, and said, Let not (Mademoiselle) my Presence astonish
you, for I bring you no News but what is good. I opened the Letter, and found
that 'twas only a Letter of Credit, by which my Brother ordered me to hear all
that this Man should say. Immediately I took him aside in a lower Chamber,
where he satisfied my Curiosity, by giving me an Account of all that happened
at our House, after my carrying away, which my Brother had not time to do.

Seeing you desire it, Mademoiselle, said he, I shall give you as brief a
Relation as I can of all that happened. I was with Monsieur de Ponsins my
Master when he came to the Castle. He immediately (...) enquired for you, but
none durst return him (...); this vexed him terribly: He went himself (...) you
in your Chamber, which he found (...) in such a disorder, as 't had never been
in (...) there. At length he came into the R^^^l in And where is my Sister, said
he, in a rage to (...) that were present? tell me presently, or I Will (...) you
to it. But none returned any Answer, and the Servant Ma^^s fell a weeping so
violently that they could not speak a word. Monsieur your (...) it (...) not
what to make of this silence and (...) who is a Neighbor of ours, (...) Man,
and one that has a great (...), and who was at that time (...), said
^^^^^oisel^e de S^. Phale) told (...), Sir. (said he) to dissemble, Ma^^ (...)
de St. Phale is carried away by force. (...) away, said Monsieur de Posins
(...) an (...)? The two Rabourses, (said Abelard) the (...) Nephew, by the
Command of Madam your Mother: And hereupon he told him all he k^^w of your
Adventure.

The Auguish which Monsieur your. Brother selt at that time is unexpressible,
it obliged him to sit (...), nor could he speak a word but this: Alas my
Sister, my poor Sister! He remained in a kind of Astonishment for about half an
hour, out of which Monsieur Abelard awaked him, by saving, Suffer not your Mind
to be overwhelmed with Grief, for what may yet be remedyed, it is not full four
and twenty hours ago that this was done, and they are carrying her into a
Convent four days journey hence. I Will go into the Village, and get a dozen of
good Troopers that shall accompany you this Evening in pursuit of them. And
hereupon be gave him an Account of the way they took, in which he had been
instructed by the Old Rabours, who had made him his confident in this matter.

This Counsel raised Monsieur your Brother from his Astonishment, and made him
come to himself. He sent Monsieur Abelard to prepare his Company, in the mean
time he went up into his Chamber, and being in a desperate Passion, wrote a
most ^itter Letter to Madam your Mother, which he caused me immediately to
Copy, by means whereof I have got it by heart, and will, if you please, repeat
it to you. I bid him do it (added Mademoiselle de St. Phale) and he presently
obeyed me; the contents of the Letter were as follows.

Madam.
THough I have had frequent Experience of the Inequality of your Temper, and
your blinded transports, yet I should never have believed that you would have
so far forgotten what you owe to your (...) and your R^putation, as to please a
Jesuit who is (...) infamous, to cause your Daughter to be violently ^avish d
from yo^^ a Daughter, who by reason of her Virtue is worthy of a better Mother
than you are; and by the ravishment of whom you have ^o^^d a way to l^^ish from
you your only Son, who had ^ather abandon all than be a Spectator of (...)
Actions. Have you will considered, Madam, what (...) will he passed on this?
Will not the world (...) that you have hurried away your Daughts, and forced
your Son out of your sight, only because you feared their presen^e and
penetration: For my part, God fo^bid that I should entertain any
disadvantageous sentiment of you; but you know, Madam, that every one has not
the Charity of a Son, and that ill Tongues are a^t to make terrible work on the
least occasions. I pray God, Madam, to pity you more than you have done your
self. These are the la^ words you will ever hear from your Son, who is going to
the Army, to extinguish with his Life, the cruel reflections that gnaw his
heart.


Monsieur de Ponsins having written this Letter in the height of his Passion,
when he scarce knew what he did himself, gave it to me, commanding me to
deliver it to Madam d' Ombreval, and carefully to observe her Countenance in
the reading of it: For there were some private Considerations which made him
resolve not to carry me with him. I faithfully discharged my trust, though I
had but too just reason to fear being mischiev'd by it. I went into Madam d'
Ombreval s Chamber as soon as my Master had taken Horse, who found Monsieur de
Haute Cour at the Castle Gate, having his Heart full of joy in hopes to see
you, but had like to have dyed in the place as soon as he heard of what had
befallen you. Monsieur de Ponsins comforted him the best that he could, and
told him that he was going to pursue your Ravishers, having a certain knowledge
of the way they took: This word somewhat revived him, and caused him to suspend
his Grief, to give place to his Fury.

In the mean time Madam d' Ombreval read her Sons invective with Eyes that
sparkled with Rage. Traitor, (said she to me) Have thou had the Impudence to be
the Bearer of what I have read? I believe, Madam, answered I, that I have
committed no great fault in obeying my Master, and in delivering you a Letter
from him, in which there can be nothing but what is conformable to the respect
he has for you. She looked upon me with a severe Countenance, and answered
nothing: I made her a profound reverence and withdrew. In the mean time I knew
that she had sent for Monsieur Abelard, who was an understanding Man, and able
to give good Advice, and that she had shown the Letter to him. Could you have
imagined (said she) that this Traitor de Ponsins would have dealt thus with me?
Has he not offended me more than if he had given me a thousand Stabs at the
Heart?

I confess, Madam, (answered he,) he has much violated the respect he owed
you. But what will not the just Grief of seeing a Sister carried into a Convent
by force, utterly against her Inclination, cause a Man to do? Ah Madam, those
that advised you to such an Action, little minded what reflections the World
would make on it, nor how much your Reputation would suffer by it. I see, said
Madam d' Ombreval, that you are one of de Ponsins Favorers. No, replied he, I
am not, God keep me from approving of his Carriage toward you, it is very
culpable. Yet Madam, I have not such base complaisance, to commend the Violence
which has been acted against your Daughter, nor your following the Advice of
such a Person as no one has a good Opinion of but your self. What would you
have men say of the influence he has on you, so as to make you become
unnatural? I know you will tell me, that it is your Zeal that has made you act
this; but can any Zeal authorize Violence? What censure will the World pass on
you, when it hears that Madam d' Ombreval has caused her Daughter to be
hurried into a Convent, obliged her Son to a^andon all, and that a Jesuit is
become absolute Lord over her Mind, and in her Castle?

Madam d' Ombreval attentively heard Abelards Discourse, and seemed affected
with his Reasons, not returning one word of Answer, which encouraged him to
proceed. You have, Madam, been highly esteemed by all the World, during the
Life of Monsieur d' Ombreval. Alas, shall it be said that this Esteem is buried
with your Husband; and that you your self have cast it into the same Grave with
his Bones? Have you well considered that remorse and anguish which must
necessarily follow what you have done? for I foresee that Mademoiselle de St.
Poale seeing her self forced into a Cloister, will in a short time dye for
Grief. As for Mounsier de Ponsins, he will not sail to find what I Am sure he
will go to seek: Thus you will be at once deprived of two Children, who have all
the Accomplishments that you can wish. After their Deaths what will become of
Monsieur d Ombrevals and your Estate? without doubt the Jesuits will have it,
who have a long time thirsted after this prev. And if the Father Matthew were a
Man that would give Glory to God, and confess the Truth, it would soon appear
that his sole end in advising you to do what you have done, was to cause your
Estate to fall into the hands of that Society.

Though Monsieur Abelard spoke only at random, yet he chanced to hit upon the
Truth. Madam d' Ombreval answered him very coldly, If I were not, said she,
assured of your Affection to me and my Family, I should think that you
delighted to vex me. If what I have said, answered Abelard, has offended you,
I am ready to withdraw, after having begged your Pardon. But Madam, (added he)
methinks it seems very hard and uncouth to see you here alone without the
Children wherewith God has blessed you, and whom he has left you to be your
Comfort after the sensible Affliction of your Husbands Death. People will be
apt to say that you delight to afflict your self, making your self the
Instrument of your Childrens Persecution.

But Abelard, replied Madam your Mother, what would you have had me to have
done? My Son had seduced my Daughter, who was become more than half an Hugonot:
According to the Maxims of our Church, I believed that being a Hugonot she
would be damned, I was desirous to secure her Salvation: And since she would
not be reduced by Arguments, (her Brother having so prejudiced her Mind, that
that Method could have no effect upon her,) I sent her into a Convent, where I
am much deceived if they do not in time surmount her Obstinacy. Madam, said
Abelard, I am a good Catholic, and therefore you have no reason to suspect me;
but I assure you, if Mademoiselle de St. Phale be forced to return to the
Catholic Religion, she will be as liable to Damnation as if she had always
lived in the Profession of the pretended Reformed Religion; for I am not so
ignorant as not to know, that God requires an hearty, free, and voluntary, and
not a forced Service. When he had said thus, he withdrew, to give Madam d'
Ombreval opportunity to consider what he had said.

Madam d' Ombreval was touched by nothing more sensibly than what concerned her
Honor, o^ which she was always very tender. She now pla^nly law, that never
imagining any hurt, she had been drawn by her Confessor into such Actions, as
exposed her to the censure of idle and malicious ^ersons. She could not conceal
her Sentiments from Abelard, whom she caused to come into her Chamber the next
day, to give her some Advice, I can advise you nothing, said he, but to call
home your Children. But how can I do that, said Madam d' Ombreval, my Daughter
it may be is at this present entered into a Convent, and my Son, where shall I
send to seek him? Besides, should I find him, I know not whether he would
return or no, and how can I suffer him in my fight after so injurious a Letter
as he has written me. Ah Madam, said he, I am sure he will beg your Pardon with
all his Heart, if we were once so happy as to have him here. As for
Mademoiselle your Daughter, they will send her back as soon as you shall desire
it, Write but one word to the Convent, and they will not fa^l of contenting you
in this matter.

In this Conjuncture there happened somewhat that had a great Influence on
Madam d' Ombrevals embracing more favorable Sentiments, than those she
formerly had, which was a long and dangerous Sickness of the Father Matthew,
which hindered him from returning to the Castle. On the other hand, Madam your
Mother, for fear of giving the World occasion to reflect on her, never so much
as sent to enquire how he did. Nor did she manifest all her displeasure against
him, for having abused the deference she had for his Advice, by drawing into
such Inconveniences as he had done. She went once into your Brothers Chamber,
and seeing a Bible on the Table, she opened it, and happened to lite on that
place where David bewailing his Son Absalom, cried out, O Absalom my Son, my
Son Absalom. This passage suited her condition, and made her say, O Ferdinand
my Son, my Son Ferdinand. I was at that time with her, and saw her shed tears
in abundance.

At length she turned toward me, and said, Thou know Mark where thy Master
is. Yes Madam, said I. And wherefore did thou not go with him? Because
(answered I) he left me behind him to take care of such things as he carried
not with him. Would thou not do better (added she) in bringing him back? You
have, said I, more power over him than I, and you know what 'twas that drove
him hence: I spoke these words with some confusion, which she perceiving, asked
me why I was troubled: Because (said I) my Master was under such desperate
Grief at his departure, that if he finds not an opportunity to end his days,
his Melancholy is of it self enough to bring him to his Grave, which if it
happen, I shall lose the best of Masters, and you, Madam, the most perfect and
accomplished of all Sons.

Thy Master has grievously offended me, and I know not whether it be possible
to abuse a Mother more than he has done me, in the Letter which he commanded
thee to deliver me. I seemed to be astonished at this. My Innocence (continued
she) together with the purity of mine Intentions bear me witness, for which
reason I am not so much offended as it may be I should have been, were I not
justified by mine own Conscience. I wish (said I) that my Master were here, I
am sure he would beg your Pardon with all imaginable humility and sorrow for
what he has done. And I, (said she) would pardon him with all my Heart, since
it is tenderness for his Sister was the cause of his offense.

Madam your Mother after she had said these words, left her Chamber, and went
into the Garden, where I saw her walk all alone in much pensiveness. 'Twas much
otherwise with her now, than when she used to walk there with Monsieur d'
Ombreval, and to converse cheerfully with her Children, the remembrance of
which filled her heart with such cruel Anguish, that she could not conceal it
from Monsieur Abelard, who came to see her. But Madam, said he, if it shall
please God to restore you your Children, may they promise themselves to live
securely with you without fear? And shall the Father Matthew no more move you
to torment those whom you have born in your Womb; whom you cannot deal illy
with, without violating the strictest Laws of Nature? If their Religion differ
from yours, how can you help it? Know, (Madam) that in matters of Religion, the
more you endeavor to force a Generous Spirit, such as Madamoiselle's your
Daughters is, the further is it from yielding to such force. I promise you
(said she) that she shall enjoy all imaginable peace, and if I deal otherwise
with her, I give you leave to account me the most inhumane of all Mothers.

I cannot promise you, said he, that she will return, yet I dare hope it. After
some other Discourse, Abelard withdrew. This was the fifth day after my Master
left us, to go to your Assistance. This Evening when it was near Night, he came
to Ponsins, and went to Abelard's House, who gave him an account of the Affairs
of the Castle, and of what he had done, and also of the seasonable sickness of
the Father Matthew. Monsieur d' Ombreval also related the History of your
Deliverance, and how you were retired hither, where you resolved to abide,
'till you could take other Measures. Hereupon they consulted together what
Course was fit to be taken, and at length 'twas resolved that my Brother should
write a Letter to Mounsieur Abelard, to order me immediately to bring him his
Habiliments for War, which he expected two Leagues off.

Abelard carried this Billet to your Mother, who said to him, let him come
hither, tell him that I would speak with him before he takes an eternal
Farewell of me, after which he may do what he pleases. Ah Madam, (said he) he
is but an Hours riding hence, I Will bring him to you this Night. Immediately he
returned to his House, where they supt together, and after Supper they went to
the Castle; but 'twas very late before they came thither, and Madam your Mother
expected them with a great deal of Impatience.

She had a great mind to show her self somewhat cold and severe; but the
affecting manner in which Mounsier d' Ombreval threw himself at her Feet, and
embraced them, without being able to speak a word, awakened the Voice of Nature
in her, in comparison of which all other Voices are weak and impotent. Ah
Ferdinand, (said she, raising him up,) I only desired to see you, to hear you
condemn your self with your own mouth. I desire no other Judge but your own
Conscience. I might (said he) find somewhat to plead in my justification, but
Madam, I had rather make a sincere Confession of my fault. But Ferdinand, (said
Madam d' Ombreval) if I cause your Sister to return, and leave her in a full
and perfect Liberty, will not this satisfy you? for I see that the great love
you have for her, causes you to fail in the respect you owe me.

Mounsier d' Ombreval seemed satisfied with this Promise, yet he still remained
silent. Ah! (said Madam your Mother) I know Ferdinand what it is that you are
afraid of; you are afraid least I should alter my mind, but for this you may
set your Heart at rest, and know, that though the Father Matthew were not sick
unto Death, yet he has caused me too many troublesome Nights ever to make use
of his Advice again: I know what Venom there is in all his Counsels, and I
swear I Will never follow them more; I swear this in truth, and in sicerity of
Heart; and what is more, I am resolved to follow no Advice but yours and your
Sisters.

Seeing it is thus, replied my Master, I shall freely confess that my Sister is
delivered, and I should have brought her with me, could I have expected so
favorable an Entertainment. Hereupon my Master gave her an Account of the
whole success of your Adventure, at which she seemed extremely pleased, and
desired to see you as soon as she could. Immediately she abandoned her Soul to
Joy, and would needs have a Collation with her Son before she went to Bed, who
satisfied her as to all the demands she made, except those as required a more
certain Assurance, that she would continue in this good temper. My Master has
now sent me hither to give you an Account of all that passed, that your mind
may be in quiet, least the uncertain Condition of your Affairs should disturb
it.

Here ended the Relation which my Brothers Servant made, whom I dismissed;
after which I went to see Madam de la Guard and her two incomparable Daughters,
who rejoiced exceedingly at the happy success of my Affairs, for which we
heartily blessed God. I had a great mind to return home to my Mother, but Madam
de la Guard advised me not to make too much haste; adding, that I would do well
to make my entrance into the Reformed Church before my return. I Will lend you my
Castle, (said she) and I have a Minister in whom we may confide, and we will
have no other Witnesses to the Action but my self, my two Sons in Law, and
their Wives, my Daughters. I thanked her, and said, that I would not engage her
in an Affair whose consequences might prove fatal to her; but she would not be
put off. Daughter (said she) we are every hour in danger of Death, make use of
the opportunity you have to make your Declaration, a time may come when you may
exceedingly regret your having let it slip. At length I yielded to her Reasons,
and we resolved that the Thursday following should be the day for this Work. As
for the place, we chose a Summer House that was in the Garden. And the Minister
being before advised of it, came at the day appointed.

He was a Man of about fifty Years of Age, of a good Carriage: He desired to
Discourse me in private. I gave him an account of what made me desire to enter
into the Communion of the Reformed, at which he seemed satisfied, finding that
I had been pretty well Instructed. After this we went all into the Garden,
which was very large and spacious, the Doors of which we carefully shut, for
fear of being ^^^^er surprised or interrupted, and went into the Summer House,
as we had designed. The first thing our Minister did, was to Pray in general
for our little Assembly, after which he made a Discourse, short indeed, but
very full and affecting, of the ^ecessity of Conversion, and of being sincere,
and persevering in it. When he had finished this Discourse, he addressed
himself particularly to me, in these Words:

There Is no great need (Mademoiselle) that I should represent these things to
you, or be more large in them. Know that the Work we are about is of such great
moment, that it is inferior to none other in the World. You abandon a Church
that is environed with Pomp and Magnificence, and is supported by almost all
those that are great and powerful; a Church that has under it many People,
Tongues and Nations, which boasts of Antiquity, and is at present more
flourishing than ever: This Church (I say) you abandon, to enter into another,
in which you will see nothing but misery, reproach and grief, whose Members are
accounted the filth and offscouring of all things, and are but very few, in
comparison of those of the Church of Rome: A Church that is charged with
Novelty and Innovation, and which is in a word oppressed and desolated at
present more than ever hitherto it has been. I ask you once more before this
small and holy Assembly, Have you well considered what you do? Has no humane
Passion or worldly Consideration obliged you to forsake the Belief in which you
were born and bred, to embrace another?

This Question, for which I was not prepared, thinking I had fully satisfied
the Minister in our private Conversation, somewhat surprised me, yet I took
Courage, and rising up, returned this Answer. I call God to witness before you,
God (I say) who knows the secrets of my heart, and to whom my most concealed
Designs are all open and naked, that I forsake the Church of Rome only because
it has fallen into many fundamental Errors with respect to Faith: And because
I am sensible that I cannot coutinue in it without putting my Salvation on a
desperate hazard. This is the sole, the only Motive of my Change, nothing of
any private grudge or worldly affection prompting me to it. I will also, and I
freely consent that you all should rise up as witnesses against me at the day
of Judgment, when the most secret imaginations of our hearts shall be
discovered, if my Conversion be not sincere, or if any worldly Passion has
moved me to it.

I need not tell you what I shall lose in the world by abandoning the Roman
Religion, nor yet the Miseries I must expect in embracing the Reformed. I have
made diverse Reflections upon it for a long time, and God has given me Grace to
surmount all the allorements of the world, and the Calamities I have reason to
expect in entering into the Communion of Saints. I shall only say, that this
Prosperity, and those delights that are in the Church of Rome have disgusted
me, and made me fear to remain in it; for I remember the instructions of my
Father, That it would be with the Church of Rome in general, as we see it is
with the wicked in particular, God suffers them to be advanced and to triumph
on the Earth, to render that ruin and fall that will suddenly overtake them,
the more dreadful. I am not so ignorant as not to know, that all those delights
and this Pomp of the Romish Church, is a mark of its being a false Church,
seeing these things leads men voluntarily to Eternal Misery. This caused me to
hate the Church of Rome, even before I was sensible of its Errors and
Impieties: But now that I plainly see in her all the Marks and Characters of
Mystical Babylon, I leave you to judge whether I am not very willing to leave
her, to obey this voice that says, Come out of her my People, least you are
partakers of her plag^es: So that though there were no ^xternal ^orm of any
other Church, as there was (...) three Ages ago; yet I should earnestly desire
to be separated from her, for fear of being involved in her Condemnation in
that terrible day, in which God will pour down his Judgments upon her.

Much more reason have I to desire to leave her ^n present, when I only as it
were leave a tempestuous Sea, to enter into a safe Harbor: And as ^e Pomps and
Delights of the Church of Rome made me first to doubt whether she were indeed
what she pretended to be, and afterward to hate and despise her in my heart;
so the Afflictions of the Reformed Church, and the Machinations of the Great
Ones of the Earth against her, made me at first esteem her, and afterward love
her. This is what made me to seek Instruction, which I wanted, to beg (...) of
God with tears and cries, who had mercy upon me, and made use of my Father and
Brother to draw me out of the bad way, which I knew to be bad, though as yet I
knew not the good or true way, which leads to Salvation, which is only found in
Jesus Christ, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, who alone has delivered
us from Eternal Death by his Death, and whom we ought to take as our only
Mediator, Intercessor, and Advocate, addressing our selves to God by and
through him in Faith and Truth.

I made my Declaration to the Minister before I came hither, of all the abuses
which I found in the Church of Rome: I now reject them all, and resolve to
adhere to the Faith of that Church which is the true Spouse of Christ,
particularly to the Faith of the Reformed Churches of France, without adding to
or taking from it, or changing it in any particular; and in this Faith I desire
to dye, and I trust in the Mercy of God, that having begun a good work in me,
he will finish it to his own Glory, and my Salvation. I have for a long time
earnestly sighed after what I have now done, and I may say, This is an happy
day for me!

Here I ended my Discourse, to which the Pastor returned this Answer:
Mademoiselle, said he, I have heard you with a great deal of Joy, as also have
those good Christians that are here present. And how can there choose but be joy
on Earth, seeing there is Joy in Heaven when a Sinner repents, or a Wanderer is
reduced into the right way? Being persuaded therefore that your Conversion is
sincere and real, In the Name, and by the Authority of our Lord, I declare you
a true Member of his Church. He has chosen you from Eternity to be his, and as
such he has called you Externally by his Word, and more effectually by his
Spirit; so that I only publish and make known to men, what God has done for
you.

You are now entered into a path very thorny, but withal very glorious; you
shall suffer all the days of your Life, but at length you shall finish your
days in peace and Joy: You must encounter with innumerable Enemies, but the
issue of your Combat will be your Glory and Triumph. The God of Mercy, who
desires not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he would repent and live,
increase in you all the Gifts of his Holy Spirit, and sustain you with his
Power from on high, that having in this World received Authentic Evidences of
Eternal Life, he may indeed bestow it upon you in the Heavens.

Consider seriously, that having entered into this way of Eternal Life, you must
not draw back, nor so much as look back, by remembering and regretting your past
Grandeur, and Conveniences: Seeing you abandon all things to follow the Lord
Jesus, you cannot, with a good Conscience return to what you have left, without
committing an outrage on him, and alienating your heart from the Lord of Glory,
who abhorrs a divided heart, an heart that pretends to adhere to him, and at
the same time runs out after the World: Little Children, says St. John, love
not the world, neither the things that are in the world, if any man love the
world, the Love of the Father is not in him. Oh how happy is that Soul, who
forsaking all other things, makes the Lord Jesus Christ his supreme happiness,
his All! Having said thus, he prayed again for me with much fervor and
affection, during which I shed a thousand tears of Joy, the Evidences of an
inward joy and satisfaction. Madam de la Guard and her two Daughters wept also,
and her Sons-in-law were much affected: This Action was concluded with singing
the 85th. Psalm, which begins thus.

Oh Lord our God, thou gracious
Have been to thy beloved Land;
Jacobs Captivity thou have
Recalled with a mighty hand.
Thy People freely pardoned
Thou have all their Iniquities;
O God thou all their Trespasses,
And sins have covered from thine Eyes.
This was followed by the Blessing, in which I as a New Commer had a double
Portion. I must needs say that the Pastor put up many particular Requests for
me; and after having ended all, he came to salute me, as one newly entered into
their Communion. Madam de la Guard with her two illustrious Daughters followed
him, and embranced me an hundred times; we wept on each other for Joy and love:
The Monsieurs d' Arbaux, and de Chables were extremely obliging in their
Carriage, which I had assurance was sincere. At length we all went out (...)
the Summer House, leaving the Minister alone, wh^ had the Generosity to write
me a Certificate, of m^ having made an Abjuration of the Roman Errors i^ his
Presence, declaring that he owned me for (...) Member of the Church, and prayed
all the Brethren in Christ to receive me as such. I thanke^ him the best that I
could, for he exposed himse^^ to extreme Danger, should I happen to lose th^^
Certificate, and it should fall into dangerous hands As an acknowledgment of
his kindnesses, I would have obliged him to have received a Ring of a
considerable value, but he would not take it, answering me very pleasantly,
That 'twas not the part o^ Converts to give presents to their Converters, bu^
of Converters to give presents to their Converts. (...) answered, That 'twas so
indeed in the false Church but in the true Church they have contrary Maxims;
yet I could never prevail with him to take any thing of me.

After we had walked some time, Madam de l^ Guard was willing to return into
the Castle, where we found in the Hall a stately Collation prepared for us.
Methinks Madam, (said I) you deal with m^ as they did with the Prodigal Son,
for whom the^ killed the fatted Calf as soon as he came to himself and returned
into his Fathers House. She smiled and said, You humble your self too much,
this comparison does not suit you. But I pray you, seeing there is now joy in
Heaven, why should there no^ be some joy also on Earth?

We were very cheerful during the Collation which being ended, the Pastor took
his leave of us I much regretted his departure, seeing God had chosen him to
receive me into his Church, and (...) were his Spiritual Child, the Apostle
Paul himself calling those his Children whom God had brought into the Church by
his Ministry. He promised after a few days to return and see us, and I was much
troubled that I had let him go, before he had satisfied me in a scruple which I
had, viz. whether in case I did return to my Mother, I ought to confess plainly
that I were an Hugonot, or else to pretend that I were still a Roman Catholic.
If I should confess the former, I should be in danger of falling into the same
Inconveniences I had been delivered from, and it may be greater, which I should
very hardly escape. If I should deny it, I should wound my Conscience, and show
that I were ashamed of Christ and his Gospel, which would be a kind of denying
him before men.

At length I resolved, that if my Mother would ^^e me, and my Brother should
advise me to return to her, and if she should demand an account of my Faith, I
would make a plain Confession of it* without dissembling any part of it,
preparing (...) self for the most cruel Events, and choosing ^^^er to suffer in
my Body than in my Conscience. I begged God to strengthen me in this
re^^lation, and to enable me, notwithstanding my own weakness, to overcome all
Crafts, Threatenings, all kind of Temptation, and my proper Infirmities. I
imparted my thoughts to Madam de ^a Guard, who approved of my design, and
exceedingly confirmed me in it.

About three days after my Brother with Mounsier de Haute-Cour came to visit
Madam de la Gar^^: This was an addition to my Joy. After the ^^^^t Caresse; and
Civilities were over, they declared to them, that I was admitted, received and
owned to be a Member of the Reformed Church, ^^d gave them an account of the
manner in which this was done. Never was surprise more agreeable. Blessed be
God, said my Brother, you have treed me from a great deal of trouble: I ^ay now
call you my Sister, not only in Flesh and Blood, but also in Spirit, and in our
Lord Jesus Christ; this obliged him to embrace me (...) second time, and to
give me the Hand or Fellowship. Mounsieur de Haute-Cour durst not so openly
declare his Joy at what I had done, yet he protested to me, that nothing ever
better pleased him in all his Life.

At length Madam de la Guard, believing that my Brother and Mounsieur de
Haute-Cour were not com^ without having something of Moment to impart t^ me,
left the Chamber in which we were. M^ Brother took this opportunity to tell me,
that my Mother earnestly desired to see me, and that (...) should prepare to
return with him. I am ready to do it, said I, but I assure you, that having
made my Declaration, I am not in an Humou^ to dissemble, but am resolved to
declare boldly that I am of the Reformed Religion. At this word my Brother was
silent for some time: At length he consented to what I had proposed, assuring
m^ that my Mother would never trouble me more o^ that account, having too
sensible remorse for wha^ she had already done; adding moreover, that she was
so extremely troubled for having suffered the Father Matthew to usurp such a
Power over her mind, that she is (said he) fallen sick with it, and it is her
Sickness that is one of the Reasons that make me press you to return.

But, Brother, (said I) has not the injuriou^ Letter which you wrote her, made
her sick? Wha^ did you mean by Writing such things? I Confess (said he) that I
was not my self when (...) wrote it; and the trouble of having, as I feared
lost you for ever, made me in a manner star^ mad: Yet this way of Writing has
not wanted a good effect, for it opened my Mothers Eyes, who immediately saw
that her having without imagining any hurt suffered the Father Matthew to usurp
such an Authority over her, was capable to do her an injury, seeing to please
this Man she had hurried away two Children, of whom she had never any reason to
complain; and that so unnatural an Action would never be ascribed to a scruple
and tenderness of Conscience, but to something more odious. It may be, unless I
had wrote this Letter, she would have been the same that she ever has been
toward you and me, so absolute a dominion had the Father Matthew over her
spirit. Moreover I assure you, that the good Woman is not at all displeased
with me for what I have done, and I have all the reason in the World to be
satisfied with the Caresses she has made me. I Will tell you more, Monsieur de
Haute-Cour being come to see me, she showed him all possible Civilities, called
him the Deliverer of her Daughter, and has given him all the hopes that he
could expect for her Consent, being fully convinced as she her self said, that
the Union between the houses de Roche Blanch and d' Ombreval, was determined
in Heaven, whose Decree it is in vain for men to oppose.

I could not choose but blush at the hearing of such News, especially in the
presence of Monsieur de Haute-Cour, who soon perceived the Confusion I was
under, and took this opportunity to fall at my feet, and to tell me, that
although his Passion had been approved of by my late Father, though it was
authorized by my Brother; and though he had also obtained the consent of my
Mother, yet he was resolved to owe me to none but my self. I had never (said I)
any aversion from you, nor am I capable of ever having it: You are an honest
man, much esteemed by all, you have much Merit and Worth, nor am I absolutely
blind. Moreover, you have for you, the Consent of my Father, of my Mother, and
of a Brother whom I am obliged by many reasons to Honor and Love. He loves
Mademoiselle your Sister beyond expression; I give you leave to draw what
favorable consequences you please out of all these things, and remember that
this is the second time that you have forced me to declare the sentiments of my
heart, though they were not unknown to you; beware, (said I smiling) you do it
not a third time, least you give me just cause to complain of you.

Ah Sister, said my Brother laughing, you would make us believe (did we not
know you well enough) that you were worse than indeed you are. I could not
choose but laugh in my turn, and to break off a Conversation so little serious,
I entered upon a Discourse of my return. Monsieur de Haute-Cour could not
consent to it, being still afraid on my behalf. But my Brother was for it,
declaring that he would take such care, and keep-such a strict watch over all
passages, that they should never be able to play me such a trick as they had
done. For my part I desired it with all my heart, and told them, that seeing my
Mother was hal^ vanquished already, the rest of the Victory must needs belong
to me.

Immediately we all three left the Chamber to rejoyn Madam de la Guard, to whom
we discovered the result of our Consultation: She consented with some
difficulty, fearing the same things that Monsieur de Haute-Cour did. But my
Brother assured her that she had no reason to fear, seeing Father Matthew was
under disgrace, and besides was sick unto Death, which hindered him from
regaining the Empire he had once over my Mothers Spirit. We supt this Evening
very cheerfully, and sat up till it was near Morning, spending the time in a
thousand innocent Diversions, at length each withdrew to his Chamber to take
some hours rei^^.

My Brother rose early enough the next Morning, considering how late it was
when he went to Bed. He discoursed some time with my Lover, at lengt^ they sent
to my Chamber, to enquire whether I was risen, and found that I was ordering my
Chambermaid (who was of the Reformed Religion, a very honest Girl, whom Madam
de la Guard had given me, and I have kept ever since, who is now in the Ship
with me) to pack up some things which I had there in order to our Journey.
Methinks, said Monsieur de Haute-Cour, after the usage you have met with at the
Castle de Ponsins, you should not be so earnest to return to it. Methinks,
Monsieur, answered I, there is nothing more glorious than to return with Honor
to a place from whence we have been shamefully driven, when those who have
driven us away, are forced by their own remorse to do us justice, and Caress us
a thousand ways, to make us forget the injuries we have received at their hands.

Just as I had spoken these words, came Madam de la Guard into the Chamber,
which prevented Monsieur de Haute-Cour from making any reply. Why Daughter,
(said she) are you in such haste to be gone from me? at least spend this day
with us. Ah! Madam, (answered I) should I follow the Inclinations of my heart,
I should not only spend this day, but my whole Life with you. It Is in this
House that I have made my entrance into the Church of the Lord, and my open
profession of true Christianity: But Madam, I have a Mother to whom I am
obliged not only by Blood and Nature, but also by a thousand unexpressible
tendernesses: She is sick, she desires to see me, I must they her in all things
in which Conscience is not concerned. Well, (said she) I will not oppose your
departure, but earnestly I desire to have some private Discourse with you
before you go. Madam, said I, I will presently wait on you in your Chamber, to
receive your Instructions, which I shall always va^^e as so many Oracles.

As soon as I had set my Affairs in order, and spoken a word or two to Monsieur
de Haute-Cour and my Brother, I went into Madam de la Gard's Chamber, I found
her alone, she received me with an embrace, which was followed with many most
obliging Expressions. My dear Daughter (said she) I admire the fatality of this
Adventure; 'twas but a few days since that I first knew you, and yet I love you
as tenderly as I can possibly love my own Daughters, which are my own Flesh and
Blood, yet the same Fate that has drawn out my Affections toward you,
snatches you from me now, when I most desire your Presence. We must obey, and
submit our selves to Gods Will. All things concur in calling you home to a
Mother that loves you, and I will not dissuade you from your Duty, yet I would
as a Mother, and as a Member of the same Society with you, give you some
Advice, which as Affairs are at present, cannot but be useful to you.

Consider Daughter, that you are a Member of the true Christian Church, and
that this quality of Reformed Christian, obliges you to renounce all the
Pleasures of the World, which ordinarily follow greatness, and seem to be
entailed on the Church of Rome. I shall not insist much on this Point, because
by what I know of you, you are too wise and Prudent not to make this reflection
your self: Yet there is another Point on which I have spoken to you already,
and shall now speak what more God has put into my mind; it is concerning your
Constancy, to show you, that having embraced the Truth, you are obliged to
persevere in it to the end, with an invincible firmness.

It has been observed, and the Observation is confirmed by daily expe^^ence,
that when a Person renounce h^ the Errors of the Church of Ro^a, to embrace the
Purity of Faith, such as the Word of God teaches us, the Devil and the World
seem to be let loose against that Person; God suffers him to be exposed to the
sharpest Trials, to discover his Iniquity and Hypocrisy, if he return again
into the false Church: Whereas the true Children of God, having their Duty
always before their Eyes, never fail in so essential a Point as perseverance
is, but continue in the fear of the Lord unto the end. Thus you see that the
same fire of Persecution, the same Furnace of Afflictions show the difference
that there is between the Gold and the Dross that is found with it, which
cannot be so well distinguished when they are both taken out of the Mines
together. But as the Fire distinguishes Gold from the Earth or Dross, so
Calamities distinguish the Children of God from Hypocrites, and Sufferings
discover what in Prosperity lay concealed.

Don't imagine (my Daughter) that your Sufferings will only be from the Enemies
of the Faith; indeed they will do the worst they can against you, if you fall into
their Hands; and the least mischief you are to expect from them is the
Confiscation of your Goods, so that you will be forced to be a poor Fugitive and
Vagabond. You may, it may be, promise your self a comforta^le retreat amongst
those of our Communion; but this is what is worst of all, and a real cause of
Lamentation and Mourning: Alas, you will not find them to be such as you
imagine. You may think that professing a Religion, which so plainly Commands
Charity, Zeal, Humility, and renouncing the World, their manners will be
conformable to their belief; but it is nothing so: Don't lie under this mistake,
but be persuaded, that the number of those whose Lives are adorned with
Christian Virtues, is very small, in comparison of those that are very Pious in
their Discourses, and splendid in their Profession, without ever practicing
what they profess.

Oh God! What a Scandal is it, to see the greatest part of those that profess
the Reformed Religion, leading Lives so unbecoming the Gospel, especially in
other Countries where the Rods of Advers^ty ^^ve not been yet felt: You will
find Pride wh^re you expected Humility, Dissoluteness instead of ^^^de^ty,
Hardness of Heart instead of Charity, ^^^ness and Indifference instead of Zeal.
Oh what anguish will the sight of these things cause in you? I h^^e known
Persons that have bravely born the lo^ (...) Goods, and have not at all yielded
to Threat^ings, Misery and Imprisonment, whom the sight of the horri^le
disorder amongst the Reformed throughou^ the W^^ld, have almost vanquishr.

Wh^^ever you retire, you will have many Spies (...), who will watch all your
words and Action^ with greater Care and Malignity than if you ^^te ^^ll a Roman
Catholic. Your greatest Ene^^es will be the Women, (I must speak this to the
shame of my Sex) who seeing you young and handsome, will not be persuaded that
a Person of your Age and Quality could abandon all for the quiet of her
Conscience. Hereupon they will invent a thousand idle and ridiculous stories
against you, as their envy or jealonsie shall prompt them. Others will relate
all that they shall hear, adding Malignant Commentaries of their own, either to
vex you, or oblige you to discover some discontent. Yea, they will be apt enough
to iniure you to your Face, either by dull or bitter Railleries, or else by
open affronts; so that that from which you may promise your self Joy and
Consolation, will be to you the Cause of Grief and Tears.

There have been Persons of Honor and Merit that have also been obliged to
seek security amongst the Reformed of other Countries; but alas! they were much
deceived in their Opinion of them, and found that they were only Reformed out
of Custom, and because they happened to be born such, and that had they, been
born Ranters, or Papists, or Jews, they would not have changed their Religion,
what faults soever they had seen in it, and on this damnable Principle they
hate all those that turn from Error to Truth, as inconstant. Who, ever heard of
such a depravation! yet I believe those from whom I had an account of it, who
are Persons very sincere and Pious, and who would never have discovered the
nakedness of those of their own Communion, had not they done it first
themselves, by their own Actions.

I speak these things that you may not be surprised nor astonished, when you
see the Lives of some of the Reformed, so different from their Faith, and that
you may not take up an ill Opinion of what they believe from their Practices,
by which they are so far from honoring the Father which is in Heaven, that
they not only dishonor him themselves, but also by their horrible Examples
provoke others to do so too. For my part, seeing the present Fury of our
Enemies, and the liberty they take in acting it, I expect some dreadful
Calamity, and endeavor to prepare my own and my Daughters minds for the most
surprising and fatalest accidents, knowing that an evil foreseen, and for which
Persons are prepared, loses above half its force.

I shall conclude my Discourse with sincere Vows for your Welfare and
Prosperity. May it please our good. God to increase in you daily the Gifts of
his Holy Spirit: Pray to him, my Daughter, call on him in your Prosperity, and
you will find him gracious unto you in your Adversity; if Men afflict you, he will
fill your Soul with unspeakable Joy; if they wound you, he will bind up your
wounds, and apply to them the most healing Balsome; if they deprive you of your
perishing riches here below, he^ll heap on you eternal ones above; this is what
I wish with my whole Heart. Moreover, that you may remember me, I beg you to
receive this small present, giving me several Books of Devotion very well
bound. I intended to have enlarged in my Expressions of thankfulness, but she
would not suffer me. I was much pleased with the Present she made me, and
carried it my self into my Chamber, to look it up in my Gabinet.

As soon as these things were over, we went to Dinner, at which we were not so
cheerful as we had been last Night at Supper. After Dinner we took our leaves
one of another. I shall not give an account of the Tears we all shed: I could
never have thought 'twould have been so terrible to me to part from Madam de la
Guard and her two illustrious Daughters, who also made me Presents after their
Mothers Example. They all went into the Coach to keep me Company; the Messieurs
d' Arbaux and de Chables took Horse to accompany my Brother and Lover, who came
on Horseback, though they also brought a Coach with them. They rode with us
about a League and half where fresh Tears were shed by us, and many Civilities
passed between our Gentlemen. My Brother and Lover made their Compliments in
particular to Madam de la Guard and her two Daughters, because of their
extraordinary kindness they had shown me; and after varieties of Expressions
denoting thankfulness and affection, our Coaches parted: I was left in mine
with none but my Chambermaid, admiring the strange revolution of this World,
that I should return voluntarily the same way which I had been but a little
before carried by force. As for my Lover and my Brother, they chose to ride on
Horseback, for fear of any unhappy accident; they had also with them two Men
that were very resolute and well armed.

I shall not give you an account of what happened this Journey, 'till I come to
our Castle. My Brother caused the Coach to stop some distance from the Gate,
because he would not have my Mother know by the noise that we were come. My
Brother and Lover alighted off their Horses, and I came out of the Coach; and
my Brother having strictly charged all the Family not to give my Mother Notice
of our coming, we went up toward her Chamber, and I met her coming out of her
Closet, with an extreme pale and languishing Countenance, at which I was much
surprised: As soon as I saw her, I fell at her feet, saving, God has been very
gracious to me, in suffering me to embrace your Knees with the satisfaction I
have of being assured that you are no longer angry with me. At this surprise my
Mother cried out, and was forced to sit down, not having strength to stand up;
at length being a little come to her self, she said, Justine, my Daughter!
Justine, my Child! Let me say, that God has been very gracious to me, in
restoring me my dear Children, after I had blindly taken such pains to drive
them from me: Come, my Daughter, let me embrace you, after which let Death come
when it will, I am ready for it.

I would not stir from her Knees, but she forced me to arise and sit down by
her. The Astonishment was so great, that she took no notice of Mounsier de
Haute-Cour nor my Brother: At length, I believe, (said she to the former) that
your Happiness has been the sole hindrance of my Daughters Misery, for Heaven
would not suffer a Person dear to you, to be carried away, but has directed
you to find her and bring her back. In a word, Heaven has destined her for
you, and men can neither successfully nor honestly oppose its Decrees. You told
me a few days since, that you desired nothing in the World more than to have
her for your Wife. I now give her to you, and both Command her as a Mother, and
beg her as a Friend to consider you as her Husband, seeing Mounsieur de
Roche-Blanche, and Madam his Wife, her dead Father, and her Brother, by whom
she ought to be directed since her Fathers death, have desired this Union.

Madam, said I, suffer me to enjoy the Consolation of seeing you, without
minding any thing else. I believe (answered my Mother smiling) that you are
very glad to see me, but one happiness ought not to be an Obstacle to another
which is greater; and after all, Daughter, I owe you a reparation. I give you
to this Gentleman, to whom you have, it may be, given your Heart already, this
ought to make you forget the Injury that was done you. And on the other hand I
am inde^ted to Mounsier de Haute-Cour for having restored me my Daughter,
though (it may be) he aimed more at his own satisfaction than at mine.

I confess I was both confounded and vexed that these things should be spoken in
my Lovers presence, and my Mother perceiving my trouble, arose, and after
having recommenced her Civilities with Mounsier de Haute-Cour, and her Caresses
toward my Brother; I desire, said she, to allow my Heart a little-Joy, after
its being delivered from such cruel Afflictions. Immediately she sent for the
two Rabourses and Abelard, who had the Honor to eat with us; the rest of the
day was spent in a great deal of Pleasure, 'till Supper, during which they made
me sit near Mounsier de Haute-Cour. You may better imagine, than I can tell,
what Discourses passed between us. In the Evening my Mother ordered my Brother
to take Horse the next Morning, and invite Mounsier and Madam de Roche Blanch,
and Madamoi^^^ Ga^^^^^^s their illustrious Daughter, to our Ca^^^^dding, that
^n the mean time she would keep Mons^^ur de Haute-Cour with her as a pawn: This
Employment my Brother joyfully accepted, and went very early the next Morning
toward Roche Blanch.

I never had enjoyed so much Peace and Pleasure since my Fathers Death, as I
now did. I was much in my Mothers Favor, who dealt with me more like a Friend
than like a Daughter. She loved me very tenderly, and I loved her much after
the same manner. I freely enjoyed my Lovers Company without the least jealousy
or hinderance. One thing indeed troubled me, which was the assurance I had that
there was somewhat I^^ near my Mothers heart which though she endeavored to
conceal from me as much as possible, yet she could not from time to time
forbear sighing in my presence. I once resolved to ask her the reason of her so
great trouble, of which I feared my change of Religion wa^ the cause. She
perceived my fear, wherefore sh^^ resolved to put me out of doubt: I know,
Justin^^ said she, that you believe your sentiments about Religion are the
cause of my Affliction: No, no, I a^ not sorry to see you an Hugonot, or ready
to (...) one. What would you say, should I tell you, that am apt sometimes to
approve of what you have done and to envy your Condition?

So unexpected an expression struck me silent s^^^ some moments, but at length
I answered thus. M^dam, (said I) I have entirely rejected the Rom^ Religion,
and embraced the Protestant; in whi^^ I hope, according to that assruance which
God ha^^ graciously given me, I shall live and dye: But M^dam, give me leave to
speak one word out of (...) Word of God to you, which I have often he^^^ from
my Father and Brother; To day ij you will hear his voice, harden not your
heart. When they spoke these words to me, I was as you at present are, under
doubts and much unc^rtainty what course to take. They advised me not eto trust
to my own understanding, but to beg of God that he would show me what to do. I
did so, and God at length determined me to do what I have now done, for which I
do, and I hope I shall to all Eternity bless his Holy Name. Besides, my Brother
gave me a New Testament, which I read several times, and we had some Discourses
together, till at length the Spirit of God finished the work he had begun in
me. Take, Madam, the same Course, and be assured, that the reason why your
Priests and Confessors forbid you to read the Holy Scriptures, is, because its
exceeding great light is abundantly sufficient to discover all their Errors and
Abuses. Indeed (replied my Mother) the words that you have spoken are very
wonderful: To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your heart. Yes,
Madam, (said I) you will find it thus written in the 94th or 95th Psalm, where
David exhorts his People not to resist the Voice and Will of God, if they hear
him speaking to their hearts or to their Eyes by his wonderful Works. And St.
Paul in the third Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews, applies this passage
to those to whom God had discovered the first sparks of his Truth, either by
his Word heard or meditated on, or by holy speculations, for these things are
indeed the Voice of God; so that none can harden their Hearts against it,
without becoming guilty in his sight.

If you please, Madam, (added I) I Will fetch you the New Testament which my
Brother gave me. Do so; (said she) and if you see Monsieur de Haute-Cour bid
him come hither, for I will not conceal our Conversation from him. I went, or
rather flew, to discharge the Commission my Mother had given me. I called my
Lover, to whom I gave a brief account of the disposition of my Mothers Spirit;
I ^egg'd his assistance in persuading her, which he joyfully promised; so that
we went both to her. Monsieur, (said my Mother) you cannot but be sensible of
the Esteem and Affection that I have for you. I desire that you would sincerely
tell me your Mind, without the least complaisance: My Daughter has confessed,
that she is of the same Religion that you are. For my part, I neither love nor
value her the less for it; and sometimes I am apt to approve of what she has
done, and believe, that had I been in her circumstances I should have done the
same thing. In a word, the farther I look into it, the more abuses I discover
in the Roman Religion; but yet I know not what to do, for we ought not to
abandon a Belief in which we have been born and bred, unless very weighty
Reasons oblige us to it; nor yet can we persevere in a belief whose falsehood we
are convinced of, without wounding our Conscience. These Considerations keep my
mind in suspense; pray help me to determine what course to take.

Madam, (replied Monsieur de Haute-Cour,) since it is your pleasure that I speak
my thoughts freely, I shall not amuse my self by discoursing largely on the
Truth and Purity of the Reformed Religion, nor the Errors of that of Rome, for
this would be a work of some hours, yea of some days. The Church of Rome errs
in many fundamental points, and the Arguments she urges in her defense are so
weak and captious, that I should never have done, should I give you a
particular account of them. I shall therefore turn my Discourse another way,
and prove that you have no reason to make any difficulty of leaving the Romish
Religion, since those very Persons that press you to persevere in it, are not
themselves persuaded of its truth.

Has it not been told you a thousand times, that A^ricular Confession was
absolutely necessary, there being dreadful Anathema^s pronounced against such
as conceal any thing from their Confessor? I shall not insist on this, that
this kind of Confession is not to be found in Scripture, without offering
abundance of Violence to it, and that if the Primitive Church ever admitted it,
'twas never accounted indispensibly necessary, as it is now. What need is there,
(Madam) that a Priest should know all my Heart, and discover all my weaknesses,
fears and scruples, whereby he may do what he will with me, especially drain my
Estate to enrich Churches, and Monasteries? This has occasioned most of those,
who have some, sense of the Abuses of Confession, to confess no more than is
consistent with their Interest: Especially those whose Confessors are Jesuits,
will not if they are wi^e, confess all they know, do, or think, because they
may assure themselves, that their secrets will be revealed, and will pass to
other Persons besides their Confessor, notwithstanding the great Corporal and
Spiritual Punishments pronounced against those that reveal Confessions*
Remember (Madam) the Questions that your Confessor asked you, and you will find
after having examined the Penances and satisfactions that he ordained, that he
made use of your Confession only to get somewhat or other from you, or else a
more absolute dominion over your Spirit. This therefore is an Article, which
the Church of Rome has published for her own private Interest, I mean worldly
Interest: Not to mention the many other mischiefs that are occasioned by it,
much like those for which it was formerly prohibited in the Greek Church, by
Nectarius Patriarch of Constantinople.

Again, P^^gatory, what is it but an Invention to maintain plenty in the
Kitchins of their Clergy, who have also found out the Remedy against it, which
are Masses for the Dead, and Pilgrimages? What Man, being persuaded that his
Soul must s^sser the most dreadful Torments for many thousand of years, can
avoid being terrified at the imagination of it, and refuse to give large
donations for the singing of multitudes of Masses, by their means to be saved
from it? Who sees not that this is nothing else but a mere humane Invention?
for Purgatory was invented to cause she Mass to be prized, and the Mass to
furnish the Kitchen; whence it follows, that the Roman Religion is partly
invented, to furnish the Clergy with means to live in pomp and deliciousness.
This has occasioned many Roman Catholics to laugh at Purgatory, and contemn
the Mass, adhering only externally to the Roman Religion for their advantage,
but indeed are of no Religion at all, because they judge that all Religions are
like the Roman, invented only to awe the People, and keep them in due bounds,
as more effectual to this End, than Arms and Cittadells.

As for the Mass, did we but know the multitude of Priests that laugh at it in
their Hearts, it may be the hundredth part of all the Priests in the World
would hardly be found good Catholics. Did they believe that Christ was really
present, and that they could bring him down from Heaven to eat him, they would
behave themselves far otherwise in the celebration of the Mass than now they
do. Not one of them but would tremble, knowing that he held in his hands Christ
the Son of God, God and Man, the Monarch of Angels, he that shall judge him at
the last day, and could punish him immediately for his offenses against him.
They would neither be what they are, nor do what they do, if they were
persuaded that they held the Savior of the World in their hands, who is
jealous of his own Glory. In a word, (added Mademoiselle de St. Phale) Monsieur
de Haute-Cour said the same things for substance that Monsieur de B. V. said
the other day against the Father Maimbourge, who undertook to defend the
Prohibition the King had made, That no Catholic should turn Protestant; and
that such as had formerly been Protestants, and had turned Catholics, should
not return to their first profession, of which Prohibition or Declaration
Monsieur de B. V. showed the horrible Injustice and Abuse.

My Mother hearkened very attentively to what Monsieur de Haute-Cour said.
Indeed he made his Reflections in so curious and sweet a manner, and with so
much strength of Judgment, that she heard him without interrupting him at all.
We had every day Discourses of this Nature, till at length I perceived my
Mother was more than half conquered, when I saw all the Images that were in her
Chamber removed and laid up in a Garret, instead whereof she ordered my Fathers
Bible with Liodates and Desmarets Annotations to be brought her, in which I
very often read to her. Monsieur de Haute-Cour expounded several passages, and
showed her what was believed and practiced in the Church of Rome contrary to
the Scripture.

On a certain day as we were all together, she took up my New Testament, and
read the words which my Brother had wrote in the beginning: Behold I stand at
the door at knock, if any one hear my voice and open to me, I will come in unto
him, and sup with him, and he with me. Do you know, Madam, said Monsieur de
Haute-Cour, what Christ means, when he says that he stands at the Door and
knocks? He does this when he touches an Heart, as he has done yours, when he
makes it know by frequent admonitions, that is must come to him. Hear therefore
his Voice, and open the Door of your Heart to him, conforming your self to his
Will, and trusting in his Holy Promises; if you let Christ in unto you, he will
sup with you, and you with him; that is, he will have a perfect Communion with
your Spirit, and will give you an earnest of his Glory.

Your Arguments (replied my Mother) are indeed very strong: But cannot the
Catholics turn them to their advantage? and cannot the Priests interpret them
in favor of their Church as well as you of yours? They may indeed do it, (said
he) but against Reason. For Christ invites us to open to him; it is he alone
that will come in to us, because he would have as full a Communion with us, as
the Head can have with its Members. It Is to him alone therefore that we ought
to open the door of our hearts, acknowledging him to be our only Savior and
Mediator. We must not open it to He-Saints, or She-Saints: No, not to the
Virgin Mary her self, who, though she bare the Lord Jesus Christ in her Womb,
yet has not the Power to save us. Let us therefore open these doors to Jesus
Christ alone. Let us set them wide open, and invite him to dwell with us; let
us have an holy confidence in his promises, and we shall be eternally united to
him. But let us shut the doors of our hearts against all other things; that is,
let us put no Confidence in any other merit but his. It Is evident, that this
was our Saviors Design: And it is this that the Reformed Church teaches, who
exhorts all Persons to hear the Voice of Christ, and give him entrance, and
none other. Whereas in the Church of Rome we are called upon to open the doors
of our Hearts to Saints of both S^xes, especially to the Blessed Virgin. Hence
it follows, that to hear the Voice of Christ, and open the doors of our hearts
to him, we must adhere to that Church which acknowledges his Merit to be alone
necessary and efficacious for the Salvation of Souls; and if our Church be not
this Church, I am out o^ hopes of ever finding it.

At this very moment my Curiosity grew to^ strong for me, and made me ask my
Mother t^ what I might impute this great alteration, that she being but a
little before so zealous a Catholic, was no^ become half a Hugonot? God
(replied she) does won^derfully work what pleases him, and often suffers us t^
take some false steps, and to be in danger of falling and the^ presently
bestows upon us sense and spirit of ^^^^ning and causes us to withdraw ou^
foot from the evil way in which we were going Above all, Daughter, that that
has most disabuse^ me, is, that the Father Matthew, in whom I entirely
confided, has discovered himself all at once 'Twas he that exhorted me to send
away my Daughter, and by my severity toward my Son, force him to leave me too;
nor had he the Patience to s^a^ till my Son was gone, before he solicited me to
bestow my Estate on the Society. 'Twas at this ver^ instant that your Brother
wrote me a most b^^e and injurious Letter, which enraged me beyon^ expression:
Two days after I examined this Letter in cool Blood, and found that he was far
more excusable than I imagined, and that I had give^ him but too just a
Provocation. You already know without doubt, the issue of that business, so
that need not repeat it to you.

Thus I lost the good Opinion I had of my Confessor, and called to mind many
other particulars which made but too plain a discovery of his Disposition. The
first thing that I desired to do, was to call hom^ my Children, and afterward
to make use of no other Advice but theirs, seeing God had been so graciou^ to
me as to bestow on me such as were both wi^^ and Virtuous. About this time I
was obliged to g^^^ into your late Fathers Chamber, to seek some Papers which I
needed. I could not forbear reading in his Books, I found many of controversy,
amongst others I saw a little Manuscript, which as far as I could judge by the
hand and Style, was of his own Writing and Composure a little before his Death.
The Title of this little Book was, The Marks of the (...) Church lately
verified in our days.

I may truly say, that the reading of this Piece perfectly changed me, for it
disabused me in many particulars. First of all, it quoted expressly those
passages, in which it was affirmed, that the Church must be exposed to a
thousand sufferings, and there were many curious reasonings on this subject. In
the second place he confirmed this Truth, by all the Miseries that had befallen
the Ancient Church. He passed on in the third place, to those that the
Protestants had endured, by Wars, Massacres, and Torments. In the fourth place,
he proved that the Reformed Church was the true Church, which the ^alse Church
endeavored to oppress; and that the same things would befall her, that befell
the Ancient Church, and which Jesus Christ had foretold. And in the last place,
he undenyably proved that the Church of Rome which made use of Frauds,
Violences, Money, and all other ways to promote her Interest, could not be the
true Church, because she follows the same Methods that the Devil takes to
establish Lies amongst Men: 'Twas on ^^is last Article that he most insisted.
The Con^^sion of this Book was, An Exhortation to such as were separated from a
Church that was forced to decl^re she had an ill Opinion of her self, never to
return into it, unless they would voluntarily become the Authors of their own
ruin: And to such as were still subject to such a-Church, not to persist in
their subjection, but to open their Eyes, since the Church of Rome her self
discovers her own weaknesses.

I was much affected with this Manuscript, so tha^ I was resolved, if God gave
me opportunity, to b^ better informed of the means of Salvation than (...) then
was. About this time your Brother returned and made his peace with me. I laid
open the stat^ of my Soul to him, and I leave you to judge whe^ther he took not
all imaginable pains to perswad^ me, which yet he could not fully d^^^, because
(...) could not tell how to think of abandoning a Religion in which I was born
and bred.

After she had spoken what she thought sit, Monsieur de Haute-Cour returned her
this Answer, Madam, said he, I am so far from blaming, that I highly approve of
your serious considering what you are about to do, before you enter into the
tru^ Church; but remember, that you must not spen^ your whole Life in these
uncertainties. For, Madam, God hates a divided heart, and protestet^ that he
cannot endure those that are lukewarm: Th^^ is what he says to the Angel of
the Church of La^dicea: I know thy works, that thou art neither co^nor hot, I
would thou were either cold or hot; but because thou art neither cold nor hot,
but lukewarm, I wi^^ spew thee out of my mouth. We ought not only t^^^
interpret this lukewarmness wi^h respect to Devotion, but also with respect to
Faith; for as God rejects such as are lukewarm with respect to Piety as well as
such as are stark cold; so he also reject those that are unresolved with
respect to true Faith as well as those that are plunged in Error. Giv^ me
leave, Madam, to tell you, that the present condition of your Soul cannot
please God, for in the Estate you are now in, it is neither cold no^ hot, but
lukewarm, and this is a terrible word. (...) will spew thee out of my mouth;
for it is a Decree o^ Rejection. God spoke thus to the Israelites, Ho^^^ ^^^g,
said he, will you halt between two Opinions? if ^aal be God, serve him, but if
the Lord be God, serve ^im? In the Estate in which you, Madam, now ^re, you are
neither a Catholic, nor of the Reformed Religion, and consequently cannot be
saved either in the Catholic Religion, or in ours. But, Madam, shall I give
you good Advice, after having showed you your Danger? Address your self to God
^n ardent Prayers, it is he that must determine you, it is he that will overcome
all your doubts and scruples, and sweetly and efficaciously draw you to
himself; submit your self cheerfully unto him, for his Yoke is easy, and his
Burden is light. I was extremely pleased with Monsieur de Haute-Cours
Discourse, for it much affected my Mother, who declared, that ^he would follow
his Advice: We spent some days ^n these Discourses, till Monsieur and Madam de
Roche Blanch, Mademoiselle de Garisolles and my Brother, arrived at our
Castle. My Mother, who ^ad lost her Husband since she saw them last, received
them with much Civility, but also with some ^^ars: and had they not left her to
come to me, they would have wept too. I shall not give an account of all the
Caresses I received. At length I ^ad the liberty of saluting Mademoiselle de
Garisolles, for whom my Mother has expressed a great deal of tenderness. I
know not how long we should have continued in our embraces, had they not
separated us.

The ^^st serious Discourse Monsieur and Madam de Roche Blanch had with my
Mother, was about our Marriages, which we presently concluded, and Articles
drawn up and signed. They caused us to be called to them, to tell us this News,
at which we were not much troubled, but made Presents one to another. This
passed without much Mystery and Ceremony, because all the Parties were agreed,
and 'twas resolved to conceal our Marriages, till we had set our Affairs in
order: Monsieur de Roche Blanch, and Monsieur de Haute-Cour, resolved to act
always in concert with my Mother and Brother. This Evening we were as cheerful
as possibly we could, in an House of Mourning, in which a double Marriage had
been concluded on, to the satisfaction of all concerned.

The next Morning, my Mother discovered the Dispositions of her Mind before us
all, at which neither Monsieur nor Madam de Roche Blanch, nor Mademoiselle de
Garisolles were surprised, because my Brother had told them of it before. We
all prepared our selves with several Reasons to persuade her, but she did not
give us opportunity to mention them. I am, said she, fully resolved and
determined, I will dye in the Reformed Religion. The Happy, Peaceful, and Pious
Death of my Husband, makes me desire to dye like him. Moreover, the Discourse
of Monsieur de Haute-Cour, which I have seriously weighed and considered, has
overcome all my scruples. My Daughter has done that already which I should
have done before her, did God restrain his Providence to the Order of Nature:
But I find, that being more obstinate than she, he was pleased to cause her
Conversion to precede, that she might be an instrument in mine. You know my
resolution, I beg you to advise me in what manner to make my Abjuration, and my
open entry into the true Church.

The Opinions were different, but at length they approved of mine. I told them
that in fifteen days there would be the Lords Supper at Madam de la Gardes
Castle, where would be the Minister to whom I had made my Abjuration,
Incognito, by reason of the unjust rigor that is excercised against those of
the Religion: That my Mother and I would go thither under pretense of thanking
Madam de la Guard for her Civility toward me, but indeed that my Mother might
do what I had done, ad^^ing, That this Lady was so truly generous and de^out,
that she would readily accept of this Propo^^tion; and that afterward we might
communicate together, which I had not yet done, but was ex^^eamly desirous to
do; besides, that all this might ^e done with the greatest privacy in the
World. ^very one approved of what I said, so that we ^^ought we had done
business enough for this day.

The third day was also spent in Conversations. Monsieur and Madam de Roche
Blanch took me ^^om Monsieur de Haute-Cour, to relate the Story ^f my carrying
away; which having done, Monsieur de Roche Blanch, who is an ancient
Gentleman, (...) a very good Humor, said, When they once come (...) take
Romantic Heroines from amongst the Cal^^i^^^, you, my Daughter may promise
your self large part, for a few days of your Life contain ^^ny curious
passages, and show that Heroique Qua^^ies do not wholly owe themselves to other
men's ^^ginations and Fancies. But Monsieur, (answer^^ I smiling) what would Men
say, should they ^^ow that the Heroine in the Romance has been ^^llied by you?
This is so contrary to all Rules, ^^at should an Author advance any such thing,
he ^^^ld ^e unmercifully dealt with by the Critics.

I believe, said Madam de Roche Blanch, should (...) let you alone, you would
write a Comical Romance, that should exceed that of Monsieur S^ar^^^, but
we will find you some other emloyment. ^ereupon they had a very pleasant
Conversati^^ so that I judge d my self happy in having a Father and
Mother-in-^aw of so good a Humor, for accounted them such already. 'Twas
impossible (...) us to mind ^^y serious business this day. As (...) my Mother,
she had a very tender Conversati^^ with Madam de Garisolles, and her Affections
^ere so set upon ^^r, that she seemed to have forgotten which of us she had
brought into the world. I was so far from being jealous at this kindness, that
I rejoiced at it with all my heart: Besides, Monsieur and Madam de Roche
Blanch had such sentiments for me, that I had no reason to be dissatisfied.

This Evening at Supper, Madam de Roche Blanch earnestly invited my Mother to
go with her to her house. My Mother excused her self for a while, but seeing
Madam de Roche Blanch would take no denial, she at last consented. 'Twas
therefore resolved that Monsieur and Madam de Roche Blanch, my Mother,
Mademoiselle de Garisolles, and I, should take this Journey, and that Monsieur
de Haute-Cour and my Brother should tarry at Ombreval, to give order concerning
some Affairs there; though 'twas somewhat cruel to be separated from my Lover;
yet I diverted my self as well as I could all the Road. I found the Castle of
Roche Blanch, the Gardens, and all other things there in a better Estate than
I could have imagined: We abode in this delicate place four or five days,
during which we were admirably treated, and took many pleasant and diverting
Walks. At length we were forced to separate, because the time in which we were
to be at Madam de la Gardes Castle drew near; my Mother and I took our leaves
with many tears which were presages of the end of our mirth, and that we should
never all meet again, which indeed we never did. Monsieur de Roche Blanch
ordered four Troopers to guard us. My Lover and my Brother rode to meet us, and
after having saluted us, came into the Coach to us, and we all arrived at
Ombreval almost as soon as it was Night.

The four Troopers abode with us three or four days, for we resolved to make
use of them to guard us to Madam de la Gardes, where we came the day before
they designed to receive the ^ord'^ Supper. Madam de la Guard was exceeding
glad to see me. My Mother and she knew each other, having seen each other at
Paris, when they were Virgins, but being of a different Religion and Province,
they had no great Acquaintance; besides, they did not know each other by the
Names of Madam de la Guard, and Madam d' Ombreval. Our Joy at this meeting was
so great, that I wonder we dyed not of it, as it is said some have done;
especially that of Madam de la Guard was much increased, when she understood by
me that my Mother was come hither to abjure the Romish Religion.

That the Domestics might not suspect their Design, they had pitched on a
weekday rather than the Lords Day, to celebrate the Supper, besides the Garden
was an admirable place for such work. The same Minister in whose Presence I had
made my Declaration, came the Evening before, and was very ready to do what we
now desired of him, as he had been before with respect to me. The same Evening
he had a long Discourse with my Mother, with which he was well satisfied; so
that the next morning my Mother was Received, to the common joy of us all, and
with the same formalities, and before the same Witnesses that I were, but she
would not receive any attestation from the Minister. After which the Minister
made a short, but good and Learned Sermon, with which I was much edified; as
also was my Mother, who soon perceived a great deal of difference between it
and the empty trash that is usually vented by the Preachers of the Church of
Rome. Neither she nor I had ever heard such a Sermon before, so that we
received the Word of God as hungry Souls. Afterward we communicated with a
thousand times more Devotion and Piety than ever we had at Mass, so necessary
is the Knowledge of the Truth to make a good Communicant: The singing of
Psalms, and Prayers, in a Tongue that we understood, much affected us, we not
having been used to hear such things; especially my Mother was ravished at the
Song of Simeon, which is ordinarily sung at the end of the Communion, in which
she found words that wonderfully suited her Condition.

As soon as all was over: Alas, said my Mother to Madam de la Guard, how
singular a Consolation have I been all my Life deprived of, in being kept from
the Knowledge of the true Religion! Oh how criminal are those that would
destroy so devout, so spiritual, so edifying a Worship! After the unexpressible
satisfaction which I have received, I may truly apply to my self, what we but
now sung, Oh Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine Eyes
have seen thy Salvation. Let Death come when it will, I expect it with Joy. And
I hope that God will not suffer me to languish long in this World, seeing I
desire the full enjoyment of those Blessings, whereof he has given me an
Earnest at present. Madam, (answered Madam de la Guard*) we ought to say as our
Lord did before his Passion, Father, not my Will, but thy Will be done.

We abode all this day with Madam de la Guard, and the next Morning took our
leaves of her, though much against the Consent of this obliging Lady, whom my
Mother thanked as well as she could. If I wept formerly when I parted from her,
I now wept more, foreseeing the miseries that were like to befall me. My Mother
would not suffer them to accompany us. During all our Journey we discoursed of
the Excellency of the Worship of the Reformed, above that of the Papists, in
stirring up true Piety in the Soul. For my part, (said my mother, the more I
examine things, the more I admire the Conduct of Divine Providence. You know,
(Justine,) how furious I was in matters of Religion. I remember the time in
which had any one assured me that you would have been a Protestant, I believe I
should have strangled you in your Cradle, and yet God made choice of you to be
an Instrument of my Convertion. Madam, (answered I) he who converted
Persecutors into Apostles and Martyrs, could easily make you, who were once
fixed in the Belief of the Roman Church, a member of his own Church. We often
see miracles of this Nature, which God works to show the wonderful Efficacy of
his Spirit upon the most obstinate Hearts.

These and the like Discourses we had on the Road, till we came to our Castle,
where we sent back the Troopers that guarded us, having satisfied them be^^nd
their hopes. M^^^^ de B^esses, who was my Fathers Sister by a second Bed, as I
told you before, and who had been married in Po^e^ania, was come into France to
take possession of an Estate that wa^ fallen to her by the Death of a Sister,
and was so kind as to afford us the Consolation of seeing her. She was ravished
with Joy, as soon as she heard of my Mothers Conversion. There were also many
Caresses that passed between her and Monsieur de Haute-Cour, my Brother and my
self, which I shall not now relate.

In the midst of all our Joys my mother fell sick, and her Distemper grew so
violently upon her, that in two days we began to be afraid of her; and what was
at first but a doubtful fear, was shortly after converted into a cruel
certainty. Notwithstanding the Violence of the Distemper, my Mothers
Understanding, Judgment, and Speech never failed her. The very first moment
that she took her Bed, she was persuaded she should never rise more; for which
reason she courageously prepared her self for Death. Dispense with me, (said
Mademoiselle de S^. Phale the tears running down her cheeks,) from relating all
the circumstances of her Death, the very remembrance of which pierces my very
heart. I shall only tell you that she dyed a true Reformed Christian, and that
she heartily blessed God that he was pleased to discover his Truth to her, and
to take her ou^ of the World, not suffering her to see those Calamities with
which his Church was threatened, and in which she might have had a large ^^^re.
She earnestly exhorted me to Piety and Per^^verance (...) the true Religion:
She called for her ^ewe^s, which were of great value, and gave Monsieur de
Haute-Cour, and m^ Brother, each of them a very ^ich Ring: Afterward she
divided her Jewe^s into two parts* giving me the one, and commi^^ing the other
to my Brother for Mademoiselle de Ga^i^oi^^^s, for whom she had designed them.

Having made this division, she disposed of the rest of her Estate, making my
Brother her Heir, on such terms as neither I nor my Lover had reason to be
dissatisfied. After which she would think o^ nothing out the Concerns of
another World: And Monsieur Haute-Cour, my Brother, and I were always employed
in reading some Chapters of the Holy Scriptures, or some of the Consolations of
the Faithful against the Fear of Death. But seeing us very apt to fall into
tears from time to time, My Children, (said she) I have no need of your tears,
but of your Constancy. My Brother was no more able to refrain from Tears than
I, nor Monsieur de Haute-Cour than either of us, though we used our utmost
endeavors to stop them. Some short time after my Mother dyed in our Arms, her
last words being that Passage which she had often in her Mouth, Lord, now
let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, for my Eyes have seen thy Salvation.

It Is impossible for me to give you a true Account of the Condition in which we
then were. Alas, how often did I envy my Mother! I need not take much pains to
persuade you that I had reason to be much afflicted. 'Twas well for us that
Madam de Brosses was with us, to take some Care about the business of the
Family, which was now in a terrible Desolation; for as for Monsieur de
Haute-Cour, his time was taken up in Comforting me, who had like to have
followed my Mother into the Grave, so that he was incapable of minding any
other business; besides, he had a real Affection for my Mother, as she had also
for him. As for my Brother, whom my Mother had loved so tenderly, he was so
affected with this stroke, that for several days he could not rest, nor would
he so much as eat, but when forced to it.

Madam de Roche-Blanche, and Mademoiselle de Garissolles came very opportunely
to awaken him out of this Lethargy: Their coming caused us all to weep afresh.
We buried my Mother without any Ceremony, near my Father, as she had ordered,
and we did what discovered not only to all that were in the Castle, but also to
all the Village, that my Mother and I were of the Reformed Religion; which was,
that we sent for no Priest when my Mother lay on her Deathbed, nor buried her
in Catholic and Holy Ground, as they are pleased to term it. These things made
a great noise in the Country, and stirred up many against us, but I could
never fully learn what Mischief they had designed to do us.

Madam de Roche-Blanche had scarce been with us two days, before she received a
Letter from her Husband, in which he gave her an Account that there was a
Design formed to carry me into a Convent by force, and that it behoved me to be
upon my Guard. The day following this Advice was confirmed, and 'twas said
moreover, that Mademoiselle Garissoles was to be carried away with me, and that
we were to be shut up in two different Convents. This News terribly astonished
us, and we were forced to leave off weeping, to provide for our security.

We daily received very troublesome Tidings from diverse places, but the worst
of all was, that a certain Person was coming from the King to demand me, and
take me from my Brother and Lover, and that besides this, he was to trouble my
Brother for his Estate. Madam de Bresses offered to carry us out of the Kingdom
into Pomerania, where we might be safe; this Proposition was accepted with
respect to me, as for Mademoiselle de Garissolles it was resolved that she
should return home, and that 'twas not likely they would come to snatch her out
of the Arms of her Father and Mother. We had no time to lose: I may truly say,
that my Eyes are inexhaustable Fountains of Tears, for I shed abundance when I
parted from Madam de Roche Blanch, my Lover, and Mademoiselle de Garissolles.
Mounsieur de Haute-Cour would willingly have accompanied me, but I forbad him
by all the Authority I had over him, for I feared least by doing thus he might
bring much trouble on his Head. I would not have so much as my Brother go with
me, for fear lest it should be said he had conveyed me away.

Thus I was forced to leave those that were most dear to me, and my Miseries
were so far from having an end, that they daily seem'^ to increase; yet I got
out of France well enough, not being discovered by any, having taken my
Chamber-maids Habit, and given her mine. All my Fardles were also by the
Artifice of Madam de Brosses safely conveyed, and had I not been taken sick by
the way, I believe we should have been in Pomerania before now. At length we
came to Amsterdam, where I found a Servant of my Brothers, with Letters for my
Aunt and Me, both from my Lover and Brother.

In these Letters I had an Account of what is too long to relate, for 'twould
furnish matter for another History. I shall only tell you, that amongst much
sad News, I learnt that my Brother, my Lover, and Mademoiselle de Garissolles
were come out of France toward Pomerania, and that I should in a short time
see them, and that 'twas the Will of Mounsieur and Madam de Roche Blanch that
our Marriages should be celebrated as soon as we should meet; so that I hope to
find at Hamburgh those three Persons whom Love, Esteem, and Nature, oblige me
to Honor and Cherish.

Thus, said Mademoiselle de St. Phale, you have heard my History, which I may
justly call Sad and Tragical; for, for the few Moments of Joy which I have had,
I have felt a thousand Dolours, and shed tears without Numbe^. In this very
moment that I now speak to you, my Heart is divided between Hope and Fear,
about the News that I shall hear at Hamburgh, so that you would pity me, could
you but be sensible of it.

As soon as she had ended, every one of the Company gave her their thanks, and
declared the satisfaction they had received in the relation of these
Adventures, which furnished matter for a Conversation, concerning the diverse
Accidents we are in this Life exposed to. The two Hamburgh Ladies took occasion
to Compliment Mademoiselle de St. Phale a^resh, and to offer her their House;
their Father in a very obliging manner did the same thing. The Danish Baron
prayed Mademoiselle de St. Phale that since he was obliged to lay aside all the
Hopes he might have conceived, she would allow him at least a part in her
Friendship, to which she answered like one very well bred, and that was not
unacquainted with the World.

Thus passed this day, and the Company brake up, each retiring to his Cabin, in
hopes the next morning to see Hamburgh. 'Twas about Nine a Clock in the Morning
before we discovered this famous City, and about half an hour after Ten we
entered the Port, where we landed; and whilst we were giving Order for the
Carriage of our Fardles, a Coach stopped near the place where we were; at first
we took no great Notice of them that were in it, nor they of us, but the action
of a Lacquey who came and threw himself at Mademoiselle de St. Phale's Feet
much surprised us: Ah Joli-Bois, cried she, Where Is thy Master? He is,
Mademoiselle, (said he) in yonder Coach, to enquire at the Port whether you are
come: Immediately he left us to go to his Master, which was indeed Monsieur d'
Ombreval, who came out of the Coach with Monsieur de Haute-Cour, and
Mademoiselle de Garissolles; I never saw two love^^r Gentlemen in my life, nor
so beautiful a V^rgin, except Mademoiselle de St. Phale. The first that came up
to us was Mounsieur de Haute-Cour, who being impatient to see the Object of his
Vows, ran toward Mademoiselle de St. Phale, while Mounsieur d' Ombreval saluted
Madam de Br^sses. These Gentlemen highly Complemented us all for her sake and
Mademoiselle de St. Phale's. I should never have done, should I relate all that
was said 'till there came Coaches for most of us, which carried us to one of
the most famous Inns in Hambrough.

We were a good Company of us, and abode there some days to refresh our selves
after our Voyage. The Merchant of Hambourgh invited us to go to an House of
Pleasure which he had in the Country near the Elbe, where we were treated with
unexpressible Magnificence for an whole day, with some of the principal Ladies
of Hambourgh who spoke French: There were also some other excellent Persons for
Worth and Beauty, so that there was nothing wanting to make this Assembly
perfect.

I must needs say, that the Power of Joy with Love is very wonderful.
Mademoiselle de St. Phale is naturally gay, yet she had a certain Languor in
her Eyes whilst she was separated from her Lover, which vanished as soon as
eve^ she saw him. As for Mademoiselle de Garissolles she was certainly a Virgin
that as well deserved to be beloved as any in the World, in whom Wisdom,
Modesty and Piety, were accompanied with Spirit, Beauty, Nobility and Youth,
which is indeed very rare. Our two Ladies of Hambourgh were as much taken with
her as they had been with Mademoiselle de St. Phale. Mounsieur de Haute-Cour
and Mounsieur d' Ombreval lef^ their Mistresses for some Moments to Complemen^
those Ladies, which occasioned one of the pleasantest Conversations in the
World.

FINIS.

