Licensed

JUNE 22. 1664.

Roger L'Estrange.

A RELATION OF A Discovery lately made on the Coast of FLORIDA, (From Lat. 31.
to 33 Degrees. 45 Min. North-Lat.)

By William Hilton Commander, and Commissioner with Capt. Anthony Long, and
Peter Fabian, in the Ship Adventure, which set Sail from Spikes Bay, Aug. 10.
1663. and was set forth by several Gentlemen and Merchants of the Island of
BARBADOS.

Giving an account of the nature and temperature of the Soil, the manners and
disposition of the Natives, and whatsoever else is remarkable therein.

Together with Proposals made by the Commissioners of the Lords Proprietors, to
all such persons as shall become the first Setlers on the Rivers, Harbors, and
Creeks there.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for Simon Miller at the Star near the West End of St.
Paul's, 1664.

A true Relation of a Voyage, upon discovery of part of the Coast of FLORIDA,
from the Lat. of 31 Degrees. to 33 Degrees. 45 m. North Lat. in the Ship Adventure,
William Hilton Commander, and Commissioner with Captain Anthony Long and Peter
Fabian; set forth by several Gentlemen and Merchants of the Island of
Barbados; sailed from Spikes Bay, Aug. 10. 1663.
AFTER Sixteen days of fair weather, and* prosperous winds, Wednesday the 26
instant, four of the clock in the Afternoon, God be thanked, we espied Land on
the Coast of Florida, in the lat. of 32 degrees. 30 min. being four Leagues or
thereabouts to the Northwards of Saint Ellens, having run five hundred and
fifty Leagues; and to the Westward of the Meridian of Barbados, three hundred
thirty and one Leagues. This Evening and the Night following we lay off and on:
Thursday the 27th instant, in the morning, we stood in with the Land, and
coasted the Shore to the Southward, Ankering at Nights, and sending our Boat
out a Mornings, till we came into the lat. of 31 degrees. but found no good harbor
that way. On Sunday the 30th instant, we tacked, and stood Northward: and on
Wednesday the second of September, we came to an Anchor in five fathoms at the
mouth of a very large opening of three Leagues wide, or thereabouts, in the
lat. of 32 degrees. 30 min. and sent our Boat to sound the Channel. On Thursday the
third, we entered the Harbor, and found that it was the River Jordan, and was
but four Leagues or thereabouts N. E. from Port Royal, which by the Spaniards
is called St. Ellens: within Land, both Rivers meet in one. We spent some time
to sound the Channels both without and within, and to search the Rivers in
several branches, and to view the Land. On Saturday the fifth of September, two
Indians came on Board us from the N. E. shore, whom we entertained courteously,
and afterward set them on shore. On Sunday the sixth, several Indians came on
Board us, and said they were of St. Ellens; being very bold and familiar;
speaking many Spanish words, as, Cappitan, Commarado, and Adues. They know the
use of Guns, and are as little startled at the firing of a Piece of Ordnance,
as he that has been used to them many years: they told us the nearest
Spaniards were at St. Augustins, and several of them had been there, which as
they said was but ten days journey; and that the Spaniards used to come to them
at Saint Ellens, sometimes in Canoa's within Land, at other times in small
Vessels by Sea, which the Indians describe to have but two Masts. They invited
us to come to St. Ellens with our Ship, which they told us we might do within
Land. Monday the 14 September, our Longboat went with twelve hands within Land
to St. Ellens. On Wednesday the 16th, came five Indians on board us; one of
them pointing to another, said, he was the Grandy Captain of Edistow: whereupon
we took especial notice of him, and entertained him accordingly, giving him
several Beads, and other trade that pleased him well: He invited us to bring up
our Ship into a branch on the N. E. side, and told us of one Captain Francisco,
and four more English that were in his custody on shore; whereupon we showed
him store of all Trade, as Beads, Hoes, Hatchets and Bills, etc. and said, he
should have all those things if he would bring the English on board us; which
he promised should be done the next day. Hereupon we wrote a few lines to the
said English, fearing it to be a Spanish delusion to entrap us. In the dark of
the same Evening came a Canoa with nine or ten Indians in her with their Bows
and Arrows, and were close on board before we did discern them: We haled them,
but they made us no answer, which increased our jealousy: So we commanded them
on board, and disarmed them, detaining two of them prisoners, and sending away
the rest to fetch the English; which if they brought, they should have theirs
again. At length they delivered us a Note written with a coal, which seemed the
more to continue our jealousy, because in all this time we had no news of our
longboat from St. Ellens, which we feared was surprised by the Indians and
Spaniards. But to satisfy us that there were English on shore, they sent us
one man on board about twelve of the clock in the Night who related to us the
truth of the matter, and told us they were cast away some four or five leagues
to the Northward of the place we then rode, on the 24th of July past, being
thirteen persons that came on shore, whereof three of them were killed by the
Indians. On Thursday the 17th of September the Longboat returned from St.
Ellens, which presently we sent on shore to fetch the other English, the
Indians delivering us three more; and coming abroad themselves, we delivered
them their two men. Then we demanded of the chief Commander where the rest of
our English were: he answered, Five were carried to St. Ellens, three were
killed by the Stonohs, and the other man we should have within two days. We
replied to him again, That we would keep him and two more of his chief men,
till we had our English that were yet living; and promised them their liberty,
with satisfaction for bringing us the English. Now to return to the business
of our Design; the entertainment we had at S. Ellens put us in great fear of
the Indians treachery; for we observed their continual gathering together, and
at last began with stern-look'd countenances to speak roughly to us, and came
to search our men's Bandileers and Pockets; yet inviting us to stay that night
with them: but we made a sudden retreat to our Boat, which caused the Indian
King to be in a great rage, speaking loud and angry to his men; the drift of
which discourse we understood not. That which we noted there, was a fair house
builded in the shape of a Dove-house, round, two hundred foot at least,
completely covered with Palmeta-leaves, the wal-plate being twelve foot high,
or thereabouts, and within lodging Rooms and Forms; two pillars at the entrance
of a high Seat above all the rest: Also another house like a Sentinel-house,
floored ten foot high with planks, fastened with Spikes and Nayls, standing upon
substantial Posts, with several other small houses round about. Also we saw
many planks, to the quantity of three thousand foot or thereabouts, with other
Timber squared, and a Cross before the great house. Likewise we saw the Ruins
of an old Fort, compassing more than half an acre of land within the Trenches,
which we supposed to be Charls's Fort, built, and so called by the French in
1562, etc. On Monday, September 21. one English youth was brought from St.
Ellens aboard us by an Indian, who informed us that there were four more of
their company at St. Ellens, but he could not tell whether the Indians would
let them come to us: For says he, Our Men told me, that they had lately seen a
Friar and two Spaniards more at St. Ellens, who told them they would send
Soldiers suddenly to fetch them away. This day we sailed up the River with our
Ship to go through to St. Ellens. On Tuesday the 22 instant, three Indians came
on board; one of them we sent with a Letter to the English Prisoners there. On
Wednesday the 23d. we sent out Boat and Men to sound the Chanel, and find out
the most likely way to St. Ellens with our Ship by Combeheh. In the mean time
came many Canoa's aboard us with Corn, Pumpions, and Venison, Deer-skins, and a
sort of sweet-wood. One of our men looking into an Indian basket, found a piece
of Spanish Rusk: it being new, we demanded of the Indian where he had it; who
said, Of the Spaniards. In the interim, while we were talking, came a Canoa
with four Indians from St. Ellens, one standing up, and holding a paper in a
cleft stick; they told us they had brought it from the Spanish Captain at St.
Ellens. We demanded how many Spaniards were come thither; who said, Seven, and
one Englishman: We received their Letter writ in Spanish, but none of us could
read it: We detained two of the chiefest Indians, one of them being the Kings
Son of S. Ellens, and that kept one of the English prisoners* the other two we
sent away with a Letter to the Spaniard, wherein we gave him to understand,
that we understood not his letter; and told the Indians, when they brought the
English, they should have their men again, with satisfaction for their pains.
On Thursday, 24 instant, we sailing further up the River to go through, at last
came to a place of fresh water, and Anchored there, sending our Boat ashore
with a Guard to get water. Toward night came the first Indian that we sent to
St. Ellens with a letter to the English, who brought us another letter from the
Spaniards, and an Answer of ours from the English, writ in the Spaniards
letter. The Spaniard sent us a quarter of Venison, and a quarter of Pork, with
a Complement, That he was sorry he had no more for us at that time. We returned
him thanks, and sent him a Jug of Brandy; and withal, that we were sorry we
understood not his letter. This night about twelve of the Clock we had a most
violent gust of wind, but of no long continuance. On Friday 25 September, we
weighed, and returned down the River six leagues, or thereabouts, because we
perceived the Indians had gathered themselves in a Body from all parts
thereabouts, and moved as the Ship did: and being informed by an Indian, that
the Spaniards would be there the next day; we took in Firewood, and continued
there that night, at which time one of our Indian Prisoners made his escape by
leaping overboard in the dark. On Saturday the 26. we weighed, and stood down
to the Harbors mouth, and stayed there till Monday the 28. In all which time
came no one to us, though we stayed in expectation of their coming continually;
therefore put out to Sea, concluding their intentions not to be good. Being out
of the River Jordan, we directed our course S. W. four leagues or thereabouts
for Port Royal, to sound the Chanel without from the points of the Harbor
outward; for we had sounded the Harbor within from the points inward when our
Boat was at St. Ellens: And now being athwart the Harbors mouth, we sent our
Boat with the Mate and others, who found the N. E. and E. N. E. side of the
opening of Port Royal to be Sholes and Breakers to the middle of the opening;
and three leagues or thereabouts into the Sea, from the side aforesaid, is
unsafe to meddle with: but the S. W. and W. side we found all bold steering in
N. N. W. two or three miles from the S. W. shore, sailing directed with the S.
W. head-land of the entrance of Port Royal: the said head-land is bluft, and
seems steep, as though the trees hung over the water: But you must note, that
if you keep so far from the S. W. side, that you stand in N. N. W. with the
bluft head aforesaid, you shall go over the Outskirt of the E. N. E. sholing,
and shall have but three or four fathom for the space of one league or
thereabouts, and then you shall have six and seven fathoms all the way in: But
if you borrow more on the S. W. side, till you have brought the S. W. head of
the Entry to bear N. N. E. you shall have a fair large Chanel of six, seven,
and eight fathoms all the way in, and then five, six, seven and eight fathoms
within the Harbor, keeping the Chanel, and standing over to the Northward: we
supposed that it flows here as at the River Jordan, because they are but four
leagues asunder, and flows S. E. and N. W. seven foot and half, and sometimes
eight foot perpendicular: the Mouth of Port Royal lies in 32 degrees. 20 min. lat.
Now as concerning the entrance of the River Jordan, lat. 32 degrees. 30 min. or
thereabouts, you shall see a range of Breakers right against the opening, two
or three leagues off the S. W. Point; which you must leave to the Northward,
and steer in with the said S. W. Point, giving a range of Breakers that runs
from the said Point a small birth, and you shall have two, three, and four
fathoms at low water; and when you come one mile from the Point aforesaid,
steer over directly to the N. E. Point, and you shall have six or seven fathom
all the way. Within the N. W. Point is good Anchoring: you shall have five
fathoms fair aboard the shore: and you shall have five, six, seven, and eight
fathoms, sailing all along upon the River, ten leagues, and a large turning
Chanel: It flows here S. E. and N. W. seven foot and a half, and eight foot at
common Tides. The River Grandy, or as the Indians call it Edistow, lies six
leagues or thereabouts from the River Jordan, and seems to be a very fair
opening: but because the chief Indian of that Place was on board us, and the
Country all in Arms, we not knowing how the wind might cross us, it was not
thought fit to stay there: But some of those English that had lived there,
being Prisoners, say, that it is a very fair and goodly River, branching into
several branches, and deep, and is fresh water at low Tide within two leagues
of the Mouth; it seeming to us as we passed by, a good entrance large and wide,
lat. 32 degrees. 40 min. in or thereabouts. Now our understanding of the Land of
Port Royal, River Jordan, River Grandie, or Edistow, is as follows: The Lands
are laden with large tall Oaks, VValnut and Bays, except facing on the Sea, it
is most Pines tall and good: The Land generally, except where the Pines grow,
is a good Soil, covered with black Mold, in some places a foot, in some places
half a foot, and in other places less, with Clay underneath mixed with Sand;
and we think may produce any thing as well as most part of the Indies that we
have seen. The Indians plant in the worst Land, because they cannot cut down
the Timber in the best, and yet have plenty of Corn, Pumpions, Water-Mellons,
Musk-mellons: although the Land be overgrown with weeds through their
laziness, yet they have two or three crops of Corn a year, as the Indians
themselves inform us. The Country abounds with Grapes, large Figs, and Peaches;
the Woods with Deer, Conies, Turkeys, Quails, Curlues, Plovers, Teile, Herons;
and as the Indians say, in Winter, with Swans, Geese, Cranes, Duck and Mallard,
and innumerable of other water-Fowls, whose names we know not, which lie in the
Rivers, Marshes, and on the Sands: Oysters in abundance, with great store of
Muscles; A sort of fair Crabs, and a round Shel*fish called Horse*feet; The
Rivers stored plentifully with Fish that we saw play and leap. There are great
Marshes, but most as far as we saw little worth, except for a Root that grows
in them the Indians make good Bread of. The Land we suppose is healthful; for
the English that were cast away on that Coast in July last, were there most
part of that time of year that is sickly in Virginia; and notwithstanding hard
usage, and lying on the ground naked, yet had their perfect healths all the
time. The Natives are very healthful; we saw many very Aged amongst them. The
Air is clear and sweet, the Country very pleasant and delightful: And we could
wish, that all they that want a happy settlement, of our English Nation, were
well transported thither, etc.

FRom Tuesday the 29th of September, to Friday the second of October, we ranged
along the shore from the lat. 32 degrees. 20 min. to the lat. 33 degrees. 11 min. but
could discern no Entrance for our Ship, after we had passed to the Northwards
of 32 degrees. 40 min. On Saturday the third instant, a violent storm came up, the
wind between the North and the East; which Easterly winds and fowl weather
continued till Monday the 12th. By reason of which storms and fowl weather, we
were forced to get off to Sea to secure our selves and ship, and were horsed by
reason of a strong Current, almost to Cape Hatterasse in lat. 35 degrees. 30 min.
On Monday the 12th aforesaid we came to an Anchor in seven fathom at Cape
Fair-Road, and took the Meridian-Altitude of the Sun, and were in the lat. 33
degrees. 43 min. the wind continuing still Easterly, and fowl weather till
Thursday the 15th instant; and on Friday the 16th, the wind being at N. W. we
weighed, and sailed up Cape Fair-River, some four or five leagues, and came to
an Anchor in six or seven fathom; at which time several Indian came on Board,
and brought us great store of Fresh-fish, large Mullets, young Bass, Shads, and
several other sorts of very good well-tasted Fish. On Saturday the 17th, we
went down to the Cape to see the English Cattle, but could not find them,
though we rounded the Cape: And having an Indian Guide with us, here we rode
till the 24th instant; the wind being against us, we could not go up the River
with our Ship; in which time we went on shore, and viewed the land of those
quarters. On Saturday we weighed, and sailed up the River some four leagues or
thereabouts. Sunday the 25th, we weighed again, and towed up the River, it
being calm, and got up some fourteen leagues from the Harbors mouth, where we
mored our Ship. On Monday the 26 October, we went down with the Yoal to Necoes,
an Indian Plantation, and viewed the Land there. On Tuesday the 27th, we rowed
up the main River with our Longboat and twelve men, some ten leagues or
thereabouts. On Wednesday the 28th, we rowed up about eight or nine leagues
more. Thursday the 29th was foul weather, of much rain and wind, which forced
us to make Huts, and lie still. Friday the 30th, we proceeded up the main
River, seven or eight leagues. Saturday the 31, we got up three or four leagues
more, and came to a Tree that lay athwart the River: but because our Provisions
were near spent, we proceeded no further, but returned downward the remainder
of that day; and on Monday the second of November, we came aboard our Ship.
Tuesday the third, we lay still to refresh ourselves. On Wednesday the 4th, we
went five or six leagues up the River to search a branch that ran out of the
main River toward the N. W. In which branch we went up five or six leagues:
not liking the Land, we returned on board that night about midnight, and called
that place Swampy-branch. Thursday the fifth instant, we staid aboard; on
Friday the 6th we went up Greens River, the mouth of it being against the place
we rode with our Ship. On Saturday the 7th, we proceeded up the said River some
fourteen or fifteen leagues in all, and found that it ended in several small
branches; the Land for the most part being marshy and swamps, we returned
toward our ship, and got aboard in the night: Sunday the 8th instant we lay
still, and on Monday the 9th we went again up the main River, being well
provided with Provisions and all things necessary, and proceeded upwards till
Thursday noon 12th instant, at which time we came to a place where two Islands
were in the middle of the River, and by reason of the crookedness of the River
at that place, several Trees lay athwart both branches, which stopped up the
passage of each branch, that we could proceed no further with our Boat; but we
went up the River side by land some three or four miles, and found the River to
enlarge it self: So we returned, leaving it as far as we could see up a long
reach running N. E. we judging our selves from the Rivers mouth North near
fifty leagues; we returned, viewing the Land on both sides the River, and found
as good tracts of land, dry, well wooded, pleasant and delightful as we have
seen any where in the world, with great burden of Grass on it, the land being
very level, with steep banks on both sides the River, and in some places very
high, the woods stored with abundance of Deer and Turkies every where; we never
going on shore, but saw of each also Partridges great store, Cranes abundance,
Comes, which we saw in several places; we heard several Wolves howling in the
woods, and saw where they had torn a Deer in pieces. Also in the River we saw
great store of Ducks, T^ile, VVidgeon, and in the woods great flocks of
Parrakeeto's; the Timber that the woods afford for the most part consisting of
Oaks of four or five sorts, all differing in leaves, but all bearing Akorns
very good: we measured many of the Oaks in several places, which we found to be
in bigness some two, some three, and others almost four fathoms; in height,
before you come to boughs or limbs, forty, fifty, sixty foot, and some more,
and those Oaks very common in the upper parts of both Rivers; Also a very tall
large Tree of great bigness, which some do call Cyprus, the right name we know
not, growing in Swamps. Likewise Walnut, Birch, Beech, Maple, Ash, Bay,
Willough, Alder and Holly; and in the lowermost parts innumerable of Pines,
tall and good for boards or masts, growing for the most part in barren sandy
ground, but in some places up the River in good ground, being mixed amongst
Oaks and other Timber. We saw several Mulberrytrees, multitudes of Grape-Vines,
and some Grapes which we did eat of. We found a very large and good tract of
Land on the N. W. side of the River, thin of Timber, except here and there a
very great Oak, and full of Grass, commonly as high as a man's middle, and in
many places to his shoulders, where we saw many Deer and Turkies; also one Deer
with very large horns, and great in body, therefore called it Stag-Park* it
being a very pleasant and delightful place, we traveled in it several miles,
but saw no end thereof. So we returned to our Boat, and proceeded down the
River, and came to another place some twenty five leagues from the Rivers mouth
on the same side, where we found a place no less delightful than the former*
and as far as we could judge, both Tracts came into one. This lower place we
called Rocky-point, because we found many Rocks and Stones of several bigness
upon the Land, which is not common. We sent our Boat down the River before us;
our selves traveling by Land many miles, were so much taken with the
pleasantness of the Land, that traveling into the woods so far, we could not
recover our Boat and company that night. On Sunday the morrow following we got
to our Boat, and on Monday the 16th of November, we proceeded down to a place
on the East Side of the River some twenty three leagues from the Harbors
mouth, which we called Turkie-Quarters, because we killed several Turkies
thereabouts. We viewed the Land there, and found some tracts of good Land, and
high, facing upon the River about one mile inward, but backwards some two miles
all Pine-land, but good pasture-ground: we returned to our Boat, and proceeded
down some two or three leagues, where we had formerly viewed, and found it a
tract of as good Land as any we have seen, with as good Timber on it. The banks
of the River being high, therefore we called it High-Land Point. Having viewed
that, we proceeded down the River, going on shore in several places on both
sides* it being generally large Marshes, and many of them dry, that they may
more fitly be called Medows: the wood-land against them is for the most part
Pine, and in some places as barren as ever we saw Land, but in other places
good Pasture*ground, And on Tuesday the 17th instant, we got aboard our Ship,
riding against the mouth of Green's River, where our men are providing wood,
and fitting the Ship for the Sea: In the interim, we took some view of the Land
on both sides of the River there, finding some good Land, but more bad, and the
best not comparable to that above. Friday the 20th instant was foul weather,
yet in the Afternoon we weighed, and went down the River some two leagues, and
came to Anchor against the mouth of Hilton's River, and took some view of the
Land there on both sides, which appeared to us much like unto that at Green's
River. Monday 23. we went with our Longboat well victualled and manned up
Hilton's River; and when we came three leagues or thereabouts up the said
River, we found this and Green's River to come into one, and so continued for
four or five leagues, which causes a great Island betwixt them. We proceeded
still up the River, till they parted again, keeping up Hilton's River on the
Lar-board side, and followed the said River five or six leagues further, where
we found another large branch of Green's River to come into Hilton's, which
makes another great Island. On the Star-board side going up, we proceeded still
up the River some four leagues, and returned, taking a view of the Land on both
sides, and now judge our selves to be from our ship some eighteen leagues W.
and by W. One league below this place came four Indians in a Canoa to us, and
sold us several baskets of Akorns, which we satisfied for, and so left them;
but one of them followed us on the shore some two or three miles, till he came
on the top of a high bank, facing on the River, we rowing underneath it, the
said Indian shot an Arrow at us, which missed one of our men very narrowly, and
stuck in the upper edge of the Boat, which broke in pieces, leaving the head
behind. Hereupon we presently made to the shore, and went all up the bank
except four to guide the Boat; we searched for the Indian, but could not find
him: At last we heard some sing further in the Woods, which we thought had been
as a Challenge to us to come and fight them. We went toward them with all
speed, but before we came in sight of them, we heard two Guns go off from our
Boat, whereupon we retreated with all speed to secure our Boat and Men: when we
came to them, we found all well, and demanded the reason of their firing the
Guns: they told us that an Indian came creeping on the Bank as they thought to
shoot at them, therefore shot at him a great distance with Swan-shot, but
thought they did him no hurt, for they saw him run way. Presently after our
return to the Boat, while we were thus talking, came two Indians to us with
their Bows and Arrows, crying Bonny, Bonny: we took their Bows and Arrows from
them, and gave them Beads, to their content. Then we led them by the hand to
the Boat, and showed them the Arrow-head sticking in her side, and related to
them the business; which when they understood, both of them manifested much
sorrow, and made us understand by signs, that they knew nothing of it: so we
let them go, and marked a Tree on the top of the bank, calling the place
Mount-Skerry. We looked up the River as far as we could discern, and saw that
it widened it self, and came running directly down the Country: So we
returned, and viewed the Land on both sides the River, finding the banks steep
in some places, but very high in others. The banks sides are generally Clay,
and as some of our company does affirm, some Marle. The Land and Timber up this
River is no way inferior to the best in the other, which we call the main
River: So far as we discovered, this seems as fair, if not fairer than the
former, and we think runs further into the Country, because there is a strong
Current comes down, and a great deal more drift-wood. But to return to the
business of the Land and Timber: We saw several plats of Ground cleared by the
Indians after their weak manner, compassed round with great Timber Trees; which
they are no ways able to fall, and so keep the Sun from their Cornfieldsd very
much; yet nevertheless we saw as large Corn-stalks or bigger, than we have
seen any where else: So we proceeded down the River, till we found the Canoa
the Indian was in who shot at us. In the morning we went on shore, and cut the
same in pieces: the Indians perceiving us coming toward them, run away. We
went to his Hut, and pulled it down, brake his pots, platters, and spoons, tore
his Deerskins and Mats in pieces, and took away a basket of Akorns: So we
proceeded down the River two leagues, or thereabouts, and came to another place
of Indians, bought Akorns and some Corn of them, and went downwards two leagues
more: at last we espied an Indian peeping over a high bank: we held up a Gun at
him; and calling to him, said, Skerry: presently several Indians appeared to
us, making great signs of friendship, saying, Bonny, Bonny, and running before
us, endeavoring to persuade us to come on shore; but we answered them with
stern countenances, and said, Skerry, taking up our guns, and threatening to
shoot at them; but they cried still Bonny, Bonny: And when they saw they could
not prevail, nor persuade us to come on shore, two of them came off to us in a
Canoa, one padling with a great Cane, the other with his hand; they came to us,
and laid hold of our Boat, sweating and blowing, and told us it was Bonny on
shore, and at last persuaded us to go ashore with them. As soon as we landed,
several Indians, to the number of near forty lusty men, came to us, all in a
great sweat, and told us Bonny: we showed* them the Arrow-head in the
Boats-side, and a piece of the Canoa which we had cut in pieces: the chief man
of them made a large Speech, and threw Beads into our Boat, which is a sign of
great love and friendship; and made us to understand, when he heard of the
Affront which we had received, it caused him to cry: and now he and his men
were come to make peace with us, making signs to us that they would tie his
Arms, and cut off his head that had done us that abuse; and for a further
testimony of their love and good will toward us, they presented to us two very
handsome propet young Indian women, the tallest that we have seen in this
Country; which we supposed to be the Kings Daughters, or persons of some great
account amongst them. These young women were ready to come into our Boat; one
of them crouding in, was hardly persuaded to go out again. We presented to the
King a Hatchet and several Beads, also Beads to the young women and to the
chief men, and to the rest of the Indians, as far as our Beads would go: they
promised us in four days to come on board our Ship, and so departed from us.
When we left the place, which was presently, we called it Mount-Bonny, because
we had there concluded a firm Peace. Proceeding down the River two or three
leagues further, we came to a place where were nine or ten Canoa's all
together; we went ashore there, and found several Indians, but most of them
were the same which had made Peace with us before: We made little stay there,
but went directly down the River, and came to our Ship before day. Thursday the
26th of November, the wind being at South, we could not go down to the Rivers
mouth: but on Friday the 27th, we weighed at the mouth of Hilton's River, and
got down one league toward the Harbors mouth. On Sunday the 29th, we got down
to Crane-Island, which is four leagues or thereabouts above the Entrance of the
Harbors mouth. Now on Tuesday the first of December, we made a purchase of the
River and land of Cape-Fair, of Wattcoosa, and such other Indians as appeared
to us to be the chief of those parts: they brought us store of Fresh-fish
aboard, as Mullets, Shads, and other very good Fish: this River is all
Fresh Water fit to drink. Some eight leagues within the mouth, the Tide runs up
about thirty five leagues, but stops and rises a great deal farther up; it
flows at the Harbors mouth S. E. and N. W. six foot as Neap-Tides, and eight
foot at Spring-Tides: the Chanel on the Easter-side by the Cape-shoar is the
best, and lies close aboard the Cape-land, being three fathoms at High Water,
in the shallowest place in the Chanel just at the Entrance; but as soon as you
are past that place half a Cables length inward, you shall have six or seven
fathoms, a fair turning Chanel into the River, and so continuing four or five
leagues upwards; afterward the Chanel is more difficult in some places six or
seven fathoms, four or five, and in other places but nine or ten foot,
especially where the River is broad. When the River comes to part, and grows
narrow, there is all Chanel from side to side in most places; in some places
you shall have five, six, or seven fathoms, but generally two or three, Sand
and Oaze. We viewed the Cape-land, and judged it to be little worth, the Woods
of it shrubby and low, the Land sandy and barren; in some places Grass and
Rushes, and in other places nothing but clear sand: a place fitter to starve
Cattle in our judgment, then to keep them alive; yet the Indians, as we
understand, keep the English Cattle down there, and suffer them not to go off
the said Cape, as we suppose, because the Country- Indians shall have to part
with them, and as we think, are fallen out about them, who shall have the
greatest share. They brought aboard our Ship very good and fat Beef several
times, which they could afford very reasonable; also fat and very large Swine,
good cheap penny-worths: but they may thank their friends of New England, who
brought their Hogs to so fair a Market. Some of the Indians brought very good
Salt aboard us, and made signs, pointing to both sides of the Rivers mouth,
that there was great store thereabouts. We saw up the River several good places
for the setting up of Corn or Saw-mills. In that time as our business called
us up and down the River and Branches, we killed of wildfowl, four Swans, ten
Geese, twenty nine Cranes, ten Turkies, forty Duck and Mallard, three dozen of
Parrakeeto's, and six or seven dozen of other small Fowls, as Curlues and
Plovers, etc.

Whereas there was a Writing left in a Post at the Point of Cape-Fair River,
by those New-England-men that left Cattle with the Indians there, the Contents
whereof tended not only to the disparagement of the Land about the said River,
but also to the great discouragement of all those that should hereafter come
into those Parts to settle: In Answer to that scandalous writing, We whose
names are underwritten do affirm, That we have seen facing on both sides of
the River, and branches of Cape-Fair aforesaid, as good Land, and as well
Timbred, as any we have seen in any other part of the world, sufficient to
accommodate thousands of our English Nation, lying commodiously by the said
River.

On Friday the 4th of December, the wind being fair, we put out to Sea, bound
for Barbados; and on the 6th day of January, 1663/4, we came to Anchor in
Carlisle-Bay; and after several known apparent dangers both by Sea and Land,
have now brought us all in safety to our long-wish'd-for and much desired Port,
to render an Account of our Discovery, the verity of which we aver.

Anthony Long. William Hilton. Peter Fabian.


A Copy of the Spanyard's first Letter.
I Am come to this Town of Infidel- Indians, to seek some English, which my
Governor and Captain General, Don Alonso de Arangows, de Colis, Cavallier, and
Knight of the Order of St. James, for his Majesty, had notice that there was a
Ship lost in that Port in which you are, that the men might not run any hazard
of their lives, as those with me here have. Don Adeleyers, with the Governor of
the Garrison of S. Augustine, are gone to ransom and free the Subjects of the
King your Master, CHARLES the Second: Wherefore I advise you, that if these
Indians (although Infidels and Barbarians) have not killed any of the
Christians, and do require as a gift or courtesy for those four men, four
Spades, and four Axes, some Knives, and some Beads, and the four Indians which
you have there, you deliver them, and that for their sakes that shall sail on
this Coast: you may send a Boat, who when she comes athwart the Port of St.
Ellens, may hoist an Ancient twice or thrice, and I will do the same. The
shortness of the dispatch I desire, for I want provision for my Soldiers, and
the way is large. Your Servant desires you would give me a speedy Answer; and
what may be done in your service, I shall do very willingly: And if you have
none that can interpret the Spanish Tongue, you may write in your own, for here
are your Contrymen that can understand it: but if you can, let it be in
Spanish.

From the Capt. Alanso Argucles. From St. Ellens the 22 of September. 1663.
The Copies of our Letters sent to the ENGLISH and SPANIARDS at St. Ellens,
with the Answer of Mr. William Davis, and the Spaniards also, here enclosed.
Loving Friends and Countrymen,
We are come up the River with our Ship, and are resolved to come through by
Combiheh, to St. Ellens, and to get you away by fair means, or otherways. If
that will not do, we have five of your company already: and the Captain of
Edistow, and one more are Prisoners with us, whom we intend to keep till we
have rescued all the English Prisoners out of the hands of the Indians. Send us
word by this Bearer what you know concerning the Spaniards; for the youth
Morgan tells us, that the Spaniards are come with Soldiers to fetch you away.
Fail not to inform us how things are. Nothing else at present, but remain

Your friend and Servant WILL, HILTON.
From on Board the Adventure, September. 21. 1663.
An Answer to the Spaniards Letter not understood.
Honored Sir,
WHereas we received a Letter from you the Contents whereof we understand not,
because none of us could read Spanish: Our business is to demand and receive
the English Prisoners from the hands of the Indians, and then they shall have
their Indians which we have detained on Board, with satisfaction for their
pains. We understand not at present that we have any business with you. Not
else at present, but remain

Your Friend and Servant in what I may, WILL. HILTON.
From on Board the Adventure, September. 23. 1663. To his honored Friend the
Spanish Captain at St. Ellens.



An Answer to Mr. William Davis his Lines written (...) the Spanyard's Letter,
Viz.
Mr. William Davis,
We received your Lines in the Spanish Letter, but hear nothing of your coming
to us* Let your Keepers send you, and that without delay; for you may assure
them, That we will be gone, and carry the Indians away with us, except they
send the English suddenly on Board, and then they shall have their Indians upon
our receipt of the English. Not else at present, but thank the Spanish Captain
for the Pork and Venison he sent us. Remain

Your loving Friend WILL. HILTON.
From on Board the Adventure, September 24. 1663. To Mr. William Davis at St.
Ellens:



SIR,
We have received your second Letter* and give you no Answer, for the Reason
mentioned in our former Letter to you. Please to inform the Indians, That if
they bring not the English Prisoners on Board us without further delay, we are
resolved to carry their Indians we have on Board away: But if they will bring
the English, they shall have theirs, with satisfaction. Also we thank you for
your Venison and Pork. Not else at present, but remain

SIR, Your Friend and Servant in what I may WILL. HILTON.
From on Board the Adventure September. 24. 1663. To his Honored Friend, the
Spanish Captain at St. Ellens.



A Copy of the Spanyard's second Letter.
MY Governor and Capt. General, as soon as he had News that a Ship, by Nation
English, was lost in that Port in which you now are, sent me with Soldiers of
the Garrison of St. Augustine in Florida, as they have at other times done, to
free them from death; for which cause I came to this Port of St. Ellens, where
I found all these Indians in a fright, fearing that you will do them some
mischief: So having found four men of those that were lost, I thought good to
advise you, that you might carry them in your company, giving some gifts to
those Indians which they desire; which is, four Spades, four Axes, some Knives,
and some Beads. This they desire, not as payment, but only as an
acknowledgment of a kindness for having saved their lives; which they have
always done as Naturals who have given their obedience to the King our Master.
And they do also desire you to let go those four Indians which are there: You
may send a Boat when you discover the Points of St. Ellens; may hoist an
Ancient two or three times, and I will do the same. I desire your Answer may be
sudden; for I am scarce of Provisions, and the way is somewhat long: and if you
have no body who understands Spanish, you may write in English, for here are
your Countrymen who will interpret it.

By the Captain Alanso Arguiles.
From St. Ellens, September. 23. 1663.
Proposals made to all such Persons as shall undertake to become the first
Setlers on Rivers, Harbors, or Creeks, whose Mouth or Entrance is Southwards
or Westwards of Cape St. Romana in the Province of Carolina, and execute the
same at their own hazard and charge of Transportation, Ammunition, and
Provision, as is hereafter expressed, etc.
I.
IMprimis, It is agreed and consented to by us Thomas Mudyford, and Peter
Colleton, Esquires, who are empowered by the Lords Proprietors to treat in
their behalf; That in consideration of the good service which Captain Anthony
Long, Captain William Hilton, and Mr. Peter Fabian have done in making so clear
a Discovery on that Coast, They shall each of them enjoy to them and their
Heirs for ever one thousand Acres of Land apiece upon the said River, Harbor,
or Creeks, on such places as they shall desire, not taken up before.

II.
Item, To Master Pyam Blowers, and Master John Hancock, five hundred Acres
apiece, in manner as (...) Ship, one hundred Acres apiece in manner as
aforesaid.

Item, (...) Ship, one hundred Acres apiece in manner as aforesaid.

IV.
Item, (...) every person that has subscribed and paid, or has subscribed and
shall pay within two months next after the Date hereof, unto the Treasurer
appointed by the Committee for defraying the Charge of the (...) Discovery, and
toward the public Stock, five hundred: Acres of Land, besides what they are
otherwise to receive and enjoy each* for every thousand pounds of Sugar, and
so for greater or lesser quantity proportionably, to possess and enjoy the
same in manner as aforesaid* the said Adventurers having promised, That the
several and respective Persons above-intended, shall within five years next
ensuing, have one Person white or black, young or (...) transported at their
Charge as aforesaid, on that or (...) other parcel of Land in the Province, for
every hundred of Acres of Land that is or shall be due to them for their
adventures as aforesaid: But when once taken up, to settle the same within one
year after it is once taken up, or lose the Land.

V.
Item, To every Person that goes, or sends an Agent at his or their own cost
with the first Ship or Fleet, or within six weeks next after the first Ship or
Fleet that shall be set out from this Island (none to be accounted as first
Setters but such as do send in the first Fleet) Armed with a good Fire-lock,
ten pounds of Powder, and twenty pounds of Bullet, or Lead, and Victualled for
six months, shall have one hundred Acres of Land, and the like quantity of
Acres for every Man servant that he carries so armed and provided, to the
person at whose charge they shall be transported as aforesaid.

VI.
Item, To every person that shall second the first undertakers, that is to say,
shall go within two months went after those that are accounted as first
Setlers, armed and provided as aforesaid, seventy Acres of Land, and seventy
Acres for every Manservant that he or they shall carry or send Armed and
provided as aforesaid.

VII.
Item, To every person provided as aforesaid, that shall go within two years
after the first Undertakers, fifty Acres of Land, and as much to him or them
for every Manservant he or they shall carry or send, armed and provided as
aforesaid.

VIII.
Item, To every Freewoman above the age of twelve years, that shall go, or be
carried thither within the first five years, forty Acres of Land.

IX.
Item, To all Male-Children above the age of fourteen years* the same quantity
that is allowed to Freemen, and on the same Conditions.

X.
Item, The Lords Proprietors will grant unto every Parish one hundred Acres of
Land for the Church and other public uses.

XI.
Item, To every person that has subscribed, and shall pay to the above
mentioned Discovery, who shall go or send an Agent within the first five years
next after the first Setlers, forty Acres of Land; and as much to them for
every Manservant they shall carry or send within that time armed and provided
as aforesaid, and the like quantity for all others so transporting themselves
or servants within the first three years, who are not Subscribers.

XII.
Item, To every Manservant that shall go with the first Undertakers, fifty
Acres of Land; and to such as go with the second Adventurers thirty Acres, and
for all other servants that shall go within the first five years, twenty Acres,
and for every Woman-servant ten Acres, to become due at the Expiration of the
first Term of their servitude in that Country.

XIII*
Item, To the Owner of every Negro-Man or Slave, brought thither to settle
within the first year, twenty acres; and for every Woman-Negro or Slave, ten
acres of Land; and all Men-Negro's, or slaves after that time, and within the
first five years, ten acres, and for every Woman-Negro or slave, five acres.

XIV.
Item, That all the beforementioned parcels of Land given, or to be given,
allotted or granted to any person or persons whatsoever, shall be held and
enjoyed to them, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, in free and common Soccage,
according to the Tenure of East*Greenwich within the County of Kent, within the
Kingdom of England (and not in Capite, or by Knights-service) paying as a fine
once for all to the Lords Proprietors, or their Agents empowered to receive the
same, one halfpenny per acre for every Acre of Land that is or shall be taken
up as aforesaid, or the value of the said halfpenny per Acre, when the person
who is to receive it shall receive his Deed or Copy of Record for his Land so
taken up; and in lieu of all, and all manner of Rents, Services, Fines, Taxes
and Impositions whatsoever, one ear of Indian Corn for every hundred acres of
Land so taken up, at a certain time and place prescribed, if lawfully demanded.

XV.
Item, It is further agreed, That every person shall or may take up their Land,
or any part thereof, where they please, in any place not before taken up:
Provided they do therein submit to such Method as the Governor and Council for
the time being shall judge most safe and convenient.

XVI.
Item, That the Lords* Proprietors shall grant to the Freeholders the
Privilege of choosing an annual Assembly, wherein by the consent of the said
Lords, or their Delegates, they shall be empowered to make Laws, and them
confirm, publish, and abrogate, as in the great Charter is expressed; and that
the Assembly may lawfully, without the consent of the Governor, complain to
the said Lords of such Grievances as lie upon the People.

XVII.
Item, That for as much as the Lords Proprietors or their Delegates may not be
at all times there present, to consent to such Laws as are or shall be thought
necessary; In such Case all Laws and Orders made by the Governor, Council and
Assembly, shall be in forte until the Denial thereof by the Lords Proprietors
shall be to them signified under their Hands in Writing.

XVIII.
Item, That the said Freeholders shall have the freedom of Trade, Immunity of
Customs, and Liberty of Conscience, and all other Privileges made good unto
them as amply and as fully as is at large expressed in the great Charter
granted to the said Lords Proprietors from His Majesty.

FINIS,

