AN Historical Description OF THE GLORIOUS CONQUEST Of the CITY of BUDA, THE
Capital CITY of the KINGDOM of HUNGARY,

By the Victorious Arms of the Thrice Illustrious and Invincible Emperor
LEOPOLD I.

Under the Conduct of his Most Serene Highness, the Duke of LORRAINE, and the
Elector of BAVARIA.

LICENSED,

October 1st. 1686. R. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXVI.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
AFTER so many disjointed Relations of Truth, and uncertain Reports hudled and
confused one among another, we do here present the Reader with a continued
Diary of the whole Siege of Buda from the very first March of the Army that lay
before it, till the end of the Siege, which terminated in the Winning of the
Town. The Gentleman that wrote it in French was, without question, an
Eyewitness of most of those bloody Transactions, as being an Imperialist, and
upon the Theater himself. Nor is it reasonable to mistrust the Credit of a
Person, whose Zeal for the Common Cause makes him so diligent as not to omit
the least Particular that may contribute to the Honor of so many Renowned
Commanders, without detracting in the least from the Gallantry of the
Defendants. So that the Passages of every Day, thus closed and joined together,
yields a full Prospect of the Industry, Vigilance, Courage, Resolution,
Experience and Conduct of Generals exact in Martial Affairs; and the
Indefatigable Constancy and Valor of Laborious and well-Disciplin'd Soldiers.
A Piece, which when the Curious in History have read, they will find the Story
of the most Famous Siege in the World; the Assailants equalling, if not
surpassing Titus surrounding Jerusalem; and Abdi Basha no less bravely
obstinate in defending his Trust, than Villerius upon the Walls of Rhodes. Of
which I shall say no more in the Epistle, since the Book is so near at hand.

AN Historical Description OF THE CONQUEST Of the CITY of BUDA.
THE Divisions and Mis-understandings that have reigned among the Christian
Princes, gave the Mahometans an opportunity to surprise some by Policy and
Stratagem, others by the force of their triumphing Arms, and to constrain some,
that were not in a condition to stop the Torrent of their formidable Armies, to
put themselves under their Protection, and acknowledge, by the payment of an
Annual Tribute, the power of the Ottoman Empire; which in less than four
Centuries has spread it self to such a vast Extent, and become so terrible to
all the Earth, that their Chief Sultans would suffer no Superiors, nor
acknowledge any Equals. True it is, the Potent Tamerlan King of the Tartars and
Parthians, had the good fortune to tame the Pride and haughty Arrogance of
Bajazet: But his death, which happened in the flower of his Age, revived the
dejected courage of the Turks in such a manner, that they not only regained the
Kingdoms and Countries which that victorious Prince had wrested out of their
hands, but in process of time forced the Parthians also and the Tartars to do
them Homage, to pay 'em Tribute, and submit to such Laws as the Ottoman
Emperors thought fit to impose upon 'em.

These Barbarians have often attempted to bring Germany under their subjection;
to which purpose they have several times, like an Inundation, with all the
Forces of the East overrun Hungary, Austria, and the adjacent Countries; and
had accomplished their designs, had not God in mere pity and compassion, heard
the Prayers of all Christendom, and twice miraculously delivered the City of
Vienna from the fury of the Infidels: First, in the year 1529. when Solomon the
Magnificent with an Army of 300000 fighting Men had reduced it to the last
extremity, by means of the bloody Assaults with which he harrass'd the
Defendants without ceasing; yet was constrained to raise his Siege upon the
approach of the Emperor Charles the Fifth. The second time, in the year 1683.
when a numerous Ottoman Army, consisting of above 200000. Men, under the
Command of the Grand Vizier Cara Mustapha, attacked that important Bulwark of
Germany, with so much fury, during a Siege of three Months, carried on with the
greatest vigor and obstinacy that had been known for many Ages past; so that
the place was driven to its last shifts, and had certainly been forced to
undergo the Ottoman Yoke, had not the God of Battles raised the Polonians,
Bavarians, Saxons, and other Subjects of the Empire, to follow their several
Princes, to the Succor of the capital City of Austria; where they all equally
shared the honor of fighting those Infidels, and putting them to a shameful
flight, with the loss of all their Baggage, Riches, Artillery, and a prodigious
quantity of warlike Ammunition and Provisions; and above fifty thousand of
their number slain.

Since which time God approving the justice of our thrice Illustrious and
Invincible Emperor's Cause, has in such a manner blessed his victorious Armies,
under the Conduct of the Brave and Generous Duke of Lorrain, and the most
Serene Elector of Bavaria, through the great Victories they have gained, and
the glorious Conquests they have made, during the whole course of four
Campagnes together, that they have struck a Terror over all the Ottoman Empire:
So that the people not knowing where the fault lay, have miserably put to death
the principal Ministers of the Port, and the best Officers of their Armies,
imputing to them the cause of God's wrath, as now intending to destroy their
Empire, and exterminate the Law of their Prophet, for engaging them in an
unjust War, contrary to the opinion of their Mufti, who is the Oracle of the
Turks, and to whom those Infidels give as much credit, as the Christians do to
the Traditions and Writings of the true Prophets, and Doctors of the Church.
This Mufti, who is the Interpreter, and Dispenser, and consequently the Head of
the Mohammedan Law, was the only person in the Divan, who endeavored to
dissuade the Grand Signior from entering into a War with the Emperor, in favor
of Teckely, foretelling him the curses that would fall upon his head, the
hazard he would run of losing his Empire, and seeing it shared among the
Christian Princes; saying withal, That God would never endure, that the
Musselmen, who had always been so punctual in the observation of their
Treaties, should violate a League two years before its expiration, and enter
into an unjust War, which would infallibly draw upon their heads the anger of
the Almighty. And indeed he missed but little of moving the credulous People,
and rousing up in their minds an aversion to a War so fatal and ruinous to
their Repose.

The Grand Signior to remedy so many disorders, and prevent the mischiefs
threatened him from his own Subjects, used all the means imaginable to put an
end to this Bloody War; to which end he offered to make a Peace with the
Emperor upon Articles favorable to Christendom; and the Court of Vienna
having rejected his Propositions, he addressed himself to the King of Poland,
and the Republic of Venice, to bring 'em to a particular accommodation, and to
break that Sacred League which our Holy Father Innocent XI. so politickly
contrived, and carried on at the expense of the Treasures of the Church, for
the good of the Cause of Jesus Christ, and the Propagation of the True Faith.

In the mean time the great Warlike preparations which the Emperor made in
his Hereditary Countries, and other parts of Germany were carried on so
vigorously, that all things were ready by the time appointed, to thunder in
upon the Turkish Garrisons. The Artillery, the vast number of Bombs, Granado's,
Shells, and Fireworks, the inventions of a Franciscan Monk, and the Sieur
Gonzales, a Spanish Ingineer, were so dreadful, that well there could not any
doubt be made of the happy issue of one of the most glorious and daring
Enterprises that had been undertaken in a long time: And though the Siege of
Buda were in vain attempted in the year 1684. at what time it cost us the blood
of 10000. Christians, the disappointment of one Campaign, and the expense of so
much Treasure; yet was not the Imperial Court discouraged from a second
attempt, well knowing that upon the Conquest of that important Capital,
depended all the rest of Hungary, and the neighboring Countries.

True it is, the Duke of Lorrain was not more succesful in the first Siege,
than those other Generals which had preceded him in that Enterprise; however he
failed not to acquire great honor, and made it apparent, that he might be
compared with the most renowned Captains, which past Ages have admired, by that
noble retreat which he made in the face of a numerous Garrison, and an Army of
the Enemies, little inferior to his own; who durst not make the least attempt
upon his Rear, for fear of having no better success than at the time of the
Siege, during which the Duke had three times beaten the Serasquier's Army; and
had it not been that the Winter was already come, which caused a scarcity of
Forage, and other necessaries for the subsistence of the Armies, and some
little mis-understandings among the Generals, perhaps there might have been no
need of a second Siege.

In the Council of War that was held the last year in presence of the Emperor,
to consult what was to be done the next Summer, there were some who presently
propounded the Siege of Buda, and to keep the Fortress of Newhausel blockt up,
that so it might be compelled to yield of it self; which was rejected by
others, who were of opinion, That Thorn was first to be pulled out of the foot,
and that the Expedition of Buda was to be reserved for the present year, as was
done. In the mean time there were several Councils of War, wherein the
Sentiments of the Generals were very much divided; the most part affirming,
That it was first requisite to be Masters of Alba Regalis, to prevent the Turks
from making use of it as a place of Retreat, and sheltering their Army under
the Cannon of that Fortress, as the Serasquier had done at the last Siege, to
the great vexation of our Forces. Others were for marching directly to the
Bridge of Esseck, taking that City, and then leaving a part of the Army for the
preservation of that important Passage; to wast all the Enemies Country, and so
to sit down before Buda. Others were for the Recovery of Agria, and the
Fortress of Mongats, thereby to exterminate the Remainder of that Arch-Rebel
Teckely's adherents; of which, the Reduction of those two places would clear
all the Upper Hungary. Some proposed to act with two Armies apart: That the
Elector of Bavaria should march into the Upper Hungary, and draw one part of
the Enemies Forces that way, while the Duke of Lorrain Besieged Alba Regalis;
and that the Croatian Army under General Schultz should march toward the Bridge
of Esseck. There were very few that concluded positively for the Siege of Buda,
which was nevertheless the Enterprise that the Emperor and the Duke of Lorrain
had resolved to put in Execution whatever it cost 'em, that they might have the
rest of Hungary at a cheaper rate, keep a door open to Belgrade, and Winter
fifty or sixty thousand Germans, in the Kingdom, where the year before they
could not Winter above twenty thousand.

This Design thus concluded upon, was kept very secret, even from the Generals
themselves, to whom the Emperor upon their dismission declared, that he would
send his Resolution what he would have done to the general Rendezvous, which
was appointed to be in the Plains of Barkan, upon the thirtieth of May. But
because the Auxiliary Forces of Bavaria, Brandenburgh, Saxony, and the Circles,
could not be there so soon, they were delayed for some days. In the mean time
the Forces marched from all parts to the place assigned, as well by Water as
Land; so that it was a lovely sight to see the Danube covered with such an
infinite number of Barks and Barges laden with Soldiers, great Guns,
Ammunition, and Provisions, Bullets, Bombs, Granado's, Carcasses, Shovels,
Pick-Axes, and other Instruments fit for the Siege of a Town.

Upon the 20th. of May the Elector of Bavaria arrived at Newstadt, to which
place the whole Court was come from Vienna some days before. There his
Electoral Highness, together with the Arch-Dutchess his Lady were received by
their Imperial Highnesses, with all the Marks of a tender Affection, beseeming
the near Relation between Personages of that illustrious Quality, the Cannon of
the Garrison being three times discharged upon their Entrance.

Upon the 23d. being Ascension-Day, the Elector went to visit the Duke of
Lorrain, who was come to Oldenburgh, though somewhat indisposed, and returned
the same Evening to Newstadt: Where his Electoral Highness having had several
Conferences about the opening of the Campaign, and taken leave of their
Imperial Majesty's, and the Electress his Wife, he departed the second of June,
with the Acclamations of the whole Court, and People, and the Prayers and good
Wishes of all, That God would be pleased to preserve the Life of that young
Prince, who was going so generously to expose his own, and the Lives of his
Subjects in such a Holy War, against the sworn Enemy of Christendom.

After that his said Electoral Highness arriving at Comorrha, was there
received by the Commanders, and Magistrates of the City, with Peals of Cannon,
and three Volleys of small Shot, ranged in double Files, and so conducted to
the Lodging prepared for him. The next day the Duke of Lorrain, who had put
himself at the Head of the Imperial Army, near Barkan, came to give a visit to
his Electoral Highness, and view the Bavarian Army, which was to that purpose
drawn up in Battle-Array in the Fields, near Comorrha, where Prince Lewis of
Baden commanded next under his Electoral Highness, in the quality of General of
the Cavalry, Count Serini in quality of General of Artillery. The Marquess de
la Vergne, and the Count de Fontaign, acted there as Lieutenant General
Marshals of the Camp; the Count d'Aspremont, and Prince Eugenius of Savoy,
served as Generals of Battalia's. The Baron of Beck, who was also nominated to
serve under his Electoral Highness, lying sick at Newhausel of a dangerous
Fever, was dispensed with; but his Regiment of Infantry, which was in the
number of those which the Emperor had made choice of to reinforce the
Bavarians, failed not to be there under the Command of the Lieutenant Colonel.

The 10th of June Count Straatman, great Chancellor to the Emperor, arrived
at the general Rendezvous near Barkan, to compose certain differences that were
risen among the Generals upon certain Punctilio's of Command, and allotment
ordained of who and who to serve in the separate Armies of the Duke of Lorrain,
and the Elector of Bavaria. This Minister of State, who is one of the most
dextrous Persons, and profoundest Politicians of his Age, caused a Council of
War to be called, where he so well managed the dispositions of the Generals,
that he gave them all the satisfaction imaginable: Which done, he showed them
the Imperial Commission, containing the Emperor's orders to begin the Campaign
with the Siege of Buda, exhorting them withal to behave themselves according to
their Qualities in an Enterprise of such great importance, upon which depended
not only the preservation of his Conquests, the establishment of his Crown
Imperial, and the welfare of Christendom, but also the Ruin of the Ottoman
Empire, which after the loss of so considerable a place could not prevent the
other Cities of Hungary from returning under the Obedience of their Lawful
Sovereign, nor stop the progress of the Christian Arms. So that though the
Generals expected positive Orders to besiege Agria, or Alba Regalis, it is not
to be expressed how much overjoyed they were when they heard that the Emperor
was resolved they should sit down before Buda. And this News being spread among
the Officers and Soldiers of both Armies, they testified their particular
satisfaction, and the eager desire which they had to hasten to the place where
they should have such noble opportunities to give signal proofs of their
Valor, and revenge the death of their Comrades, which had laid their bones in
the Trenches of the former Siege. The Volunteers, which were already numbered to
be above six thousand that resorted to this Stage of War, from Germany, Spain,
Italy, France, England, the Low Countries, and all part of Europe, of all
Qualities and Conditions, to win honor under the Imperial Ensigns, manifested
the greatest heat and zeal imaginable to signalize their Courage in so glorious
an Enterprise.

The Auxiliaries of Saxony commanded by the Prince of Saxen-Hall, and
Major General, the Count de Trautmansdorf, who had taken their march through
Moravia, being by this time also arrived at the Rendezvous, the Generals
resolved to decamp, without staying any longer for the Forces of the Circles,
or those of Brandenburgh who having chosen the way of Silesia, and the narrow
streights of Jabluncka, marched but slowly, and could not arrive so soon.

Thereupon the Armies dislodged the 12th of June, being Corpus Christi Eve, by
break of day: The Duke of Lorrain taking the Road that led to the Bridge of
Gran, which his Army passed the 13th. The Troops of Saxony keeping the Van. The
Elector of Bavaria held his march on this side the Danaw, that he might make
himself Master of the City of Pest, before he sat down before Buda. While the
two Armies marched thus on both sides the Danaw, the Count of Rabata,
Commissary-General, caused a prodigious number of Gabions and Bavins to be
embarked, for making of which the Soldiers were still employed, as they came to
their Rendezvous, to keep 'em from idleness, which were all sent with the great
Guns, Ammunition, Provision, Hay, and other necessary Provisions for the
subsistence of the Armies.

The 14th. The Body of the main Army advanced so far as till they came under
Vicegrad, but the smaller Artillery, and the Reer-guard were constrained to
stay behind by reason of the narrow ways through which they were to pass. The
Bavarian Army quartered that night near Vaccia, on the other side of the Danaw.

The 15th. The Imperial Cavalry continued their march for an hour beyond
Vicegrad, followed by the Infantry, and Artillery. And then it was that the
Duke of Lorrain sent out a commanded Party to discover the Enemy, who met with
a small Party of the Turks, that presently betook themselves to flight; but
ours had the good fortune to overtake 'em, and after they had killed some, to
make five Prisoners, whom they brought to our Camp. Where being examined, they
unanimously declared, that the Inhabitants of Agria and Alba Regalis fearing a
Siege, had secured the best of their Goods in the City of Buda, which together
with both the other places were provided both with Men, and all things
necessary to sustain a long Siege, till Relief came.

The 16th. They came within an hours march of Buda, none of the Troops of the
Garrison appearing all this while to observe our countenances.

The 17th. The Cavalry made a halt to rest themselves, and to give the Infantry
and the Artillery time to come up. At what time the Duke of Lorrain commanded
three thousand Men to make some thousands of Gabions and Bavins, and began to
lay a Bridge of Boats over the River, to the Island of St. Andrew, thereby to
join together both sides of the Danaw.

The 18th. The Baron of Diependael, General of Battalia, invested the City of
Buda with one part of the Cavalry, while the Infantry came up and took their
Posts about half a League from the place; and then they began the Lines of
Circumvallation. At what time a great Party of the Garrison, both Horse and
Foot, showed themselves without Vienna Gate. But they retreated into the City,
upon the approach of a detachment of the Imperial Cavalry, which was commanded
to charge 'em. But then the besieged bestowed upon us eight Peals of their
Cannon, though without doing any more hurt than only killing one single
Pioneer, by reason they shot at too great a distance.

The 19th. The Duke of Lorrain caused the Army to advance as far as the hot
Baths, of which he made himself Master, without any opposition, (the Turks
having abandoned that Post the day before) and took up his Head Quarters about
a quarter of a League from the place. The same day the Elector of Bavaria made
himself Master of the City of Pest, which the Turks had forsaken, after they
had carried off their Cannon, Ammunition and Provisions into Buda, and broken
down part of the Bridge of Communication between the one place and the other.
About the same time our Croats scouting up and down met a Turkish Chaous with a
Convoy of forty Spahi's, who carried Letters from the Port to the Grand Vizier
of Buda: Him they brought Prisoner to the Camp, where his Letters were read,
containing only strict Orders to the Vizier, to be watchful over the Security
of the Places that depended upon his Government, and to assure him of speedy
and powerful succor, in case of an Attack.

The 20th. The Bridge over the Danaw was finished. Some of the Enemies Cavalry
also the same Day sallied out of the Town, with a design to cut off our Advancd
Guards; but his Highness the Duke of Lorrain having timely notice thereof, sent
4 Squadrons of Horse to repel 'em; with whom joined also several Volunteers;
upon whose approach the Enemy retreated, not daring to engage. The same Day the
Artillery arrived in the Camp, and two Batteries were begun to be raised
against the lower Town, which was the Duke of Lorrain's Attack, the Count of
Starenbergh doing the duty of the Day, as Camp-Marshal-General. That Evening
the Trenches were opened; and a Janisary surren dring himself to our Camp,
reported as the other Prisoners had done before, that there were not above
eight Thousand Soldiers in the Garrison; for that the Vizier had sent some few
days before a Reinforcement of two Thousand Men to Agria, and an equal number
to Alba Regalis, in regard the Turks never dreamt that the Imperialists had
determined a second Siege of Buda, which had proved so fatal to 'em but two
Years ago. This Deserter likewise said, that the Place was abundantly provided
with Victuals, and Warlike Ammunition, to maintain a long Siege. Moreover, that
the Vizier Abdi Bassa was no great Soldier, fitter to make a Merchant of, than
a Governor, and consequently despised by the Soldiers. That he had assembled
in the public Piazza of the City, all the Captains and Soldiers, and had there
with a studied Harangue, exhorted 'em to behave themselves according to their
Duties, and gloriously to maintain the honor of the Turbant; adding withal,
that he had Orders from the Grand Signior, to defend the Place to the last dorp
of his Blood; which he was resolved to do, hoping that they would do the like
in Expectation of that Relief, which the Grand Signior would infallibly send
them. To whom the Janisaries, and Spahi's replied, that they were ready to
sacrifice their Lives in the Service of his Highness and defense of their Law,
upon Condition nevertheless, that the Grand Vizier would pay them down upon the
Nail, ten Crowns a Head; that he would set at Liberty the Officers and
Soldiers detained in the Prisons, whatever their Crimes might be; and that the
Vizier would not hold out to the last Extremity, lest the same Misfortune
should befall them, as befell the Garrison of New-hausel: all which Conditions
the Vizier promised exactly to perform.

The 21st. The Trenches were relieved, upon the Duke of Lorrain's Attack, by
Monsieur Fonck, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Souches. And the same
day, the Elector of Bavaria, having left a sufficient strength in Pest, and
passed the Bridge of Boats, to St. Andrew's Island, arrived with his Army,
before the Place, and took his Post on the same part of the Town, where he had
commanded in the former Siege, that is to say, next to the Castle and the High
Town, to form a second Attack; the third being reserved for the
Brandenburghers, which were expected in a few Days, and were to be reinforced
with the Troops of Suabia and Franconia. That Night the Enemy fired furiously
upon our Men, that wrought hard in making their Approaches, and raising their
Batteries, of whom there were about seven or eight Killed, and as many Wounded.

The 22d. The Duke of Lorrain sent all the Imperial and Bavarian Cavalry, under
the Command of General Palsi, Gondola, and others, to Quarter about Alba
Regalis, to consume the Forage in those Places, and keep that Garrison in
continual Alarm, reserving in his Camp no more than a Thousand Bavarian, and
three Thousand Imperial Horse, to secure the Pioneers. That Night we brought to
Perfection a Battery against the low Town, upon which were planted twelve
Pieces of Cannon, which played all that Day, without ceasing: We had five Men
Killed, and some Wounded.

The 23d. By Break of day, we continued Firing with such good Success, that
there was a Breach made in the Wall of the Low Town, about twenty Paces broad.
All this while the Bavarians wrought hard in making their Approaches, of whom
there were some also Killed and Wounded.

The 24th. The Breach being enlarged, they gave an Assault toward Evening, and
made themselves Masters of the Wall, without much resistance, for that they who
were to have defended it, were retired into the High Town, after they had fired
only once. In this onset we had a Captain of Foot, a Lieutenant of Granadeers,
four Soldiers, and six Volunteers Killed, and seven or eight Wounded. And from
this time forward, they began to attack the City, according to the due forms of
Art; and a resolution was taken, that the Trenches should every day be relieved
by a Sergeant General of Battalia, as well upon the Duke of Lorrain's Side, as
that of the Duke of Bavaria's: and so upon the 25th. The Count of Souches,
Lieutenant Camp-Marshal General, and Diependael, General of Battalia, relieved
the Trenches: at what time, little else was done, but only they secured their
Lodging upon the Wall of the Low Town, and re-open'd a Gate, which the Turks
had closed up to the Right hand, at a good distance from the Breach, where they
had taken their Post; and to the end the Pioneers might work more safely, the
Count de Souches caused some adjoining Houses to be fired where some Fuseleer
Turks were burnt. The same day the Bavarians finished a small Battery upon St.
Gerards Mount, which the Enemy had abandoned, from whence they shot some small
Bombs into the High Town, to try the Effect. They also finished another great
Battery to beat down the great Roundel that joins the Castle to the High Town.
The same day Count Budiani presented to the Duke of Lorrain some Colors, which
he had won from a Party of Turkish Cavalry, which convoyed about fourteen or
fifteen Barks, laden with Women and Children, belonging to the Officers of
Buda, who were endeavoring to make their Escape, with all the wealth of the
City, to Belgrade; and whom his Hussars, and Heydukes, reinforced with a Party
of Imperial Dragoons, had surprised and routed near St. Margarets Island, got a
rich Booty, and taken Ninety two Women and Children, and among the rest, the
Vizier of Buda's Wife.

The 26th. They wrought upon several traverse Lines, and to finish the
Approaches, to secure our Lodgments in the Low Town, which were furnished with
two Thousand Soldiers, and a good number of Pioneers, who met with great
difficulty to advance their Works, the Ground being very rugged, and Stony. The
same day the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, perceiving that our Workmen in
the Low Town might be easily assailed and beaten by the Turks, sent to Count
Starenbergh Camp-Marshal General for some Infantry, who thereupon sent him six
Battalions, viz. That of Starenbergh, Newbourg, Mansfield, Souches, Diependael,
and Tungen, who were posted along the Wall, to secure the Workmen. The same day
also two Deserters, who pretended themselves to be Hungarians, surrendered
themselves, and confirmed what had been said before, that the Garrison
consisted of no more than eight Thousand fighting Men, and that by the order of
the Vizier Bassa, they had begun to take away the Roofs of the Houses, and to
unpave the Streets, on purpose to prevent the Effects of the Bombs. Toward
Evening, between six and seven a Clock, the Turks sallied forth, making hideous
outcries, on purpose to scare those that were posted near the Roundel, toward
the Waterside; but they were so well received, that they retired in great
Confusion. For Camp-Marshal General Starenbergh came timely in with two
Battalions of those Men that had been posted the day before, behind the Wall;
which had he not done, the Enemy without doubt had made a great Slaughter of
our Pioneers. The Enemy was pursued about two Hundred Paces from the Trenches,
and our Soldiers brought off several of the Heads of the Turks, which they
presented to his Highenss the Duke of Lorrain, who caused a Ducket in Gold to
be given to each Soldier, for every Head. Captain Burger of Starenbergh's
Regiment was there wounded, with ten or twelve Soldiers, and as many slain
outright.

The same day the Bavarians finished two Batteries for Bombs, on each side
their Grand Battery. They also carried on their Trenches above a Hundred Paces,
they also made three cross Lines, and a Place for drawing up the Soldiers for
the Guard of their Battery. The Turks also fired very furiously upon us with
their great Guns, but did us no more Mischief, than only to kill us two Men.

The 27th. Finished the Works which they had begun in the Night; they made new
Traverses; some Musketeers were put into the Mosque of the Low Town; a Post
was taken upon the Right hand, near the Gate which makes the Angle of the High
Town; they enlarged and deepened their Lines, to render 'em capable of holding
more Men; and almost finished the Grand Battery, without any Loss, saving one
Man Killed, and some Wounded. That Morning the Enemy showed themselves in the
same Part as the day before, ranged as if they had designed some Encounter, but
perceiving we were ready to receive them, they retired within the Circuit of
their Walls, without enterprizing any thing. About eleven a Clock at Noon, they
sallied out Horse and Foot to dislodge our Men that were posted on the Right
hand; but having discharged one single Volley, and perceiving the Count of
Hoffkirken, Dunewald's Lieutenant Colonel, hastening to the relief of ours,
with the Horse-guard, they regained the City, leaving twenty of their Men dead
upon the Spot, besides the Wounded, which they carried along with them. Of
ours, there were but two killed, and five or fix wounded. The same day came
another Deserter, who reported that the Governor was very much perplexed,
foreseeing the inevitable loss of the City, which the Grand Signior had
committed to his Charge; as also for that in his Salleys, he lost the best and
choicest of his Men, without any hopes of ruining our Works; but that nothing
grieved him so much to the Heart, as the taking of his own, and the Wives of
the principal Officers of the Garrison, by the Heydukes, Hussars, and Dragoons,
when they thought they had been in a place of safety. The same day also
finished a Battery on the Bavarian Attack, levelled against the Castle and the
Rondel next the City.

They 29th. They drew a Line of Communication four Hundred Paces in length from
the Post of the Right hand Angle, to the middle Gate, and another Line were
made to go to the middle Battery, upon which was Planted twelve Pieces of
Cannon. They also wrought to raise a small Battery near the great one (...)
place (...), whereon (...) four Mortar pieces, which were brought thither in
the Evening with some Wagons full of Bombs. The same time the Besieged began
to cast Bombs and Stones upon ours; so that a Captain and 16 Soldiers were
wounded that night, and some slain. The Duke of Lorrain, then foreseeing that
there might be a scarcity of Horse-meat in the Camp, sent the greatest part of
the Baggage Horses into the Meadows that were assigned them between Newhausel
and Gran. And then it was that General Dunewald, who commanded the Cavalrie,
encamped near Alba Regalis, gave Advice to his Highness, That the Turks having
quitted the Castle of Bathyan upon the River Zarwis, he had placed a Garrison
therein, and that he had made an Attempt upon Palotta, a very strong Fort, near
Alba Regalis.

The 29. we continued to finish our Works, and his serene Highness increased
the number of Pioneers to six hundred. The Enemy made no Sallies during these
two Days, but fired more suriously than usually to ruin our great Battery.
About five (...) Clock in the Evening they made a most furious Attack upon the
Bavarian Attack with 2000 Horse and Foot, with so much ^uccess, that they put
ours into a Confusion; and the Janisaries ^^rowing themselves into the
Approaches, were very busy in ^^ining all before 'em; when the Count of
Hoffkirken, who there ^^d Wonders, flew to the Relief of the Engaged with the
Horse^uard of the Duke of Lorraine's Quarter, and the Bavarian ^enerals with
the Reserve, so that the Combat was very cruel ^^d bloody on both Sides; but
the Enemy was forced to give ^^ound, and was pursued to the very Gates of the
City, not^^thstanding the Besieged continually played upon our Men with ^^eir
great Guns and small Shot. Prince Eugenius of Savoy ^^s in great Danger, having
his Horse killed under him. Prince ^^^is of Baden, and the Generals, Fontain
and La Vargne, sig^^lized themselves in this Action, as did also the
Volunteers; ^^t above all the Prince of Commercy, who was in the hottest of
(...) Engagement. The Sieur de Switterdael, Lieutenant Colonel (...) the
Bavarian Regiment of Staina^, was there killed, with seven (...) thirty
Soldiers, and six Volunteers, besides sixty two ^unded, among which was a
Captain, two Lieutenants, and an (...) sign; but the Loss of the Turks was much
more considerable, (...) that our Soldiers brought away sixty Heads, and by a
^^scian Deserter we understood afterward that the Turks had above two hundred
of their Men killed and wounded in that Encounter. That Evening, upon the
Lorrain Attack, they began to play the four Mortar Piecey planted near the
great Battery, and to shoot Bombs upon the Enemies Batteries. Six Culverins
also were planted upon the old Battery, formerly raised to make a Breach in the
low Town, designed to play directly upon the Gate of the City, and disturb the
Sallys of the Besieged.

The 30. The Forces of Suabia and Franconia arrived in the Camp, and took the
Posts which had been assigned them. All the Night and all the Day were spent in
advancing our Works, which were so numerous, that they could hardly be
distinguished one from another. This Night there were but two Soldiers killed,
and some few wounded. The Count of Souches, who commanded this day in the
Trenches, having sent three Granadeers to observe the Distance between our
Approaches and the Roundel, brought word that it was not above three hundred
Paces, and that the Enemy was hard at work in making a deep Trench at the Foot
of the Roundel, and that having gone a great way forwarder on the left side,
than on the right, they had increased their number of Workmen on the right
side. All night long, Bavins, Gabions, Munition, and Provision, were sent to
the Camp in great abundance, through the Care of the Count de Rabata Commissary
General. The same day General Caprara left the Camp with the Cavalry of Suabia,
to head the Cavalry encamped near Alba Regalis, which he was to command in
chief. Five Rascian Shepherds also coming out of the City to feed along by the
Walls, surrendered themselves with above four hundred Sheep to the Elector of
Bavaria's Quarter, who caused 'em to be well rewarded. They could give nothing
of Information, only that there was a great Consternation among the Besieged;
nevertheless that they were resolved to defend themselves in expectation of the
Succor which they were promised; moreover that our Bombs and Carcasses had set
fire to several parts of the City, which had been fortunately quenched.

The first of July. Yesterday in the Evening General Schoning, who commands the
Auxiliary Forces of Bradenb^rgh, arrived in the Camp: And this Morning
Camp-Marshal-General Starenburgh showed him the Approaches, and the Attack
which was reserved for his Men; which was toward the water side, to the left of
the Imperialists; after which he was magnificently treated by the Duke of
Lorrain, and having had a Conference with his Highness, where was also present
General Starenburgh, he returned to meet his Forces that were expected the next
day, or the next day after at farthest. This morning the Imperasists began to
shoot from their new Battery of four Pieces carrying twenty four pound Ball.
The five Mortar Pieces also near the great Battery, continued playing upon the
round Tower upon the right Hand, with such Success, that the Besieged durst not
appear there any more. The same day they finished their Works, and made two
Redoubts to secure a Communication with the great Battery. This Night we had
but five wounded and one slain; but in the morning Adjutant General Mercy was
wounded in the Head with a Musket as he was carrying Orders to the Approaches.
There was nothing done in the Bavarian Quarter this day, only they advanced
their Works, and their Batteries had made a Breach in the Rampart without: And
the same day the remainder of the Bavarian Forces arrived, consisting of 1400
Foot, which were added to the rest of the same Circle.

July 2. Our Approaches on the Lorrain Attack side were advanced within two
hundred Paces of the Wall of the City. The night before was finished a Battery
of twelve pieces of Cannon, carrying twenty four pound ball; and four Mortar
Pieces more were planted near the first, that played without ceasing, and fired
the last night a part of the City next the great Church, which burnt till
morning. Nevertheless we continued ^^ooting with our great Guns against the two
first round Towers, which were left almost defenseless. The two Battalians also
of Keyserstein and Croy, were commanded to reinforce those that lay encamped
under the Wall of the low Town. The Enemy likewise shot down several Bombs and
Stones, without doing us any great Mischief, only that they killed us two or
three Soldiers. The same day the Troops of Suabia began their Line of
Circumvallation, and the next night raised a Battery upon the Hill which they
possess. In the mean time the Bavarians played very furiously against the
Castle and the high Town, and shot in several Bombs, which occasioned a new
Conflagration, which was not quenched in a good while. And now the Duke of
Lorrain, apprehensive lest the Turks might in the night time, by the help of
small Barks, get in Men and Provisions into Buda, went personally to view the
Places adjoining to Pest, and commanded the Prince of Savoy's Regiment of
Dragoons to post themselves in the Town^, that they might be ready to assist
the Hungarians who lay there, and had orders to raise certain little Forts upon
the Banks of the Danaw.

July 3. This morning arrived the Troops of Brandenburgh from the other side of
the Danaw, that lay encamped near our Bridge. Soon after came the Duke of
Lorrain to take a view of 'em, and was received by General Schoning with three
Volleys of Musketeers ranged in Battalia, and three Peals of Artillery planted
at the head of the Infantry. His Highness also was entertained with much
splendour at Dinner, and then returned to his Quarters extremely satisfied to
have seen such a considerable Body of Men, stout and active, and so well
provided with a noble Train of Artillery. The same day the Imperialists
finished another Line for the defense of their Trenches. They also fired very
furiously with their Cannon and Mortar Pieces; so that they not only made a
considerable Breach in the Wall, but also ruined the Batteries upon the two
first Roundels, from whence the Enemy fired without Intermission. On the other
side, the Bavarians advanced their Lines to the Castle, and raised a new
Battery on the right hand toward the Danaw, upon which they planted nine Mortar
Pieces, which did wonderful Execution. Three days before this, they played from
a Battery of seven Demi-Cannons against the round Tower, while from another of
four Pieces they belabour'd the Flanks: they likewise raised a new Battery of
eight Pieces to beat down the left side of the Roundel. Seven men were killed
in the Lorrain Attack, and some wounded. This day in the Afternoon, an Ensign
of the Janisaries rendered himself to the Camp, having deserted his own Party
for having killed a Turkish Officer in a Duel. He assured us that of true
Janisaries, there were not above fifteen hundred in the Garrison; but that what
with the Saphi's, Albanians, and others, they made up the number of seven
thousand fighting Men. He added, that the Bombs and Carcasses had already
ruined several Edifices, and occasioned great destruction both of Men and
Cattle. That the Besieged were very busy in making a Mine behind the Breach of
the Lorrain Attack; and that till that very hour, there had not any person
entered the place. As for General Dunewald, he forbore to prosecute his Design
upon Palotta, finding it was provided with a good Garrison; a Party of which
had killed some of his Men that went to take a view of the place. Another Parry
also of the Garrison of Alba Regalis had met withal, and routed some Forragers
of the Horse that were quartered in the Neighborhood, and killed among others
Count Papenheim, Captain of Horse in the Bavarian Troops.

July 4. They advanced so far with their Approaches in the Lorrain Attack, that
they were got within a hundred Paces of the Breach of the Roundel on the right
hand. The Enemy also began to make a Line without the Breach about fifty Paces
from our Works, to render the Breach more inaccessible; and though they fired
continually all night long with their Muskets, and slung an infinite number of
Stones, we had but thirteen men killed and wounded. And now had we fourteen
Mortar Pieces planted that shot Bombs and Carcasses continually without
ceasing. In the Bavarian Attack, but only what concerned the securing our
Works, and advancing the Batteries. This morning a Polonian that served the
Turks, rendered himself to the Camp, and reported that the besieged were
resolved to Surrender, if they were not relieved within a Month: and another
Deserter in the afternoon came and declared that the besieged had the night
before landed five Horsemen ashore on Pest side, who were to take several
Roads, that one at least might get safe to the Serasquier, and press him to
hasten the Relief that he had promised. On the other side the Duke of Lorrain
sent a Detachment of Horse toward Voitfar, to destroy the Grass and Corn, and
watch the Motion of the Enemy. Of this some Tartars had Intelligence, and snapt
some of our Forragers on the other side of the Danaw; they also took some
Horses, and two Grooms belonging to Prince Lewis of Baden, who were in St.
Marget's Island.

July 5. Last night sixty Granadeers, with some Pioneers, were commanded to go
and ruin the Line which the Enemy had the day before begun before the breach of
the Roundel, which succeeded so well, that they filled up the breach without
the loss of more than two Soldiers. By this time also the breaches were made
wider and wider, as well where the Lorrainers, as where the Bavarians attacked,
and what the Turks repaired in the night, was by us overthrown in the day time.
And now all the Bavarians were come up and joined together in their Quarters;
upon whom the Enemy made a Sally in the night time; and though they were
bravely received, and purfued to the very Gates of the City, yet they lost many
gallant and stout Men, and among the rest the Son of Camp-Marshal-General
Dorfeling, an Ingineer, two Lieutenants, and seven and twenty Soldiers, besides
the same number wounded.

July 6. There was a Line of Communication made from the Duke of Lorrain's
Attack to that of the Brandenburghers, not above fifty Paces from the Gate in
the middle and about sixty Paces from the breach on the right hand. This
morning the Cannon played so furiously, that they utterly beat down the two
Roundels with the Curtain; and when night came they shot without ceasing Bombs
and Grenades, that kindled a fire near the Roundel, on the right hand, that
lasted three hours. The Duke of Lorrain and General Starenbergh stayed till
eleven of Clock at night in the Approaches, to encourage the Workmen with their
presence. The Brandenburghers also had by this time vigorously advanced their
Works, their Generals of Battalia alternatively relieving one another in their
Trenches. The Sieur Fonk, Lieutenant Colonel to Souches, was wounded in the
Leg, with six Soldiers, and two killed. The Brandenburghers had a Captain of
Granadeers wounded, with six Soldiers, and eight slain.

July 7. Last night a great number of Bombs were shot into the Town, which did
great Execution, in regard the fire was seen to blaze out in several parts of
the City; though greater Execution was expected to be done upon the Arrival of
Gonzales our Ingineer, who was looked for in the Camp within two or three days,
whither the great Guns, Mortar Pieces, Bombs, Carcasses, and other Artificial
Fireworks were already arrived. This morning the Enemy sallied out upon the
Brandenburghers Attack with Horse and Foot, but greatly to their disadvantage;
being so vigorously received, that they were forced to retire in great
disorder, being pursued under the very Walls of the City: there were also
preparing their Batteries to be ready in two days, when they resolved to be
heard as loud as the rest of their Friends. Yesterday the Miners began to work
upon the Lorrain Attack to widen the breaches, and this night the same was done
upon the Bavarian Attack, where they had by this finished two new Batteries,
the one of ten, the other of seven Pieces of Cannon; and a third was raising
toward the water side, to level the attacked Roundel, and a gate through which
the besieged sallied out very frequently to get into a close way which they had
made before the said Roundel. Yesterday the Bavarians advanced their Approaches
to the foot of the Castle, so that they could approach no nearer till the
breach were enlarged. And indeed the Works in the Lorrain Attack were so near
the Wall, that they could not advance any nearer without lodging upon the
breach. So that there were above fifty men killed and wounded in the three
Attacks. Yester night the Enemy shot a Bomb, which lighting into a barrel of
Powder, killed nine of our Cannoneers.

The 8th was busily employed upon the Lorrain Attack, in raising nearer the
Walls two new Batteries of three Demi-Cannons each; and upon the left hand,
where we had not carried on our Approaches as upon the left, they advanced
their Approaches to the very Wall of the Roundel; which being a work to be done
so near the Enemy, cost us five and twenty Soldiers, killed and wounded, the
most part with Stones and Grenades, among whom was Major General Th^ngen, who
was upon the Guard of the Trenches with the Count de Souches. The Sieur
Bischoffhansen Serjcant Major of one of the Suabian Regiments, had his Arm
broken with a Musket shot; one of Starenbergh's Captains was wounded in the
shoulder, and Souches's Captain Lieutenant in the Foot. As for the Miners that
were ordered to sapp under the right side of the Roundel, had not as yet met
with any Mines of the Enemy. This evening others were set to work upon the left
side of the middle Roundel: and this night Captain B^rger of Starenbergh's
Regiment, who had been wounded in the Mouth in the Salley upon the 26th of
June, died of his wound. Some Countrymen having found a means to make their
Escapes out of the City, came the same night to our Camp, and assured us that
there were not above three hundred men that labored constantly in the Mines
and the Retrenchment which the Enemies were making behind the Wall, whither to
retire in case of necessity.

July 9. All night long there was nothing done but shooting of Bombs and
Carcasses into the City, to keep the besieged in Action, and to deprive them of
their Repose. But by break of day the Enemy perceiving that we had made a
Gallery of Planks to pass the Miners over to the middle Roundel, rolled down
several Bombs, threw Grenades, and other Fireworks, with all sorts of
combustible Materials in such abundance, that the fire caught hold of the
Planks, and reduced the Gallery to Ashes, which obliged our Miners to come
away, and desist from their work till the next night. This morning about five a
clock the Enemy sprung a Mine some Paces without the Wall, between the middle
Roundel and that of the Gate, which succeeded so well, that it overthrew one of
our Mines, where we had seven or eight of our Miners, some killed and some
wounded. After that they made a Salley, put our Pioneers into disorder,
destroyed some of our Works, and posted themselves between the Imperialists and
Brandenburghers. But the Reserve flying thither from the Main-guard,
constrained the Enemy, after a sharp Encounter of half an hour, to regain the
City. We had forty of ours killed and wounded, and the Brandenburghers had few
less, among whom was one of their best Cannoneers, and some Inferior Officers.
The Enemy left behind them above fourscore slain, besides what were wounded.
But notwithstanding this rude check to their Success, the besiegers went on
with the same vigor as before with their Approaches, their Lines and their
Galleries. And the Bavarians yesterday ruined the little Gate near the Roundel,
with a Battery of ten Pieces of Demy-Cannon, so that the breach was already
become very broad.

July the 10th, In the Lorrain Attack the men labored all night to repair the
Batteries and Approaches ruined by the Salley which the Enemy made the day
before, and to rebuild the Gallery which they had burned, so that they designed
to put the Miners to work that evening. On the Bavarian side the Miners were
set to work under the Palisado of the Roundel, and under the Wall, in hopes
that the Mines would be ready to spring in three days. We had Soldiers killed
and wounded, among whom those of chiefest note were Lieutenant Colonel
Wachtenheim, who commanded in one of the Suabian Regiments. At the same time we
had Intelligence by our Spies that the Turks, to the number of seven thousand,
reinforced by the Tartars that ramble about the Country, had a design to put a
new Governor into Buda, with a Supply of Men; which obliged the Duke of
Lorrain to command some Infantry to post themselves on the other side the
Danaw, and join in case of necessity with the Cavalry which lay there, and to
meet and fight the Enemy.

July 11. This night five Demi-Cannon were planted upon the new Batteries in
the Lorrain Attack, and two Mortar Pieces upon a little Fort adjoining, with
the loss only of two Soldiers slain, and five wounded. The Brandenburghers
planted three Pieces upon a Battery, and the next night they planted a greater
number to shoot red hot Bullets into the City. The Bavarians likewise secured
their Works with two Redoubts. Yesterday in the evening four hundred commanded
Foot were sent upon Pest side to raise some Desences upon the Danaw to prevent
the putting of any Relief into Buda. And now the Command of Lieutenant Colonel
to Souches being vacant by the death of the Sieur Fonck, who died yesterday of
his wound in the Leg, it was conferred upon the Count of Herlerstein, Sergeant
Major to La Vergne.

The 12. All the Batteries were finished, as well in the Lorrain Attack, as in
that of the Brandenburghers, and the first Lines of these two Attacks were
joined in such a manner, that the men might pass from the one to the other
secure from the Shot of the Enemy. For being so near the Wall as they were, the
Besieged did nothing but throw Granado's, and sling Stones, to disturb the
Workmen: But being thus secured, the damage they did us was inconsiderable. The
Miners in the Mine on the Lefthand, were already far advanced under the Wall:
But in that upon the Right Hand they met with more difficulty, and therefore
they resolved to widen the Breach with their Cannon. Last Night the Count de
Souches, who commanded in the Trenches, caused the Breach to be viewed by the
Orders of Count Starenbergh, and it was found wide enough to make an Assault.
The Brandenburghers also this day began to shoot red-hot Bullets and Bombs into
the City, with twenty two Cannons and two Mortar-Pieces; but they did no great
Execution, in regard the Besieged had taken away all the Rafters of their
Houses. And yet the Bombs and Carcasses invented by the Franciscan Friar, and
the Spanish Engineer, may be said to work Wonders. Nevertheless the main
business of this day was to widen and level the Breaches; and we had this day
nine wounded and three killed, by the Granado's and Stones. As for the
Bavarians, the Breach which they had made in the great Roundel was by this time
wide enough, and the Miners were at work under the Palisado of the Trench.
Yesterday the Duke of Lorrain having Intelligence that the Serasquier was
advanced with some thousand Turks as far as Hatwan, commanded Three thousand
Horse, and six Battalions of Infantry, Imperialists, Bavarians, and
Brandenburghers, under the Conduct of General Baron de Mercy, to pass the
Danaw, and post themselves on the other side of the Bridge, to prevent the
Enemy from putting any Relief into the Town, with a new Governor, called Achmet
Bassa, reputed one of the best Officers that the Turk has in his Service.

July 13. This morning the Enemy sprung a Mine at the middle Roundel near to
ours, that was already finished, without so much as the loss of one Man of our
side: Tho on the other side it did the Execution which ours ought to have done,
and overthrew a part of the Roundel, where as yet we had not made any Breach.
There were two hundred Turks who were ready to have fallen pell mell into our
Works so soon as the Mine was sprung; but finding it had done an Execution
quite contrary to what they expected, they retired. And now all things being in
a Readiness for an Assault, to the end they might post themselves upon the
Wall; Count Starenbergh directed the Attack in the following manner. Count
Guido Starenbergh, Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment of that Name, was
commanded upon the right hand against the Roundel: Count de Herbersteen,
Sergeant Major to Scherffenbergh was in the middle of the Curtin, and the Count
d' Averspergh Lieutenant Colonel to Mansfield had the left hand. They had each
two hundred and eighty Soldiers: The Engineers, Granadeers, Fuseleers,
Carpenters, and Pioneers, were posted between them and the rest, to the number
of two thousand men were divided into three Bodies of Reserve, to support and
relieve the Assailants. The Volunteers, who had requested that Station,
intermixed themselves among the first. Between seven and eight of the Clock in
the Evening the Signal was given to mount the Breaches, with a Peal from all
the Batteries, and a shower of Bombs and Carcasses that were shot against the
City and the Retrenchments of the Enemy behind the breach. Nor could all the
Resistance of the Enemy prevent our men from mounting, where the combat was
very obstinate on both sides, and maintained for the space of three quarters of
an Hour with all the bravery imaginable: At what time the Enemy also sprang a
Mine under our first Line, which buried Captain Kalkreiter of Starenbergh's
Regiment, and some Soldiers. But at length, finding we could not get footing
for want of Ground, that we could not force the Pallisado'd Retrenchment of the
Besieged behind the Breach, and that our chief Officers were already all either
wounded or killed by the continual firing of the Enemy, it was thought
convenient to cause the Assailants to retreat, who had fought like Lions, and
of which five were so valiant as to throw themselves into the Retrenchment, and
yet to bring themselves off and retire with the rest; who, had they been but
duly succored, perhaps there would have needed no farther work to have lodged
upon the Breach. However the Retreat was made in good Order. The Regiments of
Souches and Mansfield suffered most in this Action; and Starenbergh's also was
very much damnified. There were about four hundred killed and wounded: but that
which was more particularly to be deplored, was the loss of so many brave
Officers and Volunteers. The Duke of Lorrain, and Camp-Marshal-General
Starenbergh were present at this Action, giving Orders every where as occasion
required. Few of the wounded escaped, which is the Reason some believe the
Turks do shoot with poisoned Bullets. Among the dead were the Count de
Herberstein Sergeant Major to Scherffenbergh, the Count of Kuffstein, a Captain
to Starembergh, with another Captain of the same Regiment. The Baron of Roll,
the Sieur Kirchmeyer, one of Souches's Captains; and two of Mansfield's
Captains, with eight Ensigns and Lieutenants of Infantry. Of the Volunteers
that were slain or died of their Wounds, the chief were the Duke of Vejar,
Grandee of Spain, who behaved himself with so much Courage that he was one of
the first upon the Breach. Prince Robert's Son, with another English Lord, the
Baron of Scheyffer, the Son of the Count of Maldegem, the young Count of
Courmaillon, a Count of Donaw, and seven or eight other Persons of Quality.
Among the wounded, as well Officers as Volunteers, there was
Lieutenant-Collonel Guido de Starenbergh wounded with the splinter of a Granado
in the Shoulder, and a Musket Bullet in the Foot, Lieutenant Colonel the Count
d' Averspergh in the Foot, but not dangerously; and indeed there were few of
the rest of the Officers escaped; the Prince of Veldens, of the Palatine
Family, Prince Picolomine, two English Lords, the Duke of Escalona, a Grandee
of Spain; the Marquis of Valero, Brother to the Duke of Vejar; the Prince of
Commercy, and above thirty other Volunteers of Quality. The Spanish and English
distinguished themselves, and fighting to outvye one another, endured the main
Fury of the Enemy. And indeed the English suffered very much: For of twenty,
all Persons of Quality, there were not above six that were not either killed or
wounded. The Loss of the Besieged was also very great, for by what we
understood afterward, they had above two hundred of their chiefest Men killed
and wounded. It was thought the Brandenburghers would have made an Attempt on
their side, but they excused themselves, alleging that their Breach was not
then wide enough. However the Turks upon the Retreat of our Men, made a little
sally upon their Attack; but were repulsed with the loss of twenty four of
their Party. Upon the Bavarian side they had made a considerable Breach in the
Roundel, and in the Wall that secures the Castle, which the Besieged repaired
every Night with Gabions, Palisado's, and Bavins.

The 14th. All the night and day was spent in burying the dead and repairing
the Approaches, in planting more Cannon upon the Batteries, and in carrying on
the Mines, the Miners being actually set to work under Ground on the side of
the great Roundel. Two Galleries were also built toward the Curtin, between the
twelfth and thirteenth Roundel. The Duke of Lorrain also having sent for three
Regiments of Horse from near Alba Regalis, to go and reinforce General Mercy,
the Count de Caprara detached the Regiments of Trusches, Taff, and Stirum, who
this morning passed the Bridge on Pest side. In the evening the besieged sprung
a Mine in the Eavarian Attack, on the left hand of the Roundel of the Castle,
which succeeded very ill. The same day his Electoral Highness having caused
eight Parapets of thick oaken Planks plaited with Iron, (being a new Invention,
found them very proper) to be made use of in Assaults and Attacks, every
Parapet being sufficient to secure a hundred armed men. The same day the
Bavarians discovered and disappointed five Mines of the Enemies.

The 15th. They went on finishing their Lines, and being to dig under the Wall,
they heard the Enemy at work under the breach. This day the Sieur Gonzales
arrived, and shot his Bombs and Carcasses into the City, which did great
Execution, where five or six were killed and wounded. This day the Duke of
Lorrain having intelligence that the Convoy of the Enemy which had passed the
Tibiscus near Segedin, lay still encamped under the Cannon of the Fortress of
Hatwan, his Excellency sent for two Regiments of Horse more to join with
General Mercy, with a design to constrain the Enemy to repass the River.

On the 16th a new Battery was erected in the Lorrain Attack without the Wall
of the low Town on the right hand, against the great Roundel, which was also
battered on the other side to make the breach the larger. This day a Rascian
coming out of the City, with a Packet of Letters which the Governor of the
place had entrusted him with, to carry to the Governor of Alba Regatis,
rendered himself in the Duke of Lorrain's Quarters. But in regard the Letters
were written in the Armenian Language, and for that there was never an
Interpreter in the Camp, they sent them to Vienna to be deciphered. Some
Country People also making their Escape from the Town, reported that the
Janissaries began to murmur against the Governor for being so obstinate to let
things go to the utmost extremity; but that by the punishment of the Mutineers,
by means of his Money, and a strong assurance of speedy Succor, he had so well
confirmed the rest in their duty, that they promised to hold out to the last
drop of blood. This evening the Elector of Brandenburgh commanded a hundred and
fifty men, seconded by a great number, to attack the Palisado in the Trench at
the foot of the Roundel of the Castle, the Lieutenant General the Count of
Fontain, undertook the Attack on the right hand, and the Count of Aspremont on
the left. And this was the first time they made use of three Parapets of Wood,
which were very profitable to us; and they attackt that post so vigorously,
that they carried it by dint of Sword, and cut to pieces all that were in it;
but they sold their Lives dear however, for we had there the Count of Fontain
killed, with five and thirty Soldiers and Volunteers. The Count of Aspremont
was very much bruised in the Head with a Musket-bullet, which struck off his
Steel-cap. Baron Gottalisky Captain of Beck's Regiment, and the Sieur Vaubon
Captain of the Granadeers of Baden, were both dangerously wounded, with several
others. However this Post gave us access to the Roundel.

The 17. Yesterday the Enemy began to shoot from a new Battery of four great
Pieces which they had raised within the inner Wall; but General Starenbergh,
giving order to the Gunners to play upon it with several Pieces, they so
utterly destroyed that Battery in a short time, that the besieged could make no
farther use of it. About noon twenty or thirty Janisaries showed themselves
upon the breach of the Roundel on the right hand, but the Soldiers from the
Trenches firing upon 'em, they retired immediately. The Prince of Croy arrived
in the Camp yesterday in the evening, with Commission to be General of the
Artillery. This day Caprara's and Newburgh's Regiment of Horse marched to join
General Mercy. As for the Bavarians and Brandenburghers, they did little this
day but mind the finishing of their Works, and fired continually from their
Batteries.

The 18. We advanced some Paces with a new Line to the right, the better to
protect our Miners that wrought in two distinct places under the Curtin, and to
make use of it in the next Assault. The Brandenburghers enlarged their great
Battery of three Pieces of Cannon. Nor were the Bavarians idle, for their
Miners were at work under the Wall behind the Palliasado'd Trench, of which
they had made themselves Masters. As for the Enemy, he seldom now appeared in
the day time; but in the night time they kept siring continually, and killed us
a great many men, with their Stones and Grenades, which they flung into our
Works.

The 19. The Cannon was planted upon the new Battery, and the Line was secured
with two little Forts. Last night the Enemy sprang a Mine behind our Miners
that wrought under the Wall, which damnified our Mine, into which there was a
necessity to make a new Entrance, to make it serviceable again. Some of our
Miners were almost buried in the Earth, but they were all fortunately recovered
again, except the Sieur Libert their Captain, whose Body could not not be
found. Mr. Kerry, Brother to my Lord Ouberry, a Scotch Lord was killed in the
Approaches with a Musket bullet, together with seven or eight Soldiers, and
some wounded. This morning the Duke of Lorraine held a Council of War, where
were present the Generals of his Army; but the Determination was kept secret.
Some Deserters also came to the Camp this day, and assured us that the besieged
would come to no Composition, but were resolved to wait the Relief which the
Grand Vizier should bring them.

The 20. The new Line in the Lorrain Attack was finished. Three false Alarms
also were given to the besieged only to harrass them, by causing certain
Granadeers to mount the Breach, who threw Grenades into the Place, upon which
the Turks hastening to make defense, were saluted with several Cannon-shot,
Bombs and Carcasses that did good Execution. Which sort of Attacks were
frequently, to keep the Enemy in continual Alarm, and in ignorance of the time
of the really designed Assault. Moreover, they ^gorousloy carried on their
Mines; a certain German undertaking a new one, which he promised to finish in
two or three days. In the Bavarian and Brandenburgh Attacks there was nothing
passed considerable, only that the Miners hoped the next night to be under the
Roundels. They also continued battering the Walls with great fury, and shoting
red hot Bullets, Bombs, and Carcasses into the City, which did very much
mischief. Upon Information given that the Turks prepared to relieve the place,
the Trench of the Line of Circumvallation was made deeper; and strengthened with
certain Redoubts, the better to secure the besiegers; to which purpose two
hundred Heydukes were added to the number of Pioneers.

July 21. The principal Work now carried on was that of the Mines, which were
opened in three several parts. Nor could Captain Li^er^'s body yet be found,
though all diligence has been used to h^llow the Earth in that place where his
body was by all conjecture lost. He was an Officer, a Walloon by Nation, much
lamented by all the Generals, and by all that knew his Experience in the
business of Mining: Our Miners also heard the Enemy at work, but they went on
with their own work for all that. A Battery was likewise raised for four Mortar
Pieces, near that of the three Spanish Pieces, which batter the Roundel on the
right Hand. Moreover all the Cannons and Mortar Pieces were designed to be
planted nearer the Breaches, on purpose to widen them with more ease, and ruin
the Defenses of the Enemy, which are behind the said Breaches: We had in the
Lorrain Attack only twenty seven killed and wounded, among whom were Sergeant
Major Boeneburgh, a Dane, and the Sieur Lerneux, the fifth Captain of
Starenbergh's Regiment. The Sieur Gonzale's Bombs and Carcasses have had the
success which was expected; For by the Report of a Deserter, one of those Bombs
falling yesterday into the City, made its way into a House, into which were
retired above a Hundred Persons of both Sexes, who were all miserably buried in
the Ruins of it. The Bavarians finished their Battery near the Roundel, and
began another toward the water side, to batter the Flanks of the City on that
side. And now the three Attacks having made their Approaches to the Breaches
that now seemed wide enough, all things were preparing for a general Assault,
there being two thousand scaling Ladders in a readiness to make false Attacks
and scale the Walls, while others mounted the Breaches.

The 22. Nothing passed considerable in the Lorrain Attack, nor in that of the
Brandenburgher: but the Enemy this morning sprang two Mines, which did no other
Execution than only ruin a part of the Curtin, where there was no Breach
before. The new Battery likewise of four pieces upon the brink of the Ditch of
the Roundel being finished, the Turks gave 'em a most bloody Serenade by break
of day; for sallying out in a good number, they stole down into the Trench
along the Palisade, and being come to the said Battery before they were
discovered, through the darkness of the Night, they set up a most dreadful
Howling and Hollowing, nayl'd three pieces of Cannon and a Mortar, and ruined
some part of the Gabions of the Battery: The Saxons of the adjoining Posts
hastening to the Relief of their Friends, were put into some Disorder; but
Prince Lewis of Badens Regiment, being the Reserve, coming up in time, repelled
the Enemy with the loss of thirty men stain. Which was but a small thing in
comparison of the Loss which we suffered, which amounted to above a hundred
killed and wounded, the most part Saxons and Bavarians. Among the slain were
Colonel Lehel of the Saxon Forces, and some inferior Officers: The Sieur
Geschwint, Colonel of the Artillery, was also dangerously gashed and hacked
with a Scimiter. However the Turks got no advantage by this Salley; for the
Nails being easily pulled out of the Cannon and Mortar, within an hour after
they began to play again as if they had never been nailed. And the revenge
which they returned was speedy; for one of the Bavarian Bombs lighting into the
Magazin of Powder in the Castle, the whole Pile blew up into the Air with such
a hideous havoc and thundering noise, as not only shook the whole City, but our
Camp likewise; and by what we afterward understood from the Deserters, there
miserably perished by that blow above a thousand persons of all Ages, which
were buried in the Ruins of the Buildings, the Stones of which were thrown with
that violence and vast quantity into the Approaches, that they resembled a
shower of Hail, and wounded several of the Soldiers.

The 23. the Duke of Lorrain sent in the Afternoon the Count of Conningsegg
with an Interpreter to the besieged, with a Summons to surrender, in regard all
the Mines were ready to spring, and all things were prepared for a general
Assault: During which time there was a Cessation of Arms on both sides, which
was spent in the Interment of the slain. The said Count, after he had been two
hours in the City, returned to the Camp with a Letter from Abdi Bassa in a
Purse of red Damask, which he delivered to the Duke of Lorrain, wherein the
Bassa made him a haughty and arrogant Answer, purporting, That not being
necessitated to a Surrender, he could not dream of such a vile piece of
Cowardice: that he fought for the Glory of his Prophet, and the Honor of the
Mussel-men: that he and his Garrison were resolved to hold out to the utmost
Extremty, and defend it to the last gasp of Breath: that the place being
entrusted to his care by the Grand Signior, he would preserve it, or lose his
Life: that when the Duke should come to wrest it from him, he should find him
upon the Breach ready to dispute his Entrance; and let him order the Assault
when he pleased, he would expect him without stirring afoot.

The Duke having read this insolent Answer, caused all the Batteries to fire
with greater fury than before, and caused all preparations to be hastened to
give a general Assault by break of day; to which purpose he sent for a thousand
Hungarian Foot, who had voluntarily offered themselves to mount the Breaches.

So haughty an Answer, and a Defense of the besieged so obstinate and brave,
shows us by Experience that the Characters which the Deserters had given us at
the beginning of the Siege, of Abdi Bassa's conduct, were utterly false, in
saying he was contemptible to the Soldiery for being more a Merchant than a
Soldier; and the Serasquier was to blame in going about to displace him as he
had designed: for it is to be presumed that hardly any other than he, would
have so long eluded the Fury of such a Potent Army.

This day some Bavarians, that kept the advanced Guards, observing that a
Polonian, who served in our Army, had had a private Conference with two Turks,
seized upon him at his return to the Camp, and carried him to the Elector,
where having been searched and examined, he was found to be a Spy, and that he
had discovered to the Enemies all that had passed in our Camp; whereupon he was
presently sentenced and executed without any more ado. This evening also a
Bavarian Cannoneer was apprehended, who was going over to the Enemy, and had
already passed the Guards.

The 24. This morning, about eight of the Clock, a large Mine was sprung in the
Lorrain Attack, and three hundred chosen Foot were ordered out to lodge
themselves upon the Breach, together with some hundreds of Hungarians: but the
effect of the Mine was contrary to all expectation; for it ruined and overthrew
a part of our Approaches, and filled our Lines with Earth, besides that we had
a hundred men killed and wounded. Whereupon his Serene Highness seeing this ill
Success, ordered the Batteries to redouble their firing to enlarge their
Bteaches, and to reduce them to such a Condition, as to be mounted without
making any Mines. The new Battery of the Bavarians toward the water side was
finished this night; and that other which they had raised on the side of the
Ditch, had already broken down a good part of the Wall on the right hand.

The same day the Duke of Lorrain sent Orders to the Count of Nigrelli, who
commanded in Newhausel during the absence of the Count of Aspremont, to come to
the Army and officiate the place of General of Battalia: by intercepted Letters
also he was informed that the Grand Vizier encouraged the besieged to defend
themselves, promising that by the eighth or tenth of August at the farthest, he
would come and relieve them with a formidable Army. The same day likewise
General Caprara, who commands the Body of the Imperial Forces upon the River
Tibiscus, sent an Officer to the Duke of Lorrain, and the Elector of Bavaria,
to give them the news of a great Advantage which he had gained upon the
Garrison of Agria the fifteenth of this Month, by the means of two Ambuscadoes
which he laid for the Turks; into which having drawn six hundred of those
Barbarians, he utterly defeated 'em, killed three hundred upon the place,
together with Osman Basha the Governor of Agria; and taken ninety Prisoners,
among whom he found the Vice-Basha dangeroully wounded: and that in this Action
General Heusler had behaved himself with his wonted Gallantry, as had also done
the Sieurs Pecerhasi and Semsay with their Hungarians.

The 25. Nothing was done but only carrying on the Reparations of the Works
ruined by the Mine which was sprung the day before to our disadvantage. The
Duke of Loarrin hastened with all the vigor imaginable the preparations for a
general Assault, having ordered the making such parading places as were
necessary within the Lines and Approaches: and the Bavarians and
Brandenburghers did the like in their Quarters. Between four and five in the
afternoon the besieged set fire to a little Mine on the right hand of the
Roundel; which done, they sallied forth with two hundred foot, who were as soon
repulsed by our men that were upon the Guard. The Enemy left fourteen behind
them slain, and carried some wounded along with 'em: A while after they salli'd
out with a greater number upon the Brandenburghers, who repelled 'em with the
same ease: Not long after they returned with a greater number, and put the
Brandenburghers Guards into some disorder, which obliged the Duke of Lorrain to
order the Reserve, that lay posted at the Wall of the low Town, to advance;
which General Souches, who commanded the Trenches, divided into three parts; of
which one was planted one on the left hand toward the water side; the other
entered the Approaches; and the third was ordered to stand firm near the Mosque.
The Duke of Lorrain ordered the Battalions of Mansfield, Salm, Souches, to
advance on the right hand. The Skirmish continued some time, and the Turks
retreated several times, then made Head again, filling the Air with their
barbarous Cries. The Heydukes, after the first discharge, encountered the Turks,
but gave ground, and caused some confusion among ours that advanced upon the
left of the other Mosque, whence the besieged fired with their Cannon, yet
without doing any considerable damage: so that the Enemy seeing they could gain
nothing but blows, retired into the City. Count Starenburgh signalized himself
in this Action, giving all necessary Orders to our men; but his Adjutant had
both his Legs carried away by a Cannon shot. The Battalions of Souches and
Mansfield were but coursely handled, of whom many were slain. The Baron d' Asti
was wounded in the Foot, the Baron of Hobenwarth slain, and some inferior
Officers were likewise killed and wounded, wit^ ^^out an hundred common
Soldiers. But the loss of the Tur^^ was much more considerable, as we
understood by a German boy who made his escape out of the City, where he had
been ever since the Turks were beaten from Vienna, by whom he had been taken
and sold to an Inhabitant of Buda. This boy reported that the Turks made great
Intrenchments within the Town, and that the Garrison was still five thousand
fighting men. In the Bavarian Attack there was nothing passed considerable.

The 26. During the whole Siege never was more diligence used in carrying on to
perfection the Lines and Approaches than last night, and all this, as also for
the making of Parading Places, which were by this time finished, and every
thing prepared for a general Assault, and to lodge themselves upon the breaches
of the Roundels and Walls, so that at length we might make our selves Masters
of that Important Place that had already cost us so much blood. This day
likewise the besieged made a slight salley upon the Brandenburghers Quarters,
which proved to their disadvantage; for they were constrained, after they had
stood the first Charge, to retreat back to the City faster than they came.

The 27. All things being ready at length for a general Assault, and the
Companies that were to serve in this Action being drawn up in their several
Parading Places, as well in the Lorrain Attack as in those of the Bavarian and
Brandenburghers, it was resolved that the Onset should be given about five in
the Evening, to which purpose the Duke of Lorrain had given out his Orders to
all the Officers, both Superior and Inferior, what they were to do. The
Faggots, Gabions, Spades, Pickaxes, Hatchets, and Sacks of Earth were all in a
readiness, as well to dig down the Intrenchments of the Enemies, as for the
Defense of the Assailants, when they should be Masters of the Breach. The
Signal was given from Pest, by the discharge of some great Guns; and the
Assault was managed after the following manner. Forty Granadeers under a
Captain Lieutenant and Sergeant, were placed first at the head of the
Right-hand-Roundel, they were followed by fifty Fuseleers, and fifty Soldiers
with Hatchets, under a Captain Lieutenant, and Sergeant. These were first to
mount the Breach and drive away the Enemy. A Captain, a Lieutenant, and
Sergeant, with a hundred men carrying Spades and Pickaxes, made the first Line,
seconded by two Captains, two Lieutenants, and two Sergeants, with two hundred
Musketeers, the whole under the Prince of Newburgh, grand Master of the
Teutonick Order, who had the management of this Attack. That of the middle,
toward the Curtin was under the Direction of Lieutenant General Souches; to
carry on that, were fifty Granadeers under a Captain, a Lieutenant, and a
Sergeant. One hundred Fuseleers under a Captain, a Lieutenant, and a Sergeant;
and to second these there were two Captains, two Lieutenants, and two
Sergeants, with two hundred Musketeers, divided into two squadrons, followed
by a hundred men with Shovels and Pickaxes.

The Attack on the left hand of the little Roundel was ordered by the
Brandenburghers after the following manner.

In the second Line behind the sacks filled with Earth, Wool, and such like
materials, were posted the Arquebusiers, made choice of upon this occasion, who
were not to stir, but to fire continually upon the Turks that should show
themselves upon the Breaches. The Heydukes, commanded by the Deputy Governor of
Raab, were posted toward the Waterside, where a great part of the Wall was
thrown down by the Fire which happened in the Magazine, which had been blown up
some days before. They were only to make a false Attack, and were seconded by a
Sergeant Major, with some select Companies. The superior Officers possessed
several Posts to do the Duty of their Employments. To which purpose the
Marquess of Nigrelli, General of Battalia, Colonel Keth, and the Baron de
Rederer, and the Serjeant-Major of Starenbergh stood by the grand Master of the
Teutonic Order. Lieutenant General Souches had for his Assistants Baron
Diependael, General of Battalia, the Count D'Oetinghen, Colonel,
Lieutenant-Collonel Jonger, and the Serjeant-Major to Croy. There were above
twelve hundred men for a Reserve in the close way, commanded by the General of
Battalia Thungen, under twelve Captains, twelve Lieutenants, and other inferior
Officers, with all the Lieutenant-Collonels, and Serjeant-Majors to succeed in
the Places of those that should be killed or wounded. Which twelve hundred
Musketeers were to advance in little Bodies in the Lines as the others gained
ground. The rest of the Infantry stood to their Arms ready to fight, and the
Generals in the Trenches.

In this Order, the Soldiers full of Courage and Gallantry, went to the
Assault, and mounted the Breaches, where they sound great Resistance,
especially at the great Roundel, where the Ascent to the Breach was high, and
the Defendants numerous and well resolved. Ours were two or three times
repulsed, yet every time renewing the Assault, at length they made themselves
masters of the Breach, and made good their Posts. The Brandenburghers got
Possession of the little Wall, among whom were fifty Heydukes that behaved
themselves very well. The Fight lasted from five till nine at Night, with great
Effusion of Blood, not so much by the Enemies Weapons as by their Mines, and
the Powder which they had strewn in several places, to which they still set
Fire as they were driven from their Posts. There could be nothing more
lamentable than to see between two or three hundred men at a time blown up into
the Air by the force of their Mines, who were partly killed, and partly
desperately wounded. Yet for all this the Enemy could not terrify our men, nor
by their obstinate Resistance prevent 'em from lodging upon the Roundels, and
upon the Curtin. There was no great good done by the Heydukes that were with
the Imperialists, for they were greatly afraid of Fire, and that Fear
discouraged 'em from making the false Attack toward the Water Side. The Duke of
Lorrain, and Count de Starenbergh, stood near the grand Master of the Teutonic
Order, with their Swords in their Hands, encouraging the Officers and Soldiers
to do their Duty. The Prince of Croy stood in the middle near the Curtin, where
he was wounded.

Night parting the Combat, they finished their Lodgments with two Lines of
Communication of the Approaches to the Roundels possessed; and they put the
Miners to Work at the Wall or Entrenchment within, where the Turks fortified
themselves. We cannot sufficiently applaud the martial Valor of the Generals,
Officers and Soldiers that were in this piece of Service, who were almost all
wounded, in sight of the Duke of Lorraine, whose Adjutant General, the Steur d'
Artein, was slain as he was carrying Orders. The number of the Slain was not
very great, but that of the wounded extraordinary; among whom were the Prince
of Croy, the Prince of Commercy, General Diependale, General Thungen, the Baron
of Asti, who notwitstanding he was wounded but two days before, would needs
signalize himself in this Action, where he received a second wound, the
Serjeant-Major of S^arenbergh, two Captains of the same Regiment, the Baron of
Redere, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment of Newburgh, Sergeant Major Pini,
Count Schlick, Baron Gera, and several other Captains; Lieutenants, and other
inferior Officers. On the Brandenburghers side, Count Donaw, Colonel of Foot,
was Slain, as also the Sieur Marwitz, Serjeant-major, and the Prince of Curland
grievously wounded; with several others.

In the Bavarian Attack, the Elector had ordered the Onset in this manner. The
Palisado's upon the Breach-being burnt the day before by forty selected
Soldiers, his Electoral Highness commanded a Lieutenant with twenty Fuseleers,
a Sergeant with six Volunteers and ten Granadeers, a Corporal with six
Carpenters, to cut the Pallisado's: A hundred Musketeers under a Captain and
two Lieutenants, had Orders to Post themselves at the Enemies Pallisado's, and
to Fire continually, the better to secure the Workmen to make a Lodgment upon
the Roundel, among which there were twenty five with Shovels and Pickaxes, and
seventy five with Hatchets under a Captain; all which were guarded by a
Leiutenant-Collonel, a Serjeant-Major; and a Captain, with fifty men armed with
Half-pikes, Halberds and Partisans, a Lieutenant with thirty Granadeers, and
two hundred Musketeers under two Captains and two Lieutenants. This Order
being observed as well upon the right Hand as upon the left, the two adjoining
Redoubts were finished with thirty Arquebusiers each, and three Battalions of
Imperialists, Bavarians and Saxons, were to second the Assailants. The
Cannoneers and Bombardeers had order to Fire from all the Batteries, and to
throw Bombs and Carcasses, without intermission, into the Castle, and between
the two first Walls toward the Waterside.

All things thus ordered, they advanced through the Overtures toward the Breach
(tho very high and difficult to ascend) on the right and left Hand of the
Roundel, as also of the Curtin, and with that Fury, that they made themselves
masters of the Post, and drove away the Enemy, notwithstanding their continual
firing their Muskets, and a shower of Stones, which they threw from the Windows
of the Castle. They also made themselves masters of the Swinger, which is a
great space of Ground in form of a Retreating Place, between the Wall and the
Houses. But this place being commanded by the higher Walls, from which the
Enemy did much endamage our men with their Grenades, Stones, and Bombs, his
Electoral Highness caused those that had the possession of it to retire,
thinking it sufficient to secure their Lodgments upon the Roundel and the Wall
of the Castle, with a Line of Communication from the Gate of the Bridge to the
Swinger-Gate; to the end they might have the Bridge in their own power; to
which purpose they also raised transverse Lines, and two Redoubts. His
Electoral Highness showed himself all the while on the first Posts, encouraging
his men with his presence. All the Generals signalized their Courage by
striving to outvie one another, as did also the Officers, Volunteers and
Soldiers, who fought with all the bravery that could be expected from men of
Courage. The Turks who defended the Castle and Swinger, were for the most part
killed and wounded, only some few that saved themselves by flight. There were
found eight pieces of Cannon, and two Mortar Pieces, which were made use of to
batter the second Wall, or the Enemies Parapet within the City. In this Assault
of the Bavurians were killed two Lieutenants of the Regiment of Baden, and five
Captains, one Lieutenant, and three Ensigns wounded. Of the Regiment of Beck,
the Baron of Welsbergh, Lieutenant Colonel, five Captains, three Lieutenants,
and five Ensigns wounded. Of the Regiment of Aspremont, the Colonel,
Lieutenant Colonel, Count Nicholas Palfi, Sergeant Major Count Zacco, seven
Captains, five Lieutenants, and two Ensigns wounded, and one Ensign killed. Of
the Regiment of Furstenbergh, one Captain, one Lieutenant, and one Ensign
wounded. In the Elector's Regiment of Guards, one Captain killed, the
Serjeant-Major, one Captain and three Lieutenants wounded. In the Regiment of
Steinau, the Serjeant-Major and one Lieutenant slain, one Captain, two
Lieutenants, and one Ensign wounded. In the Regiment of Rummel, one Captain,
and one Lieutenant killed; three Captains and one Ensign wounded. In the
Regiment of Seibolstorfe, the Sergeant Major slain, one Captain and two
Lieutenants wounded. In the Regiment of Gallenfels, the Lieutenant Colonel
killed, two Captains and one Lieutenant wounded. The Generals, La Vergne,
Rummel and Asprement, are in the number of the wounded; as also the Duke of
Escalona, a Grandee of Spain; and some other Volunteers of note: In all, what
with Officers, what with common Soldiers, One hundred and seventeen killed, and
Nine hundred seventy two wounded. In the Saxon Regiments, there was one
Lieutenant Colonel, and some Inferior Officers killed, one Lieutenant
Colonel, two Serjeant-Majors, two Captains, one Captain Lieutenant, three
Ensigns, two Sergeants, and two Corporals wounded: which, together with the
common Soldiers, made up seventy slain, and One hundred ninety nine wounded: So
that the number of the slain and wounded in all the three Attacks, during this
vigorous onset, somewhat exceeds three thousand.

The 28. There was nothing done in all the three Attacks, their time being
spent in burying the dead, and securing their Lodgments upon the breaches. The
Duke of Lorrain also caused three Mines to be opened under the second Wall in
three several parts, which was also done in the Bavarian and Brandenburghers
Attack.

The 29. About seven in the morning three Mines were sprung under the second
Wall, with such success, that they made a notable breach in it, and filled up
one part of the Trench. The Bavarians also advanced on the right hand of the
Roundel, and made themselves Masters of two Mortar Pieces, which they turned
upon the besieged. The same day the great Cannon were planted nearer to the
Town, with a resolution to batter the inside of the City with a hundred Pieces
of Cannon, and forty Mortar Pieces, if the Turks persisted in their Obstinacy:
who nevertheless went on with their Ditches and Intrenchments behind the Wall
with great diligence. And now the Duke of Lorrain finding that almost all the
Generals of the Foot were wounded, and not in a condition to do Service,
ordered for the future that two Generals of the Cavalry should do Duty in the
Approaches; viz. the Count of Stirum, and the Count of Lodron. Whereupon the
former mounted the Trenches this evening with Lieutenant General Souches, and
was Relieved the next day by the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, and the
Count of Lodron.

The 30. A Battery of three Demi-Cannons, and another of four Mortar Pieces,
were finished upon the Curtin; and great diligence was used to perfect several
Mines, to the end they might be ready for springing the next day. Certain
Rascians having made their escape out of the Town, reported, That though the
besieged had resolved to defend themselves to the last; yet that they began to
falter in their Resolutions, and to cry out, That it was but reasonable to
prevent the farther effusion of blood. Upon which a Council of War was held,
and after a short Consultation, the Duke of Lorrain sent a second Summons to
the Governor to Surrender, while there was yet a Door of Mercy open, and that
he might do it upon honorable Terms; which if he refused, he would not be
answerable for the blood that should be spilt, if the Place should be carried
by Assault, for that the Soldiers would spare neither Age nor Sex. Abdi Bassa
kindly received his Highness's Letter, and desired a day to consult with the
Officers of his Garrison, which was granted him; and so there was a suspension
of Arms. The Deserters that left the Town in great numbers, assured us, that in
the last Assault, merely in the Bavarian Attack, the Turks had three hundred
men killed, and seven hundred wounded. We had Intelligence this evening, that
four thousand Turkish Horse were seen four Leagues from the Camp, being sent to
discover the Condition of the Place; but that being afraid of being surpised,
they retreated as suddenly.

The 31. About nine of the clock in the morning the Count of Lamberg, Adjutant
General, was commanded by the Duke of Lorrain to go with an Interpreter and
receive the Governor's Answer; which was to this effect: That he neither could
nor would so easily surrender the City which was the Key of the Ottoman Empire;
but that if he would make a general Peace, they would surrender into our hands
some other Town equivalen. In the afternoon the Enemy desired a Cessation of
Arms in the Bavarian Attack, and sent two Aga's in Hostage to his Electoral
Highness, who sent in their place the Baron of Creux, Lieutenant Colonel of the
Regiment of Baden, with an Interpreter. The Turks received him with great
Ceremony, and all the Civilities imaginable. However, he was not conducted to
the Basha, but into another House, the Streets as he passed along being lined
with Soldiers in Arms, and in very good order, though not many in number: So
soon as he came into the House, he was presented with Rice, a roasted Pullet,
and little Pasties, with Coffee and Wine. The Basha Governor sent his Excuse,
That he could not speak with him as yet, until he had consulted the other
Captains of the Garrison, what Propositions to make him. In which Interval
several Turkish Officers came to visit the Baron. Half an hour after, the
Governor sent word, That he would take it for a kindness if he would be
pleased to come over to his House; which the Baron agreed to; and went
accompanied with a great number of Turks, of which the two chiefest took him
under the Arm, and so led him before the Basha, who was in a Lodging of Wood
over against his House, very well adorned, and spread with rich Tapestries; at
which time having caused a Seat to be set for the Baron, he told him, That he
looked upon himself to be very unfortunate to be in such a Place, which had
been several times besieged without success, and now happened to be so long
abandoned without Relief. On the other side, that he was so earnestly pressed by
the Emperor's Son-in-Law, and the Grand Vizier, that he wished he were able to
give his Resolution touching the Surrender of the Place; but that being an
Affair of great Importance, and as much as his Life was worth, it was
impossible for him to resolve upon Surrender: adding withal, That if they would
require any other Place in Hungary, it should be delivered into the Emperor's
hands. To which the Baron answered, That he had no Commission to discourse of
Conditions, but to know of the Basha himself, whether he would surrender or no:
That it behooved him to consider that our men were already Masters of the City:
That it would be too late to Capitulate if he stayed till another Assault, when
it would not be in the power of the Generals to repress the fury of the
Soldiers, nor to prevent this Siege from being no less Tragical than that of
Newhausel. To which the Basha made no other Answer, but only shrugged up his
shoulders, remaining mute like one that had been Thunder-strook: But as the
Baron was going about to depart, he desird him to go along with him into his
Cabinet, whither having called the Musti, and three other Turks of the most
considerable Quality, he declared to him moreover, That he could not by any
means do the Grand Signior so great a prejudice as to surrender a Place upon
which depended two hundred Leagues of Country, and which was the Key of Turkey;
and then offered again any other City of Hungary with its Appendances and
Dependencies: yet at length protesting farther, That if he would give him any
Assurances of a general Peace with the Port, that he would then resolve to
surrender the City of Buda. But the Baron, who had no Commission to treat, took
leave of the Basha, only telling him, That he would communicate, both to the
Elector and the Duke of Lorrain, the Declaration which he had made: but that he
could not assure him that things would be so concluded. The Basha desired him
to publish his Declaration through the Camp in writing, and desired to be
reconducted to the place where he was first me^; which was done with a great
deal of Ceremony, being accompanied by several of the Turkish Officers to the
Gate. But it was Imposible either for the Baron or the Interpreter to express
the waste which our Bombs have made in the City, where they have ruined the
greatest part of the Buildings. The Truce therefore that had been observed
during this Inter-parley, was broken off yesterday in the evening, at what time
the great Guns began again to play with greater fury than before.

This day about Noon the Besieged sprang a small Counter-Mine to ruin our Mine
made under their Battery opposite to the great Roundel, but without any
Execution. Two days after we sprang two of our Mines, which were made to fill
up the Trenches, which succeeded very well: but in the afternoon Count
Starenbergh, looking out between two Gabions, was unfortunately wounded with a
Musket Shot in his right Thumb, the Cheek and Shoulder, but not dangerously:
however he presently caused his Thumb to be cut off, because the Bone was
broken. About twenty or thirty were this day wounded in the Lorrain and
Brandenburghers Attack.

August 1. A Battery was finished upon the Roundel, upon which were planted two
pieces of Cannon. In the Morning was sprung the third Mine, near the said
Roundel, but though it succeeded well, yet there was no other Attempt made,
because the Trench was not sufficiently filled; whereupon a Resolution was
taken to fill it up with Faggots, sacks of Earth, and such like Materials. Our
Miners Yesterday smelt such a noysom Stench in one of their Mines that they
were scarce able to abide at their Work, till they had removed two Bodies that
were half dead. About Noon we received intelligence that seven thousand Turks
were posted at Sexaritwan, thirteen Leagues from Buda, and that the Grand
Vizier had begun to pass the Bridge of Esseck with an Army which he had formed
out of the Garrisons of Hungary, and places adjoining, and other Campanies got
together by force, among which were seven thousand men drawn out of Bossina;
and that of eight thousand Janisaries which the Grand Vizier had brought from
the middle of Turkey, three thousand had deserted him in his March; that
nevertheless he hoped to be at the Head of fifty thousand men, for the Relief
of Buda. General Dunewald returned this Evening with the Regiments of Horse,
with which he had been scouting toward the Bridge of Esseck, to ^ain
Intelligence of the Enemy. The Generals Caraffa and He (...) arrived also from
Zolnock, after two days March, with five thousand Horse, and some Hungarian
Companies. The next day Count Budiani arrived with two thousand H^ngarians; and
the Duke of Lorrain sent express Orders to General Scherffenbergh to join him
with his Body of ten thousand Men. About this time his most serene Highness the
Duke of Lorrain, had had some two or three Fits of an Ague: However he failed
not to appear every day in the Trenches, and to give all necessary Orders for
the carrying on the Siege: To which purpose great Preparations were made for a
second Onset upon the second Wall. This Morning the Bavarians beat down a great
part of the Wall with their Cannon, and by the springing of a Mine; and made
themselves Masters of the second Swinger, where they also seized upon the
Cannons and Mortar Pieces of the Enemy, which they turned upon the City.

August 2. They continued filling up the Trench; and every thing was ready for
an Assault, which was delayed by reason of the continual Rains that fell. Upon
repeated Advice of the Approach of the Grand Vizier, who, as our Scouts assured
us, had passed the Bridge of Esseck, all necessary Preparations were made to
receive the Enemy, in case they attempted to relieve the Town.

August 3. A Deserter, who affirmed himself to be a Domestic Servant to one of
the most considerable Officers in the City, surrendered himself, and declared
that the Besieged had a Mine ready to spring in the Brandenburghers Attack, and
had begun a second: That they impatiently expected Relief: And that of all
those whom the Bassa had sent abroad, not one was returned into the City, which
very much perplexed him; and that the number of serviceable Soldiers still
exceeded two thousand, besides the Inhabitants. The Miners could not finish the
grand Mine, by reason of a Rock which they met with. But upon the Breaches
certain little Banks were made, to the end the Soldiers might fire with greater
Advantage upon the Besieged during the Assault, which was ordered after the
following manner. About Noon the Trenches were relieved, and they that were
relieved were to serve as a Reserve. The first Attack was on the right Hand of
the Roundel, to which were appointed fifty Granadeers under a Captain, a
Lieutenant, and a Sergeant, followed by twenty men that carried great store of
Granado's. They were followed by fifty Fuseleers, under a Captain, a
Lieutenant, and a Sergeant; and after them marched fifty men with Hatchets. The
same Order was observed by the Brandenburghers on the left Hand. To the third
Attack of the middle Curtain, the Hungarians were assigned, preceded by thirty
Germans, and followed by sixty, with necessary Officers. The Onset began
between five and six in the Evening, in the Presence of all the Generals, the
grand Master of the Teutonic Order commanding the Trench. They forbore to make
any false Attack, because the Mine had not done that Execution that was
expected. But the Duke of Lorrain being informed by an Adjutant that the
Elector of Bavaria had absolutely begun the Assault, commanded that the false
Attack should be changed into a formal Onset. The Combat lasted two hours, in
which three hundred Horsemen that served on foot, behaved themselves with great
valor, as did also the Hungarians. But the Breach being hard to mount, the
besieged well defended with Palisadoes, and fighting like men in despair, the
Duke of Lorrain would not hazard more men to maintain the inner Breach, where
our men had lodged themselves already, and therefore sounded a Retreat,
contenting himself with making a Lodgment on the right hand of the Roundel of
the Angle, where forty men entrenched themselves forthwith. We had few men
killed by the Enemies firing, but about two hundred wounded with Stones and
Arrows, which flew like Hail about the Assailants Ears. Count Leopold of
Herberstein, Lieutenant Colonel to Souches, was dangerously wounded; the Sieur
Bischopshausen, Serjeant-Major in the Regiments of Suabia, carrying his Arm in
a Scarf by reason of a former wound, was again wounded in the hand. Nor were
the Bavarians in their Attack less pestered with Stones and Arrows, and the
Splinters of Bombs which the Enemy rolled down upon the Planks out of the
windows of the Castle, though to little purpose, so that the loss on that side
was not very considerable. The Prince of Savoy was wounded in the hand with an
Arrow, together with three Captains, some inferior Officers, seven or eight
Volunteers, and ninety Soldiers killed and wounded. Prince Lewis of Baden going
in the morning to visit the Approaches, received a Musket Shot, which burnt
his Justocore, and very much bruised his Breast, but the strength of his Armor
preserved him from death.

August the 4th. They fired with a redoubled Force from all three Attacks to
enlarge the Breaches and ruin the Enemies Defenses. The Line of Circumvallation
was also finished, and strengthened with several Redoubts and small Forts to
flank their Works. The Imperialists, Bavarians, and Brandenburghers were also
ordered to possess themselves of all the higher Grounds, where they might
entrench to advantage. The Heydukes were posted all along the inner Wall of the
low Town, and thus they continued their Attacks with the same vigor as before.
The Bavarians raised a Battery of nine Pieces of four and twenty pound Ball
upon the Roundel of the Castle, with which they battered the Flanks, and
widen'd the Breach; for in regard the Ground is very narrow, the Enemy had the
more advantage to dispute the Entrance of our Men. This day our Scouts brought
Intelligence to the Duke of Lorrain, that the Grand Vizier had actually passed
the Bridge of Esseck, and that he had twenty thousand fighting men about his
Person, which, with the Forces that lay near Alba Regalis, would make between
forty and fifty thousand men, for the most part Veteranes drawn out of the
Garrisons of Cities and Fortresses; in whose room he had put his new Levies and
forced Men. We had also Intelligence the same day, that the Basha of Agria,
having drawn together about a thousand Turks out of the Garrisons of Upper
Hungary, was come to Hatwan, where he had commanded a great number of Wagons
to be laden with Ferry-boats, to be carried to the Danaw, by the means of which
he designed to put in a Reinforcement into Buda, at the same time that the
Vizier assailed our Lines on the other side. Upon which Intelligence all
precautions imaginable were used to prevent the Designs of the Enemy, and
secure the River on Pest side.

The 5th of August, in the Lorrain Attack they carried on their Approaches of
the great Roundel toward the second Wall, where they had lodged themselves
after the last Assault. The Miners were also set to work under the grand
Roundel on the right hand of the Breach, to enable us to attack the Enemy in
Flank: and in two other parts on the left hand under the Curtin, to blow up the
Entrenchments of the Besieged behind the Breach. The same day they began to
build a Gallery, to give a Passage to the inner Trench; and the better to
secure the Attack, Palisadoes were fixed to the Flanks of our Works. This night
the Besieged did nothing but throw Bombs, Grenades, and Stones to disturb our
Workmen; but all the hurt they did, was the killing of three Heydukes, and
wounding six or seven other Soldiers, In the Afternoon one of their Bombs
lighted upon a Barrel of Powder, upon one of the Batteries, which killed five,
and wounded three of our Men.

The sixth of August. A new Battery of two Demi Cannons was raised in the
Lorrain Attack, behind the great Roundel, by means of which the Defense of the
little Roundel was ruined, which had done us great Mischief. They also
continued filling up the inner Trench with Bavins, Barrels, Sacks of Earth, and
the like. The Bavarians and Brandenburghers vigurously continued their
Approaches; but nothing else considerable passed this day.

Aug. 7. Last Night we had several false Alarums, as if the Turks had been at
hand to attempt the Relief of the Town; which caused us to labor hard in
deepning the Trenches round about the Lines, and fortifying the Posts, to
discourage the Enemy from any design to force our Camp. The Miners also were
hard at work to get the Mines ready within the next three or four days. The
Heydukes undertook in twenty four hours time to fill up the Trench of the
second Wall, for a Reward of four thousand Florins, which was promised them by
the Generals. And now the Breach in the second Wall was very much enlarged,
which made the Generals resolve upon a second Assault, so soon as the Mines
should be ready. In the Bavarian Attack they met with great Difficulty to make
themselves Masters of the Castle, by reason of the several Walls and Defenses
which they had to force, and the obstinate Opposition of the Besieged, which
made the Elector resolve to redouble his Cannon Batteries. And indeed they did
nothing else but batter the Castle with several Batterles; which played upon
the Flanks and Curtins, that it could not be expected they should stand long.
This day his Electoral Highness having sent abroad a Party of thirty Hussars,
to gain Intelligence of the Enemy, they met an equal Party of the Turks, whom
they pursued for two whole Hours together; but the Enemy was so swift of Heel,
that they could only kill one, and take four Prisoners whom they brought to the
Camp. Among these Prisoners there was an Aga, that four Years ago had been
released out of Raab for a Ransom of eight thousand Crowns. These Prisoners
declared that the Seralquier would be at Alba Regalis with twenty six thousand
Horse, and would be followed by the Grand Vizier who was randevouzing his Army
near the bridge of Esseck, which would not be inferior to that which we brought
last year to the Siege of Gran. They added likewise that the Serasquier had
Orders not to engage in a Battle with the Christians, for fear of losing the
City of Buda and the Army both at once; only that he should endeavor to put in
a Reinforcement of Men into the Town, upon peril of his Life.

August 8. In the Morning four thousand Turks and Tartars, Horse, showed
themselves upon a high rising Ground, just against the Bavarian Quarter, and
then retreated after some slight Skirmishes with Count Budiani's Hussars,
reinforced with some Commanded Troops and Volunteers. The Prisoners then taken
deposed that the Serasquier lay encamped under the Cannon of Alba Regalis, with
twenty thousand fighting Men, where he expected the Grand Vizier with the Body
of the Army. But by the Relations of our Spies and Courriers, we were informed
that the Grand Vizier wavered whether he should pass any farther with the whole
Army, or whether he should stay at the Bridge of Esseck with the greatest part
of his Forces, to make head against the Croats, who might ruin the Bridge if he
forsook it, and by that means cut off his Retreat. However it were, to prevent
the worst, we continued fortifying our Camp, and playing with our Cannon and
Mortar Pieces against the City.

August 9. Some thousands of Turks posted themselves some Leagues from our Camp
in a very advantageous place, as if they intended to make some Attempt, but we
were every way provided for their Coming: Besides that the Soldiers were very
Courageous, and wished for nothing so much as to come to Blows with the Enemy.
However because the Enemy gave us such frequent Alarums, the Duke of Lorrain
ordered that all the Foot that was not in the Approaches, should be disposed of
within the Lines, and particularly in the Spurs of the Fortification. This
Morning a Bomb from the Besieged unfortunately lighting upon a Reserve of our
Granado's, set fire to it, and killed three, and wounded thirteen of our Men.
This Evening some of the Turks showed themselves again upon the right Hand,
behind the Bavarian Camp. Toward which two Squadrons of the Enemy advanced to
outbrave our Men; but some of our Volunteers sallying forth with a Resolution
to encounter them, they retreated with the loss only of one Man slain.

August 10. They wrought hard to finish the third Mine in the Lorrain Attack,
the other two Mines being now ready to play. His Highness caused the Hungarian
Infantry to be posted all along the Wall of the low Town; from the
water-Roundel to the German Quarters, where they secured themselves with a deep
Trench and a good Parapet: And because the Danaw is very deep thereabout, two
Barks filled with Stones were ordered to be sunk, and several Palisado'd Spurs
were raised all along the bank of the River, to discourage the Enemy from
designing any Relief that way. This morning the Enemy gave us another Alarm in
the Bavarian Quarter: whereupon all our Cavalry were commanded to horse; but
the Enemy retreated at the same time. It seems their design was to have forced
a Passage that way; but the Bavarians were too well entrenched for them to
succeed in their Enterprise. The Prince of Croy being cured of his wounds,
re-entred upon the Duty of his Employment, and appeared again in the
Approaches. Four Hussars very well mounted, advancing toward some Turks of the
Garrison, made a show as if they intended to have charged 'em, but when they
drew near, they talked lovingly together, and shook hands: which being observed
by some of the Musketeers in the Redoubt adjoining, they went forth and fired
upon the H^ssars, who betook themselves to their heels; but one was wounded and
taken Prisoner, together with another of his Companions, the third escaped, and
the fourth got into the Town. The Prisoners examined, declared that they only
expostulated with the Turks about their holding out; but then they were put off
to a more strict Examination.

August 11. Some Troops of the Enemy showed themselves upon the Hill next to
the Bavarian Quarters, toward the Road to Alba Regalis. As yet we could not
learn the exact number of the Enemy, though our Spies assured us that they were
forty thousand Turks, and twenty thousand Tartars. But notwithstanding all
these hot Alarms, being so well fitted to receive 'em as we were, all things
were at the same time preparing for a vigorous Assault of the second Wall, if
the Mines did that execution as was expected.

The 12th. In the morning all things being ready for an Onset, three Mines were
sprung in the Lorrain Attack, which did no other Execution, than only overthrew
some Palisadoes. For the Miners had not dug deep enough under the Wall of
the second Rampart; which made it apparent that they did not understand their
Trade, though the best were sought out and sent for from several Parts, the
Generals knowing that nothing would contribute more to the Reduction of this
Place than well ordered Mines. Thereupon the Assault which was determined to
have been given, had the Mines succeeded, was delayed, and the Miners were
again set to work to make new ones. In the Skirmishes which our Men had this
Day with the Enemy, there was a Turkish Officer slain, who was no doubt obliged
to have got into the Town. For there were Letters found about him, for the
Governor of Buda, discovering the Method which the Enemy intended to observe,
for the relief of the Town, which was to force one Quarter, and put Relief into
the Town, without hazarding a Battle; and that eight Thousand Tartars were to
range the Country, as far as Gran, and cut off Provision from our Men, and
infest the Country with continual Inroads Upon which Intelligence, the Duke of
Lorrain called a Council of War. Whereupon it was resolved to leave a part of
the Army to guard the Posts against the City, and to issue forth out of the
Lines with the rest of the Imperial, and Auxiliary Forces, and go and meet the
Enemy, who, as those Letters seemed to intimate, was above sixty Thousand
Strong. Though the more Judicious would not allow 'em to be above forty
Thousand Fighting Men.

The 13th. All the Army marched out of the Lines, except twenty thousand men
that were left for the guard of our Works, and to hinder the Enemy from putting
a Recruit into the Place. Commissary-General Rabata caused a distribution of
Oats and Hay for the Horses for three days: And besides we made a shift to form
a very noble Body of Volunteers under good Officers. The Duke of Lorrain posted
himself in view of the Enemy, four thousand Hussars and Heydukes keeping the
Vanguard. Nevertheless the Town was no less vigorously battered and assailed
than before. This Evening our Spies and some Deserters assured us that the
night following the Enemy would put themselves in Battle-Array, to Attack us
the next morning by break of day, which obliged the Duke of Lorrain to dispose
all things in readiness for a Battle.

The 14th. Before Sun rise the Enemy had drawn out a Body of eight thousand
Men, part Janisaries, part Spahi's, of the stoutest and most resolute Soldiers
in the Army, which being divided into diverse lesser Bodies, marched from six
till eight a Clock in the Morning, turning and winding to and again behind the
Mountains toward Alba Regalis, and entered into a Plain, designing to approach
our Camp under the shelter of a great Valley. But the Duke of Lorrain having
observed this contrivance of the Enemy, and understanding their design,
commanded Count Dunewald, General of the Cavalry, to possess himself of the
ground on the left hand, with nine Imperial Regiments, Cuirassiers, Dragoons,
and Croats, viz. Caprara's, Palfy's, Taff's, Lodron's, Neuburgh's,
Furstenbergh's, Stirum's, Serau's, and Schultz's; to which he added some
Hussars; and General Heusler had orders to post himself with his detachment
upon a rising ground on the right hand. The Hussars next to General Dunewald
were they that received the first Charge, and although they fought with all the
bravery imaginable, they were nevertheless forced to give ground; but finding
themselves seconded by the Germans, they returned to the Charge. The Turks
having thus made the Hussars give ground, thought they should have a cheap
bargain of the rest. To which purpose they advanced with great fury, and loud
outcries, against our Men, who received them without moving a foot: General
Heusler, who had the upper ground, charged them vigorously; so that the Combat
was obstinate and bloody: for though the Enemies saw themselves attacked in
Flank and Front, they did their utmost to cut their way through, till at length
they were put into disorder, separated, and constrained to fly: The slaughter
that followed was very great; and it was a very pleasant sight to see the
Janisaries drop here and there, who being abandoned by the Spahi's, and
environed by ours, threw down their Arms and shifted every one for themselves.
They were pursued into the Plain; nor would it serve their Turn, to throw
themselves among the Bushes to shelter themselves from death; for they were
Massacred like Wild Beasts that fall into the Hunters Net. The Turks had three
Thousand Men killed upon the Spot, the most part Janisaries, and all choice
Men, who had undertaken to force a Quarter, and get into the City, or to
perish; and to whom the Grand Vizier had given five Ducats a Head of Twenty,
which he promised to every one that should enter the City. They carried almost
every one of them three Grenades apiece, a Pickaxe. and a Shovel, to break
down our Entrenchments, and fill up the Trenches. The number of the Wounded was
very considerable; but there were not above five Hundred taken Prisoners. There
were taken thirty Colors and Ensigns, and eleven pieces of Cannon, and ten
Wagons laden with Ammunition.

All which cost us but little Blood; we not having above sixty Slain; among
which were the Count of Lodron, General Lodron's Brother, Caprara's Sergeant
Major, and one of Dunewald's Captains: Of the number of the Wounded were two
Captains, and thirty three Soldiers.

This Fight thus over to our Advantage, the Enemy made several Motions, and
ranged themselves in a Plain that looks toward the Bavarian Quarter, and
posting their Wings-upon the rising Grounds, made a Show as if they intended
either to come to a Battle, or relieve the Place with all their Forces.
Thereupon a Council of War, wherein it was resolved to pursue the Enemy, which
was undertaken by the Elector of Bavaria, at the Head of his Army: but the
shortness of the time would not permit him to draw up his Men in a formal
Array: so that the Turks doubtful of his design, retired. The two Generals,
Dunewald, and Heusler, pursued the Enemy beyond the Hills; and the Hussars also
had a Rencounter with a considerable Party of the Turks that stayed behind to
favor the Retreat of the Army. Several Colors and Standards likewise were
found scattered along the Fields, which the Fugitives had thrown away, the
better to make their Escape. After this Victory, the Duke of Lorrain commanded
some Companies to beat the little Woods and Bushes adjoining, where they found
several Turks, who were all put to the Sword. For they had all the Spoil of the
Enemy; among whom there was hardly one that had not the five Ducats which the
Grand Vizier had given him, besides his other Money. The besieged believing
themselves already relieved, fired continually upon those that guarded the
Approaches, and thought to have ruined some of our Works; but in vain, for they
were still so briskly received, that they had no Maw to hazard skirmishing any
more. However they made one furious Sally upon the Bavarian Attack, which
proved very fatal to 'em, for they were not only repulsed by the Regiments of
Baden, and Asprem^^t, but their retreat being cut off, there was a great
Slaughter made of them. And now the Enemy being retired without daring to come
to any decision of the dispute, the Duke of Lorrain drew all his Army within
the Lines again, and dispatched away the young Count Palsi, Captain in Count
Palsi's Regiment, to carry the News to the Emperor, and to lay at his Feet
twenty eight Colors and Standards won from the Enemy during the fight. The
rest were set up upon the great Roundel, to let the besieged understand the
defeat of their Succors, which they expected with so much impatience.

The 15th. The Germans and Hungariaus that were upon the Scout, brought several
Prisoners to the Camp which they found in the Woods: they assured us, that
though the Grand Vizier had received this Repulse, he would not fail to make
other Attempts to succor the Town, though he lost his whole Army by
Piecemeals: and in truth, though the Ottoman Army were a little retreated, yet
they failed not to Alarm our Camp every night. This afternoon, order was given
by the Generals to hang out a Signal, for a Parley by an Interpreter, to let
them understand by the Janisaries, who were Prisoners, the Defeat of their
Succors: but whether the Besieged perceived it, or no; they returned their
Answer by the Mouths of their great Guns and Muskets, with which they broke
the Staff of a Turkish Ensign planted upon the great Roundel.

The 16th. They carried on vigorously the Works of the three Attacks, and in
the morning set fire to the Palisadoes and the Defenses which the Besieged had
made upon the Breaches of the Lorrain Attack, notwithstanding all the diligence
of the Enemy to quench it: On the other side, while these things were a doing,
the Enemy threw down a most dreadful quantity of Stones, Grenades,
Powder-bags, and other artificial Fireworks, upon our men; so that four of
those that set fire to the Palisadoes were killed and burnt. A Recompense of
twelve Crowns was given to every Soldier engaged in that Action. But in regard
the Onset could not yet be given, the Enemy had leisure to fix new Palisadoes,
and repair their Defenses in the night. On the Bavarian side they incessantly
battered the Castle and the great Tower, which by this time were ready to
tumble, through the force of the Battery.

August 17. All things were ready for an Assault betimes in the morning, but
the Enemy having repaired their Defenses, and put double Palisadoes behind
those that were burnt the day before, we were constrained to desist. The
Prisoners which our Hussars brought to the Camp, report that the Grand Vizier
was extremely enraged against the Commander of the Spahi's, for not having done
his Duty, in forsaking the Janisaries: to which they added, That of ten
thousand that were employed in the Attempt, very few were returned to the Camp.

The 18th. Two great Mines were sprung in the Lorrain Attack; but neither did
that Execution which our Miners expected, which much retarded the Reduction of
the Place. Thereupon the Duke of Lorrain, finding so little progress made by
the Miners, was resolved upon the Sapp; and to that effect great Preparations
were made of Bavins, Sacks of Earth, and the like, to fill up the Trench; and
certain Engines were likewise contrived to approach the Enemy with less danger,
and to drive them from their Posts. There was also a new Battery raised to cut
off the Palisadoes of the Besieged with chained Bullets. This day a Deserter
came from the Turkish Army, who informed us that the Grand Vizier was encamped
at Ertschin, four Leagues from our Camp; but that however he had not given over
his design of succouring the Besieged; and that he Retreated only for want of
Forage. This day the Bavarians also seized a Countryman, who had swam cross
the Danaw, with Letters from the Governor of Buda for the Grand Vizier,
wherein he conjured him by the Law of Mahomet to Relieve him; adding, that he
would hold out to the last Extremity.

The 19th. The Enemy being thus resolved to hold out to the last gasp, fired
all the day long with their Artillery upon the new Battery raised in the
Lorrain Attack, to beat down the Palisadoes fixed upon the Breaches, upon which
were planted four Pieces of Canon, and made it unserviceable; so that we were
forced to stay till night before we could repair it. The Detachments of the
Grand Vizier's Army alarmed us every night; so that for the greater security of
our Camp, we had always some Regiments upon the Guard, to prevent the Desings
of the Enemy, and to be ready upon all Occasions. Moreover, it was verily
thought that so soon as General Scherffenbergh should arrive in the Camp with
his Body of men out of Transylvania, where he had garrisoned some Castles, that
the Duke would attack the Grand Vizier in his Camp, who, by the Report of all
the Prisoners and Deserters, was not above six and forty thousand men, of which
the one half were forced and undisciplined Men. In the mean time he was very
vigilant to send out considerable Parties to observe the Motion of the Enemy,
who every foot meeting with the Turks, gained every day some remarkable
Advantage over 'em.

The 20th. The Grand Vizier desirous once more to try to put Relief into Buda,
resolved to attempt with a lesser Body than before, that he might not be so
easily discovered, and might approach our Camp before we had notice of it. To
this purpose he made choice of the stoutest Officers of his Army, who promised
to obey his Commands, or perish in the Attempt. These Men set forward in the
Night time with two thousand Spahi's, and an equal number of Janiseries for the
more speed. And this morning by break of day they appeared in St. Paul's
Valley. Where having put themselves in order without being perceived, they came
thundering upon our Out-Guards with loud Cries and terrible Yelling, and having
easily forced them, fell upon two Squadrons of Caprara's and Heusler's
Cavalrie, who received 'em briskly, and gave opportunity to others to come to
their Assistance and repel the Barbarians, who fled as fast as their Horses
Heels could carry them. The Janisaries also, some of whom were already
alighted, with an Intention to break through our Lines and get into the City,
were very coursely entertained, being pursued by General Heusler to the very
Gate, and met by the Bavarian Horse-Guard, who came running in upon the Alarm;
so that the Slaughter of the Enemy was very great, and very few had the good
Luck to enter the City. For though some will have them to be a hundred and fifty,
hardly a hundred had that good Fortune, which it was easy to judge by the Horses
that were quitted, which exceeded not the same number, and besides a good part
of them were wounded too by the Musket shot of our Soldiers in the Approaches,
by which there was a necessity for 'em to pass. And indeed had the Out-Guards
done their Duty, not a Turk had passed our Lines. The Enemy had above four
hundred slain; and of our Men there were about fifteen slain, and twenty seven
wounded. General Heusler, who behaved himself with an extraordinary Gallantry,
received a Wound in the Foot, but not dangerous; but General Maigret was very
much cut and mangled with a Scirnitar. The Marquess Santini, Knight of Malta,
and Captain in Salleburgh's Regiment, was taken Prisoner in the first Onset.
And now the Besieged to testify their Joy for the Relief they had received,
hung out three red Colors in sign of Victory, and fired three Rounds of all
their great and small Shot. During the Combat some Squadrons of Horse of the
Grand Vizier's Army, who had followed the rest, to second them if Occasion
were, showed themselves in Battle Array to the Bavarian Attack, making a show
as if they intended to try their Fortune on that side, but they retired without
enterprizing any thing. But at ten a Clock at Night they returned again to the
same place where they had attempted to break through in the Morning; but were
repulsed by our Men, and retired in Confusion. Within the Lines, the Bavarians
raised a new Battery of four pieces of Cannon in their Attack, and the Besieged
planted a whole Cannon upon the high Wall of the Castle, with which they
battered all the Covert way, as also the Bavarian Battery upon the great
Roundel.

The 21st. This Morning a Redoubt was raised in that part which the Turks
forced the day before, planted with two pieces of Cannon, and strengthened with
a sufficient Force to defend the Passage. Another Redoubt was also raised upon
the Hill upon the left hand, where Lodron's Regiment encamped. This day the
Besieged fired some Rounds of great Guns in token of Joy, though we could not
guess the reason, unless it were for the Celebration of some Festival. This day
also the Sieur Rummel, General of the Bavarian Forces, being in the Approaches,
was killed with a Musket Shot. He was very much lamented, as being an Officer
who all along had given most signal Proofs of his martial Valor, and fought
distinguished upon all Occasions, where he might win Honor.

The 22d. This Morning the Elector caused an Assault to be given to the great
Tower, which is in the middle of the Castle, and which our Artillery had for
the most part ruined; and made himself Master of it after an hours Dispute,
which cost us the loss of seventy three men, and as many wounded, among whom
was Duke Henry of Saxon-Mersbergh. During this Assault there was a false Alarm
given in the Lorrain Attack to divert the Enemy; and the great Guns fired with
great Fury upon the Defenses which the Enemy had raised upon the Breaches of
the inner Wall. This Evening about ten a Clock a Turk was apprehended, who
having got out of the Town by swimming the River, traveled all along the Banks
of the Danaw; and was got as far as St. Margetts Island, where being perceived,
he threw his Letters into the River, but nevertheless confessed that he was
dispatched by the Governor to inform the Grand Vizier of the Condition of the
Place, and to press Relief: Adding withal that there was another got out upon
the same Errand.

The 23d. The Besieged made an Attempt to recover the great Tower of the
Castle, which the Elector's Forces had won the day before; but they were
repulsed, and pursued to their Intrenchments. In the Lorrain Attack four pieces
of Cannon were planted upon the old great Battery, with which they began to
batter the new Palisadoes upon the Breach of the inner Wall. Last night the
Besieged made a Salley upon the Saxons Quarter but were so smartly received and
repulsed by Lieutenant Colonel Pletze, who was upon the Guard with a hundred
Horse, that they had much ado to regain their second Wall, where this Officer
was slain with two Musquet-shots, the one in his side, and the other in his
head.

The 24th. This morning the Turks showed themselves in two distinct Bodies, one
upon the Lorrain, and the other next the Bavarian Quarters, but without making
any attempt they Retreated about Noon to their Camp, which they had removed
about a League nearer to ours than it was before. This day a Deserter assured
us, that the Besieged began to talk with a great deal of liberty against the
Governor, who nevertheless endeavored all he could to retain them in their
Duty; assuring them that the Grand Vizier daily expected in his Camp one of the
chief Ministers at the Port, called Michtakis, with full power from the Grand
Signior to treat and conclude a Peace with the Generals of the Christian Army:
and that upon his arrival there would be a suspension of Arms; exhorting 'em
not to degenerate at last from the Gallantry and Virtue of true Mussel-men,
whose Honor they had hitherto so generously maintained, and to tarry a few
days longer, before they talked of a Surrender.

The 25. The D. of Lorrain being informed the Grand Vizier might find a Passage
on the side of the Danaw, behind the hot Bathes, to put a Re-inforcement into
the City, ordered that there should be every night some Squadrons of Horse
ready to second the Guards, which should be likewise doubled; and to render the
Passage more difficult for the Turks to force, he caused Palisadoes to be fixed
in the weaker and most defenseless places, and caused certain German and
Hungarian Squadrons and Battalions to be there posted, in such a manner, that
if the Turks should make any attempt elsewhere, they might still be ready with
Relief wherever the Alarm called. There was also some alteration made in two
Batteries, the better to endamage the Besieged, and overturn their Parapets,
Palisadoes, and other Defenses, which they had raised upon the Breach of the
inner Wall. The Bavarians were forced to win their ground inch by inch, nor
could they as yet make themselves Masters of the whole Castle; such was the
Opposition of a stout and daring Enemy, who did not lose a foot of Ground, but
what he sought to regain by several Efforts, making use to that purpose of
Bombs, Grenades, Stones, Powder-bags, and all those other means that Courage
or Despair were capable to invent to the Destruction of the Assailants.
Insomuch that it cost no small labor, as fast as we gained Ground, to fill up
the Holes and Caverns which the Enemy had hollowed in the Earth for our ruin;
which had it not been done, we had never kept our Stations.

The 26th. The Prisoners which our Parties brought to the Camp, as well as some
Deserters gave us Information, that one of the Messengers which the Governor
had sent to the Grand Vizier, was safely arrived at the Grand Vizier's Camp,
and had delivered him the Governor's Letters, wherein he gave him an account of
the Condition of the place, that he could not hold out much longer; that the
Christians were Masters of the Castle, and that the next Assault would surely
carry the Place; that at the last Assault of the Castle he had lost above an
hundred of his best Soldiers; that the last Re-inforcement was very
inconsiderable, as not amounting to two hundred men, of which the one half were
wounded and unfit for Service; that for his part he had done his duty, in
letting the Christians know by a Defense so obstinate, during so long a Siege,
carried on with so much fury and bravery on both sides, that the Mussel-men
knew how to defend their Sultan's Glory, of which he claimed to have merited
the Honor: Protesting at length that it lay at the Grand Vizier's door to give
an account for the ill Success of the Siege, and that he was only to be
responsable for the loss so considerable, which could not be avoided, if the
Imperialists attempted one more Assault; as also for the Blood of his valiant
Soldiers, and his own, if he any longer delayed Relief. In the same Letter the
Governor described to the Grand Vizier the Place most proper for him to
attempt, which was so little dreamt of, that if he ordered his Business as he
ought to do, he could not fail in his Enterprise. Upon which Intelligence the
Duke of Lorrain visited himself the Place marked out by the Grand Vizier to
make the Attempt, and put all things in order to prevent the Enemies Design.
The Spies which were sent to the Enemies Camp, reported, That the Grand Vizier
had promised forty Crowns apiece to those that would undertake to put
themselves into the Town, promising moreover, that during their Lives, they
should be exempt from going to the Wars, and yet should enjoy their usual Pay
constantly without doing any duty. About Noon we had Intelligence that the
Enemy advanced with twelve Pieces of Canon, and presently after they appeared
within view of our Camp, drawn up in Battle Array: However no sooner had the
Duke Marshaled our Army in a Condition ready to oppose 'em, but they retreated
again.

The 27th. In the Lorrain Attack was finished a certain piece of Workmanship
like a Bridge, which was to be run along upon Wheels to the Enemies Palisado's
in the time of the Onset: It was covered with Earth to prevent firing, as the
day before they had fired some Wooden-works of the Bavarians, which constrained
'em to recoil; but this Morning they recovered their former Posts, and to guard
themselves from the Fire, made use of Planks covered with Tin: But when they
thought themselves safe from that devouting Element, the Enemy no less
industrious to destroy than they to preserve, flung down in the Evening such an
infinite Quantity of Pitch, Tar, Sulphur, and other combustible Materials, with
that Success, that the Fire got to the Planks, and reduced 'em to Ashes. At the
same time they also cast down such an infinite Quantity of Granado's, Stones,
and Arrows upon the Bavarians, that they were constrained a second time to quit
their Posts with the loss of twenty Soldiers.

The 28th. In the Lorrain Attack they did nothing but batter the Flanks of the
great Breach, as did also the Brandenburghers, to overturn the Defenses of the
Enemy. So that at length the Bavarians recovered their Post, and secured it so
well that it was not in the power of the Enemy to dislodge 'em any more.
Sergeant Major Stuben, of the Regiment of Sebolstorff, who commanded the
Assailants, was slain, with some common Soldiers; though both slain and wounded,
did not exceed the number of twenty. Upon the Report of some Deserters, that
the grand Vizier was resolved this night to attack us with all his Forces, the
Duke of Lorrain prepared all things in a Readiness to receive him, and all the
Army stood to their Arms in Battalia; but to no purpose, for no Enemy appeared.

The 29th. Being the Day of St. John's beheading, which the Turks, out of a
foolish piece of Superstition, have always looked upon as a day auspicious to
their Empire, a thousand Spahi's, and two thousand Janisaries, under the
command of two Basha's, and seconded by fifteen hundred Tartars, came to try
their Fortune on that side next the Water, but finding those Posts too well
provided, and having been saluted with a volley of small Shot, they retired in
great have, and thought it more proper to try to break through in that part
where the last Reinforcement had forced their way. In short an hour after they
appeared in St. Paul's Valley, and with terrible Outcries and Yells came
thundering upon the Horse Regiments of Mercy, Heusler, and Neuburgh, who
received 'em with that Gallantry, that they slew a great number of those
Barbarians, of whom some were so foolhardy as to throw themselves into our
Lines, where they were all cut to pieces, except 4. who were so fortunate as to
get into the Town. We reckoned above 600. Turks that were slain in this Action,
besides the Prisoners, which are not very many. There were also taken 25.
Colors of Horse and Foot, all Red, to signify that they would either enter the
Town or dye. On our side there were not above 30. slain and wounded, among
which latter was General Mercy, having received two Cuts with a Scimitar, one
in the Head, and the other in the Shoulder, though nothing dangerous; but his
Adjutant-General was slain. During the heat of this Action, the Besieged made a
Sally upon the Bavarian Attack; but the Heydukes assailing 'em in Flanck, they
had much ado to retire with the loss of 17. killed upon the Place. All this day
the Grand Vizier showed himself on the Bavarian Quarters, ready to try the
Fortune of a Battle, but perceiving the Arrival of General Picolomini in our
Camp, with three Regiments of Cuirassiers, and two of Dragoons, being the
Vanguard of General Scherffenbergh's Body, he retreated in great have to his
Camp.

The 30th. General Picolomini arriving yesterday with the Regiments of Saxon
Lawenburgh, Picolomini, St. Croix, Tettwin, and Magni, making in all 25.
Squadrons, was this day followed by Lieutenant General Scherffenbergh with the
rest of his Body, composed of the Foot Regiments of Veterani, Getz, Sereni,
Spinola, and Scherffenberg, all lusty proper Men, and well disciplined. The
Deserters also assured us that there was a great Scarcity in the Grand Vizier's
Army, and that the Soldiers half starved, had pillaged certain Barks that
brought Provisions for Buda, their Officers not being able to prevent it. The
31th. In the Lorrain Attacque a new Post was taken in the Trench before the
Breach of the Inner Wall, which is not above three Fadom distance from the
Palisado's of the Besieged; and in regard the place was very deep, the Turks
could not annoy us; so that we had not above two men wounded. This Morning the
Duke of Lorrain, accompanied with all the rest of the Generals, went over to
the Elector's Quarters, where he held a Council of War, and after Dinner the
Duke returned to his own Quarters, where he ordered the Works to be enlarged
and deepn'd, that they might with less difficulty go on to the General Affault,
which was then intended within a day or two.

Sept. 1. The Turks showed themselves before day by the light of the Moon near
the Bavarian Attack, to the number of 3000 Horse and Foot; but perceiving our
men to be in good order, and ready to receive 'em, they retired without making
any attempt. Yesterday the Grand Chancellor, the Count de Straatman, being
arrived at the Camp, with a private Commission from the Emperor, he caused a
Council of War to be called, where were present the Duke of Lorrain, the
Elector of Bavaria, and all the Generals, both Imperialists and Auxiliaries.
The Chancellor then produced his Commission, to this effect; That his Imperial
Majesty earnestly desiring an end of that bloody Siege, they were to consult
the most proper and expedient means to do it. Thereupon two Points were
proposed; Whether to fight the Grand Vizier with the greatest part of the Army,
leaving a sufficient Force to guard the Lines; or, whether to give a general
Assault to the Place with a greater Force than had yet been made use of to that
purpose. Which latter Proposal was concluded upon by the greatest part of the
Generals, and so a general Assault being concluded upon the next day, all
things were prepared in a readiness, that the Blow might not fail; and to keep
the Enemy in ignorance, a Rumor was spread abroad in the Camp, That the next
day the General intended to give the Grand Vizier Battle, which caused great
rejoicing among the Officers and Soldiers, who desired nothing more than to
signalize their Valor. Nevertheless they forbore not to play all the day long
from all the Batteries to widen the Breaches, and beat down the Enemies
Defenses.

The 2d. All the Generals got on Horseback, and the Army was drawn up ready to
quit the Lines, and march to the grand Parade, from thence to march toward the
Grand Vizier. The Duke of Lorrain and the Elector visited every Quarter,
encouraging the Officers and Soldiers valiantly to maintain the Cause of God
and the Emperor's Honor. In the mean time the Infantry ranged themselves in
their several Battalions, the great Guns were fired with re-doubled Fury from
all the three Attacks, and an infinite number of Bombs and chained Shot were
thundered against the Defenses of the Besieged. But when the Army was just ready
to march toward the Grand Vizier, of a sudden the whole order of the March was
changed, and about three a Clock in the afternoon the Rean-Guard was commanded
to mount the Breaches, all things being so provided before hand, that without
disturbing the Order of the Battalions, they might fall on. Which they did in
three several Places; viz. In the Lorrain, Bavarian, and Brandenburghers
Attacks: besides other false Attacks premeditated to divert the Enemy: But
notwithstanding all these Precautions to render the Assault more easy, such
was the obstinate Resistance, that they had much ado to prevail. They defended
themselves above three quarters of an hour with their Halbards, Half-pikes, and
Partisans, and slung such an infinite quantity of Stones, Arrows and Grenades,
that they repulsed us vigorously more than once: but at length our men,
encouraged by the Presence of their Generals, returned to the Assault with
greater Fury, and made themselves Masters of the Breaches in all the three
Attacks. The Turks defended themselves, retreating from Entrenchment to
Entrenchment, so that the slaughter was very bloody: for our Soldiers having
driven the Turks from their Defenses, entered the City by main force, overrun
the Streets, put all to the Sword that encountered their Fury, sparing neither
Sex nor Age, so that there was nothing else to be seen but the dead Bodies of
the slain. The Bavarians also pursued their Advantage, and fell upon a thousand
Turks who were retired to a little Fort at the Foot of the Castle, where they
defended themselves to the utmost, till at length despairing of their Safety,
they hung out a white Flag, and begged for Quarter. Which, considering their
obstinacy, and the slaughter they had made of our men, the Duke and the Elector
were at first unwilling to grant; but recollecting afterward that their number
was great, that they might do us more mischief, that Night drew on; that the
Grand Vizier was at hand with a Formidable Army, that the Soldiers were tired
and wanted repose, and that the City was on Fire in several places, they
resolved to give them their Lives; of which when these miserable Creatures were
assured, they flung down their Arms and yielded at discretion. There were about
a thousand Turks more, who being retired into Caves and Caverns, obtained the
same favor. The number of the Barbarians that were slain, amounted to above
3000. besides the wounded, which were not many: so that it appears the Garrison
was much str^nger than the Deserters reported. The Governor Basha died bravely
upon the the Breach, where he defended himself valiantly with his Scimiter in
his hand, scorning to Retreat or demand Quarter, that he might not degenerate
from the Honor and Heroic Virtue of the ancient Mussel men, nor falsify the
Oath which he had made the Grand Signior, either to preserve the Town, or
gloriously to end his days. The Vice Basha, being an Officer of high
Reputation, defended the Castle, but perceiving all was lost, retired fighting
into the forementioned Fort at the foot of the Castle, which he thought to
make good, and give the Grand Vizier leisure to relieve him; but seeing the
desperate condition of Affairs, he rather chose to implore the clemency of the
Victors, than to occasion the Massacre of those that were about him, and so was
taken Prisoner with the rest by the Bavarians, and presented to his Electoral
Highness. The Aga of the Janisaries taken by the Imperialists, was delivered up
to the D. of Lorrain, with some other Turkish Officers of note. So that the
number of the Prisoners did not much exceed 2000. Men, of 13000. at the
beginning of the Siege, all stout and experienced Soldiers, and the very sinews
of the Militia of all the Ottoman Empire. The loss on our side was very small,
compared with that of the Enemies. For we cannot reckon above 400. killed, and
about 200. wounded, among whom were several Volunteers, but very few Officers,
Colonel Spinola, Marquess of Arquato, an Officer of great merit, received his
death's wound at the head of the Assailants; and the Baron of Asti, who had
been twice wounded before, during the Siege, received a third wound more
dangerous than any of the former, to the great hazard of his life. The booty
which the Soldiers got was extraordinary, there being a vast deal of Wealth in
the City, which the Inhabitants of other Cities and Places under the dominion
of the Turk had brought thither for Security, as being a place which they
thought impregnable. There was found in the Town, Ammunition and Provision
sufficient for a Siege of two Months longer; a Magazine furnished with all
sorts of Arms Offensive and Defensive for above 30000. Men, Harness for Horses,
Saddles, Boots, and other Equipage for the Cavalry; and besides all this near
400. Pieces of Cannon, and Mortar Pieces, of which 170. were never the worse,
fixed upon their Carriages. It is impossible to give you an Inventory of every
thing; 'twill be enough to say, that never any City could be better provided to
sustain a vigorous Siege, than this was; or ever was defended by a stouter
Garrison. But if the resistance met with, were so surprising, much more must be
the Glory of so many brave Officers, Volunteers, and Soldiers, that signalized
their valor, and eternized, not only their own Memories, but the Honor of the
Emperor, in gaining such a strong hold, and recovering it into the Possession
of him, to whom it belongs by right of Nature and Succession; and which had
endured so many Sieges, before it could be reduced under the Subjection of its
Lawful Sovereign.

BVDA SEXTO INEXPVGNABILIS, SEPTIMO FIT CESARIS

Buda six times Inexpugnable, the seventh becomes Caesar's.

The D. of Lorrain, after he had prevented any farther slaughter, and given all
necessary orders to reduce the Soldiers under their Colors, commanded the
People to quench the fire that continued burning in several parts, gave the
Government of the place to General Beek, with a Garrison of 5000. Foot, and
1000. Horse, till his Imperial Majesty should otherwise dispose of the absolute
Government of this Imperial City; and commanded between 8 and 10000 Cuirassiers
and Dragoons, with the Hussars under Count Budiani to pursue the Grand Vizier,
who having looked on, and seen the taking of Buda, decamped with his whole Army
to secure the rest of the Turkish Fortresses, to reinforce the Garrisons, and
gain the Bridge of Esseck, where our General is resolved to attack him, if he
can overtake him in his march. To which purpose the Infantry was embarked upon
the Danaw, to make the more have, while the Cavalry marched by Land.

Thus was this great and strong City, the Capital City of all Hungary, the seat
of the Ancient Kings, reduced under the Obedience of our most Illustrious and
Invincible Emperor Leopold the first, after it had groaned under the Tyrannous
Yoke of the Ottomans a hundred forty five years, who made use of it as a place
of Rendezvous for their Armies, and a Magazine to furnish all the other Cities
in those parts under their subjection, with Men and Ammunition, to which
purpose they always furnished it with a numerous Garrison, never consisting of
less than between 8 and 10000 Janisaries and Spain's, whether in Peace or War.
And though Sultan Solomon won this important place from King Ferdinand, Brother
to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, in the year 1529. through the treachery of
the Hungarian Garrison; nevertheless he put it into the hand of John Zapolilia,
Prince of Transylvania, who had called him to his Assistance to preserve him in
the Throne, to which he had been advanced by Sedition, and contrary to Form, by
a part of the Nobility, after the death of King Lewis slain at the Battle of
Mohaes, contrary to the Proclamation of the real King Ferdinand, duly elected
by the four Orders of the States of the Kingdom.

This Usurper being thus confirmed in the enjoyment of one part of the Kingdom,
and of the Capital City under the Protection of the Turks, King Ferdinand sent
his General Count Roggendorff, who had so valiantly defended Vienna, under the
Command of the Elector Palatine, against the efforts of Solomon, to lay Siege
to Buda; but he was constrained to raise his Siege, after he had lost a great
part of his Army. General Felsius was sent thither 10. years after. But that
Enterprise succeeded no better tha^ the former; notwithstanding the Death of
the Usurper Zapolia, and the Minority of his Son John Sigismund, who was under
the Tutelage of the Princess Elizabeth of Poland, his Mother, and George
Martinusius, chief Minister of State to his deceased Father. However King
Ferdinand was no way discouraged by these two unsuccessful Attempts, but
considering the Importance of the Place for the Support of his Crown, resolved
upon a third Attempt. To which purpose he raised a more numerous Army than
before, and gave the Command of it to Roggendorff, who the next Year laid a
third Siege to Buda, and had made himself Master of it, if Solomon, at the
Solicitation of the Princess Elizabeth, had not hastened to his Relief; which
constrained the General to raise his Siege, not being able to make head against
such a numerous Army of the Infidels. Thereupon the Sultan politickly seized
upon the City of Buda, sent the young Prince John Sigismund, with the Princess
his Mother, into Transylvania, and kept the Town in his own Hands, with a
Resolution never to restore it, notwithstanding his public Declaration to keep
it only during the Minority of the Prince. And to that intent he filled it with
a strong Garrison of his own Men, the choicest in his Army, under the Command
of a Beglerbeg, or Vice Roy, whose Authority extends over all the Basha's of
Hungary.

Thus it was that this Royal City has been ever since in subjection to the
Ottoman Empire. The Marquess of Brandenburgh hadform'd a design upon Buda in
the Year 1542. but having in vain assaulted the City of Pest, which is
separated from it only by the Danaw, he retreated without making the least
Attempt upon the Capital City: So that this Expedition is not to be looked upon
as a Siege, as some would erroneously have it to be. Count Smarzenburgh
besieged it in the Year 1598. but was constrained to raise his Siege after he
had lain thirty days before it, by reason of the continual Rains when the Year
was too far spent. In the Year 1602. General Roswourm lay before it with the
Imperial Army, and attacqu'd it in vain. Nor was the fatal day for this Place
languishingunder the Tyranny of the Turks, yet come in the Year 1684. when the
Duke of Lorrain first attacked it. For God had ordained the 2d. of September.
1686. (the day when it was taken by Solomon) to be the day of his Triumph, when
it was again wrested from the Hands of the Barbarians, after this same 7th.
Siege had been carried on with that Heat, Constancy, Prudence, and Conduct of
the Courageous D. of Lorrain, assisted by the Elector of Bavaria, no less
eminent for all the forementioned Virtues, and several other Generals of the
Emperor, and his Auxiliaries, unanimously conspiring the Regaining of this
Place, that we have reason to hope for Conquests far more Glorious, and more
Considerable for the Advancement of the Cause of God, Advancement of the
Austrian Family, and consolation of so great a number of Christian Souls as
groaned under the Tyrannous Yoke of Infidels, and the Recovery of an infinite
number of Barbarians into the Bosom of the true Church of God.

The Turks have heretofore experienced the Valor of Huniades and Scanderbergh,
who were the Scourges of those barbarous People: They have trembled at the
Courage and Conduct of the D. of Merceur, to that degree, that the Grand
Signior threatened a Rupture with France, if the King would not recall him out
of the Emperor's Service. They have been apprehensive of the Progress of the
Valiant Count Serini, and several other famous Captains, every where attended
by their good Fortune. But much more Reason have they to be astonished at the
Heroic Virtues of our undaunted and martial D. of Lorrain, who seems to have
been born for the Subversion of the Mohammedan Law, and with whom no Person
living can dispute the Honor of being the greatest Captain of his Age, and the
Terror of the Musselmen; who knows not what it is to lose a Battle, and who may
say with the Invincible Emperor Charles V. when he swam cross the Elb,
vanquished and took Prisoner Frederic D. of Saxony, crying out, Veni, vidi,
Deus vicit. For in all Encounters wherever he engaged, during this Holy War,
he has miraculously triumphed over his Enemies, and born away the Victory. He
it was, who during the Seige of Vienna, surpised and overcame near Presburgh
the Rebellious Army of Perfidious Teckley, Reinforced with a Body of Turks
under the Command of Hussein-Basha. He it was that defeated the Turks near
Calenburgh, and constrained the Grand Vizier dishonourably to raise his Siege
from before Vienna. He it was that vanquished the Enemy near Barkan, and
rescued the King of Poland, and the Prince his Son, when they were both in
iminent Danger, and the Polish Army in Confusion. He it was that during the
Siege of Buda three times defeated the Serasquier's Army: Who during the Siege
of Newhausel relieved the City of Gran, and routed the Army of Zeitan Ibraim
Bassa. And lastly, he it was who won this glorious Conquest, while the Grand
Vizier Solomon looked on with a potent Army of Barbarians, twice or thrice beat
his Succors, and though at length he came up with all his Forces against our
Lines, gave a general Assault, and by main Force carried this Important Place,
guarded still by above 5000. fighting Men; So that it is deservedly said of him,

EXPVLIT EX BVDA TVRCAM.

He drove the Turk out of Buda.

The Conquests made in Turkey are the price of so many Victories, and will
doubtless be attended with many more by the assistance of the God of Battles,
who has hitherto favored and blessed the victorious Arms of our thrice
Illustrious Monarch, under the Conduct of so great a Captain, defcended from
the Noble Stock of so many Illustrious Hero's, and particularly from the
warlike Conqueror of the Holy Land, Godfrey of Bulloign, whose steps he treads
so gloriously, that if the Christian Princes would but assist him with their
Forces, and act unanimously with him, he might with ease regain the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, his ancient Patrimony, which the Infidels wrested from his Ancestors.

Would it might please Divine Providence that now the time were come to humble
the Ottoman Empire, which according to the Prognostications of the Turks
themselves, has not long to subsist, it being a Prediction current among 'em,
That the City of Constantinople having been taken by one Mahomet, will be
re-taken by the Christians under the Reign of another Mahomet. God grant that
this may happen under Him at present, who by the loss of Buda has lost the Key
of all his Empire. Nor will it be amiss to add in this place the following
Epigram, made by an ingenious Person upon this Subject.

Integra de Victis foret ut Victoria Turcis,
Littera Christicolis, B, capienda ter est.
Buda prius, posthanc Belgradum, Regia demum
Maenia Bysanti, caetera lusus erunt.
Over conquered Turks the Victory to complete,
The Christians thrice must Letter B repeat.
First Buda, Belgrade next, the third Effort
Bysantium's Walls, the rest will be but Sport.
That is to say, that before we can gain an absolute Triumph over the Turks,
and ruin their Empire, the Christians must win the three Principal Cities of
their Empire that begin with the Letter B, Buda, Belgrade, and Bysantium; the
rest will come easily. Buda, which is the strongest of all these three places,
is already taken, as you have heard, and by the Recovery of this Important
Place, the Gate is open to Belgrade, there being no Fortress upon the Danaw
able to dispute our Approach; and the advantage of that River will not a little
contribute to facilitate an Enterprise of so great Importance to all
Christendom. Bysantium or Constantinople also might be easily attacked, both by
Sea and Land; while the Naval Power of the most Serene Republic of Venice,
reinforced with the Galleys of the Pope, Malta, Tuscany, and others, force the
Dardanels, and block it up by Sea. The Polonian Army also crossing Bessarabia,
might march as far as the Pontus Euxinus, and awe those Countries which for
many Ages have not known what War is, nor seen an Enemy. For if a handful of
Cossacks, that inhabit the Rocks of Borysthenes, during the late Wars of
Poland, have been so courageous as to affront with their small Barks the Grand
Signior in his Seraglio, and alarm Constantinople it self, the Capital City of
the Empire, and to fire the very Suburbs: what might not such formidable Armies
of so many Christian Princes be able to do, encouraged by so many remarkable
Victories which they have obtained over their Enemies, and the famous Conquests
they have won under the Conduct of such Renowned Captains, who know nothing
else but how to Conquer; especially at a time when the King of Persia, and the
Grand Duke of Muscovy are preparing to make most powerful Diversions in favor
of the Christians?

TIBI DEVS EXERCITVVM GLORIA SIR AEVITERNA. To thee, O God of Battle, be
Eternal Glory.
FINIS.

