A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERALS Of that Worthy Personage GEORGE PVREFOY The
Elder of Wadley in Berks, Esquire Who was buried by his Ancestors at Drayton in
Leicestershire, April 21. 1661.

By Jo. Hinckley.

Quid in obitu dolendum? cum ad vitam miseriarum expertem proficiscitur; ubi
nulli plagarum dolores: mortui potius superstites misereantur, ut carcere
inclusos.

Greg. Nyss. Ser. de mortuis, p. 586. LONDON, Printed for T. Basset in S.
Dunstans Church yard in Fleetstreet. 1661.

Genesis 25.8. Then Abraham gave up the Ghost, and died in a good old age, an old
man, and full of years, and was gathered to his people.


IT is observed of St. Paul, that in the Entrance of his Epistles, like a
complete Tertullus, or ready Orator, he did first Captare benevolentiam, and
demereri populum, that is, insinuate himself into the good opinion, and liking
of the people to whom he wrote: courting them (as it were) with winning terms,
and appellations; as (...), beloved, my Son Timothy, and the like: exstolling
their Faith, Love and Saint-ship: melting them too, with kind and hearty
salutations, Grace and Peace. St. Luke also, that learned Evangelist, begins
with (...), most excellent Theophilus: And St. John ushers in one of his
Epistles, dedicating it to the Elect Lady; These were all expert fishers of
men, and so well knew how to bait their hooks that they might catch the Souls
of men. That doctrine is swallowed most sweetly, and that Sermon digested most
soundly, which is wrapped up in a sugard, and savory conceit of the Preachers
worth, learning, affectionate tenderness and integrity. Imagination here is
most operative: This subdues the hearts of men unto the obedience of the word,
as once the very fame of Alexander did not a little conduce to the conquering
of puissant Armies.

Fain would I (at this present, at this Solemnity in this Auditory) observe the
method, and walk in the footsteps of so grand Exemplar's; I mean, I would gain
your Penelope, by the assistance and conspiracy of your own Maids: Captivate
your judgments and wills to the attention, and embracing of the ensuing
discourse, by the innocent Lenocinium, or harmless treachery of your own
affections.

To this end, I shall level the Artillery of my weak Rhetoric, make my Battery
and invasion, first, upon you my Friends, Neighbors, and countrymen, you that
like the Sons of Israel, have accompanied our Father Jacob, Patrum Patriae, a
Father of our Country, hither to his Mamre, his Cave of Macpelah: you, that
like those devout men, Acts 8. have brought Stephen (...), indeed our Crown,
our Glory to his burial. And now me thinks, I could gladly descend this Mount,
and go aside with you into the Valley, of Baca, or to Mizpeh, to draw water;
full buckets of water, at the Conduits of our eyes. I could even deal with you
as Jacob did with his Son Joseph, Genesis 46.28. Fall upon your necks, and vie
tears with you, until we have made a great mourning, as once was made for the
death of Josiah, setting all our notes to the tune of Hadadrimmon. For Alas,
Sirs! what a poor desolate viduated, infeebled, gloomy Country shall we find at
our return? After we have parted with such a Father out of our Israel, such a
Stake out of our hedge, such a Ceder out of our Lebanon, such a Luminary out of
our Hemisphear. But whither am I now going? It is time to break through this
cloud; and to stop this tragical vein. My ay me at first, was not so much to
condole, as to congratulate with you, and to thank you for your company, in the
deads behalf; you have done the greatest favor, that either he was capable to
receive, or your selves to bestow: we can but bring our friends to the grave,
and there for a time we must leave them.

You also the Natives, and Inhabitants of this place, let me preface and
bespeak you in a word, or two: A Stranger to Strangers; Sirs, although we
enjoyed the company of this worthy personage, and gratias agimus, quod illum
habere meruimus; may we never be unthankful to God, Bernardus in Cant. Ser. 26.
for the society of such a neighbor! yet his thoughts were much upon you; and
his discourse frequently off this place, and at last, he bequeathed part of
himself to you: His Body to rest with your bodies, his Bones with your Bones.
So King Edward the first in our own Chronicles, signifies his great affection
to the Holy Land, by ordering his heart to be buried there, after his death.
And as the place of Homer's birth was thereby made famous and illustrious, so
shall this village receive no small honor from this Heroes birth, and burial:
Tell me now, Can we be but too welcome, that have brought such a legacy along
with us? Can we be but too welcome, that have brought the rich spoil of our own
Country to adorn your Temple?

But I must supersede these complemental insinuations: I must leave the Son too
for a while, and come to the Father, for here are no less than two funerals:
The first of Abraham, the Father of the faithful. The second of this Son of
Abraham; But it is fit the Father should have the precedence: Then Abraham gave
up the Ghost, and dyed in a good old age, an old man, and full of years, and
was gathered to his people.

Though the foregoing verses acquaint us with Abraham's Testament, and therein
his great care in disposing and settling his outward estate, to prevent
differences, and controversies among his posterity, lest tedious suits should
be entailed upon his Children, together with his Land, and his other substance.
And this has been the providence of Hezekiah, and many other Saints, to set
their houses in order, before they have gone to the place where all things are
forgotten. The manner of his Will is also very observable, He gave all that he
had unto Isaac, v. 5. yet this cannot be any plea; much less afford any
excuse, or patronage, to such cruel and injust Fathers (whose younger Children
fare no better than their Hogs, as once was said of Herod) who either for light
causes disinherit their Children, or else make one of them a Gentleman, and
leave other beggars, for Isaac was the only Son of Sarah his lawful and
legitimate wife, his other children were the Sons of Concubines, v. 6. Now
Concubines were for the bed indeed, but not for the honor of the family, taken
without espousals, and so might be put away again, neither could their Children
inherit. Therefore Judge. 11.2. the Sons of Gilead told Jephtah, He should not
inherit in their fathers house, because he was the Son of a strange woman. To
this St. Paul alludes, Gal. 4.30. The Son of the bondwoman shall not be heir
with the Son of the Freewoman; They only had some smaller gifts bestowed upon
them. In Denmark the second wife had no part of the man's inheritance, but gifts
out of his estate called Morgengab. Dr. Hammond.
So Abraham gave gifts to his other Sons. v. 6. A Learned man observes, that
the same custom is in Denmark to this day, yet waving any further
disquisition, or search further into the context: I shall come at last to those
considerable circumstances which are in the Text it self, concerning the
death, and burial of Abraham.

1. The Person dying, Abraham.

2. The manner of his death, He gave up the Ghost and dyed.

3. The time when he dyed; In a good Old Age, an old Man, and full of years.

4. How he was disposed of after death; and was gathered to his people. These
parts are plainly in the text, without either straining it, or obscuring them,
with any terms of art. I must begin with,

1. The Person dying, Abraham: And Abraham gave up the Ghost, Abraham a great
Prince, a great Prophet, a great man in estate, the friend of God, the Father
of the faithful: Titles enough (one would have thought) to have struck a we
into death it self, as (...)
impudent, or disrespecter of persons, as it is; yet notwithstanding, all this
pomp and grandeur, Abraham gave up the Ghost, and dyed. No prerogative
whatsoever will exempt us from death, though we be the favorites of Heaven, the
Potentates of the Earth, the darlings of the people; yet our breath is still in
our Nostrils, we are as much obnoxious, and exposed to the arrows of death, as
the poorest Mushroom, or Shrub, the meanest peasant that crawls on the surface
of the Earth. The Psalmist puts it to a negative question, What man is he that
lives, and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his Soul from the hand of the
Grave? Psa. 89.48. The word is not Adam, or Enos; but Geber. What rich, what
mighty, what great Man is there that lives, and shall not see death? And that
we might not pass from that text without serious considering the purport of
it, he arrests our spirits with that signal and emphatical note, Selah.

First, or last, we must all travel this common road, which has been beaten by
the feet of all our forefathers; And indeed, this is also a common and beaten
truth, that I am upon; none doubt of it in their understandings, and retired
thoughts: yet because there is a great difference betwixt a simple notional,
and speculative knowledge of a truth, swimming upon the understanding, and a
practical sanctified experimental and reduplicative knowledge, when we know the
truth, as we ought to knowing, by influencing our wills, tempering our
affections, and steering all the courses and passages of the outward man, which
is called by the Apostle, a knowledge according to godliness, or Knowing of the
truth, as it is in Jesus. I fear we do not know this truth, (in this sense) as
common as it is, else what means the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of
the Oxon in our ears? what is the reason that so many live as if they should
never dye? set their hearts upon their habitations, as if their habitations
should endure for ever? As if they should dye in their Nests, and multiply
their days as the Sand, Job. 29.18. They are ready to say with David in his
prosperity, that they shall never be moved; or with the Whore of Babylon, I
shall sit as Queen for ever. Had those Atheistical wreches learned this lesson,
who put far from them the evil day, and said, Come, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant, Esa. 56.12.

David well knew the difficulty of taking forth this truth, therefore about to
make a Sermon of man's frailty, he begins thus, I will incline my ear to a
parable, I will open my dark sayings, Ps. 49.4. And the Prophet being about to
proclaim, All Flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof, as the flower
of the field. He brings it in with a solemnity of a dialogue, betwixt a voice
from Heaven, and himself, The voice said cry; and he said, what shall I cry?
Isa. 40.6. That saying was so dark, and our natures so averse to digest it;
that there is need of crying, and crying again.

Hence it is, that as it was in the days of Noah, and Lot; So it is in our
days, there is eating, drinking, building, and beating, by oppression, of our
fellow servants, until the Flood of death, like the river Kison, sweep us
away. Hannibal ad portas, the great Philistin, or last enemy is upon us; yet we
are not drawn forth into battalia, mounted our battlements, or have our weapons
fixed. The Bridegroom is coming a pace, yet our lamps were neither trimmed, nor
furnished with oil.

Did Abraham give up the Ghost, though he was the friend of God? then let us
not only make a good use of good men, whilst we have them; by sucking and
drawing from them the honey of advice and Counsel; for there is no direction, or
knowledge in the grave; though the lips of faithful and able Ministers (whilst
alive) may drop as the honeycomb; yet their Sepulchers cannot edify, or
instruct us; the living, the living shall praise the Lord.

But since Abraham Gods familiar, and intimate friend, gave up the Ghost, and
dyed: sure death is not so terrible, as most apprehend it to be, otherwise his
dearest servant should not have tasted of it. The Apostle casts some spice into
the cup of affliction, and endeavors to sweeten chastisements by this
argument, because they fall upon the Sons and children of God, Heb. 12.7, 8. As
the grave it self (methink's) is perfumed for us, in that Christ himself was
pleased to sleep in that Chamber.

Though Abraham was great in power, and estate, yet he gave up the Ghost, and
dyed: therefore let us not make flesh our arm, in relying upon any of the Sons
of men, though never so mighty. They are but as so many dreams, shadows, or
puffes of wind, cease from man whose breath is in his Nostrils; for what
excellency is there in him? Isa. 2.22. Trust not in Princes, nor in any of the
Sons of men, Psa. 146.3. And lest we should be left utterly destitute of any
support to bare us up, David adds, v. 5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob
for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God: As if all stays were but as
so many broken Reeds, in comparison of this Rock of ages. Alexander (as great
as he was) once the Idol of his Court was content at last with a coffin: And
Diogines, Sarcofago contentus erat. Juv.
is brought in by Lucian, as jearing the Ghost of Alexander after death, (...)?
what, is Alexander dead, as well as Diogenes? Alexander had then learned, that
he was not immortal, and could say; It Is (...)Lucian. (...)Clem. Alex. p. 61.
no wonder, that I am dead, seeing at best, I was but a man. Saladine also that
great Commander, who won Jerusalem, gave order to have no other solemnity at
his funeral, than to have a Crier to go before his hearse to give notice to the
people, that there was Saladine the Conqueror of the East, and how, that of all
his riches and glory., he carried nothing with him but his shirt. And what help
can they afford to others, that have not been able to help themselves:

2. 2. Part.
The manner of his death; He gave up the Ghost. 1. Expiravit, or as it is said
of Christ himself, (...)he breathed out his last breath, to show that we are
but as so many bubbles or bladders; touch, or prick us, and we are gone, we
presently shrivel together, and as the heavens shall be at the last day, are
contracted and drawn together like a Scrowl. if God blow upon us, like so many
untimely figs, we fall and shatter; our ruddy cheeks become pale and wan, thou
changest his countenance, and sendest him away: Job. 14.20.

2. He gave up the Ghost; that is, he wilingly surrendered his Soul into the
hands of God; So Christ bowed his head upon the Cross, as it were to salute
and welcome death it self, even as he expanded and streched out his arms, to
signify how ready he was to embrace penitent sinners. Gods people has some
presentiments of a better Country; Some assurance of going to more glorious
company; They have an interest in Christ, and so love his appearance, as well
at the day of death, as of judgment: they have fought a good fight, and
therefore are willing to receive that (...)that Garland, that crown of Glory,
which is reposited and laid up for them, in the bands of a faithful Creator;
They have tasted that the Lord is gracious, by the relish of those first
fruits, those bunches of Grapes, which the holy spies, the Ministers of the
Lord, have brought unto them from the Land of Canaan; and therefore, with the
spouse Cant. 6.4. They long to go to the vineyard it self, to the beds of
spices, to feed in the Garden, and to gather Lillies: with Simeon, they are
ready to sing, nunc dimittis, now let thy servant depart in peace; or with St.
Paul, to desire to be desolved (...)migrare revertere, Scultetus.
to depart, and to return unto Christ.

This is to inform us concerning the great difference betwixt the death of Gods
servants, and the wicked; The one resign up their lives, and give up their
ghosts willingly; from the other they are wrested, and haled: The world sticks
so close to them, that they know not how to shake it off, they are clogged, and
pressed down with so many weights they are pinioned with so many sins, that do
easily beset them, that they cannot mount upwards: Their darling sins, and
bosom corruptions come about them, as once St. Anstins lust did cling about
him: Non erimus tecum in aeternum? What, shall we never be drunk, profane, and
unchaste any more? Their Souls are fetched from them violently, as it were with a
Pursevant, this night shall thy Soul be taken from thee, Luke 12.20. like rusty
swords they are hardly drawn out of the Sheathes of their bodies; to this
Daniel alludes, Cap. 7.15. Myspirit spirit was grieved within me: the Chaldee
reads it, my spirit was grieved within my Sheath, and good reason they have to
hang back, seeing they can discern nothing before them, but flames of
ever-burning fire, ready to devour them, as it is reported of the Infants of
Saguntum, (many Plagues and Judgments threatening that place) they started back
into the wombs of their Mothers, as it were, abhorring to be born into so
troublesome a world.

3. 3. Part.
The time when Abraham dyed? In a good Old Age, and old Man and full of Years.

In a good old age, 1. Naturally, being free from those Aches, Fevers, and
noisome diseases which are incident to old age; As it is said of Moses, His eye
was not dim, nor his natural force abated, Deuteronomy. 34.7.

2. Morally, Not only an old Man, but a good old man; full fraught with so many
virtuous excellencies, as might denominate him good; as his years did proclaim
him old.

Full of years, Annorum Satur, even faciated, and satisfied with years: Having
lived so long, that he desired not to have his days prolonged: or else full of
years, that is, having fulfilled that, for which he came into the world,
finishing his course with joy; and with David, serving his generation, before
he fell asleep, Acts 15, 36, In opposition to whom are months of of vanity, or
empty months, Job. 7.3. when men die and leave no Testimony behind them, that
ever they were alive, and so they are buried in death, Job. 27.15.

Seeing it is here recorded of Abraham, as a mercy, that he died in good old
age, an old Man and full of years: We may observe, that old age is a blessing;
So 'twas promised unto Abraham, Genesis 15.15. Thou shall go to thy Fathers in
peace, and thou shall be buried in a good old age, Paul glories in it, being
such an one as Paul the aged, Philem. 9. This is the promise which is annexed
to the fifth Commandment, That thy days may be long in the land. And it is
part of that blessing, which the Lord will give to them that fear him, They
shall see their childrens children, Psa. 128.1.6. Sure I am, the contrary is
threatened as a judgment to the house of Eli, That an old man should not be of
his house, 1 Sa. 2.32. Bloody and cruel men are menaced that they should not
live out half their time: He shall shake off his unripe grape as the Vine, and
shall cast of his flower as the Olive, Job. 15.33. It is observed, that from
the beginning of the world, to some generations after the flood, the Son never
dyed before the Father, Haran an Idolater is first noted to have died before
his Father Terah, in the Land of his nativity, Genesis 11.28. The experience of
many ages has also confirmed an other observation, viz. That God has commonly
Crowned the reverend Bishops and Fathers of the Church with this blessing of
the Patriarch Abraham, even a good old age: It is a blessing in a special
manner.

1. Because it is honorable, the same word which signifies honor (...), may be
fetched from (...)an old man, because of that veneration that is due to old
age, The hoary head is a Crown of glory, Pro. 16.31. Gray hairs are the beauty
of old men, Pro. 20.29. Tertullian vehemently reproved those old men who were
ashamed of their own hair, and took, Exuvias alieni capitis, forsan immundi,
forsan gehennae destinati, Grande nesas and morte piandum, cum vetulo juvenis
non assurrexerit. Juv.
the excrements of other men, and those, it may be, who have been unclean, or
else malefactors. The Lacedemonian Ambassadors being in the Theater at Athens;
rose in solemn reverence when an old man came in thither; God himself commands
this, Lev. 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head; and honor the old
man, and fear thy God.

2. Because it brings wisdom along with it, together with prudence and
experience, with the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is
understanding, Job. 12.12. This is one reason why the Devils are such Demons,
such knowing spirits, because they are of so many thousand years standing, St.
John supposes, that such as exceed in years, should transcend others in divine
understanding; I write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from
the beginning, 1 John 2.13.

This concerns not children, and all younger people only, in acquainting them
what reverence they ought to pay unto their Fathers, and such as are stricken
in years, despise not thy Mother when she is old, Pro. 23.22. The young Stork
is very observant of the old ones, And the Ravens of the valleys shall pull out
his eyes that is not so: Their own Children shall plague them too, as they have
been irreverent to others. Those in Aelian were more than barberous, who
instead of fostering and dutifully observing their old friends, they rid
themselves, of their company; and by an untimely violence, thrust their
decreped relations out of the Land of the living.

But here is something for old men themselves to ruminate upon; All mercies
bring obligations a long with them: If old men would have that honor and
Reverence which is due unto them from others, they must reverence themselves,
and maintain their own honor? The High Priest might not defile himself,
because the Consecration of God was upon him, Numb. 6.7. So neither should old
men do any thing that is black and ugly, lest they should stain their white
hairs, which are the beauty of old Men. It being demanded of an old
Lacedemonion, why he wore such a long Beard? that I might (said he) thereby be
continually minded to do nothing that is dishonorable; No spectacle me thinks
is so monstrous, and strikes so much horror into the heart of a religious
spectator, as to behold a drunken, swearing, obscene, profane, and ignorant old
man. Lucian has hit right, in stiling his body (...), a living Sepulcher, or
crawling Grave; and I may as justly take the liberty to term his Soul, in the
language of Austin, Coucha putredinis, a bundle of rottenesse, or Cage of
unclean birds: Like some old withered thicket or superannuated Forest, which
harbers nothing but Toads and Serpents: The Gibeonites old shoes and moldy
bread, some old Oak or old Raven, may deserve as much as such old men, such as
are not only children in knowledge, overgrown boy's (as one calls them) with
gray beards, like Rehoboam forty (nay sixty) years old, yet very Children, 2 Chronicles. 13.7. But are drenched in the sinck of all manner of corruptions, and,
which is worst of all, such persons are seldom observed to be (...).
converted, from their habituated enormities. The wicked man though he live an
hundred years, shall be but an accursed wretch, Isa. 65.20. As Marriage is
honorable in all, but it is when the bed is undefiled; So old age is a Diadem
of glory, but it is, when it is found in the way of Righteousness, Pro. 16.31.
which leads me to another Corollary from this part of the Text.

Old age is then a Complete blessing, when it is joined with goodness. In a good
old age, when old men are like Malison, old disciples, Act. 21.16. or like
Obadiah, such as have feared the Lord from their youth, 1 Kin. 18.12. Like the
Almondtree, and the Vine, which naturalists observe to bear the best fruit when
they are old; So if these blosom and bring forth more fruit in their age, they
may plead with God, as David in his extremity, Cast me not away in old age, Ps.
71.9. Such leave a sweet savor behind them when they are gone, their memories
are imbalmed, they need no monuments to continue their names, besides Epetaph's
engraven upon the hearts of good men, Brass and Marble are but cold
remembrances to these. The great Molossuses, and Pyramids (which are but as so
many desolate place, Job 3.14.) will be eaten up with the teeth of time. The
perpetual Lamps made of molten gold (the fond and comfortless Tapers) which
have been affected by heathens, and Mahumetans, to give light unto, or else to
drive away evil spirits from their Remains, shall sooner be extinguished then
this Motto, (Of a good old Man) shall be blotted out.

As Abraham being old and good, was ripe for death, and ready to go to his
Grave, like a shock of corn coming in, in his season; Job 5.26. I must crave of
you, that last act of humanity, to go along with me to his funeral, and that is
the last stage of my text.

4. 4. Part.
Abraham's burial, He was gathered to his People: Here Is no need of your Sobbs
or lamentations, such Funerals (me thinks) are as pleasant as weddings, where
the parties to be interred are not only old, but good too. It Is Sedenti ad
epulas lacrymas ingerere, importunum est, ne non tam amasse illum quam nostra
quaesisse de illocommoda videamur. Ber. Ser. 27. in Cant.
unseasonable to mingle our cries with their Hosanna's, unless we would seem
either to envy their happiness, or to love our selves, more than them.

1. He was gathered to his people in his Soul, that is, unto the Saints. As
Gods servants rejoice in the solemn meetings and company of such as excel in
virtue in this life; so when they die, they shall be gathered to the
Congregation of the first born, and set down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of Heaven. The Souls of wicked men, shall go to their people, to
blasphemers, unclean persons, Gorah and his company. Judas went to his place,
and Ishmael was gathered to his people, Genesis 25.17. So the Souls of holy men
shall go to the Souls of just men made perfect. He was gathered to his people.

Though when we die, we leave many of our acquaintance and sweet relations
behind us: yet we shall not go among utter strangers, but unto our
forefathers, brethren and friends, who have here professed the Faith, and
departed in the fear of Gods Holy name: Therefore, as many heathens rejoiced,
that they were to go to the Ghosts of Socrates and Plato: So may the servants
of God exult upon their deathbeds, that they are to be gathered unto Christ,
the Patriarchs, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the glorious company of
the Apostles, and the noble Army of Martyrs.

If Abraham's soul was gathered to his people, then it was not as so much water
spilt upon the ground, much less was it annihilated. That Divinity sprang from
Hell, which tells us that the soul is Emanatio e crasi, or Exhalatio e Sanguine,
and at last does transire in mentem mundi, velin Atomos dissipatur. I tremble
to English it: for me, let this Philosophy return from whence it came, I had
rather tell you (which is the very truth) that the spirits of Gods people,
being let loose from the prison of the body, mount upwards, and are gathered to
their people.

(...)Basil. p. 128.
Death is not (...), an Abolition but (...)only; a dissolution of the
Compositum, or separation of the soul from the body.

2. He was gathered to his people, in respect of his body, in that he was
buried in the cave of Macpelah, in the field of Ephron, in the next verse to
the text, where Sarah had been buried before. The body is the Caske of a
precious jewel, the temple of the Holy Ghost; and therefore is decently to be
laid up, and lodged in the Chambers of the Earth. It has been accounted a
curse, either to have no burial, or the burial of an Ass. And as all Nations
have had a care to bury their dead; So I know no^ite wherein they differ more
than in the manner of their burials; the Egyptians were very prodigal of their
spices, in Embalming their dead, quantum redolent duo funera, Christ was
anointed to his burial, Mat. 26.12. The Romans burn their dead, and put their
ashes in Urnes, some put their dead into figures of glass, and so dried them
in the Sun, others (being more barberous) eat them up, and intombed them in
their own bowels. Yet it has been the desire of most people to be buried by
their Ancestors, and to mingle their dust with that of their friends; as if the
clods f those valleys (where their allies have been buried) had been most
sweet, Jacob gave strict order, to be buried in the Land of Canaan, Genesis 50.5.
Joseph also gave the same order concerning his bones, 2.25. Ruth told Orpha,
where thou dyest, I will die, and there will I be buried, Ruth 1.17. Eutichius,
Patriarch of Alexandria tells us, that Adam, with all his posterity unto Noah,
were buried in Spelunca Alcamne, in a cave called Alcamne. Sure I am the old
Prophet, by reason of his disobedince was threatened, that his Carcass should
not come into the Sepulcher of his Fathers, 1 Kings 13.22.

After that ancient and laudable right (which has been accounted no small
privilege in former ages) our worthy Patriot, is come to sleep with his
Fathers, and to be gathered to his people. And so having performed the
Obsequies due unto the Father; It is time (order also requires the same) to
celebrate those rights which belong to the Son; A genuine Son of his Father
Abraham: and well may he so be called, his very Puresoy. Pure Faith.
name imports as much; his profession and practice were suitable to his name,
in maintaining, and contending for that faith which was once delivered unto the
Saints.

Now you see (according to my first prediction) I am conducting you to another
funeral, and in order thereunto, I am fallen upon a new text: I must also beg
your patience to hear another Sermon, only I shall quicken and refresh your
attentions, as that Philosopher in Aristotle's Rhetoricks, did his weary and
almost tired auditors, with Hem demonstrationem! If you have any devotion left,
listen now to that which may be for your great advantage, and is worth no small
sum the learning. Many of those flowers, which I shall strew upon this
Hearse, you may gather into posies for yourselves, their smell shall be as the
smell of Lebanon, whilst I open a box of Spikenard, and shed amongst you the
ointment of his name; your senses may not only be delighted, but your faces may
be made to shine.

I shall not mount into panegyrical flourishes, in the honor of the man,
though his excellent virtues would worthily bear, if not exact them in the
words of our own Historian concerning H. 7. But I shall use the words of
sobriety and truth. His name has no need to be imbellished with any strains of
Rhetoric, Nullius laudibus crescat, nullius vituperatione minuatur, as
Macrobius of Virgil: The stature of his fame can receive no addition of Cubits
from my oratory; As it cannot be obscured and sullied by any black mouths
whatsoever: for himself, I dare say, (though against my presant enterprise)
that I should never have procured his approbation or allowance in steering this
course; He had rather his own work should praise him in the gates, Pro. 31.31.
than that Homer himself should set forth the praises of him, or them; only
give me leave, first to assert, and make good the way I am going, in
vindicating it in the general, from the slanderous charge and unreasonable
imputation of superstition, we have not only the Romans, and Graecians for our
presidents, but the primitive Fathers, by their many Elegies, and funeral
orations, have given pregnant Testimonies, that they never thought it unlawful,
to give the dead their due. A Nostrate Philosophia non est alienum: Ser. 26. in
fratrem Caesarium.
It is no way repugnant to Christian philosophy, or sound Divinity. So
Naziauzen; But we have more authentic authority, yet David himself compiles a
panegyric in the commendation of Saul and Jonat after their deaths, Saul and
Jonathan were pleasant in their lives. And again, the beauty of Israel was slain
on the high places, 2. Sam. 1.19.23. The Prophet Je. 22.15.16. does the like
for Josia. He tells Jehoiakim that his Father did eat and drink and do
judgment and justice, he judged the cause of the poor and needy: No fear then
of superstition.

The first Topic to be spoken too, is the birth and extraction of this
lamented Genleman, both which were very Noble, and ancient: by the help of some
Records (which I have seen) I could lay before you a glorious Scheme of a
numerous pedigree; I could lead you many generations backward (if not to the
conquest it self) and all along point at the Eminency of his illustrious
Progenitors: But I must leave this task to better Heralds and Historians than
my self. If you understand these Escutchions, you may be your own Heralds: Had
not some inhumane, and Scrilegious persons (like so many Goths and Vandals)
defaced some monuments in this place, you need not have gone far to have seen
what I say; The loss is so much the less in that it is repaired, and his
Geneology in several branches of it, redeemed from injurious time, by the
dexterous and happy pen of a living By the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert
the now Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
library, who voluntarily transmitted unto him in his life time, an accurrate
portraiture of the same; besides, Note that Eleven of his ancestors were, slain
at the battle in Bosworth field, in asserting the right of H. 7. against the or
cruel usurper. R. 3.
the gallantry of his family cannot be forgotten in this place, so long as
Bosworth is so near; I say it again, The gallantry of his family shall not be
forgotten; so long as Bosworth field has a name in story, neither have his
forefathers been men of renown only for greatness and valor, but famous too in
the Congregation, for truth in Religion: And herein he out-went his Father
Abraham; for his Father Terah served other Gods, Joshua 24.2. Neidid he
degenerate from them, which made him the more to be honored by good men. As I
have had always an high esteem of the Ancient Fathers and Writers of the
Church: So I have accounted, that there is a tribute of reverence and respect
to be given to ancient families in the State; especially such (like the Romans,
and some Tamerlande did so, when he was about to engage with his enemies, to
the intent his courage might be roused up.
others) who often read over the Noble Acts of their Ancestors, than they might
be inflamed to do the like: Such as do not stain that honor they have
received, but rather transmit it to posterity with advantage; Therefore the
word which is translated Nobles signifies white ones, Jer. 27.20. to show, that
such as are brought up in Scarlet, should not embrace dung-hills, and defile
their garments in the mity puddles of any dirty and ignoble practice. This
Worthy was a white one indeed, for though there was an orient luster in his
birth, yet his new birth did outshine and dazzle the glory of that, virtuibus
quam natalibus vel tantis nobilior: His virtues were a better ornament unto
him, than his cout of Arms. The Gra^i^^s ^ol^ nomen pietatis quam potestatis,
Tertul.
name of piety was more sweet, than that of a Gentleman, as Theodosius gloried
more that he was a Christian, than that he was an Emperor that was best in his
account which did rather conduce to make him good than great. (...)Anton. lib.
8.
As the least in the Kingdom of Heaven (that is, of glory,) is greater than the
greatest of the Sons of men upon Earth; so the lowest degree of saving grace,
is better than the highest excellencies of Stock or State. These are poor low
and beggarly trappings, empty husks, glorious bubbles, as they are destitute of
goodness and Truth in the inward parts.

But we shall take the dimensions of his worth the better if we consider him in
his general capacities, Moral, Politic, and Divine; As a Man a Magistrate, and
a Christian.

1. In his moral capacity, as a Man: and here I an amide such a throng of
personal excellencies that I know not to which to turn first, should I rehearse
them all, the remainder of your patience would utterly be exhausted, should I
pass them all by in silence, I should wrong both his worth and your
expectations and if I should speak of this or that, without taking notice of
the rest, this would be (as Tacitus of Agricola) injuria virtutuns, a wrong to
his other virtues, notwithstanding this triple-horned dilemma, I shall like a
traveller, cast a transient eye upon those magnificent structures where I must
not dwell, Who knew him that did not also know his exemplary temperance, His
very heart rose against debauchery in others, and if at any time he was
condemned into the company of intemperate persons, his delight was no more than
a Mariner takes in his shipwreck, or a poor slave in his gally. Just so he was
not only, no swearer, but fieared an oath, Eccle. 9.2. His veracity, and
fidelity in words and promise, were no less observable: He accounted it the
greatest reproach to boggle or falsify in either.

How courteous and affable to all? quot verba, t^^ aromata: His words were even
perfumed with lenity and condescension to men of the meanest rank. So far as he
could without making himself cheap, and exposing his authority to contempt, ex
ore ejus, Cap. 23.
non tam verba quam mell^ fluxisse videantur, in the words of Vincentius. he
spoke roses, and honey dropped from his lips: or in the words of a better
author; In his lips were the Law of Kindness, Prove. 31.26. I have gone as high
as I can, yet I am narrow and short in expressions, revocetur ab orcis --
Tullius. Here Is work for another Cicero. neither was he of the number of them
who salute, complement, and set a garland of fragrant words about one's head,
yet all that while aim at the fifth rib, that so innocent and credulous men may
fall a Sacrifice to their dissimulation. He first of all acquainted me with a
court-like Aphorism, out of a latin Written by Henry Vmpton.
Manuscript by him; but it was with no small dislike. It was this, many are
omnibus benigni, paucis familiaris, nullis emici; Kind to all familiar with
few, but true friends to none.

I might ad de much concerning his judgment and understanding in several
ingeuous and liberal studies, as History, Herauldry; but above all, in that art
of all Arts, Divinity; of his well regulated Charity, always making a
judicious choice of the objects upon whom he bestowed it. But I shall consider
him,

2. In his pollitical capacity; and herein, first, as a subject of this
Kingdom, and hence I commend unto you for a pattern worth your immitation, his
peaceable disposition and submission to lawful authority; Obedience and
Humility are the signs of an honest Man, said he Ki. James in his speech at
the conference at Hampton Court.
that spoke like an Oracle. When Bellona first beat up her unhappy Drums, and
spread abroad her bloody streamers, he so far abhorred those proceedings, that
he procured a license of his Majesty, of happy memory, to travel beyond the
Seas. And when the Seas were as tempestuous as the Land, he chose rather to
bury himself live, in a private and obscure concealment of himself; (as Ah,
potius bello patiaris in isto; te Caesar putet esse suam. Lucan.
Pompey once resolved to do in a tender compassion of Rome) rather then behold,
much less join his hand in the rending the bowels of his own Country; When a
little before his death some were telling the animosities, and discontents that
were abroad, (as we are all too apt to be Athenians in sick men's Chambers,
though we now enjoy those mercies, which not long since we could not hope for,
unless from his hand who has bestowed them, and would have thought them
cheap, though purchased with a torrent of blood) he plainly told me, that the
anger of malcontents arose from the leven of their own ambition; angry they
were, but it was with (with Agrippina) because they did not reign themselves.
Many dying men, (as Jacob and others) have had prophetic spirits, and so had
he: As Naturalists have observed, that some Talpae morituri aperiunt oculos.
creatures see clearest, when about to die; when I told him, that it was us;ual
with way ward men, if they have not every punctilio they desire presently,
(like so many children) they are unthankful for what they have. He gave an
Adaequate and full consent thereunto, as comprehending his own sense; And since
I am fallen upon this subject I call to mind what a Mr. V Parson of Weddington.
Prophet of your own, I mean a Minister of the next adjoining parish, has left
upon record. It Is irksome (says he) for wild birds to be cooped in a cage of
discipline and order, or to be strait lared, after they have gone loose so
long; I wish, we were not writing a commentary upon that Text.

2. As a Magistrate, so he was an ornament of that order. He put on
Righteousness, and that ploathed him, Judgment that was a Robe and a Diadem,
Job. 29.14. Eyes to the blind, Feet to the ^ame (...), Justice is self set
forth to the life, Justice animated; his grave and regular life was enough to
put sin out of countenance, Vira censura pulns imderium.
and the intimation of his pleasure; his nod had the authority of a command.
Ready he was, (whilst he had his health) to execute the laws, especially in
punishing scandalous offenders, and relieving such as were oppressed. Pharaoh
would have them to be Rulers over his Cattle, who were men of activity. Genesis
47.6. Much move ought they to be active who are Rulers over men: Hear this ye
great one, draw forth that sword which God has in rusted to you, to the terror
of evil works and workers; but remember to be (like God himself) a Sun and a
shield to the poor and perseouted. If any one of you shall upholster
profaneness, either by your power or example: I may justly Alarm you in the
words of Zach. 10.20. Howl O ye Oaks of Bashan, great men are called Oaks in
Scripture, as men in general are often compared to trees. If you, like Oaks,
shall bring forth Acorns for hogs; that is, favors for wicked men; Then howl O
ye Oaks of Bashan. This was the reason that the Lord commanded the Heads of the
people to be hung up before the Lord against the Sun, Numb. 25.4. And that at
the end of the world, the Kings of the Earth, the great men, and mighty men
shall hide themselves in Dens and rooks of the mountains, and say to the
mountains and rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
upon the Throne, Rev. 6, 15.10. Because all these had abused their power, and
as Lucifer falling from Heaven drew the third part of the Stars after him: So
these have corrupted others by their example, therefore their judgment shall
be the more signal.

3. His Divine Capacity, Moralia cum side, sunt divina: and divina sine side,
sunt moralia.
as a Christian, though his former excellencies, both moral and civil, were
both divine and spiritual in him, as they were acted by the strength of Grace,
and directed to the glory of God, yet that which we call Religion in a more
immediate sense was his greatest delight; and those that were Godly indeed, and
truly Religious, were highest in his esteem, Et scias eos vertutibus abundare,
etc. we may safety conclude that those men have a great stock of virtue in
themselves, Pliny epist.
who set their affections upon virtue in other men: We know that we have passed
from death to life, because we love the brethren, 1 John 3.14. Neither was his
Religion of any novel date; All the Locusts of old new furbushed heresies and
Schisms (which have swarmed out of the bottomless pit in these later times)
could never fasten upon him, to blast and deface the verdure of his more
ancient and Catholic profession, but still (...) the sweet breath of pure
truth in the Church of God. Bp. Morton.
He was none of those, who having drunk old wine strait-way desired Now, Luke
5.39. Or rejecting the old Apostolicae doctrinae manna revomentus haertieae
novitatis sordibus obiectantur. Vincent. Cap. 12.
Mamna of found doctrine, longing for the Mushrom inventions of brainsick
(...), which sprang up but the other night: And that he might be assisted in
his domestic, and more public devotions in his family (which were daily as
frequent as his moals) He borrowid (...) from the Altar, by commonly keeping in
his house a Chaplain in orders, and he his absence, that the duty might neither
beneglected nor profaned, by rash evaporations and daring effusions. He had a
form of prayer read constanily twice a day in his family etc. So diligent was
he in hearing the word, that when through weaknosse he could neither go
disstand; yet we had his presence at sermon; until at last I thought he would
have breathed his last, whilst I had been preaching. A good Emperor should die
in the field, a good Minister in the Pulpit; and it seems. A good Christian
could willingly expire in the Congregation.

Indeed he was so far from running forth into heats about Religion, especially
about shuffers and philacteries, and other circumstances of lower moment, (as
if these should rather be the subject of his obedience, than disputes, that
eyes in other matters he was observed to express more Religion in his
practice, than in his words; like deep wavers that make the least, noise, and
hot like the Indian figtree, whose leaves are as broad as a targer, but its
fruit no bigger than a bean. This reservednes might easily suggest unto
strangers an occasion of suspicion, that his heart did scarce abound with
goodness, seeing his mouth was no forwarder to set it forth. But when he was
in private. O how have I been affected to hear him give a large testimony of
his faith when we have been mingling experiences, and bringing forth o^
evidences for Heaven, how have I exulted to hear him relating the way and
method he had walked in, How he and his former Sarah did constanly take sweet
counsel together, by entering, into their closet (besides family exercises) and
praying jointly unto Almighty God, there in st^^^^ Happy couple! so to live
together in this world, that they might live together to all eternity. Besides
this act of devotion, every night before he took his rest, he sat him down in
his own studdy, there he passed a severe scrutinie upon himself, examining and
calling to the test, the several actions of the day, and wherein he had
miscarried; thereto abhor himself, and implore the pardon of his Heavenly
Father, in cancelling that debt. His account shall be less at the great day of
recompenses, that often thus sincerely and impartially reckons with himself.

As he was conscionable in giving to God the things that were Gods: So he had a
sweet return from God, as of many other blessings, so of gracious assistance
and support, in time of his extremity, that he might resemble his Father
Abraham, and his deliverance upon the Mount, when God had taken from him by a
lamentable stroke, his dear spouse, the joy of his heart, and delight of his
eyes, when his Children were dispersed with the tempest of War, his estate
rent and torn, and he himself pensive, at these rugged transactions of divine
providence; He took his Bible in his hand, and so his spirit was calmed, as it
were from Heaven, in reading, Psa. 31. 1, 2, 3. In thee O Lord do I put my
trust, let me never be ashamed, deliver me in thy righteousness. Bow down
thine ear to me speedily, be thou my strong Rock, for an house of defense to
save me; for thou art my Rock and my Fortress, therefore for thy names sake
lead me and guide me: And may not he justly be called the Son of Abraham, who
could thus live upon prayer and promises, and by faith evaded and conquered the
greatest difficulties.

We shall confront this Father and Son (with their due distances) in a closer
parallel, and draw to a conclusion. Was Abraham an indulgent husband? So was
he. We look for the effect of those prayers in his surviveing offspring. Sure
children of so many prayers canmiscarry^ as is said of Austin in respect of his
Mother Monica.
Was he a praying father for his children; O that Ishmael might live before
thee? So was he. Was Abraham tried and exercised with Crosses and afflictions?
So was he. Was Abraham the Father of a numerous seed according to the spirit?
so was he according to the flesh: A seed, the branches whereof are transplanted
into several Countries (like a constellation of stars, broken up and set in
distinct orbs,) where they are the heads of their Tribes. Did Abraham command
his household after him? So did he; never did child resemble his father more in
any bodily Symmetry and proportion, than he did Abraham in this particular;
like another Antoninus, he often visited his family, ejecting such persons as
were profane and scandalous, as so much Froth and Scum, with David a wicked
person would he not know, Ps. 101. 6, 7. Zim and O chim, with Satyrs and other
unclean birds, were not suffered to dance there, Isa. 13.21, 22. This was a
reddy way to bring a blessing upon his own affairs, and to convince the vilest
servants of their Errors, to the intent they might repent and reform: That so
their spirits might be Quorum non zelas salutem subicetionem nimis ambitiose
vendicas. Ber. Ser. 23. in Cant.
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Had Abraham his failings and [infirmities? witness his cowardice in Gerar,
Genesis 20.2. So (that you may not say I have made an absolute Saint of him) had
he also; yet I must do him so much right, that when I laid before him his
impatiency and fretting, to which he had been prone; with humility he
acknowledged his fault, but withal ascribing the praise to the grace of God.
He told me, that he bad much mortified, wea kned, and conquered that once
domineering passion.

But to keep to the text, Abraham was great, and rich; yet he gave up the
Ghost, willingly submitting himself to the stroke of death. So had this his Son
a very large estate, a beautiful and pleasant Wadley has a commodions site; a
wholesome and delicious aires it is a rich and pleasam Seat. Burton. p. 259.
habitation, All other comforts whereon wordlings set their hearts; yet he had
so far studied the nature of them all, that he had found them to be only
bracteata felicitas, nothing but as a little gilded Copper, and therefore set
his Heart no more upon them, than on so many fleeting, empty, and miserable
comforters; this he signified to me, when I spoke my fears unto him, vizi.
That the great things of the world do clogg and retard our motions toward
heaven, and stake us down so fast unto the Earth, that we are unwilling to dye,
ready to preser a palace in Paris, before Paradise it self. His resolution and
answer was like that of (...)Anton.
Antoninus, no more to be in love with any thing below, than within sparrow
flying over his head, which perhaps he might never see again. He had also
studied the charter of heavenly joys, when he cried out of his pains. I told
him, that in Heaven, no malladies should attatch him, there all tears should be
wipt from his eyes: True in deed, said he, there I shall have rest, and not
till I shall come thither. And can he choose but give up the Ghost willingly,
who meditates aright upon the vanity of this world, and the blessings of that
which is to come; therefore he was observed toward his latter end, to be as
earnest to have his Coach and Horses to be prepared to bring him to this place
of his burial, as ever the was to go a progress of pleasure, looking for the
messenger of death; as Jacob did for those Charriots, which should carry him to
his Son Joseph.

2. He dyed in a good old Age. Caesar etsi gloria celum latissimus ideoque sibi
satis vixerit non tamen satio. Reip. quae praesidio carere non possit ipsius
and tutela. Sleid. Wis. 4.9.
It was observed of him, that he was an old man at twenty, in respect of us,
his Allies, the Church and whole Kingdom, so his death was immature; but in
respect of himself, so he was a good old man, for wisdom is the gray hair to
men, and an unspotted life, is old age. In this sense it is that Abraham is
called a good old man, for his age; was far inferior to many that lived before
him, but an hundred threescore and fifteen years in the v. before the Text,
yet he is said first of any to be an old man, and full of years, because his,
many virtues did crown his age, in making it the more awful; and Invida quem
Lachesis raptum rtiete ride nova. Dum numerat palmas credidit esse sevem Mart.
li. 10. Epist. 58.
illustrious.

3. He is brought hither to be gathered to his people, and to sleep with his
Fathers, until the day of resurrection, that as he enjoyed many of Abraham's
mercies in his life, so he might be like him in his death too, that (like Saul
and Jonathan) in death they might not be divided.

Heitherto I have been conversing with the dead, and tracing the footsteps of
two Heroic Ghosts. Now a word or two at parting, to you that are yet alive,
that so I may end as I began.

1. To all in general, give me leave to make such a dole amongst you, as
Nazianzen did amongst his auditors, after he had made an oration upon the life
of Athanasius, Vertutes illius inter vos partiamini, now fall a dividing his
virtues amongst your selves: But be sure that every one take some. This will be
a better badge of being at a funeral, than either Rosemary or Ribbons; when you
are dismissed, go also musing with your selves, who may be the subject of the
next funeral, and say with the Apostles, Master, is it I? Master, is it I? Only
let me prompt you to so much humanity, as to take your leaves of this our
Reverend Father, before you go; speak to him in the words of Luther to his
dying daughter, Ingredere in cubile tuum cum pace, good night dear friend,
farewell, farewell, go to thy bed of rest, draw thy curtains, shut thy doors
about thee; Et nos mox aderimus, It shall not be long, ere we shall all come
unto thee.

2. In a special and peculiar manner, to you that are the children, and that,
both by way of Consolation and direction.

1. By way of consolation, vos chara capita, vos chara pignora, you that were
the sweet pledges of his love; The branches, which once sat about his table,
and sprang out of this stem before. Finis vitae ejus nobis luctuofus amicis
tristis. Tacitus de Agric.
I confess the thoughts of his death are very sad: He is Commune Bernardus de
Gerardo.
damnuns, a common loss unto us all, but especially unto you his nearest
allies; yet the Majore hominum damno quam suo. Suet. de Tito.
loss is more yours and ours, than his, ne defleatis igitur; Therefore weep
not for him, who shall never weep more. What though you have lost a tender
Father? yet you have cause to Non dolendum quod patrem amiseritis, sed
laetandum potius quod talem habueritis Ambro. de fratre Satyro.
rejoice, that you had such an one to loose. Lost did I say? Nay, he is
perfected in an advantageous change of his station: Look beyond death, and
think with your selves, as if you saw him clothed with Non tam mortem cogitate
quam immortalitatem. Cyp. Epist. 82.
immortality. What though he be fallen asleep, into an Iron Ferreus urget somnus
Virg.
sleep, nay, a sleep of (...)Hom.
Brass? yet he shall certainly wake again. Cur impatienter feratis subductum,
in the words of Tertullian; Why should you grieve that he is gone aside, quem
creditis reversurum, who you believe to return again, never to leave you, never
to die any more? He shall get by the grave, that shall be as fullers earth, and
Nitre to purg him from all corruptible qualities: And ere long he shall break
forth out of those clods, as Cum dormientem audivimus, evigila: tutum minime
desperemus. August.
as the Sun from some cloud that had eclipsed and obscured it, or as the Phoenix
springs more vigorous and active out of her own ashes.

Vt phoenix ruptis pullulat exuviis. By way of Direction, I shall not betray my
ignorance so far as to ask you this question, did you love your Father? For you
may answer me in the words of Peter, Thou know that we love him: And me
thinks I hear you say, good reason we had to do so, omnis in Ascanio, all his
love was upon us; well, love him still, love his memory, follow his advice and
counsel, in fearing the God of your Fathers, and loving each other; remember
the Rechabites, Jer. 35.5. Having pots of wine set before them, said, We will
drink no wine, for Jonadab the son of Recab our Father commanded, saying, ye
shall drink no wine, go ye and do likewise in respect of all that savory and
fartherly counsel which he has imparted unto you; O let not that die with him.
It Is said of Antoninus, Hoc Solo patriae, quod genuit nocuit, Herein only he
prejudiced his Country, in that he left seed, a Commodus behind him. But as
it is your honor to have had such a Father, so let your carriage be an honor
to his memory: That as it is said of Rich. the first, Sol occubuit nox nulia
sequuta est.
succeeding his Father Henry the second, so it may be said of you: Though the
*Sun be set in his western bed, yet by reason of your luster, we may be freed
from the shadows of a darksom night. So shine then, in your several spears
here, as members of the Church and State, That you may shine as so many Stars
in the Firmament of glory hereafter. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

