THE PREVENTION OF POVERTY: OR A Discourse of the Causes of the Decay of Trade,
Fall of Lands, and Want of Money throughout the Nation; with certain Expedients
for remedying the same, and bringing this Kingdom to an eminent degree of
Riches and Prosperity: BY Saving many Hundred Thousand Pounds yearly, Raising a
full Trade, and constant Employment for all sorts of People, and increasing His
MAJESTY'S Revenue, by a Method no way burdensome, but advantageous to the
Subject.

By R. H.

The Rich man's wealth is his strong City, the destruction of the Poor is their
poverty.

Prove. 10. 15. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Brook, at the sign of the Angel
in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange; M. DC. LXX IV.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, RUPERT, DUKE of CVMBERLAND, EARL of
HOLDERNESSE, and KNIGHT of the Most NOBLE ORDER of the GARTER, and one of His
MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
May it please Your HIGHNESS,
THE Consideration of my own Unworthiness, and obscure Condition, would easily
check my Thoughts from the Presumption of troubling your Illustrious Eye with
these mean Lines, did not Your Princely Clemency and the nature of the thing
make such Address in some respect necessary.

For since it is Eminently known, that Your Highness has, not only by most
excellent Conduct, and personal Hazards in War, given Matchless Proofs of Your
great zeal for the Safety and Glory of the English Nation; but also by the
prudence of Your Counsels endeavored ever to promote its Welfare, by
discovering and cherishing useful Arts, and profitable Inventions, and
encouraging all things that tend to its Honor, Wealth, and Prosperity, though
tendered by the lowest and never so despicable Instruments: for which
publick-spirited Generosity Your Highness justly merits much more Honor and
Applause, than my weak Capacity is able to express.

Whether then should these unpolished Papers (wherein I have with more
Affection than Encouragement) endeavored to propose some Expedients tending to
this Kingdoms future happiness, fly for shelter in this slothful envious Age
(wherein many that will never study any thing for general Good themselves, are
too ready to crush, abuse, and misrepresent those that do) but to Your
Highnesses Protection, who are Ennobled with the clearest Judgment to Censure,
and the most obliging Candor to pardon them.

At Your Highness's feet I therefore cast them with all humble submission, and
if in any part they shall obtain the Honor of your Princely Approbation, and
be thought fit to be Encouraged in the least, as conducing to general Good, I
shall not afterward fear the Censures of Envy, but sit down secure in the
Conscience of having endeavored to be serviceable (to my weak power) to my
Country, and the happiness I have hereby to declare my self

YOUR HIGHNESS's Most Humble and most Obedient Servant RICHARD HAINES.

The prevention of Poverty: OR, A Discourse of the Causes of the Decay of
Trade, Fall of Lands, and Want of Money throughout the Nation, with certain
Expedients for remedying the same.
SO general and loud, for diverse years past, have been the complaints, for
want of Trade and Money throughout this Nation; and so pressing are the
Necessities of most men, that there is scarce any person can be insensible of
it: And this is not only in time of War, (though then more especially,) but
also in time of Peace, when the Seas were open, and we might promise our selves
the largest share of Prosperity. Whence it is evident, that the Causes are not
wholly Outward or Accidental, but rather Internal, and as it were in our own
Bowels, which consume us, and have reduced us to such a low Ebb, that a general
Poverty seems to have invaded the whole Nation, Leases being continually thrown
up in the Country, and Tradesmen daily Breaking in the City. In brief, all
conditions of men seem to have changed their stations, and sunk below
themselves; the Gentry, by reason of the fall of their Lands, and uncertainty
of Rents, being brought to live at the rate of a Yeoman; the Yeoman can scarce
maintain himself so well as an ordinary Farmer heretofore; the Farmer is forced
to live as hard as a poor Labourer anciently; and Laborers generally, if they
have Families, are ready to run a begging, the Poverty of most Parishes being
such, that they can hardly supply or relieve them.

The consideration whereof, and that no man is born for himself, but ought to
do what in him lies to promote the public Good, and general Welfare of his
Country, has invited me (though incapable, and not sufficiently qualified to
do any considerable Service, yet however) to testify my well-wishes, and throw
in my mite into the public Treasury, by endeavoring some Expedients for
raising the Trade of the Nation, and advancing the temporal prosperity of all
its Inhabitants.

In order whereunto I first applied my self to find out the Causes of such
National Poverty, which like an armed Enemy has threatened to invade the whole
Kingdom.

Secondly, to discover a Remedy, if possible, that might not only subdue this
potent Adversary, but also introduce and maintain a constant stock of Trade and
plenty of Money, and so consequently Riches and Honor both to King and
Kingdom, and Prosperity to all Estates whatsoever.

I do humbly conceive, that the General Causes of Poverty (unless it be
purposed by the Lord by reason of Iniquity) are

First the daily Decrease of Goods and Commodities of our own Growth fit for
Exportation.

Secondly, the double Increase of Foreign costly Goods and Commodities,
brought over more and more from beyond the Seas, viz. Iron, Timber, Brandy,
French-wines, Linen Cloth, and other French Commodities: and also Mum, Coffee,
Chocolet, Salt, and Saltpeter, with many more. All which Expensive Commodities
have been brought into General Use, and Imported in this Nation, within the
space of Forty years last past, or little more, (Linen Cloth and Wine only
excepted.)

The value of these Commodities Imported cannot but amount to a vast Sum, we
may modestly (though at rovers) guess it Twenty or Thirty Hundred Thousand
Pounds every year; which mighty Sums of Money, thirty or forty years ago, were
for the greatest part kept at home.

Now easily observable it is, that ever since such prodigious Increase of new
Imported Goods, our own most great and richest Manufactories have decreased,
and the Manufactors become impoverished, especially in those of Woollen Cloth
and Iron; and forasmuch as no Commodities answerable have been raised in their
stead, equally to balance what we have therein lost of our own Growth and
Production.

It remains then, that of necessity those vast Sums of Money aforesaid, must
every year go out of the Nation to make the Balance of Trade even, and this
for the greatest part in ready Coin, as may, I conceive evidently be
demonstrated. Thus, if Money were not transported, then our own Manufactories,
which are much diminished, and become far less than what they were thirty or
forty years ago, would now find quick Markets, and yield good Prizes, to the
great encouragement of the Manufactors; but the contrary is notorious:
wherefore I conclude, that according to the present course. Money every year
must unavoidably decrease amongst us, to the great impoverishing of the whole
Nation.

Obj. If it be alleged, that I mistake the Cause of this National Consumption,
and that the great Taxes and many Impositions laid upon the Nation, obliging us
to part with so much Money for his Majesty's uses, ought to be assigned as the
grand Cause of this great scarcity of Money.

Sol. I humbly Answer, that this cannot be the Cause for this Reason because
what Moneys are given by the Representatives of the Nation to his Majesty, are
but like the Moistures drawn up by the Beams of the Sun from the Earth, which
soon return down again in showers to refresh the Ground, or like the Blood in
its Circulation; for what is carried out of the Country goes but into the
City, and is there expended again; and forasmuch as it goes not beyond the
Seas, soon returns again. So that in the Nation there is not one Groat the less
to be bestowed on what the Farmer, or any others have to spare: wherefore, and
for that the Public Coffers do not hoard or keep up any extraordinary Sums, I
humbly hope I may conclude, That this is not the proper Cause. why the Nation
is so empty of Money, and that general want of this necessary thing (which
beneath Grace, and Glory, and what is conducing thereunto) is most to be
desired.

But doubtless it is the many Hundred thousnd Pounds, which our bad Husbandry
and ill Conduct sends every year beyond the Seas, which we see again no more,
this is the grand Cause of our Miseries, wasting thus our noblest spirits, that
has brought the Body Politic into this pining Consumption, and makes us so
loudly complain of bad Trade and empty Pockets, and that the Nation is become
thus indigent and discontented. But alas! what advantage is it only to
complain? Diseases are not cured with Outcries, but rather increased; let us
then wipe our Eyes, and make use of our Heads and our Hands to get out of this
quagmire of Necessity, wherein we are unhappily plunged.

Too true it is, that we are very poor, and, as I conceive, it is no less plain,
that the reason of it is the necessity of parting every year with vast Sums of
Money, to make the Balance of Trade even, because we Import much more than we
Export, and therefore I humbly apprehend the best means to prevent this growing
Evil, must be

First, to raise new Manufactures, whereby to improve what does or may arise of
our own English Growth: by which means our Lands may some other way be
employed, besides that of Corn and Cattle.

And secondly, to shut the door of Importation against those new imported
Goods, especially such as are superfluous and injurious to the well-being of
the Kingdom.

Thus the first Manufacture to be prohibited that may be made of our own
Growth, and most advantageous to the general Good and Profit of perfons of all
Estates, is Linen Cloth: for it is most certain, that our English Ground will
produce Hemp and Flax in such abundance, as may make Linen Cloth susicient for
all occasions; whence feverall great Conveniences, of much advantage to the
Public will arise. As

First, it will improve the Lands, which are proper for Hemp and Flax, to that
degree, that what before was worth but twenty shillings per Acre for Corn or
Pasture, by this means will be worth forty or fifty sillings the. Acre per
annum.

Secondly, great numbers of poor Families, who have little to do from the
beginning of the Year to the end there of, unless some few of them in the
Country, in time of Harvest, might hereby most profitably be set to work
constantly, by raising a continual stock of Employment, not only for Men, but
alfo Women, Boys, and Girls, that can do little thing besides it; whereas for
want thereof most of them now are trained up in Idleness, and live by the
labors of others, whose number by computation, after the rate of threescore in
each Parish throughout the Kingdom, does amount unto five Hundred and Eighty
Thousand people, and upwards. Thirdly, by this means every Parish, which by
reason of Poverty is not able to set up a Manufactory for the employment of
their Poor, in making of Wolen Cloth, according to the Statute in that case
made and provided, may easily provide Employment for them in making of Linen,
whereby many thousands that now wholly rely on the Parish wherein they live for
maintenance, might very well support themselves.

Fourthly, some thousands of wandering persons that go from door to door, to the
great dishonor and disadvantage of the Nation, might by this means become
Instruments for the enriching of the same. And though there be very wholesome
Laws in being for preventing this intolerable Inconvenience of Vagrants, yet
Officers are generally too remiss, and to avoid trouble, or the imputation of
being over-busie, and the ill effects thereon depending, seldom put the same in
execution. For this to my knowledge is true, that several Officers, who
willingly would do their Office, and put the Laws in Execution, have told me,
that the number of them were so great, and dangerous, that they were afraid
that their Houses and Barns might be set on fire, whilst themselves were
asleep, or that some personal mischief should be done them. And indeed no small
cause there is for these Jealousies, their confidence is so very great: for no
longer ago than the last Assizes, holden for the County of Sussex, so impudent
they were, as to appear in the very face of the Court, insomuch as to stand in
the sight of the Lord Twisden, one of his Majesty's Justices of Nisi prius for
that Circuit, whilst he was giving his Charge; and although upon this occasion
his Lordship sufficiently and loudly pressed for the putting the Laws in
execution with severity against them, yet notwithstanding the Town was still
haunted by numbers of them, all the time the Assizes lasted. For remedy
whereof, it might possibly be convenient to propose a sufficient encouraging
Reward to be paid every such poor person or persons, that shall seize any such
Vagrants, by the Overseers of the poor of that Parish where they are taken, and
that a severe Penalty be imposed on Constables, and other Officers neglecting
their duties, when any persons so apprehended are brought to them; by which
means those many thousands, which are idle, may be employed to their; own good,
and the Nations advantage, so that in six Months time, there might not be a
Beggar in the Kingdom, if such Enconragement were given.

Lastly, besides all these Advantages, several hundred thousand Pounds, which
are now expended and sent out of the Nation for Linen, might hereby be kept at
Home, or better Improved, to the great advantage of His Majesty's Subjects.
Besides, a farther advantage by this planting of Hemp, etc. will accrue toward
making of Sails, Cables, and other Cordage necessary for Shipping, of which
sufficient may be made at home, without being beholden to our Neighbors for a
Commodity so important for Navigation, parting with our Money to Strangers for
it, as we usually do to a very great yearly value.

Obj. If any allege, that this planting of Hemp and Flax, employing a great
part of the best Lands, will create an Inconvenience, by causing both Corn and
Cattle to be less plenty.

Ans. I answer, that I apprehend no grounds for such fear. For as for Corn,
great quantities of rich Lands being broken up to be planted with Flax, may
after Flax be most properly sown with Corn, and that to great advantage; so
that on the contrary, Corn will be hereby the more plenty. Then as for the
decrease of Cattle, it is easily cured; for Land, kind for Corn, when by long
sowing it is impoverished, so that 'twill bear Corn no longer, may be sown with
Trefoil, or Clover, and then one Acre shall produce as much Hay or pasture as
two or three Acres did before; and as soon as that is decayed, the Land will
bear Corn more kindly than before (provided it be plowed up before the
Couch-grass gets in it;) for Clover and Trefoil, I know by Experience, prepares
the Ground for Wheat, as much as a good Crop of Tares or French-wheat,
otherwise called Buck-wheat, can do. Besides, if Cattle should fail, the remedy
is easy and cheap; for when the King and Parliament please, Ireland is ready,
and will be glad to supply us speedily.

A second thing to be prohibited coming over, is the growing trade of that
outlandish, robbing, and (by reason of its abuse) Mankilling-Liquor, called
BRANDY, which will promote the Consumption of our own Commodities, as Beer, and
Ale; or if such a Liquor be thought necessary for Seamen, or the like, then to
raise some Commodity of the like nature and strength at home: for (as I am
credibly informed by persons well experienced that way) as good and as strong
Liquor may be made with what does abound at home. Which if so, the Profit will
not be inconsiderable, since Three hundred thousand Pounds, that Brandy now
costs us every year, will be kept at home.

A Third thing to be prohibited, may be Bay Salt from beyond the Seas: for it
is well known, that Salt for all occasions, and as good for all intents and
purposes, may be made at home; and that not only to the great Improvement of
much Land on the Seacoast, which now lies wast, and is of no profit either to
King or Subject; but will also preserve in the Nation Fifty thousand Pounds per
annum to the great enriching of the Kingdom, and may be done with very much
ease, and as little difficulty.

A Fourth commodity to be prohibited may be Saltpeter, of which we might make
and raise in our Nation sufficient for all occasions.

A Fifth Improvement, which I conceive may be made, is in Iron, which most
certainly might, as well now as heretofore, be raised at home, the benefit
whereof would be very great; because some Hundred thousand Pounds might hereby
every year be saved, or otherwise improved, (and many Thousands of His
Majesty's Subjects employed) which now is expended in that Commodity.

Obj. But if it be supposed, that such Iron works would too much consume our
Woods, I must so far beg leave to think otherwise; that I conceive, and many
well skilled in those works, are of opinion, That the neglect of Iron-work has
been a main Cause, that our Woods are so much decayed, and so many Coppices
grubb'd up, and converted into Tillage. For when Iron-works were carried on,
both Wood and Coals would yield ready Moneys, which encouraged the Owners not
only to preserve the Coppices and Woods from destruction, but also to plant and
promote more; whereas now without doubt in a few years, our Oak-Timber
(deservedly accounted the best in the world, and a great strength and ornament
to the Kingdom) will be so far destroyed, that little will be to be had; and
the reason is, because the only Nurse that makes the Oak, and other Timber to
flourish, is Underwoods, and where Underwoods are not, there cannot (or very
rarely is) any good Timber; so that although great quantities of Wood may be
consumed by Iron-works, yet Woods becoming thereby more carefully preserved,
they grow again, and consequently there is no less plenty, but for want of
Iron-works they are destroyed, both Wood and Timber, Root and Branch, and that
more and more every year.

And this the rather, and more to the destruction of Timber, because people in
diverse Countries have got a mischievous Trick, to elude and avoid that wholesome
Statute, whereby it is Enacted, That on every Fall of Under-woods they should
leave so many Standels, Tellows, or young Trees to grow for Timber; which
indeed they will do, but then at the next Fall of the same Wood, viz. about
nine or ten years after, they will cut those very Standels or Tellows lest
before, (so that they never become Timber) and then they leave new ones, and
this successively, whereby the Intention of the Statute is unworthily defeated.

Obj. But if it be objected, that Iron sufficient for the whole Nation cannot
be made, except much Land be turned from Arable and Pasture to Woods, which
will cause Depopulation and Dearth.

Sol. I Answer, that there are Woods sufficient in the Nation already growing
to compass the work, without planting any more, (provided they were improved,
and not needlessly consumed otherwise, as they are now in too many places.)
Besides, it would encourage the planting of Woods in places, which are now
otherwise of little or no use. And doubtless it might be convenient and
advantageous for the whole Kingdom, if all the Inhabitants, who live within
some few Miles of the Sea and navigable Rivers, were prohibited burning of Wood
for any general use, as Kitching-Service, brewing of Beer, or the like, whereby
many hundred thousand Loads of Wood would be spared every Year, and that to the
great advantage of the Nation for the use aforesaid. Nor will such Inhabitants
have any just cause to complain, since they might be supplied with Sea-Coal
upon cheaper terms, and those vessels which bring Sea-Coal, may in many places
carry away their Charcoal to places of use for such Iron-works, and so Boats,
Ships, and Seamen, will be increased and employed, to the great advantage and
safety of the Kingdom, and the Nation will abound with this necessary Commodity
of Iron, which now costs us at least five hundred thousand Pounds per annum;
whereas otherwise for want of Iron and Timber, we shall in short time be
reduced to such a kind of condition, as the children of Israel, truckling under
Philistin slavery, Sam, 13 o.
were in; they were forced to go into another Nation, to sharpen every man his
Share, his Coulter, and his Axe, only with this difference, They had Iron but
no Smiths, by reason of the oppression of an Enemy, we have Smiths and
Carpenters enough, yet shall have no Iron, and but little Timber, by reason of
our own fatal ill Husbandry; so that for want of Iron and Timber, our Shipping
will be dearer continually, and we beholding to others for materials, athing of
very pernicious consequence. I well remember, I have somewhere read in History,
that Edgar King of England did take greater delight in his Shipping, than any
Recreation whatsoever. And no small reason had he so to do, considering of what
strength, wealth, and safety the same is to any Nation, much more to an Island
as ours is; and therefore once every year he would sail round his Kingdom with
a Navy of stout Ships, consisting of four thousand Sail, which (says the
Historian) we find upon Record.

Obj. But I suppose here may arise an Objection against the Trade of Iron and
Linen Cloth both together, viz. both these Commodities may be bought cheaper
from a broad, than we can make them at home; and doubtless it is the best
Husbandry to buy all Commodities where they may be had most cheap.

Ans. To which I humbly Answer, That although the Inhabitants of this Nation
may have those Commodities from beyond the Seas cheaper at present, than yet
they can be bought being made at home; yet I conceive if we would industriously
set upon it, it might in short time be otherwise. And besides it is much better
Husbandry to give Twenty pounds for that of our own Growth, than but Fifteen
for what comes from beyond the Seas; because in the last case our Money is
quite gone, and will return no more; in the first it still remains, within the
Nation, and will come again, and besides imploys Thousands of his Majesty's
Subjects, that otherwise be chargeable and burdensome. And as by one Trade
Money decreaseth, so by the other Money will increase, when our Commodities are
for Treasure exported; and easier it is to part with twenty Pounds, when Money
is plenty, than with Fifteen when money is scarce, as at present.

Obj. But if it be farther objected, that I am all this while mistaken, for
that it is not Money, but Goods, that pays for all these Commodities, by means
whereof we have the better Trade for what we have to spare; but if this Trade
be lost, then our own Goods which we have to spare, will be of little worth,
and so our Case becomes much worse than now it is.

Ans. Whereunto I humbly Answer, that I still conceive otherwise, and that the
Objection is under a mistake; for what the Nation has now to spare, and fit
for Exportation, is much less than was forty or fifty years ago, as aforesaid;
and yet then, when none of these things, with many more, did come into the
Kingdom, there was a better Trade by far than what is now; for Commodities then
went for Commodities of greater worth, without parting with any Moneys, and in
those days our Commodities went farther from home, and instead of Brandy, Iron,
and the like, produced far better returns: so that then, both Silver and Gold,
not originally produced in England, was very plenty, but now our Moneys and
Commodities are carried forth, and in conclusion turn to little or no account.

And unless our Commodities for Exportation did increase answerable to the
Increase of Commodities Imported, As it is most certainly true that they do
not, then of necessity out goes MONEY, and in comes POVERTY; the truth whereof
does appear hy sad Experience. For all that our Goods and Money bring in is
soon consumed, and comes as it were to the Dunghill, whilst our Wealth becomes
a prey to other Nations. Whereas if the door of Importation for those
unnecessary and injurious Commodities were shut. Money would be prevented from
going out, and people unavoidably would apply themselves to the making them at
home, whereby there would be a far better and quick Trade, and all people would
have sufficient Employment to gain a comfortable Livelihood, and the said
Commodities in a little time become as good and as cheap of our own
Manufacture, as now we have them from beyond the Seas, and the Importation of
Bullion no way hindered, but greatly promoted hereby, and the Exportation
thereof prevented, and consequently Money much more plenty than ever it was.

To these several Commodities, which I humbly conceive fit to be prohibited to
be Imported, might be added Commodities which necessarily should on greater
Penalties be forbidden to be exported, and some better means used for that end
than what has yet been appointed. Such are Fullers Earth and Wool, the one of
excellent use, the other being a very plentiful Commodity of this Kingdom,
which to be converted into Cloth would employ great numbers of our people, and
bring in much wealth to the Nation; but by reason of the Exportation thereof
privately from hence, or growth of Wool in other Nations, those vast Advantages
formerly arising hereby, are now greatly diminished, others furnishing those
Markets where formerly our Commodities found quick Trade and good Prizes. And
since it is well known, that Woollen Cloth cannot be made without Fullers Earth,
and that Fullers Earth is no where to be had but in our Nation; Then to prevent
Fullers Earth from going beyond the Seas, must infallibly revive the former
flourishing Trade of Woollen Cloth, without which many Nations cannot subsist,
and by which we may become very rich; which if so, what care ought not to be
taken, to secure this one thing, so useful, that Silver Oar by way of Exchange
is not to be accepted for it.

We might likewise add the convenience, though not of a total Prohibition, yet
of some Restraint of the extraordinary Importation of French Wines, for the
encouragement of the Manufactories of this Kingdom, which abounds with
Excellent Liquors, as Beer, Ale, etc. the consumption of which ought to be
promoted, and foreign Drinks discouraged. Besides, the want of French Wines
might be easily supplied (in some measure by Wines made at home, for some
Gentlemen have experienced it with very good success, or however) by excellent
Ciders, which being produced in our own Climate, may be more agreeable and
wholesome for our bodies than those foreign Liquors, especially when
adulterated. But I dare not launch out too far into this Ocean, for me thinks I
see a powerful Objection arising, that like a Tempest seems to threaten no less
than the Blasting of all our Projects, viz.

Obj. If Linen Cloth, Iron, Brandy, Salt, etc. shall be wholly prohibited from
being Imported, His Majesty's Revenue arising out of the Customs will be much
impaired and diminished.

Ans. To which most Important Objection I humbly Answer, That having by the
Expedients before mentioned settled a constant and sure method of Trading,
Commodities for Commodities, His Majesty's Revenue may for the future stand
upon a firmer Basis, and our own Commodities fit for Exportation being hereby
increased, will doubtless bring home greater Returns than formerly in other
Commodities, and those of a richer nature, and such as our Industry at home
cannot supply us with. For instead of things before mentioned to be prohibited
from being Imported, out of which Customs now arise, we may have Spices, and
other Indian Commodities brought in, and afterward again exported from hence
to other Nations; as is practiced in Holland, which thereby is become the
common Spicery for the Northern Nations, and most part of Europe, which way of
Trade may, as it is conceived, supply His Majesty's Customs, so as in some
measure to balance the loss in the Customs of Brandy, Linen, Iron, etc.
especially if that Ancient staple Trade of this Nation, the Making and
Exporting of Woollen Cloth, were but encouraged and promoted as in former Ages,
and Fullers Earth secured, as possibly it may.

Secondly, That since such prohibition tends to the great Advantage of the
whole Nation, and that His Majesty in kindness to his People shall part with
such part of His Revenue, His Subjects will be obliged not only in Duty but
Gratitude to supply His Majesty; and the wisdom of their Representatives may
find out some other way by Taxes, Impositions, or the like, to compensate such
His Majesty's loss, which now may with great advantage, and more easily and
cheerfully be born and paid, seeing all people by this means only, may enjoy a
quick Trade, and plenty of Money, nor may it be given upon a better
consideration.

Furthermore, if it were not too much a presumption, I would willingly (though
still with all humble submission to those in Authority, in whose power alone it
lies to make the Alteration) propose a way and means more advantageous, which
in my Apprehension, if it may be approved of by better Judgments, may serve
considerably toward His Majesty's supply, and also be a means to raise and
preserve plenty of Money, and also tend much to the wealth and prosperity of
the whole Nation, which is thus. If all His Majesty's Coin were called into the
Tower, and Threepence taken out of every Twelve-pence, and then new coined for
a Shilling, then might His Majesty have five Shillings out of every Pound: and
so suppose that in the whole Nation there be Eightscore hundred Thousand
Pounds, a fourth part being taken out of it, will amount to forty hundred
thousand Pounds, or four Millions of Money for His Majesty's use, charges of
Coinage only deducted. And for as much as 9d in Weight is made 12d in Value, no
Subject may complain that he is hereby a Penny the worse.

But if Threepence be thought too much, instead thereof suppose it but
Three-Halfpence, there will arise for His Majesty's use thereby, two Millions
of Money, Coinage deducted as aforesaid.

What Inconveniences may hereby arise I confess I cannot foresee, but to me it
seems that these Conveniences and Advantages will not fail to be the
consequents of it.

1. It will enrich the whole Nation, since there will be near a fourth part as
much Money more than was before. 2. After all Money's new Coined, it will
invite persons, who have stocks of Plate, to melt it down, and have it put into
Coin. 3. As it increases Money, so it will secure it from going beyond the
Seas; for by its being made more in value, and less in weight, all Nations will
cease to rob us of it, as in some measure they have done of our Guinny Gold,
which by reason of its being lighter than others keeps at home the better. 4.
Whereas before, His Majesty's Coin, being more in weight and less in value than
that of His Neighbors, the profit thereby to be made, gave great encouragement
to them to covet our Moneys and refuse to take our Goods for their Commodities,
those very ill effects will now cease. 5. By this means those very Merchants,
who carried away Money from us, will now rather bring Money to us; because that
as before it was for their advantage to carry our Money, being heaviest and
least in value, so now on the contrary it may be their advantage to bring their
Money, being now the heaviest, to us, where it may suffer the same Improvement.
6. As by this means only, Money will increase and continue, so all Commodities
that we have to spare, and fit for Transportation, will unavoidably find quicks
and good Markets, so as to encourage all people cheerfully to manage their
Affairs. 7. By means of this variation of Coin, a considerable advance will
arise to His Majesty's Revenue; for if Bullion be brought into the Tower at the
Rates as heretofore, then so much as Money is made less than formerly, so much
profit and advantage will arise to the Crown.
And now behold how happily would the Tide be turned, seeing our Moneys will
hereby be secured within our own Borders? What abundance of Goods and
Commodities now must the French take of us for their Wines, which before were
paid for with ready Money, and the like in many other cases. So that whereas at
present our Moneys go out to enrich others, and poverty like a destroying
Torrent comes in upon us, now of necessity (our Coin being kept at home) out go
all our superfluous Goods and Commodities which we have to spare, and
consequently in comes a quick Trade, Wealth and Prosperity, like a refreshing
stream, spreading it self all over the Nation, adding life, courage, and
cheerfulness to its weary and greatly discouraged Inhabitants, who as yet lie
groaning under the grievous Tyranny of that Intolerable Oppressor, every where
known by the name of Poverty, whose power is now increasing, and stoutly
guarded and supported by that only growing Trade, viz. Beggars, and Vagrants,
together with the daily increase of distressed people in each Parish; but by
the means aforesaid how suddenly might his Guards be forced, himself totally
vanquished, and Prosperity, Wealth, and Honor flourishing in his stead.

Obj. But say some, the French are so Devilish wise, and politic, that they
will keep their Wines from us, rather than part with them on that
consideration. They will not be pleased with toys and fancies as we are with
theirs; they must drink Water and no Beer, wear wooden Shoes rather than
Leathern ones, and Leathern Jackets not Cloth, rather than afford us their
Wines to us to please and make us merry, unless it be for our ready Money, and
consequently we shall have no wines at all for Physical use and necessary
occasions.

Ans. To which I answer, that if this be true, I am very sorry for it; for I
fancy French Wines are good to cause Appetite, and help Digestion: but since
Experience tells us, that Cider will do the same thing, and also that a Glass
of Sack is more Cordial and cheerful, and both may be had upon terms much more
advantageous to the Nation, it would doubtless be as great Wisdom for us to
deal with them as they with us, (that is) to have no more Wines etc. of them,
than they have Goods of us to pay for them. And if they shall indeed keep their
Wines etc. from us, the worst I conceive of it is only this, that we shall
thereby save at least Ten hundred thousand pounds (or one Million) of Money
yearly, and yet have sufficient for more than necessary use; for it is
reasonably supposed, and also affirmed, that the value of French Wines which
are spent in this Nation amounts to no less than Twenty hundred thousand pounds
per annum.

Obj. But if not withstanding all these Conveniences, (and the Exemplary
practice of most neighbor Princes and States, who usually raise their Coin
when themselves want it, and abate it again as they find greater plenty, and
less occasions,) it shall still be objected, That making Money less than what
it ought to be by our present standard, will be dishonorable to the Kingdom.

Answ. I would humbly entreat that it may be considered, whether that National
Policy, when it compasses wealth and power, be not more honorable than that
which in self may be brave, and only esteemed honorable, but proves indeed
according to our present condition injurious to the Nations wealth and
prosperity in general? And whereas it is alleged as an Honor, that the Coin
of England is heavier than any in the world; would it not be a far greater
dishonor, if it should be truly reported to be the poorest Kingdom of Europe,
as by the consequence it seems to be threatened? But now by this means His
Majesty's Coin will continue in this Kingdom, to the great advantage of
after-Generations. For supposing one of His Majesty's late Predecessors had
done such a thing in their times, would it not have prevented the present
scarcity of Money? For although One of their Half Crowns had been worn as thin
as a Shilling, and a Shilling as thin as a Sixpence, yet would it have passed
as well as does an Old Groat, which has not so much Silver in it as a
Twopence, and yet continues Current and passable.

Obj. If it be objected, that by reason of this raising the value of our Coin,
both our People at home, and Strangers trading hither, will raise all
commodities proportionably.

Ans. I humbly Answer, that MONEY is principally intended for the Convenience
of Traffic between persons of the same Nation only, and to them it is all
one, since the same is made Current by Authority, and the small Piece to
purchase as much as when it was greater: and as for Strangers, when they bring
Commodities, though we sometimes pay them with Money in specie, yet it is not
intended they should carry it away, but bestow it here on Commodities, which
they may buy with the same at the Rates accustomed, not with standing this
Variation of our Money, and so be no Losers at all thereby, but only in
respect of the opportunities they have heretofore had of defrauding us, by
carrying away our Money in specie to their advantage, and our vast detriment as
aforesaid.

Obj. If it shall be farther objected, That there is a Necessity for the
East India Company to export Cold and Silver in their course of Trade;

Ans. I humbly Answer, by referring it to the consideration of Authority,
whether there be (at least when our own Manufactures are encouraged and
increased by the means aforesaid) any such nccessity at all. But if there
shall, then its humbly proposed that such Gold and Silver may be Exported
thither in Ingots, or the Mass fitted for that purpose, and not in Coin, as
has been of late accustomed, which renders ready money scarce amongst us.

But if after all this, there should as many Inconveniences be found attending
this Means as there are Advantages arising by it, which I think improbable, or
that I should be mistaken in all or any the Proposals before discoursed; yet
should I hope that my labor herein may not be wholly lost: for since, as the
Lord Bacon somewhere says, it deserves Commendations to make even Wishes that
are not absurd, I trust my Endeavors may obtain a Pardon, though in all points
it is possible they may not answer Expectation, being undertaken upon no other
motive than an unfeigned desire to serve His Majesty, and the Nation wherein I
live, and to promote the Honor and Prosperity of them both; and without
repining or envying at the glory of more happy discoveries, shall rest
satisfied, although this small Essay of mine prove but like a Whetstone, (which
sharpens other things, though blunt and dull it self) stirring up the Industry
of abler Wits, and better Experienced Heads, to find out more plausible,
profitable, and feasible Expedients.

However, for a Conclusion of this brief Discourse, give me leave to add a few
words to take off the edge of one Objection that may yet possibly be levied,
alleging,

Obj. That Corn and Cattle are now got to a good price, by means of which we in
the Country hope to pay our Landlord's Rent, and also be enabled to provide
well for our Families; so that neither Landlord not Tenant may complain, and
consequently we should do well enough without any of these Projects.

Ans. To which I Answer, That what is now by this means gotten, is little
better than pinched out of the bellies of the Poor; so that as the Landlords
and Land-occupiers Prosperity increases, in like manner the Poverty and Misery
of the Poor increases; and like the Scales of a Balance, look how much the
one is raised, the other is depressed. For suppose that at present all Corn,
Cattle, and Clothing were very cheap, by means of which the Landlord and Farmer
are greatly impoverished; yet might the Poor in like manner say, What reason
have we to complain? for we enjoy all things at easy rates to the full: and
therefore the prosperity of the Rich is envied by the Poor, and the Well-being
of the Poor neglected and despised by the Rich, because that what is in this
case good for one is injurious to the other; but by the means aforesaid, I
would hope that the Prosperity of both may be equally promoted, and the
Advantage of the one be to the comfortable Encouragement and well-being of the
other, so that the Landlord, the Tenant, and all others may live happily and in
love together.

And oh how glad should I be, if I might in an any wise be an Instrument to
promote the future Honor, Safety, and Well being of the Land of my Nativity,
and its Inhabitants! yet if my desires therein should be answered, let God have
the Glory; and those who are under him in Authority, that shall approve of the
Means, and prosecute the same, receive the whole Praise and Honor; for to my
self Nothing is to be ascribed, since I have done but what is my Duty, as I am
a Subject enjoying my Christian Liberty, and Civil Rights and Privileges.

A Calculation of the vast Sums, endeavored to be saved to the Nation (amongst
other things) by the foregoing proposals, in the space of Forty years,
according to the best information.
There is believed to be expended yearly for Brandy, Three hundred thousand
pounds. 300000l. For Iron, Four hundred thousand pounds per annum. 400000 In
Linen Cloth for our own use, which may be made of our own Work and Growth,
Five Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum. 500000 For Bay Salt, and Salt petre,
Fifty thousand pounds per Annum. 050000 All which amounts to One Million, two
Hundred and fifty Thousand Pounds per Annum. 1250000 Which in the space of
Forty years makes the Total Product of Advantage, by prohibiting the said
Goods, to amount to the Sum of Fifty Millions of Money. 50000000 Besides Ten
hundred thousand pounds yearly, that may be well saved, by prohibiting the
excess of French Wines, and yet quantity sufficient for necessary use, and
Persons of Quality to drink, which in Forty years makes no less than Forty
Millions Sterling. 1000000 Whence it appears, that the Total Sum of all Moneys
which might be thus saved (to the wonderful, great, and admirable wealth of the
whole Kingdom in general) in forty years amounts to Ninety Millions. 40000000 A
prodigious Sum of Money! 90000000

FINIS.

