ENGLAND'S Weal and Prosperity PROPOSED: OR, REASONS For Erecting Public
UUork-Houses In every COUNTY, For the speedy promoting of Industry and the
Woollen Manufactory, showing how the Wealth of the Nation may be increased,
many Hundred thousand pounds per Annum. And also that many Thousand persons may
be so Reformed, to their own and the whole Kingdoms present and future Wealth
and Glory, that there may no more be a Beggar bred up in the Nation.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Great Wisdom of the Nation, and
presented to the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS.

By R. HAINES.

To which is added A Model of Government for such Works Houses prepared by the
same Author, and Printed in the year (79) intended to have been presented to
the last Parliament.

Pursuant to a Breviate of Proposals for the promoting of Industry, and speedy
restoring the Woollen Manufactory, by him formerly published.

London, Printed for Langley Curtis, in Goat Court on Ludgate Hill. 1681.

To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD, Knt. Lord MAYOR of LONDON.
My Lord,
THough the ensuing Reasons, by the Nature of the Thing, are addressed to the
Honorable House of Commons, whereof you are so valuable a Member; It being
that Great Council, whose United Votes can alone promote with Effect, what is
herein humbly offered. Yet, my Lord, by reason this Work is of very great
Import, and (as in all such Cases) requires the more time to demonstrate the
Value, Usefulness, Necessity and Feaseableness thereof, or otherwise is apt to
be neglected or thrown by; Therefore I have taken the boldness to Dedicate the
same in particular to your Honor, as a most proper Advocate and Patron, humbly
entreating, that as you are a known Public Spirited Promoter and Encourager of
all things tending to the Weal, Safety and Prosperity of the King and Kingdom,
so your Honor would be pleased to recommend these Reasons and the Matter
Proposed, to that Honorable House, and to improve your Interest to have the
same read before them, If after your Perusal, your Honor shall find them
worthy of such your Countenance and Approbation; wherein I hope you will do
your King, City and Country no inconsiderable Service, as well as a very great
Honor to,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant, Richard Haines.

England 's Weal and Prosperity Proposed: Or, Reasons for the Erecting Public
Workhouses in every County, etc.
FOrasmuch as our Wool is the main Support of that Trade which maintains and
increases the Wealth, Strength and Glory of the English Nation; therefore, of
all Commodities of our own Growth, this ought to be most carefully maintained
and encouraged in that way it is THUS SERVICEABLE, which consists not in the
Exportation of unwrought Wool, nor in the Consumption of our Woollen-Draperies
at Home; but in the Exportations of, and quick Markets for our
Woollen-Draperies abroad, as fast as they can be made and spared at home; That
this may be done, and that for the doing thereof, Public Workhouses to be
Erected in every County, will be a most certain and effectual Expedient. These
following Reasons are prepared for the Satisfaction of all concerned therein.

Reason I.
Because such Workhouses (are no New Project, but) have already in Fact proved
the best Expedients to bring all Idle, poor People, Beggars, Vagrants, etc.
into such a Habit of Industry, that there is not a Beggar, etc. bred up, or
suffered in those Countries where such Houses are Erected and wellgoverned.

Reason II.
Because, without such Houses, in which such poor, and now idle People may be
kept to Labor under good Government, it is altogether improbable to convert
them to such Habit of Industry, and keep them employed in such profitable
Manufactures, by which the Trade, Wealth and Safety of the Kingdom may be
promoted.

Reason III.
Because, as by these Expedients, there may not be any Beggars in the Nation,
so shall not they, or any poor People have occasion to complain for want of an
honest Employment, Food, Raiment, or Habitation.

Reason IV.
Because, by these Expedients, an Hundred or two Hundred Thousand People may be
suddenly converted, to their own, and the Nations present and future
Happiness; and as it has been the fatal Practice of this Nation, to breed up
30 or 40000 persons every Year to be maintained for Begging, etc. So by these
Expedients, they may breed up every Year successively 30 or 40000 ingenious
Cloth-makers, who may convert Wool enough to make as much Cloth as may increase
the Wealth of the Nation many Hundred Thousand pounds per Annum.

Reason V.
Because for want of such Expedients, whereby Industry, and the Woollen
Manufactory may be effectually promoted, our Wool is fallen from 12 d. to 6 d.
per pound, by reason that the number of the people at present employed therein,
are not able to convert our Wool half so fast as it grows; so that it seems
very unreasonable to prohibit the Exportation of unwrought Wool, whilst the
Expedients by which it may be converted at Home are rejected.

Reason VI.
Because, that as our Clothiers and Merchants do infallibly demonstrate, that
the Exportation of unwrought Wool, has destroyed our Foreign Markets for the
Sale of our Cloth; so it is as easy to be demonstrated, that had not such
quantities of English and Irish Wool been exported, as at present there is in
abundance, it would have fallen from 12 d. to 3 d. per pound; because as the
Stock of Wool increases, the Price must decrease. So that there is no way to
raise the Price of Wool, nor yet to keep it up where it is, but either the
Nation will be brought to extreme Poverty, or made to increase mightily in
Wealth and Power, viz. either we must Export our Wool, as daily (especially
within these last nine Months) we do to those that destroy our Trade thereby,
or bring all idle, poor people to Industry, to convert it at Home as fast as it
grows; by which means only, our Wool will soon mount to 12 d. yea, 18 d. per
pound, which will also quickly remove the occasion for the Exportation thereof.
This being done, the Woollen Manufactures of France, Flanders, etc. will soon
be destroyed to that degree, as not to hinder the Sale of ours, seeing they
cannot make Cloth without a Mixture of our Wool, but on very unequal Terms (as
our Clothiers have affirmed before a Committee of the last Long Parliament.)
Wherefore as the ready way to destroy the Wealth and Trade of our Nation, is to
export our Wool, and maintain our many thousands of Poor in Idleness and
Debauchery: So the most certain Expedient by which we may revive and regain the
Woollen Manufactory, is to prosecute these Expedients that will bring all the
people aforesaid to Industry. By which we may raise the price of Wool at Home,
and afford our Cloth and Draperies cheaper than our Supplanters, in Markets
Abroad; which is not to be done, but by the Expedients proposed.

Obj. If it be objected, That if our Wool should be raised to 18 d. etc. per
pound, then other Nations will under-sell us with Cloth they make of French and
Spanish Wool.
Answ. To this I answer, this cannot be, because the Spanish Wool is so short
and fine, and the French so short and course, that they will neither work
together, nor yet apart, without a Mixture of ours, but upon very unequal
Terms. The Truth of this is well known and affirmed by Persons of good Judgment
and Experience.

Reason VII.
That without these Expedients for promoting Industry, all the Laws and
Statutes now in being, can never raise the Price of our Wool, nor keep it up
at the price it now yields, nor yet have it converted at Home, because all the
Wool of England and Ireland is (as it were) monopoliz'd into the Hands of the
Clothiers by Act of Parliament, notwithstanding they cannot by their present
course of Trade convert it half so fast as it grows, which being so, they may
keep down the price at their pleasure, (they having Power to hang, etc. those
that Export it from them, if they could catch them) which intolerable
grievance by the Expedients proposed, would most happily be removed, to the
great Satisfaction of all that wish well to the Interest of England.

Reason VIII.
Because, by these Expedients, many Hundreds of wellskill'd, but poor decayed
Clothiers, who have little or no Stock of their own, may promote this
Manufactory in every County, where every one of them may as easily employ 200
People in Work, in such a Public House, as he could Ten elsewhere.

Reason IX.
Because in such Houses a Multitude may be instructed in Art and Skill in short
time without Difficulty or Charge: For beginning upon the very coursest Wool
there can be no Loss, but rather Advantage, because, as the coursest Cloth is
as ready Money as the finest, so the greater Quantity is made, the greater will
be the Consumption of our Wool.

But if it be doubted, That by reason of our double increase of Clothing, there
will be want of Market for our Cloth. My Answer in short, is, That if all the
Wool in Europe were converted in England, there would no more Cloth be made
than what was before: For what Wool is not converted here, is converted
elsewhere; therefore the Trade for our Draperies will be as good as ever, and
much better, seeing by the Expedients and Methods proposed, we may make and sell
our Cloth cheaper than our Supplanters. That we may under-sell them is plain,
because we have greater Advantages than any of them; we having Fullar's Earth,
they have none: Our Wool is the kindest in the World to be converted without
mixture of other; but they cannot convert theirs without some mixture of ours,
unless upon costly and unequal Terms, for the Reason beforementioned.
Therefore as by the Expedients proposed, we may double our Quantity. So we may
under-sell them, and increase and double our Markets proportionably.

As for the Charge, it is no more, than as if every Parish were obliged to that
which Law and Reason already requires, viz. To provide Habitations and
Employments for their chargeable Poor; only with this difference, that in these
Houses, far greater Numbers will be employed, and to far greater Advantage when
under such Government as will teach them Skill and Art, administering Council,
Encouragement and Correction. So that twice the Work will be done, and less
time spent idly, than where they are apart.

Reason X.
Because without these Expedients, the Wealth and Strength of the Nation will
unavoidably be invaded and destroyed at the pleasure of those that are our
Supplanters, because the Woollen Manufactory is the grand Support of our Trade
of Merchandise: For it is affirmed by some of very good Knowledge and Judgment,
that if all the Manufactures of England that are exported, were divided into
Thirteen Parts; the Woollen Manufactures would make Ten of the Thirteen. So
that if the Expedients which may promote and uphold the Woollen Manufactory be
rejected, and our Supplanters increase in Trade, as of late years they very
much have done, then of necessity, our flourishing Trade of Merchandise, which
alone increased our Wealth and Treasure must be destroyed, together with our
Seamen and Navies of Ships, to the Hazard and Ruin of the Nation.

But were it so, that we were upon equal Terms with the Dutch in respect of
Industry, it is easy to be demonstrated, that England would excel all Nations
in the World in that Trade, which is the only Mother and Nurse to bring forth,
and increase Riches, Seamen, and Navies of Ships, etc. as appears, if we
consider, that the United Netherlands, notwithstanding their Provisions for
Bread, Beer, Flesh, Clothing, Timber, Iron, Materials for Manufactures, etc.
together with their vast Expense to maintain their Land against the Water, etc.
All which costs them (as it is adjudged) at least ten times more than the
Natural Product of their Land isworth; yet we know, that for Trade, Fullness of
People, Moneys, Treasure, Seamen and Shipping, they are more famous than any
Nation in Europe. But now put Case their Industry were as little as ours, and
that they also were to breed up and maintain their Poor for Begging, etc. as we
do in England, might we not then infallibly conclude, That within one Age, nay
in twenty years they would be the poorest, miserable, and most despicable
people in all the world. Wherefore we having all sorts of provisions for Food
and Raiment, as it were for nothing, several hundred thousand of people to be
employed, and Materials enough of our own likewise for nothing, to make the
richest Manufactures. Our Industry, were it but proportionable to that of the
Dutch, must needs increase our Wealth three times more and faster than theirs.
So that most plain it is, that Industry, not Money, is the Life of that Trade
which increases both Money, Treasure, Seamen, and Shipping.

Furthermore, as these Houses are the Mother of Industry, so it is most certain,
That for want of the same Expedients, in every 100 l. worth of Wool exported
unwrought, there is 1000 l. losses to the Nation, our Wool being at 6 d. or 8
d. per pound, as now it is; of which, if any be not satisfied, they may thus
demonstrate it to themselves: A yard of Fine Broad-Cloth of 16 s. or 18 s.
price will not exceed a pound in weight and the like for fine Worsted Stockins
of 6 s. price will not weigh six ounces. So that put Case two pounds of Wool
should be allowed for one pound, yet still every Shilling in Wool will amount
to more than 10 s. in Cloth and Stockins, which is what was to be demonstrated.
Thus all this which might so have been got by Workmanship, etc. being ten times
the value of the Wool is clearly lost to the Nation, whilst those that might
do it are maintained for Begging, etc.

Reason XI.
Because, as by these Expedients Industry, Trade, Treasure, Seamen and Navies
will increase, so the intolerable charge of all Parishes will decrease:
Because all poor people will be bred up to such Habit of Industry, as to learn
whilst they are young, to gain their Living while they come old, so that it
will be very rare to find any chargable, but such as are mere objects of
Charity, viz. those that by Infancy, Old Age, or Sickness are incapable of all
kind of Employment, neither of which continue long.

Reason XII.
Because, (as I have again and again demonstrated by several Printed sheets) by
the Expedients proposed, the Wealth of our Nation may increase 30 or 40 hundred
thousand pounds per Annum, the greatness of which makes many rash persons
contemn all that I have proposed as a thing impossible. Nevertheless upon
diligent and repeated Inquiries and deliberate Consideration, I dare affirm,
with all Confidence, That it will amount to much more.

1. Because the Returns of our Woollen Draperies that are now Exported do
amount to more than Ten Millions per Annum; as is attested by such as are well
skilled and experienced in this matter.

2. Wherefore there being as much more English and Irish Wool to be converted,
as is now converted by the present Course of Trade (as most certainly there
is.) Then if all the people aforesaid (being double the number of those that
are now Employed therein) were brought to Industry, as by these Expedients they
certainly and speedily might, it as certainly follows, That a double quantity
of Woollen Draperies would be made.

3. And considering there is none of these Draperies to be deducted out of such
our additional Trade to be consumed at home, or to be carried to the dismal low
Markets in Golgotha, from whence there are no Returns: but the whole of what is
raised by this our New Trade, is to be Exported to such Markets as will afford
good and quick Returns.

4. It will therefore, from all this infallibly likewise follow, That if the
old, viz. The present Trade of Clothing, after so much is taken out of it to
satisfy the uses aforesaid does now Bring in more than Ten Millions per Annum;
then must the New, out of which there is no defalcations bring in much more.

Which at least amounts to as much as what was to be demonstrated.

But put Case we have not Wool enough to employ all the people aforesaid, yet
the Expedients still remain unshaken, because we may employ them in making of
Linen with great Advantage; For as the first will bring Treasure into the
Nation; so the other will preserve it from going out, (and then whether our
Dead be buried in Woollen or Linen it matters not.) So that the Case is plain
we have Wool enough, Hemp and Flax enough, Fullers-Earth enough, and Poor
People enough, to make Draperies enough to make our Nation to excel all Kingdoms
in the World in Wealth and Power, Strength and Safety: And as certainly may the
same be accomplished, to the Honor of Almighty God, and happy Reformation of
many Thousands, who are bred up in Idleness, and live in all manner of
Debauchery, and dye most miserably.

Nor may any Member that wishes well to the Interest of England oppose it: For
as for the Landlord, he above all men, ought to promote it, because the Charge
properly belongs to the Tenant or Possessor, who is accustomed to contribute to
the Relief and Maintenance of the Poor. Nor, Secondly, may the Tenant or
Possessor complain, because they will not only be much eased in such their
Charge, but vastly advantaged by quick and good Markets, for Wool, Corn and
Cattle, when so many thousands are employed more than now are, and earn, and
pay for all that they eat, drink and wear. Nay, what they now suffer by
Hous-rents, Hedg-breaking, Pilfering, and unnecessary Contributions to Beggars,
etc. amounts to near as much as will pay for the Building of these Houses: For,
put case there be 200000 Beggars and idle, chargeable People in the Nation, and
what they eat, drink and wear, amount but to 5 l. per Annum a piece, this
amounts to one Million in one Year, and what is lost as aforesaid, near as much
more.

Reason XIII.
Because the Charge of such Houses of Industry, by which the Wealth of the
Nation may increase so many Millions per Annum, etc. considered as a National
Charge, is no Charge at all to the Nation, because the Money that must pay for
doing of it, never goes out of the Nation, but like the Blood in its
Circulation, remains within the Body for the Comfort and Benefit of every Limb
and Member. Nor has any person reason to think, that his just share of
Contribution-money might be better bestowed, seeing that by this Expedient, his
Posterity to all Generations shall be secured from Beggary, so as never to be
destitute of a Lawful Employment, Food, Raiment and Habitation.

Reason XIV.
Because, by these Expedients, His Majesty's Revenue, by the increase of
Customs, Poundage and Tollage, cannot amount to less than 100000 l. per Annum,
because answerable to the increase of Trade, so the increase of Customs will
be near proportionable: Wherefore it concerns His Majesty as much as the
Nation, to encourage the Expedients that will hasten it.

The greatest Objections raised against this Expedient, proceed from two sorts
of men, the one against it, the other for it.

1. Obj. As for the First, all that they allege centres in this, namely, That
the Expedient is impracticable, because people are generally so base, deceitful
and dishonest, that one may not trust another; and (say some) Let the Poor beg,
starve, steal, and be hanged and damned; it is best for me and mine to keep our
Money whilst we have it.
Answ. To this I shall only say, That there is no reason to account that
impracticable, which we daily see done before our Eyes by our next next
Neighbors, and to say the English are less trusty, is too gross an Affront to
be put upon our Country: However, I have offered such a Method for erecting and
Manageing these Houses, that it shall be the Interest, as well as Duty of all
Persons concerned therein, to be honest, and effectually to promote the good
Ends thereby designed; and as for the latter part of the Objection, it is such a
Misery, Uncharitable and Atheistical Folly, as deserves no further Regard.

2. Obj. The most important Objection is of the latter, which calls loud for
Answer: We approve (say they) of the thing, but it is next to impossible, that
this Honorable House should take Cognizance thereof before they have
established and secured that Religion which God has appointed for his own
Worship and Service, without which, all hope of obtaining his Mercies and
Blessings for the Wealth and Prosperity of the Kingdom is in vain.
Answ. To this I answer, First, As to Religion and Worship, that is already
established by Law, etc. but how to secure this Religion, together Exodus 22,
23, 24. Isaiah 1. from the 11. to the 24 verse. Isai. 58. from 1. to the 10. v.
Mark 10. 21, 22, 25. Luke 16. from the 19. to the 31. v. Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and Jer. 5, 28, 29.
with the Peace and Safety of the King and Kingdom, depends only upon the
Nations Submission unto, and Concurrence with the Will and good Pleasure of God
in other Cases, to wit, the good of the Poor, etc. without which, our Religion
and Worship, although it be the same which himself has appointed, is
altogether unacceptable, as is most fully declared by all the Prophets, and
confirmed by our Savior's own words.

We know, that God always had a Nation, Church, and People in all Ages,
(although in every Age subject to Error in an high degree) so also there was a
Babylon, etc. as a Rod in the Hand of God, to correct them for their wilful
Failings and Offenses. Litteral-Babylon in the time of the Law, and
Mystery-Babylon in the time of the Gospel. The First, to correct his People,
Kings and Princes of Israel: And the Last, to correct his own Christian Kings,
Princes and Churches under the Gospel. This we know is true, if we believe the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and modern Writings. And as true it is
also, that the Rod is now in an high manner lifted up against the whole Land,
the King, and the Church. Yea, and against the Religion and Worship which God
has appointed; so that Misery, Desolation, Death, and unmerciful Cruelties, do
(as it were) stare in our Faces, and nothing remains for our Comfort but this,
namely, That this Revengful and Bloody Rod, is in the Hands of a Gracious and
Merciful God, who will assuredly throw it into the Fire before it ever hurt us,
if the Crying Sins by which his most Holy Majesty is most highly provoked and
displeased, be put away, whereof this ever was, and now at this time, is one of
the most intolerable and provoking Evils, namely, The lamentable Condition of
those many Thousands of Poor People, Widows, and Fatherless Children, the many
Thousands that have been, and are bred up in Ignorance, Idleness, and all
manner of Debaucheries, unserviceable to the Nation, unfit for Church Members,
and that live and die most miserably. And for this very thing which the Most
High could never endure, God was offended, and his Wrath kindled against his
own People, their Kings, and Nation, to that Degree, that he abhorred their
most Solemn Services and Worship which himself had commanded. Yea, when by
Fasting, Praying, etc. they cried unto him, he would not hear, nor regard; it
was Iniquity, even their Solemn Meeting, until this intolerable thing was
effectually reformed.

Which is an infallible Demonstration, that God has a greater Regard to the
Poor, etc. than he had to the External Religion and Worship which himself
commanded: And for this insufferable Crime, he delivered his People into the
Hands of the King of Babylon, who worshipped Images, etc. Now that the Sum of
this is true, Moses and all the Prophets do testify. And that the same Love
and Care for the one, and his Indignation against the other, remains and
continues to this day, is also as certain. Witness our Savior's Parable of the
Rich Man and the Beggar; when the Rich Man, for being regardless of the
Beggar's Condition, lift up his Eyes in the Flames of Hell, and finding it
impossible to obtain Ease or Relief, made earnest Request in the behalf of his
Brethren, That a Messenger might be sent to testify the Verity of the matter,
that they might repent, etc. But behold the Answer from Heaven was (No, let
them alone) they have Moses and the Prophets, viz. their Sayings and Writings)
if they will not hear them, neither will they be persuaded if one arose from
the Dead. Which does plainly show, that the Will and Mind of God, delivered by
Moses and the Prophets in this matter, still remains so unchangeable, that if a
man should keep all the Commandments of God besides, and offend in this
matter, it will profit him nothing: As is positively declared by Christ, when
upon this very occasion, he turned himself from the hopeful Rich Man, whom he
loved, and said, How hard is it for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of
God: It is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a
Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

So that for a Nation or Person to have more Love or Regard to Worldly Wealth,
than to the low and despicable Poor, though Beggars, or to defer the relieving
them, appears to be one of the highest provoking Sins for which God will be
avenged; and to sum up the whole, it amounts to this, that although we worship
no false God, not bow to any Image, but do worship, the true God, according to
his Appointments, do Fast, pray, and humble our selves before him, and keep all
the rest of his Commandments from our Youth up; yet if we judge not the Cause
of the Fatherless, and the Right of the Needy, shall not I visit for these
things, says God? Shall not my Soul be avenged upon such a Nation as this? --
God Almighty grant that this may never be said of England. And to prevent the
dreadful Stroke of Babylon.

May it please this Honorable House,

To Consider, That as National Sins and Provocations incur the Displeasure of
Heaven, so likewise to reflect how much this present Parliament may concilliate
to themselves and this poor Nation, the Favor and Blessing of the Almighty;
and also how gloriously the Renown shall to all Posterity be Recorded; when by
one Act more than an Hundred Thousand shall be converted, as it were at once,
in your day, to their own, and the whole Nations present and future Happiness:
For which, not only the Poor of this Generation, but their Posterity (yea,
every individual in the Kingdom) in all Ages may call you Blessed.

Wherefore if this Honorable House do believe, that what I have with all
Humility and Zeal to the Public, offered to your Grave and Pious
Consideration, be well pleasing to God, and accordingly be approved of by this
Honorable House (as it is by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, who has been
Graciously pleased to declare, that he would be ready in his Station, to
encourage it all he could) then my humble Petition to this Honorable House, is,

That I may obtain leave to bring in a Bill, which I have prepared, containing
such Clauses, Rules and Methods as may (with such Corrections and Amendments,
as this Honorable House shall think meet) in short time compass the Design in
such manner, that all Cheats and Frauds may be so far prevented, that the
Contributers cannot be injured unless they themselves will wilfully be
regardless of their own Interest, together with such Rules and Methods for
prosecuting the Design, as may for ever secure it from failing or ceasing after
it is begun.

FINIS.

