THE RITES OF THE Christian Church further defended, In Answer to the Appeal of
Dr. WAKE.

With a Letter to Mr. Hill Rector of Kilmington, on the account of THE
Municipium Ecclesiasticum. As also an Answer.

By Sam. Hill Rector of Kilmington.

John 18.23. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why
smitest thou me?

Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster. School.

A LETTER Written to Mr. HILL on the account of the Municipium Ecclesiasticum,
With the Answer, etc.
SIR,
TAking it for granted that you are the Author of Municipium Eeclesiasticum,
and that you will think your self obliged to remove those Charges laid upon you
in your Adversary's Appeal, I think fit on so ticklish a Point, to offer you
some Considerations, necessary, in my Opinion, to allay the Prejudices that
seem to lie against you.

For first of all, There are some that conceive you to be the Author of the
Letter to a Convocation man, and therein to have thrown a needless Bone of
Contention in a time of great Jealousies under the late Plot and War, with very
suspicious Reflections upon the Greatest in the Government; and considering
your daring Attempt not long before upon a formidable Adversary, your Enemies
stick not to represent you as a Man of Incendiary Humors, a Prejudice very
easy to take among Strangers and Persons disaffected, especially in a soft Age
dissolved into Courtship and Caresses. On which account I should with
submission think it not expedient to avert those Misconstructions, by setting
forth Truth under its fair and equal Reasons for the generous Undertaking, and
this with your Name set to take off the Reproach of a Libel fixed on it. The
part that appertains to the intrinsic Merits and Substance of the Cause,
appears in the Appeal it self, which you know best how to treat; and therefore
I do not pretend to advertise you thereupon; but wishing you all Success,
Reward, and Happiness for your many Pious, Hazardous, and -- Labors for this
poor Church, I subscribe,

New Atlant, Feb. 24. 1697 Worthy Sir, Yours Entirely N. N.

The Answer.
SIR,
SInce you were not pleased to let me know you, nor where to return Thanks for
so endearing an Office, yet since you have given such Useful Intimations, you
have fixed me in a Method how to appear on this Appeal, about which I was
before very anxious and undetermined; for now I think it the most proper way
for me to give you an Epistolary account of my sense in this matter; which
being sent by the Press, will find you in your Secrecy, and satisfy at once
both you and the Impartial World against such Surmises which such an Adventure
must needs draw upon it.

Know you then that we are so far from being the first starter of this
controversy, that after all possible inquisitiveness we have not been able so
much as to guess at him, nor are we at all concerned in those (whether real or
pretended) reflections, at which his adversaries are all so fired. And to be
free with you and the world, if the passages taxed, did in truth design
reproach, his own conscience ought to smite him, and will one time or other do
so severely, if for nothing else, yet for the Hypocrisy and false Colors: but
since his language carries in it an apparent zeal and veneration for all
authorities now in being, and particularly hopes for vengeance on those that
reflect upon His Majesty to create a Jealousy with his people, we think his
Opponents have no warrant from any rules of Justice and Charity to pronounce
him a reviler so absolutely as they have done; and if God, who searches the
hearts, finds him to be as intentionally innocent as his words are, then these
Men have brought that guilt of maledicence on themselves with which they now
load him. So that herein they seem not to have considered our Saviors precepts
against Censoriousness, as much as how to gratify their own malice or
ambitions. But as to what really concerns us, we are not very solicitous what
partial men say of us, because no protestations in the world can inhibit their
malice, and therefore in what we are accountable to God alone, to him alone
will we reserve our account, being contented to leave with the world these
arguments of our integrity, that though we could have laid trains of
assentation in order to advancement, by avoiding all disgusting writings, and
by bending our capacities to serve the present Genius in Officious Treatises
and fulsom Dedications, and had prospects fair enough before us to have led us
into such temptation, yet have we never slained our concisence or our pen by
any such little and illiberal Artifices, but have always chosen rather to
please God in the Cause of the Catholic Faith and Church against all unjust
displeasures of Men, than to be sacrilegiously guilty in corrupting or
betraying those Divine Principles and Constitutions: and if it be possible that
any person, especially of the sacred Robe, can be offended at us for serving
the Cause of Christianity at the Expense of our powers, and at the loss of all
our worldly Interests, we can only recommend them to Gods mercy, and in the
mean time condole the state of the Church in that there are some in her that
are more concerned for her promotions than her fundamentals.

But though Integrity is under no such great Obligations to stand in awe of the
delicate or censorious world in order to any internal comfort and satisfaction,
yet that its designs may be more serviceable to the holy Ends proposed, we
shall not grudge to show what just reasons there were to oppose the Counsels
and Principles of this Doctor tending so openly and violently to the ruin of
the Ecclesiastical Powers and Constitutions. It is too intimately known to all
considering and religious Persons, how much the rampant Advances of Heresy and
new Schemes of Christian Faith created in the Church a desire of a free
Convocation, to correct these Extravagancies by the methods used in such cases
through all Ages. And we wish we could not say that the Interest of the
Criminals has found a party against the general appetite and benefit of the
Church, inspired with a Spite from the dead against the lower house of
Convocation, not to be abated till they can hope to introduce thereinto a
number and majority ready and sequacious in the execution of their purposes. In
which unnatural and irreligious Project they club in with all the Atheists,
Infidels and Sectaries of the Nation, a splendid Instance whereof we have in
this Doctor, who has for Accomplices in this Adventure Author of the Essay
concerning the power of the Magistrate and Rites of Mankind in matters of
Religion, in his Postscript concerning the Letter to a Convocation Man.
one profligate Antichristian Infidel, and foul-mouth reviler of the whole
Church of God through all Ages, and egregiously of the Reformed Church of
England in this last Age, in comparison with which not only his Darlings the
Sectaries (his serviceable tools to Irreligion and Skepticism) but even the
Papists, (against whom however he inveighs sufficiently) nay the very Heathens
are very Lambs and Saints; and another Anti-Ecclesiastical and Anti-Academical
Lawyer of the same bran, Author of the Letter to a Member of Parliament, etc.
and this discernibly enough, though not so raging, but more tect and sly in his
Methods of Mischief. Of this fraternity all along have been those worthy
Monitors of the Convocation at their last Session, and those raging
Calumniators of it that malign it ever since, because not waxen enough for some
Men's Impressions. Which saucy Treatments, if offered to the Guardians of our
Civil Liberties, would have brought the Adventurers under the Zeal and
Inquisition of the State, while the grand depository of Christianity is
securely vilified and used as our Lord and Master, which is however the
greatest honor in the sight of God, though otherwise intended by malicious and
vexatious Men. And yet while open Enemies do us this dishonor, we can the
better bear it, but to be betrayed trayed up to the scorn of all our Enemies by
those that eat the same bread, and drink of the same cup, is that which calls
back the saddest Example of horror in this kind to our Remembrance and
Resentments. All which being considered, will easily justify the Municipium
Ecclesiasticum from the suspicion of a causeless and incendiary Undertaking.
Nor can we think that even the Civil State will conceive any offense at it,
since they that undermine the Authority of the Church in Spirituals, overturn
the Superstructure of the Magistrates Interest in the Civil Conduct of
Religion. For no Man can think that a Secular Authority has a more Interior
Right in Ecclesiasticals than the Church its self, and therefore the
illustrious Author of the Essay abovementioned, has with the same hand
destroyed all Civil as well as Ecclesiastical power in matters religious; which
when the State shall be at leisure to recollect, it will no doubt be jealous
for its own Authority in the most important Concern, and when it shall appear
that this is overturned by destroying the Foundations of the Church, what will
be thought of those Churchmen that have supplied these Caitiffs with Match and
Powder? And if the Church shall not disclaim such Proditors of her own, how can
the State think that we will be true and trusty to the Civil Rights and
Liberties of the Nation, that are so negligent and prodigal of our own, and
hereby at once become the public scorn and scandal?

But if we are not to solicit the cares or sentiments of the State, as to
their own Matters; yet we think we may be permitted to resent and correct the
Insolences of Clergymen, making all possible sail to preferment by a spiteful
and contemptuous Carriage toward the supreamest powers in the Church, who can
traduce the use, wisdom, and gravity of all Ecclesiastical Synods in general,
Author of Christ. Prine. p. 306.
by Reflections that will destroy as much the Authority of Parliaments, p 317.
not sparing any as far as appears of the great Constantines Synods p 307.
for the sake of those that were corrupted purely on the Court Interest, which
he fraudulently conceals; who in the times of Popery scouts the Convocations,
even when opposing the avarice of the Pope, p. 195, 197, 198.
as well as for asserting their immunities against the King upon the Authority
and Injunctions of the Pope, p. 205, 350 to 356. and 298 to 303.
while yet his own historical Deduction ascribes the first Introduction of the
Papal Authority to the Acts and Contrivances of Kings against the Domestic
Power of the Church, on which however he passes no censure, p. 178, 179, 181,
182, 186, 187, 194, 195, 197, 199, 203.
above the bare relation of fact and an intimation of Weakness; who beside all
this is more Satirical upon the Reputation of Convocations, even now in a state
of Reformation, and vast Learning, and Experience, p. 42, 43, 82, 112, 270,
271, 272, 297, 316, 317, 320, 325, 329, 330, 337, 343. Appeal. p. 121.
as if they were the most peevish, untractable, spiteful, imprudent and
dangerous Societies to Kings and States, that can be imagined, in no wise to be
trusted, but under. Guards and Irons; who can when no provocation is given, not
only vilify his Adversary, and even at the same time pretend a tenderness in
this point, Dedi. p 3, 4. Pref. p. vij. Book p. 5. p. 261, 262, 296, 304, 305,
339, 345, 346, 347. Pref. to Appeal. p. xxiij. xxiv. compared with the whole
malicious Book.
but even take occasion, where none offered it self, to render the present
Clergy, or a great part of them, odious, as Men quarrelsome and barbarous
Author of Princ. Pref. p. vij. viij. Book p. 332, 333, 334.
hypocritically perjured for the sake of their Preferment, and yet Seditious
against the Government p. 349, 355. Dedic. to Appeal. p. 2.
to which they have Sworn and some associated; as if he were not contented with
the fall of those unhappy Clergymen, who have sunk under false Notions and
Principles of Allegiance, but had an appetite to exasperate the Public unto
more discriminating and more distracting Tests in order to a more Numerous and
Tragical Evacuation of Churches; for certainly that Spite and Wickedness of
surmise against such a supposed mischievous Party, yet remaining in the Bosom
and Communion of the Church, can import no less; that so we might have an
History of the Persecution of the Church of England in all things conformable,
or in no wise inseriour to that of Scotland. Hence is it that this Inhumanity
of Design, as well as Corruption of Principles, has exposed it self to the just
scorn and detestation of the Clergy of this Kingdom, and there is no Charge in
the Municipium, equal to the Malignity of the Project.

And having thus given you (as I think) sufficient Reasons, why such a
malicious and calumnious Book should be refuted, we think little need be said
for the Municipium's being nameless to purge it from the imputation of
Libellous; For if a Book be good, that concealment cannot, impeach it; if it be
naught, the prefixing a Name does not so much excuse the Libel as attest and
aggravate the Impudence; the Opinion of which the Municipium was willing to
decline with those who would be sure or likely to reproach the Author with that
Aspersion, and if to avoid this Rock he has dashed upon the other, he must bear
his Fortune as well as he can, and commit his Cause to him that judges
righteously.

From these Provocations, come we now to the Appeal it self, to consider both
the Exterior Pretense, as well as the Interior Weight and Substance of it,
that so the Readers may be able, by easy and obvious Views, to discern its
Pertinency and its Justice.

First, Then we must begin with the Pretense set forth in the Title of the
Appeal, which runs thus; An Appeal to all the true Members of the Church of
England in behalf of the King's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, as by Law
Established; by our Convocations approved; by our most Eminent Bishops and
Clergy men Stated, and Defended; against both the Popish and Fanatical Opposers
of it. So that herein four things present themselves to our Consideration.

First, Of what form this Book is; namely, that it is an Appeal.

Secondly, To whom it is offered; to all true Members of the Church of England.

Thirdly, In what Cause; in the behalf of the King's Supremacy, as by Law
Established, etc.

Fourthly, Against whom; and they are both Popish and Fanatic Opposers. The
Title Page being thus taken into parts, is accordingly in order to be
considered.

Now First, Appeals in Law are forms of action against some Illegal Process or
Sentence of an Inferior Judge, which he, supposing himself to have sustained
by the Municipium, appeals to all true Members of this Church, as more
righteous and equal Judges. So that if he allege any such Gravamen or false
Judgment, and prove it by the exhibition or production of the acts, in all such
Instances he ought to carry, otherwise to lose his Cause.

Secondly, The Judges appealed to are all true Members of this Church; on which
the Party appellate is in suspense; not that he suspects such Judges, but knows
not whom the Appellant intends. For it appears by other repetitions App. p.
117. lin. 3, 4.
, that it is a Critical and Distinctive Character from false Members in this
Doctors design, though he has left them as indiscernible for want of a particular
Note as the Subject of Infallibility in the Roman Church. For first, the
Deprived Clergy claim this as their Peculiar Honor merited by their Cause and
Sufferings: And in the next place, among the undeprived this Drs, Acumen has
smelt out a Party of perjured railing Incendiary Hypocrites, that are setting
up for a third Church of England Ap. p. 3.
, namely, those that are for the Municipium, which to his utter grief he finds
to be the Body of the Clergy every where, even home to his Doors. Now these are
dangerous Judges for the Dr. to trust such an Appeal with. So that in the third
place the Mystery is, that those few of his Party that are against all Divine
Authorities in the Church, are his secure Judges, his allowed Members of the
Church of England, and then indeed we and the Church too is undone, if we
decline not such Judges. Either therefore let him show us our very Judges, or
be content to carry the Appeal to the Apostles and Fathers of the Church
Catholic, and we will readily join with him, if need be.

Thirdly, The Cause or Matter in Appeal is here pretended to be the King's
Ecclesiastical Supremacy as by Law Established, etc. But how this comes to be
the Subject of an Appeal against the Municipium, and for his former Book, I
cannot conceive. It Is true, the Letter to a Convocation-man after his Assertion
of the Divine Right of Synods, endeavors, not to deny the King's
Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but under that, to assert a like Legal Liberty to
Convocations as to Parliaments, in which latter part upon our Legal
Establishment the Minicipium did not concern it self. But being dissatisfied
with the Drs. denial of the Sacred Powers, and with that unlimited System of
Regal Authorities ascribed to all Christian Princes on the mere Right of their
Magistracy, which are truly collected into nine Aphorisms out of the Drs. Book
in the 108 and 109 pages of the Municipium, it undertakes the refutation of
these his general Maxims So that the Dr. has appealed in a Cause in which we
never prosecuted him. So that except it appear upon production of sayings in
the Municipium, that the particular Legal Establishment of our King's
Ecclesiastical Supremacy is impaired or impeached therein, it ought to be
acquitted by our Judges; and this is what we stand to in this Appeal,
remonstrating that according to the Title of the former Book (now shifted from
all Princes to ours only) he ought to have laid his Appeal in behalf of the
Authority of Christian Princes [in general and simply] over their
Ecclesiastical Synods; as by himself stated and asserted, etc. that is, against
the Divine Right of Synods in the Church, and for those Authorities of all
Christian Princes summed up in those nine Aphorisms. This then is a defect in
the very Title and Pretense of Body of it he yet if really in the Body of it he
has made out these his Maxims for all Christian Princes, we will be content
that the Municipium be condemned as severely as the Doctor desires.

Fourthly, The Adversaries against whom he Appeals, are all Popish and
Fanatical Opposers of the Kings Ecclesiastical Supremacy; (for so the
interpunctation of the Semicolons after three Participles, does determine his
intention, that herein he may not shuffle) but all along the Appeal you find no
Book reflected on but the Municipium; So that this seemed a pretty Artifice, to
expose his Adversary under hated and ignominious Characters, though he knows him
as far from those Imputations, as any Man in England. For as he knows the
Catholic Balance against Popery, and the Dissertation de Presbyteratu against
Franticks, to have been as unanswered, and perhaps as unanswerable by those
Parties, as the Municipium is by himself, so the very Municipium it self
asserting the Divine Rights of the Episcopal Hierarchy does herein at once as
well oppose the Council of Trent as the Genevian or Scotch Consistories. So
that if this part of the Title be sincere, we are not the Person against whom
this Appeal is brought; if it be calumnious, it will affect no Man's Integrity
or Reputation but his own. But to gratify the pretty Caprice for once, let us
be Popish or Fanatic, or any other Exotic or Invidious Name; what then will
the Consequence be? Namely this, that then we may fairly decline his Judges the
True Members of this Church; and his Authorities therein, namely, the Articles,
Canons and Laws, and the Sayings of her Bishops and Doctors; It being an
unequal thing that we should be concluded by prejudicate Parties, especially
considering that all the Fanatics, who deny the Kings Ecclesiastical
Supremacy, as much as Papists; and as equally the Authorities owned in the
Church of England, are tolerated in the whole Profession of their Fanaticisms
against this Supremacy and these Authorities, even by the Supreme Civil Powers
themselves.

And consequently if the Doctor has not proved his Authorities produced in this
Church, to be good upon Prior and more Eminent Authorities, such as are those
of Scripture, Common Reason, and the Ancient Church Catholic, to which the
Municipium yields and refers it self, and ought so to do; but has left the
Arguments of the Municipium with no other answer but this, that they are
contrary to the Principles established, and Notions received in this Church,
what does he else but betray his Church to contempt, and confess that the
Arguments in the Municipium have overthrown the Senses of this Church by
Scripture, Reason and Ecclesiastical Antiquity, on which the Dr. was not able
to reply one word. To such Absurdities, indeliberate Rages use to betray Men.

From the Titular Form of this Appeal, proceed we now to the inner Part and
Body thereof, if perhaps he has therein discharged himself from the Convictions
of the Municipium, which challenged him of two dangerous Principles; one for
disowning the Church to be a Society, or to be endued with any Synodical
Authorities till Incorporated into the State; Auth. of Christi. Princ. p. 265,
266, 267. cit. ap. Munic. Eccles. p. 2, 3, 4.
the other in asserting to all Christian Princes, on the mere Right of their
Magistracy all those Authorities in and over Synods, Collected into the Nine
Aphorisms. p. 108, 109. of the Municipium.

To refute the first Principle of the Doctor, the Municipium spends its Eight
first Chapters upon Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity, and shows him, that by
this Principle of his he unwittingly denies the Unity of the Catholic Church,
to which (so civil and benign are Men when baffled) the Learned Doctor replies
not one word. But hereupon we must challenge him to Answer those Eight Chapters
effectually, or we must conclude upon his persistence in this Error, that he
will obstinately renounce one Article of his Creed, and one part of his
Baptismal Vow and Liturgy, the 8th, 19th, 20th and 34th Articles of our
Religion, to which he has given assent in all his Elevations, the penal
Consequences of which, even in this World, he may remember from those objected
to the Municipium in this pretended Appeal. In the mean, however, here being no
defense made against these Eight Chapters, for the Churches Divine Powers, we
crave Right and Justice of our Judges, and desire a clear dismission as to this
Article, because this Synodical and Rectoral Authority in the Church, before
any Civil Incorporation is asserted also in the Testimonies and Authorities, 1
Can. of 1640. Appeal. p. 8. Dr. Heylin. ibid. p. 88, 89. Bishop Tailor. p. 97.
Bishop Parker, p. 98, 100. Dr. Falkner 103, 104. Dr. Barrow, p. 160.
produced in this Appeal, as well as by our 20th and 34th Article of Religion,
and 139th Canon.

So much then, and so little for the first Matter charged on the Dr. by the
Municipium; come we now to enquire what he has done for his Nine Aphorisms,
which we must here transcribe with a little Verbal Correction and Expunction of
the word [Canons] in the 7th, because he pretends himself wronged in it, though
he that considers his 89th page, referred to in the Margin of the Municipium,
will find that the word [Constitutions] imports the same with [Canons] and that
every where else he Assigns a far greater Power over Canons, than a bare
Suspension of their Execution, which yet he neither disowns, nor dares to
disown. Municip. Eccles. Chap. 9. 4. Now the Doctrine of the Dr. chiefly
consists in these Aphorisms;

1. p. 14, 41, 48, 76.
That under the Dominion of the Christian Magistrate the Church has no inherent
Right or Authority to Convene in Synods, but what it derives from the express
Concession of the Christian Prince. 2. p. 84, 85, 136 to 139, 289, 38, 286.
For that all Synods are but of Counsel to the Prince, and entirely in his
hands; and so 3. Not any to be sent to the Synod, but such as he shall allow;
nor 4. p. 79 to 83, 106, 107, 110, 112, etc. 132.
When convened; to Sit, Debate, Propose, Deliberate, or Conclude, or Decree any
Matter of Doctrine, or Discipline whatsoever; 5. p. 44, 53, 54, 71.
Nor in any Form, Method or Manner whatsoever, save what the Prince admits; and
that 6. p. 81 to 86, 133.
The Prince may Ratify, Annihilate, or Alter all their Acts, and Procedures,
or as many of them as he pleases; and 7. p. 85 to [89] 125, 126.
Suspend the Execution of all or any of their [Constitutions and] Sentences; 8.
p. 288.
The Authority of their Acts being entirely and only. his; and lastly, that 9.
p. 77 to 79
No Synod has Right to dissolve it self without the Kings License.


Now these Aphorisms he pretended to support sometimes, and rarely by
interspersed Intimations or hints of Reason, but professedly by Ecclesiastical
History.

As to his Reasons, they are all answered in the Ninth Chapter of the
Municipium, to which he has not given one Syllable in order to Refutation.

The Ecclesiastical History is reserved for a second Part; only in preparation
thereunto, the Tenth Chapter does examine what Legal Grounds there can be to
justify Regal Interpositions in Synodical Concerns, without which they must be
taken for injurious Acts of Domination; which Chapter lays down such
Principles, as will destroy all Pleas of general Prescription or Justification
from those Acts of Princes, which go beyond the Lines of Regal Authority
allowed in the Munictpium, p. 105, 106, 123, 124. where a particular Contract
with a particular Prince, cannot be proved or well presumed. But this is
nothing to the general Right of all Princes, for whom the Doctor would
prescribe from some Facts recorded in History, which cannot presume a Contract
for all Princes with all Churches universally.

Now to this tenth Chapter, laid as a bar and prejudice to all his Inferences,
for the general Omnipotency of all Kings in Spirituals, what replies the
Doctor? Truly to be Uniform, and all of a Piece, not one Syllable or Gape; But
only shifts and juggles that he has said no more, And defended no other
Authority in the Prince (meaning our King) than what both he and we, and every
other Clergyman of the Church of England, have solemnly declared our Assent
to, and are obliged to our Power to maintain. Pref. to App. p. vj, vij. 39 Can.
First Can.
But this is nothing to the purpose; for the Question is not what our Kings
peculiar Prerogative is, as King of England in Virtue of our Laws, but what is
the general Right of all Christian Sovereigns as such; and hereof we desire a
proof, that we have Assented to all those Aphorisms, and are bound to defend
them to our utmost; If this can be done, 'twill be a good Argument against us
(though not with all the World that have made no such Subscriptions) not so
much to assert Truth, as to muzzle our Mouths: But even as to our own King, we
desire that it may be proved accordingly to the second Aphorism, That all our
Synods are but of Counsel to the Prince, and entirely in his hands; and that,
as in Aphor. 8. The Authority of their Acts is entirely and only his; and
moreover that, That we have subscribed an Assent and Promise to defend it. This
is not yet done, and so we yet are in no danger from this part of the Appeal.
But when Men are in the vein of Dedications, their Strains are more Airy and
Rapturous, and in such perhaps we may find something more apposite and daring.
Now Dedic. to App. p. 3. he calls his a Cause, In which not only the Church of
England, but the Church Catholic, ever since the Civil Powers, have become
Christian, is concerned together with her. The Authority he plead for, in
behalf of our Kings being no other than what the most famous Bishops and
Councils of the Church, have given to their Emperors.

Now this will reduce the Dispute to a short Issue; Let there be production
made of the most famous Bishops and Councils of the Catholic Church, under
Christian Princes, asserting these Nine Aphorisms of Ecclesiastical Authority,
to all such Princes on the sole Right of their Magistracy, and we will deliver
up the Municipium to the Flames, and the Author to the most penitential
Humiliations. It is not done in the former Book, it is not attempted in this
Appeal; nay we have produced his own Contradictions in the most important
Instances of such Supremacy, Munic: Eccl. p. 160, 166, 167, 168, 169, 172, 173,
175, 176
against these Infinite and Arbitrary Prerogatives, to many of which Remarks he
has said nothing, and so owned them just, and to such as he has excepted
against, we shall show his exceptions frivolous and causeless in due Place. And
so as to all that was proper Matter for Appeal in the Municipium, he has
produced nothing to excuse, much less to justify his Cause and Principles, and
so we humbly crave and hope for a dismission in this Second Part of the
Controversy also.

But these Informations of ours, in this Cause of Appeal, though so very clear
and undeniable, will be apt to leave the World under an amazement, that a Man
should Appeal in a Cause, and make such loud Clamours, and yet really not offer
one pertinent Syllable for himself; it is so odd, so strange a prejudice, that
the World will hardly believe their own Eyes. What, has he made no Answer to
any one Charge or Imputation at all? This is an hard Saying, who can believe?
Who can bear it? Now to satisfy the World, the truth is, he appealed not in
the Cause on which he was charged, nor made any defense thereof, but in a Cause
of our own Kings English and Peculiar Supremacy, for which the Municipium never
touched him. As to the merits of the Cause therefore there is none the least
defense made; and the whole considered as a formal Appeal, is a perfect and
entire Impertinence. But whereas the Municipium taxed him, not only for the
dangerous falsity of his Principles, but with several personal Inadvertencies,
Absurdities, and Contradictions; some of these strokes he has endeavored to
evade, which though Excentrick to the Pretended or Real Matter in Appeal, shall
have their due Examination, though we confess it is a very sickly and unprofitable
Labor, that must be employed in winnowing such Trifles.

1. And first of all the Municipium is blamed for four times Municip. Eccl. p.
6, 8.49, 55,
Taxing his Definition of a Synod as unaccurate, whereas he never pretended it
for a proper Definition, but plainly enough discovered his Sense of it to be
otherwise, though yet it had been a fit Companion for our as unaccurate a
Definition. Pref. to App. p. xx.

To which we Answer, That the Words appeared to us as a Definition, on which an
Argument was to be raised, concerning the Carthage Conference, for a Regal
Supremacy over Synods, else how could it be deemed a Cavil, if it were no
Synod, to allege that it was none; and so to reject it as an Impertinence? To
what purpose does he call it a Meeting of Ecclesiastical Persons on an
Ecclesiastical Affair, or such an Assembly under Imperial Authority, as may
justify the like Imperial Authority over any other of the like kind Auth. of
Prin. p. 60.
if real and proper Synods were of another kind? What then, are proper Synods
Meetings of Ecclesiastical Persons on an Ecclesiastical Affair, or are they
not? Or are they like or unlike to the Carthage Conference? It cannot be denied
that Synods are such Meetings; and if Ministers had been set instead of
Persons, it had been an accurate Definition enough. Then again if they are
unlike to the Carthage Conference, and that in their Synodical Form, the
Instance of that Conference was idle and frivolous; if like, as he says, then
the Description thereof was intended for definitive. And it is false that the
Doctor in the same place disowned it to be a Synod, but having labored to
evince it to be so, yet waves urging it too much upon his cavilling
Adversaries, and pretends to allege others which were unquestionably proper
Synods. But the main sting in the Municipium p. 7, 8.
the Doctor conceals, namely, that he had allowed those huddles of Christians
running together in consult under Alien Powers, to be proper Synods without
Authority, from which absurdity this Definition of a Synod, though (as it seems)
designed to comprehend all such Cabals, could not defend him.

And further yet, to show his repeated Inadvertency about the Carthage
Conference, let it be observed, That he says that Synods consist of the same
kind of Persons, as the Carthage Conference did, and about the like Affairs;
Auth. of Prin. p. 60. Pref. to App. p. xx.
How then can this be disowned a Synod? But the truth is, though they met on the
like Affairs, yet they did not consist of the like Persons. For in Ganonical
Synods all the Members are to be Catholic, but the King and his Arians that
carried all by force were not so, and consequently were not Persons
Ecclesiastical, nor qualified with any Authority Regal or Canonical to Act
under pretense of Authority, and so 'twas an industrious Impertinence to
allege it in Plea for Authority. But whereas he recriminates on the
Unaccurateness of our Definition, (p. 49.) we challenge him (though it be but a
small Pique) with all his skill to detect it, and we will readily own it, and
thank him for the discovery.

2. He complains of being false quoted in the 100 and 101 pages, and more
injuriously, p. 109. of the Municipium. Pref. to App. p. xviij.

To which we Answer, as to the 100 and 101 pages, That it is a Calumny, and
refers to the said pages; and as to the 109 page, we have above accounted for
it in the Introduction again of the Doctors Aphorisms; and the most that can be
made of it, is an harmless Inadvertency; ( quod temen non fatemur, etc.) and if
our Judges please to censure it for such, we are content with the Judgment,
without any further Appeal.

3. That page 160, in the Matter of the Council of Ariminum's self-dissolution,
distinction is not made between his Historical Relation and his own Sense
thereof, which does not condemn that Act of the Council. Pref to App. p. 19.

To which we Answer, that he is rightly represented, for he set a Rule Absolute
against the Self-Dissolution of Synods, without any reserves or exceptions;
which must then ipso facto condemn that Procedure or Conclusion of the Council
of Ariminum related immediately upon the Rule; and he brings moreover the
Emperors disgust at that Dissolution as an affront, a great Affront put upon
him, and as a Corroboration to his Rule against that Act of the Council, as
also his suggestion, That Theodosius and Valentinian took more care than to be
so tricked or affronted, by the Council of Ephesus; p. 77.
The same right he again asserts to Princes, against Self-Dissolution of
Synods; p. 78.
and then finally concludes, p. 79.
It is therefore the Duty of all Synods, as they are Convened by the Princes
Authority, so to tarry till they have the same Authority for their Dissolution.
And if all this does not import a sense against the Dissolution of the Council
of Arminium, we know not what can, We are sure no man could think otherwise
from the Precedents and Consequents in this Relation. But since he is now so
candid as to suppose that these Fathers had good Reasons for their unlicensed
Recess, and so will not pretend at this distance, and under so much ignorance
of their Motives, to condemn them, we mightily applaud this forced Ingenuity;
(if such a Virtue can be forced) but then withal we must engage him either
totally to expunge, or else to qualify his Rule herein with Exceptions for
extraordinary Reasons.

3. That p. 166. He is unjustly charged with Contradictions in Arguments from
matter of Fact; See Pref. to App. p. xxj.

To which we answer negatively, the Distinction of Regularity of the more
ancient Age, and the Irregularity of the later Ages, set in the Preface to the
Appeal, not appearing in the Original Book. p. 295, 296.
For he never used the Method of proving Imperial Acts Regular, by comparing
them with, or justifying them by any produced Rule or Principle; but he only
produces their Acts to assert their Right. Now if such bare Facts argue or
legally presume Right, without any other apparent Rule of Right, why should not
such Facts publicly used in Synod by the Clergy, without Royal License, or
Rebuke, or any Rule to the contrary then apparent, (as there is none alleged
in the pages above noted) be as good Arguments for the Right of the Liberty
Synodically used without exception? Now since the Doctor set no Rules against
that Liberty of Synods in the above noted Pages, then it is too late to hale
them in now, so as to charge the Remark made upon him herein for injurious. And
if a Man compares page 295. with page 112. he will conclude, that the Letter to
a Convocation-Man argued fairly and strongly for that Right of Liberty, Letter
to a Conv. M. p. 58.
except we can suppose that the Kings then had no better esteem of their Synods
than as a pack of dangerous Villains, whom no Laws could restrain, without
Guards and Jaylors over them; which every one knows was not the common
apprehension against the Clergy in those times.

4. That page 167. He is unjustly taxed for an absurd or contradictious
Relation of Genstentines Words. Pref. to App. page xxj, xxij.

To which we answer. That here the Doctor notoriously forges words of Remark
that are not in the Municipium, contrary to Sense as well as the Emperors
Intention, for it is not remarked from those his Words, That Princes have
nothing to do in Affairs of Synods, for the Municipium assorts the contrary of
Constantine in Right and Fact.) But the Remark is, That this Saying is directly
against that universal Right and Authority in Synods Ecclesiastical
(Capitulated by us into nine Aphorisms) given by the Doctor to all Princes,
etc. and this Remark is immutably true, and incapable of Impeachment.

5. That page 168. the Remark of Contradiction upon the Saying of Socrates is
injurious; Pref. to App. p. xxij.

To which we Answer, That as the Words are in the Municipium, the charge is
evidently True and Just, and we desire our Judges to view the Columns; and to
note first, That the Doctor leaves out the word [usually] to represent the
Sense, that no lesser Councils were called by Emperors, which is no part of
the Intention, but only that lesser Councils commonly were not, as appears
also, Municip. p. 132. and this is proved by us, of four Synods out of the
Doctor himself, in the place complained of, though the Doctor passes it over in
silence to beguile his Reader.

6. That page 169. he is injuriously charged with Contradiction, in asserting
the Right of Godly Princes in Convening Synods, and yet asserting the Churches
Right herein under ill ones. Pref. to App. p. xxij. xxiij.

To which we Answer, That the Contradiction in the Columns, appears undeniable,
there being no distinction in his words between good and evil Princes, that
provide for, or neglect the Church, and for confirmation hereof, we refer also
to the following Remark, in which lies the most convictive force and evidence
of the Charge.

To conclude therefore all possible pretensible matter of Appeal; as to his
Principles against the Churches Divine Rights of Synods, and for his unlimited
Domination of all Princes in Ecclesiasticals, he has not offered one word in
Answer to all or any one Argument or Saying in the Municipium; and of 15
Instances of Absurdity or Contradiction, he has excepted but at six, confessing
thereby all the rest to be just upon his own Concession; and what sorry
Defenses he has made on these six poor Heads of Complaint, we suppose our
Judges must have needs seen, had we offered them no Informations; but now we
suppose none is so blind, either through passion or ignorance, but must needs
see the poor languishing Doctor utterly enervated, and destitute of all
Pretenses for his Appeal.

But be it so, the Doctor is resolved however not to dye unrevenged; but if he
had no Cause of Appeal, he will pretend one of Recrimination; that the Author
of the Municipium has condemned our Ecclesiastical Constitution under the Kings
Supremacy, and called it Oppressive, asserted Divine Rights against it, and
reflected against K. Hen. VIII. his Convocation and Parliaments, declared the
Church to be out of the Kings Protection, that so he may pronounce him out of
the Bosom of the Church, and advance a Croisade for an holy Rebellion against
him; by which this Impious Author is Perjured against his Oath of Supremacy,
has renounced the 37th Article, broken the first, second, twelveth, and other
Canons of the Church, and so incurred deprivation by his Bishop, without
present Revocation of his Errors, and is excommunicate ipso facto, not to be
forgiven by an inferior Hand, but that of the Archbishop, upon Repentance and
public Revocation of his Wicked and Anabaptistical Errors; And to aggravate
his Crime, he has done this against the Sense of the greatest Bishops and
Doctors of the Church, from whom the Doctor has brought many Citations.

This is indeed a Thunder as loud as brute, and we require a proof as exact as
what is judicial and convictive, and we are sure he can never produce it. We
can be Surety before God and Man, that the Author of the Municipium believes
the 37th. Article, has violated no Cannon, nor Oath against the Ecclesiastical
Supremacy owned and to be owned by the Church, according to allowed Rules of
Interpretation; which do not require from us a Sanctification of all our Acts
in Hen. VIII's Reign, upon which I have reflected no more than what undeniable
History warrants; in which there are (...).

And for the Good he did, we owe him no thanks, for that he did it for self or
evil Ends, he Persecuted at once both Papists and Protestants, and at last he
and his Vicar General died Papists, and to that Church we leave them. We owe
under God all true Gratitude to the Memory of Q. Elizabeth for our Reformation;
and against her Injunctions, Orders, and Articles we have committed no offense.

We declaim against that Domination which the Doctor arrogates to all Princes,
whether claimed by Devolution or Occupation; for as to Contract none such can
be pretended for all Princes, though there can with us for our Kings
Prerogatives; but on this we have never past any Censure, even where occasion
presented it self, but suspended our Opinion, leaving the Judgment of our
Original as well as subsequent Contracts herein to God the Judge of all; p.
136, 155, 176, nay, we make the Kings Ratification and Concurrence necessary to
give a Civil Force to Acts Ecclesiastical, p. 166, 175, and Subject all
Persons, Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal, to the Civil Sword for obstinate
and evil Doing, without any Exemption on the account of Priesthood; page 105,
120, 125. without any seditious Resistance of the Supreme Legislative Powers,
or their Ministers under Legal Persecutions, for that such Powers are
unaccountable to any Domestic Tribunal, and uncontrollable by the Subject,
page 5.100 101, 106, etc.

And as to our particular Loyalty to his present Majesty, beside our Honor
assigned him in our Preface, we suppose the Dialogue of Solomon and Abiathar,
and the Debate on the Justice and Piety of the Present Constitution may
signalize it as much at least, as any of the Doctors false Services, for which
he has obtained a good part of his past aims, and thinks his present
seize as pledges of greater, while we have done our Duty to the King
without intuition of reward, which we know we had once obstructed by our Duty
toward God, and have now done so again in opposing this Doctor.

And therefore being not at all concerned at his sanguinary Rages, we do still
renew to him the sincere Conclusions of our first Letter, and do not despair,
after some Years Cooling and Meditation, but that he will also be of our Mind.

As to what he has alleged out of the Worthies of our Church, there are very
few Passages that are contrary to our Sentiments; and most are founded upon
Ecclesiastical History, and therefore we shall prorogue their Examination to
the second Part, as they shall properly offer themselves at their Respective
Instances; and then by Gods blessing, if not the Doctor, yet the disinterested
part of the World, may receive satisfaction.

To conclude the whole; the Sum of our Sense herein is, That the Church alone
and by her self, where the Christian Prince will not interpose, (as that he may
lawfully refuse) has a Divine Right of Synodical Authority in Canons and
Sentences purely Ecclesiastical, and this the Doctor is forced to grant; but if
the King and the Church Contract for Establishing Ecclesiastical or Canon-Laws
of Civil as well as Spiritual Authority, there the Supremacy, as to Civils, is
in the King on the Right of his Sovereignty alone; but what particular
Prerogatives shall accrue to Kings herein in restriction to the Churches
Liberties which she had in disjunction from the State, will depend on the Terms
of the several Local Contracts and Coalitions; and therefore may be diverse in
diverse places. and mutable in all; and ought not to be asserted of universal
and unchangeable Right on the account of mere Sovereignty simply as such; and
if such Contracts and Conditions violate no Divine Fundamentals, they are
innocent, and perhaps also may be expedient; but if the Divine Tenures be
broken down by them, no Man can absolve them; and therefore when Laws of
dubious or suspicious Acceptance (as to Form of Words) are strained, or
perverted from the first fair Prospects and Intentions of their Legislators to
ill and oppressive Purposes, as we cannot but abominate such perversions, so we
cannot magnify the Laws, that under such deficiencies may be wrested from the
opposing to the doing evil; in which case, though there is no reason to desire a
total abolition, yet Religion will force a Man to wish for a temper and secure
Correction.

And thus you have the intimate Sense and Soul herein, of the meanest of Gods
Ministers, in the Service of Gods Church; who (kind, but unknown, Sir) is also
particularly

Kilmington, March 5. Your obliged Servant, S. Hill.

FINIS.

