Fasciculus Literarum: OR, LETTERS ON Several Occasions I. Betwixt Mr. Baxter,
and the Author of the Persuasive to Conformity. Wherein many things are
discussed, which are repeated in Mr. Baxters late Plea for the Nonconformists.
II. A Letter to an Oxford Friend, concerning the Indulgence Anno 1671/2. III. A
Letter from a Minister in the Country to a Minister in London. IV. An Epistle
written in Latin to the Triers before the Kings most happy Restoration.


By JOHN HINCKLEY, D. D. Rector of Northfeild in Worcestershire.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset at the George near St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. MDCLXXX.

THE PREFACE,
THe Sun has run its course nine times through the Zodiac, since these Papers
passed betwixt Mr. Baxter and my self. He was pleased to be the Aggressor; and
he also sounded the Retreat: far be it from me to invite and Reassume such
grinning trouble. I shall ever embrace my own rest and quiet, in making a
Golden Bridge for such an impetuous Adversary; laying hold on any generous
overture, whereby I may both save my credit and my pains; that I may the better
pursue (without distraction) my calmer and more profitable Studies. I had
indeed given him some fraternal advice, in order to the peace of the Church.
But his restless and distempered Stomach, turned this wholesome Dose into Foam
and Choler. He made himself ready for War: And presently snatches up his angry
Pen, made of a Homo Histricosae, and lividae mentis. Jerome. P. 213.
Porcupines Quil, to gore me for my Charity. As if it had been provocation
enough, to presume to see one inch farther than his Eyes could reach; or once
to suppose, that his daring Judgment; could any way stag or warp with error
and fallibility; so as to need advice and counsel. Hence it is, that his Strain
is lofty and Magisterial. Had another let fall one drop of such corroding
Vitriol, he must immediately have (...) that he dealt in proud wrath. So that
it is not the least thing observable in these Papers: we may divine of what
spirit these Men are of; and with what Scorpions we had smarted, if Providence
had not delivered us from such Egyptian, tyrannical Taskmasters. Herein
indeed they are like to the Disciples of Christ, when their dark side was
toward us, -- they are still aspiring to be greatest; and ready to call down
Fire from Heaven upon those that stand in their way. I hope that I have not
requited him with his scornful and slighting Rhetoric. Better to fall short in
answering his Arguments, and remain in his debt, than pay him in his own Coin,
and strive who shall be the proudest sinner. I have not so learned Christ -- to
revile when I (...) reviled: Such a Conquest deserves no Tri^^h. Nay, he that
overcomes in this Amphi^^^ter, (...), Philo Judaeus; is in a worse condition,
than he that gets the mastery: He is the greater and more forlorn Captive. He
deserves no other Garland than one made of Nettles and Hemlock. He merits
little better, that makes a loud profession of Christ, seems to ingross
Religion, and monopolize all Piety; yet neither shows Meekness, Humilty,
Self-denial, Obedience, Love, or any other Christian Grace in his Life:
pretending more than ordinary kindness to the Husband; yet rending and mangling
his Spouse the Church into more parts than the Levite did his Concubine. With
the Heretical Crow (so Prosper calls that ravenous Bird) they run out of the
Ark, and will not return: they leave it desolate; and their deluded Hearts feed
upon Carcasses; those Inventions that float upon the Surges of their own
Brains: For never were Men more guilty of what they condemn in others. They
declaim against Innovations, Superstition, and Will Worship: And yet their own
darling-discipline, with the whole Compages of their affected Devotions,
(especially as to the manner of them) is little else but a Cento and Miscellany
of the same. As singular, as their looks, garb and utteranee. What poor
Sacrifices are these to Atone a most wise and heart-searching God? to win upon,
and engage the Judgments of such Men, as know that a reasonable Service is
required at their hands? The more united we are in Gods Worship, the more we
throng and flock together to Gods House, the more God will be glorified; we
comforted and confirmed; and the greater awe and terror will be upon our
Adversaries. These Men have, and do make St. Austin's Complaint to be justly
ours, Epist. 147. Husbands and Wives can agree together to lie in the same Bed:
Parents and Children, to live in the same House: yet Domum Dei non habent unam,
they cannot agree to go together to the same Place of Worship. We may ask with
St. Paul's amazement, Is Christ divided?

A better account must be given of publishing these Papers, after they had so
long been thrown aside as wast Papers; devoted either to Moths, or the Oven;
especially since Mr. Baxter in his last seemed unwilling they should see the
Light: And I did heartily comply with him. It was no small joy, that he did
supersede his trouble of writing: I still wish it may not only be a Truce, but
a lasting Resolution; for he is indefatigable in raising Clouds of polemick
dust; and makes Books faster than I can read them. I do not say this in the
words of the Father, -- Decolorare famam, -- to fasten any blot upon his Name;
but to gratify and applaud my own happiness, in being delivered from so
importunate and voluminous an Author.

1. Did I stand at his Elbow, I would whisper to him, -- That the Issues and
Products of his Head would be more lively and masculine; if his retentive
faculty were more costive and vigorous: If he teemed with the deliberation of
the Elephant; rather than slip his burden before it come to maturity. Those
Animals that are most pregnant, have the most imperfect Births.

2. Had he taken as much pains to edify and save Souls; to teach Men Piety,
Obedience, and Loyalty; to press Men to Unity, Peace, and mutual Love; as he
has in making Parties; distracting and dividing Men's minds; and inflaming the
Church and State with his Aetna-Granadoes and Eructations, his Name might have
been imbalm'd with a fragrant savor in the Ages to come.

3. Since he has told us almost in every Book he has printed, for above
twenty years past, how infirm he is in his bodily health; and that he is daily
dropping into his Grave: If I durst presume to be his Counselor, I would mind
him of spending the remainder of his time in writing Books of Heavenly
Devotions; that so, laying aside the Sword, and taking up the Trowel, he may
make some satisfaction to the Church for those wounds and breaches, he has
either made, or kept open in her Bowels; And also Antidote the Souls, whom he
has poisoned with his vexatious Divinity, before all the Sands of his Glass be
run out, and he go hence to give up his Account before an All-seeing and
Impartial Judge!

Though I had escaped thus out of his Talons, and there was a kind of
stipulation betwixt us, to let down the Floodgates, and shut the Gates of
Janus; yet as if (to use his own words) he had pined me fast to a Wall, where
he might inflict the Correction of as many Stripes as he pleased, without
either resistance or repercussion from me: He tells the World in print, -- what
Toys I had written. And in several other Books, -- as also in the last I have
seen, (for being immersed in the Country, and overgrown with Arcadian Moss, I
converse with few that are new) he acquaints his Readers how unsatisfactory my
endeavors have been; though he answers neither one Chapter, or Page, in the
whole Book, that so much offends him: Let equal Judges blame me, if I have
transgressed against his fourth Letter, or my Answer to the same: For he has
confuted his own Reasons, and first brake the Condition of a Hypothetical
Compact: Since he goes on to reproach our Mother, and all her dutifal Sons, is
not this enough to force a dumb Child to speak, -- Semper ego Auditor tantum,
nunquamne reponam? I must do him right. He strikes (...) through my Loins
alone; but with the same Dart wounds my Betters. As if I should have this allay
in my fall, -- to have good company. It matters not what we say; for, as if we
were mere Shrimps and Striplings to this Goliath; whiffling Currs to this
Majestic Lion, -- he holds on his way, without once stooping or looking aside
to any Reasonings of ours: And (which is as great blemish to his Ingenuity) he
gathers up the vomit and Venom of all the malcontents and Incendiaries that
have pestered the Church since the breaking forth of this Schism: He puts his
Paint and Varnish upon them; and then obtrudes these weather-beaten
Superannuated Wares, for fresh Merchandise; as if they had never been blown
upon before. He rallies those Troops which have been routed and baffled; and
furbishes those Arguments which have been answered again, and again, by the
Divines and Worthies of our Church: So that there will never be an end of these
Disputes, if there be such a Circulation in the management of them. If they
revive and rise again, as often as they are overthrown and disarmed; and with the
Hydra's Head, grow as fast as they are cut off. No need of new Answers to such
Books. But as Dr. Whitby did prudently transcribe an Answer to Mr. Crescy's
Exomologesis, out of our own reformed Champions; so it is enough to confute and
retund the force of such Rapsody's, in opposing what others have said already.
Old Diseases must be rebuked and cured by old Remedies. I fear that those who
reinforce old Cavils, without taking notice what others have said to evade
them, do either delight in wrangling, or which is worse, -- withold the Truth
in unrighteousness.

As for the Book it self, I leave it to the Animadversions of those that are
concerned in an Answer, if it deserve any; yet I cannot forbear some few
Strictures or Remarks.

1. As to the Circumstance of time, when it came forth; even then, when we were
almost overwhelmed with fears from our common Enemies. He had pleaded before
for a License and Dispensation: As if the printing such a Book would be against
Law and Conscience. But when he perceived an Interim, the Laws were hushed and
silent; Conscience (with the Lord Chancellors Gown) was quickly thrown behind
the door: And when we were weak and sore, ready to fall a Prey to the Roman
Fowler, he helped forward our misery, by laying his Loins upon us too. So that
if the King of Babylon be not strong enough, -- The People of the Land are
ready to weaken the Hands of the People of Juda, Ezra. 4. 4. He accorded with
Mr. Hobs, as to the occasion of the late War. Both of them agree to father the
Brat upon some speculative Disputes and Differences concerning some Doctrinal
Points; that they might the better undervalue the Universities, and disgrace
the Divines of those Times. So he had rather promote the Interest of Rome, by
shattering our Power, than miss of his Will in seeing our ruin. I hope that
God, who has been a Bulwork to his People; a Wall of Brass, and a Wall of Fire
about his Church, will still infatuate the Counsels and Contrivances both of
Manassey and Ephraim, and preserve his own Juda. How can we depend upon their
Kindness? that with the Samaritans, will carry it far in our Prosperity; but if
Antiochus set upon us, will join their Forces with him, and disown us in our
extremity.

2. He does not only magnify the power of the People (and this is ominous, at
least suspicious) as if the Patronage of Churches and Bishoprics were wholly
in them -- but he says too -- That neither Magistrates, nor Bishops can silence
Ministers once ordained. What intrenching is this upon the Kings Ecclesiastical
power? as if it were less now, than it was once in the Kings of Juda. This
seems to me not only to be contrary to Titus 1. 11. Whose mouths must be
stopped; but to Mr. Baxter himself in his Book of Confirmation, page 87.
Ministers cast out by the Magistrate are bound to obey him; and to give place
to others (if his error tend not to the destruction of the Church) and bestow
their labors in some other Country, or in some other kind at home. His mind
changes with the Moon; yet he is constant to his first Hypothesis -- his
endeavor to pull down the Fabric of our Church, which is so excellently
built, that it is the wonder of all Lands. None can justly be offended at it,
only seditious and factious Sectaries at home: Jesuits abroad, and he that
spawned them both; are vexed, and gnash with their Teeth, to see her
prosperity. But mauger all their attempts, If our sins do not demolish the
same; it will appear, to be rooted in Adamant, and built upon such a Rock, that
neither the winds, or tempests of those men united together: nor the Floods and
Waves from the Dragon himself, shall ever overturn, or drown it, when we know
not what to do; yet we will trust on that God, whose outgoings are seen in the
Mount.

3. How Tragically does be cry out, against the Translation of some Texts, in
the Epistles, Gospels, and Psalms? as if they had never been observed before:
whereas he might also have taken notice -- that Mr. Hooker, Mr. Nicholas
Fuller, and others, have given a satisfactory Account, how these places may be
reconciled. He that had one dram of Candor, would have sat quiet at the seet
of the Gamaliels, without vexing the People, with such needless scruples. If he
have a mind to trouble himself, with more various Readings of Scripture; his
Friend Mr. Capell will lead him a dance, through such Meanders, that he will not
easily extricate himself, out of them. What if Mr. Baxter had two Bibles? In
the one Job's Wife said -- Curse God and die. In the other, Bless God and die.
In the one -- Christ said to the Figtree -- no man eat Fruit of thee hereafter,
for the time of Figgs was not yet. In another -- for then was the time of
Figgs. Will he burn these Bibles? yet he would have the Liturgy utterly
cashiered, and rejected; because of some diverse Translations; which are not
contradictory: for they are not Secundum idem; or in the same respect.

4. How does he strain some things in the Act for uniformity, and also in the
Liturgy; until the very Blood follow? As if he were resolved to stand with a
flaming Sword in his hand: Either to keep some tender minded men, out of the
Vineyard, and Paradise of our Church; I have too much cause to justify what I
say: Or else to Affright, Puzzle, and Perplex, those that have entered already;
that they may drive more heavily: Proceed with Trepidation; and carry on the
Lords work, with less expedition. Whereas some grains of Charity, in taking
words and things in the best sense they are capable of, (as every honest man
ought to do) might have prevented and spoiled the greatest part of his Book.
When the Covenant was justly charged to be unlawful, from the very articulate
sound of the words: with what tenderness, and softness was it sens'd? What
Salvo's were invented to Palliate the Ulcer? But in our case; how are words,
and sentences wrested, and tenter'd beyond the Grammar, and intention of them?
that snares may be spread upon Mispeh, to keep men from going to the House of
the Lord; will the great God thank these Mormo-makers another day? Quam sapiens
argumentatrix sibi videtur ignorantia humana in the words of Tertullian. How
fond and wise do they seem to themselves, that by a Carnal kind of subtilty do
affect to be accounted the disputers of this World. I may well call such
wisdom, carnal (how Angelical and Seraphick soever it appear) from the
authority of the great Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 3. whereas there are among you
Envying, Strife, (...), sidings, or making of Parties, and factions, are ye not
Carnal? will nothing satisfy some supercilions Humorists, but that the whole
frame of our Church and Religion must be taken asunder, Ravell'd, and
Cancelled, to please them? Why did they not Petition the King and Parliament,
to erect a scruple Office? or a standing Committee? that might assoil their
growing doubts? And by some Scolia upon the Liturgy, and their own Arts, give
the meaning of every Paragraph, and word in both? They are now so mudded by
these men's struggling, and trampleings; that like Aristotle's Physics -- they
are Edita, and non Edita, dark and Aenigmatical; until they are cleared, by the
Lamp of some supervening Commentary. That common sense, which satisfies many
thousands of their Brethren; will not serve their nice, and squeamish stomachs.
But as if there were some Snake lurking in the Grass; and some invisible knot
in the Bulrush; every leaf, every sprig of Grass must be turned, and shaken:
every little feavourish doubt must be Excuss'd. As if a new Targum, Misna, or
Paraphrase, must be calculated on purpose, for the Meridian of their swimming
heads; And none must do this, but the first Authors, and Legistators -- Magnus
Revocetur ab orcis -- Tullius. If the noise of their Axes, and Hammers, were
once abated; there wight be hope, that the Temple of God would rise: If Schism
(that battering Engine) were dismounted; the Walls of Zion, would flourish, and
mount toward Heaven. What could hinder Nourishment to be Ministered to the Body
of the Church, by Joints and Bands? that so being knit together, it might
increase with the increase of God. Our peace would not only be (...) in the
words of Basil the great -- A means to charm the Devil, that he should not
approach us, but our consenting together (as Ignatius) would be (...), the
means to crush his very head, in frustrating his dividing designs, so we might
also defeat his Instruments too, that wait for our fall: Nam neque perire nos,
neque salvi esse, nisi una Possumus; as Otho in Tacitus said to his Army. If we
sink, we shall sink together: And if we arrive to a safe Haven; it will be
whilst we are united into one Body. Therefore if Mr. Baxter would either do
good, or prevent mischief, in his Generation -- May he be (as Nazianzen said of
Athanasius) An Adamant, and a Loadstone. An Adamant to break the Conspiracies
of naughty men; and a Loadstone -- to draw together; and to close the
differences of dissenters; I am thy Servant said David, and the Son of thy
Handmaid; that is, as Prosper glosses those words -- the Son of thy Church --
He adds also -- He is not the Lords Servant, who is not such a Son: A Son of
Peace. For Christ is the King of Salem; the Prince of Peace; And Jerusalem,
which is the Spouse of Christ, and the Mother of us all, signifies the Vision
of Peace. But

Invidiae quondam stimulis incanduit atrox
Alecto, placidas late cum cerneret urbes.
Mr. BAXTER'S First Letter, Directed thus.
To the AUTHOR of the Persuasive to Conformity.
SIR,
THE vehemence and importunity of your Call for an Account to the World of the
Reasons of my Judgment and Practice, have sufficiently made me willing of the
Work; and put me upon craving your assistance in it, and to answer me these few
Questions. 1. Whether you know of any one that will License it, if I should
write it? or can procure me so great a favor, and who it is? 2. Or whether you
think it lawful to print it unlicensed, contrary to the Law of the Land? 3.
Whether you think it lawful by my Reasons, which you call for, to write that
which the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws forbid, under the Name of depraving the
Liturgy, and appugning the Church Government? 4. Whether you know how I may be
kept out of Goal when I have done: (I hear you are now Minister of the Place,
whence a Letter was sent, which occasioned my last imprisonment, where I am
virtually still, being adjudged to go to Newgate, when I am apprehended?) 5.
Or if a Prison, and (in probability) thereby Death, be that you desire, whether
you think it lawful to suffer so much and die, to satisfy your desire, and do
that Work? 6. Whether you know of any Printer and Bookseller, who would Print
and Publish such a Book, and who they are? The Savoy Papers which you talk of,
were written by the Warrant of the Kings Commission, and published (some of
them; for others were never published) by poor Scriveners that had the Copies,
to get Money, (without my knowledge, and to our injury, in a Time when the Act
against Printing was not made.) 7. Whether you think if I should write such a
Book, that the Diocesane Party would not be much more offended and angry, than
if I had said nothing? 8. Whether I should be called so earnestly to do that
which will give so great offense against the New Conformity, when that which
you mention, which was done by Commission against the Old Conformity, could
never have an Answer? And is it not as easy with you to contemn another in
stead of answering it, as that? I crave your Answer, especially to the first
Questions, because your Importunity would force me into a hope, that at last I
have met with the Man (though unknown) that will procure me the liberty of
writing and publishing an Account of my Nonconformity: For Charity forbids
me, till constrained, to charge you with such vile Inhumanity and Impudency, as
publicly to call to a Man for that which you take both for Sin and
Impossibility, and to reproach him for not printing, when you know the Press is
shut up from him; and know, that it were like to be his death, or ruin;
especially when you appeal in defense of the Reasonableness and Equity of your
Demand, and when you are a Preacher of the Gospel, and as much wiser and better
than the Non-conformists, as your Book imports. Craving your Answer, I rest,
your greatly obliged Servant, if you procure what you seem to promise me,

Ri. Baxter.
Aug. 18. 1670.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Baxter's first Letter.
SIR,
I Received yours this Afternoon, directed to the Author of the Persuasive. I
will not tell you, that shooting at Rovers, you have missed the Mark. Though I
glory not in such kind of Tactica, but prefer any plain Sermon I preach before
them. The main design of of that Essay, (I hope) was not only innocent, but
commendable: To cham down fiery Spirits; not to raise them: And to call in your
Charitable Assistance; not to provoke you. Therefore after such candid dealing,
(especially with your self) I am not a little surpised with these rough
Passages, as -- Desiring your Imprisonment, -- your Death, -- vile Inhumanity,
and Impudency, -- Reproaching yo^ -- Accounting my self wiser, and better than
the Non-conformists; besides that Sacrasme, -- now you have met with a Man, --
(...)! I hope there is not so much Gall and Acrimony in that whole Book you
stumble at. Sir, I beseech you, set a stricter Watch over your Spirit, that you
offend not in your Tongue: Let not your Saul-like Parts elevate you so high, as
to overlook others. I will assure you, I have no malignant thoughts toward
your own Person, or any that are of your Judgment: Those that know me, will be
my Compurgators.

I had, and still have a deeper sense of the gasping condition of our bleeding
Church -- The struglings of her own Children within her Womb, I well knew,
procured these Throws. If therefore, according to the sentiment of my Judgment;
which I neither received from extraction, or education, but from deliberate and
impartial study; I ventured on an Expedient to reconcile them, and antidote her
utter Deliquium; I had thought I might have escaped the Gauntlet, and only have
been pointed at by this Spit, -- Magnis tamen excidit Ausis. If I could
discover by the narrowest scrutiny, that I was acted with any other Principles,
than the Fear of God, and Honor of the King, I would both abhor my self, and
abandon my Enterprise* But till then, -- Dii coeptis aspirate meis! I little
looked for this Complaint from you: for when Fame lately spread a Report,
Kidderminster.
that you would return to your old Province, in these Parts, I did heartily
rejoice; not only in respect of the public good, but that I should be happy in
such a Neighbor: from whose Torch I might borrow Light, to illuminate those
dark and opacous Parts which are in my self.

Before I come to an Answer to your Queries, I must premise my hearty thanks,
in that you have gratified me in one of my Requests, by the Retractation of
your political Aphorisms. The other, which you stick at, is as modest and as
rational. As hereafter we must give an Account, to him that is ready to judge
the Quick and the Dead: So what absurdity was it, to desire the Reasons of your
Judgment? since you are pleased to walk Antipodes to us. That you, who are
(...). might extricate us out of the Labyrinth of our Errors; if you can make
them appear so. That so we may come over to you, and walk on the safest part of
the Globe.

The Occasion moving me to that boldness, was a startling Assertion from a
Friend of yours, Mr. Baxter affirmed afterward, that Conformity is an avowed
and deliberate sin.
-- That Conformity is in it self simply and absolutely sinful. And was it not
time to call in Aid? Let this appear, and then farewell Tithes. How shall I do
such wickedness, and sin against God? I do not find you so peremptory; but
rather to favor sober, painful, and conscionable Conformists: In which Classis
I desire to be found.

I had thought some Principles of yours, Healing Church Divisions.
formerly laid down, had inclined you to us: Not to mention your Approbation of
Dr. Brians 6th Sermon; and your late Book, wherein you affirm many Catholic
Truths. Though (if I rearch your meaning) -- All things are not therein
calculated to the pleasing of the Diocesan Party, as you call them. And the
deluded Proselytes in these Parts, are as much exasperated with you, on the
other hand, for your deserting them: And as they apprehend, too much
compliance. I am ashamed to stain my Paper with what they do eruct are in their
Frenzy-sits. As double-minded Men are unstable in all their ways: so those are
never fixed, that steer their course according to the Notions of Man's Wisdom.
But to your Queries.

I, and 2. Q. Whether I hnow any that will License such a Book, (as contains
the Reasons of Nonconformity.) And whether it be lawful to print such a Book?

A. These Queries are captious, and fallacious: Implying, that all Books de
sacto are licensed. The contrary whereof, is by daily experience evinced, in
Books of the like Argument, and against the Royal Society it self. Nay, some of
your own Books are not licensed. And does your Conscience cheek you at this
Instant only? These Pangs will not be permanent. Were I Chaplain to his Grace
of Canterbury, or the Bishop of London, I could give you a more direct Answer
to the former; and as for the latter, you are your own Casuist.

3. Q. Whether it be lawful to write against the Laws of the Land?

A. I am glad you are now so tender. Ab initio non fuit sic. Far be it from me,
to advise you to be disobedient to the Laws. Better my desire should be
frustrated, than you should commit the least sin. But see that your Obedience
be aequabilis, commensurate to one Law, as well as another, and to the same Law
at all times. There is a Relaxation (you well know) of the Law sometimes. And
who knows, but Authority (if desired) may dispense with the Letter of the Law
in such a Case? If you had been always so cautious, there had been no need to
have complained in your next Query of your Imprisonment. But upon what Basis
you should ground a Promise of security from me, I am utterly ignorant.

Q. 4, 5. How you shall be kept out of Goal? Whether I desire your Death?

A. May not this be done, with so much moderation and sobriety, that you need
not incur the guilt, or penalty of Treason?

May Mr. Baxter (per me licet) live as free as the Birds of the Air, and not be
cooped up in any Recluse! Long! long may you live! to the Glory of God; the
Peace and Welfare of this Church. And may you bring forth more and more mature
Fruit in your Age! I would not have you hazard the least hair of your Head for
my sake. I had rather Screene (I mean) stand betwixt you and danger; than
expose, or betray you to the least uneasiness. The more unkindly do I resent
that bitter Reflection, -- As if your Imprisonment came from my Parish. I dare
avouch, you have not one Enemy in it; except one Will. Lees; whose Horses (he
says) you took from him, with your own hands, in the time of the War: (...), he
calls them. Now were I in your Case, I would not trust an Act of Oblivion, here
below, to bear me out before the great Tribunal above; without giving the Poor
Man some equivalent satisfaction, whilst he is in the way.

Q. 6. Whether any will print, or sell such a Book?

A. This is all one, as to enquire, whether Huxters, or Mercenary Men, will
refuse their Advantage? You have been so happy, as to enrich this kind of Men
already.

Q. 7, 8. How such a Work will please the Diocesan Party? and the New
Conformists?

A. (...). Never was any Man so happy as to please all Parties: And I hope you
do not study to be a Man-pleaser. We must discharge good Consciences toward
God and Men. And then Ruat Coelum! Let the Mountains fall into the midst of the
Sea! Nobismet ipsi plaudamus! nos liberavimus animas nostras.

Now Sir, I have given you these Strictures, in obedience to your demands:
Neither courting, nor deprecating your further trouble. Though I prefer the
serenity of Peace before the most learned Dust. I desire to reciprocate no
other Saw of Controversy with your self; than that of mutual Love and Honor.
And herein I shall be loath to afford you the Spoils of a Victory. So far am I
from constraining you to use virulency, which you threaten; that I had rather
set a Lamb before an Elephant, and by a Spirit of Meekness, disarm your
Menaces, than make a Schism and Rupture in our Fraternal Bond.

Sir! until I shall be so happy as to see you, I shall continue your Faithful
Servant, and Affectionate Brother,

Jo. Hinckley.
Northfeild Aug. 25. 1670.
Mr. BAXTER'S Second Letter.
SIR,
WHen I had wrote an Answer to so much of your Book as concerned my self, I
cast it by, perceiving that it contained a just detection and denomination of
such things, as none of my Reproachers hitherto have had patience to endure to
be told of, who had not the patience or sobriety to forbear committing them.
For your Book confirmed me in the Opinion which late experience of the World
had brought me to, that it is one of Satan's impudent designs, to make sin pass
uncontrolled in the World, and to render all that oppose it more criminal than
them that commit it, to tempt Men to sin in such kinds and degrees, as that he
shall seem an uncivil Railer that presumes to charge them with it. I purposed
therefore to leave you in the Fruition of your self-pleasing-crimes, lest the
naming of them should transfer the imputed Guilt from you to me. Therefore I
only tried you with a few gentle Questions, in order to the fuller
understanding of your sense. I answer to which, and in this second also, you
express so great tenderness, and count your softest signification of a dislike,
to be Censures so harsh and passionate, as if you were injured, if your Crimes
were not applauded: And withal take it ill, to be supposed impatient of
hearing the Truth, and call for my Proofs in the very Lines which vehemently
express your impatience. Your two Letters so abound with words, which serve
only to tell me your conceits and confidence, and what you would have us do, to
be pleasing to you, and so much pass over all that it concerned you in Reason
and Justice to have spoke to, that it is with reluctance that I trouble you
with any Return. For what benefit can be expected by it? You importune me to
break the Kings Laws by printing without License; and in the same Volume
represent us as heinous breakers of his Law, for -- you know what. You can
suppose me, without any proof, to have formerly printed without License; and
when you thought I had sinned once, importune me to do it again: You can
intimate to the World how unreasonably I deal, if I write not and publish not
that which you judge it a sin to publish, as being forbidden, and so cunningly
bring me under one of the imputations unavoidably, either of sinning by my
unreasonable silence, or by breaking many Laws. You lay this Charge on me,
before the World in print, and so importune me to that Act, which the Law of
the Land will heavily punish; and yet wipe your mouth, and take it ill to be
noted, as one that would draw me into suffering. And yet you want not words,
when you can give no reasonable Answer concerning any of this. You cannot
pretend, that such Laws, if I break them, will not be excuted, when I lie
almost these two years under penalty (adjudged to Newgate it self for six
Months, by Sentence and Warrant) for a far smaller breach of the Law (which my
best understanding persuades me is none at all.) You think the silencing of
about 1800 Ministers, while many hundred thousand Souls are perishing through
ignorance and ungodliness, to be a Load not heavy enouh to the People and them,
(to say nothing of the great indigence of many of their Families) unless it be
increased by your wordy bitter Oratorical Reproach; when we would take it for
rare clemency, if we might but have leave to preach Christ's Gospel without a
farthing of their maintenance, (yea, and to be confined to preach only on the
Catechism Points, to some of the poorest ignorant Congregations, such as many
in Wales, etc. as I offered, when I was silenced first; yea, and under sharp
Penalties, if ever we speak against Bishops, Liturgy, or Ceremonies;) yet after
nine years silencing we must be scorned by you, as such as abjure their
Calling, and make themselves Milites emeritos: When you know that God will not
be served by deliberate avowed sin; and that he that so enters on, and
exercises his Ministry, (and will sin by Covenant, that he may preach against
sin) can scarce expect a Blessing, if a Pardon: And when you cannot but know,
(for you dwell in England, and write against the Non-conformists) that the sins
which the Non-conformists fear they should be guilty of, if they conformed,
(not accusing any others) are so inhumane and heinous, that we dare scarce name
them, lest you startle, and think we charge them upon you, (whom we leave to
your own Master.) Yet do you make a heinous matter of it, that we thus by
fearing sin our selves, do seem to think, that Conformity is any sin at all,
and say we weaken your Hands, prejudice your Ministry, and make the People cold
in joining with you: What then should we do, if we published the Reasons of our
Nonconformity, and opened all that sin which we fear, which yet you so
vehemently call for? Yea you say, [Who would unmuzzle a fierce Panther, that
would worry him that set his Chops at liberty] even then, when I ask you but to
get me a License for that which you so openly call for: which is all one as to
say, [Do it if thou dare: and if thou do it not, thou abjurest thy Calling, and
refusest to give the World a reason of it:] You can tell the World, that in my
Book of Rest I seem to go their way, that hold, (That they may fight against
the King, if it were for the cause of Religion to purge the Church of Idolatry
and Superstition, and cite P. 123. (in which Edition of 12, I know not,) when I
never wrote so never thought so; but have proved the contrary at large in
several Writings! Yet this is done deliberately in print. You fetch your Charge
from the old Editions of that Book, eleven years after I had retracted, and
expunged, and left out of that same Book, not only that which you pervert, but
all the rest from end to end, which seemed in the least to favor the late
Wars. Either you knew this, or you did not. If you did, was that done like a
peaceable Minister, to aggravate with such gross and odious untruth things
retracted, and utterly expunged, even long before the Act of Oblivion; and that
so as directly tends to the temporal ruin of him you charge them on? If you
knew it not, did it beseem you to meddle in Print, where you know no better
what you do oppose? What good will Austins Retractations do him, if he shall
ten or eleven years after be freshly charged with all that he retracted, and
much more? (yea, I gave Mr. Hampden Pie one of the Books of One of the latter
Editions so altered, but a little before he came to your House (to his utter
undoing.) If you did not see it, you might have done, before you had written
against it. Yea, (as not regarding your self-contradiction) at the same time
you call me to retract my Political Aphorisms, and tell me how excellent a Work
it would be, when I had done it before, and had so long before retracted what
you aggravate: Though the one was done so lately, that you could scarce know of
it, the other that was done eleven years before might have been known: And if
so long time excuse not the Book, or Author yet, from your bloody Charge, why
do you desire him to retract another? What good will retracting it do, if you
will nevertheless so many years after make such use of it, (from what
Principles, and to what Ends I leave to you?) The Aphorisms, which you would
have retracted, you say, [are those especially which are gathered by an Eminent
Hand:] Who can think but here you condemn all those which that Eminent hand
has gathered? And the first of all is [Governours are some limited, some de
facto unlimited: The unlimited are Tyrants, and have no right to that unlimited
Government.] The next words are, [For they are all Subjects themselves, and
under the Sovereignty and Laws of God.] Because it is your highest Preferments,
as you say, to preach the Gospel, I beseech you give me some such light here as
is necessary to a Retractation. If any Governors are not limited by God, tell
me whether it be any sin in them, if they make Laws, commanding Men to deny
God, and blaspheme him, to worship themselves as Gods, as Caligula did, to
worship Mahomet or Idols, to kill all the Innocent People of the Land? (I talk
not of the absolute Power of all Men's Estates and Lives.) Nay, whether there be
any thing imaginable which they may not command? or whether it be possible for
that Man at all to sin, that is not limited by God? And tell me if this be the
Doctrine which you count it your chief preferment to preach? And whether you
can think that any wise Governors in the World will take those for friendly
Promoters of their Interest, who would so calumniate them, as to make their
Subjects believe, that they lay any such claim? You can gather, that I approve
of Men's terms of Ministration, because I join with the Church which they teach.
As if no more were required of a Curate, than of a Communicant. And as if the
same Reasons which warrant my Worship as a private Man, would warrant all my
Subscriptions, Declarations, Oaths, and all the rest of Ministerial Conformity.
You can blame me for not Actively submitting to the Laws, when you can name no
Law which commands me what you mean. You can Magisterially say [Not that
loose paralitick Discourse given to the Kings Commissioners at the Savoy,
written rather Rhetorically, ad Captandum Populum, to insinuate into vulgar
Capacities, than Logically to evince the Hypothesis contended for, stripped of
its multifarious Fallacies, ungrounded Surmises, and erroneous Suppositions,
etc.] 1. As if you knew what was given in at the Savoy, when a considerable
part of the Papers were never published: Yea I have reason enough to believe,
that no Man living can give an account of them to you but my self; because no
Copies were taken, and some Papers only read. 2. There are many Papers printed
which were given in upon that occasion; and who knows by this Character which
of them it is that is called the Loose paralitick Discourse? 3. You talk of a
Hypothesis contended for, as if you had a mind to be thought to say somewhat,
though you understand not about what: For no Hypothesis is named by you, and no
wonder. If you mean the first, second or third Paper given in at the beginning
of the Business to the Lord Chancellor, the Hypothesis was, that union is
desirable; the means whereto we offered as we were commanded. If you mean our
exceptions against the Liturgy, the Hypothesis was, that the Liturgy was
corrigible, and to be altered in some things. And do you oppose that Hypothesis
which the King had expressly put into the words of his Commission, so far as to
appoint Men to alter it? and which the Convocation by their actual alterations
owned? If you mean our Reply to the Answer of the Exceptions, the Hypothesis
general is the same. And what made all those Learned Persons who wanted neither
Time nor Will, forbear ever to give an Answer to that Reply, if it were so
loose and contemptible as you make it? Was it because contempt was fitter than
a Confutation? that could not be; because smaller matters not written by Men
commissioned by the King for such a Treaty, nor offered by their own
importunity, have found some of them at leisure for a more particular
Consideration. If it be our Liturgy offered them that you mean, the Hypothesis
there is, That those forms there offered were fit to be taken into
consideration, as the Addenda mentioned in the Commission. If this be false,
what can you imagine to be the reason that we could by no importunity ever
procure any by word or writing to open to us the faults of that Liturgy; and
that L'Estrange himself had no more to say against it? Though being drawn up in
eight days only, we desired we might have had leisure to have made it more
perfect, (which might easily be done.) If it be the Petition for Peace that you
mean, the Hypothesis was, That our Concord was so desirable, as that they
should make the abatements there mentioned to attain it; but especially, rather
than silence so many Ministers, and choose the other ill Consequents that would
follow. If this be, it you mean, and you are ambitious of acquainting your
Rulers, that you will stand at Gods Judgment as an approver of -- all that --
enjoy the pleasure and fruit of your desire. If the silence of so many hundred
Ministers, and the Consequents to so many thousand ignorant Souls, be a
Blessing to be rejoiced in, put not your Sickle into other Men's Harvest, but
let the Labourer, who is worthy, have the hire. If it be otherwise, what need
any Man say, Their -- be on us, and on our Children? 4. And when you talk of
Vulgar Capacities, do you not reproach the Reverend Bishops as Vulgar
Capacities, in print? To whom were they given, but to them? And I never heard
of any that they showed them to. If you say, That they were printed afterward,
I answer, 1. Some were, and some were not. 2. How could we then foretell that,
when we gave them in? 3. They were done, as far as I can learn, by a poor
reading Curate, that gave the Printer Copies through mere poverty to get a
little Money, without our knowledge. For he was the Scribe that we were forced
to use for Copies, and I hear he kept some for himself. 4. I sent to the Kings
Secretary, Sir IV. Morris, when I heard they were in the Press, to desire him
to search the Press, and apprehend them. 5. The printing of them by offending
our Antagonists, and by the intolerable falseness of the impression, was a
very great injury to us. Moreover you dare publish to the world, [Had Men kept
close to the Church of England, they needed not have stumbled at swearing, That
it is not lawful to take up Arms against the King. I must tell the whole Chorus
of my dissenting Brethren, that this very Fly is enough to spoil the Box of
pretended Ointment: who can choose but nauseate that way of Discipline, which
startles at renouncing War against the King?] Do you think you were able to
bear it patiently, if I should tell you how much of the Diabolical Spirit is in
these Lines, and how unfit such a Spirit is for the Sacred Ministry? 1. You
know that it is a time in which our Rulers are justly exasperated for the
horrid Murder of the King, and for the Treasons and Rebellions that have been
committed: And you know, that no design could more gratify the Prince of
Darkness, than to bring the Odium of all this upon the Ministry, or upon any
part of the Ministry whose labors are needful to the Church. 2. I suppose you
know, that it is not one of a Multitude of the Non-conformable Ministers that
ever took up Arms against the King. I suppose in all Worcestershire there is
not now two, for I remember not one, (though there are some Conformists that
were in Arms against him.) 3. I suppose you cannot be ignorant (because you
dwell in England) that they were Episcopal Parliaments that were long
quarreling with the King, and that still cried out of the danger of Popery,
Arminianism, Monopolies, etc. of which Rushworths Collections sufficiently
inform you: And that Dr. Heylin, in the Life of Arch bishop Laud, has fully
acquainted the World, that it was one Party of Episcopal Men, (of whom he would
make Archbishop Abbot the head) that contended against the other, and put in
the difference about the Subjects Propriety into the Quarrel; and that besides,
Neile, Laud, Buckridge, Howson, Corbet, and Mountague, the Bishops went all the
other way: So that by Andrew's advice it was thought unsafe to let a
Convocation meddle in their Cause. 4. I suppose you cannot easily be ignorant,
that the War in England against the King was begun by an Episcopal Parliament;
where (as some of the Members aver to me) there was but one known Presbyterian
in both Houses, and there or four Independants, and two or three Sectaries, and
about four hundred Episcopal Men and Erastians: And also by an Episcopal Army,
for such was the Earl of Essex, and almost all his Chief Officers; and by
almost all Episcopal Lord-Lieutenants, who were first put into possession of
the Militia against the Kings Commissioners of Array: In so much that even the
Propositions sent to the King at Nottingham were but for the Regulation of
Episcopacy, and not the Extirpation: And among all the Westminster Assembly
there were not called ten Non-conformists (nor I think eight.) Nor indeed was
Presbytery then well known in England, till the notice of it came in long after
with the Scots and Covenant. So that it is past doubt with any but the
desperately impudent, that it was Episcopal Men in England on both sides that
raised War against each other; though one Party of them afterward fell in with
the Presbyterians of Scotland, and the Sectaries, for fear of wanting help, and
of being overthrown. 5. You cannot but know that it is not the whole Chorus of
your dissenting Brethren, that scrupled swearing, that it is not lawful to take
up Arms against the King. That twenty in London took the whole Oxford Oath at
once, and more after: That the chief Nonconformable Ministers took it in
Northamptonshire, Somersetshire, Devon-shire, and some other Places: That many
Non-conformists were against the War; as Mr. Geery, Mr. Capel, and almost all
the Gloucester-shire Ministers, and many others. Poor Mr. Martin of Weedon,
lately in Goal near you for preaching in private, lost an Arm in the Kings
Service in his Oxford Army; when the only Archbishop left in England
(Williams) was a General in Wales in the Parliaments Army. 6. You have not
given the World any Proof of any Presbyterian Minister in England, (much less
the whole Chorus) that ever scrupled swearing what you mention. I should know
their minds as well as you, and I know not one, that I remember, that is not
ready to swear, that [It is not lawful to take up Arms against the King.] I say
again, I know not one. And shall a Levite stand up and intimate, (though it be
not so spoken out) To the King, and to Papists, and to Posterity, that it is
the whole Chorus of Dissenters about Discipline? Put out your other Clauses,
and let us have no more Oaths of Allegiance or Fidelity to Diocesanes or
Lay-Chancellors put upon us, than were imposed on Christ's Churches for 600 or
800 years, and then try who will refuse to swear a Renunciation of War against
the King. 7. But I admire how you came to such an obdurateness, as to talk of
nauseating [that way of Discipline, which startles at renouncing War against
the King.] Is it Episcopal Discipline that you mean? If not, what way of
Discipline is it that startles at it, unless you mean Military Discipline? Read
over the Confessions of the French, Belgic, and all other Presbyterian
Churches, and see whether there be any thing in their Discipline that startles
at it. What if it had been the Presbyterians, and not the Episcopal, that in
England raised the War? Does it follow that their way of Discipline was for it:
Name us that Form of Discipline, and tell us where to find it, which you mean
that is guilty of what you charge on it. Does he that says [Every Church
should have a Bishop, and not only a thousand or 600 in a Diocess] hereby say
[we may not renounce War against the King?] Do not so wrong God as to think him
so unjust, as always to suffer such as you thus to abuse the Innocent. 8. And
you that talk so malepertly of the Savoy Papers, it is like know, that it was
not Presbytery, nor any other than Archbishop Usher's Form of Episcopacy in
terminis, in his own printed Paper, which we offered the King and Bishops as
the Medium of our Concord in 1660. And when that would not be received, see in
the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs, whether it was not the
downright Prelacy that was submitted to, with only the additions of some
Pastoral Power in a Rural Deanery: And I never heard Presbytery pleaded for by
Word, or saw it by Writing in all that Treaty, but only Vshers Episcopacy. Why
then do you talk of the Discipline of the Chorus, unless you mean the Episcopal
Discipline. And do you not know, (that write about the Cause) that the War was
not founded in Theological Differences, but in Law Differences? and that it was
Statesmen and Lawyers that made the difference by their Political and
Law-Controversies? Not but that Divines on both sides were too guilty, if not
the forwardest. But my dull Brains could never find out any one Point of
difference in Theology, about the Power of Kings, and the Duty of Obedience in
the People between the Divines called Presbyterians and Episcopal: If you know
any, name them me, and tell me your Proof; I know that they meddled too much
with the Political and Law-Controversies of Lawyers and Statesmen, (for there
lay the difference) as I did my self in my Pol. Aphor. of which I unfeignedly
repent, (though I thought then, that Oceana forced me to do it.) 10. It Is not
probable, that so Learned a Man is ignorant what Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson,
Bishop Andrews in Tortura Torti, and many more such have said, to prove, that
Calvin, and the Presbyterians, and the English Puritans, differ not in these
things from the Theology of the Church of England, taking the same Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, etc. And how come you to be wiser than they, and to
prove the Discipline Interest in the disagreement? And when you have taught the
Papists to say that Andrews, etc. spoke falsely, how will you prove it? I know
that there were many Sectaries, and some individual Persons of the Episcopal
and Presbyterian Judgment, that erred in Law and Politics, and perhaps in
Theologicals too. But what is that to a difference between the Parties in their
Religious Principles? 11. For can you be ignorant that it is the grand
Champions for Prelacy that have written for the Principles of the Long
Parliament, by which they pleaded for their War? Do you not know, (to pass by
Bishop Jewel) what Bishop Bilson of Subjection has said, and what Rich. Hooker
in his Eccles. Pol. L. 1. and. 8. has said higher than those Parliament
Soldiers that I was most acquainted with? I have now written a Book, (Licensed)
which contains a Defense of Monarchy against R. Hookers Popular Errors. Why
then do you not call the Episcopal Party to repentance? or why do you insinuate
such suspicions into Men's Minds, that the Discipline is it that startles at
renouncing War against the King? You know, I suppose, what Grotius de Jure
Belli, also has said in his Enumeration, (out of Barclay) of Cases in which it
is lawful to take Arms against Kings: Even that Grotius who was the Master of
the late Game, and boasts of the approbation of the English Prelates. Was
Archbishop Abbot a Presbyterian, (who says he was suspended for refusing to
License Dr. Sybthorpes Book; see his Narrative in Rushworth?) Did he and all
the Clergy, and Parliaments, that went his way, forsake the Church of England?
Who then were the Church? Yet you can add [P. 125. And since the Lines of our
Peace and Happiness, as to Church and State, do meet and concenter in him, as
our common Father, is it unreasonable for Subjects to swear they will not
endeavor the alteration of Government in the Church and State? who would
think, that any Natives of a Land, professing themselves the Followers of
Christ, -- and expecting protection from a lawful Prince, should once demur,
whether they should make this Declaration, or take this Oath?] (O easy happy
Swearer!) Qui deliberant desciverunt: Such as doubt of this, have even shak'd
off the Yoke of Subjection, (unhappy Doubters!) 1. Here [They will not
endeavor the alteration of Government] is put in stead of [will not at any
time endeavor any alteration of Government.] [2. In Church and State] is put
instead of [in Church or State.] 3. Not one Man of my acquaintance of them you
question, refuses to swear, that he will never endeavor any alteration of the
Church Government, as it is in the King according to the Oath of Supremacy. 4.
They that offered Bishop Vshers Form of Episcopacy, are not for altering
Episcopacy as such. 5. The Oath of the Canons 1640. put [we will not consent]
in stead of endeavor. And a Parliament condemned that Oath; and no Parliament
since thought meet to justify or restore it. 6. We know that Lay-Chancellors
exercise the Power of the Keys, by decreeing Excommunications and Absolutions:
And we believe, that exercising the Power of the Keys so, is Church Government.
And we are all agreed, that yet no reforming alteration is to be attempted by
Sedition, Rebellion, or unlawful means; but only by Subjects petitioning,
Parliament-mens speaking, etc. And if you think to come to Heaven by swearing,
that we may not petition against Lay-Chancellors use of the Keys, cannot you go
quietly your own way, and let others alone that trust not to such means? 7. We
believe, that Ignatius his Episcopacy (every Churches unity being known by one
Altar and one Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons) is as lawful at least as
one Bishop only to a thousand or 500 Churches: And I believe, that it is in the
Power of the King and Parliament to reduce our Episcopacy to that ancient Form:
And if they do it, I will not swear to disobey them, if they command my Service
under them: I was once commissioned among others under the Broad Seal to
endeavor such an alteration of the Liturgy, etc. And before what was done
about Episcopacy, the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs shows;
and I will not swear to disobey the King, if he command me the like again; nor
I will not swear universally, and mean particularly, till the Lawgivers so
expound themselves. 8. I know by what Oaths the Roman Clergy got their
Supremacy, and mastered Kings and Emperors. 9. I know that till Roman Tyranny
invaded the Church, the Clergy was not put to swear to the Bishops. 10. I love
but one King in a Kingdom, nor any thing that is injurious to him; and I am
willing to swear Allegiance to my lawful King, as I have done, and to take his
Office as a Constitutive part of the Kingdom.

But not to twist any other with him by Oaths into the Constitution, nor any
thing that looks like it, especially not to swear to the Church Governors
before the Kings State-Government. And now what is the connection of your
Premises and Conclusion? [The King is the Center of our Happiness, etc. ergo,
none that are Natives and Christians, and expect protection, should once demur
whether he may swear to Diocesanes and Lay-Chancellors, yea not to endeavor
any alteration of their Government by Petition, or if the King command them;
ergo, they that doubt of this, have even shaken off the Yoke of Subjection;
ergo, they all deserve, not only to be forbidden preaching Christ, but to be
hanged, (as all do, no doubt, that have shak'd off the Yoke of Subjection;)
ergo, not only the Non-conformists, but the Conformists, that swear doubtingly,
should be all hanged. Thus differ the Priest and the Levite, that pass by the
bleeding Church, from us wretched Samaritanes. Turba gravis paci, placidaeque
etc. As to the Popish malicious Slanders long since by them vented against
Geneva, etc. Beza, the Scottish and English Encouragers of Bothwell, which you
intimate on the by, the first are long ago refuted by King James, Bishop Jewel,
Bishop Bilson, etc. And lately by Dr. Pet. Moulin Junior, in his Answer to
Philanax Anglicus, where he will let you know, that Geneva, Holland, etc. shook
off their Governors while they were Papists, before they turned Protestants.
And of the later learn more truth from Buchanans History of the Queen of Scots,
and of Bothwells Murder of the King. I am weary of following your Treatise so
far, I will add but a little more as to your Letters: In the first Letter these
words astonish me, [I hope there is not so much Gall and Acrimony in the whole
Book.] Wonderful, that any Man should so little perceive what he says and
does, and be so blinded by Self-love! as to think he speaks Oil and Sugar,
when he speaks Fire and Swords. You say you find me not so peremptory as to
hold Conformity simply and absolutely sinful: I pray you, could you judge so
hardly of me, as to think that I left my Ministerial Labors, to which I was
vowed, to escape but that which I account no sin? You say, [Some of my own
Books have not an Imprimatur] why would you say so, before you knew it? I know
of none of them that want it, that were then printed since the Law required it;
though the Imprimatur be not printed in them. But since you have so urged me to
print without License, I cannot say that the last Book (the Defense of my Cure)
is licensed, nor that it is not; but if it come without, you have taught it the
way. You so far credit your Neighbor Lee's Report, as to give me the advice
for restitution of his Horses. Charity is not so easy of belief. Why did he
never make such a demand of me while I lived there in sixteen years space. This
is like Dr. Boremans printing, that [it is said I killed a Man in cold Blood
with my own Hand; but if that be not true, I am not the first that have been
slandered.] Very true: Whereas I know not that ever I struck one Man in anger
(except Boys at School) in my life, nor did I ever kill or wound any Man in War
or Peace. Nor did I ever take any Man's Horses with my own Hand; nor was I ever,
to my knowledge, in Northfield or Kings-norton Parish; nor ever with any that
were employed about taking up Horses in the War, to my knowledge, but once;
which was, when the Kings Soldiers had taken up about a thousand in
Warwickshire, and 500 in Northamptonshire, the Earl of Essex gave a Commission
to Colonel Mitton and others to take up some three hundred in the Kings
Quarters in Worcestershire: And about twenty Men went three or four times
about it; of which times I went once with them to see that they committed no
abuse by taking from such as they were not warranted to do; and they brought
away about twenty or less, and some were restored, and I touched not one of
them, nor was their Guide; and I never heard that they that went the two other
times (which was toward Northfield, where and when I had nothing to do with
them, nor knew what they did) took about thirty more, which I heard were many
of them restored; and if your Neighbor had come to me, and given me any
probability that he had lost by me injuriously, it is like I had repayed it; but
his slander obliges me not to restitution: I will say no more about your Rule,
with relation to all that were present on either side when any were wronged in
that War. Your acquaintance with the Huxters that so readily print and sell
unlicensed Books, is no direction to me that know them not: A few Sheets many
will venture on; but I know not them that will venture on a large Book, lest
they be undone by the surprising of it. In your Letter you could find a
Categorical Affirmation, that (...) is a Verb; whereas you may see in the
Errata of another Book then at the Press, (because that Book had no Errata
prin^ed) that [Verb] was misprinted for [Word^] And if I know not a Verb from a
Participle, yet that little concerns our Case in hand: And though my own
opinion be, that the Parts of Speech should be reduced to three, etc. I will
not trouble you with my Gramatical ignorance any further than to tell you, that
I am contented that you take liberty to judge it as great as you please; but
that Man should be more temperate in censuring the Errors of the Press, Scribe,
and Author, who cites Dr. Manton (then in Prison) upon Jude, who never wrote
on Jude, but only on James; and that cites Dr. John Burges of Regeneration,
who never wrote of such a Subject; it is like the Subject drew you to think,
that he that wrote so much for the Ceremonies (though once a Nonconformist)
was like to be the Author of such a Book, which indeed Dr. Cornelius Burges
wrote, when he was a great Conformist, who was afterward Assessor in the
Westminster Assembly, and (though a Protestor for moderate Episcopacy) wrote
that Book for the necessity of Reformation, which so much offended the
Episcopal Party. In your last you liken me to the Papists that take liberty
more than enough, when you cannot name one Book since the Act, before your
importunity, that I took more liberty in, than was given me, that I remember.
And you in the same Paragraph invite me to comply with your sober request, and
to direct it to the Commonwealth of the English Clergy; and yet talk against
unmazzeling the mouth of the Panther, as aforesaid; but these no doubt you can
reconcile better than I. As for my nonsense in putting Librum pro Authore, it
is such as I am not seldom guilty of, as I am also of putting the Author for
the Book. As to your particular Exceptions. 1. Speaking slightly of Conformity,
Do you expect that a Man that by not conforming loses more than you have yet
gotten by conforming, and that also loses his Ministerial Liberty, more
desirable than all the Bishoprics in England, should commend the Conformity
which he so avoideth. As for Mr. Dod's words, I glad that you say [Doth God
stand in need of our Lie, (O! no, nor of our Perjury neither) should we speak
wickedly for God, or talk deceitfully for him?] (No, I think we should not; nor
deliberately covenant, or do any wicked thing on pretense of securing the
liberty of preaching against the sin of other Men.) But yet it is my opinion,
that we may thank God for the effects that are brought to pass by Men's
mis-doings; (though not for the sin it self) even for the death of Jesus
Christ; which was all that Mr. Dod could mean. 2. If you had but seen the
Colections of Instances given in by some body at the Savoy Treaty to the
reforming part of the Commissioners of Defects and Disorders or
Immethodicalness in the Liturgy, you would not wonder that I now take it not
for Perfect. Especially when you compare it with the Liturgy which we offered
them, and see there what difference we made, can you forbear a Censure of ours,
(which has hitherto strangely escaped their Censures who rejected it) and yet
marvel not that we take not yours for perfect? As for your likening me to the
Jews that hire Christian Servants to dress their meat. (There is but one comes
sometime to my House, and he will eat no meat there on any days but of his own
dressing.) Remember that you said even now, God needs not our Lie or
deceitful wickedness, that we may have leave to preach or pray. 3. As to your
third Exception: 1. When you have got me liberty to write my Reasons, I will
tell you more of my opinion about Diocesanes, if you cannot understand it by my
Disputes of Church Government long ago printed; which if you have read, do you
still expect that I should approve of Diocesanes? or marvel that I think better
of the Waldenses Bohemian Episcopacy, and that which obtained in Ignatius, yea
in Cyprians days? But what thought you of when you call me to obey old
Establishments, and not invent now ones, and set the People on gadding after
Innovations? Did you really think that our Establishment was elder than the
days of the Apostles of Ignatius? and that theirs were Innovations to ours? And
that Archbishop Usher reduced Episcopacy to Novelty, when he pretended to
reduce it to the ancient Form? Does not Dr. Hammond maintain, that there were
no Bishops in Scripture times that had more than one Congregation, and that de
facto there was then no such things as distinct Subject-Presbyters? Is 1650
years ago the time of Novelties to us, and our establishment the true
Antiquity? Well! let it be so. -- 2. But you untruly report me to say, that we
must not communicate with a Parish-Minister, who concurreth with the Bishop, P.
77. If you had added [In consenting to our silencing;] For I only said, that I
made that none of our Question: The reason was, because my work lay another
way, and it would have hindered the edification of those I wrote for, to have
pleaded that Cause with them: But do I deny all that comes not into our
Question? To deal openly with you, I fore-knew long ago what would stick most
against our Concord, when I labored in vain to have prevented it; and now the
thing which I foresaw is come: When I persuade the People to Communion in the
Parish Churches, they say [shall we have Communion with those that have
silenced so many hundred such Ministers, and set up such and such in their
stead?] And here I may as well drive them through a Stone Wall, as drive them
on directly in that way. If you can do it, why have not you done it? I am sure
I cannot: They will sooner renounce Communion with me, than hold Communion with
those that they think have been the chief Promoters of all this, that are of
the Clergy. And if I did not challenge them to prove if they can, that ever
such and such Parish Ministers were the Silencers, I could get them to hold
Communion with none of them all: If you will have your work done your own way,
on your own terms, do it; I cannot so do it, for I am not of your judgment. And
now, Sir, I am not so unacquainted with what I do, as to tell you I have given
you a lenifying Answer, or to expect that this should please you, who accounted
a few gentle Questions so sharp: If my business had been to win your good
opinion and report of me, I would have spoken you fairer. But though veritas
odium parit, I am naturally addicted to speak plain truth, (without any ill
will to you or any) though I foresee that impatient guilt will call it railing,
and what not. If none deal plainly with offending Preachers, how much worse is
their condition than the Peoples? But had it been for public view, and not for
your own private admonition, I should have used a softer Style on several
accounts: As I take none of your plainness with me amiss, so far as it
contains truth; so the imitation of it ought not to seem injurious to you:
Nothing has more moved me to it, than to find by your Letter how greatly
averse you are to Repentance; in the promoting whereof I should gladly be

Your Servant, Ri. Baxter.
April 28. 1671.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Baxter's second Letter.
SIR,
YOurs of April 28. came to me May 19. It may be it visited some Friends by the
way, which retarded its passage: And though my Head and Heart were then filled
with better Meditations; I mean, against the Lords day approaching, yet I could
not but give you my sentiments of some Passages therein. Though I shall not
requite you, much less be avenged of you for your length and sharpnes^. A full
Anatomy of such a Carcass may prove offensive.

It is natural (I perceive) to you to drench your self in the Waters of Mara;
and to sport in the Salt Sea if Sarcasines and Satyrs: -- Magnus ab Infernis,
revocetur Tullius umbris, -- non potes absolvi. It is a small thing with you to
tell me of Crimes and Guilt: That I comply with Satan's designs: That I have a
Diabolical Spirit, unfit for the Sacred Ministry: I talk malepertly: A Levite
started up: That I write against the Non-conformists: When I only court and beg
their assistance, in doing no worse than my self, that they would not stand
still idle in the Marketplace; whilst so many hundred thousand Souls (as you
say) are perishing through ignorance and ungodliness. That I traduce the
Presbyterians, though I never named them (I think) (...), in any Writing or
Sermon of mine. As if I would have sin go uncontrolled; and that I look on them
as uncivil, that presume to acquaint us with it. Whereas I have procured your
indignation, only by a submissive and mannerly Request, that you would give us
the Reasons of your Nonconformity, that we might see where the sin lies. But
you say, You will leave us in our self-pleasing Crimes. Then I must say, you
are but a treacherous Watchman, to suffer sin upon your Brother, contrary to
Levit. 19. 17. If you will not help us out of the Ditch into which we are
fallen. It is one of Gods greatest Judgments, when he does not reprove, chide,
afflict: See Hosea 4. 14. Are you one then that account it your duty to deal
plainly with offending Preachers, (though you will not own the Name of a
Diocesan Bishop, yet you fancy your self sitting in his Chair) and yet you
will leave them in their self-pleasing Crimes? Let the Righteous smite me; it
shall be a kindness: Let him reprove me; it shall be an excellent Oil, which
shall not break my head, Psalm. 141. 5. This dealing of yours will do little
toward promoting my Repentance: It may exercise my patience. I will herein
write after the Copies of St. Austin, Melancton, Calvin, etc. who in their
greatest heats and provocations retained their calmness, sweetness, and
serenity of Spirit toward those that did bitterly oppose them. (...). as
Diogenes told Antisthenes in Laertius. Michael the Archangel, and my grand
Master, have trodden this Path bebefore me.

Sir, you reckon up 1800 Ministers that are silenced. Though I utterly dislike
the term, Silenced; for to me it is apparent they are silent actively, and
through their own fault, until it appear to the contrary; and then the sin is
yet more heinous, by how much it is the more voluntary. But if you are a true
Accountant; if this be not a false Muster, and you mistaken in your
Arithmetic: How many of these have little more learning than your English
Books have taught them? As great Strangers to the Writers of the first
Centuries, as they have been to the Universities. How many of these were nested
in other Men's Habitations; whilst the right owners were exposed to wind,
weather, and starving; double the number of 1800. This Retalliation may cause
them to say: As I have done, so God has requited me. Judges 1. 7. yet I have
some ground to think, the number is not so great, since I hear that many come
in, and more remove into more remote Parts and conform there. If it be true
that Dr. Connaught has re-assum'd his Ministry; I think his Example (whose
Piety and Learning is so considerable) may be very attractive. However, it is no
strange thing, (...). Methinks that Men who are so willing to preach in Wales,
and the poorest Congregations, without a farthing, upon Catechetical Points;
neither meddling with Bishops, Liturgy, or Ceremonies, (as you say) should be
willing to take things (in order thereunto) in their most favorable and candid
sense. Give me leave to give you two Cautions. 1. Take heed how you undertake
for any considerable part of those 1800. that they shall preach on those terms:
For then you trans-element them; their Tongues do not only itch, but their very
Nods and Whispers tend that way. 2. Take heed you do not impede so good a Work,
by maintaining Conformity to be an avowed and deliberate sin; absolutely and
simply so: A sin, as it were, by Covenant: So that a Blessing is not to be
expected on their Ministry; so inhumane and heinous, you dare scarcely name it.
What will we say, if you should lay open the sin of Conformity in your Reasons?
Such a Lion in the way is enough to affright many. Such a Flaming Sword may
keep Laborers out of the Vineyard; out of the Paradise of the Church. I have
sadder apprehensions yet. As the Papists do unchurch us, and by consequence
damn us; so you are like to arrive to the same uncharitableness: For if we live
and die in avowed and deliberate sin, what Wages are we like inevitably to
receive? You infer from my words, or rather drag from them, by an odd Climax of
Ergo's, that there are some Persons deserve hanging: But I can, with more ease,
and better Logic, gather from what you say, that we must be damned.

I am glad you own my Quotation out of your Book of Rest: At first you made me
afraid, when you said, -- You never wrote, or thought of any such Passage. Yet
this is but like the jumping of a Deer after a Mortal Shot; or the playing and
sprunting of a Fish, when it is stricken with an Hook: You make me amends
afterward by saying, you have retracted and expunged it in your later Editions.
And truly, I do much rejoice at your reiterated Ingenuity in this kind: For as
it is said, The best thing is not to be born; the next, cito mori: So a
Palinodia is next to the publishing of sound Truths. But though this
Retractation was before the Act of Oblivion, (as you say) yet I fear the War
was done, and execution over. If you be so rash in obtruding your immature
Notions upon the World, before you have licked them, and strained out their
Crudities, and ill Humors in the Press first, by several Editions, you will
discourage Men from buying your Books, when they first come forth.

This Overture has given you occasion, -- Renovare dolorem, by minding me of
the saddest Tragedy of my whole Life. The utter undoing of Mr. H. P. though you
well know he was undone before: I could lament this in Tears of Blood; yet as
my Conscience does not upbraid me of negligence herein, so that good Lady (I
hope) will do me the Justice, that I gave her notice of what I feared and
suspected a fortnight before the Catastrophe. And if there was such a fatality
in it; that after I had beseech'd her Ladyship, that I might convey him to some
House of his Fathers; and this not being yielded unto, but I was entreated to
keep him longer; I could not preserve the Walls of my House from being broken
in the night time; this is, this must be for a lamentation.

I presume you had not poured this Vinegar into my Wound, had I not been your
Remembrancer, about your taking the Horses of Will. Lees. And though you deny
the Fact, both he and his Wife offer to swear it. They say, they followed you
to Coventry, and obtained an Order from the Committees there to have the Horses
restored; but you refused to obey it. Nay, they followed you to London, and and
at Mr. Foley's House came to your Bedchamber. If their Relation be false, or
your Memory fail, I cannot help it: Many and many a time they desired me to
write unto you for some satisfaction toward maintaining them in their poor
decrepit Age. You confess you came into the Kings Quarters in those Parts to
take Horses; ergo, Retract again: For in your late Book, you say, you meddled
not with the War, until after Naseby Fight; yet you prayed and preached to the
Coventry Garrison: Could you forbear to besprinkle your Prayers and Sermons
with some of those Principles which after carried you into the Field?

Although I moved you to retract your Political Aphorisms; yet 'twas only such
as were erroneous, and dangerous to our Peace. That which you mention, about an
unlimited Power in Princes, or universal Obedience in Subjects; even to turn
Mahumitans, if they command; I do as much abhor in the Leviathan, as I did
dislike those Rotations and fond Principles of Government in the Oceana; ergo,
you might have saved the labor of your Dilemma. Austin did not retract all
that ever he wrote. How does it follow? I account it my chiefest preferment to
preach the Gospel; ergo, you ask me, whether this Gospel which I preach be the
unlimited Power of Princes? Sure you think I live not in England, but in
Turkey; or else that I am an errand Stranger to the Nature and Latitude of that
Embassage, which is committed to my trust. Well! Enjoy your own pleasing
Conceit! You will be a Gnostick, do what I can. This is not very stranger: For
you conclude, that since Archbishop Abbot refused to License Dr. Sybthorpes
Book, I must suppose him to be a Presbyterian. And because, I say, the King is
the Center of our Happiness; ergo, I must say, None must demur to swear to
Diocesans, or Lay-Chancellors; and that those that petition for an alteration
of their Government, if the King command, must not preach. The Consequent is
not here questioned, but the Consequence; and your Metaphysical Head will
hardly find Enthymems enough to make it good.

Since you so often tell me in your Letter of the Presbyterians, as if you were
their great Patron, and would set them against me; though (under that Name I
never disturbed them) to gratify your importunity, take my naked Thoughts.
Many of them (I think) are good, sober, religious Men; especially such as are
deluded and seduced into that Sect; Errors: but if they be Gerrones, Men
devoted to a Party, and addicted to a distinct Government, from that under
which we live; accounting themselves obliged to the endeavoring the pulling
down Episcopacy established by Law, and to set up Presbyterian Government in
the Church, against the consent of the Supreme Magistrate: I think such a
Presbyterian, quatenus such, in the Kingdom of England, (as things now stand)
is neither a good Man, nor a good Subject; but is rather factious, seditious,
schismatical.

As for your large Narrative, concerning the Savoy Transactions; wherein you
inform my nescience, or negative Ignorance, (for I was not bound to know every
Secret of that Assembly) I thank you for it. I only took notice of what was
revealed to the World in Print. And I heartily wish, the Result thereof had
been the same with that of Hampton Court. But I perceive, the older the World
grows, the more stiff and inflexible Men are in their own Notions and Opinions.
Your noncompliance then seems to me as pernicious, as Bez^'s heat at the
Colloquy at Poissy: I had almost said, as the abrupt breaking up of the Treaty
at Vxbridge. I wish some such Men (as Dr. John Reynolds) had been the
Commissioners, who might have suppl'd and oiled your Wheels; and so have
allayed the starkeness of your Joints. I will pray for you still in the words
of Optatus. Vtinam, qui jam malam viam intraverant, agnito peccato, super se
reverterentur, and revocarent, quam fugarent, Pacem. Is not the Roman Eagle
ready to prey and quarry upon us all? And shall we scatter our selves into
Parties, and crumble and divide our selves into small Gobbets? as if we would
facilitate our own Captivity, and fit our selves for her Talons.

You are at much expense of pains to clear the Non-conformists of the guilt of
the late War. A very few of a Multitude were engaged in it. You lay this Brat
at the doors of Bilson, Abbot, Hooker: Of an Episcopal Parliament; not above
one Presbyterian among four hundred Parliament Men: An Episcopal Army,
Episcopal Lords, and Episcopal Lieutenants of Counties. I had thought (currente
Rota) whilst your hand was in, you would have said, that the Regicides had been
Episcopal too.

Sir, I do now perceive, that Cataline was a Fool: If he had laid the
Conspiracy against Rome, upon Tully, might not he have gone free? But I foresee
also, that in process of time it is like to fall out with the late unnatural
War, as it did with the Gunpowder-Treason. Cecil, and the Puritanes, were
accused for this by the Papists: And the other (though acted but yesterday, and
by whom, is too fresh in our Memories) is like to be fathered on Episcopal Men:
Or else, like Filius Populi, it will be hard to find the true Father; or like
Nilus, the true Original. Give me leave to use the words of a good Author.
Primo accusant Rei, ut crimina, in siletium mitterent sua; vitam infamare
conati sunt alienam, ut cum possint ab innocentibus argui, innocents arguere
studuerunt. Ahab told Elijah, Thou art he that troubles Israel, 1 Kings 18.
17. If Episcopal Men began, and carried on that War, and Presbyterians were
free; I had almost said, -- Sit anima mea cum Presbyterianis! For I hate
nothing more than Rebellion. But sure you were too credulous, and easy to be
deceived by your Informer; were they Episcopal Men that cried, To your Tents O
Israel? That preached -- Curse ye Meroz? first voted, and then fought against
the King? If they were, they were degenerous from the English Episcopacy. They
did not keep close to our Church, (which were my words) to our Articles, our
Canons, our Liturgy, and our Homilies. If they were Episcopal Men, they had
found out some new modeled Episcopacy. I will (in this) neither own them for my
Fathers, nor my Brethren. They were Monsters sure; for would Episcopal Men
conspire to root up Episcopacy?

The only Archbishop in England, (say you) Williams, was in Arms against the
King; pudet haec. But if he was the only Archbishop in England, more shame for
some who had removed a better out of this World. The best use we can make of
his miscarriage, is to take heed of pride and discontent; lest God should give
us over to the Byas of our own Hearts, and so we should also fall into the
condemnation of the Devil.

What you say of Archbishop Abbot, out of Dr. Heylins Life of Archbishop
Laud; as if he began the Quarrel about the Subjects property: Do but read the
Drs. last Book concerning the History of Presbytery; and then you may see who
have been the best Subjects to Princes, Bishops or Presbyterians.

As for Bishop Jewel and Bishop Andrews Defense of Calvin, and our Puritans; do
not wrest their Charity, as the Romanists do ours, when we say they may be
saved. I much fear, lest the Complexion of those Men be much altered, since the
days of those famous Prelates: So that could they start out of their Graves,
and see how their Claws are grown, what havoc they have made in this Church;
they would (like the Partus Saguntinus) for very grief and shame, retire into
their former Dormitories: Or were they to write more Polemicks, they would
scarce write Apologies for some amongst our selves: So unlike are they to such
as Mr. Ball, who wrote so nervously for stinted Liturgies, and Communion with
our Church.

Mr. Hooker (you say) is under your exagitation. I pray use him kindly; trample
not on a dead Lion: For were he alive, he would make many such as you are to
quake. So strong would you find his Breath, in his deep, close, and strenous
Arguments: As those that disputed with Stephen, were not able to resist the
Wisdom, and the Spirit by which he spoke, Acts 6. 10. I have read him over
again and again; yet I never observed him to be an Enemy to Monarchy. You can
find out, (if not new Worlds) yet new Inhabitants in the upper part of this, in
the Stars and Planets; and if you can look beyond Galileo's Glass, it may be,
with your Lynceus Eyes, and strange Telescope, you may make strange Discoveries.

Though I honor the Memory of Learned Grotius; yet it is not a Duty incumbent
on me to defend his ipse dixit. I have a Tract by me, wherein are collected
some Political Aphorisms out of him and others, (which I have not examined by
his Writings;) but if truly his, I do as little approve them, as I do yours.

You would have me read the Confession of the French Church, and of others, and
see whether they allow of taking up of Arms. Sir! this is not to do: I have
also read Davila concerning their practice: And if he be impartial, I cannot
boast. The unlawfulness of the Arms of the French Protestants in several
Risings cannot be denied. Du Moulin P. 28. And how it was with the
Disciplinarians in Scotland, I have learned sufficiently in Spotswood: Neither
can you be ignorant, what the Grand Master of the Discipline ascribes to
English Parliaments against Kings, if you read his fourth Book of Institutions.
What need we speak of Men's Confessions and Declarations? Have not we seen their
Actions quite contrary? Until the Scottish Presbyterian Covenant be utterly
renounced and forgotten, it will stand upon Record, what is to be expected from
those of the Discipline. If you have not time to read Sions Plea. T. C. his
Reply. Travers de Disciplina Ecclesiae. Martin Junior. Bancroft, etc. You may
see their sense in this Point Collected to your Hands, by Sir Tho. Aston in his
Survey of Presbytery.


All the Foam you can gather in your angry Fits, will never obliterate this, or
wash such a Blackmoor white. When you challenge me to show from the Confessions
of any Presbyterian Churches, that they allow the taking up of Arms against
Princes, you deal just as the Papists do, when we urge them with that odious
Doctrine from Mariana, and others of their Jesuits; and also with their
practice in this case, they say as you do: Show us any Decree of the Church;
show us any Canons of Counsels, wherein the Doctrine of Killing Kings is
allowed. What shall we say? I can find no such Canon in the Counsel of Trent: I
know no such Edict of the Church: Nay, the Counsel of Constance condemns the
Doctrine of killing Tyrants, as erroneous; yet indirectly and obliquely they do
maintain the same, by giving the Pope a Power to exexcommunicate Heretical
Princes, and to absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance. And as Bellarmine
says; though the Pope does not teach Men to disobey their Kings, yet he makes
them, who were their Kings, to be their Kings no more. So, though this Doctrine
be not expressed, in the Confessions of Disciplinarians; yet if it be suitable
to their practice, and follows a posteriori from their Covenant, and other
Principles, by a parity of Reason, it is enough to prove them guilty.

However the War was managed; yet the Divines (whether Presbyterian or
Episcopal) meddled little with it. If I know any, you bid me name them. Your
dull Brains could never find out any Point of difference in Theology, about the
Power of the King, or the Duty of Obedience in the People.

This is strange, you lived in England, as you often tell me: And were you such
a Stranger in our Israel, that you heard nothing of the clashing of Pens, as
well as the brandishing of Swords? Was the Controversy only betwixt Lawyers
and Statesmen? I have much ado to forbear an allusion to the words of Job to
his Wife. Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speaks. So you speak of
these things, like some rude and ignorant People in the Country. Did you never
hear of Dr. Fern? Mr. Dadley Diggs, and many others, who wrote in behalf of
the King, against the lawfulness of taking up of Arms? And did you never hear
of Mr. John Goodwin? Mr. Bridges? Mr. Calamy's Speech in the City of London?
What was the great design of most Sermons preached at Westminster for some
years by the Smectimnians, but to tell their Auditors, that the Engagement of
that War was pro aris, as well as focis; for the Cause of God and of Christ;
against Idolatry and Superstition, as well as for the Privileges of
Parliaments; and against Monopolies. The King and Martyr suffered for his
Religion, says your Du Moulin P. 110. Did you never hear what pains Mr. Vines
and Mr. Marshal took, to prove, that the higher Powers, Romans 13. were to be
understood of the two Houses of Parliament? If I should tell you what Doctrine
I heard preached at the beginning of the War, (I was Master of Arts then) and
by whom; if I did not make your Ears to tingle, I should blur and stain more
Paper, than I am willing.
The Scottish Douglas says plainly; The Hostility against the King, was from
his setting himself against Religion. I do not so much wonder at this your
inadvertency; since you affirm, That Dr. Manton never wrote upon Jude, but only
upon James. Will not the Doctor take it amiss, that you take no more notice of
his Labors? And as for Dr. Burges, it is now in the Hand of a Friend. Are you
such a walking Library? Such an Heluo Librorum, especially of those that are
Modern and English: And yet had you no acquaintance with these?

You say, and you ingeminate it, -- That there is not any Nonconformist but is
ready to swear, he holds it not lawful to take up Arms against the King. Why
did so many of them then flit their Habitations, five Miles from any
Corporation, or their own ancient Homes? What was the Sum of that Oath? was it
not plainly and directly against taking up Arms? Did it any way hinder
Parliament Men's speaking? or others peaceable petitioning, for such Reformation
as is necessary? were not those who were commissione'd to administer it, ready
to declare the sense of it? yet down it would not go with many; latet aliquid:
-- But I find it is with many of you as I have found it experimentally with
some who have been troubled in Conscience: When I have applied the best Balm I
could to these tender Souls, so that they had nothing to say against their own
Peace; yet still they would be starting some black doubts against themselves;
turning their very Shadows into Gorgons; that so they might continue in the
Valley of Baca. Just so will you find knots in Bulrushes; Mysteries in
Cabbalistical Titles; and Anexes; spin Webs to entangle your selves, out of
your own Imaginations; and with Thrushes, pinion your own Wings; that so you
may scrupulously vex your selves. You say well in your Book of Conscience, --
That Melancholy is often mistaken for Conscience: So I fear this shieness and
skittishness of these Men, is rather the result of an hot and feavourish Brain,
than any well-weighed conclusion of a sound Heart.

But put out the other Clauses out of the Oath; let us have no more Oaths of
Allegiance to Diocesans, or Lay-Chancellors, put upon us, than Christ's Churches
had for six or eight hundred years imposed upon them.

Why do you lay this Injunction upon me, and others in my Sphere? Are we the
King and Parliament? Have private Men a Legislative Power? Can they reverse and
retrench Laws? It is very plausible in you to bring all things to the
Institutions of Christ; and in things doctrinal it is also necessary: But as to
what concerns all the Modes of External Policy and Administrations, it is not
only difficult, but impossible. Nay, I think he may be impleaded of Schism and
Singularity, that stands up too stiffly for the immediate Dispensations
(especially where they are so uncertain) in opposition to the Instrumental
teachings and directions of Men. You may find my Ground, 1 Cor. 1. 12.

It seems you are much troubled at Lay-Chancellors; as if they hindered your
Conformity, by exercising the Power of the Keys, in decreeing Excommunications
and Absolutions.

Me thinks a Person of your ingenuity should rest satisfied with that modest
declaration of our Rubric, concerning the Censures of the Church in the
Preface to the Communion. But since you say, That Lay-Chancellors exercise the
Power of the Keys in Excommunications; do they do this of themselves, as
Laymen? or do they not? You see, it is easy to push with your Horns, and to
evince, that you are either ignorant or absurd. But I shall only remember you,
what you cannot but know already, -- That Lay-Chancellors, (though commonly
very knowing in the Civil Law, which is an excellent Handmaid to Divinity) yet
they excommunicate not as Laymen, but by virtue of those Surrogates, who are
delegated for this purpose, originally by the Bishop himself. This Abstraction
is not too hard for you to conceive. But why are you so incensed against
Lay-Chancellors? I Will warrant you have more kindness for Lay Elders, if they
were joined with you in things Sacred; as Catechizing, admission to the
Sacrament, and the Censures of the Church.

But as Luther distinguishes of little and great Devils; so I think this of
Lay-Chancellors is but a Gnat in your way. The Camel or Beelzebub is Diocesan
Bishops. The Episcopacy of Bishop Usher you are for; and the Episcopacy of
Ignatius (you say) is lawful. I am glad you grant this; for one of your
Brethren maintained to my Face, -- That there is no difference betwixt a Bishop
and a Presbyter in Ignatius. But you are kinder to Bishops; for where there is
one, I suppose you wish there were many hundreds: And if this were allowable,
we that are minorum gentium (as to our own Interest) have no cause to oppose
it: For then, it may be, you and I might in some time of our Ages commence
Bishops. But me thinks we should now agree; especially if you would call to
mind that Maxim in Logic. Magis and minus non variant speciem.

If Bishop Usher were now alive, he would give you but small thanks for
pressing his Model of Episcopacy (if his,) now the King and Laws are restored,
which he only calculated, as that which could be born by the iniquity of the
latter times. Sequestered Ministers, who would gladly then have received a
fifth part out of their Revenue, would be loath now to be bound up to the same
terms. The Counsel Bishop Usher gave to the late King; Rather to part with his
Life, than Episcopacy: And his Notes upon Ignatius, concerning the division of
Asia, confuting Dr. Meric Causabon, affirming, that Episcopacy crept into the
Church in the second Century, do sufficiently discover his Judgment. If Thieves
should strip me of all my Cloths, I I will rather accept from them my old Coat,
than go naked; yet if the time come, that honest Men may come to their Goods, I
would have all again to a very Shoo-string. Let us not take up the old trick
and method of the Papists; they have given out, that some famous Men, who lived
Protestants, dyed Papists: So let not us extract Presbyterian Government out of
the dead Trunks of Episcopal Cedars.

Calvin seems to excuse his New Government at Geneva. -- Habemus qualecunque
Presbyterorum Judicium, and formam qualem ferebat temporum infirmitas. What? is
there any Sorcery or Necromancy in the word Diocesan? As Tertullian once
jested; -- De nomine Chameleontis. (...) is a modest word in Greek; and is it
become Babylonish by being rendered into English.

Beza was more propitious than you are to the Diocesan Bishops of England. --
Fruatur (says he) ista singulari Dei beneficio, quae utinam sit illi perpetua!
But you think they have too many Parishes under their Inspection and
Jurisdiction. This is but obliquely to reflect upon former Kings and Statesmen,
who have allowed such large Provinces. Some of them have been much cantoned in
latter Ages, if we look into our own Stories. What think you of Crete, ((...))
Ephesus, Rome? were there not many Parishes in these? And I cannot think, but
as Jerusalem had her Daughters the Cities and Towns adjacent. So many Regiones
suburbicariae, did belong to the Bishops of those great Cities; ergo, they had
their Chorepiscopi to assist them. Tell me true, were there not Bishops before
there weary any Parishes? If so; Christ never ordained they should be Parochial.
Do not you know that the Bishop of Alexandria had all Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis, under him? And that Thebais and Mareotis were afterward added to
his Diocese. But you will be guided (you say) by Cyprian and Ignatius. Well!
Agreed; yet these were Diocesans: Cyprians Diocese was Africa; over great part
of which his Power did extend. Ignatius was Bishop of Syria, Coelosyria, and
Mesopotamia. If you doubt of this, I can show my Authority.

But why should we swear Allegiance to Bishops? Till the Roman Tyranny invaded
the Church the Clergy was not to swear to the Bishops, This is to twist them
into the Constitution of the Kingdom, say you.

Is it unlawful to promise or swear to be obedient to Bishops, in rebus licitis
and honestis? Yet this is the sum of our Canonical Obedience. By your leave,
Sir, de facto, Presbyters have been obedient to their Bishops, under the
Penalty of an Anathema, and Excommunication, long before the Roman Tyranny
invaded the Church. I could tell you of the Apostles Canons and Decrees of
Councils for this. But since you have such a kindness for Ignatius, see his
Epistle to the Ephesians. -- (...). And to the Magnesians. -- (...). And in his
Epistle to the Philadelphians. -- (...). Is not this Canononical Obedience?

But this intrenches upon the King, and twists Bishops into the Constitutive
part of the Kingdom: I am glad you are so tender of the Kings Honor and Power.
Mr. Cartwright wrangled himself at last into Conformity: And if you have
arrived to a just Latitude of Allegiance, in giving unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, I think you have shot the Gulf, and may at last, -- per tot
discrimina rerum, -- tendere in Latium. I will secure you, -- that what we
swear to Bishops, does not twist them with a Coordinate Power with the King, no
more than when I sworesidelity to the University at my Matriculation: When a
Soldier takes a Sacrament to be true to his General; and Tradesmen do the like
to their several Corporations: I say, no more do we set up an Aemulous
confronting Power with the King in subscribing to Bishops, which he does not
only allow, but authorize; than I made the University, or they, their Generals,
or Corporations to have -- divisum cum Jove Imperium.

When I quote your words, -- We must not communicate with a Parish Minister,
who concurreth with the Bishops, you say I should have added; In consenting to
our silencing. Indeed I thought those words needless and superfluous: For what
Parish Ministers had any hand in your silence? If as being Subjects virtually
in the Parliament, so you were accessory your self: If as approving and
rejoicing at your silence, you will find this very diffcult in any good Parish
Ministers; especially, since we cry aloud for your Ministerial Assistance.

You tell me, You can as soon drive the People through a Stone Wall, as bring
them to Communion in our way. You bid me do it my self, if I can. Sir! Had they
not been distracted, distorted, and poisoned by other Tutors, much might have
been done; perhaps we might have taken such straggling Sheep upon our Shoulders,
and have brought them to their proper Folds. But since they have been taught
(like Wolves) not to value the Scepter, I have small hopes to prevail with my
Shepherds Crook. If they will not now hear your Voice, and be obsequious to
your Whistle; they will, like Corah's Company, tell me to my Face, -- They will
not come up; or like Mastiff Dogs, will worry me to pieces. Those that are
lately perverted any way, are most heady and sierce. The Revolters are profound
to make slaughter, Hos. 5. 2. And after the Scribes and Pharisees had compassed
passed Sea and Land to make one Proselyte; when he was made he was twofold
more the Child of Hell than themselves, Mat. 23. 15.

Now, Sir! Since you do both in print, and in your Letters, so scorn at my
absurdity, in desiring your Reasons for Nonconformity; whereas, it would hazard
your safety, if you should do it without a License, which is not to be
expected. If you have such strong Arguments in store, which may prove
Conformity to be simply and absolutely sinful: An avowed and deliberate sin;
what think you of transmitting them to me? I will do my best to Midwife them
into the Light, without any commerce with the Huxters you reproach me with.
Indeed I did send an Epistola veridica to the Tryars (in the Usurper's days)
without an Imprimatur.

You end, as it were glorying, That you have not given me a lenifying Answer,
or spoken me fair. You might have said, (If you are so naturally addicted, as
you say, to speak plain truth,) That taking your Rod into your Hand, you have
slashed the Malepert Levite. Well! I will get some good by you, whether you
will or no; I will think more humbly and meanly of my self, than you can speak.
And though you say I am so blinded with self-love, that I neither know what I
say or do; yet I will not pay you in your own Coin; but pray for you, as I do
for my self, -- That wherein you or I err, that God would even reveal this
unto us, and reduce us into the Way of Truth.

If your habit of severity, and keen edge of fastuous contempt, may be abated,
and you may be happily mollified into more kindness: If you shall then
vouchsafe to write to me in a more favorable, smooth, and obliging Strain; you
shall not overcome, though you conquer me. In the mean time you may call me a
Levite; but I will take the boldness to subscribe my self,

Your (...), Jo. Hinckley.
Northfield. May 23.
A LETTER Written to Mr. Baxter, After his BOOK of Church Divisions came forth.
SIR,
I Perceive, that my Answer to your Letter was not satisfactory; since I find
in your late Book, not only oblique Reflections, but direct and downright
Expressions; wherein (without any Ambages) you articulately signify your
discontent both with me and my Book. Who would have thought that a word or two
of advice and seasonable counsel should have merited such harsh and Passionate
Censures? or should not escape branding with the black Theta of a Challenge,
Ambuscade, and an intimation of Defamation and Blood? Herein (me thinks)
considering the Premises, you show as great a defect of Logic, as of Charity.
To what purpose is your Tragical outcry of provoking you to gape against an
Oven? and making your Name a Stepping-stone to those Ends I aspire after? Alas!
what advantage will it be to me to see you in the flames? or your Name sullied?
That Is barbarous; and this ambitious. I am in the Zenith of my preferment,
whilst I am a constant Preacher of the Gospel.

How are you sure that I am not able to endure the light of the Truth? If the
Organs of my Eyes are indisposed at present, I will borrow some Spectacles, or
procure some Eyesalve to clear them, before you can prove those things to be
truth, which you call so. When I see Scripture and reason for them, let me be
accounted stabborn or stupid, if I either shut my Eyes, or cannot (...), hold
them steady enough to discern them in their genuine Colors. Before this be
done, you cannot be assured, that you are a true Prophet, in judging and
condemning me aforehand. Are you Secretary to him, who at one glance sees
them, who have Eyes and see not, or else see but perceive not? You know who it
was that boasted that his Eyes were open, Numb. 24. 3. I wish you knew me
better, and then you might have abated these severities.

How can you hope to heal our Divisions, and to woo our English World into
mutual love? when your own Gall runs over with such large Effluviums, and your
thoughts are so overweening, as if you did comprehend all Knowledge, Truth,
and Light; and we, poor Wretches! were groping in Cimmerian darkness, or
grovelling in some narrow Ditch. But if you will not hold up your Taper and
help us forth, reserving your Antidote against our sin and error, in your own
Breast; take heed you meet not with the same doom, as he in Cardan, who knew
how to cure the Stone, and dyed without revealing it.

It is well, that you are pleased to prolong your Answer, until I procure you a
License; for so you may spare your own trouble, usque ad Call. Graec. For who
would unmuzzle a fierce Panther, that would worry him that sets his Chops at
liberty? Although another Man would tell you; Herein you deal like the Papists,
who tell us, they can prove us all Heretics, if they might have liberty to
dispute, and write without the hazard of the Law: Yet when it pleases them,
they take liberty more than enough. Sir! if ever you comply with my sober
Request, you need not direct it to me, but to the Commonwealth of the English
Clergy.

As for those four Lines 2. Part. Page 8. spend your second thoughts upon them,
and see whether you can make sense of them. There you serve in again the same
Dish of Coleworts; but you leave out the Author, and name the Book; yet in your
Grammar the Book is a Person. This is no Solacism with you, who can make one
Disparatum to predicate of another; for in the same Part Page 92. you
categorically affirm, that (...) is a Verb. These are but trifles; yet if a Man
be put to sencing, he will take all advantages.

As for the bulk and scope of your Book, concerning healing Church Divisions,
-- Cum sis mortalis, etc. The Scene is laid in Heaven, and the design is
Generous, Noble, and Christian. It is great pity, that you should, Ausis
excidere tam magnis. Yet consider whether the aim and level be both right. If
you would have us join together with one Heart and Shoulder in the Worship of
God, as now constituted, which you allow P. 38. me thinks you should not (I
will use as much softness as I can) have spoken so slightly -- of Conformity.
As, if you should conform, it would neither be a little or single sin, Page 26.
This must needs weaken our Hands, prejudice our Ministry, and make the People
cold in joining with us. Will those words of Mr. Dod hold weight in the
Balance of the Sanctuary? who thanked God for the Churches sake, that some Men
conformed; and for the Truth sake, that some conformed not. Can that be for the
advantage of the Church, which is not according to the Truth? Does God stand in
need of our Lies? should we speak wickedly for God, or talk deceitfully for
him? Job 13. 7.

2. Though in some places you speak honorably of our Liturgy, Page 38. 59. 88.
yet you dash all again by complaining of its imperfect mode and fashion of
words, Page 59. And that you join with us merely by force, for want of a
better; for were you in New England, you would not join with our Prayers. 2.
Part P. 176. Is this your Balm of Gilead for our Wounds? Are you like to prove
a good Samaritan to our bleeding Church? What lowering and longing must there
be, after another mode of Worship, if ours be so imperfect, and that of other
Churches so far beyond it? You do well: Go on! that you join with the Prayers
of the Liturgy, and in the Celebration of the Sacrament, P. 34. 40. yet you
will not touch either (as to an active Administration of them) with the least
of your Fingers. And herein you resemble the present Jews, who hire Christian
Servants to kindle their Fires, and to dress their Meat on the Sabbath Day.
They care not what is done, so they do it not themselves.

3. Was it a right course to cement us, and cure our Divisions by alienating
the Minds of Men from their Governors, and that Government which is
established by Law amongst us? As if it were not lawful (by your Doctrine) to
own Diocesan Bishops, and to hold Communion with a Diocesan Church, P. 75. Nay,
we must not communicate with a Parish Minister who concurreth with the Bishops,
P. 77, The Government is such as God will not accept, Part 2. P. 3. And to take
off the Stomachs of Subjects the more from their present Governors, you have
found out a Foreign Government for them, (though not in Rome, yet in Bohemia,
Page 46.) which in your Judgment does far surpass ours. Sir, I thought it had
been far better for you and I, to obey old Establishments, than to invent or
prescribe new ones. If we set the People a gadding after Innovations, we
neither perform our own Duties, nor go the right way to cure the Peoples
Divisions.

Now Sir! I have given you these Strictures, not out of any desire to
reciprocate the same with you, any farther than a private Letter; but only to
prepare you for what you may expect from your Antagonist, and to show you how
dangerous it is to recede from the good old Paths, and allowed Principles, and
to bewilder our selves and others with new and rash contrivances of our own
Heads. As for any thing, which upon just and proper Grounds shall have a
tendency to the advancing of Love and Peace, I shall always be your Second, and
your Fidus Achates, whilst I am,

John Hinckley.
Northfield April 11. In Worcestershire.
Mr. BAXTER'S Third Letter.
SIR,
THough you foretell me how little good my writing will do you, in which I
presume not to contradict you; yet the vindication of Truth is an end
sufficient to invite me to bestow a few more Lines, in detecting your unworthy
opposition against that Object of the intellectual Nature. Truth and Repentance
are the things which you vehemently militate against, (under pretense of
skirmishing with my words) and that by no better Weapons than a wrangling Wit,
Rhetorical diversions, which you use like one unwilling to understand the
truth, or to confess an Error or injurious Deed.

. 1. You tell me I am a treacherous Watchman if I suffer sin upon you; and at
the same time open your offense, that I tell you of Crimes and Guilt, and name
some of your faults: This is the Waters of Marah to you, Sarcasmes, Satyrs,
etc. Are not you resolved then to be displeased by our Speech or Silence, and
to make me unavoidably an Offender by the contrariety of your Laws; (and what a
wonder of self-ignorance is it, that the Author of the Persuasive should draw
up the Floodgates of Sarcastical scorn upon so many and such Men, and yet be so
sensible of a drop of just reproof that fell upon his own Head?)

. 2. After such a Book you would not be said to traduce the Presbyterians, as
if you wrote you knew not what, or had already forgotten it.

. 3. When I had opened your strange dealing in calling for those Reasons of our
Nonconformity which you knew we must not publish, you neither can hide your
disingenuity, nor will confess it.

. 4. In my last I briefly named diverse of your palpable contradictions; and
many of them you have no cloak for, and yet no confession of, but a silent
preterition. And what you speak to is so managed, as if our Question had not
been, whether you had spoken well and truly? but whether you could speak again,
or had any Pen, Ink, and Paper left?

. 5. As to the silenced Ministers, (that you may not seem guiltless) you first
say, [How many of these have little more learning than your English Books have
taught them, as great Strangers to the Writers of the first Centuries, as they
have been to the Universities.] You did craftily to speak interrogatively: For
a Question cannot be false. There are many Non-conformists that live within a
few Miles of your dwelling; which of them do you mean? Is it good old Mr. Sam.
Hildersham, or Mr. Sam. Fisher, or Mr. Wilsby, or Mr. Bryan, or Mr. Reignolds,
or Mr. Tho. Baldwin Senior, or Mr. Spilsbury, or which of all the rest do you
mean? Sure it is I that am the Stranger to the Universities, that am therefore
worthy to be silenced: I know but of two or three more in all the Country about
you: But that two of those are so strange to the Fathers I do not believe. But
if they be, I had rather the Church had Men that will speak sound Doctrine in
an apt and serious manner for the bringing of sinners to repentance in English,
than such as can lace an insipid, empty, or senseless discourse with some
Shreds of Chaldee, Syriack, and Arabic: And though I could wish, that all the
Ministers of Christ had all Accomplishments fit even for the adorning of their
Sacred Work; yet I had rather hear a mere English Divine, than an Hebrew or a
Syriack Sot. But as I am grown of late years to take it for no very great
honor to our young Preachers, that they are acquainted with the Universities;
so I think it so short a Work to read the few brief Writers of the three first
Centuries, as makes it more a dishonor to be ignorant of them, than any great
honor to be acquainted with them.

But Sir, this kind of talk had been sitter for a Man of Aethiopia or Armenia,
that knows not England, than for an English Priest. O that one half of our
Parishes now had Men that were near as learned and understanding and able for
their Ministerial Work, as those two that I know near you, who never were
Graduates in any University: How easily could I bear the silencing of my self
and all the rest, if all our Places were but fully supplied with Conformists
that had but that measure of Knowledge, Utterance, Piety, and Diligence, as the
more unlearned and lowest Rank of the Non-conformists of my Acquaintance have,
if you take out a third part of that inferior Rank, (though some one individual
may be as low.) And I think I know as many of them as you: What pains do I take
by Word and Writing and Example, to satisfy them that are averse to join in
the public Assemblies? And when I meet with a Parish that has an honest,
sober, tolerable, or competent Preacher, I usually prevail. But alas! from how
many do I hear, [What Man can endure to hear a Schoolboy read over or Cant the
Shreds and Patches of insipid nonsense, or ignorantly abuse the Scripture, and
talk of things which he understands not, and prate against he knows not
what, to get some reputation with those that take Vanity and Vexation to be the
laudable Accomplishments of a Priest? Or if sometimes they speak things good
and needful, it is done with so little skill or seriousness, that all comes
cold and dead to the Hearers, who hear them as Schoolboys saying over their
Lessons, and not as Men that are in good sadness and believe themselves:
Especially considering how seldom a good word is heard out of their mouths all
the week after, and how often they are in the Alehouse, and how seldom in the
Houses of the ignorant to instruct them, and help them to prepare for the Life
to come] such Answers as these, how often do I hear? Pudet haec opprobria -- I
believe no more than I am constrained to believe. But I sometimes hear Lads
talk in the Pulpit at such a rate my self, as I confess would go near to drive
me also away, if ordinarily I had not better: And when Patrons seek to me to
motion them to a Teacher, how hard do I find it to find them a Man that has
the abilities of the lower sort of Non-conformists. To confess the truth to
you, the Preachers of these late years have almost brought me to the opinion of
some of the highest Formalists, that not only a Form of Prayer, but of
Preaching too, be strictly imposed on some Ministers, and nothing endured but
Liturgies and Homilies: For I am so far now from being all for Sermons, that I
take the Common Prayer to be incomparably better than the Prayers or Sermons of
some that I hear, and to be the best that I expect in many places when I go to
Church: And if all conformable Preachers were such, as too many be, I would
heartily prefer our Homilies and Common Prayer before all their Pulpit-work.
And now I see which is the way to bring it to this pass, and to put down
Preaching and Pulpit-Prayers, even to set up such as will weary the Hearers,
and make them be glad of a Homily, as better than such pitiful stuff: But yet
I will not consent to that design, while there are so many living that can and
would do better if they might. But must we be silenced because we be not such
as these Conformists, or must these also be silenced with us? But I pray, Sir,
forget not to tell me in your next what one Nonconformist was silenced on the
account of insufficiency? and whether the very worst and meanest of those that
formerly joined with them, be not re-ordained and received when they do
conform?. 6. You next ask [How many of these were nested in other Men's
Habitations, while the right owners were exposed to Wind, Weather and Starving,
double the number of 1800?] Answ. 1. But how many of those were never in any
Sequestration; and must not they preach the Gospel for the sake of others? 2. I
deny not the great Crime you charge upon them: When the Judges of those times
had cast out many Conformists, (most that ever I knew of, upon accusations of
insufficiency, or gross scandal witnessed upon Oath) though too many (contrary
to the requests of my self, and many other Ministers) were censured for their
opposition to the Parliament) then did these Non-conformists (some of them)
come upon the Peoples request into the vacant Churches, and chose rather to
preach to the People, than they should have none, and Gods public Worship
should cease in the Land; and I confess, that they did eat Bread while they
labored, even that which was devoted to the maintenance of the Laborers. I
was one of these my self, and others before you have told me of it. And though
I never put the Vicar out of his House, (nor set my foot within his doors, lest
he should think I intended it) yet I confess he had but somewhat above 40 l.
per Annum out of the Sequestration, and his old Curate Mr. Turner 10 l. But
that amounted to about 500 l. a Sermon in fourteen years, (and I never forbade
him to preach) whereas before his Sequestration he had not past 30 l. or 40 l.
a Sermon at most; (For he preached (as some called it) once a quarter.) His
Curate Mr. Turner had his old stipend to his death, and almost all the time did
publicly read the Common Prayer at Mitton, though I told him indeed that I
could wish he would give over the Ministry; seeing upon examination I could not
find that he understood much of his Creed, nor what we expect from Catechized
Children of twelve years old. But whether it had been my duty to have forborne
my fourteen years labor there, because the Times cast out such Men; and
whether it had been better have left many hundreds untaught, to perish for ever
in their sin and ignorance, or whether sin and ignorance are really such
dangerous matters as we Non-conformists have believed, are Controversies which
I will not now debate.

. 7. You add, [The Retalliation may cause them to say, As I have done, so God
has requited me.] Answ. 1. Does this savor of any sense at all of a love to
Souls? Is it the Preachers or the People that suffer more? When we desire but
that we may be suffered to instruct sinners, and persuade them to Repentance,
till the Churches be so well supplied as not to need us, in stead of nothing
the misery of those that perish for lack of teaching, you tell us how justly we
are requited: And must so many thousands go to Hell that we may be requited?
Why should so many suffer for our faults? 2. But let us consider also your
Justice to our selves. 1. The Ministers that were in Sequestrations were put
out (where any could claim the Place) before the 1800 were silenced, and they
were not I think a fourth part of the silenced ones that were of that number.
2. They succeeded those that were mostly cast out upon accusations of scandal,
witnessed upon Oath, (as the two first Centuries printed unhappily show:) If
you say that the Witnesses swore falsely, and the Judges were unjust, I answer,
That where I was acquainted the Witnesses were reputed as honest Men as any in
the Place, and they got nothing by their Oaths; and if all were unjust, I
answer, that was not the succeeding Ministers fault. 3. I my self succeeded one
that preached but once a quarter, and that so as I never heard the silliest
Sectary preach in my life. 4. None of them that I know of had any hand in
casting out these Ministers: Most of them came out of the Universities after
the other were ejected. 5. If they had not come in, the Peoples Souls, and the
public Worship of God had been forsaken. 6. When we were in, we labored with
all our skill and power publicly, and from House to House, and might we have
indulged the Flesh, had never taken such a Flesh-displeasing course. 7. The
ejected Ministers had for their Wives a fifth part of the maintenance. 8. And
the ejected Ministers were never silenced that I know of, but only forbidden to
use the Common Prayer but a little before Cromwell dyed. 9. And against this
both I and others wrote, and requested of the Usurper, that none that was of
competent Parts, and an honest Life, might be hindered from the Ministry for
serving the King, or upon any such civil or disciplinary differences. This was
our Case; and were we requited as we had done? Did we silence any Man? Did we
cast any out, (how bad soever;) some did perhaps, or had a hand in it? But
what is that to the many hundred that did not? Have we the fifth part? Have we
leave to preach when we are ejected out of the Places of Maintenance? I confess
we had an opinion, which I will not now stand to defend, that the damnation of
multitudes of Souls is too dear a price to purchase the Ease or fuller
Maintenance of an ignorant and a drunken Priest above his fifth part: And
though here and there such a Man as your self might be cast out, which I never
liked or had a hand in, yet your pleading in this Cause does urge me to tell
you my own experience: When I was a Child, I lived under five Teachers before I
was ten years old, of which most were ignorant Readers, two Drunkards, one an
unlearned seldom Preacher; after that, before I was fifteen, I lived where was
a Parson of eighty years old, that never preached, and a Vicar of near eighty
that never preached, both in one Parish; and four Curates and Parsons, drunken
Readers, most of them my Schoolmasters: The last preached but once, and then
he was stark drunk, the dreadfullest Sermon that ever I heard, on Mat. 25. 40,
etc. Besides all these, some years, when the old Parsons Eyesight failed, he
said the Common Prayer by rote, and a Tailor read the Scriptures for him one
year, and a poor Day-labourer another. When I entered into the Ministry my self,
I have told you whom I did succeed: But as the man is, so is his appetite and
relish: I strive not to bring you to dislike such Priests, nor to win you from
pleading for the silencing of Faithful Ministers; but while I am silenced, I
will tell you what Truth and Innocence have to say.

. 8. As to the Number which you will not believe, I can only tell you that
about 1800 were silenced 1662. of whom I will suppose an hundred to have
conformed, and an hundred to be dead: But doubt not but some spring up in their
steads.

. 9. As to your first Caution, I confess Exasperations have made some talk more
sharply against the Bishops than I think meet: But I wonder and rejoice that
they are so few. Had it been about London an usual thing, they had heard more
of it before now.

. 10. And for your second Caution, it is not you nor I that make those Laws
which denominate Duty and Sin: And if I would hold it to be no sin in me to lie
deliberately, and say, that I assent and consent to all things in three Books,
when I do not, or to absolve from an Oath many hundred thousands, when I never
knew in what sense they took it, or other such like; if I encourage the Laity
to conform to the Corporation Declaration, that no man is bound by any thing in
the Vow, no not against Schism, Popery nor Profaneness, nor to repent of his
sins, etc. Gods Law will never the more justify any of this for my Conformity
to it: Nor will he accept of disobedience for a Sacrifice, nor needs my lie
or other sin to his Service or Glory. But it is a fine World, when fearing sin
(and no less sin than aforesaid) is become the sin and danger of the Church.

11. I will add one observation on this Subject, to make up your comparison
what those whom I and others of my acquaintance succeeded were (not silenced
but) sequestered for, is said before; but. I never yet heard of one
Nonconformist silenced for Insufficiency or Scandal, but for Nonconformity
alone. Let not your talk and mine, but the Laws, and Court-Records judge and
tell Posterity the Truth. But I have known silly Anabaptists and Sectaries,
whom we never approved, received into the Ministry of the Church of England
upon their Conformity.

12. You say, [I am glad you own my quotation out of your Book of Rest, etc.]
Answ. Alas Sir, is not repentance better than hiding slander by palpable
untruth? I told you truly, [I never wrote so, I never thought so, but have
proved the contrary at large, etc.] Why did not you cite the words where I say
it.

. 13. You add for a Cover another untruth, that I say [I have retracted and
expunged it in a later Edition;] not a true word, I only said, [That I had
retracted and expunged, not only that which you pervert, but all the rest from
end to end, which seemed to savor the late Wars.] And is it all one to say, I
expunged what you accuse me of, and to say I expunged that which you pervert:
But you have more learning than we that are strangers to the Universities, and
therefore can make good one untruth with another; and sport your self with the
Image of a jumping Deer, and a playing Fish; so hard is it to convince you of
visible sin.

. 14. You add, [If you be so rash'in obtruding your immature Notions, etc.]
Answ. I justify none of my Juvenile Errors or Crudities. But how suitably
comes this from the same Pen, that tells me how glorious it would be, P. 128.
to retract with the great Bishop of Hippo, etc. And in the same Book not only
urges, but falsifyeth what I did so many years before retract; and now again
upbraideth me with that which I did retract. I know Innocence is best: But can
any Man think it would please such Men? I confess had I never wrote at all, I
had never wrote any word amiss: And had I never preached at all, I had never
preached word amiss, which is the cure used on us now, and the innocence of
Priests which I have heard some plead for.

. 15. I neither had nor have any mind to pour Vinegar into the Wound which you
lament only, when in your Book you tell me of the inconformity of some that
grew up under my Shadow, Page 129. you forgot that you would not be responsible
for one Man in your own Family, and yet I am chargeable with that which you
suppose the fault of I know not who.

. 16. If your Neighbor and his Wife will swear what you say, wonder not that
so much scandal was charged by Oath on your sequestered Ministers; I tell you
again, that I was never to my knowledge in your Parish in my life; that I never
took Horse in my life; that I meddled not my self with any one at that time that
I told you I went out; that I never kept or possessed one of them: Therefore no
Committee could order me to restore them. But a Week after, another Company, as
I told you, did fetch some from that Parish, and were ordered by the Committee
to restore some of them; which must needs prove your Neighbors mistake. No
Man, to my best remembrance, ever came to me with any Order from the Committee;
for they knew that I was no Officer, and kept not a Horse. And if he followed
me to London, it must be at least sixteen years after. For I was never at Mr.
Foley's House in London till 1660. and the time he speaks of was 1644.

. 17. You say, [In your late Book you say, you meddled not with the War till
after Naseby Fight.] Answ. Not a true word: What should move you to do thus? I
see Mr. Bagshaw is not the only temerarious Writer. I tell you the clean
contrary in that Book, and only say, [That I never entered into the Army till
after Naseby Fight.] And is that all one as to say, I never meddled with the War?

. 18. The Aphorisms which you called me to retract, you thus noted, [Those
especially which are gathered by an Eminent Hand.] I instanced but in the first
which that Eminent Hand had gathered: And now, this is not one of those that
you meant.

. 19. You say, [That since Archbishop Abbot refused to License Dr. Sybthorpes
Book, I must suppose him a Presbyterian.] Answ. Yet not a word true! I only
said, [Was Archbishop Abbot a Presbyterian?] implying that he was none: and so
that the prelatists were they that began to offend the King by striving against
his Will, as I further told you.

. 20. The inconsequence which you bring in with [I must say] should have been
turned into [I did say,] Did I not recite your own words? Does he not swear to
Diocesanes and Lay-Chancellors, who swears, That he will not at any time
endeavor any alteration of the Government of the Church, which is in their
Hands? And does not he endeavor an alteration, who Petitioneth the King or
Parliament for it? Shall we swear universally, and say we meant it but
particularly?

. 21: In your description of Presbyterians you talk of [pulling down
Episcopacy, and setting up Presbyterian Government in the Church against the
consent of the Supreme Magistrate,] when you were told that it was Episcopacy
that the present Non-conformists moved to obtain: And I know none of them that
take it not for Rebellion to pull down or set up forcibly or by the Sword, any
thing against the Supreme Ruler, or without him, (except only what a Parent or
Master may do in his Family on Children with the Rod.)

. 22. Seeing you cannot deny but that you printed about the Savoy Business that
which you understood not, and cannot justify; why do you not rather retract
it, than wish things had been managed worse? Do you not know how much, yea very
much more we yielded to, than ever Hildersham, whom you praise, or the other
old Nonconformist would have done? See but the Kings Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and read Dr. John Reignolds Papers to Sir Francis
Knowles against Episcopacy, and judge whether he himself would have gone any
further. Indeed I know not that I differ in any Point of Worship, Ceremonies or
Discipline, from that learned Doctor whom you praise.

. 23. You make me wonder to read what you urge us with about Popery, when we so
long together spoke aloud, (when we were allowed) and told them, [Our union is
our strength, and all the faithful Ministers of England are too few to cast and
keep out Ignorance, Popery, and Sensuality; and if we were all never so
conformable our selves, we do know the Land so well, that we are sure if such
and such things be made necessary to Ministration and Communion, many hundred
worthy Ministers will be silenced, and many thousand religious People will
become Separatists, and more be offended; and our Divisions will involve us in
discontents and murmurings on one side, and severities on the other, and Popery
and Profaneness will prosper under our Divisions: And you will be necessitated
to fill up our Places with many such Ministers as will increase all this
misery; and all this may now be prevented by that which will do you no harm at
all.] And when after all our endeavors the Floodgates are plucked up, which
we would have kept down, it is now pretended, that if we cannot nimbly and
deeply swear, and subscribe, and do all that is imposed on us, Popery forsooth
will come in, and it is long of us, that would fain have prevented it, and
stopped the gap.

. 24. When I had beyond all sober contradiction proved to you, that it was
Episcopal Men in England that raised the War against the King, that I might
move you to impartiality, and to call them to Repentance, you do the poorliest
put off that which you cannot confute, and yet will not acknowledge, as if
nothing were criminal in them that are of the Church of England: Who knows
not that many Episcopal Parliaments before had begun the same Quarrels against
the King, which the Long Parliament prosecuted, and cried out still of
Monopolies, loss of Liberties and Propriety, Arminianism and Innovations in
Religion, toleration and increase of Popery? Read but Rushworths Collections,
and Heylins Life of Archbishop Laud, and deny it if you can. You cannot deny
but that the Long Parliament began in the same temper as the former ended,
having the irritation of that which they accounted Lauds Innovations to go
higher: You cannot I think name two in all the House of Commons that were
Presbyterians when the War began: I provoke you to read over the List of the
Lord-Lieutenants of the Parliaments first Militia throughout all England, and
prove but one of them to be then a Presbyterian, or any of them that survive
yet to this day: I provoke you to name me one General, Officer, yea or three
Colonels in all the Earl of Essex his first Army that were Presbyterians. I
might have gone further, and wished you to peruse the Names of all the
Parliaments old Major-Generals or Chief Commanders in the several Counties,
(the Earl of Stamford, Sir William Waller, M. G. Massey, the Earl of Denbeigh,
Sir John Gell, Ferdinando Lord Fairfaix, Dointz, Mitton, Sir Tho. Middleton,
Morgan, the Earl of Manchester, etc.) and tell me how many you can find that
were Presbyterians. I can witness, that many greatlyest famed of late for
Presbyterians, have earnestly pleaded with me for the present Episcopacy. I
asked you whether it was not only the taking down that which they took to be
the Innovations and Exorbitances, and civil Power of the Bishops, which the
Parliament asked when the War began? You can give me no answer to any of this
that savoureth of sense and modesty, but what must grant, that it is
notoriously certain that it was not a Presbyterian, but an Episcopal and
Erastian Parliament in England which began the Wars: And yet you will rather
hide their fact and fault, while you aggravate the same in others, than you
will call the Episcopal Party to repentance. What credit shall we ever give to
History, when a thing so public and notorious, as a Parliament, an Army, the
Lord-Lieuteants, the Major-Generals, yea and the Synod, shall all be
represented to be Men of another Party, and that had another Cause, than indeed
they were and had? If in the same Age, the same Land, even where and when a
great part of them are yet living, and the rest lately were our Neighbors and
Familiars, there shall yet be found such Men, yea Preachers, as have the face
to tell the World, that these at the raising of the War were Presbyterians; we
may next expect, that History may make Posterity believe, that they were not
Englishmen: I my self knew many of the Parliament, many Lord-Lieutenants, many
of Essex his Army, many of the Major-Generals, and I scarce remember one
Presbyterian among them all at the beginning of the War, except two or three
Scottish Soldiers that were in Essex's Army; and I do not know that they were
such, but only that they were Scots. And for the Westminster Assembly, except
only the six or seven Independents that were there, I provoke you still to name
me three English Divines, that were Presbyterians, or that were not Conformists?

Now what do you say to all this? Do you deny? Do you confute any of it? Do you
name a Man as an instance of my mistake, or can you do it?

. 25. First you tell me, I am at much pains to clear the Non-conformists of the
guilt of the late War. Answ. No such matter, -- I only tell you that it was not
a Presbyterian Parliament, or Army, that began the English War. 1. The
beginning of the War is one thing, and the progress is another; the
Presbyterians (or, says Dr. Heylin, the Scots Lords for their Church Lands and
Tyths sake) began it in Scotland, the Papists began it in Ireland, one part of
the Episcopal against another began it in England. 2. All Non-conformists were
not Presbyterians. 3. Cannot I say that the Episcopal began it without clearing
those that did second them; or the Sectaries that carried it on to the end?

You feign me to say, that [A very few Non-conformists of a multitude were
engaged in it;] whereas my words were, [It is not one of a multitude of the
Nonconformable Ministers that ever took up Arms against the King.] I speak
there of Ministers only, and those that are now Non-conformists; of whom the
far greatest number were then Children, and many unborn, and many of the elder
(yea most) never meddled with Arms: But as for the beginning of the War, I
cannot say, of a multitude a few only were engaged, for there was then no
multitude in England of Nonconformable Ministers. Little did I think to have
ever been put to dispute such a Cause about open matter of Fact. I know not
your age, but (being a Preacher near four years before the Wars) I was old
enough to know, that in all the Counties that I was acquainted in, there was
not above one poor obscure Nonconformable Minister in a County, taking one with
another, nor I think past one for two Counties: Poor old Mr. Barnet in
Shrop-shire, Mr. Langley in Cheshire, none in Worchester-shire, Mr. Atkins in
Staffordshire, Mr. Angier in Lancashire, and how few more in all England, and
which of these meddled with the Wars?

. 26. And here you say, [I had thought, currente rota, while your Hand was in
you would have said, that the Regicides were Episcopal too, etc. Sir, I now
perceive Cateline was a Fool, etc.] Answ. And is there any sense or strength in
such an Answer? Do such words satisfy your Conscience, for the falsifying of
such notorious matters of Fact? Is there any room for a doubt in the Business,
except to Strangers, or those that were unborn, or Children? Would you make me
believe, that I saw not what I saw, and heard not what I heard?

You say, [If Episcopal Men began and carried on the War, and Presbyterians
were free, etc.] Answ. Did I say that they were free? or that they joined not
in the Progress? How could a non-ens be free or guilty? There were very few
Presbyterian Ministers then in England; the Scots did bring in Presbytery
afterward. You add,

. 27. You were too credulous, etc. were they Episcopal Men that cried, To your
Tents O Israel? that preached Curse ye Meroz, first voted, and then fought
against the King? Answ. Is there one Man named here as an Instance to Confute
me? Is this Evidence fit for such a Contradictor of notoriety it self? When you
have named me the Men that used those words, I will answer you whether they
were Episcopal? I think Dr. Burges was one of the most accused Preachers, being
Assessor in the Assembly, and Chaplain to the Earl of Essex's own Regiment: And
he was one that protested for a Salvo for Episcopacy, when the Covenant was
taken in the Assembly, as he has told me with his own Mouth, and wrote to me
with his own Hand, and none deny: And Dr. Downing of Hackney was one of the
next, Chaplain to the Lord Roberts's Regiment, who (being Dr. of the Civil Law)
has Writings yet visible in print for Prelacy and Conformity. Mr. Marshal and
Mr. Obadia Sedgwick were two of the next, (one Chaplain to Essex, the other to
the Lord Hollis's Regiment) both old Conformists: Of all the Chaplains of
Essex's Army, I knew not a Nonconformist and Presbyterian but Mr. Ash; and I
think I knew them almost all. And for the Parliament I said enough before: The
Members yet living say, that Mr. Tate of Northamptonshire was the only
Presbyterian then in the House of Commons, and I never yet knew one among the
Lords.

. 28. You say, [If they were, they were degenerous from the English Episcopacy,
they did not keep close to our Church, (which were my words) to our Articles,
our Canons, our Lyturgy, our Homilies.] 1. Answ., Your words were also, [Who
can choose but nauseate that way of Discipline, etc.] 2. Speak out then, and
confess that they were degenerous Episcopal Men, and call them to repentance as
the Raisers of the War, and deceive not Posterity by telling them the contrary.
3. But Sir, what mean you by your Church, which they kept not close to? Does
not the Canon Anathematize them that deny the Convocation to be the
Representative Church? And must not the main Body of the Clergy then be your
Church? And does not Dr. Heylin largely show you, that there were but five
Bishops joined at first with Bishop Laud? and that Abbot had the rest with him,
in so much that they durst not commit their Cause to a Convocation? And that
Arminianism, new Ceremonies, with Matters of Propriety and Prerogative, were
the Matters then of the Contention, which made Heylin say, That he knew not
whether the Church could have a greater plague than a Popular Prelate, (because
of Abbots Interest in the Nobility, Gentry, and People.) How should one then
have known which of the Parties was the Church, and who shall be Judge which
Party it is that keeps close to the Articles, Canons Lyturgy and Homilies:
Whitgift with Dr. Whitaker thought that the Anti-Arminian Lambeth Articles were
the sense of the Church and Articles.

George Abbot Arch bishop, and Robert Abbot Bishop of Salisbury, with Davenant,
Hall, etc. thought the middle Augustinian way was the true sense of the
Articles, Lyturgy, etc. (which is the plain truth.) Bishop Laud, with his four
Partners, (Neile, Buckeridge, Howson, and Corbet) thought (as Heylin says)
that the way called Arminian was the true sense of the Articles and Church.
Overal and Mountague kept with them of the middle way in the main, yet were
more averse to the Calvinist Prelates than the rest. These fall out among
themselves: The Arminians being few, are born down by the rest in Parliaments,
and Convocations. The Duke of Buckingham (and, as Heylin says, the King)
favored the five dissenting Bishops! When favor strengthens their Party,
they call themselves the Church; accordingly one part of them pleads for His
Majesty's Prerogative, etc. and the other are for Parliaments, and cry up
Propriety and Liberty: At last the Scotch and Irish Bussles prepare all for a
War, and these two Episcopal Parties sight; one Party cries down Arminianism,
Innovations, Altars, favor to Papists, Ship Money, etc. the other Party cries
out against absolute Reprobation, Calvinism, Puritanism, etc. the one Party
cries down the Papists, and calls the Scots Presbyterians to their help; the
other Party cries down the Presbyterians, and calls the Papists to their
help: Which of these is the Church, which keeps close to the Articles,
Canons? etc. for my part I am none of the Judge between them in that Point. And
I think if you call one side the Church, it will be never the more the Church
for that; unless the King does make it so: but surely they were both Episcopal,
though one Party after fell in with the Presbyterians, (and the Presbyterians
were conquered or cast out by the Sectaries) and the other Party kept with the
King.

. 29. You say, [Would Episcopal Men conspire to root out Episcopacy?] Answ. At
first they conspired but to restrain and regulate those that they thought
Innovators and Arminians, etc. (I speak only of Church Matters) but after they
were too weak to defend themselves without the Scots and Sectaries, and were
content to take down Episcopacy to please their Helpers, rather than to be
overcome themselves.

. 30. Whether Williams or Laud was the better Archbishop, or whether they did
well that cut off Laud, is none of the Question: All that I say was, that
Williams was an Archbishop, and a Commander for the Parliament in Arms.

. 31. When you turn me from Heylins Life of Laud, to Heylins History of
Presbytery you do but trifle and seek a Subterfuge. I justify not the
Presbyterians in that he charge on them, (though you may know what Peter
Moulin, Prebend of Canterbury, in his Answer to Philanax Anglicus, has said
about the Foreign Churches.) But what is that to the Question, whether it was
an Episcopal Parliament or a Presbyterian that began the English War, will the
fault of one excuse the other?

. 32. As to what you say of the Change of the Puritans, since Jewel, Andrews,
etc. wrote for them, and that they are not such as Ball, etc. I Answer 1. Is
the Discipline changed which you speak of, or the whole Chorus which you speak
to? Was there no Martin-Marprelates then? Have we retracted our Doctrine or
Consent to the Church Articles, or to the Oaths of Allegiance or Supremacy?
Have we not in 1660. yielded to more than ever Ball, or any of the old
Non-conformists yielded to? Deny it if you can. 2. As for personal Charges,
others will be as ready to requite you with the like: But neither you nor they
should charge any more, than you can prove guilty.

. 33. You tell me, [If Hooker were alive, he would make such as me to quake, so
strong should we find his Breath in his deep, close, and strenuous Arguments: I
have read him over again and again, yet I never observed him to be an Enemy to
Monarchy; -- You can find out, if not New Worlds, yet new Inhabitants, and make
strange Discoveries.] Answ. A learned Confutator, I say not that Hooker or
Bilson were Enemies to Monarchy. But I say that it was theirs, and such
Prelatists Principles that led me to what I did and wrote in the Book which I
have retracted. And must I be put to defend the King against such Men and
Principles, at the same time when we are charged with that which we oppose? And
will you indeed cry out of the Discipline of the whole Chorus of Dissenters, as
not Loyal, and at the same time defend such Principles in the Prelatists?

Come on then, I will cite you some of their words; send me your defense of
them in your next, and you shall, if I be able, have my Reply; and I begin with
Bishop Bilson, because he was the more Learned Man: Difference of Christ.
Subject. etc. Page 520. he says, [Except the Laws of those Realms do permit
the People to stand on their right, if the Prince would offer that wrong, I
dare not allow their Arms: -- I busy not my self in other Men's Commonwealths
as you do, neither will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels. Cases
may fall out even in Christian Kingdoms, where the People may plead their Right
against the Prince, and not be charged with Rebellion. -- If a Prince should go
about to subject his Kingdoms to a Foreign Realm, or change the form of the
Commonwealth from Imperie to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established by
common consent of Prince and People, to execute his own pleasure; in these and
other Cases which might be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to
defend their ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment and Laws, they may not
well be counted Rebels, -- I never denied that the People might preserve the
Foundation, Freedom and Form of their Commonwealth, which they foreprized when
they first consented to have a King. I never said that Kingdoms and
Commonwealths might not proportion their States, as they thought best by their
public Laws, which afterward the Princes themselves may not violate. -- And in
Kingdoms where Princes bear Rule by the Sword, we do not mean the Princes
private Will against his Laws, but his Precept derived from his Laws, and
agreeing with his Laws, which though it be wicked, yet may it not be resisted
by any Subject with armed violence. Marry when Princes offer their Subjects not
Justice but Force, and despise all Laws, and practice their Lusts, not every or
any private Man may take the Sword to redress the Prince: but if the Laws of
the Land appoint the Nobles, as next the King, to assist him in doing right,
and withold him from doing wrong, then be they licensed by Man's Law, and so
not prohibited by Gods, to interpose themselves for the safety of Equity and
Innocence. -- It is easy for a running and railing Head to sit at home in his
Chamber and call Men Rebels, himself being the rankest.]

Hooker Eccles. Polit. lib. 1.. 10. Page Ed. ult. 21. That which we speak of
the Power of Government, must here be applied to the Power of making Laws
whereby to govern, which Power God has over all, and by the natural Law,
whereto he has made all subject, the lawful Power of making Laws to command
whole politic Societies of Men, belongs so properly to the same entire
Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate, of what kind soever, upon Earth,
to exercise the same himself, and not either by express Commission immediately
and personally received from God, or else by Authority derived at first from
their consent, upon whose person they impose Laws, it is no better than mere
Tyranny: Laws they are not therefore which public approbation has not made
so.

And lib. 8. Page 192. Unto me it seems almost out of doubt and controversy,
that every Independent Multitude, before any certain Form of Regiment
established, has under God Supreme Authority, full Dominion over it self. --

And Page 193. [In Kingdoms of this quality the highest Governor has indeed
universal Dominion, but with dependency upon the whole entire Body, over the
several Parts whereof he has Dominion; so that it stands for an Axiom in
this Case, The King is Singulis Major, Vniversis Minor.

And Page 194. Neither can any Man with reason think but that the first
Institution of Kings, (a sufficient Consideration wherefore their Power should
always depend on that from which it did always flow, by original influence of
Power from the Body into the King) is the cause of Kings dependency in Power
upon the Body; by dependency we mean sub-ordination and subjection. A manifest
Token of which dependency may be this. As there is no more certain Argument
that Lands are held under any as Lords, than if we see that such Lands in
defect of Heirs fall unto them by Escheat; in like manner it does follow
rightly, that seeing Dominion, when there is none to inherit it, returns unto
the Body; therefore they which before were Inheritors of it, did hold it in
dependence on the Body: So that by comparing the Body with the Head, as
touching Power, it seems always to reside in both; fundamentally and
radically in one; in the other derivatively: In one the Habit, in the other the
Act of Power.] And [ -- The Axioms of our Royal Government are these, Lex
facit Regem; The Kings Grant of any favor made contrary to Law is void, Rex
nihil potest, nisi quid jure potest.

And Page 210. When all which the Wisdom of all sorts can do is done for the
devising Laws in the Church, it is the general consent of all, that gives them
the Form and Vigor of Laws, without which they could be no more to us than the
Counsels of Physicians to the Sick; well might they seem as wholesome
admonitions and instructions, but Laws could they never be, without the consent
of the whole Church to be guided by them: Whereunto both Nature and the
Practice of the Church of God set down in Scripture, is found every way so
fully consonant, that God himself would not impose, no not his own Laws upon
his People, by the Hand of Moses, without their free and open consent] (O
fearful Passage!)

And P. 220. It is a thing even undoubtedly natural, that all free and
independent Societies should themselves make their own Laws, and that this
Power should belong to the whole, not to any certain part of a Politic Body.

And P. 221. [For of this thing no Man doubts, namely, that in all Societies,
Companies, Corporations, what severally each shall be bound unto, it must be
with all their assents ratified. Against all equity it were, that a Man should
suffer detriment at the Hands of Men, for not observing, that which he never
did either by himself or by others mediately or immediately agree to.

And P. 205. [If Magistrates be Heads of Church, they are of necessity
Christians,] (as if no Magistrates but Christians were Chief Governors of the
Church, which is meant by Heads.)

And P. 218, 223, 224. What Power the King has, he has it by Law. The Bounds
and Limits of it are known: The entire community gives order, etc. P. 223. As
for them that exercise Power altogether against Order, although the kind of
Power which they have may be of God, yet is their exercise thereof against God,
and therefore not God, otherwise than by permission, as all injustice is. -- P.
224. Usurpers of Power (whereby we do not mean them that by violence have
aspired unto Places of highest Authority, but that use more Authority than ever
they did receive in form and manner aforementioned, --) such Usurpers thereof
as in the exercise of their Power do more than they have been authorized to do,
cannot in Conscience bind any Man to obedience.

And Page 194. May a Body-politick then at all times withdraw in whole or in
part the Influence of Dominion which passes from it, if inconveniences do grow
thereby? It must be presumed, that Supreme Governors will not in such case
oppose themselves, and be stiff in detaining that, the use whereof is with
public detriment, etc.

Sir, I do not by reciting it dissent from every word that I cite, but I am
against Mr. Hookers Popular Fundamentals themselves, and desire you to let me
know whether these be the Prelates Principles which you defend: And for an
Exposition of Mr. Hooker, remember that Sir Edwin Sandys was his Pupil and
chief Bosom-friend.

But you say you have read his Book over and over, and therefore it is not from
ignorance of what he wrote, that you become a defender of him. I suppose you
are not ignorant that these are the very Principles, which (I will not say the
Long Parliament, but) the very Rump and Regicides went upon, that Power is
originally in the People, and escheateth to them, and that the King is Singulis
Major, but Vniversis Minor, etc. See Parkers Observations 1642.

If I were writing to such as Mr. Walton, who would tempt Men to question
whether the 8th Book be not corrupted, I would tell them; 1. That the Passage
in the first Book is the Sum of all the rest, and shows that they came from
the same Author. 2. Dr. Spencer was not a Person so to be suspected, as one
that would befriend a corrupted Copy. 3. I can yet give you the Testimony of
one of the famousest Men in England for Learning in the Laws and Integrity, who
had long ago a Copy in M. S. agreeing with the printed Copy. 4. Bishop Guuden
dedicated it to the King, and says, That even the eighth Book is interlined in
many places with Mr. Hookers own Characters, as owned by him, and he proves it
by other Reasons. And the same Bishop Gauden says, P. 18. He admirably
expresses the original of all Laws.

And yet Bishop Carlton Treat. of Jurisdiction, Page 12. says, [This I observe
the rather, because some of the Popes Flatterers of late, as others also, to
open a wide gap to Rebellions, have written, That the Power of Government by
the Law of Nature is in the Multitude.] I conjecture that Mr. Hooker was the
chief Man whom he meant by [others:] And his foresaid Pupil and Friend was far
from being a Presbyterian, as his Europae Speculum shows; and yet it is well
known how close he stuck to Abbot's Party, and how great a Man he was in
Parliaments for the Subjects Liberty, and the restraint of Monarchy. And even
Bishop Gauden his last Publisher says, Page 4. of his Life. [This is certain,
that the strength of the Church of England was much decayed and undermined,
before it was openly battered, partly by some superfluous illegals and
unauthorized Innovations in Point of Ceremony, which some Men affected to use
in public, and impose upon others, which provoked People to jealousy and
fury, even against things lawful, every Man judging truly, that the measure of
all public Obedience ought to be the public Laws. Partly by a supine neglect
in others, of the main Matters in which the Kingdom of God, the peace of
Conscience, and the Churches Happiness, do chiefly consist; while they were
immoderately intent upon mere Formalities, and more zealous for an outward
conformity to those Shadows, than for that inward, or outward conformity with
Christ in Holy Hearts and unblamable Lives, which must adorn true Religion.] To
which he adds the Testimony of Dr. Holsworth!

So that it is a thing notorious and past contradiction, that the Arminianism,
Innovations, and supposed excesses and exorbitances of one part of the
Prelatists, gave occasion to the other part (then accounted the Church and the
more Protestant) to vent their displeasure and fear in many Parliaments, and at
last to take up Arms, and when they found themselves too weak, to invite the
Scottish Presbyterians to their Aid, who fell at last into the Hands of the
Sectaries. And therefore I excuse or justify none of the Parties; but those
that say that the beginners of the War against the King are guilty of his
death, as well as they that killed him, must confess that it was the
Prelatists, or they must be impudent: And therefore I again advise you to
forbear the defense of Hooker and such Conformists, and call them first to
repentance, who were first (of the English) in taking up Arms against the King.

. 34. It Is well you disclaim the Politics of Grotius: But what abundance more
Authors of Politics could I name you that make the Majestas Realis to be in
the People, yea and the Power of judging Kings. Such as Willius (he whom Bishop
Hall wrote his Epistle to in his Remains) Alstedius, etc. Besides the Papists;
and if you agree with me in disliking those, do not own the same in Hooker, or
other Prelatists.

. 35. Because you said, [Who can choose but nauseate that way of Discipline,
which startles at renouncing War against the King:] I desire you to tell me
what Discipline you mean? You will not say Prelatical Discipline; If you mean
Presbyterian, 1. I told you it was Episcopacy which the present Non-conformists
offered to the King and Bishops. 2. I desired you to peruse the Confessions and
Descriptions of the Discipline of the Foreign Churches, and to tell me which
words do deny renouncing such War. And what say you to this? why! first you
deride the motion, as a thing not to be required of you, and say their Actions
are quite contrary to their Confessions? Will not your Conscience mark here; 1.
How your own Pen does acquit their Confessions, and yet you nauseate the way of
Discipline that startles, etc. And where is the way of Discipline to be found
but in those Confessions, which even the Accuser now absolveth? 2. And now you
lay it on Practice, and what is that, 1. to the way of Discipline; 2. or to the
whole Chorus which you speak to, or any one Man whose Practice you have not
proved such as you accuse? And is your printed Clamor come to this?

. 36. And what say you of the Practice now? 1. You tell me of Davila. I pray
next go to Parsons Image of both Churches, and to Philanax Anglicus, where you
shall find the Prelatists as deeply charged. And must Davila a Papist be
credited against Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, King James, and many other on the
other side? And is not Davila a false Historian? For instance, he falsely
says, That Carpenter was killed in the Massacre, (who dyed of the fright) and
that Peter Ramus (the Father of the Independents) was a Papist, etc. And is a
false Forreigner and a Papist to be believed against the French Protestants? I
again refer you to the late notable Vindication of the Foreign Presbyterians
in France, Holland, Embden, Geneva, etc. by Pet. Moulin Jun. in his Answer to
Philanax Anglicus: And yet his Father might well blame them for some Instances
as you cite him; For as to the last Business at Saumurs and Rochel, he was a
noted and suffering Dissenter from that Party, and so were other Protestants,
as well as he.

But one would think by your Progress, that I had justified all the Wars or
Actions of the Presbyterians, because I told you that the Prelatists begun the
English War; which if you would insinuate, (or else you speak not sense) you
want either that understanding or that sincerity which beseems a Historian
and a Divine.

But if really you will stand to it, that their way of Discipline is to be
nauseated, who are guilty in practice of resisting Kings, who do you not speak
out then, that the Prelatical Discipline is to be nauseated, when you have not
spoken a word of sense to disprove the aforesaid Charge against the Prelatists?
As to your Margin; 1. I have no more to do with Martyn than you have. 2. If you
had any thing to have justified your Calumny out of T. C. or Travers, you
should have cited it; for it is but a silly shift to set down their bare Names.
3. And I will no further believe Bancroft or Sir Th. Aston, than they prove
what they say, no more than your self. And I have reason for so saying.

. 37. Next you feign me to say, That [the Divines, Presbyterian or Episcopal,
meddled little with it;] whereas I had no such word, but on the contrary told
you, [That the Divines on both sides were too guilty, if not the forwardest.]
And are you a fit Man to state these matters in print for Posterity, and pour
out such Invectives against other Men, that have not so much patience or care
as to heed what you read in a Letter, or what you write in answer to it? What
use can such Writings as these be of, but to abuse the simple? I only told you
the differences were Political and Legal, and not Theological; but I said not
that Divines meddled not in them.

. 38. I did, as you say, desire you to name the Theological Differences, if you
know any, for I never did: And what say you to this? would not any Reader here
expect that you should have named some one difference? But instead of that, you
exclaim, [This is strange] and you ask me, [Did I never hear of Dr. Fern, Mr.
Dudley Digs?] yes, and of Mr. Weldon, and Michael Hudson, and Sir Francis
Nethersole, and more, and have long ago read them all. And what of that? And I
have read Jo. Goodwin, Mr. Bridges, Mr. Calamy, etc. And what of all that? Why
did you not name the Theological Difference? -- You say, That it was called the
Cause of God, Religion, etc. Did you think that you spoke to the purpose, when
you said this? It was Gratia materiae, finis and effect us that they accounted
it the Cause of Religion: They thought it had been the liberation of their
Church and Country, and the defense of Religion against Innovators. But what is
that to the lawfulness of taking up Arms? Is any Man so mad (especially an
Episcopal Parliament) as to think all War lawful against the King, which is for
Religion? Will a good end justify ill means? Your own Instance of Mr. Vines
and Mr. Marshal, to prove, that in Romans 13. by the higher Powers was meant the
Parliament-houses, etc. if you had been a Man of consideration, would have
clearly showed you how it confuteth your self: That, and many Texts of
Scripture were agitated by Dr. Fern, Mr. Digs, and those that answered them:
Upon all which it was agreed, as far as I know, that the Higher Powers were not
by Arms to be resisted. And this is all the Theological part. But did you think
that they thought that Romans 13. or other Scriptures, did tell the World whether
Caesar or the Senate was the higher Power? or which is the higher Power in
Venice, Germany, Poland, Hungary, France, England, or any Country in the World?
Will you put the King to prove all his Power from Scripture? What ever you take
it, I and all that ever I met with, that were above the Rank of those you
describe by Jobs Wife, did take this to be a Point of Policy and Law, and not
of Theology, and that Scriptures tell us not who is the Supreme in every
Republic, but supposing that known, commands us not to resist them. And then
comes in Bishop Bilson, and says what is before cited for Lords and Commons
vindicating their Librerties; and then comes in Hooker and tells us, That by
the Law of Nature Legislation belongs to the Body, and that the King is
dependent and subject to the Body, and such like. And many Divines took up
those Opinions; and Dr. Fern and others were against them. But what of all
this? Are not these Controversies in Law and Politics, though handled by
Divines?

. 39. Your next say, That Dr. Manton wrote on Jude, and note my in-advertency
that take no more notice of his Labors: And I marvel more than you can do,
that I never heard of that Book before: Nor could hear of it from any one, till
he told me himself, that he had long ago published some Sermons, which he
preached very young, etc. on Jude. And that I was hereof ignorant I confess.

. 40. You say of your Citation of Dr. Burges, That the Book is in the Hand of a
Friend; and you add, [Are you such a Helluo Liborum, and yet had you no
acquaintance with these?] Answ. I have read I think all Dr. John Burges's
Writings, except those against Conformity before he turned. And I read Dr.
Cornelius Burges Book of Baptismal Regeneration about 36 years ago; and I after
wrote somewhat against it, and Dr. Ward and Mr. Bedford on that Subject; and
since I was familiar with the Author till near his death, therefore I believe
not that it was John Burges that wrote that Book, but suppose you to be much
liker to be mistaken than I. And unless Dr. John Burges wrote another Book of
the same Subject (which I shall also wonder that I never heard of) I am as sure
you are mistaken as my Eyes and Acquaintance can make me.

. 41. I told you I knew not one of the Ministers that was not ready to swear
that which you feign the Discipline of the Chorus to refuse. And you ask me,
Why then did they flit their Habitations?

Answ. Did I not expressly tell you why? and was your disingenuity at leisure to
fill your Paper with the recital of an answered Question, that you might have
opportunity to vent your Latet aliquid? And here you begin to dispute the Case
(Platonically.) But I cannot persuade my self to dispute it with one that no
better understands it, or cares what he says; only I answer your Questions.
Q. 1. What was the sum of that Oath, was it not plainly and directly against
taking up Arms? Answ. 1. And is that all the Oath; or is there not a Clause for
our Church Government? 2. If so, why is the first Clause the Sum of the whole?
3. Or need my Conscience stick at nothing in an Oath, but what you will call
the Sum? O happy quieter of Consciences that fear an Oath! Q. 2. Did it any way
hinder Parliament Men's speaking, or others peaceably petitioning for such
reformation as is necessary? Answ. 1. You shall not draw me to say, that an
alteration of Diocesanes or Lay-Chancellors is necessary, no not ad been esse
Ecclesiae; for I know the Law is against it. But if I thought so, is
Petitioning no Endeavoring? Say so, and show that you care not what you say,
to draw down an Oath: And must not I swear, That I [will not any time endeavor
any alteration?] And shall I swear universally against all endeavor, and
mentally reserve [excepting petitioning, speaking, etc.] Are Oaths things to be
swallowed thus in sport? And will wiping my Mouth thus make me innocent? Q. 3.
[Were not those who were commissioned to administer it, ready to declare the
sense of it?] Answ. 1. Where did the King and Parliament give them power to
declare the sense? 2. Is it not all the Justices in England that are authorized
(two at once) to administer it? And do you know what all the Justices in
England are ready to do? 3. Are you sure they will all agree in the sense? or
must we take it in several senses, if several Men severally expound it? 4. What
Law or Divinity teaches you to take an Oath in the sense of an inferior
Magistrate that offers it you, who is not by the Law empowered to interpret
it; nor is so much as made a Judge of the sense, but of my Fact of taking or
refusing it? If this way be lawful, what if a Papist could find a Justice that
would expound the Oath of Supremacy for the Pope? May he therefore take it? Is
not the Lawmakers the universal Expositor of his own Law; except for the
Judicial decision of a particular Case which he commits to his Judges? or
can a Justice dispense with equivocation in Oaths, and not a Pope? 5. I was but
once yet sent to Goal for refusing that Oath, and then I told them that I
refused it not, but desired the Justices to tell me the sense of it, which they
refused, and said I must take it according to the plain words, or importance of
the Phrase, (which is the truth.) And yet you say, Are they not ready, etc.
What wonder if Oaths go smoothly down, where there are such Resolvers? and it
Books revile them that will not swear?

But here ensues as confident a Rhetorical Invective against those that
scruple this kind of swearing, as if Logic first had done its part, or at
least one word of sense had been spoken to satisfy the Conscience of a Man
that would not be stigmatized with PER. And we must swear without any smoother
Oil to get it down, than such talk as this, or else we must go with you for Men
of hot and feavourish Brains. But Swearers we find have a Heat of their own
kind, transcending others: Such as your Book and other Men's Actions have
declared.

. 42. I told you, [If you would put out the other Clauses of the Oath, etc. you
should see how few would stick at that of taking Arms against the King.] Here
you say, [Why do I lay this on you, etc.] Answ. But Sir, you might have
understood my Inference: Why then do you pretend a false Reason of our refusal,
when we tell you the true Reason? If you cannot put out the Clause which we
refuse, you could forbear to Calumniate us of Traitorous Meanings, as if we
stuck at another Clause.

. 43. When I desired the imposing of no other Oaths on us to Prelates or
Chancellors, than were imposed or used for many hundred years in the Church,
you tell us, That [it may be schismatical to stand up too stiffly for immediate
Dispensations as to the Modes of External Policy, etc.] Answ. 1. As some things
not commanded in Modes of Church Policy are lawful, so some things are
unlawful; or else you may swear to the Pope as well as to Diocesanes. And is it
lawful to swear to the unlawful part think you? what that is I will not dispute
with you. 2. All that is lawful to be done, is not to be sworn to, and made so
necessary, as that a Church or Nation shall swear never to endeavor any
alteration of it, when a Change of Divine Providence can turn many lawful
things into unlawful. 3. But are we the great admirers of Antiquity, and yet
must we have Oaths, even public Oaths in the Church it self, and Matters so
necessary, as that Ministers must be sworn to them, which the Church never knew
for 800 years. Well! plead for Antiquity when it serves your turn, and when it
makes against you cry it down. 4. If you will (among many others that have
written, how the Pope got Princes under his feet, by imposing Oaths upon the
Clergy) read but what Bishop Carlton says of Jurisdiction, Chap. 7. and you
will see one Reason why we are loath to swear to the Church Government as
totally unalterable, and that before the States.

. 44. About Lay-Chancellors exercising the Spiritual Power of the Keys, and our
swearing never to endeavor any alteration of it, you say, [Me thinks a Person
of your ingenuity should rest satisfied with that modest Declaration of our
Rubric, concerning the Censures of the Church, in the Preface to the
Communion.]

Answ. Is there one Syllable in that Preface for justifying Lay-Chancellors use
of the Keys? What need is there of Ingenuity to swallow an Oath upon such
satisfaction as this?

But you add, [Do they do this of themselves as Laymen, or do they not? You
see it is easy to push with the Horns, and to evince that you are either
ignorant or absurd: But I shall only remember you, that Lay-Chancellors
excommunicate not as Laymen; but by virtue of those Surrogates who are
Delegates for this purpose, originally by the Bishop himself. This abstraction
is not too hard for you to conceive.]

Answ. We have feverish and skittish Brains indeed, if all this Oil will not
get down Oaths. But come Sir, Horns against Horns is an ordinary way of
combating. These Lay-Chancellors either are Clergymen, or they are not: If
they are not, (as they are not) then they that excommunicate not as Laymen, do
it as Clergymen, or not; if not as Laymen, nor as Clergymen, as what then?
If as Clergymen, then they that are no Clergymen may excommunicate as
Clergymen, or not: If not, all the Fat is in the Fire still: If yea, then
either they may act as in a Person which they have not, or not: If not, yet we
cannot swear: If yea, then you are pushed up to a Stone Wall, and must deny two
Principles: 1. That operari sequitur esse: 2. That a negatione est secundi
adjecti, ad negationem est tertii adjecti, valet argumentum: Qui non est
Clericus, non operatur qua Clericus. 3. To which I may add a Moral Principle;
Non est mentiendum.

But I have heard before now of Preaching, and other officiating per se aut per
alium. But let us horn it with you a little further: Either the exercise of the
Keys by excommunication is an Act proper to the Sacred Pastoral Office, or it
is not: If it be not, then Preaching, Praying, Sacraments, or some other
Actions, are proper to it, or not: If none be proper to it, we are at the Wall
of a Contradiction, for then it is no Sacred Office; but if something be proper
to it, that something is more Sacred than the Power of Excommunication, or not:
If not, then we are again at the Wall of a Contradiction: If they be equally
Sacred, they are equally proper to the Sacred Pastoral Office: If yea, then
Argumentum valet ab opere ad Officium, the Office of a Bishop as such is less
Sacred than the Office of a Presbyter: And either it is one half a Bishops Work
that may be done by a Layman, or all! If all, (Ordination and Jurisdiction or
Censure) then a Layman may be a Bishop, and a Bishop a Layman; and so
Episcopacy no Sacred Office. If half, 1. Either that half is included in the
Keys of the Kingdom, given to Pastors, or not: If not, then we are at a Wall;
for, 1. It will prove no part of their Office or Power (as Bishops or Pastors.)
2. The word Keys will never be intelligible, if it include not the Power of
Binding and Loosing; but if that half be included in the Power of the Keys,
then either Christ, when he committed the Keys to the Clergy, did distinguish
in that one word, and make one Act of the Keys proper to the Clergy, and not
another, or he did not distinguish, but make the said Keys wholly proper to
them: If the former, what is the proof? where is the distinction found? there
is none in the Words: If the latter, then habetur quaesitum; Excommunication is
not to be done by a Layman; or else he made all the Keys communicable to the
Laity; and then Baptism (which is the first Exercise of them Politically) is
communicable, and then there is no Sacred Office.

Again, a Bishop can excommunicate by a Presbyter, as well as by a Layman, or
not: If not, we are at a Wall: If yea, then a Presbyter may do the Work of a
Bishop, if a Bishop please; and if so, then he may ordain also, if a Bishop
please; for why may not one Key be exercised per alium, as well as another? and
if a Bishop please, Presbyters Ordination is valid.

Moreover, either the Bishop may commit this Power to a Lay-Chancellor only pro
hac vice, or statedly as an Office. If the first, farewell Chancellors who have
an Office of it. If the latter, then either to make a Man a Chancellor is to
make him a Bishop, or not: If yea, then speak out, and call him not a Layman,
but let him be ordained and consecrated; if not, we are at a Wall again, and we
must deny a Principle, viz. That they are the same things that have the same
true definitions. For, (do but suppose the other half the Prelatical Work
(Ordination) also to be done per alium in a stated way of Office, and he that
does it will have the same definition; that is, one in stated Office,
authorized to ordain and exercise the Keys of Jurisdiction, or Absolution and
Excommunication: For the Office is nothing else but Authority and Obligation to
do the proper Acts. In a word, Circumstantials, circa Sacra, or Accidentals,
may be done per alium, (as to call the People to Church, etc.) Acts proper to
the Sacred Office (of Bishop or Presbyter) may not! Otherwise 1. Ordination or
Consecration cannot be proved to be an entering into a Sacred Office; because
it tyeth us but to that which another may be tied to without it; 2. or the
Office which may be exercised per alium by a Layman, is not Sacred; and
Episcopacy may be translated into the Hands of the Laity, or rather is a
Lay-Office already.

But what mean you by saying, That they excommunicate by virtue of those
Surrogates, etc. Do you mean that Surrogates give the Chancellor his Power? I
knew not so much before, nor believe it now; or does the Chancellor represent
the Surrogate, and do it in his name? I am content to be still so ignorant and
absurd, as to wish you had more consulted the Honor of your Knowledge, than to
talk at these rates. In my opinion, of the two you had taken a more plausible
way, if with your Brethren you had pretended, that taking down Chancellors (who
are the stated Governors) is no alteration in the Church Government; or else
that the ordinary Priest, who sometime pro forma pronounces the Sentence which
the Chancellor decrees, is the Excommunicator and Absolver; and so say that a
Presbyter exercises the Episcopal Office, rather than a Layman, (if we were
not more jealous of the Presbyters claim of right to it, than of the Lay-mans.)
I pray take some of these ways the next time; or else do not rant too hotly
against those skittish hot-brained Men, that make a question of swearing as
boldly, and as deeply as you expect them. And teach them better than by
Rhetorical Flourishes, how to confute the Seperatists, that say, [A Perjured
Clergy is not to be communicated with: But, etc.] If I had no better answer for
them than what you afford me, I would leave them to some that are more able to
confute them: For with your Weapons I am unable.

And your saying they do it by virtue of the Surrogates, makes me question by
how many descents a Bishops Power may be committed to others. Does the Bishop
commit it to the Surrogate, and the Surrogate to the Chancellors, and the
Chancellors to the Official? And what if it come down yet ten degrees more? Is
it a Lay-work, or a-Sacred Clergy-work at last, when it is per alium, qui per
alium, qui per alium, etc.

If you shall say, that by the Surrogate you did mean either any Priest that
does pronounce the Sentence, or the Parish Priest that proclaims it in the
Church; remember that it is neither Ministerial pronouncing, nor Ministerial
proclaiming or reading it that we speak of, but Judicial authoritative
decreeing it; and that the Chancellor does not excommunicate decretively by any
virtue of the Priests pronuntiation or reading, which both follow after, and
are done ministerially in obedience to him: And that the Crier that reads the
Kings Proclamations is no Magistrate, much less one by virtue of whom the King
does make them.

. 45. You add, [I'le warrant, you have more kindness for Lay Elders, if they
were joined with you in things Sacred: As Catechizing, Admissions to the
Sacrament, and Censures of the Church.]

Answ. Your Warrants are so ready and rash, that I know not well what it is
that you may not warrant at these rates; or else you would not have warranted
this to one that has wrote so much against Lay Elders, and never had any thing
to do with them, (as Men that meddled with any part of the Sacred Office, though
Lay-Magistrates and Aged Men I honor.) I will not trouble the Churches Peace
either against Lay Elders or Lay-Chancellors; but I will be sworn to neither of
them as Users of the Keys.

But you think this is but a Gnat in my way; so wide is your Swearing-swallow,
and so terrible to us Men of feverish Heads, are your things indifferent.]

. 46. You say, [The Camel or Beelzebub is Diocesan Bishops: The Episcopacy of
Bishop Usher you are for.]

Answ. 1. Quer. Whether the Archbishops and Bishops in Ushers Model be
Diocesanes or not? or whether the Game you play at be not self-contradiction.
2. If ever I be a Bishop, I shall bless my self from such a Defender as you, if
you can defend no better than you do swearing to Church Government by
Lay-Chancellors.

. 47. You say, [You are kinder to Bishops, for where there is one, I suppose
you wish there were many hundreds; and if this were allowable, we that are
Minorum Gentium (as to our own Interest) have no cause to oppose it: For then
it may be, you and I might in some time of our Ages commence Bishops.]

Answ. O for one Grain of ingenuity and modesty in this kind of Men! The
Debater reproacheth us in print for blowing so long upon our Ecclesiastical
Dignities before we refused them; When I delayed my Answer but one day; and
there were but three of us that had the offer of Bishoprics, and two of
Deanaries, that ever I heard of: And one did almost as soon accept it, as I
refused it: And the third (Mr. Calamy) and the two other, only delayed till
they saw whether the Kings Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs would be
established by an Act; and refused when they saw it at end. And I was so afraid
of the odious Crime of Ingratitude, that I was fain to give the Reasons of my
refusal, as easily as I could, in writing to the Lord-Chancellor, lest it
should favor of undervaluing the favor offered. And I scarce ever talked of
it to any to this day, unless in answer to a question, lest I should seem to be
unthankful; yet can we not have rest in silence for this sort of Men! while all
my fear was, lest my refusal would be too displeasing, and cast me under more
discountenance than before; sometime I hear out of the Pulpit, (from a grave
Doctor known to you) when no Nonconformist but my self is present, that the
reason why we dislike Bishops is, because we cannot be Bishops our selves, (and
yet I ceased not hearing the Accuser:) And here you Sarcastically insinuate
some such thing; which allows me again to wish for one Grain of ingenuity in
you.

. 48. You add, [Magis and Minus non variant speciem.] Answ. That is only in
Substances, where the different quantities are all consistent with the Form:
But not in Relative Beings, where difference of Quantity may change the
Subject, and so the Relation, as Keckerman might have taught you, Log. de
Relat. in the Instance of a Ship. Does your Logic teach us, that the People of
a whole Nation may be but a Family, (a vicus vel pagus! or that a single person
may be a Kingdom or a Family) because Magis and minus non variant speciem?
Would your Spoon be a Spoon if it were as big as a Church, or your Church be a
Church if it were no bigger than a Spoon? Is a Troop, a Regiment, and one Army
of the same Species? or if all the Captains and Colonels were put dowu, and
the General would be the sole Ruler of the Army, were there no change of the
Species of any of the Government? If all the Schoolmasters in the Diocese were
put down, or turned only into Monitors, except one general Diocesane
Schoolmaster, would it not vary the Species of School and Schoolmasters? Is a
Christian Society united for Personal Communion in Gods Worship of the same
Species with a thousand such Societies, united in one Diocesan Head, which can
have no personal present Communion as never seeing one another? Enjoy your
Logic: I am contented with the dishonor of being no Graduate in the
University, that teaches thus, and so applies it.

. 49. You say, [If Bishop Usher were now alive, he would give you but small
thanks for pressing his Model of Episcopacy, (if his) now the King and Laws are
restored, which he only calculated, as that which could be born by the iniquity
of the later times.]

Answ. 1. That the Model was his, he told me with his own Tongue. 2. That he
thought better of it than of that which you set against it, and did not offer
it as a less desirable thing, appears by the Reasons which he gives for it,
from Antiquity, and from the nature of the Pastoral Office, to which he says,
a part in the Keys or Discipline belongs: And he took this to be the true
ancient frame of Government used for many hundred year after Christ, and to be
the true means of our union: And he told me, that he offered it his Majesty
before the War, and it was not accepted, and after the War, and then it might
have passed. And in conference with me he came lower than that Model, as the
Minimum that might serve for our agreement, which I mentioned publicly to the
Parliament, in my Sermon the day before the Kings Restoration was voted by
them, (printed by their Order.) And he told me, That moderate Men would unite
on those terms, but he had tried that others would not. 2. But what is there in
that Model that is so intolerable now? Is one tittle taken from the Bishops or
Archbishops Honor? Is one farthing taken by it from their Estates? Is any of
their Power or Negative Voice taken away? or is not the stated Ministry only
made their Presbytery instead of a few uncertain Presbyters, that must be
present when they ordain, and instead of the present Form of some Courts, etc.
O humble Clergymen, that take this for more intolerable than all the contrary
evils that we undergo! Dishonor not our Church so as to tell Foreigners, That
to be reduced to such an Episcopal Government by Bishops with their Presbyters,
as was commonly in use for six hundred years at least, as that which could be
born by the iniquity of the latter times, but cannot be born by the Clergy now,
if it pleased His Majesty so to order it: But mistake me not; I only speak of
Ushers Model: I do not now speak against the Government, nor plead for a
Change; for the Law forbids me.

As to what you say concerning Vshers Notes on Ignatius concerning the division
of Asia, I suppose you should have said, His Notes on Ignatius, and his
Discourse of the Proconsular Asia, which are two Books, (if you knew the Books
you talk of:) But I know very well that he supposed Episcopacy to have been
before the second Century; but the question is, what sort of Episcopacy? and
that Question his Model does resolve.

. 50. To all that you talk after on this Subject, I cannot find in my heart to
trouble my self with any other Answer, than to tell you, that all you say is
utterly impertinent to those you write of, and shows that you do not at all
understand the Case of the present Non-Conformists, nor the state of the
Controversy.

. 51. But about swearing Obedience to the Bishops, you say; 1. It is but in
Licitis and Honestis: 2. That of old Presbyters have been obedient to their
Bishops under the Penalty of an Anathema.

Answ. 1. The Question is not only of Swearing to obey them, but swearing never
to endeavor any alteration of Church Government. 2. The King himself is to be
obeyed but in licitis and honestis: And must we be sworn as much to the Clergy
as to the King? 3. Those that think the English Species of Diocesanes to be
unlawful, take them to be quoad jus divinum Usurpers: And they say, they would
not swear to obey the Pope in licitis and honest is, nor Cromwell if he were
alive, lest it prove Treason against the true Sovereign, to swear Obedience to
an Usurper, even in licitis and honestis. And how impertinently do you speak of
Presbyters Obedience, sub poena Anathematis, when I only spoke of antecedent
swearing to them. (Nay not to them, but to Men of another Office, though of the
same name.) Are we not now under Anathema's enough in the Canons if we obey
not? Yet how little have you heard the Non-Conformists say against those Canons
these eleven years? (I mean such as have ever publicly agitated their Cause.)
If you Anathematize me unjustly, it is none of my sin: But if I swear unjustly,
it is my sin, I can obey many a Man that I cannot swear obedience to: He that
takes away my Coat, may have my Cloak also; and if you bid me go a Mile for
you, I may rather go two, than do worse: And we must submit our selves to one
another; but yet I will not swear Obedience to all that I may thus obey. And I
may obey a Justice or Constable as my duty; and yet not swear to the perpetuity
of their Office, and that before the Kings: But if Obedience under pain of
Anathema served above a thousand years, without swearing it, why may it not
serve turn now? Are new Oaths necessary to be sworn by us to the Clergy, which
never were necessary till of late? You mean not I perceive, that Antiquity or
Universality shall be the Character of your Church or Impositions: Nor to stand
to Lerinensis Test, (quod ab omnibus, ubique semper, etc.)

If we may neither have Ignatius his Episcopacy in specie, nor be under such
Bonds only as Ignatius speaks for, without such Oaths as he never mentioned, it
is self-condemnation for you to cite the words of Ignatius.

. 52. You say, [Mr. Cartwright wrangled himself at last into Conformity.] Answ.
It is not well done of you to write Historical untruths so boldly: You have no
way to come off, but either to say some body told you so, or that by Conformity
you mean that he separated not from the Parish Churches, which he never did, or
that he was favorable to kneeling at Sacrament, and not peremptory against the
Surplice, into none of which he wrangled but studied himself: And, says
Amesius, retracted his moderation about the Surplice: But did he conform to
Diocesanes, to Subscription, to the Oath of Canonical Obedience, to the Cross,
etc. How is the World abused by false Historians? Thus one of my Antagonists
charge him (after Suttliffe) with acquaintance with Hackets Villainy, and
other such things, from which he so fully vindicateth himself in a Manuscript
of his own, which I have by me, (given me by old Mr. Simeon Ash) as may make
the Reader wonder at the hardened front of Calumny?

. 53. When you say, [you will secure me] about the Oath, I have no confidence
in your security, till I see it to be better backed, than your bare word with a
fallacious unlike supposed Simile. when I must subscribe and swear, That [I
will not at any time endeavor any alteration of Government in this Army,
College, University or Corporation, nor of the State,] putting them conjunct
with the State, and before it, and not excepting, [unless the King command me
to endeavor it,] then I shall better consider of your security. Till then you
do but suppose me to see no difference between things most different.

. 54. Who is it that has done most to drive People from the Parish Churches, I
am satisfied by experience. And whether all such Dissenters are such Children
of Hell as you describe, I shall leave to a more wise and righteous Judge.

. 55. To write a full and just defense of that Nonconformity, which I own
according to the importunity of your Book, would take up much time, and the
Volume would be great, and I have not so much time to spare, unless I saw a
probability of some better effect than is like to arise from my putting it into
your Hands, as now you motion.

If my Style suited to your Matter be displeasing, review your Book, and
retract the culpable part which is the cause, and you will have less cause to
repent of your Repentance, than of your Impenitency. If as you say you are
under affliction, I hope it will help you to do as my long afflictions have
partly done by me, even to judge of Persons, Things and Causes, as one that
daily waits for the time, when he and all shall be judged of God.

I rest, though your plain and faithful Monitor, yet a true desirer of your
welfare.
July 4. 1671.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Baxter's third Letter.
SIR,
YOu lay a very sandy Foundation in your very first words; you foretell (say
you) how little good my writing will do you; yet the Vindication of Truth is an
End sufficient to invite me to bestow a few Lines upon you. Do you call five
Sheets a few Lines? Are these written to vindicate the Truth? Yet I must tell a
Man of your gravity, (though with blushing) that Truth has no communion with
Falsehood, nor Light with Darkness. Where did I foretell you, that your writing
should do me but little good? I have told you to the contrary, that if you
could evince your Hypothesis, that Conformity is absolutely sinful; I would
quit my station, and come over into your Camp. Nay, when you had informed me,
(as to some Passages in the Savoy Conference) I returned you my thanks. Is not
this an inauspicious and ominous Presage, what is like to follow? A Line
crook'd at hand, will never be straight, though drawn (if possible) in
infinitum. Speak the truth your self, before you accuse me for an unworthy
Opposer of the Truth. What delight had I, think you, to rush into the midst of
your Pikes? and to put my Hand into an Hornets Nest? But only to extricate
Truth, and redeem it (as those Argonauts did the Golden Fleece) from the midst
of waking Dragons; that it may be tried whether I and others do sin in
Conforming, by the dint of Scripture and sound Reason. Some would call this a
generous Enterprise proceeding from tenderness; but you call it an unworthy
opposing of Truth; coming from Calumny, and an hardened Front. One Grain or
Filing of Truth is more precious to me than all the Gold of Ophir; if it lay in
the bottom of the Sea, I had rather fetch it thence, than all the Pearls and
Coral, which the slavish Indians venture for with so much hazard. No Man can do
me a greater favor, than to reduce me from any by-way of Error. Et Officium
meum implisse arbitror, si labor meus aliquos homines ab erroribus liberatos,
Lactantius de Opificio, Ca. 21.
ad Iter Coeleste direxerit. Who would have thought but that you who affirm,
that Conformity is simply sinful, should have brought some clear Texts of
Scripture to prove this, or shown some express divine Law which is violated
hereby? So you might have brought the Controversy to an Issue. This had been
the most dexterous course, to have overthrown the very fundamental Principle
whereon I stand; which is, That I owe submission to the Ordinances and
Constitutions of my lawful Governors, so far as they are suitable to, or not
repugnant or contrariant to the Word of God. But instead hereof, you write
large Encomiums, and Panegyricks on the Non-conformists, reproach the present
Preachers, stumble at Diocesan Bishops, Lay-Chancellors, and the Oath of not
taking up Arms, yet in none of these will you take up your standing, by saying
this or the other is absolutely sinful: So that you are still widing the
Breach, cutting out new Work, and putting up new Game; which is nothing else
but a rambling from the first Subject of the Dispute: Yet I must follow you, or
rather be dragged and hailed after you, as the Serpents Head in the Fable, when
the Tail had the leading and conduct of it. Only let me tell you, whereas you
complain of my Rhetorical Diversions, I wish you were liable to the same Guilt;
for then you would not write so much with so much ease, if you did but slick
and polish your Lines as you go.

. 1. What a wonder of self-ignorance is it, that the Author of the Persuasive
should draw up the Floodgates of Sarcastical scorn upon so many and such Men,
and yet be so sensible of a drop of just reproof?

Had you been trained up in Alexanders Army, you might have felt his discipline
for railing rather than fighting, for giving a Book hard words, when you should
have confuted it with convincing Arguments; or had you been brought up at the
feet of some Gamaliel, you might have learned, that a general Charge is no
sufficient Answer, and that a Book cannot be faulty, as you make it, when the
Pages are not so; as a Man is not leprous, when all his Members are whole and
sound. I should not fear to lay Bellarmine himself on his back, if it were
enough to nickname his Writings with some unmanly taunt. I am not a little
confirmed, that my Book is innocent, in that you (though you speak big) deal as
kindly with it as Jonathan did with David, when he hid himself by the Stone
Ezel, you shoot your Arrows on this side and on that; but you have taken more
care than to hit it. I might well complain of your Drops, (as you call them)
for they made me to smart, as if there had been Poison in them. Can you blame
me for laying them before you, that you may see, if not blush at their
malignant Aspect; and if one drop be so painful, what if you should pour one of
your spoonfuls as big as a Church upon me?

As for the Title of Self-ignorance which you apply to me, I have taken that
up, and put it into my Pocket. We Will raise no dust about that; only I must
observe, it is hard to be Head of a Party, and to be humble, and forbear
contemptuous scorn toward those that stand in their way, and do not vail their
Bonnets to such Popular Rabbis.

. 2. After such a Book, you would not be said to traduce the Presbyterians, as
if you wrote you know not what.

I well knew what I wrote, for I never named them in that whole Book: Yet if
they be guilty of Nonconformity and Disobedience, (in our Case I make but
little difference 'twixt these) I mean them. However, your Application to a
particular Rank of Men, of what was spoken to the Non-conformists in general,
is a transgression from the Laws of Discourse. Who gave you Commission to make
an Enclosure of that which lay in Common? or to limit my meaning without
Authority from my words? You cannot be ignorant that there are other
Non-conformists besides these that are Classical, and such that not long since
were the more predominant, and such that will not conform now to the Church of
England; yet could then dance after the Pipes of those grand Masters.

There were but few who were not then tantum non Independents; and are they all
now of a sudden become Presbyterians? sure they are like the Elements, which
agree in second qualities, they are easily exchanged one into another.

. 3. When I had opened your strange dealing in calling for our Reasons of
Nonconformity, which you knew we must not publish, you can neither hide your
disingenuity, nor well confess it.

Conviction, you know, must go before Confession; you say indeed you have
opened my strange dealing; but if what you hitherto said be called opening,
it is like the publishing of Aristotle's Physics, Editum, and non Editum. What
you have opened is still abstruse and mystical to me. Is it strange dealing,
and disingenious, to call for the Reasons of Nonconformity? since you say you
cannot conform without sin? Is it disingenious to learn of you where the sin
lies, that we may avoid it? I know not to this day why you may not publish such
Reasons: I am sure you take liberty to publish things of as dangerous
consequence; yet you would make Men believe that you must not write on this
Subject, lest you should traduce the Government; yet you dare traduce the Writ
de Excommunicato Capiendo, in the difference 'twixt the Magistrates and the
Church-Pastors, P. 19, 27, 39, 40, 41, etc.

Alas! the Church-Censurers, without the Civil Arm, are but Brutum fulmen; yet
that Writ is incorporated into our Law. Is it not better that the Civil
Magistrate should take the excommunicated Person in hand, than that he should
be delivered over unto Satan and visible Judgments; which in the Primitive
Times followed Anathema, and Maranatha?

Before King Charles the first, Rushw. P. 202.
High Sheriffs took an Oath to assist and be helpful to all Ordinaries and
Commssioners of Holy Church, as often as should be required. You dre affirm,
that Pastors have the sole power of Discipline; and he that exercises an
Authority over his Neighbors Churches, is an Usurper: Is not this to traduce
Government?

You dare say, that Kings may not be excommunicated, Difference betwixt
Magistrates and Pastors, 35, p. 36.
unless perhaps in some rare Case; pray who shall be Judges of that Case? You
rightly observe the tendency of the Romanists Doctrine in that Particular. I
will not say you leave a gap open for the same end.

You dare say, Ibid. 38.
that Magistrates forbidding faithful able Ministers to preach the Christian
Faith, Ibid. 45.
where there are not enough more to do the Work, sin hainously against Christ
and the Souls of Men.

You dare say, Ibid. 46.
that Lay-Chancellors are such a sort of Church Government, that you will never
swear not to endeavor to alter it; yet I am disingenious to call for your
Reasons of Nonconformity.

Once more, you dare join Popery and Church-tyranny together, and 'its easy to
discern who you mean by Church-tyrants. You dare speak against a lofty Faction,
that persuade the People that there must be no King any longer than their
Dominion is upheld: Such as shall twist the very grandeur of their Function, by
Oaths, into the Constitution of the State. Tell me no more that I am
disingenious in desiring your Reasons of Nonconformity; for then you should
traduce Government.

. 4. In my last I named some palpable Contradictions; but you pass them by in
silence.

Had you showed me one Contradiction properly called so, you should have seen I
would not have wasted my Ink in any other things, before I had acknowledged my
inadvertency. It Is like a Female Impotency, to resolve to have the last word
with whom soever we contend. This is like Valentine and Orson and Knights
Errant, that boast of Battles and Victories in such Fields where they never
drew Sword, and slew such Enemies who never were in rerum natura. It Is true, I
did contradict you; but this must not pass for a culpable Contradiction; show
me any one, and you shall have another Answer; in the mean time your
Atchievments shall pass for a Rodomantado Ostentation.

You deal craftily in speaking interrogatively, for a Question cannot be false.

Some Lines before you accused me of Ignorance, and now of Craft: Are not you
often guilty of the same Craft, by arguing frequently by way of Question? But
Sir, consider your Dogmatical Aphorism; Cannot a Question be false? What think
you of this? Will you cease to preach false Doctrine, and slander your
Brethren? Are not negative and affirmative Interrogations in Scripture
equivalent to plain Negations and Affirmations? nay do not they vehementius
negare and affirmare? If you will be coining more Aphorisms, you should examine
them better before you obtrude them on others.

. 5. I had said that of those 1800 silent Ministers, how many of them have much
more learning than your English Books have taught them? You reply, Do you mean
good Mr. Sam. Hildersham, Mr. Fisher, Mr. Brian, Mr. Wilsby, Mr. Reignolds, Mr.
Baldwin Sen', or Mr. Spilsbury.

You have reckoned up several of my Neighbors, but not all, if you would put
me upon the proof of my words, you should have given me leave to be my own
Accountant: It is Answer enough to your arguing; you have rekon'd without your
Host. I could give you another List of such Men that have leaped out of their
mechanical Shops into the Pulpit. If these had learning enough to pass your
Hands in Ordination, yet were they well examined, they would scarce befound fit
to teach a petty School, or be Interpreters to some Latin Mendicant.

As for those Persons you mention, I have as much esteem for them, as you can
have; but not for their Nonconformity; yet for their gravity, sobriety,
learning, peaceableness. May not I say that Abraham was the Father of the
Faithful, and David a Man after Gods own Heart? though the one was
pusillanimous in Egypt, and the other had his falls? May not I say that Venus
was beautiful, though she had her Mole? But this is a usual Stratagem with you,
to possess particular Persons with an opinion, that I detract from them, though
I named them not. As this is bad arguing, -- Syllogizare ex particulari, so
it is worse Morality. Those which I intended have your suffrage. You had rather
hear a mere English Divine, than an Hebrew or Syriack Sot. You are, I see, for
the liberty of prophesying; it is a question whether you are more for Blew
Aprons or the Priesthood. What Fanatic could have spoken more slightly of the
Universities than you have done? It Is no very great Honor to our young
Preachers, that they have been acquainted with the Universities. Speak out! Are
not you of their mind? who said that the Congregation was Holy, and that Moses
and Aaron took too much upon them? Although you are so happy as to be (...),
and dry-nurse your self into a Gigantick Stature, without sucking the Breast of
our Mother the University, or being dandled on her Knees; though you sprang up
like those (...), (who first inhabited some Countries) we know not how; yet
forbear to Eclipse those two Luminaries, which are as useful to our English
World, as the Sun and Moon in the Firmament: God has wonderfully preserved them
from Anabaptists, and other furious Sectaries, in times of Anarchy, who were
wrathfully displeased at them: Yet they could not find their Hands; but, as
Agamemnon, when he was hampered in his vestis (...), -- Casside vinctus
incassum furit. Or like the Sodomites, though never so near, yet could not find
out the door of Lot. So God did restrain these boisterous Waves, when they made
sure of overwhelming the Nurseries of Learning and Piety. Do not you think now
to undermine them with any Ismalitish scorns.

Had you been planted and cultivated in those Seminaries, you might have
brought forth more kindly and mature Fruit; and you might have avoided those
Rocks and Shelves, against which you have both dashed your self and the Church.

You deal no better with the Primitive Fathers of the Church, than you do with
the Universities. It is no great matter to be acquainted with them. I count it
so short a Work to read the few brief Writers of the three first Centuries.

Is this so easy a Work? yet how shall they do it, who understand not their
Language? They had need agree with some such as Dr. Holland, to translate them
into their Mother Tongue. I will tell you what I heard in the University; A
grave Dr. in the Divinity School proved the Proposition denied, with -- Sic
dicunt omnes Patres; but Dr. Prideaux gave him his Check, -- Tune legisti omnes
Patres? I have been acquainted with the Studies, and therein with the
preposterous Method of some amongst you. They began with Calvin and some of the
German Divines, and so read downwards; but when their minds have been
prepossessed with prejudicate thoughts toward our Government, and Discipline,
then (if urged thereto) they have stepped back many hundred years, and read some
of the Fathers. But alas! It has been only to wrest and deprave them; to weed
something out of them, whereby they may (...). Just as you read Hooker, Bilson,
Andrews, Heylin, etc.

After you had in this Paragraph highly extolled the Knowledge, Utterance,
Piety and Diligence even of the lowest rank of Non-conformists, you come to
throw about you whole loads of dirt; that so you may blacken and depreciate the
present Ministers: Such as lace their insipid, empty, senseless discourse with
shreds of Chalde, Arabic, and Syriack. Hebrew Sots, such as ignorantly abuse
Scripture, prate against they know not what; Schoolboys saying their Lessons;
Lads that talk at such a rate, as they go nigh to drive you from the Church.
They are often in the Alehouse; what they preach is dead and cold, so that
Patrons seeking to you to motion them Teachers, you find it hard to find a Man
that has the abilities of the lowest sort of Non-conformists. And you are now
come to this, that you prefer Homilies and Common Prayer before our Pulpit-work.

I see that it is difficult to forbear reproaches toward them from whom we
differ; or not to build our own reputation upon the ruin of other Men's Names.
Does this savor of humility in preferring our selves before others? If this
judging and condemning be from the Spirit, I must tell you, You know not of
what Spirit you are of. I heard a grave Minister say formerly, I thank God, I
never heard a Sermon, but I could get something by it; if the Sermons which you
hear be insipid, examine your Palate, and the Anfractuous Passages of your own
Ears; something may be amiss there. Cast away prejudice, purge out the Yellow
Jaundice of partiality: Do not espouse a Party; but put on Catholic Charity.
It may be you may taste more sweetness, and see more comeliness in the Sermons
you hear. St. Paul could say, Whether in pretense, Phil. 1. 18.
or in truth, Christ is Preached, and I rejoice and will rejoice. But as you
complain of the Ministers, just so did Martin-mar-prelate traduce the regular
Clergy in his days; calling them Boys, Dolts, Lads, Drunkards, etc. from whence
Brown did not only take an occasion of his separation; Heylin of the Presb. p.
181, 182.
but Sir Edwin Sandys affirms, that even at Rome there was use made of those
scandalous Aspersions. What your design is herein, I will not divine. But it is
well observed, that some complain of abuses; not that they may be redressed;
Ibid. 35.
but by disparaging the State, they may make way for their own Discipline: They
wound the Civil State through the Ecclesiastic. King James, in his Speech to
the Parliament Ann 18. of his Reign, spoke like an Angel, or like himself; That
those that make themselves popular by recounting grievances, have the Spirit of
the Devil. Just so did Absalom steal away the Hearts of the People. -- There is
none appointed by the King. -- O that I were made King in Israel!

Did these prating Lads, with their Hebrew, Chalde, Arabic Shreds, come out of
your Shool, they should have been stroaked for precious Youths. Then it should
have been said as formerly; when young Birds come abroad unfledged, and with
their Shells on their heads; Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou
ordained strength, because of thine Enemies.

I hope it is not a crime to learn other Languages than what our Mothers taught
us, especially such as are even necessary for the very right understanding of
Scripture. The time was, when 'twas almost Heretical, I had almost said
Antichristian, and resembling the Beast, to make any use of those Tongues. Sure
you are not so nice as to run out of the Church, as if you were frighted with
Babylonish Trumpets, when you hear a little Hebrew in the pulpit: If such
Linguists do not reach the abilities of the lowest sort of the Non-conformists;
what Seraphick Angelical Doctors are those amongst you of the highest Hierarchy?

If you were better acquainted with the University, you might find most hopeful
Men both for Learning and Integrity of Life (if you do not dislike them because
they have their breeding there) to supply such Patrons as have recourse to you
for Teachers; and it may be too you would be a propitious Angel to put them
into good Livings, if they would make their Humble Addresses unto you. It seems
though you have no Rectory of your own, you can gratify your Friends. As the
Earl of Warwick took more pleasure in making another Man King, than being so
himself. Do not stop their way to preferment, because they show their Parts in
their first Essays; in the Eloquent Efforts of their Oratory. Such Colts as
trot high at the first, may at longrunning become good Pad-naggs. We were
Children before we were strong Men; Hercules had not all his vigor at once:
You will betray less Judgment than they, if nothing will please you in a young
Divine below the skill and dexterity of an old Chrysostom. As for those
amongst us who are Sots, as you say, and spend their time in Alehouses, I am
no Proctor for them, sighs and groans shall be all my Answer: Yet if I would
recriminate, I could point out some of your own Minions that might bear them
company. All your 1800 are not clear from such stains.

But since you have now so good opinion of the Common Prayer and Homilies, I
see Men's Judgments will vary as well as Fashions. He that durst have said so
formerly, should scarce have any Place in the Church: As Hazael once thought he
should not have been so inhumane as to rip up Women with Child, etc. So you
little thought heretofore, that you should ever have spoke so favorably of the
Common Prayers and Homilies: Therefore it is not good (you see) to drive on too
furiously, according to our present apprehensions, without long deliberation.
But I have something else to observe: -- Some Men are so much afraid of
moderation and a mediocrity, that whilst they avoid one Extreme, in contraria
current. You impose a Task on me, to tell you, What one Nonconformist was
silenced for insufficiency: You might have forborne this; unless you could have
grounded it on my words, as my Assertion. But it is usual with you to wave the
subject Matter of Contest, and to move impertinent Doubts: As if he that has to
do with you must answer Quodlibets. The grand reason of your silence is of
another nature: You do not give security to Authority; that you will preach up
no more Wars; and carry your selves like obedient Subjects, and peaceable
Ministers of the Gospel: Until you do so, you are suspended from the exercise
of that Ministry. When Marchiomont Needham wrote a Book to entitle the
Protector to all the Revenues of the Church; and that it was in his Power to
admit whom he pleased to partake thereof. This was good Doctrine in the days of
the Tryars; they embraced it as the foundation of their arbitrary Power. But
now there is a Shibboleth of Peace and Loyalty to be pronounced by all those
that will practice in the Ministerial Calling. You either lisp it out in
distinctions, or cry out of Tyranny: So that your Question is a Fallacy, a non
Causa ut Causa, putting insufficiency for the Cause, when in truth it was quite
another thing.

You ask me again, whether the worst of those that joined with you, being
re-ordained, are not received when they do conform?

If they were not the worst among you, who do conform, no doubt you think them
so? yet I could name some, who were of the chief Rank, who so far have denied
themselves, as to draw forth their Breasts to feed the Hungry. Sure they did
not see with your Eyes, that Conformity is absolutely sinful.

Now Sir, If the worst among you are received when they Conform; what a shame
is it that you and others of the higher Rank should stand idle in the
Marketplace? whilst you suffer God to be served with your Bran; the Blind and
the Lame (it seems) are good enough for your Heavenly Prince; and you may see
how favorable and indulgent the Governors of the Church are, in that they are
loath to disparage your Judgments, in rejecting those whom you had approved.

After I had deducted out of the gross Sum of 1800 those that had been nested
in other Men's Livings; 1. You faintly demand, -- How many of these were never
in any Sequestrations, and must not they preach the Gospel? Yes, both they and
the others too; and woe unto them, if they do not. There is never a Cherubim
with a drawn Sword in his hand to keep them out of the Churches Paradise: 2.
You give up the Cause, and say ingeniously, I deny not the great Crime you
charge upon them. Yet as if you repented of your own Concession, you say, that
many of those that were turned out formerly were accused of insufficiency and
gross scandal. So hard a thing is it, fully, and without reserves, to
acknowledge a fault. The Serpent was Eve's Cloak, and the Woman Adam's: Nay,
God himself must be reflected on, (the Woman whom Thou gave) before Adam will
be silent, and have nothing to say. You know that the insufficiency and scandal
of many of them was, that their Consciences could not dispense with their
former Oaths, in asserting of an ungodly Cause; yet had they been as vile as
you can make them, their Freeholds ought not to be taken from them illegally.
Then 3. you vindicate your self, as if I had aimed at you: When the truth is, I
had not the least thought of you. I must do you so much justice, as to say, --
I have heard you dealt transcendently civilly with the Incumbents, in
comparison of many whom I knew; and since you speak of these things with some
regret, I will not (like a Coward) press and prosecute this advantage. I have
touched this Sore very softly, that you may not smart. Here you chide me for
minding you of a Retalliation; as you supplanted others, so God requited you.
Does this (say you, savor of any sense at all to Souls? Must many Thousands go
to Hell, that we may be requited? The Peoples Souls had been forsaken: The
Damnation of a multitude of Souls is too dear a price, etc.

1. It is no up-start practice to soar high in Pretenses, and yet with the
Raven and the Kite, have our Eyes fixed on some Carcass here below. We have
heard some cry loud, the Temple of the Lord, -- the Salvation of Souls: Yet
they were not the Souls of every Soil; such as did inhabit poor Villages, but
such as dwelt in the fattest Parsonages, or else in great Towns, where these
Men, who were so much for the good of Souls, might act their parts with most
popularity and success, both in respect of themselves and the Cause.

2. What good was done to Souls by these Intruders, late Posterity will find.
Those unquiet Principles which were then instilled, will not be worn out in one
Age; nor those Breaches and Gashes in the Church, made by them, be cemented and
healed by the Hands of the most skilful Bezaliels, or Spiritual Surgeons of
the highest value.

3, The good of Souls is a most glorious aim; yet St. Austin held it not good
to tell a lie to save a Soul. Much less may we preach down lawful Authority,
and plunder others, living under the pretext of the good of Souls. This has
been an old contrivance in Scotland, to bring all Causes within the Kirks
Jurisdiction, King James his Answer to the Petition of Parliament. Rushw. P. 49.
saying it is the Churches Office to judge of slander; and by that means they
hooked in the cognizance of all Causes, because all Causes were either Slanders
against God, the King, or their Neighbors. In Rome too the Pope intermeddles
with all Temporal Things in Ordine ad Spiritualia. Just so you plead for Arms;
starving Men, Women, and Children; If it be for the good of Souls. You say that
they had a fifth part; yet you know Mr. Lea endeavored to dismount that
Ordinance, as unlawful and unreasonable; and some I am sure for very want were
ready to swoon in the Streets; the number was not small. It has been
maintained, that more Ministers were deprived in three years, when your Friends
sat at the Sern, than in all Queen Mary's Reign.

I thank you that you say, you never liked turning out such a Man as my self:
You are more propitious than the Commissioners were, who threatened to silence
me for preaching on Christmas Day. The Tryars were not of your mind; they would
not have had me to preach at all, and the Soldiers would scarce let me live: I
still bear about me the Badges of their Cruelty. But tell me true; should you
reassume your Chair, would you continue in this courteous Mood?

You say you lived under five ignorant and unlearned Teachers before you were
ten years old. In your Book on the Sabb. P. 117.
You complain elsewhere of the profaneness of your Native Town. You had hard
fate to live amongst such Men; yet the greater is your excellency to thrive
into so polished a bulk, among such Barbarians, and to keep your integrity
amidst such temptations. I cannot but admire at your Praecox Ingenium, that you
could judge (you began betimes) who were ignorant, who learned Preachers,
before you were ten years of age. I fear it is still the greatest part of some
Men's devotion to censure the Parts and Gifts of the Preacher.

. 10. Your intermediate Sertions contain nothing of Argument, or Contradiction;
therefore I shall tell you once for all, I shall neither now or hereafter
trouble you or my self with your Narratives or Excursions. I am not so fond of
superfluous labor, or prodigal of my precious time, as to oppose every thing
that you say, or to trace you in all your Meanders.

Here you go to the Heart of the Controversy. If you had either proved what
you say, or disproved what had been said; 1. You cannot lie deliberately, and
say you assent and consent to all things in three Books, when you do not; yet
you show no reason to the contrary: Inform your self better. Judge charitably
and heartily of those Books, and then the fault may be in your self, and not in
them. If you approach to the Borders of a Lie, every thing that suits not to
your present apprehension is not presently a Lie. Had you declared formerly
what you do now, Sect. 5. Concerning Common Prayer and Homilies.
you would not willingly have been taxed for a Liar.

In your first Letter you call this assenting and our new Conformity; yet the
same thing in substance was subscribed to in Archbishop Whitgifts Time, Art. 2.
viz. That the Book of Common Prayer and Ordination of Bishops contained nothing
contrary to the Word of God, Heylin of the Presb. P. 202.
but might lawfully be used, and that they would use it and no other.

2. You should absolve many Thousands from an Oath, when you never knew in what
sense they took it: Here you nibble at the Covenant, yet you take no notice of
what has been said on that Particular: But Sir! take an unlawful Oath in what
sense you please, and there will be much need of Absolution: Must the sense of
an Oath be measured by him that receives it, or from the Authority and
Intention of him that does impose it? Affirmatio aut negatio quaestionis
propositae, Amesius de Consc. P. 216.
si ex Conscientia respondentis non vere conformetur sensui quaerentis, aut
rogantis est mendacium.

You mention some good things in the Covenant: As the Declaration against
Popery, Schism, Profaneness: But you pass by the second Article with other
Passages in the rest, and the Power imposing the whole; what was good in it we
are obliged to in another former Covenant; what was naught do not you strain
your Parts to justify. The worst of Heretics maintain some Truths, the better
to usher in Error, as it were with Sugar and Syrups.

. 12, 13, 14. I took it for granted that you owned my Quotation out of the Book
of Rest. You said you had expunged the words in a latter Edition, and I was
satisfied; yet now you challenge me to cite the words: In one breath you say
you did and you did not retract them. The Passage I quoted was in the 5th
Edition, P. 258. If you are so unsteady, you will never arrive to the glory of
the Bishop of Hippo; for you do even retract your Retractation; and whilst you
do plangere commissa, you do committere plangenda. You perform this Work with
regret and reluctance; wrapping your self up in obscurity. A true Penitent will
not extenuate his fault, but set it forth in the fullest Character, and in the
most bloody Colors. Indeed you make Mr. Bagshaw your Confessor, and say
something to the purpose; and though you deal not so plainly with me, yet I
love and honor ingenuity where soever I find it. If I am not so strict always
as to mention terminos terminantes your very syllabical words, yet I give the
result of them for brevity sake. Such (...), or funiculi ex arena, will not
serve your turn before equal and prudent Judges. How often did Christ and his
Apostles quote Texts out of the Old Testament? and yet did not observe the
Identical Words: Will you say they were unfaithful, or not a true word?

. 15. You tell me of the inconformity of some that grew under my Shadow: I tell
you again, this is no evidence of an hearty recantation, when you go about to
deny, justify, or extenuate what is notorious in these Parts, and is Matter of
Fact, so legible, that a Man may run and read. What was your highest reputation
formerly, in being the Coryphaeus of a Country Association, you now interpret a
Reproach. Just as Amnon did passionately court Tamar to day, and on the morrow
thrust her out of doors. Hereafter build the Pyramid of your Fame upon a sure
Foundation, and then it will last. Such Glory will not turn into shame. This
freeness of mine (it seems) provoked you to make me smart, by laying before me
(what I shall never forget) the miscarriage of one in my own Family. The best
is, my Conscience tells me, it proceeded not from want of Vigilance, Advice,
and Prayers, or Example, but from a defect of that which neither you nor I have
power to bestow, and that is Grace.

16. If your Neighbor and his Wife will swear what you say; wonder not that so
much scandal was charged on your Sequestered Ministers: Yet you say Sect. 7.
Where I was acquainted, the Witnesses that swore to the Scandals of the outed
Ministers, were reputed as honest Men as any in the Place; and they got nothing
by their Oaths. What, honest Men, and charge the Sequestered Ministers of
Scandal upon their Oaths? no more justly and truly than my Neighbors have
charged you with taking their Horses: Whereas you affirm, you was never in my
Parish, nor never took Horse in your life. I could say much from my Neighbors
in confirmation of their Charge; for since I checked them for putting me upon
such an odious Employment, they brought a creditable Person in this
Neighborhood, who asserts much of that they say. Sir, you gave the first
occasion to this harsh and unpleasing discourse, by saying that your
Imprisonment came from the Place of my Ministry; thereby tacitly impeaching my
Innocence. But Manus de Tabula. I shall touch no more upon this, except you
provoke me, and draw me by the Head and Shoulders into this Field. Only your
prementioned honest Witnesses puts me in mind what you have printed concerning
some honest Conformists. What Conformists and honest too? when you say,
Conformity is an avowed deliberate sin! (i. e.) As I conceive, is a sin against
Knowledge, which the Scripture calls a Presumptuous Sin; and if I mistake not,
it is such a Sin that borders upon that against the Holy Ghost. Honest
Conformists then in your Dialect must be tantamount to Honest Sinners. But who
are the Honest Conformists? are they not such that swear, declare, subscribe
one thing, and speak and act another? Like Ephraim, half baked, or like the
Laodiceans, neither hot nor cold. So many Simons within the Walls of the
Church, like those Priests in time of Jeroboam, that said, Put us into the
Priests Office that we may eat a piece of Bread. So these conform, that they
may enjoy the Patrimony of the Church; yet make you believe their Hearts are
with you: Are not these (...)? they have an Heart and an Heart; like Tumblers,
squint-eyed, look one way and aim another.

. 17. I mentioned your words in a late Book, I never meddled with the War till
after Naseby Fight; not a true word say you, yet your words were as you
acknowledge, I never entered into the Army till after Naseby Fight; ad Populum
Phaleras! I had thought such a Fly had not been worthy the notice of your
Eagle-Eyes; you will get little by this ficulna Evasio, this little poor
Criticism. It seems you meddled with the War by your Prayers, Counsel, Sermons
and Endeavors; though you entered not as a Soldier into the Army into the high
Places of the Field. But if your Confession to Mr. Bagshaw be sincere, I shall
look upon you as Innocent. (...). Chrysostom. ad Tneod.


When I call on you to retract your State-Aphorisms, you mention one, and ask
me whether I mean that: May not a Man's Arm be sound, and all the other Members
be leprous, gouty, and rotten: If one or more of your Aphorisms be sound, must
they all needs be so? Was Bishop Abbot a Presb. implying he was not: I dare not
contradict you; for I am sure you said before, that a Question cannot be false.
What Archbishop Abbot was, or whom he favored most, I list not to enquire;
let his Dust rest quietly for me. There are those that will tell you, that it
is no Paradox for a Bishop to be a Presbyter: What think you of the Bishop of
Lincoln? He turned his back on the Conformable Ministers; Rushw. p. 424.
and where the Puritans were conveen'd, he would not admit any Proceedings (in
Leichestershire) against them: But said, He was sure they would carry all at
last. They are the words of your own Author; and is it any wonder to see this
Man in Arms against the King? He was no more truly Episcopal, than Julian after
his Apostasy was a Christian: And why may not Bishops be Presb. as well as
Presb. Episcopal? for you chide me in traducing the Presbyterians, Sect. 21.
when I spoke only to the Non-conformists. And it was Episcopacy, say you, that
the present Non-conformists moved to obtain.

What you say of the Prelatists, that they began to offend the King by striving
against his Will, I shall meet with the same again and again: The Prelatists
are much in your thoughts, it seems, you encounter them so often; though you
charge them with such things, that three parts of the Non-conformists will be
their Compurgators.

You cannot deny but that you printed about the Savoy Business that which you
understand not. I printed what I found in print, and you disclaim that Book
wherein the Savoy Business is described. And in stead thereof you give another
Narrative. I thanked you for your pains; but I am a Fool for my Ingenuity. How
shall I please you? I know not that I differ in any Point of Worship,
Discipline, or Ceremonies, from Dr John Reynolds. I do not find that he
inveighed against Diocesans, or Prelates. Did not he live and die in the full
Conformity with the Church of England; There are those alive yet of the same
College, who can tell you, that on his Deathbed he received Absolution,
according to our Liturgy. Were he now alive, I believe he would be as hard a
Maul to Schismatics, as he was to the Papists. He would not say as you do, I
will be a Nonconformist a little longer, Difference betwixt Mag. and Chapter Past.
P. 55.
rather than give Baptism, or the Lords Supper, Absolution, and use the
justifying Assertion at Funerals.

24. When I had, beyond all Contradictions, proved to you, that it was
Episcopal Men in England that raised the War against the King, you do the
poorliest put it off, which you cannot confute.

This is a (...), which runs through the whole woof of your discourse; and I
said the less to this Assertion, because I looked upon it as the strangest
Parodox in Historical Transactions, that ever saw the Light. A serious
Confutation would have showed me to be in a Delirium. I thought the Jesuit
might as well justify, that the whole Body of Popery is contained in our 39
Articles, as you can prove, that Episcopal Men were beginners of the War. I
said but a little out of abundance of store, not knowing what to say first; yet
you answer not that little. Who knows not that many Episcopal Parliaments cried
out still of Monopolies, Liberty, Arminianism, Lauds Innovations, etc. Was it
not as true, that the Spirit of Presb. Heylin of Presb. P. 267. 307.
was stirring in those Parliaments, though not known by those Names? There were
many troublesome Members in Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's days, promoting the
Discipline; for the Scottish Ministers, who had been banished Scotland, did
great hurt in England. Did you never hear, that when those Parliaments were in
full cry against the Duke of Buckingham, as the source of all their grievances,
that they secretly moved him, that Dr. Preston should be made Archbishop, and
then all Complaints should be hushed. Those Popular Patriots, that did so
vehemently complain of Grievances and Innovations, (I question not) aimed at
that which their Successors accomplished, the downfall of Bishops, and the
possessing of their Lands. Nay, some of them lived to make it good what was the
Quarrel they designed. Who did the King mean, Rushw. P. 415.
2. Caroli? when he said the Hand of Joab was in the misunderstanding 'twixt
him and his Parliament, and that the Incendiaries of Christendom had suddenly
and subtlely insinuated those things which had unhappily caused diversions and
distractions. There might be clashing 'twixt those Episcopal Men in Parliament;
yet it would have been long enough e're these had raised War against the King.
You are not ignorant, that in the Marian days many Laymen and Clergy fled
beyond the Seas, to Geneva, and other Places; at their return their Garments
smelt of the Disciplinarian Fire ever after, which grew stronger and stronger,
until it had burnt the Cedar in our Lebanon, and levelled the glorious Towers of
the Church. How did Calvin and Beza labor with their Favorers here to promote
their Discipline? that as it was once said, The S. S. came from Rome to Trent
in a Cloak-bag, so did it come from Geneva hither in Packets.

You say Sect. 25. There was but few Presbyters or Non-conformists here before
the War, no Presbyterians, except two in the Parliament: The General,
Lieutenant-Generals, Major-Generals, were Episcopal Men. I little thought to
have disputed such a Cause.

I meddled not with Laymen, but with my dissenting Brethren: Though the other
cannot be excused; yet these were most guilty in blowing up the Trumpet. Dathan
and Abiram (of the other Tribes) rose up against Moses; but that Rebellion was
called the gainsaying of Core; because he being of the Tribe of Levi, was
deepest in the Conspiracy: And it is observable, that all Insurrections against
Princes have been inflamed by some Clergymen or other, for some Centuries last
past. But were there so few Non-conformists in England before the War? yet Anno
1603. King James is said to be saluted with a Petition of a thousand Ministers,
against Episcopacy; and before that, Anno 1582. Mr. Cartwright, (who was no
Episcopal Man) for he had renounced his Episcopal Ordination beyond Seas, met
usually with sixty Ministers of his own Way, in some Corner of the Land: Did
not these (think you) increase and multiply? If five or six in the Assembly,
and five Bishops (as you say) in the Parliament raised such stirs; what shall
we think may be effected by so many Dissenters? Whereas you think that the late
Wars furnished us with Presbyterians out of Scotland; it is doubtful to me,
whether Scotland infected us, or we Scotland: for when the King was in
Scotland, he was informed, that the Scots had neither taken up Arms, nor
invaded England, but that they were encouraged to it by some Members of
Parliament, Heylin Presb. P. 442.
(you will say these were Episcopal Men) on a design to change the Government of
Church and State.

One Proposition sent to the King after Edgehill, was, That he should yield to
extirpate Archbishops, Bishops, etc. yet you will say that all the Parliament
(except two) were Episcopal Men. As good as any among the Covenanters, who
vowed to abolish Prelacy, etc. or as any of those in your own Association.

When Alderman Pennington with his 15000 Myrmidons petitioned against Bishops,
it may be you will vouch them to be Episcopal Men, as well as you do the
Parliament Men: Yet I do not find that any said any thing against that Petition
besides the Lord Dighy; as for many others it did appear that such Lettice was
too suitable to their Lips, yet sound Episcopal Men in your sense.

The War was called Bellum Episcopale, not as if fought by Episcopal Men on
both sides; but Episcopacy (or rather the Bishops Lands) was the Palladium or
Helena; one side fought for it, the other against it. Mulciber in Trojam pro
Troja, etc. And here was the very stick at last in the Isle of Wight. As for
the particular Members in the Army, they were better known to you than my self.
I delight not in personal Reflections or Quarrels. If those that are yet alive
be not Episcopal, I wish they were so. But that they were, whilst they acted in
the support of the late Cause, I have not so far renounced my reason and
experience, as to fall in with your Account: And if you persevere in this new
Doctrine, we shall be as distant as the two Poles. One Document I cannot but
observe from what is said, -- That the late War was so odious, that neither
side will own it. Even as the dead Child (in the Parable) was rejected by both
the Mothers.

. 28. Your notion of the Arminian and other Calvinian Bishops, fighting and
beginning the War, and also each claiming to be the Church, is a pretty
singularity, and savours of a Romantic (...). Did they all fight against one
another? Did they not all equally abhor the War? Where did either part pretend
to be the Church? You have framed a strange imagination, and when you are
setting of it up, it will not hang together. I may say of it, as the
Lacedemonian did of one setting up the body of a dead Man, when his Head
swagg'd this way and the other, he cried out (...), something is wanting
within: So it is with your discourse, it is Soul-less and Life-less, sine
sanguine and succo.

It is true Archbishop Williams was in Arms; but he lost the Lord-Keepers
Seal, and was not admitted to do his Office at the Kings Coronation: This
inflamed the Man, and transported him beyond his duty toward the end of the
War. The missing of a Bishopric did pervert Arrius; and St. Jerome himself was
not a jot the better for it.

29. 31. I had said, -- Would Episcopal Men root out Episcopacy? You apply your
former groundless Hypothesis; They intended at first to regulate the Arminians;
but after, by the help of Scots and Sectaries, they took down Episcopacy. How
transparent and thin is that Answer? Just as our modern Naturalists salve every
Phenomenon with their round, square, and forked Atoms: So do you silence
Doubts by the Arminian and Calvinian Bishops. But you must prove it better that
the Bishops began the War, or else all you say tumbles to the ground.

You say I trifle in referring you to Dr. Heylin on the Presbyterians, though
you referred me before to his Book on the Life of Archbishop Laud: Who would
have thought but ad hominem this Method had been justifiable? If I am sparing
of my pains, and forbear an elaborate Answer to such (...), such shallow and
partial reasonings another Man would soon pardon me.

You say you will not justify the Presbyterians in that he charge on them;
yet he says the Presbyterians thrive best, Heylin of Presb. P. 335.
when they involve whole Nations in Blood and Sacrilege. I mentioned them not
at all, yet you charge me for traducing them.

33. The Principles of Hooker, Bilson, and such Prelatists, led me to what I
did and wrote in the Book which I have retracted.

As for Bishop Bilson, I have not his Book by me which you quote; neither dare
I take upon me to defend what all our Bishops have written: I must either want
Employment, or be very pragmatical, to venture upon every Task you are ready to
impose upon me. If any of my Fathers discover their nakedness, I will put on my
Mantle and go backward. I will not lick up their Spittle, and say it is sweeter
than Nectar and Ambrosia. I will follow them only so far as they follow Christ.

I am satisfied that Bishop Bilson was willing to say something in behalf of
our Neighbors of Holland, in vindicating them from Rebellion against the King
of Spain. And so stretched the Doctrine of Subjection too far. Whether this
will satisfy you I know not: I am sure multitudo pecantium non minuit
peecatum. If Bishop Bilson misled you in point of Subjection and Obedience, let
him make you amends in setting you upright about Diocesan Bishops.

I said something (upon your provocation) in behalf of Mr. Hooker, not
intending to be drawn further into the Field. I am jealous of my own failing
and weakness; and so am unfit to be another Second, when I have enough to do
to answer for my self.

I do still admire Mr. Hooker; and I find my Betters have done so before me.
Cambden wished his Books had been turned into an universal Language! Bishop
Usher, Morton, and Mr. John Hales had the same high opinion of him: Bishop
Gauden said he had been highly commended of all prudent, peaceable, and
impartial Readers. King James said his Book was the Picture of a Divine Soul in
every Page of Truth and Reason. The late King commended it to his Children next
to the Bible. And the same happy Pen, which taught the Kings Book to speak as
good Latin (if possible) as it had English, had almost turned Mr. Hooker into
the same Dialect, for the benefit of the learned World.

Yet you say he led you into what you did and wrote; in print you say the same;
you cite his 1. Book, P. 21. Laws they are not which public approbation has
not made. They must be made by entire Societies. What is this more than what
some that wrote for the Kings Cause in the late Wars have confessed, -- That
quoad aliquid, that is as to making of Laws our Kings have not challenged a
Power without Parliaments; The stumbling block of Disobedience. 267.
though I find that the legislative Power of Parliaments is properly and
legally in the King alone in Heylin: And the same incomparable Hooker adds, --
An Absolute Monarch, commanding his Subjects whatsoever seems good in his own
Discretion. This Edict has the force of a Law, whether they approve or dislike
it: And elsewhere he says, -- Where the King has Power of Dominion, no
Foreign State, or Domestical, can possibly have in the same Cause and Affairs
Authority higher than the King. Take heed you do not imitate him, who only took
what was for his purpose, and left out the rest.

But you have found out other Doctrine in Hooker, viz. That Power is originally
in the People, and Escheats to them, that the King is Singulis Major, and
Universis Minor. I cannot subscribe to this; for as by God Kings Reign, their
Power is from him, so it Escheats to him. No Ephori, Demarchi, or Tribunes can
curb the Prince. But Sir, was you led aside by Hooker, to what you did and
wrote? yet you quote these Passages out of his eighth Book. Now you was led
aside in what you did and wrote, before that Book and his Fellows saw the
Light; perhaps you did and wrote, and then after the Kings return you gathered
up your Principles, as it were ex postliminio; as if you should first build the
Roof of an House, and then lay the Foundation; or first possess your self of an
Estate, and then blunder for a Title. Yet your Title is but cracked, if you
have none but what you have from his third Book; King Charles the first denied
them to be his. If they were not (...), spurious, or changelings, yet they were
so adulterated, that they neither resembled Parent or Sisters. My friend Mr.
Walton did not guess amiss; he had good Seconds. Dr. Barnard says, That Bishop
Usher noted that in these three Books there were many Omissions; ex. gr. -- If
a Private Man Offend, there is the Magistrate that judges: If Magistrates, the
Prince: If the Prince, there is a Tribunal in Heaven, before which they shall
appear; on Earth they are not accountable to any. -- Bishop Sanderson said,
That this Passage, -- The King is accountable to the People, was not in a
Manuscript he had seen; but he said the Copies had been interlin'd; therefore
he commanded nothing of his should be printed after his death. And Dr. Spencer,
whom you recite, said, the perfect Copies were lost; See his Life printed 1666.
P. 28, 29.
and that those which he saw were imperfect, mangled, draughts dismembered into
pieces; no favor or grace, not the shadows of themselves remaining. Had he
lived to see them thus defaced, he might rightly call them Benonivs.

35. I said I could not choose but nauseate that Discipline, which startles at
renouncing War against the King. You ask, Is it Prelatical Discipline? No, I
acquit it. Presbyterian? No, say you. The present Non-conformists offered
Episcopacy to the King. You dare not undertake for all. Some will startle as
much at Episcopacy, as they do at the Oath; Except you castrate and qualify it
with your allays, until you have made it quite another thing. As Martial said
of a Fellow, who repeated his Verses amiss, he made them his own: The Poet
would not own them. So must you do with Episcopacy, before it will slip down.
Indeed you puzzle me very much; I am at a loss who these Non-conformists are:
When I write to them, you tell me, -- I traduce the Presbyterians. But when you
speak of them, you say, -- They are for Episcopacy. By your words they are of a
Motleylinsey-woolsey Kind, Episcopal-Presbyterian-Nonconformists. But what ever
these Men are, their Discipline must not be touched.

Neither the Chorus, nor any Man of them, startles at renouncing War against
the King. You have not proved their Practice such, and is your printed Clamor
come to this? You say you know the Non-conformists better than I; yet I know
some that will not agree to the former part of that Oath about renouncing War
against the King. They have jealousies and fears almost about every word, as if
there were an Ambuscade to entangle them, or to take away their Liberty. What
need I prove their Practice? Is it not proof enough to point at those Men that
flit their Habitations, rather than subscribe to what I say. Even as the
Philosopher said nothing, but walked up and down to prove that there was such a
thing as Motion. What if I should ask you, whether you ever took that
Renunciation; I think I should stop your career, that you would not act the
part so jovially, Militis tam gloriosi.

You say there is something else in that Declaration, -- as not to endeavor
alteration of Government in Church, etc. But this makes me to nauseate your
Principles, as much as the former. What Peace can be expected, whilst Men in
effect tell their Governors, -- they will let them alone, whilst they can do
no otherwise; but when they have an opportutunity, they will throw them out of the
Saddle. Shall you not (say you) endeavor the alteration of Government by
Lay-Chancellors? Yes by petition, as becomes Subjects, if you do not bring a
Sword in the other hand: But you must do it in your Places; that is, -- in your
Ministry: You must pray and preach them down: If you turn Soldiers, you must
fight them down. So the old Covenant Evasion will stand you in little stead.

You sent me to the Confessions of Foreign Churches, to learn what their
Discipline was. I gave you some Instances of their practice, and I could have
given you many more; as in Prague, and other Places. Are not these the best
Commentary on their practice? Sir, what think you of these disciplinarian
Principles? -- If Princes hinder the Discipline, they are Tyrants, and may be
deposed. -- The Supreme Magistrate must have no place in Synodical Meetings
Heyl. on Presb. P. 285. 335. 269.
unless he be chosen for an Elder: You know then what follows. So that it has
not been suggested amiss, -- That the Genevian Principles make those, in whom
they are rooted, Enemies to the Power and guidance of all Sovereign Princes. --
That the Principles of Presbyters are Tyranical and Antimonarchical; Rush.
Coll. P. 161. 360.
That Puritans and Sectaries, though two of them scarcely agree in what they
would have, yet they are haters of Government; and they would have the Kings
Power extinguished in matters Ecclesiastical, and limited in Civil.

I shall the less value public Confessions, since I call to mind what a
glorious King the Long Parliament promised to make our late blessed Sovereign.
If any should deny now, that this King was fought against by the same Men, and
murdered; and for a proof should send me to their Declarations; (how Posterity
may be cheated by this way of arguing I know not) I shall never so far baffle
and hoodwink my own knowledge and sad experience, as to believe them. I took
the same way to convince you, -- That Episcopal Men being faithful to their
Principles, could not be the beginners of the late War; because our Liturgy,
Catechism, Articles, Homilies are against such practices. Then you even pitied
my poor silly kind of defense: You send me often to Rushworth, Heylin, and lay
much stress on Du Moulins Answer, to Philanax; though I have read him all over,
yet I find not that he does patronize your Cause at all: His design is, (and he
makes it out) that Popish Tenants lead to Rebellion; but may not other Men have
that Firebrand in their Tails? though they look quite a contrary way. But see
your own partiality, when I refer you to Sions Plea, Travers, Bancroft, Sir
Thomas Aston, that you might see the Discipline, and nauseate it as well as I:
You check me and reject them. I may allude to the words of God himself, (I hope
without offense) Is your way equal? is my way unequal? Our own Brats (it seems)
are beautiful, and others of the same Symmetry are deformed.

37. After you had said the War was not founded in Theological differences, but
in Political, and Law-Controversies: I inferred that you intended to excuse the
Divines. If this was not suitable to your mind, pray pardon me. But since you
say the difference was not Theological, pray review your own words. -- The
extirpation of Piety was the great design: The Saints Rest. P. 257, 258. the
fifth Edition.
Many able Ministers silenced, Lectures suppressed, the Lord's Day reproached,
and devoted to pastimes, a multitude of Humane Ceremonies took place. This was
the Work which we took up Arms to resist. Those that scruple the lawfulness of
our War, did not scruple the lawfulness of subverting our Churches among us.
Were not these things Theological? Yet for these you took up Arms; speak no
more of Political Lawdifferences. As if Statesmen were only in the fault. Did
not you say before that the Quarrel was begun by Episcopal Men; whereof some
were Arminian, Anti-Arminian; and were not these differences Theological?

Should I insult now and say, Are you fit to torture the Press, and make it
groan, with so numerous a Progeny of Books, and yet do so grossly contradict
your self?

40. You confess your Error, in denying Dr. Manton to have written upon Jude;
and I confess my misnomore of John for Cornelius Burges. I was a stranger to
this Cornelius until these latter days, and could scarce believe he could be
the Author of so Orthodox a Book. If we be thus ingenious, we shall come near
together at last.

41. This Section is spent about taking up Arms; but the latter Clause of the
Oath does most stick with you, and the word endeavor much troubles you; but if
we look upon it in reference to former Transactions, it must be reasonably
understood of a tumultuous and armed Endeavor; and this has (as I am informed)
been declared by the Judges, who are the true Interpreters of the Law. As King
Charles the first told them Anno 1628. and may not the Justices in the Country
declare what was the sense of the Judges? If every word in an Oath must be
strained to the most unfavourable sense, and no Interpreters be allowed to
explain it; it is the best way for us to turn Quakers, and not to swear at all:
Not in Christ's sense, but theirs; for it is easy to turn the plainest Oaths
into Snares. How shall it be known, that Men by virtue of the Covenant do not
hold themselves obliged to subvert Ecclesiastical Government by Bishops; if it
be unlawful to swear not to endeavor the Alteration of the Government: Then
they may lie at catch to play their former Game over again; and who knows but
there is so much pleading to keep this Sally-port open to this purpose? This
bogling makes me think your Retractation is not so sincere as St. Austins; and
then it is no wonder you fall short of his Glory. As for those Titles of want of
ingenuity, not understanding what I say; O happy Quieter of Conscience! They
are so common, -- that like those that live near the falling of Nilus, though
it roar never so much, they take little notice of it; so I am inured to your
Buffetings, that I am almost turned into a Callum.

44. Your refusal of that Oath (it seems) is bottomed on this, -- That
Lay-Chancellors make up the Church Government, which is not to be altered. I
think it will not be easy to prove this; and I am sure I never yielded it to
you. They may be appendants to, which are not the essential parts of a
Government. If you peruse the Oath 1640. which occasioned so much dust at that
time, you will find the Church Governors set down at large, -- Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons; there is no mention at all of Lay-Chancellors;
except you will play the Chemist and extract them out of the rest, etc. and
then you may make Registers, Proctors, Apparators to be the Government, But
Sir! remember your self, you tell me, you must not give the Reasons of
Nonconformity, because this would be a traducing the Government. Why do you
print against Lay-Chancellors then, if they be the Government?

Learned Men have maintained both in the Schools and from the Press a Divine
Right of the Government of the Church by Bishops: But who ever did so in behalf
of Lay-Chancellors? Is not this to have hot and feverish Heads? when you will
startle at every Leaf, as if it harbored a Serpent, and turn every Bush in
your way into a Gorgon: Men will never want woe that are such pregnant
Contrivers, how to puzzle and entangle themselves.

When you seemed perplexed about Lay-Chancellors, I did say, Me thinks a Man of
your ingenuity should rest satisfied with that modest Declaration before the
Commination in our Liturgy, concerning the Censures of the Church. Have I done
you any wrong in appealing to your ingenity, who have so often caled me
disingenious. In that Declaration there is an acknowledgment, -- That in the
Primitive Church there was a godly Discipline, which it is wished might be
restored. It is granted then that our Discipline is imperfect; and though there
is no mention of Lay-Chancellors, yet Excommunication being a part of
Discipline, and belonging to Penance, I thought you might be so ingenious as
not to exagitate what is confessed to be imperfect. Poor impotent Flies stick
upon Sores, but generous Spirits are satisfied with an acknowledgment, satis
est prostrasse leoni.

You might perceive I had no mind to draw the Saw, about Lay-Chancellors and
Excommunication. I had not mentioned them in my Book, or asserted any thing
about Excommunication; but it is your manner to draw any (...) into your
discourse. And then if I do but touch upon it, it is enough; you will presently
pour forth a whole Volume. Just so when I was a Puny-Sophister in the Schools:
If I could catch an advantage from any word, that fell from my Antagonist, I
would hold him there, and pass by the merits of the Cause. It may be I could
wish, -- that Excommunication were reduced into a more Scriptural, Apostolical
and Primitive Channel, as much as your self; but I never look that the Church
below should be without spot or wrinkle.

I said, (what could be said) that Lay-Chancellors do not excommunicate as they
are Laymen; but by their Surrogates. O quam vapulo* I am pushed to a
Stone-wall, and pined up fast there, and then I am bound to your Chariot,
whilst you sing Io. Triumph. Come on, say you, you speak just like an Hector,
Horns against Horns. -- They excommunicate as Laymen, or as Clergymen; but
not as Laymen, ergo, as Clergymen. And upon this you ground many subsequent
absurdities; as Vno absurdo dato, etc. I shall break your Chain in the first
Link; for I deny your division: Your major is imperfect, for Excommunication is
not from them, either as Laymen, or as Clergymen formally, or by any proper
Causality; but from the Surrogates. Say not our Articles the same: Vnusquisque
Vicarius Generalis, Officialis, seu Commissarius, qui Ordines Ecclesiasticos
non susceperit, eruditum aliquem Presbyterum, sibi accerset, and associabit,
qui sufficienti authoritate vel ab ipso Episcopo in jurisdictione sua, vel ab
Archidiacono (Presbytero existente) in Jurisdictione sua munitus, idque ex
praescripto ipsius Judicis tunc praesentis, excommunicationis sententiam, pro
contumacia pronunciabit. Inter Articulos, Anno Domini 1584. Regnique
Elizabethae vicessimo septimo.

Anno 1571. Nullus Cancellarius, nec Commissarius, nec Officialis, procedet
usque ad ferendam sententiam Excommunicationis; sed sententiam deferent tantum
ad Episcopum; camque aut ipse per se pronunciabit, aut gravi alicui viro in
Sacro Ministerio constituto, pronunciandum committet.

Anno 1597. Quotiescunque censura ista Excommunicationis, in poenam cujusvis
haereseos, schismatis, symoniae, perjurii, usurae, incestus, adulterii, seu
gravioris alicujus criminis venerit infligenda; sententia ipsa vel per
Archiepiscopum Decanum, Archidiaconum, vel Prebendarium (modo sacris Ordinibus,
and Ecclesiastica Jurisdictione praeditus fuerit) in propria persona
pronunciabitur.

Canon 13. in the sixteenth of Charles the first. No Excommunication or
Absolution shall be good in Law, except they be pronounced by the Bishop in
person, or by some other in Holy Orders, in whom is the Power of the Keys. You
did not do well to overlook what I said about the Lay-Chancellors being expert
in the Civil Law; and so were competent Judges about Intricacies, arising about
Spiritual Affairs, and so might have a Superintendency, and a Juridical
Inspection over this Particular of Excommunication. Tell me, Sir! May not a Man
be said to do that vertually, which he does not act immediately? The King does
neither preach nor administer the Sacraments, yet has a Supremacy of Power in
all things belonging to the Church. Are not many things in Parliament ascribed
to the Lords Spiritual, which were transacted by their Proxies? Did you never
read, that the Nobles of Jehosaphat went about all the Cities of Juda, 2 Chronicles.
17. 4. 9.
and taught the People? Was not Teachings proper to the Priests, Levites,
Prophets, as Matters of Discipline were to the Apostles? Why do you not quarrel
with these Nobles, for being Usurpers? If you say, as some Commentators, that
they taught the People, in that they encouraged the Levites to do so: Why in
this sense may not Lay-Chancellors act about Excommunication, by informing and
directing the Surrogates how to carry themselves in doubtful Cases? as Jetho
advised, that Matters of the greatest concern should be brought to Moses:
Although all this while the original Authority is in and from the Bishop, and
we are all but his Curates as to the exercise of it. I find that if you may be
permitted to fix your Engine upon a false ground, and begin your Building upon
a precarious Foundation; you will do wonders; and raise a Babel as high as
Heaven: But remove this Sand, and you come tumbling down like Lucifer.

You may please your self in comparing us to Cryers; because we act
subordinately to our Superiors: I think, as we are Gods Ambassadors, we are no
better: Our Commission is limited, and we do but Cry what is enacted above.
Nothing below an Independent, Absolute, and Autocratical Power will serve your
turn. Nobis non licet esse tam potentibus. If the Presbyterians should succeed,
they would assume a Power to excommunicate Kings; Rush. P. 218.
and then Men are not like to take much care what becomes of them. Is it this
you would have? I dare not but name my Author; it was the Lord Digby.

45. I told you, that if Lay Elders meddled in Excommunication, you would not be
offended at them: You say in effect you renounce them; for you have written
against them. Where shall I find you? If I touch upon any thing that may
reflect upon the Presbyterians, or their Discipline, presently your blood is
up, and I must be called to a severe account by your self, as the Achilles of
the Party: Yet if any part of that Discipline be charged upon you, or want a
defense, then you fly off, renounce the Cause you have espoused: You know not
the Man, although you think I am obliged to defend every usage of the Church
with which you have a mind to quarrel. What prevarication is this? Into how
many Shapes can you transform your self? Hecate Triformis! Flesh, Fish,
Mirmaid; Episcopal-Presbyterian-Independent; yet none of these when you please:
An (...). sometimes in the Water, and sometimes out. I only wish you were
either hot or cold. Epist. 8.


I find that Beza made the same Complaints as you do, that Excommunication was
decreed by the Civil Lawyers, and not by the Presbytery; yet I find, that at
Geneva the Power of Excommunication was in the Consistory; whereof two parts
were Laymen: And how it was with the Sanhedrim Mr. Seldom will inform you:
Heylin of the Presb. P. 7.
But as great a Mecaenas as you are for the Discipline, I doubt whether you
will own this.

If ever I be a Bishop I shall bless my self from such a defender: and herein
you would do me a kindness: for you would be such a strange and uncouth a
Bishop, that it would exceed the skill of a better Advocate than I to defend
your manner of Episcopacy.

But there is but little fear of this trouble; for before Richard will agree
with Baxter, what kind of Bishop he would be, it will be too late in the
afternoon with me to undertake your defense.

47. Here you say, I sarcastically insinuate something about your
Nolo-Episcopare, and so you wish again for one grain of Ingenuity in me. You
might have saved this labor, if you had not undertaken to know my mind better
than I do my self. Who gave you commission to read my thoughts backward? as
destitute of ingenuity as you make me, I never reproached any with their
misery, or upbraided them with their choice. It may be an act of magnanimity to
refuse preferment; for Nazianzen and many others have done it before you. I
will not be so curious and inquisitive as to search whether your motives and
theirs be the same,

48. Magis and Minus non variant speciem; holds in substances, say you, but not
in relatives. Yet neither substances nor relatives in my Logic, Suscipiunt
magis and minus; If they be relatives secundum esse. But this is only in
respect of quantity and quality which do adhere to them. For as one man is not
magis homo, so one Father is not magis Pater than another. But say you Would a
spoon be a spoon if it were as big as a Church. It is enough for my purpose
that there is no specific difference betwixt a little Spoon and a great one,
nor betwixt a small Diocese and a great one: and this you seem to assert in
your next Section, showing that there is small difference betwixt Bishop Ushers
and the present Model. Take heed of absurd and ridiculous suppositions; for as
they are not argumentative, so they infer nothing but monstrous conclusions.
Rub up your Philosophy about maximum quod sic and minimum quod non, De Invocat.
Sanct. Thesi 49.
and see what Vossius says -- that things only dissering gradually are (...),
and then it may be you may give leave to magis and minus, and to be a Maxim
still. But right or wrong you must have a fling at Diocesan Bishops, which you
say can have no personal present Communion with a thousand Churches under them,
since they never saw one the other. Is there no Communion but personal, and
'twixt those that see each other? Many of the Kings Subjects never saw his
face, yet they have many hands and eyes in respect of their subordinate
Officers. So have Diocesans in their Curats, and may not we be (...), and have
a (...) with the Saints below and the Saints above, though we never saw them.

50. To all you talk after on this Subject I cannot find in my heart to trouble
my self with any other Answer than to tell you that all you say is utterly
impertinent, you would have cried out -- O easy Answer! but why impertinent?
you had declared your self for the Episcopacy of Cyprian and Ignatius; but not
for Diocesan Bishops, because they were not primitive. I told you there were
Bishops before there were Parishes, therefore the most primitive Bishops were
not Parochial. Then I showed you the large Diocese of Ignatius, Cyprian, etc.
And I quote the very words of Ignatius in his Epistles, and all this is
impertiment: but it is no strange thing with you; for when I mentioned several
grand Authors about the Discipline, you give me just such another Answer.

51. You had spoken, (as I understood) against our Oath of Canonical Obedience
to Bishops: I told you this was only in rebus licitis and honestis. This you
canvas up and down; yet when you had to do with Mr. Bagshaw you grant it, but
with me you dispute it over again.

Are Oaths necessary to be sworn to the Clergy? It was once made necessary to
swear and vow against the Clergy to the utter rooting them up, and those that
refused ran the hazard of all they had. And may not we now promise Obedience to
them in things lawful? or rather by the King by whose Law this is injoy'nd? but
where is any Antiquity for it? I produced the words of Ignatius to this
purpose, yet you take no notice of them.

52. I had said Mr. Cartwright wrangled himself into Conformity: you say it is
well done of you to write an historical untruth so boldly? you have no way to
come off, but to say some body told you so: some body told you so is sometimes
and in some cases a good account. If we were stripped of the advantage of
Tradition, you would be much puzzled about the Christian Sabbath. But is this
an Historical Untruth? You might have read the very words in print before now;
and in another Author you may read -- Cartwright either was, or was persuaded
to be satisfied; when he was admitted to Warwick he faithfully promised, Mr. S.
P. Herlin Pres. 15.
if he might be tolerated to preach, not to impugn the Laws, Orders,
Government, Ib. 291.
or Governors in the Church of England, but to persuade and procure as much as
he could, both publicly and privately the Estimation and Peace of the Church
-- he carried himself with as much respect to the Archbishop as any of the
regular and conformable Clergy to his death. Ibid. p. 327.
-- Dr. Burges Observed that Cartwright opposed the Ceremonies as inconvenient,
Ibid. p. 377.
not as unlawful; and therefore persuaded men to conform rather than leave
their Flocks; so that you may see I had better ground for what I said than mere
hearsay.

53. Here you repeat concerning the Oath of non-endavouring the Alteration of
Government. But as you say nothing but what has been said before, so I have
nothing to say but what I have said already, until something be produced de
novo.

54. Who it is that does most to drive people from the Parish Churches, I am
satisfied by experience; and whether all Nonconformist Dissenters be such
children of hell as you describe them. Methinks you are like a waspish or
choleric Disputant, who being impatient of contradiction, and having spent his
stock of reason, falls to chiding, and supplies the want of argument with the
overflowing of the gall, and it is no wonder you begun to faulter and rage at
the latter end of the day, after so tedious a Journey, I mean so long a
discourse: But when you are refreshed, revolve with your self in your
retirement and solitude. 1. Whether we that now bear the heat of the day (I
might ask you according to your procedure, whether you mean me,) do drive men
from the Parish Churches. 2. Whether I describe dissenters, all of them to be
the children of hell. Reverende Pater in hisce duabus Quaestionibus expecto
animi tui sententiam. Take heed of that pernicious Luciferian Counsel --
Calumniari fortiter haerebit aliquid. Let St. Paul rather instruct you (...),
to speak the truth in love. Away with these Heats; let us tear one the other in
pieces no longer: Can you blame me for saying such dissentions make Music at
Rome? Let us show our selves to each other like Joseph and his Brethren at
their interview in Egypt. Though my Judgment leads me to be Pius Inimicus to
the Nonconformity of the Non-conformists; yet nothing shall make me
uncharitable to their Persons.

55. To write a just Defense of the Nonconformity which I own, would take up
more time than I have to spare, unless I saw a probability of better effect,
than by putting it into your Hand, as now you motion. I will not say this is a
Tergiversation; for if there be any that comes near St. John's Hyperbole, of
writing more Books than the World can contain, you are the Man. If you do but
open the Floodgates of your Lips, out there gushes such a Torrent, (I allude
still to St. John, but it is to the Dragon in the Revelation) that is enough to
overwhelm such a Pigmy as I am. Your Foam is the more grievous because it is
brackish. I expect nothing from you but scorn; and that you should pronounce
your wonted Raca against me in a higher Key, and a more Emphatical Accent: You
will have the Lions Motto, Nemo me impune lacessit: Yet I could wish that if
your Writing be no sweeter, it might be shorter; and that you would contract
your swelling thoughts, and like the Oracle speak much in a little, for I am
weary in following you.

I hope you will no more tell me, that I call upon you to blow against a
flaming Oven; and to do Impossibilities, when I called for your Reasons of
Nonconformity. You tell me I know no such Book could be licensed; yet when I
made the motion in assisting you in the Birth, you utterly waved my Overture.

If you are under affliction, I hope it will make you to judge as one that must
be judged. Sir, I told you the very truth: I was entering into the Furnace in
my last; and since that God has been pleased to drench and plunge me deeper,
both as to my Person and Family; else you had received this Return much sooner:
Though I might have thought such an Intimation might have procured your
forbearance, and that you would not have come upon me when I was sore.

I thank you that you have any hope that I may improve my afflictions, by
sucking some Honey out of such a hard Rock; and I can bless God that of very
faithfulness he has caused me be troubled. I can kiss the Rod without any
murmuring Sobs, and adore him that has made me to smart.

(...).
(...).
It is God that bears Rule in the Kingdom of Heaven and Earth; therefore I
praise, honor and extol him; all whose Works are Truth, and his Ways Judgment.

What Talents the same God has bestowed on me, I shall lay them out, not to
drive Men from the Congregation, but to invite and woo them more and more into
the Church, that they may come under the Net of the Gospel, and the droppings
of Heaven. Herein I should rejoice to have your Cooperation, and the assisting
Labors (all little enough) of all our dissenting Brethren: Whilst I am an
unworthy Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, and

Your Devoted Friend, Jo. Hinckley.
Northfeild October. 13.
Mr. BAXTER'S Fourth Letter.
SIR,
WHen I had written an Answer to your last, the Transcriber moved slow in his
Work, and it being somewhat long, (fourteen Sheets) before he had finished it,
I heard from a double report of your own acquaintance, that you purposed to
print what you got from me! At the first hearing I was not sorry for it: But
upon second thoughts these four Reasons put a stop to the mission of the Papers
to you. 1. I have written more plainly and smartly than I would have done if it
had been for any ones use besides your own: A secret conviction and reproof may
be sharper than an open one. 2. I am confident that you cannot get the whole
licensed, (and I cannot easily think that you are willing.) Upon your
encouragement a few sheets against Bagshaw (since dead) were printed without
License, and were surprised in the Press; and if you should print mine by
scraps, and not entirely, I should take it for a great injury and dishonesty.
3. And I doubt it would be offensive to some, and so might tend to my own
disquiet; for to make it so plain, as that nothing but a high degree of
Ignorance or Impudence can contradict it, that the Parliament that raised Arms
against the King were by profession Episcopal, (such as Heylin describes Abbot
to be) as against those whom they accused of Innovation, and raised suspicions
that they were reconciling us to Popery, at the price of our loss of Propriety
and Liberty. I have been fain to name so many Men, of whom some are yet living,
that I know not how they will take it, to have their Military Acts recited
after the Act of Oblivion; and I believe those Clergymen that have used this
false Visor to put on the Non-conformists to make them odious, that it was they
only, and not the Episcopal that began the English War, will be very angry to
have their fraud detected. 4. But all these are small matters in comparison of
the last; Though God has given us a King, who is so firm to the Protestant
Religion, as to make a severe Law against all that shall cast out suspicions of
his being inclined to Popery; yet all Men are mortal, and God knows into what
Rulers Hands my Papers may be put by the Papists for their advantage when they
see them: And they may say, You see, Sir, that it was not only the
Non-conformists, but the Episcopal Protestants also that raised War against the
King; therefore no Party of them are to be trusted by you, as Philanax Anglicus
attempted; and Arguments from Interest take much in the World. And I had rather
the Non-conformists alone were distated and cast out, than the Conformists
also, lest worse succeed them. On all which Considerations I shall suspend my
sending you these Papers, till you give me sufficient Reasons to believe that
they shall not be used to more hurt than good; and then you shall have them by
the next Messenger. But I doubt whether it will not offend you to see it so
undeniably proved, that your Papers contain so great a number of gross
mistakes. Among which one of the most excusable-willing one, is your mistake of
my Apology (in tantum) for one or two Non-conformists near you, (I know of no
more) that had not Academical Education, or might be suspected to be half as
low in Learning as you defined them to be, when I told you how much I preferred
Matter before strange Words, and an English Divine before a Syriack Sot, or a
few Shreds, etc. For though I had no thought of accusing the Conformists more
than others, of being guilty of acquaintance with the Oriental or other
Languages; yet I confess I had mentioned the Conformists somewhere in the same
Sheet, and you were like enough in the contradicting humor to think that all
that was mentioned to you was spoken by way of opposition to your Party, when
you found some crumbs of credit in it: But to disabuse you, I assure you; 1.
That I thought not in those words of comparing Conformists with Non-conformists
at all, but only Pedantick smattering in strange words, with real solid
understanding, and preaching of Theology, in what Parties soever they were
found. 2. That I never yet heard any of your Youths in our Pulpits that showed
any higher Matters of that poor kind of ostentation than a few words of Hebrew.
3. That really it was a Lad in my own House at my Elbow, the remembrance of
whom suggested to me the matter of my Comparison, who is yet no Conformist, and
I assure you no judicious Divine, (what ever he may be hereafter) and yet
(seeing you seem to differ from me in this Point also, and so prefer such
Shreds before true Knowledge in Divinity) is able to gratify you with somewhat
more than Shreds of Welsh, English, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chalde, Syriack,
Arabic, Persian, Samaritan, Aethiopick; and if these be not enough for you, we
can make shift between us to send you some Shreds of Armenian, French, Italian,
Spanish, yea and of the Indian Language of our Americans, in which Mr. Eliot
has printed the Bible. And if you signify your desire or willingness to
accept them, he shall send you some Shreds of these by the next, in stead of
solid Divinity, that you may have that which you prefer. And I further assure
you, that he never had these from any University, nor from any Tutor that is
fond of Conformity; which I say because you tell me how we would boast of such
if they were among us. And would you have me send out such a Lad (of nineteen
or twenty years of age) to be a Preacher or a Pastor, because he can talk
nonsense (or at least but little profound Divinity) in so many Tongues? Had I
set as light by Languages as you dreamed, I had not taken care to help him to
this much: But because I set more by real Science, than you seem to do by your
contradiction of my preference of it, I count him that is without it, and
without the Holy Love and Life which it tends to, to be but as sounding
Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

Your Servant, R. B.
Jan. 20. 1671.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. Baxter's fourth Letter.
SIR,
I Received yours directed to the Curate of Northfeild. Now there is some hope;
your Language is truly Episcopal: For we are in truth the Bishops Curates; and
under that Title we are prayed for in the Collect, though more at large in the
Littany. But I think the King will shortly give me a Writ of Ease, so that I
shall neither be Rector nor Curate there long. All Times involve me in
Sufferings: May I hereby know (Reduplicative.) the Fellowship of my Saviors
Sufferings! And so thereby with him be made perfect!

Those that told you what I might say about Printing our Papers, might have
told you the whole truth; which was with this reserved Hypothesis. -- If you
should approve of it. Though you well know, how you have urged me to it. Such
Apocopes do too much resemble the Legerdemain of the grand Impostor. I may be
ignorant; I cannot be dishonest. I had rather your Devoto's should take it for
granted, that you have mangled the whole Book you oppose, and laid the whole
Compages of it in the Dust, than confute them by doing you the least injury.

Your four Reasons are satisfactory unto me: And I am glad that you are
convinced, that your Ink did overflow with Gall toward one who treated you
with much humanity. But I am sorry you do (...), in still asserting, -- that
the War was raised by Episcopal Men. Herein you are singular, and are deserted
by your own Friends; who are concerned to lay hold on such a Doctrine, (if
true) with both hands. But this History is too fresh in our Memories to be
transposed or depraved.

It is true, Dr. Heylin, and many others, thought Archbishop Abbot a great
Mecaenas, and favourer of Puritans, who were afterward called Presbyterians.
There were hot Disputes by other Episcopal Men against the five Articles,
against encroachments upon our Liberty Civil and Religious; therefore these
Episcopal Men raised the War: This Sequel or Consequence you cannot make good;
or if you set down this Argument categorically, I will deny the Major in
Aeternum. You may as well bottom our late difference betwixt King and
Parliament, on the remote Quarrel betwixt York and Lancaster. Had Bishop Abbot
lived, do you think he would have espoused the Parliaments Cause? Qui pauca
respicit, de facili pronuntiat.

What you say about the many Sheets you have prepared, I tell you as formerly,
-- I do not court your trouble. I cannot suppose that you have taken so much
pains to be buried in my Desk; nor shall I willingly examine such a Bundle,
without the exposing my Sentiments to the Suffrages of the learned World.

You excuse the expression of a Syriack Sot: And because you tell me the
occasion of it, I will tell you my surmise. I had thought you had perstring'd a
dear and old Acquaintance of mine, who for his humble self-denial, and deep
Learning in the Languages, is stupor Mundi both at home and abroad.

You speak of my gross mistakes: But if there be no other than you name, let
any Man that understands sense read the Papers, and perpend the state of the
Controversy, and I dare boldly say, he will fall into the same Toil. Your
Explicatory Clavis has expedited me out of that intanglement. And I am resolved
not to be resolute in quarreling. It is a strange courtesy you tender me of
sending me your Lads scraps. If I had not a competent measure of that kind of
Learning, I could have a better Tutor; who, as I told you, is the Glory of his
Age. I have known pregnant Boys, -- praecocis Ingenii, come from Westminster
School, fraught with a Cyclopaedy of Languages; and yet before they have left
the College, they have scarce retained any footsteps thereof, unus in
omnibus, etc. Just as you have seen the beauty of a fair Face, either by
Sickness or Age, so obliterated and furrowed, that there is no more remainder of
Beauty left, than there is of Troy, in those plowed Fields where it once stood.

The Fathers were good Divines; yet as Dr. Hackwell observes, -- Among the
Latins St. Jerome, and Origin Among the Graecians, did excel in the Oriental
Languages.

The last part of your Charge I cannot but take unkindly: You say I prefer
Shreds before true Knowledge in Divinity, and real Science.

Sir! here you speak without Book: For I have neither said so (...), nor can
you charitably infer it from any thing I have spoken. I know not how to confute
you, but by wishing you knew me better. When I have heard Sermons at the
University as smooth as Glass, so that the Art in wording them did opus
superare; I have declared to Persons of no small Place, -- that such slippery
Preaching, and Cadencies of words, will spoil all in the Country: Such Sermons
will reach no further than the Ears, and be looked on as Romantic Harrangues.
You know what Austin said of Tullies Hortensius: The same say I of such
Preaching, which tends not to advance Piety and Holiness.

Now worthy Sir! For as Calvin said of Luther: Think of me what you please, I
will acknowledge your worth in many Particulars. And as for Absoluteness, it is
so incompetible an Attribute to Man, that I know you do not aspire unto it: I
am sorry; and it shall be for a lamentation, to see in your late Writings a
Foundation laid for a grand Schism in this Church, as things now stand.

Give me leave, supra totam materiam, to reinforce my Persuasive by this
Consideration. -- Have not you seen Presbytery supplanting Episcopacy?
Independency, Presbytery? Have not you seen Anabaptism with one foot in the
Stirrup? And who knows but (as Montanus said of the Holy Ghost) Quakers and
Fifth-monarchy-men might have had their turns? Nay, Papists and Atheists, if
those days of Anarchy and Nonconformity had continued. If you saw the boldness
of Papists, and their great Numbers, where I sometimes exercise my Ministry,
you would count it no small happiness, that such fluctuations are limited by
Reformed Bishops in a Reformed Church. It shall be my Prayer therefore, that
you were not almost, but altogether a Conformist.

John Hinckley.
Feb. 2. 1671. Respondi, etc. --
A LETTER TO AN Oxford-Friend, FROM A Countrey-MINISTER; Concerning the
INDULGENCE. Anno 1671/2.
CAP. I.
The Commendation of an Oxford-Life.

Dear Sir!
I Have always had a great Veneration for that Bishop who never approached your
Oxon: though in his Episcopal Grandeur, and Declining years; but whilst he was
in the way, when he first saw your rising Towers, he alighted from his Horse:
And in the open Field, prostrating himself upon our Common Mother the Earth, He
paid his Duty, to his Mother the University: or rather, the Tribute of Praises
unto God, who first brought him thither.

In like manner, Sir! The Sense of that Mercy and Goodness, which I have seen,
and tasted within your Walls; has prompted me to say -- How beautiful are thy
Tents, O Oxford! If at any time, from Shot-Over, or any of those Adjacent
Hills, I have (as from Mount Nebo) beheld your Land of Canaan: And well I may
call it so; where there has been such a torrent of Milk and Honey; The Sincere
milk of Gods Word: And that, which is sweeter than honey; I earning, and
Religion. These are the genuine streams of that Fountain, except it be mudded
by some strange Cattle; or poisoned by Principles of a Foreign growth. If any
come from you, either loose, or illiterate; they are but degenerous Plants,
that never tasted the sweetness of your Soil: nor bowed themselves to your
Discipline. They are but the Wenns and Cancers of your body; Or rather Insects,
hatched out of their own ill humors, which they brought with them thither, out
of their Country, Schools, or Families.

Sir! Our Friendship is no Mushrome, sprung up the other Night: But it is
almost immemorial: of so long standing. that I am even puzzled, to trace it up
to its first original; or to show, where was the head of this Nile. She was a
very unhappy Girl, who had so long lived under an Act of wanton Indulgence;
that she could scarce ever remember, that she had been a Virgin. But it is the
Crown of your Kindness, that I am not able to tell, when It was otherwise. Yet
All this while, I never Acquainted you with one notable change, or
dispensation, which befell me at Oxon.

I came thither (blessed be God) well principled in the First Table; Religion
toward God. My dearest Friends were accounted Puritanes, in those days; yet I
had not learned my Duty to the King. I looked upon him, as an ordinary Man: And
if things went not well (that is) in my Apprehension, I was too ready to murmur
against his Government. But, to Pray for him, to speak Reverently of him, as
God's Vicegerent, And to give him that Obedience, which was his Due; I had not
learned. Conscience was not so well Edified, as to concern It self in these
things. They seemed to me Indifferent Acts: they might be done; or they might
be left undone: They were no Essential parts of my Religion: But altogether
Extrinsecal to it: until with David, I went into the house of God. I mean, upon
a day of Inauguration, I heard Dr. Wentworth of Baliol College, Preach at St.
Mary's, on 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks, be made for all men, for Kings, and all
that are in Authority, etc. He showed so Invincibly from hence, That all these
do belong, even to wicked Emperors, and Kings; that I was thoroughly convinced of
my Former Error; And had Cause to Report, That God was there of a truth. Had
you sat in Mr. Nye's Chair, among the Triars; you would have looked on such a
Transmutation, as an Act of Conversion. But such a Confession before those
Rabbis, would have been so far from an Evidence of grace (so much was this
word Abused) that it had been enough, to have drawn down an Anathema. It would
not have been easy to have Escaped the brand of a Malignant Carnalist, (I
speak to softly) of an Absolute Reprobate. In such Request was Loyalty then.
And have these Leopards (do you think) changed their Spots? Let them come
forth! let us see their penitent tears, wherewith they have washed themselves.
Let them come, but to the very threshold of Repentance; in an Humble
Acknowledgment of their Guilt, before God, and his Church; And we will be more
charitable unto Them in allowing Them Converts, than they have been to Us. I
much fear, the King's Indulgence has not melted them, and put upon them a Royal
stamp. Nay? Does it not harden them? Do they not think themselves the best of
Subjects, to whom so great a favor is vouchsafed? Will they not expect
hereafter to be humored, rather than governed? As if they were a People of the
greatest moment, and weight in the balance of the Kingdom, to whom the Laws
themselves must bow, and bend; rather than they must be displeased?

But I am come from Jerusalem to Jericho: from my Mother's genuine Sons, to a
spurious Offspring. Therefore, like a man that is affrighted, with the sight of
Wolves and Tigers; I will betake my self out of this wilderness, unto my
beloved Oxford again.

Sir! Your Lot is fallen to you in a fair ground. You may Converse with Men,
and Books; breath in Libraries, until you become one your self; and you may
ransack the vety Treasures of the Indies. Had not I a transcendent Kindness for
you, I would tell you, I envy your Condition. It cost me many a tear, when I
parted from those Cloisters; when by an heavy Judgment, it came to my turn, to
be taken; and to yours, to be left. It was like the Haling, and Dragging of a
living Member, from its own Natural Body; or the lugging a fond Child from his
Mother's Breast.

I looked upon Going into the Country, as if I had been Condemned; or
Banished. Nay! as if I had been Sentenced into a Region of Death.

But did I say, that I am parted from your Society? No. As Diogenes told
Antisthenes, you shall never find a Club, Knotty, and Crabbed enough, to drive
me from you. I will be with you still, in the Contemplation of my Mind. In
admiring your happiness: for as Plato's Love, was in Abstracted, and
Intellectual Beauties, so it is not impossible for my purer part, my Mind
(without the help of Atoms) to take many a pleasant, and invisible Turn, in
your Galleries. You have your Pilgrims, as well as Loretto, and Jerusalem,
Aristotle's Well has more Savor and Virtue, than St. Winnifred's. Therefore I
will be with you still (Maugre all unkindness) in my Devotions: Praying, That
Peace and Plenty may be within your Walls.

CAP. II.
The Indulgence is a disheartning to young Students.

WHen I first Read the Indulgence; I did not only tremble, and quake; out of a
presentiment of that Havoc, which it was like to make in the Church: like a
flying-burning-roll demolishing, and levelling the very Pinacles of it with the
dust. I could not forbear saying as Zippora did to Moses -- A bloody Husband,
said she. A bloody Indulgence, said I, art thou to the Church of God. I read in
the very face of it, what was seen in Hazael: that it would lay wast this Eden;
and cut the very heart strings of an orderly Religion. Therefore, so soon as it
was born into the world, I named it Icabod -- The Glory is departed from our
Israel. I had another Dread upon me too; which was, That the Smoke, and Smother
of it, would even blast the Plants of your Nursery. And like the opening of
Pandora's Box, would fill you with Blasting, and Mildew: I had almost said,
with Murrain, and the very Pestilence.

Alas! what Encouragement is there, to exhaust the Spirit in Studies? to
espouse an Ephod? and to be Consecrated to the Temple? when every beast may
touch the Altar. And every Heteroclite, that has Pride enough to be singular,
may have liberty to set up Altar against Altar, when there is worshipping under
every green tree; and in every superannuated Barn. According to the number of
thy Cities, so are thy Altars, O England! Is it not a dismaying Spectacle, to
see Mount Gerazim, and Mount Ebal to strut, and swell; as if they would either
confront, or confound Mount Zion? To see Dan, and Bethel (like Excrescencies in
the Body) not only, to starve, and macerate Jerusalem; but with their numerous
Baalites, to deride, and vex her? As Hagar did her Mistress Sara: And Peninna,
the Lord's Handmaid, Hanna. As it is said of Saul, That his Shield was vilely
cast away, as though he had not been anointed with Oil. So, our Churches, and
Oratories, are slighted, and contemned; as if they had never been Consecrated,
and set apart, for the Service of the great God. Profaneness in Manners, is
like to follow upon such Profanation of Places.

Now Sir! Your Students had need have the Courage of Joshua, who dare venture
into the Camp, and list themselves into a warfare, against all these Cananites,
Jebusites, Philistims, and what not? As many Adversaries, you may be sure, as
Apollyon can muster up, and thrust out of his bottomless pit. He had need have
Ceur de Lion: or to have his heart wrapped up, and fortified with as many
sheets of Brass, as there were Folds in the Shield of Ajax. Such Swarms of
Locusts, will make the stoutest Champions, Austin, Luther, to quail. Where then
will your Stripplings? your young Divines appear? when they see the Heavens
black, and all places filled, with dust, and noise* when an empty
Nonconformist, who never eat one grain of Salt in your Naioth: or if he did,
it was (like the Dogs of Nilus) touch and away; shall be cried up among the
Rabble, and giddy Fraternity; as much as Diana was at Ephesus: when in the mean
time, the most Learned of your Doctors, shall be dismissed -- with -- Alas!
Poor men! Their Discourse is unsavory. They were never in the third Heaven.
Nay! They shall not be fit to be put in the Balance, with some forward
Tradesmen: For these begin again to display their gifts; and think, they can
scan a Text, and sound the depth of Scripture, as well as the profoundest
Gamaliel amongst you. And this is effected, by a sullen kind of gravity; a loud
and bold utterance; and extatical Devotion, and a down look, as if they had
lost that Os sublime which God bestowed upon them at first; or as if those
Optic Nerves, which naturally draw and pullice up the Eyes toward Heaven,
were either cracked, or broken. One would think such a popular Ecclesiastes,
were the most humble, the most mortified lump, as ever was quickened, with a
living Soul: And yet that Shrub in Semblance, is higher in his own conceit than
the tallest Cedar. He does not only overlook. Lincoln, but Canterbury too. All
your Skill in Languages, Arts, Sciences; all your Reading of Fathers, Councils,
Primitive Histories, is nothing to his precious Parts, and mournful Accents,
when the Auditors are set, and keep tune, and chime with every Pathetical
expression. Their very Bowels seem to sound like an Harp, and their Sighs to
Echo; like some hollow Cave, or Cavern of the Earth. Hither, the multitude
Flock, just as Insects swarm about a Dung-hil, or besiege a dead Carcass. As I
have seen in Markets and Fairs, more People about a Mountebank, one that sings
Ballads, or a Pedlar's Stall, than in a Jeweller's, or a Goldsmith's Shop.

Is not this enough to make your Students to throw away their Books? to divert
their Studies? and when they peep out into the Country, to startle and recoil
(like those Infants of Saguntum) into their Mother's womb again; or else to
betake themselves, to some more quiet, and thriving kind of life?

Sir! I have found, by long Experience, that you have had a Compliance and
Sympathy with me, in most things of Concern. As if one Soul had been divided,
betwixt us both: we have condol'd, we have rejoiced together; you cannot then,
but grieve with me, to foresee that desolation and widowhood; which is like to
befall our Mother the University: when the most Pregnant Wits shall have a damp
come upon them, and even smother them in their Nests. What need so much
Watching? so much consulting the Oracles, and Monuments of the Dead? when the
Reading some English Neotericks, will bring them to more Repute. And as Jerome
told Marcella, Idcirco sancti, si nihil scirent. They are accounted the more
Holy, by how much they are the more Ignorant. Nihil tam facile, quam vilem
Plebeculam and indoctam concionem linguae volubilitate decipere; quae quicquid
non intelligit, plus miratur. Hiero ad Nepotia.
But it will appear, that those Men are most subject to delusions, who have
strong Fancies, devout Affections, and weak Intellectuals. Therefore the Jews
say, -- That a Religious man, who is a fool, is one of those things that
destroys the world. Christ is wounded worst in the house of such Friends.

If it be so, that every Sect may have liberty to choose a Priest: Those that
are not acquainted with Cajoling a Party; by dropping oil into their Ears, and
sowing Pillows under their Elbows; but do endeavor impartially, to Preach up
the Peoples Duty to God and Men* they may be Shepherds without any Flock: like
a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers; left alone, with Elijah; and their*
Congregation as thin as the Grapes upon the Vine, after the Summer Vintage.
Will not this make our fluent Chrysostomes, and our divine Nazianzens to hide
themselves in holes? And to say with Moses, -- Send by him, by whom thou will
send. Thus the Church is like to dwindle, and wither away; not being refreshed,
and impregnated by your Breasts, and by the Rivulets derived from your
Fountain. Darkness is like to overspread her Territories, when the Luminaries
abscond themselves in a thick Cloud. What then will be left, but flashy
Meteors, and false Fires, to give an uncertain light? what an easy Prey will
she be, to the Attempts of her Enemies? when there are no Champions, to defend
her Battlements. Though Themistocles was slighted by the Athenians, in times
of Peace; yet in the Storms of War, they ran to him (say Plutarch) as to the
shadow of a Palm Tree.

Learned Jewels, Hookers, Reynolds, will be in account again, though slighted
at present; when Hannibal shall knock at our Gates: when Rome, and Munster
shall set up their Standard against us. Loose Chiding, and frothy Scolding,
will not then serve turn; but then there will be need of the Sinews, of close,
and succinct Reasoning. The former victorious Trophies, and Triumphs, over
their Goliahs, is enough to endear your famous University, to the present, and
future Ages. Manlius pointed at the Capitol, which he had preserved, when he
was accused before the Senate: And he that was an Advocate for Phryne when the
Judges were ready to condemn her, He caused her to open her Bosom, that so they
might see her beautiful Breasts, and her white Alabaster Skin. This did so melt
the hearts of the Judges, that they Absolved her. Thus, did your very
Adversaries behold the Excellency of your Schools, the Soundness of your
Learning, and the necessity of your Arts, both to defend, and adorn Religion:
This would even inflame and ravish their hearts; so that they would be as much
enamored with Oxford, as I have been.

CAP. III.
The Indulgence frustrates and lays wast, the fruit and success of all our
Sermons.

SIR! As you have communicated, and transferred to me the Occurrences of the
University; and so have allayed the Melancholy of my Countrey-Solitude; so (in
an unequal exchange and requital) I have Rebounded unto you the Affairs of the
Country. And because nothing has been more welcome to you, than to hear how it
goes with the Church; with God's Ark: And those deserve to be looked upon, as
our best, and most faithful Friends, who are the heartiest Votaries for the
welfare of Zion: If Religion sit close to their Hearts, we need not fear to
Repose our selves upon their Laps. Therefore that I might satisfy your Pious
desires, I informed you what Progress our Ministry made in these Parts. I told
you, where the Laborers in the Lord's Vineyard, were Laborers indeed; when
they preached well, and lived well: There were scarce any party-colored,
speckled Cattle in our Flocks. Such as had been formerly great Dissenters, went
with the multitude to the house of God; joining with us in Prayers, Sermons,
and Sacraments: so that you would have said in an holy Admiration, -- Who are
these that come as Doves to their windows? There were scarce any that did so
much as mutter against our Doctrine, or Discipline; except here and there an
overgrown Schismatic; or a silly Woman, who was as weak in her Reason, as
strong in her Passion: who in a Proud singularity, would not consent to this
Harmony; lest she should be accounted no wiser than her Neighbors. It Is
strange (you will say) she would not be in the fashion. If this Sex must be
humored with the loss of our Peace; we deserve to be accounted Effeminate, as
well as to be unhappy. Luther gave a good Answer to his Wife, when she extolled
one Preacher, and disparaged another. Yes Kate (says he) you prefer such an
one; because he Preaches just as you women Prate. It has been Satan's Policy to
work his Deceits first upon the Women, Eve, Miriam, Job's Wife. As the Jews
stirred up devout women (in the Acts) to Persecute Paul.

But whilst our Tongues were running over with Praises; and our Hearts with
Comfort, to see of the Travel of our Souls; and to behold such a stupendous
Blessing upon our Ministry; whilst the Papists did even gnash with their
Teeth, to see us Concentre together in so happy a Syncretism, and to build our
selves up in the same Faith, upon the same Foundation; in comes a Ball of
Wildfire, which scattered us into Corners. This unravelled all our Webs,
confuted all our Sermons, turned our Joy into Mournings; and in a moment cast
to the ground, what we had been many years in erecting. It is no wonder we
little Artists have labored for the wind, in Preaching up Peace, Order, and
Unanimity, for these several years; when that great Body, the Parliament, reap
nothing but the Whirlwind; and have brought forth nothing but untimely fruit,
for several Centuries. One brush of this Besom, sweeps away the Webs of all
their Church-Laws. It was not so in the time of H. 3. for when there was a
Motion, tending to the Retrenching of one Law; the Barons, and Earls gave this
short Answer -- Nolumus leges Angliae mutari: and good reason: for a City may
be as safe without Walls; as a Kingdom, without Laws. Nay; as if the Plague of
Athens had been amongst us; we began to stand off, and stare one upon another,
as if we had forgotten, That ever we went to the House of God as Friends: I am
sure you are such an exact Master in Story, that you well know what is said of
Those that recovered from that Pestilence; That they were so stupify'd, that
they had forgotten their nearest Friends. But though they are willing on a
sudden; to forget, and cast us off, and to reject our Doctrines of Piety,
Peace, and Obedience: yet, will they not return to their former Vomit? Have
they forgotten to Judge? Censure? and to shed the blood of their Brethrens
names? Have they forgotten to Sequester? and Banish? Had they but another
Declaration, to Authorize them thereunto. The Lion (they say) may be so tamed,
that you may stroke him, and he may lick you; yet if his tongue (which is
rough) draw the least blood, with his slaver; he is so ravished with the
Savouriness of it, that he is put into a rage: So, the fiercest Schismatics
may be so gentle, that they will fawn upon you for a time; yet if they do but
taste the sweetness of Power and Liberty, you are in danger of begging a
Toleration of them; who were so free, to let them loose; and to take off from
them, the Awe of Legal Restraint. If Beasts break out of their own Pastures,
and feed on the other side of the Hedge; it will not be easy to reduce them
from their wandering Purlieus, into their ancient bounds; many Children have
been utterly undone, by too Indulgent Parents. I wish this Religious liberty,
do not make them wanton in matters Civil; And that this Toleration in the
Church; do not make way; for another in the State. Some Birds, when they are
let out of the Cage, will not stoop presently to the Lure. And Headstrong
Horses, having once shak'd off the Bridle; will never cease running, until they
have thrown off the Saddle too. I have always thought that Regularity in the
Church, and faithful Preaching there; has been the best School to educate, and
train up the best and most conscionable Subjects. Therefore, it was the Saying
of a wise man, That Schism is worse than Corruption of Manners: For that tends
to the dissolution of the Compositum; and this is but an ill humor in the
Body, that ends in Death: This, in a Distemper. We see this in a mirror before
our faces How are we crumbled, as it were into Atoms, by the late Thunderbolt;
who stood together, a little before, as an Army with Banners? terrible to our
Enemies: lovely, and beautiful to our Friends. How has the Lord covered the
Daughter of Zion, with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven the
beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool, in the day of his anger?
Sir, I am in so Tragical a vein, that I could even transcribe the whole Book of
the Lamentations: for we are not only broken into shivers; our strength, and
spirits wasted in vain; and our pleasant fruit blasted: But the Peoples ears
are precluded, and stopped (like the Companions of Ulysses) that they will not
hearken to our Charms. If we Preach up Peace, and Unity; this is to cast Pearls
before Swine, who are ready to turn again, and rent us in pieces for our
labors. This is not their Element. They must have more of the Whirlwind. What?
Preach up Obedience to the Law? This is little better, than Rebellion against
the Lawmakers: And Treason against the King. The wind is turned; and beats back
our Arrows into our own faces; we told them formerly, of an ungodly War against
the King. How justly, let Heaven and Earth bear witness! Now, they tell us, we
are the King's Enemies, if we speak a tittle against private Meetings; And this
venomous shaft, pierces deepest of all. What? Shall those that have prayed,
paid, fought against the King? Reproach those for Traitors, who have lost Blood
and Estates, and jeoparded their very Lives for him? who Preach up Obedience
and Loyalty to his Sacred person, and Government. I dare say, that never any
King, had a more Loyal Clergy. The poor Levites of old, did never put forth
their strength, more cheerfully, to carry the Ark; than we do, to support the
Throne: As if it were not only our Duty; but our Ambition, to Honor the King.
I say not this, as if we did supererogate, or merit; but that we are most
willing to do what we can, toward the Discharge of our Consciences, to God,
and the King. And should the King think it fit, in his Ratio de Stato, to
divest us of all our Employments; and to put us under the very Harrows of our
Adversaries, to tyrannize over us, as in the days of Yore; yet we would be as
Zealous, for the Honor and Safety of his Sacred Majesty; as when we wept by
the Waters of Babylon; fasted and prayed for his Return to his just
Inheritance. Nay! when we trudged many a Mile, to Persons of Quality, and
Estates (who were propitious to us, in those days of Persecution) to pay some
Tribute to their exiled Prince. You well know, who carried their Lives in their
hands; that they might convey it like David's Worthies; they rushed through the
very Army of the Philistims, that they might refresh their drooping King, with
the waters of Bethlem; and who they were, that were deeply engaged in all
Designs, to dethrone Olofernes: that our Rightful Sovereign might be restored
to his Crown; when some of these very Men, who are now shielded, and sheltered
under this Indulgence, said where is now your King? Nay! where is young
Tarquine? Chapter St.? Just as David's Enemies insulted over him, in his distress,
saying, -- Where is now thy God? yet neither Reproaches, nor Threatenings
(though we saw the blood of our Fathers, and Brethren shed before our faces)
could abate our Resolution, and Courage in so good a Cause. Were it not for
this; I should be like a man that passes over a narrow Bridge, and then looks
back, and wonders how he came over; so should I be amazed, how we that were
bred up in Calls, and wrapped up in soft Gowns, should pass through so many
hazards; were it not, for the Integrity of Conscience within; and the
Providence of a good God without: And what? are we transformed now? Are Men
turned into Hogs, and Hogs into Men? If this Indulgence has made them loyal, to
all intents and purposes; without Reserves and Equivocations; it is the best,
and most wonderful effect it is like to work: for I perceive by sad Experience,
That it is as difficult a work, thoroughly to Convert one of these Dissenters, as
to carry Mount Caucasus, upon one's back. I will assure you, I have labored
much, in convincing, and persuading some of them to be true Members of our
English Church. The work was done in appearance. They seemed to be, not only
Proselytes of the Gate; but of Justice too. In every thing submitting to, and
approving our orders. Yet when liberty of Meetings was proclaimed; off flies
these Demases: like a company of Ducklings, hatched under an Hen: They follow
her, and she Hives them under her wings; but if they come near their own
Element, the water; the Hen may cluck her heart out: They are turned
Renegado's; and will have none of her company. And no wonder: for one of the
Bel-weathers of this Flock, bleated formerly, like an harmless Sheep; as if he
intended Unity, and the healing Church-Divisions. But when there was tidings of
an Indulgence: He turns his style; and strikes up an Alarm, for Separation, and
Schism. His word is, -- As you were: He pushes again, with his old Horns; which
had been hid for a time, under wool; as the Viper covers his teeth under soft
flesh.

Sir! I fear, this melancholic Discourse, has made you sad: And indeed, who
can be otherwise? that sees the sad fate of Religion: How it is gone backward,
more degrees, than ever the Sun did, in the Dial of Ahaz. Not only the
disguised Sectaries, who were persuaded to be almost Christians, have returned
to their former Vomit: They are as busy, as ever; in undermining our Walls;
widening our closing wounds; and pouring in Wine (without any Oil) into them.
But the profane Gallio's, have their Conventicles too. The Alehouses strut
with these Companions; why, say they, may not we meet, and have our liberty; as
well as every Faction, has leave, to bandy together, and gratify the Itch of
their several humors? The very Peasants can tell us, if we give a check to
their Extravagancies -- That now, they have liberty of Conscience. And this is
not strange in them, when some Lawyers have mooted the Case; Whether there be
any Penalties remaining, for Drunkards, and Whoremasters? Thus the mere
Moralist, and Natural man, who is inclined to Atheism, is hardened against all
Religion. And that Sect amongst us, who seem to be most Zealous for Religion,
in observing the Christian Sabbath (as if on a sudden, they were become
Ranters) does most scandalously profane it. I know, this word will be
swallowed with much Kecking, and reluctance; yet let the best of their
Casuists, state and determine it otherwise if they dare: After they have
considered with themselves impartially, Whether it be not a breach of the
Sabbath, to Run or Ride six or seven miles on that Day, to hear a gifted
Preacher; when they might have heard the word of Truth and Salvation, rightly
divided, and applied at home. Is not this to play the Wantons, with those
things which are most Sacred? Is not this, to slight, contemn, reproach, and
discourage their own painful Ministers, who watch for their Souls? and to teach
others to do so, by their example: when God himself has Commanded, to
reverence, and honor him, with double honor. Nay! let them say it close to
their hearts, Whether these Transactions do not savor of the Mystery of
Iniquity. I know they are forward enough, to lay this Brat at the doors of
Rome. And for me; let it lie there: yet it is worth their second thoughts,
Whether such dealings are not Iniquity? yet a Mystery; because they are
crusted, and covered over, with a pretense of Piety, and Devotion.

I know, you will wonder, that they are so forward, to leave wholesome, and solid
meat; to run after Kickshaws. Will you give me leave to divine? They are in
pain, and do Penance in keeping off their hats; and kneeling in the public.
They are of Judas his mind; that all is wasted, which is spent in an outward
Reverence, and a bodily honor upon their Maker. They must be more familiar
with God: sit cheek by Jole with him; and be hale fellow well met, with the
Almighty: that they may reason the Case with him (if need be) upon even terms:
As when they said, Lord! why did thou leave us in the West? Why did thou
forsake us at Leicester?

But whilst our Religioso's, are thus traversing their ways, it is pretty to
observe; how the Presbyterians and Independents, do salute and embrace each
other; who could scarce agree together, in our Remembrance, in the same
College, City, or Kingdom, yet now they throng together into the same Parlour,
Hall, or more ignoble Apartment* Herod, and Pilate; Manasses, and Ephraim, have
joined hands against Christ and Juda. And that you may see, what Wonders this
Indulgence works, Those that pretended weakness, and disability of Body, to
go a stones throw, to their own Churches: They would sigh, as if they were
ready to expire, if we desired their Company there: yet now, they can rise
early in the morning, and Gallop several Miles, to a Meeting. The King (you
see) is a most Sovereign Physician: He can heal all Maladies, and Distempers;
He can make an old decrepit Sectary, to find new legs, and new strength, and to
grow young again, all over. Before you lay down your Admiration, concerning
these Aenigmatical men, tell me, if you can, how those, that have lifted up
their hands to Heaven, in the solemn League and Covenant, against a toleration
of other Religions; can kiss the golden Calf of a Universal Indulgence; and yet
tell us, we go about to wound their Consciences; and persuade them to be
perjured: If we persuade them to declare -- There is no Obligation in the
Covenant, let the next Age expound these prevaricating Riddles.

I know they say, we value our Reputations so much; that we are loath that
others should share with us. And have we not a Cause? If our Credit be stained,
our Preaching will be of little moment. Alexander got most Victories, by the
glory of his Name. Did not St. Paul complain of those who would exclude him out
of the Affections of the People? Therefore, to keep our names intemerate, and
free from the sullying breath of calumniating Traducers; it is not a vain
affectation of Honor, but a necessary means, to make our Ministry effectual.

They tell us too, that we have our Tithes allowed us still: we may gnaw our
Crust in a corner, without snarling at others. True! if our aims in taking on
us this Angelical Office were so low, as only to look after the Loaves, and the
Milk, without any care of the Flock. As if a man should marry a Wife, merely
for Portion; and then suffer her to be prostituted to the Lusts of other Men.
Nay! It is the ready way, to expose us, to the Scorns and Affronts of our
People; to give us their Tithes, and yet to allow them liberty, to choose their
Ministry; for the Country People do not dote upon such as take their Tithes.
Therefore if they cannot be avenged on their Parsons any other ways, they will
leave them in their Pulpits by themselves.

CAP. IV.
The Indulgence Confutes our Books, which have been written in the behalf of
Conformity.

BEsides other Malignant Influences, which the sad Comet of a Toleration sheds
abroad: Though it cuts our hearts deep enough, to have our People ravished out
of our Bosoms; and decoyed out of our Assemblies! For these are our glory. Pro
officio Sacerdotii omnes Christianos filiorum loco Diligimus, and profectus
eorum, nostra est gloria.
And you know, who said it; that he had rather die, than that his glorying (in
the progress of the Gospel) should be made void; yet there is another fatal
disaster, which attends the motion of that Monster. Some have endeavored by
their Pens, to vindicate their Mother Church, from the Imputation of being an
Harlot: and have asserted, that she requires nothing that is sinful, in order
to her Communion: How this has been managed in an Argumentative, and Persuasive
way: How the Policy, Government, and Liturgy of the Church, have been defended,
you are not ignorant; and other Learned and Pious men, are abundantly
satisfied. But now, on a sudden; some there are, who being sheltered under the
Command of this Toleration (as if they were men of Gath) have with one breath
blowed away all the Paper that has been written! One tells the world in Print,
He that thinks, that such toys, as Mr. Fulwood, Mr. Stileman, Mr. Hinckley,
etc. should satisfy them, He thinks contemptibly of their Understandings. But
Sir! Is this a sufficient Answer to all those Books? to call them toys: without
attempting any thing in particular against them. Who will care, what Volumes
were written against him? if the mere calling them toys, were an Orthodox
Confutation. When you disputed in the Schools, would you have taken it, for a
good Answer? if your Respondent had Nick-nam'd your Argument; and cried nugae!
As if he had triumphed, before the Victory. Yet here is a Thrasonical Fencer
comes upon the Stage; looks scornfully, cries pish! And then his deluded
followers (who are no small number) take it for granted; That whatever has been
said for Conformity, is quite overthrown.

But he goes on. Let him procure us leave, but to publish our Reasons against
Conformity, and then let him tell us, that we were better Conform, when he has
answered them. It Is easy to talk, when none must Confute him, and to brave it
against one whose tongue is tied. You may imagine this man standing, with his
hands upon his sides, strutting, and vaunting; as if he would beat down all
before him with the fierce aspect of his Eyes. As if he would fly over the
Alps, had he but the wings of an Hawk; and that he would hew us all in pieces;
had he but Scanderberg's Sword, Let him but procure us leave, to publish our
Reasons against Conformity. The man is grown modest, and mannerly: He has done
as much as this amounts to, formerly, without asking leave. But what need is
there of elaborate Reasons against toys? must Cannons be planted against a
Paper-wall? Are there any Laws so Draconical? Severe? and Keen? as to hinder
any man from answering toys? Or has this Champion nothing else to do (had he
leave) but to encounter Flies? Non vacat exigius, etc. one would think: He
could show as many feats, as a Mountebank's man; if his hands were untied: or
that he had strange Discoveries in his Budget; only the mouth of it is sealed
up, and tied with a Gordian knot.

He complains that his Tongue is tied. If he had spoken the truth; their had
not been much loss to this part of the World. Had his tongue been tied, with a
Cable-Rope, to his Jaws, Ill betide him, that should cut it! for by so doing,
he would have loosed a Chain, that had hampered a wild Beast; and plucked up a
Floodgate, that would endanger another Deluge. Those that have known this
Author for above these thirty years, never knew him subject to this Infirmity,
or once guilty of such a Distemper. His tongue has been rolling in his mouth
continually. And ever and anon (like Mount Aetna) has belched forth some
wildfire; wherewith he has scorch't those that stood in his way: this is not
that Ignitum Eloquium which was said to be in St. Bernard. His tongue has been
like a troubled Sea; casting up dirt and mire into the face of the Church. He
has been no more Tongue-ty'd; than some of those poor wretches in Bedlam, that
rave day, and night; or some Impetuous chiding Women, whose tongues do seldom
take any rest, longer than they are hush't, and silenced; or as it were tied to
their good Behavior, by a dead Sleep.

I am sure, you read better Books, and place your time better, than to stoop to
Canting Gibberish. But we in the Country, either for want of Money, to buy the
Volumes of the Greek and Latin Fathers; or else want of Skill to understand
them: or leisure to read them, are forced to take up with Pamphlets in our
Mother Tongue; such as the Pedlars furnish us with, at our Doors. Among others,
this Tongue-ty'd Scribe, furnishes us with the greatest plenty. His pregnant
Invention, voids a Book, almost every Month. He is as fruitful as a Rabbit.
Nay! He tells the world, he made some of them (as that of the Grotian Religion)
in four, or five days.

He had little cause to say, It Is easy to talk, where none must confute:
whereas, we do not find that he either fears Laws, or Men. Nor can any man give
him a word; but he has received three for it. You may as easily bind the
Influences of Orion, or stop the ebbing, or flowing of the Sea; as tie his
tongue; or be a Remora to his Pen, in the career of Writing. But, Quid tanto
dignum feret hic promissor hiatu? what must we expect, when this Mountain? this
Behemoth, shall groan, and bring forth? Some Masculine Offspring sure. If so,
It is more than all the Non-Conformists have hatched these hundred years. T. C.
saw as far into this Controversy, as R. B. yet what said he? which did not
receive a full, and Adaequate Answer, from Archbishop W. Others have but lick't
up his Vomit.

It may be (with Bolsech, or Aretine) this great Undertaker may snort out his
foam; and be-dirt us with his Reproaches: But if neither he, nor his, might
have a Toleration of all Religions, until they can evince by Dint of Argument,
that they cannot have Communion with our Church, without Sin: so that there is
a Necessity to come out of her, and separate from her; we need not fear, that
our peace and quiet should be disturbed, either by the lowing of the Oxen, on
the one hand; or the braying of the Asses, on the other.

But Sir! Take notice of his Threatners Ingenuity, and Candor. He would make
the world believe, his tongue is tied: He cannot Print his Sentiments, on this
Subject. I am informed, and I dare engage to make it good, That after he had
complained of this Obstruction; and had in many Sheets of Paper, reasoned
against Conformity; he received Answers accordingly, from one of those Persons,
he taxes for toys; and mentions with Scorn. Yet when it was freely offered him,
that the Papers on both Sides might be Printed; that so the world might see,
what he could say, against the Economy of our Church, and our Compliance with
it; then this daring Hector declined his own Motion: and in cold blood,
refused; that his Reasons (such as they were) should see the light: Accusing
him of dishonesty, that should venture to do it; yet, as if he were quite
another man, upon the public Stage, than what he was in the private tiring
Room; He says in his late Book, and to the same effect in a former: Let him
procure us leave, but to publish our Reasons against Conformity: then let him
tell us, that we were better to Conform; when he has answered them. He had
leave: And what Reasons he proposed, have been answered. But you know, the
followers of a baffled Cause, must be animated, and their Spirits supported;
not by what is; or has been done: but by the bold brags of their Leaders, what
they will do for the Future. Just like a Prodigious Coward, that never looks
more fierce with his Eyes, or struggles more violently to assault his
Antagonist; than when the slanders by (who are his best Friends) hold his
hands, and pinnion his Arms. It is a fond Presumption, that Caesar is their
Friend, which puts such Spirit into them. If they once find that he tolerates
them, as God permits Sin; we shall hear no more of their Challenges.

CAP. V.
Private Meetings are not like to Assist, or Promote the Public Ministry.

THis is strange (say they) that Public Ministers, should not allow, and abett
Private Meetings; when both carry on the same Gospel-work. Is there not need of
many hands? and all manner of Help? to advance the Salvation of Souls? Yet many
hands sometimes do mar the work they are about; several Surgeons, do but
inflame the Wound, if they do not agree exactly upon the Ingredients of their
Balsom. And variety of Physicians, do not only protract the Patients Malady,
but endanger his life; If they go several ways. Therefore our Savior gave most
excellent Counsel: That when in the latter days; Men shall say, Here is Christ,
or there is Christ. He is in the wilderness: or in the private houses; Nolite
exire, go not after them. When Joseph, and Mary sought Christ sorrowing; they
found him at last in the Temple. It was never his choice, but necessity, if at
any time he betook himself, into Corners or Private houses. When it was
objected to the Primitive Christians, that they were Latebrosa, and lucifuga
natio, a People Sculking up and down; Origin answers in their behalf -- That
they might thank the Heathen for it, who would not suffer them to meet in
Public. I am sure, our Corner-hunters cannot justly use any such Plea.

In what a dismal Condition is the poor Pilgrim? if he shall not only meet with
Cross-ways, but Cross-guides. Every one may pretend to put him in the rightway,
until they have quite distracted him, by their Directions: As those Suitors in
Plutarch, did all profess a passionate Love for one Maid, yet at last, they
fell to such Contention about her, that they tore her in pieces.

Sir! I am an Absolute Stranger to my self, and false to my Profession; if it
be not my hearty desire, that Israel, I mean, that all the People under my
Charge, may be saved. I Envy no man's Parts, but rather Rejoice; if he be more
dextrous than my self, in Salvation-work. I would even part with a share of my
own Maintenance to such an one, who would come in, and with a single eye, and a
single heart, aim at, and help forward the Good of Souls. Yet I am Jealous over
my People, with a Godly Jealousy. And though I dare not say (with him at Rome)
that I am Sponsus Ecclesiae, an Husband to that part of the Church, which is
committed to my Care and Trust (I leave that Prerogative to Christ himself) yet
I am as careful, that my People do not commit Spiritual Fornication with any
Impostor; as the dearest Husband is tender of his beloved Wife, that she be not
debauched by Adulterous Companions.

When Ministers walk by the same Rule, and maintain one sound form of words, as
it was among the Apostles, and is still, among those that have subscribed the
same Articles of Religion, and the same form of Worship; then they may be
Coadjutors, and lend an helpful hand, one to the other. But as an Ox, and an
Ass, will not Plough well together: nor was it allowed in the Tabernacle, to
have Hangings, and Curtains, of Linsey-Woolsey: So Non. and Con. (which carry
something of Opposition in their very Names) are not like, whilst they continue
so, to build well together. But as it was of old, one will call for Mortar, the
other for Stones; and neither agree where to place them. Nay! One, it may be,
will pull down what the other has set up. If these be Stars, they are not such,
as are in Christ's right hand, but in the Dragon's Tail; like Ignes fatui, they
will only afford so much light, as to show the way into pits, and quagmires.
They may cry up Godliness; but it is without Goodness: And they may be
Christians, but without Christianity.

How Natural is it for Men, to procure fame to themselves, and leave others
under Reproach? Those People, whose Religion seldom descends lower, than the
Head, and the Tongue! And learn no more by a Sermon, than to Censure and Judge
the Preacher, will end all their Devotions, in admiring the one, and despising
the other; or may be, like Scholars of different Masters, may draw out into
Parties, and bandy against each other; so there will be

-- Pila minantia Pilis. It is no Art of Prophecy, to Divine, what will be the
issue: For, As the lowest Virtues draw most Praise, from the Common People: So
says the same Lord Bacon; A few that are stiff in a Faction, will tire out a
greater number, that are more moderate. They have this Advantage too. They are
sure of the People's affectionate Pity: for let the Cause be what it will, they
will always incline to those that are lowermost; and like Sturgeon, they will
swim against the stream; and be weary of those, that are in present Office.
Therefore the violence of Factions, argues the weakness of Princes: For when
they are carried audaciously, it is a sign, that the Reverence of Government is
lost. And then you know what follows. If a Son has parted with his awe toward
his Father, he will pay but little Obedience to him. Therefore our late blessed
Sovereign, gave this Divine Advice to our present Monarch, -- Neither to fear,
nor flatter any Faction: for if ever he stand in need of them, or must stand to
their courtesy, he will be undone. It is to be feared, that these hot, and
busy Factionists, will be no better Friends at last to Magistrates themselves;
than they are to us, and our Ministry. They begin already to Muster up their
Companies, and with David, to number their People. Some of them are Captains of
Thousands; and some are Captains of Hundreds: And there are not those wanting
among them, who are too well acquainted with Military Discipline; as not to
have their Field Officers abroad, to Marshal their whole Body, and to give the
Word. If another General should start up: The Peoples Darling: And Heir to his
own Disappointments; and swelling with his own Discontents. Especially, if he
should weave the Covenant into his Colors; and Ingrave Reformation upon his
Standard. I even Tremble to think what Thunder and Lightning may break out
again from our Clouds. Herrings, they say, when they come in Sholes, may
destroy a whale; And a Town in Thessaly, was undermined with Moles. Small
Distempers in the Body Politic (as well as in the Natural) must be disarmed,
and prevented in time; we read of a Cloud, but of a Span long; the breadth of a
man's hand! yet in a short time, it dyed the whole Heavens black. These are no
Panick Fears, nor Groundless Surmises: for I have heard some of them glory in
their Multitudes; and others gave me no other Reason, of their Riotous
Assemblies; than thereby to Counterpoise the Papists. He spoke like a Royal
Prophet -- That pretensions to Reformation of Religion, are the best and most
Auspicious beginnings, of the worst designs: for the Devil of Rebellion, does
commonly turn himself into an Angel of Reformation.

When the Puritans Petitioned King James, for the like Toleration, and said, --
Many Thousands would be discontented if it was not granted; This was accounted
by the King, and his Council, to tend to Sedition, and Rebellion.

Where is the Good, then, that is to be expected from these Assistants?
Confusion is their Advantage; I had almost said, Their Design. They value not
Kingdoms, when they stand in their way. And if the Cedars are not safe; it is
no wonder, that some of them have said to my face, that had they Liberty, they
would soon Preach us down. Is this the Assistance they will give us? Are they
so purely Spiritual, as to labor for the wind? Is this the way to keep up, and
maintain all their Softnesses? Will they not grudge, if they be not satisfied?
And will not the People murmr, if what they get by their hard Labors, must
be divided into so many Channels, and feed so many mouths, besides their own?

And what? Must the People do nothing but hear? Must there be nothing else but
sowing of Seeds? Nothing but Preaching* In some places four, in some six
Sermons a day. No time for the settling the Seed of the Word in the furrows of
their hearts? for ruminating, and digesting what is heard? Superfoetation is
monstrous in Nature; and the turning all Religion into Hearing, is as if you
should see a man all Belly, or all Ear.

Do these Men grow more than others, in the dimensions of Religion, by their
gadding up and down? I have seen Sheep kept within their bounds, in a Barren
and hard Pasture; yet by resting quietly in their own Limits, they have
gathered Wool, and Flesh upon their Backs; when those that have crept Hedges,
and have gone from one ground to another, have lost their Fleeces, and have
been little better than Carrion; so, many plain honest Countrymen, who live
contentedly under the droppings of that Ministry which God has providentially
set over them, thrive more in real goodness, than these Disputers of this
World; who are hurried up and down, with an Oestrum of Curiosity, and devour
innumerable Sermons; yet at last, are like Pharaoh's lean Kine. They have
passed through so many brakes; that their Consciences are torn, and become as
peeled and Schismatical, as themselves.

The Mothers Milk, is most kindly for the Child* Several Nurses will put the
little one into a disorder, and trouble him with a fret in his Belly. He that
is the Rightful Pastor, the Sheep know his voice; and a Stranger they will not
follow.

This is as true, as Scripture. But where there is one sort of Prayer, in
Private Meetings; Another, in the Public Congregation. One way of Preaching
and Discipline here; Another there. This may puzzle, and distract, it cannot
edify. Charles le Bon, and Charles le Grand, spoke like himself; when he said,
The Company of Ministers obtruded upon him in his Confinement, were more sad,
than his Solitude; for he could not conceive, How they could be proper
Physicians, who had so great an Influence, in occasioning his Calamity, and
inflicting his wounds upon him. May not we say the same? Are they like to be
our Assistants, in promoting the work of Peace? Piety to God? Loyalty to the
King? And mutual kindness toward all Men? who have been so Industrious
formerly in subverting all these; and still continue in the same Sin, without
any open Repentance; who are to this day, thorns in our sides; and keep our
wounds from closing, who buzze the People in their Ears, that our way of
Worship is Superstitious. bordering upon Idolatry: That our Conformity is
absolutely sinful: And that we, are no less, than guilty of Ungodly Oaths, in
Subscribing, and Declaring. Thus they have been as Serpents in our way, and
Adders in our paths, Some of our People, who would seem the only Hasidaei, or
Holy Men in their Age (whom they have not yet thoroughly perverted into
Separation) will out of formality (some are formalists, who would not be
thought so) come to our Sermons. Yet they sit in their Seats, gaping and
yawning (though very attentive formerly) As if they had not slept the Night
before; or rather, as if they were weary of their present station, i. e.
(thought long e're they were in their own Meetinghouse; As I have seen Cows
impatient, until they return to their Calves.

Nestorius the Heretic, was called a Snake; for this very Reason, because he
lurked in Holes to do mischief secretly by his venom, and his sting. The
Donatists also, were called Clancularii; and the Valentinians were compared to
Grasshoppers: In that they sculk'd here and there, and hopp'd up and down to
intoxicate Men, with their sly Enchantments; and keep them from Embracing the
Truth, in the love of it. So it is with our whispering, transcendent
Beau-Clerks; let the Public Minister (if by Mr. Med's leave, that title may be
allowed) be never so Learned, and Pious: never so dextrous, at the Dividing,
and Applying the Word of Truth; yet when they meet with their Partisans, and
Comrades in Separation, they will find out, or invent something concerning his
Person or Doctrine; that they will shake their heads, list up their eyes, bless
themselves, and pity the poor wretch, before they part. It may be, they may
allow him to have some unsanctify'd Wit, or profane Learning: But not one
scrap of Grace. He was never acquainted with the turnings and windings of the
Spirit: A cold formalist; one that may go to School to one of their Heavenly
Teachers. Thus men lose their Judgment, cum res transit in Affectum; when they
are biased with the partiality of their own Passions. But quorsum haec? Why
all this do you think? Why, Just as Absalom complained, That none were deputed
by his Father to do Justice; therefore he wished himself in the Saddle, in the
Throne. O that I was King in Israel! I would do every man Right. They would
Preach like so many Seraphims, if they might ascend our Pulpits; and turn us
again out of our Houses. Therefore it is almost as credible to me, That a Muffti
will assist a Christian Patriarch; That a Jesuit will help a Reformed Priest:
a Lutheran go along with a Calvinist: Nay! a Samaritan, a Jew; James and
Jambres, Moses: As the Leaders and Guides of House-Meetings, will help forward
the peaceable, Regular, Soul-saving design, of such Ministers as are settled in
their Provinces, and Charges by Law: And do conscionably conform to the just
Commands of their Superiors.

This is no wonder; the old Serpent is a Serpent still. He is not
Superannuated; nor has he put off his destroying Policy: As, first to divide
and break the Bond of Unity; And then, to crush the whole Community, by Piece
meal. First, to tempt some to follow low Paul; others Apollo: And then, to take
them off from both. Neither Paul, nor Apollo; not Jesus, but Barabbas. And
thus, Those that make their boast of Religion, are most likely to dishonor
God; by being the chief Pioneers to Undermine it.

CAP. VI.
There is no Necessity of an Indulgence; that there may be Preaching from House
to House.

THere is a Notion flies abroad, -- That Ministers must Preach from house to
house. And if the Public Minister cannot spare so much time from his Studies;
why should others be hindered from so good a work? You may guess from whose
Quiver this Shaft comes, and whither it goes: who were the first Promoters of
it; and upon what Errand, it is set forth; You know the Men, and the design of
their Communication.

Here is a narrow Isthmus, or Bridge to pass over; on the one hand, we must not
strangle the Embrio's of Religious Attempts; or quench the sparks of an
heavenly Zeal; nor seek for subterfuges, either for our negligence, or
idleness, in declining any Ministerial Duty. On the other, we must not make our
selves more work, than ever God injoyns us: lest we should be either guilty of
willworship, in serving God according to our own Inventions: or bring such a
burden upon our Shoulders; which neither we, nor our Fathers were able to
bear. And so, by doing what is least of all required; we may omit what is more
necessary.

Now since those words in the Acts, (...), are the foundation of this
Assertion; And they are looked upon, but as Demi-Ministers, who do not go from
house to house (like a Company of Ale-tasters, or Eaves-Droppers) to pry and
search into all the Corners of their Neighbors houses; I wish, that others
understood the sense of those words; and how they are rendered, by Learned Men,
as well as you. Some say, they are to be understood, of the Bishops
super-inspection, in his Visitation; Others, that from house to house, is meant
the Sea Dr. Cave On Primitive Christianity. Page 127.
Upper Rooms, or Chambers in the Temple, where the Christians met, for fear of
the Jews, to Pray, Preach, and receive the Sacrament; for the same St. Luke
says, -- the Apostles were continually in the Temple, blessing and praising
God. But that we may come nearer yet, to the Malecontented Brethren: who will
be sure to Reproach, and Accuse us, before our People, for going wrong, If we
do not tread in their steps; we can tell them truly, that in some Sense, our
Liturgy, and Canons, do both allow, and enjoin us to Preach from house to house.

If any be Sick, we must visit them; move them to Repentance for Sin: and upon
their Repentance, Absolve them; by virtue of that Authority, which Christ has
bequeathed to us. After Prayers with them, and for them, we stir them up to
Acts of Charity, etc. that so they may with more comfort, commend their Souls
into the hands of God. I hope there is no Conscionable Minister, but he lays
hold of all Overtures, to preserve the Souls of his People, from the Jaws of
Satan; and Rowses up himself, to assist those that are in extremity of bodily
weakness, or lie under the Scruples of a troubled mind. Thus we Preach from
house to house.

It is our business also to reconcile those that are at variance; to confer
with Recusants; And when we have any good Call to any House or Company; we
endeavor to undeceive those that are seduced: To inform the Ignorant: And
Reprove gainsayers. If this be to Preach in Season, and out of Season: or from
house to house: we are ready to acknowledge it our Duty, and to take shame to
our selves, if we come short of it. There are also, many other Cases of
Conscience, which may Incidentally, and occasionally fall in; wherein we are
obliged ever in private, to give what Satisfaction we are able. As also to
discourage, and keenly to check Scandalous Offenders: To Comfort those that are
cast down: To answer pertinent Doubts, and necessary Questions, which may be
proposed unto us.

Suppose the Apostles did practice any other sort of private Preaching: yet,
they have not left any Precept behind them, to bind us thereunto. And who dare
say that we are bound in every thing they did, to follow their Example?
Considering, what they did, was in the first Plantation of the Gospel; and in
days of Persecution. Neither can it, with Reason be imagined, that in those
days, they went into all Houses universally; as into those of the Pharisees,
Sadduces, etc. for then they had been Prodigal, in exposing their Lives;
neither had they leisure so to do, when every one had so large a Diocese, as
several Countries, and Kingdoms to preach in: and so short a time to stay in
them.

He that performs the former Offices faithfully; besides public preaching, and
Catechizing, (if it be lawful to distinguish betwixt these two) provided, he
set off all, and adorn his Doctrine, with an Holy Life; Christ will own him,
as his Ambassador: though, it may be these Capricio's will scarce set him with
the Dogs of their Flocks. Our Savior spoke openly to the World; He ever
taught in the Synagogue and the Temple, whither the Jews Resorted. And in
secret he said nothing. The Apostles also excused themselves, that they no
where raised up the People. But where they could with safety, they Resorted to
the Synagogue.

The old Canons did not allow Clergymen to be too frequently in Towns. Then
they were accounted to be as much out of their Element, as to see a Fish upon
the dry Land; Facile contemnitur clericus; says St. Jerome. That Clergy man
will be soon despised. That makes himself, so cheap, and common, as to go to
every Feast, and place where he is invited. If his lips preserve Knowledge, the
People are to seek the Law at his Mouth. Christ taxes the People, that they
would not come to him. Though, sometimes He was found of them that sought him
not. He that teaches School, does not go to several Houses, where his Scholars
dwell: but thinks he discharges his Duty, if he teach them, when they meet in
the place appointed for them.

If we should go to all Houses, and deal with the People there, in private; how
soon might we wound our Names? and bring a Scandal upon our Persons? Besides
other Reproaches. This would too much resemble false Teachers: who had only a
Form of Godliness, without the Power thereof, who crept into Houses, and led
Captive silly Women. This Practice has been very serviceable, to such as have
made it their Business, to set up for themselves; and to make Parties in the
Church. Great has been this Diana of the Independents, and other Sectaries.
But, we have not so learned Christ. Woe be to us, if we preach not the Gospel
publicly; when we may. Such Assemblies are most for God's Honor: And Woe be to
them, that attend not at the Posts of Wisdom's Temple, when there is no
invincible Impediment to keep them back, and prefer Pest-Houses, before the
Gates of Heaven. You know, who set up an Exercise of Prophesying among
Ministers. This was very plausible in its time; yet afterward there was Cause
to discontinue the same. And if this Preaching from House to House, has ever
been useful to the Church of God; there may be Reason enough now, to forbear
the Practice of it (since it is not of Divine Institution) when so many speak
in the Language of Ashdod, and under this Pretense, may easily Insinuate their
Hetrodoxies, into the minds of weak, but Well-meaning People. Those that are so
minded, may bring in damnable Heresies; and countermine all our Labors, by
this Jesuitical Stratagem: So that we shall weave Penelope's Webb. Besides;
some there are, who will have none of our Divinity. They will even thrust us
out of their Doors; others are poor, and must maintain themselves, and their
Families, by a diligent following of their Callings. And no doubt, but they may
serve God on the Weekdays, as well in their honest and conscionable labors, as
if they should every day hear a Sermon; Therefore to tender our selves, to
interrupt them in their Vocations, by our Preaching unto them in such a Land of
light; under the very Tropic of the Gospel, will either beget in them a
Nauseating of God's Word; or else it will be as unseasonable unto them, as
Singing the Songs of Zion, to those that sit by the waters of Babylon. Every
Master of a Family, is a Priest in his own house. And after we have done our
Duty in the Church; we must leave something for him to do at home; otherwise
(it may be) he may become a Drone; and devolve his whole care upon us. At
least, he will be slack, and sluggish, as to the Public. He will not care to
go to the Market, If others must Cater for him; and bring his Meat to his own
Doors. We our selves also, shall have but little time to study in, if we must
be Domestic Chaplains, to every House within our Precincts. Our Breasts will
quickly be dry, if we do not supply what is exhausted; and give Attendance unto
Reading; as well as to Exhortation. There had need be as many Ministers, as
there were Dii penates, among the Heathen: And the Doctrine of these Men, does
suppose the Lord's Vineyard so furnished with Laborers; that there may be one
allotted to every Tree. A Guardian Angel to every House. But there lurks a
Serpent under these Verdant Leaves. They would set up Preaching from house to
house; either that there may be matter of ostentation, to glory in their
singular diligence; How often have we heard this from the Press? And the Actors
themselves have been the Trumpeters! or else, there are some, who under this
Umbrage, would sow Tares, in the furrows of our Field; and give a vent to their
own Singularities, and Discontents. May we ever give thanks unto God, in the
great Congregation! May Jerusalem be as a City that is at Unity in it self! and
may the Tribes have liberty to go up thither to worship; that so, Those evils,
which the craft and subtilty of the Devil or Man works against us, may be
brought to naught; that we his Servants, being hurt by no Persecutions, may
evermore give thanks in his Holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CAP. VII.
A Toleration of all Religions, is not like to contribute to the welfare of the
King himself.

THe true glory of Princes (said the Royal Martyr) consists in advancing God's
glory, in the maintenance of true Religion, and the Churches Good. And as it is
a Prince's Glory, so it is his Safety and Security to Countenance the truth,
and to discourage Error. When the People chose new Gods, we presently read,
That war was in the Gate. By me (said God) do Kings Reign. And as they Reign,
by his powerful Assignment: so they should Reign, for the glory of his Name,
and the Comfort of his Household, the Church; here they must be Nursing Fathers:
the Guardians of his Spouse: And the Keepers of the first Table, which concerns
Religion toward God; as well as of the second, toward Men. Christ is no
Polygamist. He has not a Wife in every Corner. Unity is an Essential mark of
the true Church. It is a sign of the last times -- to say, Lo! Christ is here:
or lo! he is there. It argues no less, than proud Donatism, to say, the true
Church is in this Conclave, or the other Town Hall; exclusively to other
places. The Papists are not the only Usurpers, and Ingrossers in the World;
consining the Church, within the compass of the seven Hills: Every Sect is
guilty of the same incroachment: And though some of these, are contrary one to
the other; yet every one will lay claim to some kind of Infallibility. They
would be looked upon, as the peculiar Darlings, and chosen People of God;
almost to the dispaleing and Reprobating all the rest. Now, It is the Honor of
Magistrates, first, to discern what is the Catholic and Apostolic Faith; and
then to Shield and defend the same: lest, if they should suffer God to be
Blasphemed, by various, and contrary Modes of Worship; they should not only,
not show themselves to be God's Vicegerents, and Defenders of the Faith; but
provoke his wrath against themselves, for the not keeping up the Mounds of his
Vineyard; I had almost said, for laying it wast. The breaking down the Hedge;
and the not maintaining it, is almost Tantamount. And the Hogs that root up the
Garden, are not more Accessory to the defacing of it; than those that let them
in. Where God's Honor, and the Churches Peace and Unity, are not asserted;
There it will be interpreted little less, than taking counsel against the Lord,
and his Anointed. Qui non vitat peccare, etc. And will any dare to run upon the
thick Bosses of his Buckler? There is a sad Text in the tenth of Hosea. The
Princes of Juda were like to them, that remove the bound. That is, They
neglected the Laws, which were as bounds in matters of Religion. Now it was a
great Sin in the Law, -- to remove the ancient Landmark. Therefore it follows
in that Text -- I will pour out my wrath upon them like water. Josiah, and
Hezekiah; Constantine, and Theodosius, have embalmed their Names to all
Posterity. The former, by beating down Idolatrous Altars, and Groves. The
latter, by encouraging the true Christian Religion, not only against its open
Enemies the Heathen: But defending it too, against the Arrians, and other
dangerous Heretics, who endeavored, in the very bosom of the Church, to eat
out the very Bowels of it.

Those Churches have been most commended, which have been most Zealous for the
Truth, against those that have opposed it. As, the Church of Ephesus -- That
she hated the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans. The Church of Thyatira was
condemned; because she suffered the woman Jezebel, who called her self a
Prophetess, to teach, and seduce his Servants, to commit fornication; that is,
the impure Gnostics. The Lord had also a quarrel with the Church of Pergamus,
that she suffered them that held the Doctrine of Balaam. And if these things be
blameable in Churches; it cannot be for the Honor of the chiefest Magistrates
(who are the Supreme Governors of them) to suffer Jews, and Gentiles;
Barbarians, and Scythians; Parthians, Medes, and Elamites; Papists, Arrians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, to set open their Shops, and expose their
Trinkets, in their Dominions: for though these look several ways; yet they are
moved and carried about, with one and the same Primum Mobile, or Spring of
Confusion. Miserable are the People that are in such a Case. As once it was in
Israel: when every one did that which seemed good in his own Eyes. It showed
the Impotency of Julian, that when he saw, his Cruelty would not abate the Zeal
of the Christians: He gave every one leave to follow his own Religion. This is
not the Case of our Constantine: His Garments are not died with the blood of
his Subjects: nor are our Streets profaned, with the doleful cries of poor
Orphans. But by mildness, clemency, and gentleness; both he, and his
Subordinate Officers, had made such a Conquest upon the hearts of the People;
that even by the Cords of love, they were drawn into an happy Harmony: except
some few Obdurate Caitiffs; who can only be melted, and softened by an hotter
Element. But alas! There comes an unlucky wind out of the wilderness, which on
a sudden blasts all our Hopes: and throws all our Doors from off their Hinges.
All the Bars of our Gates are broken. Come Foxes! Come Leopards! Here Is a free,
and open passage; we shall be an easy prey; who will, may sport themselves in
our gore; and lay wast our pleasant Plants.

Although our Laws, were almost asleep before this Hurricano came; yet the very
Image, and Picture of them, did fright away the Birds of Prey: The Woolf durst
not Approach our Folds, so long as there was but the Resemblance of a
Mastiffe-Dog: But now these Terriculamenta, these Scare-crows, being taken
away, the Laws being fallen into a Swoon, I had almost said, the Laws being
extinct; the Frogs Croak up and down, in every corner. I hope they will never
be so impudent and saucy, as those were in Pharaoh's days; to hop, or dance
their Hays in Kings Chambers.

By this, you will easily see, that this Indulgence is not the way, to procure
God's blessed favor upon Magistrates, and their Government; nor does it tend
to their safety: for though these Dissenters seem to be Innocent harmless
Creatures; without either Tushes, or Talons; yet they have rooted and ayowed
Principles in them, against the Grandeur and Majesty (if not) the very Being of
Kings; and though they fawn at present, and bless God, who has put such a
thing as this, into the heart of the King: and are ready to say, -- They have a
greater share in David, than we; Yet, let but a warm gleam ripen them into
Maturity: let their Fangs, and Sampson's- Locks grow out again, or let them be
crossed in their darling Dalilah; by brideling them up from then beloved
liberty, and then, will they not lift up their heels? or Curse him to his Face?
Looking backward, in this Case will be looking forward: And History, will be
downright Prophecy.

Pelle sub agnina, latitat men's saepe lupina. You Remember, that when the late
King Declared, That the Right (according to Law) was in him, to Arrah his
Subjects for the Defense of his Person, and Government: And accordingly He did
Commissionate many worthy Persons, to put the same in Execution; that not one
of these Dissenters would Comply with that Declaration. When also He Prohibited
any to take the Covenant, by his Royal Proclamation; Do you call to mind any
one of these new Royalists, that did obey it? But now there comes out a
Declaration (Mouth-meet) which throws the Reins upon their own Necks; and
permits them (like unbroken Colts) to go whither they will: and now, who better
Subjects than they? What? Not obey the King's Declaration? It is their Duty. So
that should the King rule by Edicts, as our Stories tell us His Predecessors
have done, before the Reign of Henry the First, who began the Foundation of
Parliaments; these men are like to be his most sequacious, and obsequious
Followers: Ready fixed; to make him an Absolute, and Glorious Prince. Some, it
may be, will be ready to add, Yes; as they did his Father before him: For I
much fear, That if it should please His Sacred Majesty, to set forth another
Declaration, (to try the temper of their Obedience) to Reinforce the Laws,
concerning Episcopacy, and the Liturgy; that these Men would not then obey the
same, for Conscience sake.

It is strange to see, what queazy Stomachs these men have; one Morsel, which
is Cooked to their Palats, they will swallow without chewing: And at another,
which is every whit as wholesome; they will sputter, as if it were Poison. Mr.
Baxter himself has had Experience of this Inconstancy.

If he call upon them to Confederate, and associate themselves in Private
Meetings, they say, he is returned to his first love, and his old Principles:
But if he tell them of his receiving the Sacrament on his Knees, and call on
them to stand up at the Hymns in the Common Prayers; then they say he is an
Apostate.

It may be, this Indulgence (like a thick Gobbet) may stop their mouths at
present. The King may sleep securely for a time; whilst Jacob and Esau are
struggling in the Womb; whilst York, and Lancaster are in Aequilibrio; poised
in an even Balance: But alas! this would be but a serene Calm before a
Tempest: The drinking a Cup of Wine, before a Feverish Fit; or a lightning
before Death: for whoever, either by Power, or Policy, can get ground of his
Fellows, and leave them in the Valley; will be sure to show their predominant
Power, not only to their Competitors, but to the Government it self. It has
been a fallacy, which some have put upon themselves; that pity and gentleness
will indear, and oblige these Dissenters: But he that calls to mind, how dear
one Prince has paid already, for his lenity to them; may have a Clew, wherewith
to extricate himself out of that Error; and may also undeceive others. It is
pity that Kindness (as we say of fair Weather) should do harm. But as Panthers
are choked with Perfume; so Mercy it self degenerates into Cruelty, and
sometimes brings Ruin after it.

St. Austin confesses, it was once his Judgment, That no Compulsion should be
used in matters of Religion. Yet he lived to see his great mistake: For he
found by Experience, that by punishing one Offender; who was Refractory, and
turbulent in his Diocese; He did more good, than by all his wooing Orations.
Such Libertines, are like Birds put into a Cage. They flutter at first; but
when they see themselves cooped up, they will struggle no longer, to get into the
open Air; roosting quietly in their narrow Confinement.

I have not wondered a little, to read some of their Books, wherein they
complain Tragically of Prisons and Gaols. Three Persons are named, who have
suffered in this kind, for their Disobedience, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Baxter, and Dr.
Manton. But if we would go about to requite them with our Arithmetic, we could
reckon for every one of them an Hundred, who were (in the time of their
Tyranny) clapped under Shipboard, or strarv'd. But what did those three men lose
by their Imprisonment? What Ignatius said of his Fetters; He looked upon every
link, as made of precious Stones: So may these men glory, in their golden
Chains. Some of them got more by a Weeks Imprisonment, than we get by Preaching
a whole year; so that a Gaol was as beneficial to them, as a Bishop's Palace;
and to Confine them, was to set a Fine upon the Heads of the Zealous Citizens.
Those that know the Idiotism, or proper language of these times, can tell, that
by doing of good works, is understood, Liberality to Dissenting Ministers. I
condemn no man's Charity; yet I should be loath to be an Object of theirs.
Therefore, may our tranquillity be lengthened; and the King's Throne
Established in Righteousness! by the due Execution of Laws; which are both our
Birthright, and Security; lest we be constrained at last to beg in vain for
that Indulgence, which they now Enjoy.

The neglect of a speedy Reforming, and effectual Suppressing of Errors, and
Schisms, will both encourage, and increase them: for though at first they may
seem like that Cloud in Scripture, of an hand breadth: yet by Seditious
Spirits, they will soon be blown up into so large Dimensions, that they will
darken the whole Heaven. It has been accounted a great oversight in Q.
Elizabeth of Blessed Memory; that she gave too much liberty to Foreign Divines,
to Preach in London, and other places, until they had leavened the minds of her
Subjects, with prejudice against her own Government; and had almost introduced
the Platform of Calvin into the room of it.

The smell of those mistaken flames of Charity are upon us, until this day. So
many Iliads of mischief are contained in the little compass of an unseasonable
Connivence. It does not only Ruin Churches, but Princes too. As Impunity is the
Mother of Impiety toward God: So, tolerated Libertines, will quickly profane
the Hallowed Di^dems of Kings. -- They are all hot as an Oven, and have
devoured their Judges: All their Kings are fallen, Hosea 7. 7. Habent hoc
Proprium Calvinistae, ut statum, in quem irrepserunt, evertant: neque ante ipsi
Conquiescant, quam rerum potiuntur.

These men nibble already, at the very root of the Royal Cedar, By telling the
King's Subjects in Print, -- That they are not obliged in Conscience to obey
Magistrates, and their Laws. An ill requital sure for the King's gracious
Indulgence. What? Do you thus requite the King? O Ungrateful and unkind! If
Conscience be once debauched, with such Principles as these; the Throne will
lose its principal Pillar; and the King will find himself weakened, by these
treacherous Priests, and undermining Popelings, who go about to Absolve his
People from the very Ligaments, and Sinews of their Obedience, which is never
more genuine, generous, and lasting. than when it is for Conscience sake. This
is all one, as to tell the King to his face, that it is his safest course to
guard himself with the Power of Arms: For if ever he be so unhappy, as to take
a measure of their Consciences, they will make no more scruple to Dethrone him,
than they did to Depose his Father. Men without Conscience, are like
Mastiff-Dogs, when they grow mad; or Lions (which have been tamed) when they
recover their natural fierceness: They shake off all awe to their Masters, and
Keepers; neither will they boggle at taring them into Pieces. How turbulent
these Men are, when they are let loose, may easily be gathered from some few
smattering Dissenters, of this kind, in our own Parishes; who are errant
Firebrands, where they live. There is not a Difference betwixt Neighbors, but
they are at one end of it; blowing up and inflaming Contentions, by their
Whispers and Nods; and by their Pragmatical Intruding into other Men's matters:
As if they were injured, if they are not looked upon; as the only Competent
Judges, and Umpires of all Contests; where any place is blessed; with sound
peace, and quietness; there these Men are un-elemented: They starve, and pine
away; unless they can make, what they do not find. And since one or two of
these Innovators, are so pregnant with quarrels, in our narrow Precincts; what
Earthquakes? what a Conflagration? will these vapors, these sparks raise? when
they are encouraged to Conglomerate, and to Unite their Forces, in the Bowels
of a Church or Kingdom. There is a Tradition of some Parliament Men; when it
was disputed, whether Priests should Marry. They cried out, yes! by all means.
It was better they should have Wives of their own; than be too busy (as they
had been) with other Men's. So, It were better, these Dissenting Brethren had
Diocesses of their own; than that they should be such busy Incendiaries, in
other Men's Bishoprics. If they say, Nolumus Episcopare; It is, because they
desire to be Archbishops; I had almost said Popes, and Overseers of the whole
Church.

CAP. VIII.
A Toleration does not tend to the Happiness of the Kingdom.

HE that has time to Ransack Stories, will find how fatal, small, and
inconsiderable Meetings have been, to the downfall of States, and Kingdoms:
either in letting in a Foreign, and professed Enemy; as it was in that
Conventicle met together in the Trojan Horse: or by mastering, and bringing
under the Governors of them, by devilish Contrivances. Who knows not? that
the Gunpowder-Treason was hatched in a Conventicle? And that Holy League in
France derives its Pedigree from the same Original. Therefore to prevent such
Assemblies, our wise and jealous Conqueror, caused the Corfeu bell to be rung;
which was to give warning, to break up all Meetings, by the covering of the
Fire, and putting out of Candles. I know it will be said, These Meetings were
upon a Civil Account, to contrive Plots and Designs against the State, and such
are unlawful still: But these Meetings now, are for the Worship of God, in a
way of Religion.

Now this is a distinction without a difference. The members of it are
Co-incident, against the Rules of Logic. For there are seldom any Meetings
upon pretense of Religion (except in times of Persecution) but they degenerate
at last into Shops of Sedition: That which is cried up at first for the
exercise of pure Religion, will at last send forth the dreggs of
State-Confusion. Let us alone, say they, to serve our God; we desire no more.
This is the Voice of Jacob: but e're long, you shall see the Hands of Esau,
red, and bloody. When Mr. N. (like another Cataline) began to Associate his
Friends together, in a Religious Meeting. (if it be not a Barbarism, to call
Hell it self by so excellent a Name) some diligent Observers will tell you,
that it was not long after, but Swords were drawn in this Kingdom, in an
unnatural War; when vapors begin together and to Cnndense into a cloud, though
but a little one, it portends a Storm: It may be, it may end in Thunder and
Lightning. And you well know who it was (in the Wane of Rebellion, and in the
declining days of Usurpation) that gathered a Church out of the Officers of the
Army: And this Comet did presage the downfall of that Pageant, who was acting
his Part, and Personating a little Infant King, upon a Royal Stage; or rather,
he had drawn the Curtain, entered the Scene, and e're he had made his Legs, and
passed his Complements (like a Meteor, or Jack-a-Lent) he disappears, and
vanishes. It was but just; that as that Bloody Tragedy began, so it should end
in a Conventicle.

Sir! If you have time, to resolve into their first Principles, The Sicilian
Vespers, and the Insurrection of John of Leyden. I say, If you trace them back
to the Spring head, from whence they flowed: you shall find them all hatched in
Conventicles, gathered upon pretense of Religion. So that, when I consider this
present Indulgence, I have great hopes, that our wise and gracious Sovereign,
by the Relaxing of the Laws for a time; and by the Confusions, that follow
thereupon; does but make it appear, by a visible demonstration, how necessary
it is to hold a straiter Rain in the Government of the Church for the future;
As the Lacedaemonians suffered their Servants to be Drunk, that their Children
might see the Ugliness of that Excess: And the Persians (after the Death of
their Kings) suffered a perfect Anarchy for five days; that this confused
Interregnum might make the People more in love with Government afterward.

It is the great Policy of that Circumcised Infidel, the Grand Signior, that he
by the greatest Circumspection, keeps out any such Indulgence out of his
Empire; nor will he suffer this Sinon to come within his Walls: whereby he does
not only preserve what he has gotten, but does still enlarge his Territories.
Therefore, he will not suffer his Religion to be blended with any (though of
the Persians) how near soever it may be to his own. The Romanists too, by their
Inquisition, begin to be like those Mahumetans. The Children of this world, are
wise in their Generation, to maintain their Notorious Errors: How much more
should we be wise in guarding the Truth?

But if what has been said, will not enforce the veracity of the Thesis -- That
a Universal Indulgence, does not tend to the Happiness of the Kingdom, cast
your eyes abroad, into other Nations. Poland, and Holland. It is too far to
send you to Jerusalem, for a miserable President of Religious Madness. These
nearer home, have been branded for harboring all Religions. So that it has
been a Proverb -- If any man has lost his Religion, He may find it in Craconia,
or Amsterdam. And have not these People been visited for this? You have heard
of the sad Alarm against Poland. The Lion is roused out of his Thicket, the
Destroyer is on his way. Nay! He has made a bloody Progress. Be wise now
therefore, O ye Kings; Be careful to compose your quarrels, and keep Schism out
of your Territories, O ye Judges of the Christian part of the World! And as the
Turk is the Rod of God's anger against the one; so are the French against the
other: Who can tell, but that their Miscellaneous Hotchpotch of Religion, to
the dishonor of their Maker, has pulled down these signal Judgments upon their
Heads? I know, some will point at another Cause of these Miseries; and that is
Rebellion. I will not contend with them; nor have they any reason to dissent
from me: If they consider, that Schism, and variety of Religion, is either the
Mother, or the Daughter of Rebellion. When Princes have a mind to take their
Ease, and their Pleasure; and that they may do so the better, they give their
Subjects leave to do so too, by doing what they list; they do but set them a
work to gather sticks, to set their Palaces in a flame.

There is not much difference, whether we Blaspheme God in our own Persons; or
suffer others to do it, when we have Power to hinder it. Those that worshipped
the true God, and permitted Idolatry, are said in Scripture, not to fear God,
or serve him at all.

When an House and Kingdom are divided against themselves, they cannot stand.
And are there any Divisions so bitter? and so destructive? as those that arise
from Religion.

Therefore as it was with the Image in Daniel's Vision, it moultred down, and
shattered apieces; because it was part of Gold; part of Brass, part of Iron,
and part of Clay: So, that Church must needs come tumbling down, which is part
for Christ, and part for Belial. The farther we go from Unity, the nearer we
come, either to Nullity, or Desolation. And therefore the Philosopher thought
the Heavenly Bodies to be incorruptible, and eternal a part post; because they
were a pure Quintessence, free from the dreggs of mixture; and such contrary
qualities, which incline other Bodies to Corruption. If there be any thing will
make a Kingdom Immortal, and keep it from a Palsy of shaking Tumults, it is a
Uniform Harmony in Religion; which is the very Vital Spirits, and Soul of the
State.

That good man, Mr. Ball, has left it upon Record, where there is a voluntary
separation, from the Lords Table, and Prayers of the Congregation, there is a
willing Excommunicating our selves from the visible tokens of the Lord's
presence. Now, one of your young Sophisters, will easily Infer. If in God's
presence there is fullness of Joy: where this is withdrawn from any Nation,
there must needs be the fullness of misery. As Darkness follows, upon the
Removal of the Sunbeams.

Some will say, -- This Toleration will Advance the Trade, and Interest of the
Nation. Sir! I heartily wish for the prosperity, and Wealth of my Country. May
our Corn, and Wine; our Wool, and Flax Increase! And may our Merchants become
Nobles, like those of Tyrus!

India mittat Ebur! Mittant sua thura Sabaei. Yet those Riches will bring a
Curse, a Firecoal along with them; which are gotten with the loss of Piety, and
Holiness. What Advantage will it be, to be rich in the World, and poor toward
God? To have a fat Carcass; but a Meagre, and lean Soul? To defend the
Outworks, and lose the main Fort? To get Mammon, and to part with Religion?

CAP. IX.
A Universal Indulgence is most likely to end in Popery, or Atheism.

NOw we are come to the Mare Mortuum; whither all these Rivulets, and
multiplicity of Religions, are by their several winding, bending their Course;
either they will carry us beyond the River Tyber; from whence we have been
brought by a good hand of Providence, under the Conduct of Pious Princes. They
will Reduce, and bring us back to the Roman yoke: Immerse us in this Lerna of
Vncatholick Innovations, and Superstitious Inventions of Popish will worship.
As the just scandal, which Luther took at Popish Indulgences, brought him off
from that Church: So, this Indulgence now on foot; if not timely controlled, is
likely to decoy many into the Church of Rome again: Or else they will bring us
into a cursed Indifferency, whether we have any Religion at all: Methinks I see
the Atheist, and the Papist holding out their necks, and gapeing for a prey: As
if they would swallow up our Reformed Religion, at one Morsel. And were it not
that there are many faithful Daniels in the Land, who prayed the King formerly
into his Throne; and now are wrestling with Heaven in his, and our behalf: I
should much fear, that our whole Land, would become a great Cage for these
unclean Birds; and that these Dragons would devour the woman, and her Child;
and Adulterate, or quite overturn all the true Worship of God, in the midst of
us.

I know the Devoto's of our Age will startle at this: What? They open the
Floodgates to let in Atheism? who stand up so much for Godliness: or, Are they
like to bring in Popery? who have lifted up their Hands, and Covenanted against
it. True: But did not Peter Vow and swear as heartily as they, That He would
not deny his Master? yet our Savior saw what was in his heart. Did not they
Covenant too, to preserve the late King in his Person, and Honor? But they
never intended to make it good; nor to move a Hand or a Tongue in his behalf.

Did not Hazael seem to abhor the ripping up of Women with Child? yet you know
what followed. If Orpah will forsake Naomi; She will return to her People, and
to her God. And if these Dissenters will renounce our Reformed Church, and lay
their loins upon it, to break it into Shivers; they will at last (when they
have wearied themselves in their own Mills) endeavor to fix the Plants of
their Feet upon some Ararat, or other. Sure, they will desire to live and dye
in some Church; or in a Communion, among some People, professing some Religion;
with Balaam, They will desire to dye the death of the Righteous. Otherwise they
must declare, as too many do already, (I will not say through their means) that
they are a People without God in the world. What Music? What Triumphs are we
preparing for new Rome? how can we gratify the Pseudo-Catholicks more, than by
pulling down the Pale of our English Church? It is this, which stands in their
way. Take this Rampart down, and the Pope will hope to recover his old
Revenues; which have formerly exceeded those of the Crown: The Priests and
Jesuits will be contriving to set up Mass in our Churches, and to domineer in
our Pulpits. And some Bonners (it may be) if we cannot outrun their Rage, will
be thinking of making Bonfires again with our Bodies; our Dissenters, all this
while, are like Gallio -- They care not for these things. They go on with a
Munsterfury, in their separate Meetings; pulling and rending the very Bowels of
their Mother asunder; As if (like Nero) they could never be sufficiently
revenged of Her that gave them life, and dandled them on her Knees. I know,
they will wipe their mouths, and deny the Conclusion; though they lay down the
Premises. They will not see what Confusion they are bringing in upon us.
Although it is as easy to be discerned (without a Spirit of Prophecy) upon
their proceedings; as it is to discover a Lunary Eclipse, upon the foresight of
the Interposition of the Earth, betwixt the Sun, and the Moon. It may be; when
with Sampson, they have pulled down our Gates, and Pillars; and lie scrawling
together with us, in the rubbish; they may then whisper us in our Ears, -- We
never thought, that this would have been the effect of our Schismatical,
dividing Principles and Practices. At present they bear themselves up, against
all hazards; and disbelieve all plain Predictions; as if they should still
enjoy Peace, and Prosperity; though they walk in the ways of their hearts, and
in the sight of their own eyes; because their followers are so many: There are
such swarms of Dissenters in all places, enough to outface all the Power of
Rome.

It is true: They grow into vast numbers, in most places: But Xerxes, and the
King of Assyria were not therefore Victorious, because their Armies were very
numerous: Mazzanello, and John of Leyden, were mere Squibs, and Pop-Guns;
though attended with an innumerable Rout of followers. So these Dissenters, not
marching under the Banner of God's Church, will find themselves to be like a
Land-flood. They may roar and swell for a time; and like those Locusts in the
Revelation, they may have Power to do hurt for some Months; but they will soon
shrink within their Banks, and become a contemptible Adversary to those that
are wedged, and united into one Body; and with Marius, do always march in rank
and file. Those Veterans of Rome, have espied their nakedness; how that they
are a loose multitude; not cemented together with any Principles; and therefore
will soon be scattered like a Flock of Sheep, when their Eagles come once
amongst them. Hence it is, that most of them use that liberty, which is
afforded to them, calmly and (to give them their due) modestly: when our
Furioso's do even run themselves out of breath; until they lose their way, and
themselves: For they know, that by keeping their Stations, and standing their
ground, they shall break all the proud waves of their giddy Opponents, and
quench their wildfire. These deluded wretches are going so fast toward Rome;
that Rome may save her self the labor of moving one foot toward them. The
time was; these Men were full of Jealousies, and Fears. They dreaded a Pope in
every bush. They were afraid, where no fear was, but now they are foolhardy,
and rush into the Pope's Conclave, without either fear or wit.

Sir! I must now pause a little; and fetch my breath very deep. My heart has
been sad and heavy, as lead, all the time I have been writing unto you. But
now, my Spirits have such a damp upon them, that I can scarce form another
Letter.

It was my great Joy -- to see the face of a Church to Return, together with
the King. And though I had but little to leave behind me; yet it was my
Comfort, that my Posterity was like to Inherit a pure Religion, in the best
Church of the World. This was the richest Portion, I had to Bequeath unto my
surviving Family. But when I come now to look about me, there is such a Change,
so many Undutiful Daughters sprung up, that are ready to pull out the Eyes of
their Mother. The poor wafaring Church is fluctuating betwixt wind and water;
and struggling for life; and the Ravens are ready to devour her. So that I
cannot promise my self the Enjoyment of that happiness, which once I hoped to
transmit to those that were to come after. These pensive and melancholy
thoughts and fears, are very much inhanc't, when I consider the Confusions of
Holland: A place much famed for Integrity of Religion, and a Sanctuary for the
Distressed; yet the Inhabitants hereof, have so long encouraged all Religions,
until at last, they have scarce any at all. Profit is become their Godliness;
and Gain is their Idol. And because they did not receive the love of the Truth;
but prostituted this Virgin to be adulterated by every Sect; God first gave
them over to strong Delusions; and then made them a prey to the teeth of their
Enemies. So that, what Religion is like to be Predominant; or whether any at
all, Time only will show.

It is observed, that before the late Rebellion in Ireland; there was an
Indulgence of Religion; at least, by way of Connivence. The Priests and Jesuits
had liberty, without control, to exercise their Religion: and presently after,
we heard the Tragical News, that no fewer than an Hundred and fifty Thousand
were murdered. The Present State of Ireland, p. 134, 135, etc.

When Julian went about to bring in Heathenism, he first scoffed at the
Christians in general: And then he derided the Priests and Preachers amongst
them, as a Company of Dotards, and such as taught the People Old Women's Fables.
He well knew, that the slighting of the Priesthood, and bringing it into
contempt; by levelling and laying it common with the Laity; was the most
Compendious way, to overturn all Religion.

Never were there a People so destitute of Reason, but they owned some God; And
then it followed of course, that some Priests were to be maintained, to assist
the People in the Service of that God. And it has been the special Honor of
Kings, to defend and countenance these in their work. One that was much versed
in the Antiquities of the Jews; tells us, That whilst Solomon was ascending
those six Steps, which led to his Throne; the Herald cried aloud, -- Meddle
not with the Priests Office. How things go with us, in this kind I need not
tell you. If we have been accessory to this contempt, which is cast upon us by
our Idleness, Pride, Earthliness, may we Reform, or else, may we be cast forth
as Salt; which has lost its savor, and let better be put into our places, that
so the Church may not suffer for our sakes. I know your Sentiments do jump with
this Prayer; for you have often said, -- That no men do more resemble the
Prince of Darkness, than debauched, and unworthy Clergymen. Yet I think it is
a Problem, which will puzzle you to tell, which are most dangerous to the
Church. Those that stand up for Loyalty to the King, and Regularity in the
Church, yet stain both, by their loose and irregular lives; or those that
transform themselves into so many Angels of light: Cry up Religion and Purity
of Worship; yet affront and wound the Church by their Spiritual Pride, and
stubbornness, in not yielding to her just Commands. When St. Paul wrote to
Timothy, to flee youthful Lusts; it is thought, he did not mean those of the
lower, and sensual Appetite as Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. for he was called
upon to Drink some Wine, but wantoness in the understanding: Pragmatical, and
Hotheaded Courses. How happy would it be, If there were a (...): If all
Members out of Joint, those and these were rightly set, and rectified? If all
the Ministers of the Gospel, did (...), make strait steps, without declining to
profane looseness on the one hand; or factious unpeaceableness on the other.
Then we might hope to see our Church to flourish like the Garden of Eden; when
such Cherubims shall be the Keepers of it. Then we need not fear (Auspice
Christo, Auspice Carolo) that either Atheists, or Papists shall lay it wast.

But it is time to check my sliding Pen; when I have first begged your Pardon,
for my interrupting your more weighty Studies with so Prolix, and tedious a
Discourse. You may well guess by the bulk of it, that it comes out of the
Country; for we are so accustomed to beat our plate thin; by dilating,
mincing, and enlarging our Sermons, that they may suit with the Capacity of our
People; that we forget our Laconick strain, to say much in a little; even when
we write to our betters. I look not for a Requital from you, in length. If at
your leisure, you vouchsafe me some few Lines by way of Return (provided you do
not chide me for my Country Rudeness) it will be very comfortable in these
days of Desolation: And nothing can be more welcome, in this Solitude of a
Country Retirement, To him that is Ambitious to be

Your Devoted Friend and Servant.
Aut transeamus ad illa instituta, si potiora sint: aut nova Cupientibus
auferatur dux, and Author. Vt imperium evertant, Libertatem praeferunt: si
perverterint; libertatem ipsam aggredientur.

Tacitus. I infer this Conclusion, in despite of all black Devils, and white
Devils; Heretics, and Hypocrites; That the Reformed, and Conformed Protestants,
in the Church of England, do justly Condemn both Papists and Puritans, as
Upstarts, and Novelists; in removing the most ancient Bounds of our Forefathers.

Concerning Schismatics, and Separatists; they be worthily surnamed Novelists.
For their Platform of Government, is a new Device which no Fathers ever
witnessed; no Councels ever favored, no Church ever followed; until within
these few years, it was unhappily dug out of the Alps. Therefore they that
forsake the Church of England, to Suck the Breasts of Rome, or Amsterdam, may
cry with Naomi, -- I went out full, but the Lord has caused me to Return
empty. Dr. Boys in his Remains, p. 152, 153. 166, 167.

Nulla periculosiora vitia, quam quae virtutem imitantur: Nam praeterquam quod
bonis etiam lubricus in ea lapsus est, nulla difficilius corriguntur, propterea
quod vulgus imperitum, Religionem violari credit, dum istiusmodi
Reprehenduntur. Reclamet ilico mundus, and oblatrent clamosi quidam
Concionatores, qui ista libenter intus Canunt; non ad Christum, sed ad suum
compendium respicientes.

Erasmus Enchirid. p. 101. Eccles. 8. 11. Because Sentence against an evil act
is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set
in them to do evil.

If any Presbyter set light by his Bishop, and set up Separate Meetings, He
shall be deposed; and the People Communicating, shall be excommunicated.
Apostol. Can. 31. Conc. Antioch. Can. 5. The same is affirmed by the Synod of
Illibeus, and Counc. of Gangra.



A LETTER To a MINISTER in LONDON, From a MINISTER in the COUNTRY*
Good Brother!
I Want such a Friend as your Self, in these Times; into whose Bosom I might
empty and impart my Pensive Thoughts; and so give ease to my Troubled Mind: And
also enjoy the Balsom of your Counsel, for the healing of my wounded Spirit. My
Ears are not only grated upon, and filled with the Din of a Discontented World:
but my very Heart throbs, and Palpitates in my Breast, when I consider the
Divisions of our Reuben. It is not long since we sang the Songs of Zion: our
Mouths were filled with Laughter, and our Hearts with Joy: when after a long,
and wearisom Night; the Sun brake forth in our Hemisphere, and cheered our
Drooping Spirits: Our Rightful Prince, came leaping over all the Mountains,
that were in his way. And under the shadow of this Cedar* we have sat safe and
quiet ever since. That which sweetened the Mercy, was this; It was bestowed by
way of Answer to our Prayers: After many frustraneous Contrivances,
Combinations; and Attempts of our own. We gave Heaven no Rest, either day, or
night; until He, by whom Kings Reign; gave us our Rulers as at the first, and
our Governors as in Ancient days. But as if (with Aaron and Hur) we had let
down our hands; and intermitted those Devotions which must Contribute to the
continuing, and preserving of Mercies, as well as Influence the procuring of
them; we are again surrounded with Affrightments. The Clouds gather, and the
shadows are stretching themselves over us; as if there were a Storm; and
another Eclipse of the Sun approaching. The Archers are fitting their Arrows in
their Quivers; Nay! upon their Strings; as if they had some Game in view; some
signal Mark to aim at: Neither great, nor small; but the King of Israel. All
this while we stand amazed, and cannot tell out of what Coast this Storm may
arise; or from whence this shower of Artillery may assault us: Like men devoted
to fall a Sacrifice; yet we know not whose hands may be imbrued in our Blood.
All Parties are lowing after their Calves; and are ready to Gore those that
meddle with them, or stand in their way. Of old, we read but of two in all
Israel: But now Calves have gender'd, and brought forth a numerous Generation.
There Is scarce a great Town, where there are not whole Droves and Herds of
them. They leap, and Sport, and take their Pastime (like Leviathan in the
Waters) without Control. None so fierce that dare stir them up; who is able to
stand before them? They esteem Iron as Straw, and Brass as rotten Wood: Darts
are counted as stubble; they laugh at the shaking of a Spear. At their first
appearing in the World, their Pens were at a considerable distance one from the
other: Dan, and Bethel; but now they couch so near together, that they are
almost Contiguous. And as Herrings when they meet in Sholes; they do not only
threaten, but endanger the tallest Ships; so the Adorers of these Calves,
combining together; and swelling into a Prodigious Bulk; do even threaten the
downfall of Church and State; though rooted in Adamant: Joab himself would be
confounded; if he were to Number these People. You see how Sparks neglected may
grow into a Flame, and a Flame not extinguished in time, may become a
Conflagration. Then it will be too late to say, -- We thought Calves had been
so far from having Horns -- that they had been harmless and innocent Creatures,
so that Children may even play upon the holes of these Asps. The Lacedaemonians
in their Commonwealth, and the Chinese to this day, will not permit Strangers
to continue in their Cities above three Days; lest their People should learn
any Manners, or Customs which might Adulterate, or Subvert those of their own
growth. It is Death among the Turks to do any thing openly; whereby the
Religion Professed among them, may seem to be slighted or contradicted. And
Porcius Cato told the Romans in a set Speech -- How careful their Ancestors had
been; that no external Rites of Worship; or Sacrifices of other Countries
should creep in; and incroach upon their City. This made it, and them so
formidable unto their Enemies. It may be hereafter scanned by Sober Politicians
-- whether Mercury, or Prudence was the Ascendant in this Nation, when
Thistles, and Nettles were suffered to multiply, and grow to that height --
that they threaten all the Flowers in the Garden: either to choke or over top
them. The poor Husbandman weeds out the Tares and Darnel out of his Field, lest
they should rob his Corn of that Sap which should feed it; or twist about it
with Mortal embraces; until they humble, and level it with the Earth: Who would
nourish a Viper in his Bosom, until he come to that strength and vigor, that
it is able to sting him to the very heart? Governors, even of private Societies,
and Houses, are commonly jealous of any Encroachments; that may undermine their
Power, or confront their Authority. Now he is an errant Stranger in our Israel,
that sees not how several Parties swell and increase every day; and all Combine
against the Powers that are. Where one Man speaks the Language of Canaan: what
savours of Loyalty and Obedience to his Prince: what tends to the Peace and
welfare of the Church. There Is twenty speak the Dialect of Ashdod; what smells
of Nitre and Sulphur, Discontent, and Confusion. And what they do not express
in Articulate Sounds; they make out in Nods, and Whispers. A naughty Man
winketh with his Eyes, and speaks with his Feet.

Some think the Blow we fear, will come from Rome. And indeed that City was
founded in Blood: Her very Walls were cemented with the same. And since it
became Christian; how have the Streets thereof been filled with Blood, from one
end to the other, in the several Persecutions? Jerusalem it self, in the days
of Titus, can scarce Parallel those Tragoedies. Nay! Since the Roman Eagle, has
given place to the Cross: And the Bishop has supplanted the Emperor: How easy
would it be in each Country, where the Pope's Horse has set his foot, to find
out whole streams of Blood? This Beast has still the same Instruments of
Cruelty; though she hide them (as the Viper her Teeth) yet when any Game is
started, that is fit for her prey, then her fangs do appear. Blood is as
natural to this Woman, as it is to a young Lion, or a young Eagle; She loves to
dabble in gore; until, as St. John says, -- she be drunk with the blood of
Saints and Martyrs. Yet who can conceive that any should be so fond of Slavery,
as to return into this Babylon? so Ambitious to hold the Pope's Stirrup; and
lay his Neck under his insulting feet; that he should be accessory to promote
his own Bondage? to bring his Person, -- Conscience, -- and Estate under the
Harrows of this Usurping Tyrant? to make the Land of his Nativity, Tributary to
a foreign Power; by becoming (as Egypt once was) the Granary of Rome?

Others fear a Storm from France. The Clouds gather that way: But maugre all
the Pride and Power of that growing Monarchy, we may be safe under the
Protection of the Almighty, and the Conduct of our National Prince; if we were
as a City that is at Unity in it self: more Zealous in the Service of that God,
who dwells on high, and laugh's those to scorn -- that think to trample on
their Neighbors, by virtue of their own brawny flesh; without any Commission
from himself; and to lead into Captivity those that desire to be quiet in their
own Land. If ever we fall by a foreign Enemy; we shall be accessory to our own
Ruin: either betraying our selves by our own Sins; and so forfeiting God's
blessed Providence, which has been so long a wall about us: or by some
Persidious Sinons among our selves -- that shall open our Gates to our open
Adversaries. If we could Reduce and Unite our roving and distracted Affections
into one Point: gather our selves into a Rundle, as the Spanish Fleet did their
greatest Danger, in the days of Q. Elizabeth. If like Sheep (when affrighted
with Dogs) we could rally into one Body; we might be impregnable in our own
Island; If the Stars in their course, or God himself did not fight against us.
But alas! we are so shattered, and look such several ways: As if we were
contriving how to sink, with the least trouble to our Assailants; and give them
an easy and cheap Victory; we have almost as many Parties, as Men: And each
Party stands on Tiptoes, waiting for the Destruction of the rest. Alas poor
England! What evil Spirit is come abroad, and crumbled thee into so many
shivers? What Stars did then prevail, when thou becamest the Byword of other
Nations, who wast the Glory of all Lands? The Battails of Cressy and Agencourt,
are not yet forgotten in Story. And shall our Sins so bow down our Backs, that
we must fear those whom we have Conquered? Shall we now so unravel our Cord by
our Intestine Divisions, that they may be easily broken apart; which were
inviolable whilst twisted together? This is to bring swift Destruction upon
our selves, without yielding any glory to those that shall spoil us. Where was
the Kites renown, that soop'd away the Frog and the Mouse, whilst they were
contending and aiming at each others Ruin? whilst their eyes were so
blood-shotten with Spite, that they never attended the Motions of their Common
Enemy. Those fowl that are tame, do even dread the Shadows of Birds of prey, by
the instinct of Nature, though they hover in the Air at a great distance from
them. And shall not we have so much Prudence, as to reunite our selves, now our
Enemies are not only hovering, but ready to fall directly upon our heads?
Hannibal is even at our very Gates, Titus is casting up his Trenches; and we
(like those Zealots in Jerusalem) are pulling each other by the Throat. Was
there ever Madness like this Madness? O for the Harp of David! to allay this
rage, and to charm down these Furies. O that some Rays from the face of God,
might shine upon us! That these Clouds might be dispelled; and our Fears
prevented! If that Grace which brings Salvation, did once arise in our hearts;
by reducing us to the same Point, where we first parted; That is, the door of
the Sanctuary: by teaching us to worship the same God, in his own way; there
might yet be hopes in our. Israel concerning this: we might all speak the
Language of Canaan again, and become a terror to our Enemies. The Lord is
terrible in the behalf of his People, by sending Hornets among their
Adversaries, when they are gathered together in the holy Place of his Zion. T.
Quintius said, the Snail was safe in her shell; so might we be in the Sanctuary.

You see it is hard to live in a Countrey-Cell; and not gather some Melancholy
Air. Yet it is for a Consolation, that I have both liberty and leisure, to
breath out the same to my God in Devotions, and to give a vent to it; by
transmitting the Echo thereof to your self. I wish these Lines may find you
free, from all Encumbrances of Sadness: that no such ghastly Objects may
perplex or disturb your Recesses. And lest I should be guilty of pouring Water
into your Wine; I will shake off my Hermits Pall; and dazzle you with a more
taking Dress. My Gratulation shall requite you, for my former Complaints; and I
will both encourage you, and my self with what follows.

The Truth is, not only common Fame, but my own secret Thoughts have suggested
to me an equal fear from your London, to that from Rome and France: For I am
old enough to remember, what Commotions arose from that place about Forty years
ago. The King of blessed Memory, was affronted in the Streets: All loyal
Members of Parliament, and Conscionable Subjects, were awed with the dreggs of
the People. Judgment was turned backward; those gave the Law, that did violate
it most, and deserved to be made Examples by it. Seditious Pamphlets and
Insolent Petitions, flew abroad like Granado's; and he that durst give a check
to this Torrent, was sure to be overwhelmed; and to perish in this Gainsaying
of Core, Woe be to Righteous Lot, if found in the midst of these Sodomites. Woe
be to St. Paul himself, if he stood in the way of Demetrius, and his Crew. No
man fit to describe these Confusions, but he that wears Buskins: has a Vein of
writing Tragedies; and can set forth the Plague of Athens in its own direful
Colors. I once thought, I should have died St. Steven's Death, only for
Preaching on the Fifth Commandment. When I look back and consider what Tails
these Comets drew after them; I am like one that goes upon a narrow Bridge over
a deep River. My head and my heart tremble and pant; and I can scarce believe
my own Happiness, that I have escaped the roaring of these Waters, for so the
Sacred Writ calls a tumultuous Multitude: Methinks I am only in a Dream, and I
sometimes seem to see the Mountains smoking; and Firebrands coming out of
Pulpits, to increase the Flame. Young Men, that were sent by their Friends to
be disciplined and trained up in honest Callings, were debauched in their
Duties to their Superiors, and enchanted with Sheba's Trumpet; As if it were
not enough to Poison one Generation.

Sir! It is not long since we were affrighted in the Country; as if the like
times were Revolving upon us. As if your London were catching again the same
Wildfire; and like Aetna, were breaking forth into another Conflagration. Every
man we met, talked of little else, but the rising of the City: Such especially,
as are given unto Change; and have the Leprosy of Sedition, and Schism running
upon them; that think to get that in a Scramble, which they can never attain by
their own Merits. These shak'd their Heads; made ghastly Faces -- as if another
Doomsday of Insurrections were coming upon us; and the fatal Period of our
Tranquillity was approaching. This Alarm did so far amaze me; that I dreaded
the Fire, that had scorched me. I wrote Letter after Letter to my Son, an
Apprentice there -- to Charge and Command him, by virtue of my Paternal
Authority -- not to enter into their Secrets: or Conspire with those Catalines
that desire to disturb our Peace, or oppose our Government. It is better we
should all suffer; than Carve out our Fortunes, and divert supposed Calamities,
by lifting up an hand against the Lord's Anointed. God commonly turns the
Projects of Achitophels into Folly: for though precipitate actions are pleasing
in their beginning; yet they are difficult in carrying on, and disapprove the
Success.

But blessed be God! London is not London now. The Magistrates and Citizens are
Men of another Spirit; and better acquainted with their Duty to God, and Men.
They are too wise to be cheated over again, with Jesuitical, I had almost said
-- Devilish pretenses, whereby they were formerly deluded. Their Repentance
cost them too dear, so soon to traverse the same ways, wherein they have been
betrayed to Robbers and Thieves. I am almost afraid to hear Subjects cry up
Religion, and Property; lest they should again strip us of both: To cry down
others Miscarriages with Absalom; or with Cham discover their Nakedness; lest
they should Usurp the Fasces into their own hands, and whip us again with
Scorpions. It is almost enough, to make men Jewish Infidels, to compare some
Men's former Actions, with their own Declarations: Their hairy Hands, with their
Jacob's Voice, whatever we feel: whatever we fear, is the dismal Effect of that
Hypocrisy. The Jews thought there were some grains of the Golden Calf, in all
their Sufferings; and whatever Ghost haunts and affrights us now, was raised by
our own Malignant actings in the days past. Of whom shall we Complain? If our
Dangers are great, our Sins have been so too: let us no more prevaricate: let
us be Israelites indeed; and then those unhappy vapors, which threaten to
Eclipse our Prosperity, will soon vanish. No need of being Jealous of our
Governors: or for them to be distrustful of us: For then they may sleep safely
in the Laps of their People; and we Rejoice under their shadows.

Good Sir! Pardon the Indecorum of this Letter: For I write to an Eminent
Shepherd; just as I treat my Country Flock: yet I cannot forbear to
transgress, whilst I deprecate my Fault.

I sometimes Ruminate with my self -- How our Tribe is assaulted from several
Coasts. It shakes and totters with Impetuous Volleys from all parts of the
Circumference: Manasseh against Ephraim; and Ephraim against Manasseh; and both
against Levi. These Rocks are even ready to grind us to Powder. And as the
Earth hangs upon nothing, but the Word of God's Power: so we only subsist, and
are preserved, by the powerful Providence of the same God; and by the gracious
Favor of his Vicegerent. Let us be Faithful and Diligent in our Places; and
those billows shall be so restrained, that they may roar; but shall not swallow
us up. Whilst these Contemplations take up my Thoughts; there are other
Sentiments rush in upon me. Alas! How cold and perfunctory are many of us in
our Ministerial Imploys? As if we were not only Regardless of the Souls
committed to our Charges; but of our own. As if Ease, Gain, and Grandeur, were
the great designs of our Functions. Nay! Has not the Altar it self been
formerly polluted? Has not Religion been prostituted to the Lusts of Men? Has
not the Diana of Disobedience been cried up, by Preaching and Prayer? Is not
the same Fervent Swelling still among us? The same Jonah in our Ship? The same
Achan in our Camp? Shall not the Lord visit for these things? If any Complains
that such Men are silenced; who for their Parts may be useful to the Church; I
answer with M. Curious in a like case -- The Church has no need of such as have
not learned to obey.

But I am carried (I know not by what Genius) out of a Fragrant Garden, into a
stinking Golgotha. I was commending the present Constitution of your City,
beyond what it has been in our Memory; to the intent, that God might have the
Glory; and the Sword of Gideon too, might have that praise which is due unto
it: I mean your self; and other Regular Ministers of the Gospel there, who have
far transcended many of those that went before you; by infusing better
Principles: Planting and Preaching more sound and peaceable Doctrines among the
Inhabitants of that place: so that the Glory of this second Temple, has quite
outstrip'd the Rubbish that went before it: yet whilst I was thus musing:
solacing my self; and sweetning this Solitude, with the Platonic Pleasure, and
sensuality of these Idea's; In came a swarm of Thoughts; what a confused heap
that famous City has been; under the Conduct of false Lights, and unlucky
Pilots: And whilst I was thus possessed and transported; I have conversed with
Tombs, and Charnel Houses. But waving these unpleasant Reflections; I shall
fix my Eyes upon your London, as it is Informed, and Reformed by happy
Teachers: Not only Glorious and Stupendous in Structures, and Merchandise; but
also, for her Religion to God; and Fidelity to the Prince. In a body of such
Dimensions; there is no wonder -- that there are some excentrical Motions: Some
Excremental Excrescencies, Wens and Botches. Our little Parishes are not free
from Heteroclites: irregular, and disorderly walkers. There are some Dregs, and
Relics of the late Times. We can easily divine, who went before; by the
Impression of those crooked, and distorted Footsteps they have left behind.
Though we constantly Pray, Preach, Catechize, and Instruct our People
publicly, and privately: yet the hand of Joab still appears; and those Tares
which Inimicus homo sowed in the Furrows of our Fields, are not yet rooted up.
There are: there must be Heresies in the World, until we come to the Unity of
the Faith; and all our Chaff shall be winnow'd out at the Day of Judgment. The
Harvest will come, when vile Weeds shall be separated from the precious Corn.
In the mean while, we that live in the Valleys, are so far from envying your
Happiness, that we make it our own, by exulting and triumphing in the same; and
praising God, for your numerous and generous Progeny. Though ours be as thin as
Grapes after the Vintage: As lean and meagre as Pharoah's Kine. Many of your
People are as the Sons of Anak, of a transcendent growth and stature, both for
Parts and Piety: your Assemblies, as so many Synods -- How beautiful are thy
Gates! thy Tents, O London! when a Man enters into your orderly Congregations;
He stands as it were, in the Porch, and Suburbs of Heaven: so that he must say
-- God is among you of a Truth: Your Faces look toward Zion, and shine with
the luster thereof, like Moses's in the Mount. Your Reverence and Devotion
declare -- That Heaven is your aim; and that you are in good earnest, in
seeking the Country that is above. It is true: -- Gebal, Ammon, and Amaleck do
what they can to weaken your hands, and blast this your Success. They grudge,
and gnash with their Teeth -- to see those so prosperous in their Ministry;
whom they traduce and undervalue; and in their Prosperity, set them with the
Dogs of their Flock. Therefore they set up Altars of their own; and decoy your
People into their Mountains. Mountains, did I say? Nay! into their African
Corners, and Vaults. Yet through your Primitive diligence and dexterity; your
bow does still continue in strength. And Maugre all their Contrivances and
Blocks they lay in your way, to divert you in your Evangelical race; and hinder
the erecting of Jerusalem's Walls: your work goes on through the Power of the
Almighty God of Jacob: And theirs moulters and dwindles; at least, It does not
thrive, being set together with untemper'd Mortar. Though they have this
Advantage -- They drive down the Hill, and woe the People, to what both
Naturally, and by Instigation, they are too much inclined; and that is,
Disobedience to Authority, and all that is called God. This suits too well, to
that Gunpowder: that depraved Activity; and Elastick Virtue, which they bring
into the world with them. May you, and all our Brethren go on with undaunted
Courage! notwithstanding their barking; to keep your Flocks from ravenous
Wolves; and to save the Souls of your People, from Schism, Faction, and
Sedition here! from Satan, and Hell hereafter! We cannot deny, but there was
much Zeal (such as it was) in that place formerly: But this was as Fire in our
Thatch; or like the career of a blind Horse, that has much Spirit; but no eyes
to guide him. Now, there is not only Zeal; but according to knowledge: Not only
a partial Religion, in observing the first Table; but also, conscionable
Obedience to the second; that Faith toward God may appear to be true and
Genuine; by works toward Men; Love to God, whom we have not seen; by Love to
our Brethren, whom we have seen.

In the midst of our late Fears -- This very Consideration kept me from
drooping, and sinking. What? Shall men that have a Religious, well-grounded
fear of God, bandy together against their lawful Governors? Men that are so
taught? such Proficients in Christ's School? shall these brandish that Sword,
to which they have no Right? This would even have justified the worst of Times;
when those in your places pleaded Scripture and Conscience for Resistance.
Others made Harangues to the Representatives of the City in their Common
Council, to inflame them to an ungodly War against their Prince: nor were there
wanting such Orators among them, that mustered up all the sinews of their
Eloquence, and Rhetoric, to sway and bow the great Council of the Land the
same way. You have better learned Christ, and you have better taught your
People. It is the Physitian's glory to check and chastise any predominant and
luxuriant humor in the Body; and to reduce it into an even and Moderate temper
with the rest. So it shows the Ministers Skill to allay the vehement Efforts of
an irregular People -- in persuading them to this Sobriety -- to leave the
Government of the World to the Providence of God; and the disposal of Church
and State to the Wisdom of the King. We may be too Pragmatical, and deprive our
selves of present Enjoyments; by being too solicitous for the time to come; I
will Pray for the welfare of this, and succeeding Ages. May true Piety, Peace,
and Plenty be ever within the Walls of this Church, and State! And may God
raise up such Men to sit at the Stern of both; that may be nursing Fathers
indeed! yet I will leave my Prayers at the feet of God; and trust him with the
success of them. It has been the great Mercy of God, in putting it into the
heart of the Prince; and the signal Prudence of the Right Reverend Bishops
successively; to place in, and encourage, Able and Regular Ministers, in the
chief City of the Land: both to root up those dangerous and unpeaceable
Doctrines, which have been formerly settled there: and cast a Malignant
Influence upon the head of all our Tribes. And also to plant such sound
Catholic, and Orthodox Truths; whereby men may be guided into the ways of
Peace, and Holiness. The fruit and benefit of such Preaching, and Preachers,
has appeared in hushing those Discontents that were amongst you: In restraining
and preventing the madness of the People, and their Tumultuous Practices.
Faithful Ministers are not only Necessary to Conduct men to Heaven; but also to
establish Peace here below -- and to support the King's Throne. The Sun it self
may as well be spared out of the Firmament, as these Luminaries out of the
Church. Had it not been for Faithful Preachers in the City and Country -- to
stand in those Gaps, that are trodden down by the Furioso's of our times; we
had been overrun e're this, with Herds of feral, and unruly Beasts.

Many there are that complain, and find faults. They declaim against Abuses,
and Exorbitancies, especially in the Church; not that they may be redressed
(except they themselves may be the Reformers) but that they may Disgrace and
Wound the Civil State, through the sides of the Ecclesiastic: For if we would
study how to be revenged of those that Dissent from us: To Crucify them, and
Countermine their Projects; we cannot take a more Compendious way -- than to
agree together, in a vigorous pursuit of the fear of God, and the Honor of the
King; to teach our People true Piety, and Allegiance; our Sores are their
Repast, and our Peace is their Torment. May we always thus goad their Sides!
and rend their Caules! by being good Men, and Orthodox Preachers: By
maintaining God's Honor, the King's Repose, the Tranquillity of the Church and
Kingdom; promoting our own Salvation, and our Peoples eternal Happiness.

It may be some Grief to you, that some of your Flocks are cluck'd away, and
purloin'd from their own Shepherds. Christ himself was troubled at the loss of
one Apostle: He also put an Accent of Sorrow upon these words to his Disciples
-- Will ye also go away? St. Paul complained, when Demas and the People of Asia
forsook him. Yet be of good cheer -- you are still thronged with grave, and
knowing Auditory. The ways of Zion do not mourn; and the Abomination of
Desolation does not stand, where it ought not. Though some loose, light, smutty
Ears may fall, or rather be snatched from you; yet your sheaves are still full
of weighty and solid Corn. Your People do not talk, smatter, dispute, and
wrangle about the great things of Religion: but they live, act, and practice
the same. Their Senses are both exercised to discern, and their capacious, and
healthy Souls, to receive and digest the stronger Meats of the Gospel.

Alas! We are not so happy in the Country; we lisp, and speak half words; we
Instill our Milk by Drops; here a little, and there a little: And we account it
our best Learning, to condescend to the Ignorant; in Calculating our Words and
Matter to the Meridian of their Understanding. We had rather some should carp,
and censure; than the greater part should go away, without any Edification.
It Is better to Sacrifice our own Credit, than their Souls. To use an Arcadian
Dialect; than they should stare, gaze, and say we are Mad; or with him in the
Poet, be starved in the midst of our Dainties; and scorched with thirst,
whilst they are catching at the gilded Streams of our flouring Rhetoric. Yet
we rejoice, if by the Pulse of our People we can discern any Motions, or
Symptoms of a Spiritual life; and that Religion is true, and sincere; though
weak, and unpolished.

Sir! I know that your heart sounds and ecchos herein to mine. Well! let us go
on with a cheerful Diligence in our several stations: you in the Mount; we in
the Valleys: you, with the Mother-City; we, with the Daughters of Jerusalem --
until Righteousness, and true Holiness; be not only the Ornament, but Bulwark
of our Land. For as the most rugged passages of God's Providence, are beautiful
in their season: And the most contemptible Members of the Body, are Useful and
Necessary in their places; so the lowest and meanest Officers in the Church (if
found faithful) may add to her luster, and adorn the Compages of Christ's
mystical Body: As little Choiresters may help to make up the Consort, and
Harmony of the Quire. I know you will not overlook our help in carrying on the
common Salvation; though our shoulders are weaker than yours.

I have got the happiness to speak to a wise Man, who is able to judge what I
say; and I am unwilling to part with it. This must be my Apology, for
protracting this, beyond the bounds and measures of my ordinary Letters. If you
be more concise in your Answer, make it out in your Prayers. And herein I will
requite you -- by Importuning the Throne of Grace -- That both you, and all our
Brethren, may do worthily in that Ephrata, and famously in your Bethlem! That
the Ministers of London, may be the glory of England! as our English Clergy is
the wonder of the Christian world. And though the Fawns of the Wood, must be
content to come behind the City-Muses. Though we cannot reach the Selah of your
loud Cymbals; yet we will follow you, with our little Timbrels and Pipes. We
will do what we can -- In reconciling God, and his People; in preserving a
right Understanding betwixt the King, and his Subjects; promoting Primitive
Piety, with Catholic Love, and Charity amongst our People. --

FINIS.
EPISTOLA VERIDICA AD HOMINES PHILOPPOTEYONGAS. Cui Additur ORATION Pro statu
ECCLESIAE Fluctuantis, quae ex quavis Regione vacillat and periclitatur dum
clavum teneant qui art Sacro-nautica minime polleant.

Londini Excusum, Anno Dom. 1659.

LOGOS PPOTPEPTIKOS
Ad Magistros satis Magisteriales and Dominos nimis Dominantes Nigh Peter's
Tombs Caeterosque (...) Mar. 6. 21. Qui legitimos Evangelii ministros. tot
veluti juniores Ottomannos) (quantu^ in ipsis) strangula^t and crucifigunt.
JAm tandem mihi gratulor (viri magnates) quod excusso stuporis veterno,
lacertos rursus movere gestiam; and vos ultro alloqui ausim intrepidus, qui me
(...), saevas nuper pronuntiastis ad bestias; vos, inquam, qui telorum
grandine, parum abfuit, quin obruissetis; and Gigantes cum sitis (quantum in
vobis) in Coetum Gigantum, hoc est ad inferos usque, vestro Anathematis
fulmine, diram (proh dolor!) miseritis victimam; sed nullos tam puros manes
admittit infernus: tam charum lucis filiolum, respuunt tenebrarum regna: sic
nitentem vestibus, si aspexissent Cacodaemones; perstringantur oculi, and
subterranea perhorrescant examina; nec non ipse Minos, aequiori perpendens
trutina, acumen vestrum, simul and justitiam, frendens incuset, and iratus;
quasi, ab auro scoriam, a tritico paleam, a medulla corticem, a spuriis vere
genuinas aquilas haud dijudicare poteritis. Apage igitur cum sententia vestra!
seram cantate palinodiam; and quod temerario exarastis calamo, ex vestris
subito deleatur Annalibus: ut Herodes olim suos expunxit natales; hic, ne
parentum ignominiam; vos, ne vestram suboleant, nasuti nepotes. Quantum ad me
attinet, tota cervice divinioribus studiis pergam incumbere, and (exanimatus
licet) sacris paginis adhuc pallescere; ut ex rupe ista (Scripturae scilicet)
fontes salvificos: ex thesauro isto, gemmas: ex alveari, favos; and ex
promptuario isto, cibaria, and succos salutares possim eruere; animae meae,
gregique populari confestim traditurus; ut nec Deo, nec bonis (quanquam vobis)
audiam (...).

Postquam vos, quasi tot immaniores Levitae, Galliones, and Homunciones (...)
me vestris consossum vulneribus, gemibundum, and tantum non expirantem, vix
intuebamini: ecce melior Samaritanus (conscientia scilicet subridens,
intemerata, and (...)) parato occurrit gremio: utrisque ulnis, ruit in
amplexus, dulcique susurro in aurem blanditur: me molli sovet cataplasmate:
pedibus vestris conculcatum sublevat; oleumque suum, in ipsa cordis penetralia
effundit.

Utinam de Cathedra vestra and sella Curuli, paululum descendatis in arenam:
non luctam subituri, sed velitationem, eamque amicabilem, and sine odio.
Siccine indignus ego? nulla eruditionis rimula? nulla pietatis scmtillula?
dicite mihi sodes! triobolaris ego, and nullius pretii Theologaster? de ponte
mittendus, sicut (...)? Heu! perii infelix: contremiscunt viscera: labascunt
crura: suffusus rubore vultus; nec non singuli artus solvuntur in (...): sub
tam infausto natus sidere, (...), tot preciunculas quotide ejaculatus fuerim:
tot lachrymis genas humectarim? toties jejunaverim? tot labores exantlarim? tot
librorum volumina (absit invidia! absit jactantia!) evolverim, ut muneri huic
Evangelico, and animarum aucupiis invigilarem? and incassum cesserunt singula?
Sed vestras revolvite memorias: judicia explorate propria, utrum nullis
praejudicii nebulis offusa: nam ipsi aliquando oculi sic humoribus intumescunt,
sic glancomate laborant, ut circa ipsos colores omnimodo hallucinentur: sic
Senatus quondam Romanus, vero aut pretium, aut gratium anteferebat. Interrogate
fideliter animas vestras: non audio quid interrogata corda respondeant: sed
nisi callo prorsus obducti, nisi (...), quin (...) sitis, nullus dubito, quod
Lesbia etiam evaseritis regula, qui lapides Lydios, and paene infallibiles esse
gloriamini, compertum habeo. Ah! quoties nigro carbone notabitis immeritos, cum
meliorem calculum apposuisse debeatis? vol is igitur in posterum consulo, ut
Cryptam aliquam Caliginosam intretis judicatur^; aut judicum instar
Atheniensium, alta nocte censuras vestras proferatis, si infamem exuatis (...).
Et cum suggesta vestra ascendisse videar, vobisque in subsellio sedentibus
perorasse, bona adhuc cum venia, perrexisse liceat. Non mihi cordi est, ut
quaestionum involucris vos irretirem, aut spinosis argumentorum aculeis
excruciem: non ut (...) essem, gladios loquuturus, aut fulgura. Absit, absit,
inquam, vindictae tam impotens Cupido! (...). Exultate adhuc, per me, singuli;
meae quanquam ruinae, quo jure, quave injuria, sabri simul, and artifices. Non
commodi oestro percitus, non famae distendor aucupio; sed aliorum, sed
ecclesiae gratia dicturus; and quare dixisse poeniteat, cum vos tam horrenda
fecisse non pigeat? Quid vetat anseres ipsos, clamorem in coelum tollere, cum
templi arces, ipsumque Capitolium sitis prodituri? (...); Basil. p. 318.
prodituri inquam; quid enim a proditione distat, tot satellites, tot veteranos
inhibuisse, quos in castra sua miserat Dominus Exercituum? intraque ecclesiae
muros, contra hostium insultus, and molimina, excubare jusserat, sicut Domini
vineam vastasse videamini, qui tot fidos praeclusistis operarios, quos Dei
misericordia, piorumque preces in medium emiserant; quodque dolendum magis, a
vobis etiam dilaceratur Christi Sponsa; a vobis inquam, totum vulnus fit and
Cicatrix, quibus eam propulsare, and custodire incubuit; adeo ut non possum (ad
ravim usque) non ingemiscere -- Quis custodiet ipsos -- Custodes? sed nondum
animam meam omnimodo liberavi: nam ut Deus Angelo Pergamensi, sic ego ulterius
(...).

Quis non videt capita vestra coelo ipsi minantia? Primo.
and altas veluti Cupressus, singulos prae vobis, tanquam viburna, and vilia
arbusta fastidientes? Cristas hasce, and caudas vere pavonias, tandem deponite:
supercilia remittite, and posthac in majorem erudiamini mansuetudinem. Quorsum
caperatis frontem, and superbienti supercilio sic supplices torquetis miseros?
Non mancipia sumus, sed fratres? nisi Donatistrarum instar, fratres etiam
vocari dedignamini, aut cum Eunomianis fraterne non estis affecti; adeo (...)
(ut Basilius olim) (...) videmur in oculis eorum esse ut cicadae. En! vos
adimus, Numero cap. 13. 33.
aequali, ac aras ipsas sacrificuli, reverentia: nudato capite: curvato
corpore: vultu submisso, and flexis genibus vestra lambimus and osculamur
vestigia: at quasi statuae sitis ambulatoriae, sine ullis fibrarum flexuris,
vix (ne vix quidem) nutum possumus extorquere: nutum dixi? o nos felices! si
non torvos vibretis aspectus, and verba acuminata, ipsa morte acerbiora. O
quanta clientes vestros (Carnificina quadam) occiditis mora quam pedibus
nostris, heu! trita vestibula! dum luna ipsa saepius suos peragit cursus; quasi
vobis dulces ipsi morientium gemitus: nihil vestra refert, populos nobis
charos, uxores, pignora, longa pati divortia, and noster -- fundo suspiret
nummus in imo: sed cavete quaeso, ne sicut Papae ambitio peperit Antichristum,
sic iisdem eum armis expellere venditaretis, quibus introductus, quibus sua
debet incunabula. Si olim erga ministellos, sic sese gessissent Antistites,
quanto boatu tota remugiret regio! imo ipsa resonaret Europa! Alia quaerenda
terra: alii lares: nam intolerabilis (vestras querelas repeto) Episcopalis
majestas: ipsa constupratur aura, spiritu isto plusquam Sunt quos in conspectu
hominum superbia tanquam suos demonstrat hosts, and intrinsecus nequissimos
habet milites. Fulg. p. 691.
Luciferiano. Quid tandem restat? nisi ut cervicibus publicis depulsi jaceant,
and caedantur victimae, non tam aliorum ambitioni, quam suae? nisi ut magna
illa, and erudita nomina, tot essent trophaea; tot fortunae ludibria, currus
vestros ornatura triumphales. Sed cavete rursum, ne digitos vestros experiamur,
illorum lumbis graviores: cavete inquam, ne fastum illorum conculcaretis, sed
fastu majori; ut Romani olim, regios Tarquinii fastus, alia superbia, non
ferebant -- sic etiam sapientibus, Cupido gloriae, novissima exuitur.

Hoc tamen dato; quod vobis in clerum Domini, sic dominari, cervicesque nostras
premere, jure quodam contigisset; quis affin^s vestros, famulosque vobis
ministrantes, dominos nostros constituit? nam sicut Ancillas suas habuit
Penelope, quarum auxilio, and lenocinio adjuti, suam proci -- adibant
Corinthum; sic vos famelica comitatur mancipiorum turba, quibus inhiantibus, si
offam aliquam, seu victimam, non obtulerimus; qui ad Altitudines vestras, nos
introduceret, nemo placatus fuerit; erit forsan, qui praedae avidus, ad
devorandum fauces aperiat, calumnias comminiscatur indignas, and precibus
nostris aures obseret vestras, quae clavibus nullis recludendae fuerint, nisi
auratis: sed priusquam demulceantur, and cicurentur, istiusmodi ferae, in quam
varias Humilitatis figuras, nostra torquenda sunt corpora? At at Ganymedem
quendam habetis delicatulum, de prosapia sua, and stemmate gloriantem; quasi
neutiquam patrissare potuisset, nisi nos ruricolas, and in vervecum patria
natos, despicatui haberet. Hic omnes supereminet, and erecto vertice, ipsa
paene pulsat sydera. Nos -- viles pulli; Hic -- Gallinae filius albae: Hunc
nisi summo demereamur obsequio, nisi titulis insigniamus Honorificis; nisi
genua nostra, ad terram usque flectentia, suum illi tribuant vectigal, Jovisque
nimbo prolapsi, in gremium ejus involemus, de nobis actum erit, and re prorsus
infecta, erit redeundum.

-- Quid domini facient, audent cum talia fures? Alteram vobis dicam non possum
non impingere, Secundo.
quod cum animalcula sitis humi reptantia, vespertilionum instar, and
noctuarum, ad naturae lumen caligantia: coruscantes tamen divini solis radios,
en! audacter intuimini; and quasi e secretioribus consiliis, ipsi Deo
famulantes, arcana ejus perscrutari, and (...), haud detrectatis; Cujus judicia
sunt incomprehensibilia, and investigabiles viae ejus.

Frustra in aere quaerimus aquilae volantis vestigia: frustra in mari, ratis
tractus, and semitas indagamur; imo, mare ipsum Aspicientes nos totum latet --
Quaenam -- moveat -- tam crebros causa meatus. Thales sydera contemplaturus,
incidit in foveam, cui anus inclamavit: qua ratione o Thales! quae in Coelis
sunt comprehendes, qui ea quae ante pedes videre nequeas? Quorsum igitur, vos
Dei gressus, and Circuitus, in ipso cordis sanctuario, ad amussim callere
jactatis? Quorsum in ipsius spiritus scrinium, claves vestras demittitis?
animarum pulsus, non minori fiducia tractantes, quam corporis temperiem, per
symptomata, and Crises, Hariolantur medicorum filii? Adeo vobis patent Coelorum
abyssus. Quae nobis intus, episcamini facile, and cordium tabulis insculpta
(quanquam spiritus sulcantur stylo) aeque vobis legibilia, ac in ipso frontis
meditullio, solisque radio fulgescant singula: Imo gratia non est gratia, nisi
vestra mutuaretur suffragia, and authoritatem. Quis conversionem, and (...)
sibi ausit vendicare? nisi ipsissimum Quando and Quomodo vobis innotescat? vae
nobis, si censura vestra esset futuri judicii praejudicium. Tot larvae
insernales: tot umbrae: tot fumus Cadavera, si sic staret sententia vestra;
sroculos magis propitios, non vobis dederit melior Deus. Si vivisicus ille, and
coelestis spiritus, clam vobis irrepserit, vel pectoris angulo delitescens, nos
secretiori obumbraret spiramine; eheu! Athei, and Ethnici (Cur non asini caput
adorasse? cur infantulos etiam devorasse, non sortiter nos calumniamini?) non
sine convitiorum plaustris a vobis appellamur; sed quis conscientiarum judices,
quis (...) vosmet constituit? cum diplomate vestro accincti prodeatis: vestros
ostentate fasces; sic censuris vestris non assurgemus inviti: sic neque
suspecta erit vestra authoritas, nedum contempta: interim proprias explorate
(...), favete alienis: suam Deo (reticenda scilicet religionis mysteria)
permittite provinciam. Number vobis solummodo erexisse scalas, and tot quasi
Acesios, in caelum ascendisse contigit? Paulinum istud paulo attentius
evolvite, Quis hominum scit quae sunt hominis nisi spiritus hominis qui in ipso
est? and quae Dei sunt, nemo cognovit, nisi spiritus Dei. Novus ille homo, in
cordis utero formatus, quasi Gygis annulo praemunitus, invisibilis ambulat:
Hunc licet intus soveamus, sicut and animam; licet motum ejus vitalem
persentimus, aliis tamen ostentare, -- and dicere hic est -- Hic labor, hoc
opus est. Quid ni de gratia dicendum? quod ille de tempore; si nemo ex me
quaerat, scio; si quaerenti explicare velim, nescio.

Miror sane, and indignabundus stupeo, de vestro literarum contemptu;
praesertim cum vosmet ipsi, Tertio.
scientiarum apices attigisse videamini: satis, heu satis vapulat, and ubique
vilescit artium scientia, nisi malarum: vicatim clamitant nebulones; Ad furcas
docti! in cineres redigantur, and favillas, librorum volumina! nil nisi Haeresi
(...) sentina, ex Philosophiae lerna: uberrimae errorum segetes, ex Musarum
font ebulliunt: sophistae audiunt, and Circulatores, quotquot patrum
monumentis invigilant, and scholasticorum lectioni horas impendunt, quanquam
succisivas. Quo se ferat lacerata haec, and procellis agitata cohors? ubi
reclinabunt capita, ignorantium consputa opprobriis; quibus adhuc cordi sunt,
morientes, and steriles literae? en ad vos catervatim confugiunt doctrinae
alumni: vos Maecenates esse, eorumque columnas, abunde sibi promittentes: sed
hinc etiam oboriuntur lacrymae, etiam a vobis. Novercatis nimium, and dedecori
inter vos cedunt literae: nec emergunt facile, qui dehonestantur artibus; sed
si turpe est apud vos, bonas literas colere, praestat agnoscere culpam, quam
deprecari: nunc totam eruditionis (...) intra vos occlusam velitis, sicut and
religionem: nunc ipsi diabolo damnantur affines, qui eruditione insignes
evaserint. Audite Anglicolae! audite exteri! sed lugete utrique. Non quidlibet
audeo: Hunc ipse appello, and verba sua agnoscat oportet, quisquis fuerit, --
Inter Socraticos --

Murus estis; sed qualis est apud prophetam, cui accumbentibus paratus est
serpens: sic pessimi hominis inimici, sunt ejus domestici. O quali tripudio
exultet Romana proles, cum nudos nos, and inermes viderit; hisceque orbatos
spiculis, quibuscum eorum turmas saepius profligavimus; quibus tot edidimus
strages; tot reportavimus victorias, and confertissimas eorum Aquilas fugantes,
veritatem paene triumphatam, quasi postliminii jure, liberavimus: Hoc igitur --
Ithacus velit, and magni mercentur Atridae; ut pessum eant, and opprimantur
maxim, qui Quinto illorum lateri gladios suos intorquere essent peritissimi;
clypeosque suos eorum ictibus fortissime opponerent. Pessima de Christiana
religione meruit Nero, qui junioribus disciplinam interdixit and literas; ut
ignorantiae tenebris and fuligine obvoluti, in barbariem remensa vestigia
citius praecipitarent: sic Mytilenses olim, sociis qui defecerant, ut
suppliciorum gravissimum, imposuerunt, in inscitia artium liberalium vitam
transigere. O quam fluctuat Ecclesia! quam vacillat respublica! sine literarum
fulcro, and stabilimento. In quantam errorum voraginem immerguntur, quibus
doctrinae fundamina desiderantur? Ipsa sacra pagina, Genesis 29. 2, 3.
fons est; sed (c) fons Haran, grandi scilicet lapide clausus, qui nisi
devolvatur, non adaquabit greges. Liber est quidem Scriptura, imo (...), sed
obsignatus, sine linguarum, artium, antiquitatum peritia. Philosophiam
perstringit Apostolus, Colos. 2. 8. sed vanam, sed Epicuream; quae tollit
providentiam, and in deorum numerum refert voluptatem; aliter, ad Christum
(...). Efflat scientia, sed non vera (ut idem Cle. Alex.) (...), quae videtur
tantum: quae cerebro solum supernatans, ut illa Gnosticorum, ad cor corrigendum
nunquam descenderit. Procul a me absit, sic in Theologo eruditionem extollere,
quasi eodem conatu pietatem deprimere libeat, sine qua in doctrina, frustra
quaerimus doctrinam: nam timor Domini est principium scientiae; and ubi vera,
and superna sapientia exarserit, haud aliter a cultu Coelesti, and sanctitate
divelli queat, quam a se invicem Hippocratis Gemelli. Neque religio ulla sine
sapientia suscipienda; nec ulla sine religione probanda sapientia. Cum doctis
igitur revertimini in gratiam; and quanquam mihi indigno quasi fraterculo, non
sine magno meo damno, infensi fueritis, nullam vobis intendo litem: nullam peto
vindictam: imo, vos valere jubeo; si candore vestro, humilitate and charitate
freti, gaudeant alii: si ecclesiae jam Anhelanti sitis Refrigerio; si laboranti
succurratis, and tot veluti Junones Lucinae, obstetricantes, feratis opem: nam
de Arca nutante actum erit: de legitimis Evangelii ministris conclamatum; si
eo, quo coepistis, pergatis pede; si pro furfure, and faece Romuli habeantur;
si pro quisquiliis, and sale insulso projiciantur for as, qui sunt in agro
dominico puriores segetes; in domo Dei Columnae, stellaeque in dextra ejus
fulgentes: praesertim, si blatterones, tyrunculi, (...), and quilibet praecoces
adolescentuli sub sigillo vestro and insignibus tam audacter militent, qui
ecclesiae gubernacula tractare minime noverint. Haec enim que sequuntur, tot
sunt veluti elementa Theologos vestros constituentia: Habiles and idonci
concionatores facile per vos renuntiantur: modo sint inordinati: imberbes
juvenes: mediocriter docti: optime vestiti.

1. Inordinati: ordinum Ecclesiasticorum expertes: sacerdotes sine sacerdotio:
dispensatores sine clavibus: neque (...); neque (...) quos neque Timotheus
aliquis initiavit, nec (...) aliquod consecravit. His inquam libentissime manus
apponitis suffragantes, and approbatorias; qui manuum impositionem nunquam
subiere; in eorumque gremium, album adjicitis calculum, qui in mystarum Albo
nunquam fuere adscripti. Hinc rauco picarum murmr, hoc est, mechanicorum
concionibus inconcin^is, ubique crepant Templa; strident rostra: conculcantur
Sacramenta, and Altaria fumant contra Altaria. O belli judices! Haeccine in
publicum benevolentia? sic Coelum terra miscere gestitis? sic contentiosi
pulveris nubem pedibus vestris excitare? sic Haereticorum (tot veluti
serpentum) spumam: tot errorum zizania in Area dominica dispersisse libuit?
Haec enim fecistis omnia; dum talia sacientes in sinu fovetis: dum in deliciis
habetis maxim, and in ipso Templi pinnaculo collocatis, quos horum omnium
canales fuisse and scaturiginem, experti lugemus. Non vos latet, hand male
conjectari aliquos. Originem illum Alexandrinum, tot portentosis scatuisse
erroribus, and quia juvenis docuit, and absque patrum (...). Male igitur per
vos respuuntur: male a tabernaculo, arcentur, quos patres nostri, hoc est,
praesules venerandi semel retigere; quasi lepra nos affecissent, dum manus
imponcrent; aut carmine quodam fascinassent, cum more suo vere paterno, nobis
benedicerent.

2. Imberbes juvenes; qui implumes adhuc, e nido suo, and nutricum brachiis
nuper elapsi sunt; qui perdicum instar, ovorum tegumentis circumvestiti, vobis
accurrunt; and mentorum primitias, hoc est, lanuginem suam vobis offerunt. His
aures utrasque and ulnas expanditis, qui ex Ephebis nedum excesserunt: qui
genas molles and delicatulas vobis ostentant. Adeo (...) estis; balbutientes,
and dimidiata verba tentantes, amplexuri. Barba sane nunquam fecit Theologum;
sed jam nocet plurimum. Reveranda Canities, cui assurgunt Gentes, vobis
opprobrio: in ea prolapsi sumus tempora, de quibus conquestus est propheta:
rationem sacerdotum non habent, senibus non faciunt gratiam; Hoc olim grande
nefas, and morte piandum. Quomodo canales esse poterint, qui conchae ne unquam
fuerint? Sed subtilitatem vestram, and mysterium, ad quod collimatis, (adeo
diaphanum est) facile perspexerim: nam Ecclesiam novam estis fundaturi;
abjiciendae igitur trabes antiquae, and putridae; seniores scilicet, and qui
prioris Templi gloriam intuebantur. Vimina. and surculi aedificio vestro optime
inservient, hoc est, adolescentes qui ut rasa tabula, ad dictata vestra
suscipienda, and in verba vestra jurare, erunt paratiores; lubrica enim eorum
ingenia: Olim igitur Catalina in parts suas juniores pertraxit: plaudite
igitur, vos felices fungi, (...)! heri prosani, hodie sacrorum antistites; nam
tales habendi sunt concionatores, quales habuit Rehoboam consiliarios.

3. Mediocriter docti: Doctores sine doctrina: Theologi sine libris; nisi quos
in lucem vosmet edidistis: lectores modesti; qui abeuntes retrorsum, operuerunt
facies suas, ne orientis, vel occidentis ecclesiae patres, pudibundi
aspicerent: -- frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos. Hoc modo,
testae recentes erunt, side catholica (sanctis semel tradita) nondum imbuti;
nec quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, cognoscentes: eo magis odorum,
quos immissuri estis, tenaciores: and in dogmata vestra, manibus, pedibusque
festinabunt velocius. Sic pictor Praxiteles loco Veneris, adulterae suae
imaginem adorandam proposuit. Sic saetus maxim viriles, in partu ipso, ab
obstetricibus Pharaonicis strangulari jubentur.

4. Optime vestiti: exuviis undique conductis fulgentes, (...), Calamistris and
cincinnis ornati: pulvere nescio quo exotico, and sussitibus delibuti -- ut
matutino sudans Crispinus amomo: histrionum instar Atticorum holobyssini: Hi
pallio vestro inaugurantur: and sine mora salutantur belli curatores omnium
animarum: quasi sancti esse nequeamus, nisi sericati: nec Theologi in Ecclesia
serendi, nisi ut causidicos, sic nos etiam -- purpura vendat, and -- sulserit
annulus ingens. Ignoscite quaeso, si vos imitari hac ex part nequeamus: nec
despectui habeatis, quibus non licuit esse tam divitibus: nec intumescatis
nimium, turgide incedentes, ut oculos nostros perstringatis: Hezekiae (boni
quidem regis, sed circa vestiaria sua misere labentis) recordamini. Hoc ipso,
ab Ambrosio, in clerum quidam non erat receptus, quod gestus ejus plurimum
dedeceret. Miranda quoque Lacedaemoniorum civitas, (...).

Sic penecillo satis obtuso, coloribus tamen suis, Theologum vestrum
delineaverim: Gorgona hanc in quam adeo deperitis, iterum aspicite: umbra est,
and praeterea nihil. Sed jam intumescere videmini; jam circa corda vestra
sanguis ebullire occipit, quasi ipse scandali Magnatum reus peragar: At inter
minas vestras, and stigmata, solo conscientiae satellitio stipatus, mihimet
erectus plaudo: nam sicut a (...).
Nerone; sic a vobis condemnari, non est infame: Adhuc igitur Deo, Ecclesiae,
imo vobis ad aras usque -- dum spiritus hos regit artus, seipsum animitus
consecrat, and devovet

Oration pro statu Ecclesiae fluctuantis, quae ex quavis regione periclitatur.
O Aeterne Deus! pater luminum! qui illuminas omnem hominem venientem in hunc
mundum; cujus solius lumine videmus lumen. Lumen rationis qua homines sumus
constituti, tuum est: lumen gratiae, qua plusquam homines; and lumen gloriae,
qua angelis ipsis erimus simillimi. Quanquam ipse habitas lucem inaccessibilem,
quae oculos nostros caligantes (dum hac corporis mole sumus circundati) penitus
perstingit: Quanquam te coram videre, facieque ad faciem (ne moriamur) misellis
homuncionibus non contingit; ne tamen tenebris propriis abrepti, in hac valle,
and umbra mortis, deserto scilicet vitae hujus, palabundi erremus; ipse nobis
laborantibus, alteram ignis columnam propitius praetendisti: nec tantum
spiritus tui radiis, quasi lampade accensa, cordium penetralia perfundis,
vultusque tui lumine laetificas; sed verbum tuum pedibus nostris lucernam
indulcisti; and luminaria, in hoc firmamento, and candelabro Ecclesiae hujus
inserioris, verbi ministros collocasti. Hos tanquam stellas, intra sphaeras
suas lucere jussos, ipse in brachii tui concavo tenes absconditos; dextramque
tuam expertos protectricem, foves and confirmas. Hinc in medio nationis pravae,
and perversae, adhuc perstitimus superstites; adhuc sepulchra, foveasque
evasimus, quas nobis toties struxerunt homines maleferiati, and plusquam
ferales, qui lucem oderunt, quia opera eorum mala fuere: huc usque, divino
fretis auxilio, cuniculos suos, and stratagemata, frustra tentarunt, and tui,
and nostri hosts, infensi simul, and conspirati; nec Romae, nec inferni (te
vindice, clypeoque nostro portae, adversus nos praevaluerunt. Pergas quaesumus,
benignissime Deus! clerum tuum, legatos, praeconesque obumbrare, and sacerdotes
tuos induere salute. Hoc ipsum, hoc ipso praesertim tempore, omnibus animarum
nervis, ad suspiria usq, gemebundi exoramus: nam fremunt populi, frendunt
Daemones, irruunt venti in domum tuam: trabes, columnae, anguli crepant, and
contremiscunt custodes ejus. Ipsae Abyssi, and cataractae coeli aperiuntur:
torrentes evomit draco: tantum non immergitur, and obsorbetur Ecclesiae navis.
Non solum grex ipse pervicax and rebellis, coeco impetu insurgit adversus
pastores and ductores suos: horumque oculos erueret, qui eorum paci and saluti
prospiciunt, and evigilant; sed pastorum titulo quidam gestientes, pastores
quoque laniant and obtruncant. Hi fastu suo, levitate, vel studio partium, in
altum sublati, ad pedes suos himillime provolutos indigne conculcant. Multis
(quos ipse legasti) in vineam, and Arenam Ecclesiasticam intraturis, ostium
praecludunt: plures avertunt, and exanimant, in ipso partu suffocantes. Ipse
nos clamare jusseris, and instar tubae voces attollere: At at isti obturant
ora, and silentio obruunt; ite, inquis tu, and praedicate: Hi contra euntes
inhibent, and minaces intonant; Vae vobis, si Evangelizetis. Sic talenta tua,
and Charismata, quae nobis donasti, quaeque aliis impendere eramus parati,
absconduntur in terra (non nobis Domine* non nobis hoc imputetur!) and sub
modio quasi torpescunt: nosque; ipsi sub umbra, and in angulis delitescimus;
quoniam aestum, and pondus diei sustentare non licuit. Arcemur ab Area nutante,
suppetias etiam allaturi; and ab area Domini (quantum in illis) exulamur,
quanquam in ea tot ubique pullulant zizania; and impostoribus plena sunt omnia:
rugiunt leones, ululant lupi, obrepunt vulpes, saltant satyri, and strident
bubones: nos tamen excludimur, ut aemulentur ipsi, solique in terra dominentur.
Exurgat Deus! and dissipentur quotquot invident Sioni! quotquot Tyrannorum
instar grassantur in Ecclesiam, praedae and velleri solummodo inhiantes, ut cum
Zebedaei filiis, and superbientibus discipulis ditiores, magnates and proceres
evaserint: dissipentur etiam, qui sub specie aedificandi, devastant templum
Altissimi. Faxit Dominus, ut nunquam conteratur and labefactetur religio ab
ipsa religione! hoc est, praxis ejus sincera, and infucata; ab inani, jejuna,
spumosa and jactabunda professione. Quantum ad nos dispensatores, and legatos
tuos; hoc solum habemus residui, ut oculos nostros dirigamus ad te; ut fiduciam
nostram in te, qui es mons aeternitatis, omnino reponamus; and hoc solatio,
inter minas, and vulnera, exultamus maxim; quod Deus noster, quem spiritu
nostro colimus, cui pro viribus servimus, potest eripere nos de camino ignis,
and de manibus inimicorum liberare. Ipse potis es Domine, and ipse solus,
squallorem nostrum excutere, lacrymas abstergere, genua titubantia and
collidentia confirmare, stolas nostras sepulchrales solvere, and exuere: de
Bochim and Calvaria, in montem Ararat and Tabor possis transfer; ut coronis
redimiti, and vestimentis laudumk amicti, tandem redivivi plaudamus, and hisce
oculis, Sionem quietam, and ecclesiam videamus Aciem ordinatam, qua doctores,
and docti; pastores, and populi, tanquam agmen quadratum, viis suis, and
ordinibus incedant unanimes. Utcunque statutum est; licet ut sal infatuatus,
aut ut quisquiliae in sterquilinium projiciamur; tibi chari simus Pater
omnipotens! and in deliciis habiti, etiam in stercore. Been erit torrentibus in
flamma, si nobiscum perambulet Christus: been erit, si in cineres etiam
redigamur, dummodo ex cineribus nostris, ex ruinis, and exuviis, prodeant and
oriantur homines, qui evangelium magis adornent, qui pietatem, gloriamque tuam
propagent melius, and promoveant* per famam bonam, per infamiam; per vitam, per
mortem transire, in votis est; si in terris floreat gens sancta, and regale
sacerdotium: ipsique in Jerusalem supernam, and Ecclesiam primogenitorum, hoc
curru igneo, and turbine, quasi triumphantes, provehamur; and ita cum Christo
simus in aeternum, qui est vita vitarum, and spiritus spirituum: quo potiti;
valiant honores! valiant promotiones omnes mundanae! quem cognoscentes ut
cogniti sumus, nec fide, nec praedicantibus opus erit, nisi qui lauds agni,
and sedentis super thronum, cum tubarum clangore extollant. Cui trino and uni
Deo, hic etiam in terris, sit laus, and gloria, in secula seculorum, Amen.

FINIS.

