THE HISTORY OF CALEDONIA: OR, THE Scots Colony IN DARIEN In the West Indies.
With an Account of the Manners of the Inhabitants, and Riches of the Country.
By a Gentleman lately Arrived.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. MDCXCIX.

THE HISTORY OF Caledonia, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Erecting of the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the
Indies.
THE SCOTS having observed the great Benefits arising to all Nations by Trade,
which was not well understood, and put into Method, till about the latter end
of the Last Century, in this part of the World; and that, above all others,
that of Africa and the Indies was the most Beneficial, have long ago projected
to share in it with their Neighbors. But by the Policy of those who had
already felt the Sweets of it, and who feared a Diminution of their Gain, they
found, till of late Years, unsurmountable Difficulties.

But in the Year 1688. they having, for the most part, Early appeared in the
Revolution, and served his Present Majesty with great Zeal, they thought they
might. Justly promise to themselves a suitable Return to so great Merits. And
having managed their Business with great Dexterity, they found themselves not
frustrated of their Expectation.

About Three Years ago, under the Administration of the Earl of Twidale, who
was mightily influenced in this Affair by Secretary Johnson, Son of the late
Lord Warreston, an Act was touched by the Scepter for erecting a Company to be
called the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and tke Indies, with great
Immunities, viz. of being Custom-Free for above Twenty Years; and that all
Ships which should be taken or damaged by any other Nation, to be made Good at
His Majesty's Charge. These Two Proviso's in the Act, were a mighty
Encouragement; For by the first they were enabled to undersel their Neighbors,
and by the second they were always sure of His Majesty's Protection, being
obliged by the strongest Ties of Interest.

CHAP. II. Of the Opposition against it.
NO sooner was the News of this Act of Parliament spread abroad, but it was
opposed in England by all concerned in the East India Trade, who made a mighty
noise against it. Some indeed contemned it, and making severe Reflections upon
the Poverty of Scotland, looked upon it as a Chymerical Project; but the wiser
sort here thought it might be of dangerous Consequence; making serious
Reflections upon the great Privileges granted the New Company, thought many,
both here, in Holla^d, and other Nations, might easily be induced to join with
them; and accordingly, many began, even here, to talk of Subscriptions, and
remitting great Sums of Money; and more particularly the Hamburgers had a
Project of Subscribing an Hundred Thousand Pound. But the Parliament sitting
here about the time when the Discourse of this Great Affair was at the hottest,
the Companies most concerned, made their application to them, and prevailed so
much, that they quite dashed all Subscriptions here; and that they might, if
possibly, quite Ruin the Scottish Project, they addressed His Majesty, That he
would take all care, and use all possible Methods to suppress it; they obtained
a Promise, That some Methods should be taken, and His Majesty making some
Reflections upon what had passed, was pleased to express himself, He had not
been well served in Scotland. But the Act being passed, and the whole Kingdom
being engaged in it, it was looked upon as next to an Impossibility, to have it
Repealed. All that could be done, was to quite discourage all from Subscribing
here, and to remonstrate to the Hamburgers the Injury their Joining with the
Scots would be to the English Trade. Accordingly, Sir Paul Rycaut, His
Majesty's Minister to that Republic, had orders to press it home: Upon which
the Hamburgers put out a Declaration in Justification of themselves; and seemed
resolved to pursue their Project. But upon Cooler Thoughts, etc. considering
the mighty Benefit they received from the English Trade, they having made it
their Staple for Cloth, for the North Parts of Europe, to the mighty Enriching
of that Republic; and that it was not impossible but they might remove the
said Staple from thence to some other place, as formerly they had done from
Antwerp, to the mighty prejudice of that City; and being warmly pressed by His
Majesty's Minister, they at last resolved to desist, preferring certain Riches
before uncertain Gain.

CHAP. III. Of the Progress of the Company.
THE Scots seeing that no Subscriptions from England were to be expected, the
Frowns of the Parliament having quite disincouraged all here; and that the
Hamburgers were for preferring a present and certain Gain before Great
Expectations, being resolved to Keep all measures with England, they resolved
to stand upon their own bottom, and to show to the World that they were not so
Chymerical as some gave out, they set themselves more warmly to carry the
Project on, and accordingly subscribed 400000 l. most of the Nobility and
Gentry, and all the Cities and Royal Boroughs unanimously concurring, giving
the World a sufficient Proof that Scotland was neither so Poor, nor so
Dis-jointed, as some people would have it believed. This Great Foundation being
laid, the Superstructure went on apace; First, they bought them a Noble House
in Miln-Square in Edenborough, to serve both for the Offices of the Company,
and a Warehouse. Then they began to build and buy Ships, both for Burden and
War, the chief of which are the St. Andrew, the Unicorn, the Caledonia, the
Dolph^n and the Endeavor. And here it is not improper to remark, that before
this late Revolution they had no Men of War in Scotland; but now being partly
necessitated by the Long War, and to carry on the Designs of the Company, they
have a pretty good Squadron, some of them of 60 Guns a-peice and upwards.

After they had procured Ships sufficient for the present Designs of the
Company, there was a great Debate among the Company, to what part of the Indies
the Ships should be sent: and this part of the World was amused with va^ious
Rumors of the Scots Designs. But the first Project laid by Mr. Paterson, about
Ten Years ago, for settling a Colony in the Isthmus of Darien, prevailed.
Accordingly Three Stout Ships and Two Tenders were Equipped in the Port of
Leith in the Frith, and all manner of Provision and Warlike Stores put on
Board, with about Twelve Hundred Seamen and Soldiers, the Complement of the
last being the most Select Foot of Scotland; they sailed from the Frith with a
prosperous Gale, and went round by the Orcades, and having a prosperous Voyage,
about the middle of November, the last Year, School. arrived safe in the Bay of
Darien, having lost few or none of their men.

As soon as they were arrived safe in the Bay, after their hearty Thanks to
Almighty God for their safe Arrival, they fell to sounding the Coasts, and
found within a great Chain of Islands (among which is the Golden Island, by the
Spaniards called St. Katherine), a most large and Capacious Port, where Ships
of the greatest burden may safely ride secure from wind and weather.

The Entrance of the Port, to which they have given the Name of the Port of New
St. Andrew, is not above Canon-shot over; so that it is very capable of being
defended against the Attacks of any Enemies, they having already raised
Platforms for that End. Upon the Low Neck of a Promontory within the Bay, which
contains not above Thirty Acres of Land, they have begun to build them such
Houses as so short a time can give them leave; which they have covered over
with the Leaves of the Tree called Plantain, whose Leaves are about a Foot and
a half long: For the better security of the New Fort, they have cut the Isthmus
or Neck of Land on which it stands, for about 130 paces and let in the Sea. So
that it has no Communication with the Land, but by a Bridge in this Fort they
have already Mounted 50 Guns, and placed in it a Garrison of near 600 Men.

As soon as they had fortified themselves against all sudden surprises, they
sent Deputies to treat with the Indians of which you shall have a particular
account after the General Description in the following Chapter.

CHAP. IV. A short Description of the Country of Darien; Now called Caledonia.
THE Country of Darien, is one of the most Famous Isthmus's in the World, It Is
about a hundred and twenty Miles long, and threescore broad. If it were
possible to Cut a Channel from Sea to Sea, capable of Shipping, it would
facilitate the Navigation of the World two Parts in three; but it is next to an
impossibility, for it is almost a continued Chain of Mountains, of which some
are as high as any of the Alps; especially those toward the North Part, which
is only described in these Papers, none of the Colony being able to give so
exact an Account of the South as yet.

The Valleys are watered with Rivers and Perpetual clear Springs, which are
most pleasant to drink, being as soft as Milk and very Nourishing.

The Rivers that fall into the North Sea, because of their short course are not
Navigable; for they have their rise from the high Chain of Hills above, which
reaches all along the Isthmus, within twenty Miles, and sometimes less of the
Sea. From the top of the Hills, is one of the most pleasant Prospects
imaginable; for you have there a clear view of the North Sea, and the Various
making of the shore, together with the Adjacent Islands, which are called
Samballas, between which, and the continent runs a Channel about a League over;
which makes all along the Coast Numberless safe Harbors, and supplys the
defects of the Rivers which are small, and commonly (because of the Violent
Land Floods in the rainy season, that carries down infinite Earth and Mud) are
barred with flat Oazy Shol's.

These Hills are Clothed with tall Trees without any underwood, so that one may
Gallop conveniently among them, many Miles free from Sun and Rain, unless of a
great continuance. The Air makes on the tops of the Trees a pleasant
Melancholy Music, so that one of the Colony considering the Coolness,
Pleasant Murmuring of the Air, and the infinite beauty of a continued Natural
Arbor, called them the shades of Love.

Between these Hills and the Sea, are gentle declivities and a rich fat soil
full of all manner of Vegetables, among which are many not known to us in
Europe. It Is capable of any improvement, but toward the shore in many places,
especially near the Mouths of Rivers are Morasles, in which grows a Tree which
rises from several Roots, to which was given the Name of the Stilt Tree,
because the Roots like Stilts are entangled one among another. It Is a Tree of
about a foot Diameter. It has red bark and may be good for dying and dressing
of Leather. This Tree is very troublesome to Travelers, because it makes a
continued thicket.

The whole Country is comprehended between the eight and tenth degree of
Northern Latitude, and has its Name from the River called Darien; whereby its
Northern Coast is bounded to the East. It Is more subject to Rain than any other
Country in the same Latitude, because of its Mountainous situation, between
the Atlantic or Northern Ocean, and the pacifick or mare del Zur. The Rains
begin in May, and last four or five Months, but are very gentle at first like
April showers, but after are more Violent, insomuch, that sometimes they make a
kind of a deluge covering the ground in some places seven or eight Foot all on
a sudden, and carrying down Trees with great Impetuosity, but those that are
acquainted with the Country know how to avoid the danger. But those Rains even
in the wettest months are not so continued, but there are many fair Days, and
sometimes a week together with small Thunder, showers and refreshing breeses of
Air. The pleasant dry Months are December, January, February, March and April.
The Sky is then very serene, and not so much as a Cloud to be seen, and
notwithstanding the warm situation of the Climate, it is extremely Pleasant,
every thing having a fresh verdure and odor, the Air gently fanning the
Inhabitants, so that the heat is so far from being troublesome that it is
delectable.

But the Country tho it be Rich and Fruitful on the surface, is yet far Richer
in its Bowels, there being great Mines of Gold; for the Deputies were certainly
informed that not above twelve Leagues from New Edenborough, was a great Mine
of this precious metal, on which were employed near a Thousand Blacks, and
that in the River of Sancta Mena; which is not above Thirteen Leagues from this
Colony, and which falls into the South Sea, the Spaniards every year get Gold
dust to the value of a Million.

And here it may not be unpleasant to the Reader, to give him an Account of the
manner of getting the Gold dust, which is as follows. They have little Wooden
Dishes which they dip into the water and take it up half full of sand, and at
every dipping they find some Gold mixed with the sand, they shake the sand and
the Gold goes to the bottom, and the sand rises and goes over the brim of the
Dish with the water, then with a Loadstone they extract the Iron dust from it,
and so it is clear from any other oar or filth. This can only be done in the
fair Season, for the Rivers are too deep in the wet, and then is the Gold
brought down by the impetuous deluge from the Mountains. It Is easy to guess
from this what vast Mines may in time be discovered, when Art and Industry are
joined together, and of what importance it will be to Great Britain, to take
all possible measures to preserve this Colony.

CHAP. V. Of the reception of the Deputies of the Council by the Dariens, and
of their Manners and Customs.
THE Reader in the third Chapter, had mention of a League made between the
Dariens and the Company: It will not be improper here, to give an Account of
the reception of the Deputies and the manners of Indians.

After the Colony had refreshed themselves a shore, and taken all possible
precautions against any sudden surprise, by such fortifications as could be
made in so short a time; It was agreed on by all, that it would add much to the
security of the enterprise, if they could enter in a League and strict bond of
friendship with the Indians, whom they knew to be great Enemies to the
Spaniards, who had endeavored to extirpate them, but could never prevail by
reason of the invisible paths of the Country. Accordingly some Deputies were
sent out, among whom was Mr. Paterson, the chief Projector of the whole design.
They found the Indians were, as it is before related, very tractable, and had
certain intelligence that one of their great Kings (as they call their chief
Captains in their Language) was not far off upon the great ridge of the
Mountains, and would be very glad to understand their design, and enter into
any League against the Spaniards whom they Mortally hated. They set out with a
small train to give no occasion of Jealousy, and had several slight
Merchandises; as Beads, Linen and Woolen Clothes and other things, which they
knew would be acceptable presents to the wild Indians.

They found the Country, through which they passed, of an exceeding Rich soil,
but much covered with Wood as above related, only here and there they met with
some places which the Indians called in their Language Savannah's; where they
plant their Mari, a kind of Corn something like wheat, upon little hillocks, at
a little distance one from another. These Savannahs are not level, but consist
of small Hills and Valleys, with pleasant spots of Wood intermixed, which serve
both for pleasure and profit, of which more hereafter.

The Indians were so secure, that they saw several of them sleeping in Hammocks
tied to two Trees, and had no other covering or Canopy, but large Plantan
Leaves, for they were told by their Priests, or rather Magicians (who went a
Conjuring, which they call Panawing, as soon as our Fleet arrived) that the
People newly arrived, would be a great assistance against the Spaniards their
Enemies, and would never molest them in any matters of Religion, but live in
good Correspondence with them; if they failed not on their Part.

The Panawing is performed, as the Deputies were informed, with hideous
yellings and shrieks, in which they imitate sometimes the hissing of Serpents,
sometimes the croaking of Toads, sometimes the yelping of Foxes and Barking of
Dogs; to which they join the noise of several stones struck together, and of a
sort of Drums made of Bambo's; they labor so hard and strain themselves so
much, that they are all in a great sweat, and often fall into strange ecstasies
and trances for a considerable time, and then renew their shrieks again, till
the Oracle be given. The great Enemy of mankind and lover of discord invited by
such jarring Music, at last visibly appears and audibly gives his Answer,
which for the most part proves exactly true, that he may the better delude
these poor Creatures, who stand in great awe of him.

But to return to where we left off, after they had made two easy days Journey,
they arrived at the place where the King was, which was on the top of a very
high Hill, which had a Noble Prospect toward the North Sea, as far as the Eye
could reach, and was Crowned with a most Noble Grove of Stately Trees; some of
which were eleven Foot Diameter, which bears a Cod about the bigness of a
Nutmeg, full of short Wool, which when ripe is blown about by the wind, and is
of small use; tho it is something like Cotton.

As soon as the King had intelligence that the Deputies were near at hand, he
sent a few Persons of the best Quality to Conduct them to his presence: these
were attended with a sort of Musicians who played upon a kind of Pipes made of
small hollow Bamboes, and Reeds full of notches, with which they made a kind of
whining noise, but nothing Musical to European Ears, and all the Company, to
keep Consort, made a humming at the same time to themselves.

As they approached nearer, they were diverted with a Dance of 40 Men in a
Ring, who stretched out their hands and laid them on one another shoulders,
moving gently sideways round in a Circle, wrigling themselves into a thousand
ridiculous Postures, something like the Highland Dances in Scotland: After they
had Danced a pretty while, one of the Company jumped out of the Ring and Played
several Antic Tricks, throwing and catching a Lance, bending back toward the
ground, and springing forward again with great Activity, to the no small
admiration of the Deputies.

Most of them were six foot high, strait and clean limbed, big-bon'd and full
breasted, their faces were round, with short bottle Noses, Eyes large and
sparkling, white even Teeth.

Their hair was strait, long and black, which they wore down to the middle of
their back or lower, hanging loose at it is full length, they often scratched
their heads, and when they found any lice, they would immediately put them in
their Mouth and eat them; it is supposed they have not the use of Combs.

They had no Beards, neither does any of the Nation wear any, but has it, as
well as the hair in other parts, pulled up by the Roots, by their Women, except
the Eyebrows and Eyelids; for which purpose, because they have not the use of
small Pincers, they most dexterously make use of two sticks, between which they
pinch the hair and pluck it up.

Their Color, as is the rest of the Nation, was Orange Tawney (for this
description may serve for the whole Nation, and therefore the digression is the
longer) they had newly anointed themselves with Oil, which they make use of, to
make their Bodies shine and to make their Skin smooth and supple, and hinder it
from Parching; they had drawn upon their Skins many Figures of Birds, Fishes
and Trees, in many parts of their Bodies, but especially of their Faces, the
colors were red, yellow and blue, they are laid on with Pencils made of jagged
and beaten sticks.

They were quite Naked, and had not so much as a rag about them, only a piece
of a Plantain Leaf, which was rolled up into the Figure of an extinguisher, and
but half covered their privities.

They had all a piece of an Oval thin Plate of Gold, which covered their Mouth
from corner to corner, and hung dangling over their Lips, being fixed to the
inner part of the Nose.

They had several Chains of teeth, shells, Beads, hanging from the Neck down
upon the Breast, and to the Pit of the Stomach, which was looked upon by them
as the greatest piece of Finery, and the more weighty and more numerous the
Chains are, the more they value themselves upon their Dress.

But to put an end to this long, yet necessary Digression: When they were come
to the top of the Hill, and almost in sight of the King, to show how welcome
they were to both Sexes; they were entertained by a Dance of Women, who behaved
themselves with great modesty and activity, dancing in a Ring, as the men did.

The had every one of them a piece of Cotton Cloth about their middle, tied
behind with a Thread, hanging down to their Ankles: they were very plump and
fat, well shaped, and had lively brisk Eyes, but something short, and a little
too thick.

Their Features were very regular, their Hair long and black, which was tied
together with a string just behind the Head.

These Women danced still before the Depu^ies, till they were arrived in the
King's Presence, whom they found seared under a Tree of an extraordinary
bigness, upon a kind of a Throne made of several Logs of Wood, piled neatly one
upon another, and covered with a sort of Party-colored Cloth, which he had
purchased of the Spaniards for a great Sum of Gold; he had on his Head a Diadem
of Gold Plate, about ten Inches broad, indented at the top, lined within with
Network, made of small Canes, and a Robe shaped something like a Frock, of
Cotton, down to his heels, with a Fringe of the same Cotton above a Span long,
with short wide open Sleeves, reaching only to the middle of his Arms; his Face
was painted with Red, as if he designed War upon some of his Neighbors; he had
a Plate of Gold hanging over his mouth, of an Oval Figure, covering his mouth
from corner to corner; he had hanging at each Ear a Pendant made of two large
Plates of Gold, fastened to a Ring, the one hanging before to the Breast, and
the other behind on the shoulder: the Plates were about 8 Inches long, and
shaped like a heart.

Those who attended him wore on their Heads a kind of a Diadem made of Cane
work, indented and jagged at the top, wrought very fine, and well painted, set
round at the top with long beautiful Feathers, in the form of a Crown.

They all wore several Chains of Teeth, hanging down from the Neck above a
Foot. The Teeth were all indented and overrun, tallied and notched exactly
with the other, which made them look like a solid piece of Bone.

The Deputies, after they had made a Low Obeisance to his Majesty, were
conducted by the Master of the Ceremonies, who is always a principal man, to
some Seats made of Logs of Wood, covered with Cotton Cloth, just over against
the King's Throne, but much lower. After they were seated, they were by the
same Master of the Ceremonies commanded to give an account of the Affairs they
had to transact with his Majesty. Then Mr. Paterson, the First of the Embassy,
rose up, and after due reverence, made a short and pithy Speech; the substance
of which was, That they were come from the uttermost Coast of the World, being
the Subjects of a Mighty Prince, to admire his Grandeur, to establish Traffic,
and to make a strict League with him against all Enemies whatsoever.

There was a most profound silence during the Speech, and it was obferved that
his Majesty smiled, and often twirled the Plate of Gold which covered his
mouth, which was a fign that he was extremely pleased. But I cannot here omit
one thing which happened just when the Speech was ended, which was no small
cause of Laughter: A Drove of Monkeys came leaping up and down the Branches of
the Trees, and made an extraordinary squeaking, sometimes breaking the little
Branches, and throwing them down among the people, and pissed among them, and
hung down by one another's Tails, in a Chain; and swinging in that manner till
the lowermost caught hold of a Bough of another Tree, and drew up the rest;
and it is by this means that they pass from top to top of high Trees, whose
Branches are a little too far asunder for their leaping. The Indians looked
upon this as a very good Omen, and interpreted it thus, That as the Monkeys by
this Stratagem were a mutual assistance one to another, so the Scots and
Indians would be, and that all would end in pleasure and profit.

After this little Diversion was over, all was hushed again in a profound
silence. Then, by his Majesty's Order, a Noble Indian stood up, and made a
Speech; the substance of which was, That the bearded Men were welcome; that
there should be nothing wanting that they could possibly assist them in; that a
League should continue while Gold and Floods were in Darien (an Expression used
there to signify Perpetuity) and that they might be assured of it the more, his
Majesty would Swear it by his Teeth, and Touching of Lips with his Fingers.

After the Speech was ended, the Deputies were ordered to withdraw, which they
did, making a Profound Reverence to his Majesty. Then they were conducted to a
pleasant cool place; at a little distance from the place of Audience; where
they were entertained with a sort of Drink made of Indian Mace, which was very
strong, but of a Sourish Taste, and is very windy.

The Deputies asked if they had any other sort of Drink? Upon which presently
was brought in great Calabashes a milder drink, called, Mislaw, which is made
of Ripe Plantains, which is not unpleasant to the Palate. After they had been
treated in this place about an hour, a Message came from his Majesty to invite
them to Dinner, which was made ready under another huge Tree; for Houses here
are none; this being only a place for Summers Diversion, where they fear no
Rain or change of weather for some months.

They found the King Seated on a low Seat, with some few of the Nobility
standing about him; after due reverence paid him, they were commanded to sit
down at a little distance from His Majesty, who was at the head of the Table
which was made of twigs, most curiously wrought, and covered thick with
Plantain Leaves, instead of Cloth and Napkins, and instead of Knives, there was
a kind of a Dagger which they use in War, called a Macheat: In the middle of
the Table was an Earthen Vessel full of salt, which is very scarce in the inner
Parts of the Country, and another of Pepper, which is very plentiful, and much
used in Dressing all their Victuals.

The first course was of flesh meat, which was stewed in very small Pieces in a
Pipkin, with Roots and Green Plantains, and Bonanos, with a great deal of
Pepper, which was stewed too much and poured out into Earthen Dishes; It
relished extremely well, and perfumed the whole place.

The next Course was for the most Part of the flesh of two sorts of Beasts,
called by Indians Peccory and Narree, which was broyled upon Grid-Irons made of
Wood; it was served up without any sauce; but when it came to the Table, one of
the waiters strew it all over with Salt and Pepper.

The third and last Course was of Fish, some boiled in Earthen Pipkins with
Pepper and Bonanos, and some broiled upon the Indian Grate, called Barlecues.

After all, for a kind of desert was served in dried Plantains, Bonanos, and a
kind of a musk Fig with some Bastard Cinnamon, with which the Country abounds.

Every one had at his right hand, two or three Calabashes of several of the
abovementioned Liquors, to take and drink when he pleased without any Cups,
and another of Curious Spring Water.

The King in Eating, dipped his two fore fingers of the right hand bent hook
wise, and took up therewith out of the Dish as with a spoon, as much as he
could, stroking it a Cross into his mouth. After every mouthful, he dipped his
fingers into the water by his side, for Cleanliness and Coolness, sor the meat
he eat is excessive hot; he eat no bread with it; but at every three or four
mouthfuls he dipped his finger in the salt and strok't over his Tongue.

All Dinner time he was entertained with Music, Vocal and Instrumental, which
seemed to be very diverting to him; tho to the Guests it seemed harsh and
jarring; the subject of it, was the great Achievements of himself, and
Ancestors, and concluded with a Song to welcome the Guests.

After Dinner was over, the Deputies withdrew and were Conducted to the place,
where they had refreshed themselves after the morning Audience.

CHAP. VI. Their Game and Manner of Hunting.
THEY had not been long there, when a Messenger came to them to ask them if
they would be pleased to divert themselves with Hunting, for News was brought
the King, that a great drove of Peccary was come down the Hills. This Peccary
is a kind of a wild hog, very black with little short Legs, yet runs swiftly.
Its Navel is upon the back, and if upon the killing this Beast, the Navel is
not cut away from the Carcass within four hours at farthest, it taints all the
flesh and makes it stink intollerably; but if it be taken away, it will keep
well several days, and is well tasted and very Nourishing Meat. But to return
to our discourse, all things were made ready, the Dogs were brought out, which
are small ill shaped Curs, with rough straggling hair and very slow; So that
they rather serve for starting Game, then running it down. The Hunters which
were all on foot, here being no Horses, had every one his Bow and Arrows, his
Lance, and a long Knife which they call a Macheat; being thus accoutred, they
set forward, and the Women made frequent Prayers for their success. The King
with the Deputies stood upon a Hill, where was an excellent Prospect, and where
they saw the whole Hunting without scarce moving a step; with their Men and
Dogs and some Nets they had (which are made of a sort of Grass that we called
silk Grass, of which strong thread is spun) they surrounded four or five of
them, so that they could not easily escape. They seemed not to value the Dogs
which durst not attack them, but stood barking at them, as it were at Bay. But
the Hunters from behind some shrubs, shot them with their Arrows, and they made
away with several of them in their Bodies, and run very fast for a while, but
the loss of Blood soon stopped their Carreer. Then they came in with their Dogs
and Killed them with their Lances in a trice, then they cut them into four
quarters immediately, and raised a mighty shout, which was Answered by the King
and the People about him; some Playing upon a kind of a Trumpet made of Bambo,
and sounded in an unmusical strain, the Death of the Peccary; as soon as the
Peccary was brought to the King, he made the Deputies a Present of two of them.

At Night they took leave of the King, and were Conducted to the forementioned
place of retirement, where were hung several large Hammocks made of silk Grass,
and tied from Tree to Tree; the Night was pleasant and refreshing, and every
body slept as well as if he had been in the best furnished Chamber; there was
all round a mighty silence, and the pleasant murmuring of the wind in the tops
of the Trees gently moved us to sleep; neither were we troubled with the least
fly or insect, which are very ttoublesome in low swampy ground. But it is not
here to be forgot, that a proffer was made of some young Women to solace the
Deputies, which was modestly refused. Every body slept soundly till about Sun
rising, when we were awaked by a noise of Pawnaners, of which enough has been
said above.

CHAP. VII. Of their return to Fort St. Andrews.
AFter they had dressed and refreshed themselves with some of the Peccary
Barlecued, or broiled upon a Wooden Grate, they walked up and down those
pleasant Groves, and passed two Days more with almost the same Entertainment
and Ceremonies as at first. The third day Early in the Morning they had their
Audience of Conge; and several young Boys of the Chief Nobility, were
recommended to the Deputies to be Educated, and to Learn the Scottish Language,
who were kindly received by them; who were glad to have so many Pledges for the
observation of the Treaty, and which was the greatest mark imaginable of their
sincerity, they were re-conducted down the Hills with almost the same
Ceremonies and Dancings they had at their coming up. All was pleasant and gay,
only the mothers of the young boys made at first a mighty howling, and beating
of their Breasts; but they were comforted by their Husbands, who told them, It
would only be for a while, and that the Deputies would send some Boys of their
Nation to be trained up in their stead.

In our return we met with a sort of Wild Hog, called Warree by the Indians: It
is very good Meat; it has little Ears, but very great Tusks, and the Hair, or
Bristles, is covered with a long and thick Set. It Is a fierce Creature, and
dreads no Beast whatsoever: But one of the Company quickly dispatched it with a
Slug shot out of a Fowling Piece. The Noise of the Shot rouzed at the same time
a stately horned Buck, who made his escape.

We saw abundance of Rabbets, which are as ^^^ge as Hares, which have no Tai^s,
but little short Ears, with huge large long Claws: They have no Buroughs, but
lodge in the Roots of Trees. Several of them were Killed. They are excellent
Meat, and eat much moister than European Rabbets.

We met with whole Droves of Monkeys, most of them black, some few white; some
with large Beards, others Beardless, which were then fat, the Fruits being
ripe, and are very agreeable meat.

We saw many other sorts of Animals, of which a further Account will be given
in a particular Treatise, by an ingenious Gentleman who designs the Natural
History of these parts. But we neither saw Bullock, Horse, Ass, Sheep, Goats,
nor so much as a Cat, tho they be much troubled with Rats and Mice. So that one
may make their Fortunes by Cats, as Whittington did, who was twice or thrice
Mayor of London, which confirms that common Tradition of his sudden acquiring
of great Riches.

The Country we returned through was very Woody, only here and there were some
pleasant large Savanals, where grows great plenty of Maiz, which makes a
substantial strong Bread, but it eats something dryer and harsher than our
Wheat. It produces a wonderful increase, above a Thousand for One. The Planting
and Gathering of it is the Work of the Women. The men's Employment is only
hunting and fishing.

There are infinite quantities of Cedar, very high and large. The Wood is very
Red, of a curious Grain, and of a very fragrant smell The only use they make
of them is for Canoa's and Periago's, the first being much less than the
second; which latter sometimes, tho all of one Tree hollowed, will conveniently
carry fifty or threescore men.

There are great store of Plantains which produce an excellent Fruit: The
Indians set them in Rows, and they make very delightful Groves.

Bonano's grow here in great plenty: They are a sort of Plantains; the Fruit is
short and thick, sweet and mealy; it eats excellently well raw; but the
Plantain eats best when it is boiled.

But the Crown of all is that Delicious Food which we call the Pineapple,
shaped something like an Artichoak, as big as a man's head. It grows like a
Crown on the top of a stalk, about the thickness of an ordinary man's Arm, and
a Foot and a half high. The Fruit is commonly 7 pound weight, enclosed with
short prickly Leaves. This Fruit has no Kernel in it. It Is very juicy, and
seems to taste of all the Delicious Fruits together. It ripens at all times of
the Year, and is raised from new Plants. The Leaves of the Plant are broad,
about a Foot long, and grow from the Root. Some of the Company would have
called it, The Vegetable Manna, which would have been no improper Name; for it
has a thousand Delights in its Taste, and may supply the Defects of all sorts
of Fruits. Its Leaves serve for covering of Houses, and Bed-cloaths over the
Hammocks. Two or three of them will defend one from the Sun and the Rain.

We saw Sugarcanes in abundance; but the Indians know not how to make Sugar;
they will carry them as they walk, under their Arms, and now and then take a
piece of one of them and chew it, and suck out the Juice.

Bastard Cinnamon Trees grow in most places, which bear a sort of a Cod
something shorter than a Bean Cod, but much thicker. It Is thought if they were
transplanted, the Bark might in time be little inferior to the famed Cinnamon
of Ceilon.

There grows plentifully two sorts of Pepper, the one called Bell-Pepper, the
other Bird-Pepper, which are both much used by the Indians; both sorts grow on
a shrubby Bush, about a Yard high. The Bird-Pepper has the smaller Leaf, and is
much more esteemed by the Indians, and is capable of great Improvements.

Red Wood, fit for Dyers, is no less plentiful than the former. The Trees are
commonly about 40 Foot high, about the thickness of ones Thigh. The Indians
with this, and a Kind of Earth, dye Cottons for their Hammocks. It makes a
bright lively Red.

The Tobacco that grows here is not so strong as that in Virginia, which we
attributed to their want of Skill in managing it; for they raise it only from
Seed, and never transplant it, as they do in all the Tobacco-Countries. When
it is cured, they strip it from the stalks, and laying 2 or 3 Leaves upon one
another, they roll up all together sideways, into a long Roll, leaving a little
hollow; round this they roll other Leaves, closed hard, till it be as big as
ones Wrist, and 2 or 3 foot long: They smoke it in Company thus: A boy lights
one end of the Roll, and burns it to a Coal, wetting the part next it, to keep
it from wasting too fast. The end so lighted he puts into his mouth, and blows
the smoke through the whole length of the Roll into every body's Face in the
Company. Then they sitting in their usual Posture upon Forms, make with their
hands held hollow together, a kind of Funnel round their Mouths, and Noses,
they snuff it up greedily, and are extremely pleased, and look on it as the
greatest of Refreshments.

These were the most remarkable things we observed in our going and returning,
besides great variety of Fowl, which deserve a more particular Account; which
is let to the Author of the Natural History, here being no room for such large
Accounts.

As soon as we were come within sight of St. Andrews Fort, we all fell down on
our Knees to give God most hearty thanks for our Success, and happy Return, and
were presently met by a great part of the Garrison. Never were People so
caressed, tears of Joy standing in every bodies eyes; and there was great
striving among them about getting the Education of the Indian Boys, who in so
short a time had most of them learned a great many words of our Language. So
that it is not doubted but in a short time they will attain the Perfection of
it, as some of our Little ones will do of theirs, who are speedily to be sent
to remain with the Indians, according to the Agreement in the League, which
it is hoped will ptove as advantageous to Scotland, as that made between
Charlemain and King Achaius.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Advantages of the Situation of the Fort St. Andrew, and
the Interest of preserving it, and the Dangers that threaten it; With the
Conclusion of the History.
THE Spaniards, whom it highly concerns, will do their utmost to disturb us,
but unless they be assisted by some other Nation, we have no great Reason to
fear them; for the daily confluence from all parts, of great Shoals of People,
the Strength of the Situation of Fort St. Andrew, the League with the Indians,
and the frequent Defiles will render it an Enterprise too difficult for them.
They made some feeble Attempts from St. Maria; but we dispatching a few select
men, under the Command of Capt. Montgomery, met them in a Plantain Walk,
quickly dispersed them, took above 100 Prisoners, and among the rest their
Chief Commander Don Domingo de la Rada, who is as yet a Prisoner at Fort St.
Andrew, and will be continued there till we have a Good Account of the
Spaniards treatment of Capt. Pinkarton, who commanding the Dolphin Tender, was
forced by distress of weather under the Walls of Carthagena, and made Prisoner
last February, a little before the abovementioned Skirmish happened.

As we grow stronger, we shall endeavor to procure a part in the South Sea,
from whence it is not above 6 weeks Sail to Japan, and some parts of China. So
that bating distress of weather, by bringing the Commoditys of those Countries
over this narrow Isthmus, the Riches of those Kingdoms may in 4 or 5 months
time arrive in Europe.

What Interest England has in concurring to the Preservation of this Colony,
it is needless to dispute, since they have Arts and Means to share in the Riches
of Scotland; And all our Nobility and Gentry must, for their own Interest,
attend the Court of England, and consequently disperse their money among them.
All these Circumstances concurring, makes us hope it will be one of the most
thriving Colonies in the world, and that all Attempts against it will prove
abortive, which ought to be the wish of all the Inhabitants of Great Britain.

FINIS.

