ENGLAND'S Weal and Prosperity PROPOSED: OR, REASONS For Erecting Public
VVork-Houses In every COUNTY, For the speedy promoting of Industry and the
Woollen Manufactory, showing how the Wealth of the Nation may be increased,
many Hundred thousand pounds per Annum. And also that many Thousand persons may
be so Reformed, to their own and the whole Kingdoms present and future Wealth
and Glory, that there may no more be a Beggar bred up in the Nation.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Great Wisdom of the Nation, and
presented to the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS.

By R. HAINES.

To which is added A Model of Government for such Works Houses prepared by the
same Author, and Printed in the year (79) intended to have been presented to
the last Parliament.

Pursuant to a Breviate of Proposals for the promoting of Industry, and speedy
restoring the Woollen Manufactory, by him formerly published.

(...)

To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD, Knt. Lord MAYOR of LONDON.
My Lord,
THough the ensuing Reasons, by the Nature of the Thing, are addressed to the
Honorable House of Commons, whereof you are so valuable a Member; It being
that Great Council, whose United Votes can alone promote with Effect, what is
herein humbly offered. Yet, my Lord, by reason this Work is of very great
Import, and (as in all such Cases) requires the more time to demonstrate the
Value, Usefulness, Necessity and Feaseableness thereof, or otherwise is apt to
be neglected or thrown by; Therefore I have taken the boldness to Dedicate the
same in particular to your Honor, as a most proper Advocate and Patron, humbly
entreating, that as you are a known Public Spirited Promoter and Encourager of
all things tending to the Weal, Safety and Prosperity of the King and Kingdom,
so your Honor would be pleased to recommend these Reasons and the Matter
Proposed, to that Honorable House, and to improve your Interest to have the
same read before them, If after your Perusal, your Honor shall find them
worthy of such your Countenance and Approbation; wherein I hope you will do
your King, City and Country no inconsiderable Service, as well as a very great
Honor to,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant, Richard Haines,

England's Weal and Prosperity Proposed: Or, Reasons for the Erecting Public
Workhouses in every County, etc.
FOrasmuch as our Wool is the main Support of that Trade which maintains and
increases the Wealth, Strength and Glory of the English Nation; therefore, of
all Commodities of our own Growth, this ought to be most carefully maintained
and encouraged in that way it is THVS SERVICEABLE, which consists not in the
Exportation of unwrought Wool, nor in the Consumption of our Woollen-Draperies
at Home; but in the Exportations of, and quick Markets for our
Woollen-Draperies abroad, as fast as they can be made and spared at home; That
this may be done, and that for the doing thereof, Public Workhouses to be
Erected in every County, will be a most certain and effectual Expedient. These
following Reasons are prepared for the Satisfaction of all concerned therein.

Reason I.
Because such Workhouses (are no New Project, but) have already in Fact proved
the best Expedients to bring all. Idle, poor People, Beggars, Vagrants, etc.
into such a Habit of Industry, that there is not a Beggar, etc. bred up, or
suffered in those Countries where such Houses are Erected and wellgoverned.

Reason II.
Because, without such Houses, in which such poor, and now idle People may be
kept to Labor under good Government, it is altogether improbable to convert
them to such Habit of industry, and keep them employed in such profitable
Manufactures, by which the Trade, Wealth and Safety of the Kingdom may be
promoted.

Reason III.
Because, as by these Expedients, there may not be any Beggars in the Nation,
so shall not they, or any poor People have occasion to complain for want of an
honest Employment, Food, Raiment, or Habitation.

Reason IV.
Because, by these Expedients, an Hundred or two Hundred Thousand People may be
suddenly converted, to their own, and the Nations present and future
Happiness; and as it has been the fatal Practice of this Nation, to breed up
30 or 40000 persons every Year to be maintained for Begging, etc. So by these
Expedients, they may breed up every Year successively 30 or 40000 ingenious
Cloth-makers, who may convert Wool enough to make as much Cloth as may increase
the Wealth of the Nation many Hundred Thousand pounds per Annum.

Reason V.
Because for want of such Expedients, whereby Industry, and the Woollen
Manufactory may be effectually promoted, our Wool is fallen from 12 d. to 6 d.
per pound, by reason that the number of the people at present employed therein,
are not able to convert our Wool half so fast as it grows; so that it seems
very unreasonable to prohibit the Exportation of unwrought Wool, whilst the
Expedients by which it may be converted at Home are rejected.

Reason VI.
Because, that as our Clothiers and Merchants do infallibly demonstrate, that
the Exportation of unwrought Wool, has destroyed our Foreign Markets for the
Sale of our Cloth; so it is as easy to be demonstrated, that had not such
quantities of English and Irish Wool been exported, as at present there is in
abundance, it would have fallen from 12 d. to 3 d. per pound; because as the
Stock of Wool increases, the Price must decrease. So that there is no way to
raise the Price of Wool, nor yet to keep it up where it is, but either the
Nation will be brought to extreme Poverty, or made to increase mightily in
Wealth and Power, viz. either we must Export our Wool, asdaily (especially
within these last nine Months) we do to those that destroy our Trade thereby,
or bring all idle, poor people to Industry, to convert it at Home as fast as it
grows; by which means only, our Wool will soon mount to 12 d. yea, 18 d. per
pound, which will also quickly remove the occasion for the Exportation thereof.
This being done, the Woollen Manufactures of France, Flanders, etc. will soon
be destroyed to that degree, as not to hinder the Sale of ours, seeing they
cannot make Cloth without a Mixture of our Wool, but on very unequal Terms (as
our Clothiers have affirmed before a Committee of the last Long Parliament.)
Wherefore as the ready way to destroy the Wealth and Trade of our Nation, is to
export our Wool, and maintain our many thousands of Poor in Idleness and
Debauchery: So the most certain Expedient by which we may revive and regain the
Woollen Manufactory, is to prosecute these Expedients that will bring all the
people aforesaid to Industry. By which we may raise the price of Wool at Home,
and afford our Cloth and Draperies cheaper than our Supplanters, in Markets
Abroad; which is not to be done, but by the Expedients proposed.

Obj. If it be objected, That if our Wool should be raised to 18 d. etc. per
pound, then other Nations will under-sell us with Cloth they make of French and
Spanish Wool.

Answ. To this I answer, this cannot be, because the Spanish Wool is so short
and fine, and the French so short and course, that they will neither work
together, nor yet apart, without a Mixture of ours, but upon very unequal
Terms. The Truth of this is well known and affirmed by Persons of good Judgment
and Experience.

Reason VII.
That without these Expedients for promoting Industry, all the Laws and
Statutes now in being, can never raise the Price of our Wool, nor keep it up
at the price it now yields, nor yet have it converted at Home, because all the
Wool of England and Ireland is (as it were) monopoliz'd into the Hands of the
Clothiers by Act of Parliament, notwithstanding they cannot by their present
course of Trade convert it half so fast as it grows, which being so, they may
keep down the price at their pleasure, (they having Power to hang, etc. those
that Export it from them, if they could catch them) which intolerable
grievance by the Expedients proposed, would most happily be removed, to the
great Satisfaction of all that wish well to the Interest of England.

Reason VIII.
Because, by these Expedients, many Hundreds of wellskill'd, but poor decayed
Clothiers, who have little or no Stock of their own, may promote this
Manufactory in every County, where every one of them may as easily employ 200
People in Work, in such a Public Honse, as he could Ten elsewhere.

Reason IX.
Because in such Houses a Multitude may be instructed in Art and Skill in short
time without Difficulty or Charge: For beginning upon the very coursest: Wool
there can be no Loss, but rather Advantage, because, as the coursest Cloth is
as ready Money as the finest, so the greater Quantity is made, the greater will
be the Consumption of our Wool.

But if it be doubted, That by reason of our double increase of Clothing, there
will be want of Market for our Cloth. My Answer in short, is, That if all the
Wool in Europe were converted in England, there would no more Cloth be made
than what was before: For what Wool is not converted here, is converted
elsewhere; therefore the Trade for our Draperies will be as good as ever, and
much better, seeing by the Expedients and Methods proposed, we may make and sell
our Cloth cheaper than our Supplanters. That we may under-sell them is plain,
because we have greater Advantages than any of them; we having Fullar's Earth,
they have none: Our Wool is the kindest in the World to be converted without
mixture of other; but they cannot convert theirs without some mixture of ours,
unless upon costly and unequal Terms, for the Reason beforementioned.
Therefore as by the Expedients proposed, we may double our O^^^^^^ (...) we may
under-sell them, and increase and double our Markets proportionably.

As for the Charge, it is no more, than as if every Parish were obliged to that
which Law and Reason already requires, viz. To provide Habitations and
Employments for their chargeable Poor; only with this difference, that in these
Houses, far greater Numbers will be employed, and to far greater Advantage when
under such Government as will teach them Skill and Art, administering Council,
Encouragement and Correction. So that twice the Work will be done, and less
time spent idly, than where they are apart.

Reason X.
Because without these Expedients, the Wealth and Strength of the Nation will
unavoidably be invaded and destroyed at the pleasure of those that are our
Supplanters, because the Woollen Manufactory is the grand Support of our Trade
of Merchandise: For it is affirmed by some of very good Knowledge and Judgment,
that if all the Manufactures of England that are exported, were divided into
Thirteen Parts, the Woollen Manufactures would make Ten of the Thirteen. So
that if the Expedients which may promote and uphold the Woollen Manufactory be
rejected, and our Supplanters increase in Trade, as of late years they very
much have done, then of necessity, our flourishing Trade of Merchandise, which
alone increased our Wealth and Treasure must be destroyed, together with our
Seamen and Navies of Ships, to the Hazard and Ruin of the Nation.

But were it so, that we were upon equal Terms with the Dutch in respect of
Industry, it is easy to be demonstrated, that England would excel all Nations
in the World in that Trade, which is the only Mother and Nurse to bring forth,
and increase Riches, Seamen, and Navies of Ships, etc. as appears, if we
consider, that the United Netherlands, notwithstanding their Provisions for
Bread, Beer, Flesh, Clothing, Timber, Iron, Materials for Manufactures, etc.
together with their vast Expense to maintain their Land against the (...) All
which costs them (as it is adjudged) at least ten times more than the Natural
Product of their Land is worth; yet we know, that for Trade, Fullness of People,
Moneys, Treasure, Seamen and Shipping, they are more famous than any Nation in
Europe. But now put Case their Industry were as little as ours, and that they
also were to breed up and maintain their Poor for Begging, etc. as we do in
England, might we not then infallibly conclude, That within one Age, nay in
twenty years they would be the poorest, miserable, and most despicable people
in all the world. Wherefore we having all sorts of provisions for Food and
Raiment, as it were for nothing, several hundred thousand of people to be
employed, and Materials enough of our own likewise for nothing, to make the
richest Manufactures. Our Industry, were it but proportionable to that of the
Dutch, must needs increase our Wealth three times more and faster than theirs.
So that most plain it is, that Industry, not Money, is the Life of that Trade
which increases both Money, Treasure, Seamen, and Shipping.

Furthermore, as these Houses are the Mother of Industry, so it is most certain,
That for want of the same Expedients, in every 100 l. worth of Wool exported
unwrought, there is 1000 l. losses to the Nation, our Wool being at 6 d. or 8
d. per pound, as now it is; of which, if any be not satisfied, they may thus
demonstrate it to themselves: A yard of Fine Broad-Cloth of 16 s. or 18 s.
price will not exceed a pound in weight and the like for fine Worsted Stockins
of 6 s. price will not weigh six ounces. So that put Case two pounds of Wool
should be allowed for one pound, yet still every Shilling in Wool will amount
to more than 10 s. in Cloth and Stockins, which is what was to be demonstrated.
Thus all this which might so have been got by Workmanship, etc. being ten times
the value of the Wool is clearly lost to the Nation, whilst those that might
do it are maintained for Begging, etc.

Reason XI.
Because, as by these Expedients Industry, Trade, Treasure, Seamen and Navies
will increase, so the intolerable charge bred up to such Habit of Industry, as
to learn whilst they are young, to gain their Living while they come old, so
that it will be very rare to find any chargable, but such as are mere objects
of Charity, viz. those that by Infancy, Old Age, or Sickness are incapable of
all kind of Employment, neither of which continue long.

Reason XII.
Because, (as I have again and again demonstrated by several Printed sheets) by
the Expedients proposed, the Wealth of our Nation may increase 30 or 40 hundred
thousand pounds per Annum, the greatness of which makes many rash persons
contemn all that I have proposed as a thing impossible. Nevertheless upon
diligent and repeated Inquiries and deliberate Consideration, I dare affirm,
with all Confidence, That it will amount to much more.

1. Because the Returns of our Woollen Draperies that are now Exported do
amount to more than Ten Millions per Annum; as is attested by such as are well
skilled and experienced in this matter. 2. Wherefore there being as much more
English and Irish Wool to be converted, as is now converted by the present
Course of Trade (as most certainly there is.) Then if all the people aforesaid
(being double the number of those that are now Employed therein) were brought
to Industry, as by these Expedients they certainly and speedily might, it as
certainly follows, That a double quantity of Woollen Draperies would be made.
3. And considering there is none of these Draperies to be deducted out of such
our additional Trade to be consumed at home, or to be carried to the dismal low
Markets in Golgotha, from whence there are no Returns: but the whole of what is
raised by this our New Trade, is to be Exported to such Markets as will afford
good and quick Returns. 4. It will therefore, from all this infallibly likewise
follow, That if the old, viz. The present Trade of Clothing, af(...) said does
now bring in more than Ten Millions per Annum; then must the New, out of which
there is no defalcations bring in much more.
Which at least amounts to as much as what was to be demonstrated.

But put Case we have not Wool enough to employ all the people aforesaid, yet
the Expedients still remain unshaken, because we may employ them in making of
Linen with great Advantage; For as the first will bring Treasure into the
Nation; so the other will preserve it from going out, (and then whether our
Dead be buried in Woollen or Linen it matters not.) So that the Case is plain
we have Wool enough, Hemp and Flax enough, Fullers-Earth enough, and Poor
People enough, to make Draperies enough to make our Nation to excel1 all Kingdoms
in the World in Wealth and Power, Strength and Safety: And as certainly may the
same be accomplished, to the Honor of Almighty God, and happy Reformation of
many Thousands, who are bred up in Idleness, and live in all manner of
Debauchery, and dye most miserably.

Nor may any Member that wishes well to the Interest of England oppose it: For
as for the Landlord, he above all men, ought to promote it, because the Charge
properly belongs to the Tenant or Possessor, who is accustomed to contribute to
the Relief and Maintenance of the Poor. Nor, Secondly, may the Tenant or
Possessor complain, because they will not only be much eased in such their
Charge, but vastly advantaged by quick and good Markets, for Wool, Corn and
Cattle, when so many thousands are employed more than now are, and earn, and
pay for all that they eat, drink and wear. Nay, what they now suffer by
Hous-rents, Hedg-breaking, Pilfering, and unnecessary Contributions to Beggars,
etc. amounts to near as much as will pay for the Building of these Houses: For,
put case there be 200000 Beggars and idle, chargeable People in the Nation, and
what they eat, drink and wear, amount but to 5 l. per Annum a piece, this
amounts to one Million in (...)

Reason XIII.
Because the Charge of such Houses of Industry, by which the Wealth of the
Nation may increase so many Millions per Annum, etc. considered as a National
Charge, is no Charge at all to the Nation, because the Money that must pay for
doing of it, never goes out of the Nation, but like the Blood in its
Circulation, remains within the Body for the Comfort and Benefit of every Limb
and Member. Nor has any person reason to think, that his just share of
Contribution-money might be better bestowed, seeing that by this Expedient, his
Posterity to all Generations shall be secured from Beggary, so as never to be
destitute of a Lawful Employment, Food, Raiment and Habitation.

Reason XIV.
Because, by these Expedients, His Majesty's Revenue, by the increase of
Customs, Poundage and Tollage, cannot amount to less than 100000 l. per Annum,
because answerable to the increase of Trade, so the increase of Customs will
be near proportionable: Wherefore it concerns His Majesty as much as the
Nation, to encourage the Expedients that will hasten it.

The greatest Objections raised against this Expedient, proceed from two sorts
of men, the one against it, the other for it.

1. Obj. As for the First, all that they allege centres in this, namely, That
the Expedient is impracticable, because people are generally so base, deceitful
and dishonest, that one may not trust another; and (say some) Let the Poor beg,
starve, steal, and be hanged and damned; it is best for me and mine to keep our
Money whilst we have it.

Answ. To this I shall only say, That there is no reason to account that
impracticable, which we daily see done before our Eyes by our next next
Neighbors, and to say the English are less trusty, is too gross an Affront to
be put upon our Country: However, I have offered such a Method for erecting and
Manageing these Houses, that it shall be the Interest, as and effectually to
promote the good Ends thereby designed; and as for the latter part of the
Objection, it is such a Misery, Uncharitable and Atheistical Folly, as deserves
no further Regard.

2. Obj. The most important Objection is of the latter, which calls loud for
Answer: We approve (say they) of the thing, but it is next to impossible, that
this Honorable House should take Cognizance thereof before they have
established and secured that Religion which God has appointed for his own
Worship and Service, without which, all hope of obtaining his Mercies and
Blessings for the Wealth and Prosperity of the Kingdom is in vain.

Answ. To this I answer, First, As to Religion and Worship, that is already
established by Law, etc. but how to secure this Religion, Exodus 22, 23, 24.
Isaiah 1 from the 11. to the 24 verse Isai. 58. from 1. to the 10. v Mark 10.
21, 22, 25. Luke 16. from the 19. to the 31. v. Jer. 18. 7, 8, 9, 10. and Jer.
5, 28, 29.
together with the Peace and Safety of the King and Kingdom, depends only upon
the Nations Submission unto, and Concurrence with the Will and good Pleasure of
God in other Cases, to wit, the good of the Poor, etc. without which, our
Religion and Worship, although it be the same which himself has appointed, is
altogether unacceptable, as is most fully declared by all the Prophets, and
confirmed by our Savior's own words.

We know, that God always had a Nation, Church, and People in all Ages,
(although in every Age subject to Error in an high degree) so also there was a
Babylon, etc. as a Rod in the Hand of God, to correct them for their wilful
Failings and Offenses. Litteral-Babylon in the time of the Law, and
Mystery-Babylon in the time of the Gospel. The First, to correct his People,
Kings and Princes of Israel: And the Last, to correct his own Christian Kings,
Princes and Churches under the Gospel. This we know is true, if we believe the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and modern Writings. And as true it is
also, that the Rod is now in an high manner lifted up against the whole Land,
the King, and the Church appointed; so that Misery, Desolation, Death, and
unmerciful Cruelties, do (as it were) stare in our Faces, and nothing remains
for our Comfort but this, namely, That this Revengful and Bloody Rod, is in the
Hands of a Gracious and Merciful God, who will assuredly throw it into the Fire
before it ever hurt us, if the Crying Sins by which his most Holy Majesty is
most highly provoked and displeased, be put away, whereof this ever was, and
now at this time, is one of the most intolerable and provoking Evils, namely,
The lamentable Condition of those many Thousands of Poor People, Widows, and
Fatherless Children, the many Thousands that have been, and are bred up in
Ignorance, Idleness, and all manner of Debaucheries, unserviceable to the
Nation, unfit for Church Members, and that live and die most miserably. And for
this very thing which the Most High could never endure, God was offended, and
his Wrath kindled against his own People, their Kings, and Nation, to that
Degree, that he abhorred their most Solemn Services and Worship which himself
had commanded. Yea, when by Fasting, Praying, etc. they cried unto him, he
would not hear, nor regard; it was Iniquity, even their Solemn Meeting, until
this intolerable thing was effectually reformed.

Which is an infallible Demonstration, that God has a greater Regard to the
Poor, etc. than he had to the External Religion and Worship which himself
commanded: And for this insufferable Crime, he delivered his People into the
Hands of the King of Babylon, who worshipped Images, etc. Now that the Sum of
this is true, Moses and all the Prophets do testify. And that the same Love
and Care for the one, and his Indignation against the other, remains and
continues to this day, is also as certain. Witness our Savior's Parable of the
Rich Man and the Beggar; when the Rich Man, for being regardless of the
Beggar's Condition, lift up his Eyes in the Flames of Hell, and finding it
impossible to obtain Ease or Relief, made earnest Request in the behalf of his
Brethren, That a Messenger might be sent to testify the Verity of the matter,
that they might repent, etc. But behold the Answer from Heaven was (No, let
them alone) they have Moses and the Prophets, viz. their Sayings and Writings)
if they will not hear them, neither will they be persuaded if one arose from
the Dead. Which does plainly show, that the Will and Mind of God, delivered by
Moses and the Prophets in this matter, still remains so unchangeable, that if a
man should keep all the Commandments of God besides, and offend in this
matter, it will profit him nothing: As is positively declared by Christ, when
upon this very occasion, he turned himself from the hopeful Rich Man, whom he
loved, and said, How hard is it for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of
God: It is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a
Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

So that for a Nation or Person to have more Love or Regard to Worldly Wealth,
than to the low and despicable Poor, though Beggars, or to defer the relieving
them, appears to be one of the highest provoking Sins for which God will be
avenged; and to sum up the whole, it amounts to this, that although we worship
no false God, nor bow to any Image, but do worship, the true God, according to
his Appointments, do Fast, pray, and humble our selves before him, and keep all
the rest of his Commandments from our Youth up; yet if we judge not the Cause
of the Fatherless, and the Right of the Needy, shall not I visit for these
things, says God? Shall not my Soul be avenged upon such a Nation as this? --
God Almighty grant that this may never be said of England. And to prevent the
dreadful Stroke of Babylon.

May it please this Honorable House,

To Consider, That as National Sins and Provocations incur the Displeasure of
Heaven, so likewise to reflect how much this present Parliament may concilliate
to themselves and this poor Nation, the Favor and Blessing of the Almighty;
and also how gloriously the Renown shall to all Posterity be Recorded; when by
one Act more than an Hundred Thousand shall be converted, as it were at once,
in your day, to their own, and the whole Nations present and future Happiness
(...) Posterity (yea, every individual in the Kingdom) in all Ages may call you
Blessed.

Wherefore if this Honorable House do believe, that what I have with all
Humility and Zeal to the Public, offered to your Grave and Pious
Consideration, be well pleasing to God, and accordingly be approved of by this
Honorable House (as it is by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, who has been
Graciously pleased to declare, that he would be ready in his Station, to
encourage it all he could) then my humble Petition to this Honorable House, is,

That I may obtain leave to bring in a Bill, which I have prepared, containing
such Clauses, Rules and Methods as may (with such Corrections and Amendments,
as this Honorable House shall think meet) in short time compass the Design in
such manner, that all Cheats and Frauds may be so far prevented, that the
Contributers cannot be injured unless they themselves will wilfully be
regardless of their own Interest, together with such Rules and Methods for
prosecuting the Design, as may for ever secure it from failing or ceasing after
it is begun.

FINIS.
A METHOD OF GOVERNMENT FOR SUCH Public Working ALMSHOUSES As may be Erected
in every County for bringing all idle hands to Industry. AS The best known
Expedient for restoring and advancing the Woollen Manufacture.

HUMBLY Offered to the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY and both Houses of
PARLIAMENT.

BY R. Haines

With Allowance.

A Method of Government for Public Working Almshouses, etc.
THE Scope or End aimed at, and promised by my former Proposals, is, That all
the Wool of England, and what Scotland and Ireland have to spare, may be
Manufactured in England, as fast as it grows and arises, on such Terms as that
all the Cloth we have to spare, being exported, may find quick Markets as fast
as it is made.

The Expedients or means to Effect All this; are,

First in General, To bring all poor People and idle hands to Industry.

Secondly, in particular, as the only effectual Way or Method, to do this to
the best advantage it is proposed, That two or three, or more, Public
Workhouses be Erected in every County, where all such poor people and idle
hands may under good Government be constantly employed in that Manufacture,

Which having been perused and considered by several Public Spirited Persons,
known Promoters of the Nations wealth and safety, they have generally very much
approved and encouraged the said Expedient, as most certain, feasible, and
effectual to accomplish the great and good ends aforesaid; If I could but
propose such a Method of Government in these Workhouses as the Nation may be
secured of these four things, viz. The Country from being cheated of their
Money raised for erecting and furnishing such Houses; the Poor from being
abused; unfit Persons kept from being Officers and bearing Rule in them; and
Justice from being wrested so as not to redress Grievances and punish Offenders.

Wherefore (with all submission to better Judgments) I humbly offer such a
Method of Government, as far as concerns the preservation of the Stock raised,
and prevention of Frauds and Corruptions in Officers, as will, I conceive,
remove all Apprehensions of any the before mentioned mischiefs, that so all
ju(...)

Since all Parishes are to contribute to this Work, and every Parishoner is
concerned in the Charge, and may reap Benefit by it, if honestly managed,
Therefore, because it cannot be imagined that any people will cheat or injure
themselves, let each person in every Parish be concerned in or about the
Government or Inspection thereof; as follows.

1. That it be Enacted, that all contributing Parishioners, or the greatest
part of them, meet Quarterly in their own Parish, and elect one, or more, as
their Overseer or Delegates for this Inspection; And so every Parish to choose
and send their Overseers every Quarter of the Year to inspect the State of that
house to which they belong. Each Parish neglecting to choose, to forfeit 5 l. to
the Treasury of the said Hospital. Each Overseer to be allowed 2 s. 6 d. a day
by his Parish for the time he is out on this Affair on Horseback; and 1 s. 6 d.
being out on Foot, provided that none continue out above 6 or 7 days at one
time. Or if this seem too burdensome, two, or three, or more, small Parishes
may join to this purpose as one. 2. That these Overseers, being Assembled, may
have full Power to elect Governors, prescribe Rules and Orders, choose
Trustees, appoint Officers, enquire into the Welfare of their respective Poor
there, hear and redress their Grievances, see that they be not abused or
discouraged, reform all disorders, call each Officer or Trustee to an account,
turn them out, and elect new ones as often as they think necessary, etc. To
which purpose they may subdivide themselves into several Companies, and
dispatch much business in little time. 3. That all men in this Assembly may be
of equal Authority, and no one person overruled the rest, who shall likewise
before they are admitted, oblige themselves by Oath, or solemn Promise made
before a Magistrate, to do those things that are just and honest, to suffer no
wrongs or injuries to pass uncorrected, to do nothing for favor or prejudice,
but to perform all that lies in his power for the safety and public good of
the Stock and House, and to give a (...) ted to have any Office there, but that
for the encouragement of such as are sent to the House to earn their Living,
all inferior Offices or Places of Preferment may be conferred on such of the
House as most deserve it, if capable. 5. That if it be known any Person or
Persons, directly or indirectly, has given or taken any Bribe or Fee, or
offered so to do, in order to obtain or confer any Office or Trust, or do
improve his Interest to promote or continue any dishonest scandalous person in
Office, then every such Person shall thenceforth for ever be incapable of
having or holding any Office in the said Workhouses, or giving his Voice
concerning the same in any meeting of the Parish or Overseers. 6. That the
Assembly of Overseers, with the Assistance of a Magistrate, have power to
enjoin all Officers and Trustees of the house, either by Oath or solemn
Promise, that they shall act according to such Rules and Orders as shall be
agreed on in the said Assembly; that they shall not conceal any ill Practices
in any but discover them to the next Quarterly Assembly: That they shall every
Quarter give a fair and just Account to that Assembly of all Moneys by them
received or disbursed; what Goods they buy or sell, and the quantity and
prizes, and what Goods or Money they have in their Custody; And that any one
breaking such their Oath or solemn Promise shall be punished as in the Case of
Perjury; and besides, the Offender to make satisfaction, for what he has
detained, imbeziled, or defrauded, to the house, or those that entrusted him.
7. That the Overseers neglecting at the time appointed to use their utmost
endeavor to take a true and just account of all persons entrusted, or failing
to deliver a true account thereof to their respective Parishes, shall forfeit
five pound a-piece, to be paid to the Treasury of the Hospital. 8. That for the
building and first stocking such Workhouses, every Parish, or Parishes united,
shall (till the same are finished and Government settled) send their Overseers
every Fortnight, or Month, who shall carry the proporti(...) rying on the work,
shall be chosen by such Overseers, and be accountable to them till the house be
finished and settled. 9. That if any difference arise between the Overseers of
the Parishes, and the Trustees of the House, it shall be refered to a meeting
of the respective Parishes, concerned in such Workhouse; And in case the like
difference arise between the Parishioners and their Overseers, the same be
referred to the next quarter Sessions, or if it require speed, then to two
Justices, one to be chosen by the Parish, the other by the Overseers; Provided
none shall have power to hinder the Parish or Parishes from choosing such
Overseers as they shall think most fit to be trusted; or turning out such as
they find dishonest. 10. That every Parish, and Parishes united, do bring a
fair account of what Moneys are Collected for the present year, and how
disposed of, what remains in hand, and what poor they relieve at home, and in
the Hospital, to the Justices at their Easter sitting, after the manner now
practiced. 11. That the Parishes united shall be equally Taxt at a poundrate
for the relief of their poor, and that their Taxes and accounts be confirmed by
the Justices, and that the Justices may in join the Parishes to contribute what
is fit, when otherwise they refuse, and that any poor Inhabitant when abused,
and cannot be Redressed, may make his case known to the Justice, when the
Governors or Overseers shall refuse to do their Office.
This Method of Government or Inspection I humbly offer as most safe, because
from head to foot the Interest of one Member has its dependence on the other.

1. It Is the Interest of each Parish to Elect honest Overseers, 2. It Is the
Interest of these Overseers to Act righteous things, and Elect honest Trustees,
not only because, if they betray their Trust, they are in danger of punishment
and dishonor, but also, because their own private Interest lies at stake in
the Common interest of their Parishes. 3. It Is the Interest of the Officers and
Trustees, whether Honest men or Knaves, to do honestly, because then they may
con(...), they cannot hope to conceal their misdemeanors, and then must be
severely corrected, and pay dearly for it.
Thus much for the Form of Government, as to the Governors; I shall now add a
few words concerning the Persons to be Governed; The rather for that our design
is abusively Represented, as if we intended these houses to be places of
Slavery, and to keep people per force there all their Lives, whereas we propose
only this.

1. That the Children of all poor people, who are Chargeable to the Parish, be
without abuse employed in these Houses at six years old and upwards, and all
Impotent people who are capable of employment, and do not Earn their livings at
home, having no Children under the Age of six years to be maintained. 2. That
the Men-children brought up in these Houses have their Liberty to go to Trades,
or Husbandry, when they come to the age of 18. years. And the Maiden-Children
liberty at the same age to learn Housewifry. 3. That all Beggars, Vagrants etc.
who have no habitation, nor will earn their Livings in any lawful Employment,
be placed there. 4. That all dangerous persons, Criminals, etc. Whom the law
condemns to be hanged, etc. (Except in the Case of Murder and Treason)
especially such as are guilty of Perjury and Forgery, may be confined to these
Houses during Life, or for a certain Term of years, to serve the public, being
able by their Labor to maintain as many more as themselves. 5. That all
Debtors in prison, not able to pay their Debts, or maintain themselves (whereof
many hundreds there are ready to starve) may remove themselves to this
Hospital, where they may live Comfortably and be Instruments for public good.
These are the persons that may compose and fill up these Houses. As for the
Officers way of providing their Diet, Clothes, and other circumstances, we need
not here particularize, Christ's Hospital, or the like Foundation, may afford a
good President for (...) to imitate. (...) like, which to prevent the most
happy Reformation and Weal of our Nation, remains a Gazing-stock to discourage
all public Spirits, as the Devil and self-interested people would have it, The
same ought to be no plea or obstruction to what we propose. For,

1. That which rendered that and other Houses unsuccessful, was the
ill-government thereof, but such regular method of Government as we have
offered, at least with some amendments, will prevent all such inconveniences.
2. As for that House, it is nothing strange that it did miscarry, rather it
would have been strange if it had not; since the persons governing such Houses
ought to be inferior to those by whom they are entrusted, that the latter may
speedily bring them to account, and if they find any one dishonest, correct and
turn him out of doors; whereas the Governors of Clerkenwell house were great
men, and authorized to raise money at pleasure, not to be corrected, but by Act
of Parliament, etc. So that their quality, and business, or want of honesty,
hindered them from using that inspection over inferior Officers as was
necessary, and when money came into their hands, and was diverted who could
force them to an account? 3. If this be a precedent of ill-success, and only
for the reason aforesaid, we can show you many precedents in Holland, etc. of
such Workhouses erected and managed with good-success; nay there is scarce any
thing contributes more to the wealth and strength of that Nation, than their
prudence and industry in this respect; but there they are managed not by
Grandees, as Clerkenwell was to be, but by honest laborious men, who if they
fail in their duty are forthwith severely corrected. A person entrusted in a
Spin-house in Amsterdam, was publicly whipped and turned out of doors for being
partial, viz. because by his connivance a young woman, who was sent thither to
work for her living, made her escape. Another Officer was whipped and committed
to the Rasp-house, for diminishing what was allowed for the comfortable
maintenance of the Poor. At Leiden I saw a fellow most severely whipped upon a
Scaffold, erected for thousands, and after committed to the Rasp-house, for
that he under pretense of being zealous to serve the States, inricht himself by
abusing and oppressing the Poor. 'Twas for want of such strict Government
Clarkenwell, etc. came to naught. 4. If because that House, merely for want of
right method, and persons of fit qualifications to govern it, miscarried,
therefore no such Houses must be made use of; may not our Merchants as well
conclude, that because some Ships, for want of an honest fit Master or skilful
Pilot, have been cast away; therefore tho there be men enough whose
qualifications and integrity are sufficient, yet they will never venture to
send forth any more Ships; If you say the case is different, for tho the Houses
have failed, yet we know most of our Ships return safe, then I may return you
the same answer; In Holland none of these Houses fail, therefore if we take
right method of government, our Houses will not fail so often as our Ships, and
will become as profitable to the Kingdom, for if the Houses prosper, to be sure
our Shipping will increase, therefore whoever is an enemy to these Houses, is
as great an enemy to the increase of our Ships and Seamen, and consequently an
enemy to the true, Wealth, Safety and Interest of the English Nation.
At least since this expedient is no new Project, but daily practiced with
extraordinary success and advantage by our Neighbors; It Is humbly hoped that
the same shall not be contemned or rejected by any, before they have first
found out, and demonstrated some more certain, effectual and feasible
expedients to accomplish the work in hand, and by the proposer humbly offered,
viz. To convert all the Wool of England, and what Scotland and Ireland have to
spare, into Cloth, on such terms as to vend the Cloth as fast as it is made,
whereby 30 of 40 hundred thousand pounds, per annum, may be gained to the
Nation, and all poor people bred up to such an habit of industry, that for the
future a Beggar may not be seen in the Kingdom; but neither they their
childrens children shall ever want a lawful (...).


