A Profitable method Compiled for the Benifit of all Indigent people, so
effectually drawn into a MODEL, the like before has not been exposed to this
our ENGLISH-NATION:
Wherein is particularized, the several Orders and degrees, for the promotion
of the Linen Manufacture, as also the management and farther improvement of
the said Benificial Exercise to the great encouragement of his Majesty's
distressed Subjects, as likewise for the disburthening the charge of Parishes
throughout the Nation.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Great Wisdom of the Nation, viz.
His most Excellent Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, by R. H.

HAving some time since humbly offered to the grave and pious Consideration of
the Supreme Authority aforesaid, PROPOSALS for Promoting and speedy perfecting
the Linnen-Manufacture; by which the good Ends beforementioned may infallibly
be accomplished, and more than ten hundred thousand pounds per Annum saved to
the Nation; as is plainly demonstrated by what I first printed, entitled
Proposals for building a Working-Alms-house in every County, etc. Wherein I
give an account of a Spinning-Engine of my own invention; by which a Child of
four or five years of age, may learn to spin, and earn three pence a day,
easier than a Child of seven or eight years old now; and others nine pence a
day, easier than six pence a day without it.

But finding still some very judicious persons, after they have highly expressed
their Approbation of such my Proposals in the main, at the same time declaring,
That they must oppose me, unless I could propose such a method of Government in
those Worke-houses as the Nation may be secured of these four things, viz. The
Country from being cheated of their Money raised for erecting and furnishing
such Houses; the Poor from being abused, Knaves and unfit Persons from being
Officers and bearing Rule; and Justice from being wrested, so as not to redress
Grievances and punish Offenders.

To which I answer, That the best Designs or Models may in some measure be
abused; but it will not therefore follow, That with a destructive carelessness
we should neglect what appears of certain use and profit, but rather to
Regulate things so by the best of humane prudence, that they may as little as
is imaginable be obnoxious to the inconveniences of Fraud and
ill-administration. The particular method to do this, I left to the great
wisdom of the whole Nation, as best able to contrive the same; yet since it
seems expected so far from me, that without it my Proposals are opposed, I
shall with all submission to better judgments, humbly offer, A Model of
Government of such Working Almshouses as far as concerns the preservation ot
the Stock raised, and prevention of frauds and corruptions in Officers: which I
conceive will remove all apprehensions of any the four beforementioned
Mischiefs. That so all Judicious Persons piously-disposed for this Good and
Pulick Business, may be satisfied before I move further for the prosecution of
it. As thus:

Since all Parishes are to contribute to this Work, and every Parishioner is
concerned in the Charge, and may reap Benefit by it, if honestly managed;
therefore because it cannot be supposed, that any people will cheat or injure
themselves, let each person in every Parish be concerned in or about the
Government and inspection thereof, as follows.

1. That it be Enacted, That all Contributing Parishioners, or the greatest
part of them, meet Quarterly in their own Parish, and Elect One or more as
their Representatives or Delegates for this Inspection; and so every Parish to
choose and send their Representatives every Quarter of the year, to inspect the
state of that Almshouse or Hospital to which they do belong. Each Parish
neglecting to Choose, or (...), neglecting (unless in case of sickness) to give
his attendance at the time appointed, to forfeit to the Treasury of the said
Hospital. Each Representive to be allowed 2 s. 6 d. a day by his Parish for the
time he is out on this Affair on Horseback, and 1 s. 6 d. being out on Foot;
provided that none continue out above six or seven days at one time. Or if this
seem too burdensome, two, three, or more small Parishs may join to this
purpose as one. 2. That these Representatives of each Parish, being assembled,
may have full Power to Elect Governors, prescribe Rules and Orders, choose
Trustees, appoint Offices and Officers: To see and inquire into the welfare of
their (...) Parishioners who are sent thither, and see they be not abused or
discouraged: To hear and redress all their Grievances, correct and reform all
Disorders: To call each Officer and Trustee to an Account, and to continue them
in their Office or turn them out, and Elect new once, when and as often as they
judge necessary. To which purpose they may sub-divide themselves into several
Committees, and dispatch much business in little time. 3. That all men in this
Assembly may be of equal Authority, and no one person overruled the rest; and
to that purpose that their Chairman continue but for one day, and so daily
whilst they sit a new one to be chosen by themselves: And who shall also,
before they are admitted, oblige themselves by Oath or solemn Promises, To do
those things that are just and honest: To suffer no wrongs or injury to pass
uncorrected: To do nothing for favor or prejudice: But to perform all that
lies in his power for the safety and public good of the Stock and House; and
to give a just and true Account to the Parish at his return, when they shall
call for it. 4. That no known Drunkard, Gamester, Swearer, rude or disorderly
person, shall be permitted to have any Office in that Government; but that for
the Encouragement of such as are sent to the House to earn their Living, all
inferior Offices or Places of preferment, may be conferred on such of the the
House as most deserve, if capable. 5. That if it be known any person or
persons, directly or indirectly, has given or taken any Bribe or Fee, or
offered so to do, in order to obtain or confer any Office or Trust, or do
improve his Interest to promote or continue any Drunkard, Gamester or dishonest
scandalous person in Office; that then every such person shall thenceforth for
ever be incapable of having or holding any office in the said Workehouses or
giving any Vote concerning the same in any Assembly Parochial or
Representative. 6. That the Assembly of Representatives have power to enjoin
all Officers and Trustees, either by Oath or solemn Promise, That they shall
act according to such Rules and Orders as shall be agreed on in the said
Assembly: That they shall not conceal any wrongs or ill practices in any
concerned in the Government, but discover the same to the next Assembly: That
they shall every Quarter give fair and just Account to that Assembly of all
Moneys by them received or disbursed, what Goods they buy or sell, and the
quantities and prices, and what Goods or money they have in their custody. And
that any one Breach of such their Oath or Promise herein, shall be punished as
in the case of Perjury; and besides, the offender to make satisfaction for what
he has detained, imbezilled, or defrauded, to toe House or those that
entrusted him. 7. That for the building and first stocking such Workhouses,
every Parish and Parishes, united as aforesaid, shall (till the same are
finished, and Government settled) send such their Representatives every
fortnight or fourweeks, who shall carry the proportion of Money payable
thereunto by such Pareshes respectively. And that all Expenditors, Overseers,
and Trustees employed for carrying on the Work, shall be chosen by such
Representatives, and be accountable to them every fortnight, till the House be
finished and settled as aforesaid.
This method of Government or Inspection I humbly offer as most safe, because
from Head to Foot the interest of one Member has its dependence on the other.
Interest is a thing that governs all people in the World, both good and bad. A
good man knows it is his greatest Interist to live honestly and uprightly in the
fight of God and Man; because then he believes a blessing attends him. A bad
man, though so foolish as not to regard his future happiness, will yet act
honesty too, when it is for his advantage so to do. Now according to the
Constitution of the Government here prescribed, every man's Interest is linked
together. As, 1. It Is the Interest of each Parish to elect honest
Representatives. 2. It Is the Interest of these Representatives to act righteous
things, and elect honest Trustees, not only because if they betray their Trust
for Favor, Bribes, or Prejudice, they are in danger of punishment and
dishonor; but also because their own private Interest lies at stake in the
common interest of the Parishes. 3. It Is the interest of the Officers and
Trustees, whether honest men or Knaves, to do honestly; because then they may
continue in their Places of reasonable profit; but if they do otherwise under
so many Eyes, and such frequent Inspections, they cannot hope to conceal their
Misdemeanors, and then must be severely corrected, and pay dearly for it,


Thus much for the Form of Government relating to the election and
qualification of Governors; I shall now add a few words concerning the Persons
to be governed, the rather for that I find our design abusively represented,
as if we intended these Houses to be places of of slavery, and to keep people
there all their lives; whereas I propose only this, 1. That the Children of all
poor people, who are chargeable to the Parish, be without abuse employed in
these Houses at four or five years old and upwards; and all impotent people
having one hand, to work, and such that can make use of their Legs, though no
Hand, who cannot earn their living at home, and all others that are chargeable,
unless it be married people having Children, not designing to part Man and
Wife, as some Opposers do suggest. 2. That the Men-children brought up in these
Houses, have their liberty to go to Trades or Service in Husbandry, etc. when
they come to the Age of 13 or 14 years; and the Maiden children to have like
liberty, if they please, at the same age, to go to learn Housewifry, etc. 3.
That all Beggars, Vagrants, etc. who have no Habitation, nor will earn their
livings in any lawful Employment, be placed there. 4. That all dangerous
persons, Criminals, etc. whom the Law condemns to be hanged, etc. (except in
the Case of Murder and Treason) especially such as are guilty of Perjury and
Forgery, may be confined to these Houses, during life, or for a certain term of
years; whereby they may have the opportunity to be reformed and made fit for
another world before they die: and in the mean time to serve the Public, being
able by their labor to maintain as many more as themselves. 5. That all
Debtors in Prison, not able to pay their Debts, or maintain themselves (whereof
there are many hundreds ready to starve, having but three halfpence a day, and
what they can beg, to live on) may remove themselves to this Hospital; where
they may live comfortably and be instruments for public good. This I the
rather press for, for that I have observed such dogged Cruelties in some of our
Prisons, where many poor famishing persons have been crowded up in one little
Room, without any thing to lie on, save Straw, and that so seldom changed, that
'twas become Muck, and only fit to breed Vermin: And to aggravate their
misery, the Jailer fastened broad thin Plates of Iron, pent-house-wife across
the Grates of the Prison, to prevent those who were charitably disposed, that
they should not give them Beer through the Grates, but that they might be
forced to drink his, and pay two pence for little more than a pint. This
unmerciful Cruelty have I seen in our Nation; And were it not better to have so
many people comfortably at work, than languishing thus under unconscionable
Oppressors?


These are the persons that may compose and fill up these Houses. As for the
Officers, the way of providing their Diet, Clothes, and other Circumstances, I
shall not here particularize, Christ's Hospital, or the like Foundation, may
afford a good precedent for us to imitate: Only as a thing most necessary for
the Christian Education and happy Reformation of this, great Family, special
Care must be taken that a godly Minister of a good kind disposition and
exemplary Conversation, be placed and maintained in each Hospital; and that the
Children be allowed one hour in each day to learn to read English.

If any doubt whether the Inhabitants of the respective Houses will be able to
maintain themselves, my Answer is, That a man who has health and strength, may
by reasonable labor, earn 18 d. a day; a woman 9 d. or 10 d. a day. Men or
women, who are impotent, and can do nothing but sit still and employ their
hands, may earn with ease 8, 9, or 10 d. a day: Yea, any one that could earn 6
d. a day heretofore, shall in this house as easily earn 9 d. or 10 d. a day. A
Child of moderate understanding at four or five years old, which cost the
Parish 1 s. 6 d. or 2 s. a week keeping, may after two months teaching, earn 3
d. a day the first year the second year 5 d. a day, the third year 7 d. a day,
and the fourth year 9 d. a day: so that at nine yars of age, they may earn more
than any woman by the same employment can do without the help of our Engine: So
that all may live comfortably on so easy an employment as cannot possibly do
them hurt. And by this means all the Nation will suddenly be bred up to such an
excellent profitable way of Industry, that no Nation in the world can exceed
us; which without this Expedient, can never be effected with so much
Expedition, Profit, and Ease.

Thus much I have proposed, for the satisfaction as I hope, of those who are
the most judicious Objectors or at least so far, as that with their
Corrections, it may be made feazable and acceptable to the great Wisdom of the
Nation. In the mean time I leave my Proposals, as a Ship without Governor,
running a drift amongst the raging waves between the highest Rocks, and the
shallow Sands, attended with Storms, Calms and Cross-winds; yet laden with
Treasure sufficient to enrich the whole Kingdom to that degree, that there may
not be one Beggar in the Nation. Nay, I will affirm, that it is more than 3000
l. a day lost to the Nation for every day in the year, whilst it is neglected;
besides the loss of what is of a far greater value, as may be more plainly
demonstrated, if desired.

Now would I crave leave to add a word or two to another sort of Pople, whom I
cannot so properly call Objectors, as Opposers of my Proposals, since they are
so Censorious as to judge and condemn them before they have read them, or know
what my Reasons are; and so regardless of the happy Reformation intended
thereby, that they think it too much to part with their unnecessary
self-interest, and contribute a small Assistance for improving the best and
most profitable Expedients, crying out, The old way is best, and the work will
be better done at home by their own fires; when perhaps the wood is stolen out
of their Neighbors hedge; And that the Parents may best bring up their own
Children. Though too true it is, that instead of bringing them up in Industry
to earn their Livings at five or six years old, and to be instructed in good
manners both toward God and man, they now generally at four or five years old
learn of their Parent to curse, swear, lie, beg and steal, until they be
fourteen or fifteen years of age, and so addicted to vice, that they are not
fit for a good man to take into his house. And thus from generation to
generation have they been, and are brought up to live and dye most miserably.
To these Gentlemen I have this to offer, viz. Suppose, Sirs, there were no
Profits to be reaped, That what we contribute is only a mere Act of Charity,
accomplishing the happy Reformation, comfortable Employment and Maintenance of
the Poor. Consider I say, if this were all, whether it be safe to keep that
Interest or money which we ought to part with, and improve for Gods glory, and
good of our poor Neighbors; since by so doing we may incur his displeasure and
our own ruin for ever. Or how can we that are impiously uncharitable, expect
pardon and mercy since it is so, that our Faith, our Hope, and all we can do
without Charity avails nothing? What more plain and loud Call can there be
for an Act of Charity, than when thou feast that by a free and general
Contribution so profitable a Reformation may be so accomplished? I thank God, I
think it not too much, or any dishonor, to be (...) a Beggar for the Poor at
the doors of those in whose power to carry on this (...) I am certain, if they
be for it, no good man dares be against it. What you may do I know not: for my
own part, rather had I be a simple object of Charity like La^^^^^ a Beggar at
the door of the Rich, than to be a rich man without Charity, to lift up my eyes
in the flames of Hell. What will it profit a man to keep his money in his
pocket, when God shall certainly make him miserable for not improving of it? Is
it not an infallible Truth, that no good man can possibly be uncharitable; and
also that no bad man shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? How necessary then
is it for thee to be found in thy Stewardships improving thy Talent while thou
may? that so thou may be an object of mercy in that day when Almighty God
shall accept of thy Account, and say, Well done, good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful in few things, thou shall be Ruler over many Cities.
Thou did not hide thy Talent in a Napkin: Thou have been a Father to the
fatherless, an Husband to the widow, in their distress and poverty: Thou have
fed the hungry, clothed the naked, made such comfortable Provision for their
Children, and their Childrens Children that none of them shall beg their bread,
or want an Habitatoon; yea thou have contributed of thy substance to turn many
Thousands, who like the blind were wandering in the paths of Death, and have led
them into the way of Eternal Life. Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

Much more might be added for the admonition of those who had rather hide their
Talents in the earth, than improve them for the most public and greatest
Advantage; but I leave it as a work more suitable for the most Grave and Pious
Divines, the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. whose expressions of zeal to the pious
ends of this Design, have invited me to believe they will not be wanting to
contribute their assistance, whereby to encourage those who are under their
Spiritual Care, to be assisting in so profitable and charitable a work; by
which the Glory of God, the Prosperity of the whole Nation, and the Welfare and
happy Reformation of all poor distressed People, may be at once and together
promoted.

If any shall object and say, Such a design would have been certainly embraced
and prosecuted, had you proposed it, in the Generation past; but is not so
proper for, or probable to thrive in this. I desire to know the obstacle, at
whose door the fault must lie: Sure I am, his Majesty has been most graciously
pleased to give a Signal Instance, of his Royal Approbation and Encouragement
thereunto, though it seem to diminish his Majesty's particular advantage, more
than all the People in the Nation besides. His Illustrious Highness Prince
(...), that eminent Promoter of the Prosperity of our Kingdom, and several
Noble Peers in particular have expressed themselves satisfied with the Utility of
the Design: diverse Reverend Prelates and Divines have declared their great and
unanimous Zeal for promoting the work. And not a few worthy Gentlemen of the
House of Commons are convinced, that no other expedient yet offered, can so
certainly, speedily, and easily accomplish the good ends designed. And why then
may not this Age be as proper as the age past, for this hopeful Plant to
flourish in, under so many cherishing Influences.

Howbeit with all humble submission I refer the same, and all that I have said,
to the favorable Construction and grave Consideration of the great wisdom of
the Nation; beseeching God to direct their Councels, and bless their
Enterprises, as may make most for his Glory, and the Nations Prosperity.

FINIS.
With allowance, London Printed for D. M. 1679.


