New Lords, New Laws* OR, A DISCOVERY OF A Grand Usurpation

In Opposition to the Holy Laws of God, (...) of the Good Laws, and Royal
Prerogative (...) Supreme Magistrate, as it has been lately practiced by the
Lordly MATTHEW CAFFIN, A Pretended true Apostle of our Blessed Lord and
Savior, and Ruling Head of his Congregation, usually meeting at Southwater
near Horsham in Sussex.

By R. H.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be
(...) the King as Supreme,

Or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the punishment of
(...) Doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

As free, and not using your Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the
Se^^^^of God.

Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King, (...). 2. v.
13. 14. 16. and 17.

London, Printed in the Year 1674.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
HAving certain knowledge of the many Scandals and Abuses cast upon those who
are the Faithful Professors of the ways of truth, I should be most heartily
Sorry to give any just occasion of increasing the same; yet do believe it my
Duty to do my part for the Defense and Vindication of the Innocent. And
conceivng my self (as will appear by the following Discourse) to have received
no small injustice, from a pretended Apostle of our Blessed Lord and Savior,
(by Name, Matthew Caffin,) though his Acts of Usurpation, Tyranny, and
Partiality have in part already made manifest to the world, that he is far
otherwise; and for that his (and his deluded confederates) Tyrannical dealing
with me by way of Excommunication, was for my doing a thing which is so far
from being any transgression of any known Law, That both the Law of God, and
the Law and Royal Prerogative of the Supreme Magistrate of this Nation, and (as
I am informed) all Neighbor Kingdoms, do allow of and justify the same. I
therefore think it my duty to publish to the world his Usurped Authority, his
new Laws, strange Prerogative, and acts of Injustice; all which are to my
certain knowledge utterly disowned by all the Officers of the Baptized
Congregations, both in Country and City, that I have as yet had the opportunity
to treat with, those only that are under this pretended Apostles; awful wings,
excepted.

All which I am not only induced, but constrained to publish for th^se Reasons
following.

First, because it does appear to me and others, that the Authority by which he
and his Consederates have executed such his new laws and inventions, is an
Usurped Authority; and therefore the timely Publication of the matter is to
prevent the like errors from creeping into the Church of Christ, as heretofore
have done, being brought in by such Lordly Spirits, whereby the Church of Rome,
once the Spouse of Christ, is Apostatized, and become an Harlot, (as he the
said Matthew Caffin has said) on which account I conceive it my duty by this
means to do my part in order to the suppressing this growing and dangerous
Distemper, which otherwise, like a Gangrene, may destroy the whole body.

Secondly, that the Truth and honest Professors thereof may be preserved from
those reproachful abuses and Censures, which by this means are apt to be cast
upon them, That so the burden may be laid on the right shoulder, and a whole
Profession not be condemned for the proud Extravagancies of (...) or some few
more particular men; for so it is that some (otherwise judicious and sober)
persons hearing of such strange Carriage, daily say, that these Professors are
a crooked and perverse generation, running into a thousand errors, that their
pretense of Holiness is but deceit to cover a design of mischief. And some
persons of good quality and repute (no enemies to the Truth or its Professors)
have by this means been provoked to entertain hard thoughts, and open their
mouths against them, to say both in words and writing, that we are of dangerous
opinions, accompanied with rancour and malice against all that will not go
along with us, be it right or wrong. For (say they) we can expect no better
fruit from them, then what you have had from your Saint, (meaning the Lordly
Apostle aforesaid) all which and much more of that nature does abound to the
great dishonor of the Gospel, and the Professors thereof, wholly upon the
account of this Busiebody.

The third reason for Publication hereof is, because all other Admonition and
Advice which was publicly given him in full Meeting by several Church Officers
of known integrity, (to wit) Mr. G. Mr. W. Mr. P. Mr. C. and Mr. T. and diverse
others the most, or however the most Eminent in London, was and still is wholly
slighted, and could no way incline his mind to Humility, but he still goes on
to justify his Practice of Tyranny, notwithstanding this meeting was singly
for the hearing and determining of his case only.

Fourthly, Because I would thereby have the World to know, that I know not one
Professor in the way of the Baptized Congregations to be of the like
quarrelsome and dangerous principle, unless it be those who are at his own
dispose, or in servise subjection to his own Laws as aforesaid.

And now Impartial Reader! this one thing I humbly beg of thee, and I pray deny
me not, viz. That thou would not by means of any thing contained in the
ensuing discourse accuse or condemn the Innocent with the Guilty, nor the
peaceable, Loyal and Obedient, with the Peace-breaker, Contentious, and
Disobedient. For although it may appear in thy Judgment that we are both
unworthy, yea, although I my self through the Instigation of the Devil should
become an Adversary to all good (for I dare not host of my future
Perseverance, though I can through mercy say, I have more than a little
Confidence) notwithstanding, I say, thy worst Imaginable should happen, yet be
entreated I pray, ever to love and ^^ver to be offended with the honest; godly,
and peaceable (...) walk in the ways of truth; which according to the Holy
(...) the Royal Road and Kings highway to Life and Glory, which Profession (I
hope I may say) I never in all my Life did yet despise.

And (if I know my heart) I had rather a thousand times suffer the ^^proaches
and Censures of him who now through malice and a lying Tongue may abuse me at
his pleasure, than that the way to Glory, and those that humbly and devoutly
walk therein, should be corrupted, abused, and evil spoken of.

And this I pray further take notice of, that I do declare, that the
Publication of the ensuing matter to the world in this manner, was wholly
contrary to my own will and desire, neither had I so much as the laise thoughts
of so doing, had not they, to wit, Mr. Caffin or his Confederates, first
published my Excommunication to the World, and particularly to such as they had
reason to believe did hate me most, and this they did within less than three
days. The consideration of all which, together with the Effects that did every
day attend it, to the great dishonor of the truth, did after some time upon
just grounds engage me to publish the matter and manner of their proceeding
against me, and accordingly I did make preparation for it, and that long before
the Publication hereof; But if it demanded why I did not publish it sooner, I
faithfully and sincerely can answer, my reason was this, viz.

Because I greatly feared that by this means, not only the Offenders would be
ill thought of, as justly they may, but that the way of truth it self, and
honest Professors might happen to be Censured by some inconsiderate people, and
evil reported of, to the dishonor of God, and prejudice or discouragement of
the innocent.

Wherefore I did rather resolve to use all fair and safe means to prevent these
ill effects, and bring the matter to be heard, determined and composed without
such Publication. To which purpose, I read part of what I had written to a
person pretending much kindness to me, who I well knew did intend also to serve
my causeless Adversary to his power, yet (...) thought he ha^h been such (...)
one as (...) he (...) (...) person after I had so showed him the substance of
what I (...) for public view, did intent me to forbear; to which (...)
consented, upon condition I might have the matter heard by (...) London
Friends, that had power to do justice, and did promise that (...) were done, I
would totally desist, (...) ways. This my (...) being made, he (...) persuade
me to (...) it to some (...) Congregation, by which means the matter might be
com(...) but I considering that all or most of the Congregations (...) respects
inferior to him, and he much adored and e(...) them did (...) refuse so to do,
whereupon he ac(...) undertook to persuade Mr. C. (and other (...) London.

(...) did I apply my self to an Elder (with whom only I had a little (...))
for his advice, and he appointed both time and place, and also did speale to
several Church Officers to be there, because my self had little (...)
acquaintance with any of then. This is that Elder that first advised me to a
appeal to the General Assembly, and thought it no unfit that such of the
Nation, as I thought meet, might be present at the heating of the Cause,
notwithstanding they were not in Fellowship. However at this meeting the matter
on M. Caffins said was generally disliked of and he admonished by the persons
aforesaid (to wit) Mr. G. Mr. W. Mr. (...) Mr. T. Mr. C. and diverse others
there present, To go home and call (...) together, and reform the matter.
Accordingly home they (...) me, but when I came home, which was about six days
after, (...) general Reports went contrary to my expectation, some relating
they (...) Justified in what they had done; but that being opposed as a (...)
by one that heard the matter debated; Then one of them, (to wit) the same that
would have a man Damned for displeasing their Lord C. rather then for offending
the most High, as you may see in the ensuing Treat se; replied that they were
not to regard what our London Friends did; for said he, We not own them.

Which indeed pr^^es to be very true, for all their Grave and Pious Council and
Advice for Peace and Reconiliation was rejected and contemned; And since that
time their pretended Apostle, Mr. C. has also declared in the Assambly of his
Congregation, the same thing, saying, As for those London friends (meaning
those who gave him such Admorition before named) we do not own them. And this
was the end of my first proposal, and willing endeavors in order to prevent
this Publication, and the ill effects if any should attend it.

Yet notwithstanding their obstinate persisting in their illegal practice
without any (...), President, on Example, for their Authority I still resolved
to wait, hoping in time their eyes might be opened and (...) minds incline to
Repentance. But when after a long and (...)ctation, I perceived no appearance,
or probable hope of their (...) mation, I then again began to think of
publishing the matter (...) still feared my so doing might tend to their
greater confusion etc. (...)

Whereupon I again said it by, with resolution to make my appe^^^ the next
General Assembly of Church Officers at London, in hope some good might be done
by them, and accordingly I made my pre^^^ Friends acquainted therewith, and not
only by word of mouth (...)ral of the Confederates, whom I desired to be there,
to (...) money to the truth of what they knew, but also by a (...) their public
Meeting, and desired the messenger ((...) of that Congregation) to deliver, and
desire M. C. to (...) gregation, But althought it were delivered into his (...)
that he the said M.C. not only promised at other times, that he (...) by no
means prevent the matter from being heard, but also said he (...) do what he
could to have it determined there, yet when the time came and the Church
Officers assembled together, I appearing amongst them with several persons that
were my Witnesses, Matthew Caffin himself moved the matter, saying, that there
was present a certain person that had been dealt withal in the Country that
did make his Appeal to them; and sail he, I perceive he is resolved to move the
cause to you, and therefore you were as good hear what he has to say now, or
to that effect. Whereupon I (who had been before made to doubt by M. C. and
other, that my cause could not be heard in this Assembly, because of an
agreement they had made, not to hear any there, before it had been heard by
some Neighbor Congregation) first desired to know whether they would
intermeddle in such case, and determine a matter in controversy between a
Congregation and a single person, whereto it was forthwith replied by Mr. M. we
can choose out a party, six or more persons, and refer the matter to them, who
may determine it presently before we part, or to that effect. Then said I, -- I
am ready for it; but then Matthew Caffin (how agreeably to his former promises
and pretenses, let sincerity judge) interposed, saying, But the matter concerns
the Congregation, and they are not he^e, and therefore it cannot. be heard now,
which was seconded by one of his Assistants, and so the matter put off.

The Consideration of this acting so palpably contrary to such promise, that he
would no ways hinder the matter from being heard, but do what he could that it
might be here determined, puts me in mind of that Cardinal of whom it is
reported, he should declare, That an honest man ought not to be a Slave to his
word, and might make a stranger apt to imagine this high pretender endued with
such Cardinal Policies, (...) with the honesty of a true Apostle; For nothing
imaginable (...) and design to (...) the Heating by that excuse, did hinder
(...) having his party there, without whom he well knew (as is evi(...) hand,
that it could not be done; and though he did do (...) was not ^o civilly honest
as to let me know thereof, that so I might (...) and unnecessary Charge, which
he knew would be consi^^^able,

(...) the consideration of all which, and for that all means of Reconcili(...)
said M. C. and his Associates contemned, and their ill, (...) acts practiced
and defended by pretended Au(...) but now at last conclude it highly my duty to
make (...) that so those who are concerned, may at their next (...) I do appeal
by these presents, take it into (...) consideration and doing right, may clear
themselves and the Profession in general from the imputation of such
mischievous errors; whereunto otherwise they may be thought accessory, leaving
it to them to judge whether this pretended Apostle be not an Usurper; and
whether his Government be not Arbitrary, Tyrannical and dangerous, both to the
Church and Civil State; and also whether he be not a partial and unjust judge,
a deluder and seducer of those who otherwise would he innocent, and a contemner
of the Authority of all that are above him.

Lastly, whereas some sober persons think it strange that I do not withdraw my
self from the Baptized Congregations; my answer is, that I know not any other
Congregation of that persuasion corrupted with any of those errors, but that
their actions and conversations are according to their Profession in the
judgment of Charity. And forasmuch as I do upon safe and Scripture grounds,
believe, That the way they prosess is the way to Grace and Glory, I therefore
dare not desert it, but desire to be found persevering therein with Heart and
Affection. And that all good people may do the same, is the hearty prayer of
him who is, a lover of Truth, Righteousness and Peace, and of those who embrace
the same, under what Notion or Form soever they be,

Richard Haines.

A word to the Ingenious and Learned Perusers.
Honored Sirs,
SInce neither Nature nor Education have furnished me with those (...) and
Accomplishments which I must acknowledge necessary to all such as expose their
writings to the Public eye; let me entreat, and not be denied your favorable
Construction in the ensuing Leaves, as often as you find me unskilful in
Language or Methodical Order; for as I have never been exercised in such
public endeavors, so should I not now have appeared to the world in this
manner, had not the Conscience of my duty constrained me thereunto; nor had I
been thus tedious and burdensome to the Reader, but out of a desire to regain
my poor deluded Brethren, who pretend great love unto

Your humble Servant, R. H.

NEW LORDS, NEW LAWS. and.
HAving some time since received much Injustice and Abuse from Matthew Caffin,
a Pretended Apostle of Christ, and Elder of a Congregation; together with some
other of his deluded Confederates, who without any Authority or Example, and
for a matter not proved to be any Sin or Crime by any Text of Holy Scripture,
procecded to pass Sentence of Excommunication against me, and still persist in
and justify the same, and endeavors yet further to render me Infamous. It is
therefore the design of the following discourse (for the several causes and
Reasons mentioned in the Epistle to the Reader) to make a full discovery of all
proceedings in that affair, that so innocence may be cleared, Friends at a
distance truly informed, and these Lordly Spirits, if possible, made ashamed
of, and so repent for such their wicked and erroneous courses,

All which I shall endeavor, by relating plainly and sincerely. First, The
Cause or pretended Crime Objected. Secondly, The most partial unjust, and cruel
proceedings thereupon against me. And Thirdly, The unreasonableness of both in
several Circumstances, and the mischievous consequences of such Antichristian
Popis^e Principles and Practices.
The occasion or thing for which I was Excommunicated, was as follows.

I having by my Industry found out and invented a way to cleanse a certain sort
of Grass Seeds, by some called Trefo le, by other, Nousu^^, and by others
Hop-clever (but properly may be called Yellow-clover, because it bears a
three leaf'd grass and yellow flower) from its husk and course Grass Seeds,
which course Grass, was very destructive to the other, so that the same by
means of such invention is become better then it was before, as some of my
Adversries themselves confess.

Now forasmuch as it did evidently appear, that such a way of cleansing the
aforesaid Seeds, was a thing that would be for a General benefit to all should
make use of the said Seeds, I then considered that it was reasonable I should
have the benefit of cleansing the same according to the Statute in such cases
made and provided; which privilege of invention I did understand (by Council
Learned in the Law) The King, by his Royal Prerogative, might lawfully grant
and confirm by his Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, to the
first and true Inventer.

And I being the same (as one of my chiefest Adversaries declared at their
Meeting publicly, that he verily did believe I was) did and still do conceive
that I might lawfully endeavor to obtain it as my lawful and just privilege.
Forasmuch as by this means, I should prevent no person enjoying any of their
former Rights and Privileges which they enjoyed before this my doscovery for
as they bought, sold, sowed, and improved it before, so they may still, without
the least interruption; nor have they cause to complain, that by the Kings
Letters Patents they are prohibited from cleansing the said Seeds, seeing every
person may have the privilege of sowing the Seeds which I thus cleanss, so
that every one may ^eap the profits of my labor, and the greatest profits too,
for if the cleansing of it were free to all, the advantage would be very
little, wherefore I did on good grounds hope that no honest man would be
offended with the Kings Letters Patents, nor with me for attaining them, except
it were a generation of self ended men, who, envy my prosperity; nor could I
believe, that I for this thing should be condemned by those who are my
pretended tender loving Brethren, since I have not hereby transgressed any
known Law, for where there is no Law transgressed, I do belive there is no Law
to punish, unless it be under that Government where Usurping Tyrants bear rule.

All which considered, I did proceed in my endeavors to obtain his Majesty's
Gracious favor for the grant of his Letters Patent for my aforesaid
Privilege, But being willing to let some of my friends know of my design
therein, before I had finished my business, and judging Matthew Caffin most
Faithful, I therefore thought him most worthy to be trusted with secret things.
Some other also I declared my mind ^^ to, who did promise secrefie, nor did
they report it to any that I know of; but he the said Matthew Caffin, whom I
thought most faithful, was pleased to be offended with the thing, and would not
by any means allow of Letters Patents, and because I would not without just
cause desert my privilege, and lose all the charge I had been at (which by
this time was not less than Thirty pound) only to please himself (for as yet
you may note that he knew not that any others were offended, or did know of it)
therefore he soon after (the better to bring about his design of revenge for
this my disobedience) declares it to others, and our of doors they thrust it
with as bad a name as might be gives to it.

Thus by his, and his Consederates means, they provoked others to conspire
against me, by reporting that other persons had made the discovery before me,
and not only so but that I did intend also to prohobit all persons from
cleansing Clover, and thereby provoked several worthy persons to oppose me
through these their false information; because I would not sacrifie my just
right and privileges to satisfy his own ambition.

By such means his design was carried on; for from his ill reporting of the
thing, they now report what he would have them, little thinking that whilst he
pretends a desire of good, they themselves are in this their so doing, become
his Servants merely to serve and please his quarrelsome and boundless humor.
For now by this means he can change me with a thing that (says he) is of an
Evil Report in the World, and odious amongst the Common sort, he himself having
under hand used all art to render it so. And now by this time he himself only
requires me to come to a quarterly Meeting (as they call it) in order to debate
the matter at the Meeting, but because I was engaged to be at London at that
very time I was not there. Nevertheless a Meeting there was, wherein he, as
before, acted his part according to his art and Cunning, whereby to make my
case as odious to the Congregation as possible, of which was as follows.

When first he came to mention the thing to the Congregation, he said, that
there was a certain case which he should acquaint them with, but said he, we
need not name the person, nor judge the matter, for that is referred to another
Meeting; but no sooner had he so said, and named the thing, but he immediately,
to conjure up the displeasure of the people against me, uses all his art and
cunning to make out Ba^enta as odious as was possible; and after he had spent
much time that way, and bad seemingly answered that might be said for the
justification of Patents, he then said that I did pretend that I had a Statutre
for the justification of a Patent, but said he, I do not believe it; But said
he, if he has a Statute for it, what is that to us: what have we to do with
the Laws and Statutes of men, calling them unjust? (notwithstanding they are
for the praise and encouragement of those that do well, and for the punishment
to the lawless and disobedient) And again said he, what a Professor get a
Patent? the very name of a Patent is odious amongst the common sort of men, so
that I can as freely have Communion or Fellowship wish any Idolatrous or
unclean person as with a man that should obtain a Pattent; and if be shall
persist in it, he shall be dealt with or Excommunicated; And then said he to
the Congregation, whoever shall stand by him in it may expect to come under the
same Condemnation.

Thus by flattery and threats were they conjured to do according to his own
will as though he were an Apostle, perfect and infallible, and Letters Patents
as black as the Devil, as he endeavored to represent them; So that at the same
Meeting it was agreed by them that they should not: trade with me so as to buy
^ sell for me; And although my Servant was one of them, yet it should be
unlawful for him so to do. Thus was I and my case condemned when I was thirty
or forty miles from them, and before the weak Brethren had spoken of it to me.

Here let us suppose some one in Ecclesiastical Authority, whom he does
separate from, should act and express himself as he has done, I pray would he
not judge and condemn such an one as a proud imperious person? But to proceed,

When the Church-meeting came that was appointed for the trial of my Case, I
being then to treat with the Congregation about it; after an Oration made by
this New Lord against me, and Letters Patents whereby to render them odious, he
then first charged, it as an evil thing; for said he, it is of a bad report
amongst people in the world, for I heard them speak against it, and said he, I
could not speak one word in defense of it.

Secondly, he charged it as an offense to the weak Brethren, and therefore we
may not allow of it, but said he to me, you may plead for your self.

Now by what he had said at this and other times, I did well perceive, that he
had a design to carry it against me with a high hand, and knowing no accuser
besides himself, therefore I directed my speech to the Congregation, and to the
weak Brethren, to whom I was to give satisfaction, and said, That whereas it is
alleged, Patents are ill reported of by some people of the world, the same is
no sufficient argument to prove them unlawful, no more them it is if one should
allege the ways of Truth to be unlawful, because persons of the world report
evil of them or reproach those that embrace the same. And forasmuch as they had
received an accusation against me from the world, and none of them there
present to accuse me, I therefore had a desire to pl^ad my cause to the
Congregation (who according to their own principles are to judge and determine
all Controversies according to Scripture) and also desired liberty first to
discourse and reason the case with those weak Brethren, of whom it is said,
that Pattents are an offance unto them, without the interruption of Matthew
Caffin, for said I, I am none of the Sons of Art, who by their cunning can make
a Mountain of a Molehill, and therefore I would that I might first treat with
my equals, and then I would discourse it with him if desired; For you must
observe that the power lies in the Congregation, and not in his Lordship, as he
himself sometimes in words confesses, and therefore declares that the Lord
Bishops are Usurpers.

But this poor courtesy was utterly denied me, for those to whom I should give
satisfaction, might not discourse the matter with me, by reason of his
perpetual interruption; for as soon as I had thus said, he presently replied,
that he never was denied his privilege before, and then cries out, it is my
Privilege, and has been my privilege this twenty years, and what do you
think that I will lose it now? And notwithstanding, he has confessed that the
Authority lay in the people, and not in the Officer; yet so it was that by his
commanding power, and Lordly Prerogative, which he claims by virtue of his
Twenty years Tradition, I was not suffered to treat with any of the
Congregation, nor they with me, by reason of his Perpetual interruption (as
they, if they be honest, will testify) which occasioned such a strange
confusion, that I was not suffered neither time nor opportunity to discourse
with the weak Brethren that were offended, as he said; But to this day I know
not who they be. But when he had spent much time, after an insulting and
upbraiding manner, like his Brother Diotrephes, but never proving any thing by
which I had transgressed any known Law of God or the King; nor letting me know
who he or they was that I had offended. I therefore stood up and demanded
several times, saying, who it is that does accuse me? (for you must note that I
refused to discourse it with himself) Then did this Lordly person stand up,
saying, I do accuse you; Now forasmuch as he had usurped an over-rulling power,
and that my malitiouss accuser should not be my judge, and seeing that he had
before prepared the people to do according to his own will and pleasure, upon
pain of Excommunication (as they very well known) the like practice in the
Church of England, if any such were, I am sure he would call it not only
Usurpation, but Tyranny and Intolerable Oppression.

I therefore declared for an appeal (for you must know that in such cases,
Appeals to some other Congregation are allowed of) But so far was he from
mercy, that he would not permit so much as this Heathenish kindness, but with
the consent of his overawed adherents, after he had prated against me with
malicious words, like his Brother Diotrephes, to rites he proceeded and
declares me to be an Excommunicate person; and also said to him who did speak
in favor of my case, and that but sparingly neither at that time, yet if he
did not desist to abet the cause of the Patent, he must expect to be severele
dealt with, ( Oh how necessary would a torturing Inquisition now be!) for now
there is to be no Reconciliation without works of Supererrogation, and that,
because I did stand to justify (not Covetousness or any one sin,) but only the
lawfulness of Letters Patents that are upon lawful means obtained, and not
otherwise. The which Sentence of Excommunication he was troubled to express;
nor could he find a name for the offense, but declared that Letters Patents
were of the Devil, and that the Devil put me upon it. And all this did he do
before it was proved that I had transgressed any known Law, or that I had
wronged any Man, Woman or Child, or that Patents were of the Devil as he said
they were. He having thus acted his part, whereby to practice his revenge and
malice against me for this contempt of his U^urped Tyrannical Authority, he
said to me that I might make my appeal to whom I would, Provided (said he) they
be such as me own; Now who they be that he owns, or who they are that own his
dangerous errors, and corrupt Government I know not; Therefore with advice I
did make my appeal to the General Assembly of Messengers and Elders, but I
suppose that this great Apostle, who thinks himself equal with St. Paul was
unwilling that the case should be heard and determined by them; for since I
perceive he did not own some of them, as does appear thuse; One of the Assembly
there present (to wit) Mr. M. who had written against an error that Caffin
has Preached up, and owned, and had Printed it too, had not some of the
Brethren prevented it; The error is his Principle cencerning our Blessed Lord
and Savior, of whom Caffin faith, That he did not take his flesh of the Virgin
Mary, and that he was not made of the Seed of David. Now because Mr. M. had
written a Book to confute this error, wherein it does plainly appear, that the
said principle is Heretical and dangerous, as you may find at your leisure in
his said book, E^tituled, A Cure for the Cankering Error, to be sold at the
Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange, the price a shilling, well worth
the money and reading; For which Book, Caffin at this Assembly, endeavored to
engage, the whole Assembly against M. M. and also had prepared something in
writing in the nature of a charge against him, in order to bring him under the
Censure of the Church.

And for this reason I conclude that he did not own these Brethren, because all
of them were on Mr. M. side, a small party that were of Mr, C. Faction excepted.

But whether he would not have me therefore to appeal to this Assembly I know
not; but this I know, That whereas the Question was put to one of Matthew
Caffins right hand men, by a Worthy person, why my case was not heard and
determined by the Assembly, the reason and answer was this (to wit) because
their business was so much that they had not time for it: This I say I know to
be an untruth, but this he might honestly and truly have said, that had it not
been for his erroneous principle, and quarrelsome humor, there might have been
more time spared and better, spent. Again, I suppose that the great reason of
his unwillingness that it should come to a hearing at London was, because I
have declared my Resolution (that is to say) that I would have it so public,
that whom I pleased should be there present.

But however, if the reason why my case could not be heard and determined at
the Assembly, was want of time (as it was not) or, that it could not be done,
because Mr. C. adherents would not be there; therefore to prevent the like
excuses, These are to Certify all person whom it may concern, that I do
resolve to make my Appeal to the next General Assembly at London, which will be
about Whitsuntide next, according to their agreement; and in the mean time (I
calling all in the world there to prove if they can) that I have wilfully or
knowingly done wrong either to man, woman, or child, or that in any case I have
been unfaithful to any that have relied on me; and also to prove if they can
that I ever despised Admonition or the Admonisher for any, sin committed
against the most High God, or that I ever did design or practice any thing of
revenge against any person; or that I have refused to be reformed in any thing
by which I have transgressed any known Law, and therefore to the Assembly I
freely refer the case, where I hope they by doing justice will clear themselves
from being guilty of any such acts of Usurpation and Tyrannical practices, as
now they are censured to be guilty of by many sober persons (of the better
sort, notwithstanding they are justified by the baser or common sort as he
called them) And also will do me justice according to the unerring rule. Yet
notwithstanding all that I have said, if according to what was proposed by the
Assembly ( viz.) six Officers to meet together to hear and judge, of the,
matter, whom I shall choose as they said I should; I then in, the mean time
shall consent thereunto, Always provided it may be at London, and that I may
bring with, me to the meeting whom I please. And in the mean time I humbly beg
all persons to whom these lines shall come, to have charitable thoughts of
those who in the Profession of the Truth in this cause are wholly Innocent; for
it is undoubtedly as great an evil for them to despise and condemn the
Innocent, as it is for me to conceal the danger and erroneous Principles of a
Seducer.

Some other Acts of Usurpation I cannot but mention, whereof this is but one
(to wit) his forbidding me to be a Peace maker between Neighbor and Neighbor,
when in the way to ruin one another; In which work I have been often
concerned. This also was an offense unto him, notwithstanding he nor any other
can honestly say that I ever did knowingly do any unjust thing, or knowingly
committed any sin thereby. Who this New Lords Assistant or Council is, I need
not determine, but doubtless he is no friend to Peace nor Peacemakers.

Again, when at that Meeting in which he accomplished his design against me, he
also in the face of the whole Congregation, sharply rebuked me; because
sometimes, although but upon occasion, I kept company with Great Persons (as he
called them) this also is contrary to his New Law, notwithstanding he nor any
other can honestly accuse me or them for any disorder thereby committed, but
this did he do as though they had been a company of Strange kind of persons
dangerous to have any converse withal; Notwithstanding he knew that those
persons, of Quality are both sober, honest and of good report, and Well
deserving their places of Authority, and the love of all honest men, for that
they are favorites to that which is good, and punishers of those that do evil.

Now why he should have such an Antipathy against great persons, that it should
be contrary to his New Law, for those that are under himself to be in company
with them I know not, but surely if their great Estates and Authority were
removed, and they in all pomts equal with the Common sort, and his own new
Arbitrary Government Established, then I do believe he would permit them to be
Companions fit for him and his Confederates, Provided, they with submission,
came under his new Government, however in the mean time the baser or common
sort are more necessary and useful for Usurpers, than those who are in place of
Authority, and faithful therein. Now if he shall pretend, that what he does in
this case is upon a Conscientious account, and that the knowledge of it to be
his duty to God, did constrain him thereto, and that the Throat of his
Conscience could not swallow these small things, yea so small as not to be seen
or heard of in all the Book of God. I that am false in my judgment, but if true
in his own, How then comes it to pass that he can swallow far greater things,
yea as great as Cammels in comparison of the other; for he can swallow
Covetousness Fraud and Deceit, all in one Morsel, as does appear by his owning
and allowing one of his supporters, who with himself thought fit to punish me
with Eternal Misery, for coveting a Patent (as he calls it) which no known Law
forbids, by which I covet nor take any thing that is another proper Right. But
this Confederate having a good estate in Lands of his own and a good Trade
besides, is not content therewith, but unlawfully coveteth another Trade, which
is his Neighbors lively-boad, and so makes use of both; And when they
perceived that their livelihood was diminished thereby, they to secure their
proper right and privilege, caused the said Covetous person to be Indicted at
the Assizes; but he to secure himself, deceitfully puts himself an Apprentice
for a Term of years to one who was of the same Trade, who lived near twenty
miles distant from him. And now notwithstanding his Estate, which is sufficient
to keep him, yet will he become a pretended Servant and Bondsman, in order to
defend and maintain his Covetous practice, on purpose to enrich himself, and as
it were to rob his Neighbor. Now whether this be not Covetousness and deceit,
and contrary to a known Law, I leave it to all for to judge; yet nevertheless,
this narrow throated tender conscience of his Lordships Grace, can swallow this
without asking any question, whether it be to the dishonor of God, or his
Truth; all which considered, judge ye whether what he did and designed to do in
the other case, were not for his own Glory and Renown, and not for the Glory of
the most high and holy one, as he would pretend.

But further to demonstrate his being guilty of partiality in the highest
degree, as may appear thus (that is to say) by his practicing all the ways and
means he can to accomplish his malice and revenge against a person that disowns
his and their unmerciful proceedings against me; and in order to deal the like
with him, he labors to find an occasion against him; and having found one
sailing unawares committed, which might have more honestly beed born with, then
many which he and they do connive at, and allow, seeing he did acknowledge his
failing with Humility, yet notwithstanding he must be, and was publicly
rebuked, and further threatened to be severely dealt with; Nor could his
Lordship accept of his Humility, because it was not really from the heart, as
he faith, (But how he should know the secrets of hearts I know not, although he
pretends to it, but this Ple say, if he have such an Inspection as to know what
is in the heart, why then did he, unknown to the people within doors, creep
into a house and stand behind a Wall to hear the secret discourse of two Women)
But this failing of, my friend not being sufficient, his Lordship has sought
out other Inventions whereby to make him odious, and to cast him out of their
Synagogue, and will not now leave one stone unturned; for why, he has how
sinned against one that cannot be reconciled, (to wit) his won self. For as in
his conceit it was committed against the most high, it might have been born
with from year to year, as you may observe. But now the case, is altered, and
his Popeship is now offended, and severely this offender must be dealt with;
and to work he goes from one house to another, as it were with threats in one
hand, and flattery in the other. And the better to accomplish his design of
revenge, he knowingly, purposely, and designedly did tell a lie of his own
making, as may be made appear, and all this to make a discovery of some secret
sin, which his Lordship had reason ten years ago to believe was committed if at
all, and yet all the time since as it was a sin against God, it was born with
ease, although in his own apprehension it was true. But now doubtless to his
greater trouble he finds it false, and the party Innocent; Yet nevertheless,
because he takes my part, he must be severely dealt with. But further, to make
his conniving and his partiality more plain, and that it may appear that this
his great care to discover sin was but to defend himself and his acts of
Wickedness from being brought to the light. Another of his Confederates, who is
highly oblieg'd by his Lord to stand by and defend his Master at a pinch: at a
certain time this person, who in a dissembling manner did pretend great Love to
me, but played Jack on both sides, so far as it might do service to his Master,
(This is that person to whom I first read my Book, of whom I make mention in my
Epistle) and so it was, as I by, good hands am Informed, that this person upon
the Road had tired his Horse, and having so done, he beat him with such
cruelty, which caused a person to send a Messenger out of his house to tell
him, That a merciful man would be merciful to his Beast; but instead of
moderation, he abused him the more, and fell a Cursing, and said, a Plague of
God take him, he can go, but will not with a Pox to him; using other ungodly
expressions to the Spectators, who are credible persons, and will testify the
Truth of it; and although his Lordship had knowledge of this disorder from some
of the Spectators own mouths, yet notwithanding all is by him connived at, and
he only justified, and they in his account are all Liars; Judge now if this
Information had been brought against this Member that is disobedient to
himself, would it be welcome News, and easy to be believed?

But Sirs, why may not he who was so wicked as to beat and a^use a person, whom
he loved so, as to own him to be a Brother in the Lord, and yet several times
did smite him with his Fist, until such time that the poor man was constrained
to strike up his heels, and all this he did, because the man would not
willingly do a thing one way, because he could do it better, and with more ease
another. Certainly, he that without cause can do thus wickedly to his Brother
whom he loves, may do much more to his abused and tired out Beast which he
hates.

And as touching his Lordships dealing with him, for abusing his Brother, and
somewhat of another Nature (which out of a desire to regain them, I shall
forbear now to mention) it was very gently and sparingly as I am informed;
therefore it is not strange that he should hear with him in the other case.
Furthermore, touching this person that abused his horse, he seems to be a very
Religious man as some may suppose, for I think he serves no less than two
several Gods besides the most high and holy one, (that is to say) The Lord
Caffin and his own Belly; as thus, first you must note, that upon a Religious
account, as he pretends, he cannot eat nor drink with me, nor would not from
time to time, not because any thing of sin was proved against me, or that it
was because he was more zealous in the observation hereof, because it is
commanded of the most high God, but rather because it did please his Idol God
(to wit) the Lord Caffin, as may appear thus, at a certain time he and I coming
to my Quarters in London, I being hungry, asked the Maid for such Victuals as
the house did afford, his Belly-god pinching him, he said, give me some too,
and so went up Stairs into my Chamber, and there at one Table, and a very
little one too, we then could eat and drink together, at which time a Friend
comes up into the Chambers, and was very joyful to see us eat and drink
together at so little a Table, but said this Religious person, I Will warrant you
he will laugh at me for this hereafter, but since that time he has recovered
his Zeal to his Idol again, and now he will neither eat nor drink with me, yet
notwithstanding he has not repented of this his sin, as it is a sin committed
against the most high God; for since that time I have told him of his behavior
in this case, and that in the hearing of another person, he then said, he could
do so again, thererefore I conclude, that which he does in this Case, is not in
obedience to the true God: But now may some say, you seem to signify that he
is an Idol, and that he is idolized by them; to this I shall say more
hereafter, when I have done with his conniving and partialities which may
further appear. For some that do not adore him, as others that are more fit for
his turn, if they through Infirmities commit or fall into any evil (as I think
none may boast that they are free) let the matter be as private as it can, and
for their sin as penitent, as through grace they may, yet notwithstanding he
will make them as odious to public view as possible, if they refuse to do
according to his own will, yet if one who is his beloved favorite should
commit -- with one whom he loves not, or at best but very little, Let the case
be as notorious as it will, yet it shall be concealed, and the worst shall be
favored for the sake of she that he loves best. Although the Fact be as it
were posted up for the public view of all, and that there be a necessity of
Marrying her to some body, So that the Beloved, and he that is not Beloved,
must now by the care of the Brethren, go from one place to another to get them
Married. And although he the said Apostle was informed of this disorder, yet
notwithstanding, he never in public rebuked them, until the early great Belly
discovered the Fact, and then very gently too, but that in the mean time he did
not deal with her in a Corner, I cannot say, now if he had not been partial, I
wonder why he had not dealt with or publicly rebuked this new married man, who
was at that very meeting when he practiced his revenge against my self, I am
confident it was not because he had nothing against him; for he and others did
discourse of other things they had against him at that very time for which Mr.
Caffins displeasure was sufficiently signified against this man; But if he had
been blamed or dealt with for that which was notorious, then the discredit
would have reflected upon his great beloved Favorite; but why she should be the
object of his love more then others I know not, but if he had known her to be
better than others whom he has insulted over, I am persuaded it must be
otherwise then in the way of Regeneration.

There is an old Proverb, Kissing goes by favor. But suppose an honest Widow
or Maid should marry with one that is not in fellowship, be he of the Church of
England, Presbitery or Independent, and notwithstanding he be of a more honest
life and conversation than he that was fain to marry his own Favorite; yet for
this thing, according to his Law she shall be accused as an offender, and no
humility to be accepted of, but excommunicated she must be, and she not to be
forgiven to the hour of death except they part, or he be converted to them; but
in the mean time, she is to be adjudged to live in Forincation, and so their
children are Bastards but this Doctrine is opposed by the Congregations in
London and elsewhere, and by what Authority he does maintain it, I know not;
but this I, with others, do believe, that persons fearing God, ought to match
with those that do agree with themselves therein, if they can to their
contentment. One thing more is observable which is this, that before this
meeting he had certain knowledge of this disorder and yet at the meeting
signified that he was ignorant of it.

But to smooth up the matter, possibly he may pretend, that the cause of his
bearing with this Female Favorite was, because she was his nearest or dearest
Kinswoman, and therefore this thing was suffered without pulick rebuke contrary
to order for public Sin. To which I answer, that if the Case be so, and this
sufficient, then it may be concluded, that if a man will but purchase a
Kinswomans favor of him, he then may keep a Concubine without any public
rebuke. But to all this I know, that some, whose eyes are blinded with
Idolatrous zeal, will yet say, that I do not well to censure him, for say they,
I am CONFIDENT that he has holy good ends in what he does, and that he
designs the good of all. To which I answer, so did others as honest as himself
pretend, and that without doubt Pope Clement the first, did as soberly and
seriously pretend the same thing, and those that idolized him, did believe that
he designed the good of the Church, when he made pardons and Indulgences
saleable, for seeing, said he, that one drop of our Saviors blood had been
enough to have saved all mankind, and yet that all his blood should be spilt,
he persuaded himself that the overplus was given as a Treasure, to be dissposed
of by the chief Officer of the Church.

But say you, these things are not according to the Law of God and the holy
Scriptures, which we own for the unerring Rule, and I say, so is not
Usurpation, Tyranny, Rebellion conniving at sin and partiality, the Case is as
broad as long, sin is the same think among the Baptists where it is allowed of,
as it is amongst the Papists, whom you condemn and separate from. What think
you of it when a man shall be thus publicly charged with cruelty and cursing
by many creditable persons, and yet connived at, whilst another man has spent
all his days, so as to commit scarce any public evil to the dishonor of the
Gospel or the Church of Christ as ever yet was proved, and yet that an
Accusation should be received and Credited against him and that from the mouth
of one person, and he one of the world too, and does speak in his own Case and
for his own Ends, all that he says, is not this partiality, I leave it to all
the world for to judge.

But forasmuch as I am blamed by some of my pretended brethren for calling them
Idolators, I must confess it is very ill done of me, if it be not true. But if
I can make it appear that they do give more homage to their new Lordly Officer,
than they give to the most high I suppose they, not I, deserve the blame. Now
that it is so, does it not appear by this ( viz.) one of his chiefest adherents
soon after they had practiced their Tyranny without any the least show of
mercy. I at a meeting at this man's house did take an occasion to interrupt him
in his discourse, and said that they preached one thing and practiced another,
he having not wherewith to defend their practice declares publicly that I had
lived in transgression these several years, but would name nothing, and (said
he) I have convinced you thereof, and yet you have continued in it; and further
said, that I deserved to be excommunicated for that very thing; now Sirs, I
pray observe, that if this dangerous thing, without name, which he accuses me
with, to render me odious to the people, were true, and that he knew it to be
so, which if not, is he not a liar and a false Accuser of his Brother; but if
true, pray Sirs, how has he done his duty, have we not often been both at the
Lords Table since that time? have we not ear and drunk several times to our
greater condemnation (if it be as he said) I pray sirs observe, all that could
be swallowed up very well notwithstanding it was to the great dishonor of God
and tending to the damnation of us both.

Now all this he can suffer without the least disquiet of Conseience, does it
not therefore appear that he is more zealons to do the will of his new Lord,
than the will of him that is in Heaven; if not, why did he not rebuke ^e before
this time, and disowned to have fellowship with me if I was obstinate, but that
the thing for which he condemned me, was as a sin (as doubtless he would have
the people to believe, it was a most intolerable one) I utterly do deny, and
also do affirm, that he never did convince me that it was so, and therefore I
leave the Reader to judge whether he be not a Iyar and an abusive false
accuser, for saying that he did. Again, if I did confess it to be a sin, and
yet to his knowledge I did live several years in it, why then did he not
admonish me according to order? but inasmuch as he did not, I pray what
condition is he in by neglecting his duty, and having fellowship and Communion
with it; if, as he said, I deserved excommunication for; the case was only
this, A certain person from year to year was often a Trespasser upon me by his
Cattle lying in my Corn and Pasture, which said person, at a certain time,
dealt dishonestly with his own Brother in a Case that was injurious to my self
also, by which means I was provoked the more to require satisfaction for the
wrong which he did unto me, his Cattle at that very time lying on my Corn, and
because I did take money of him in satisfaction of all the injuries that he had
done me for the time past. And notwithstanding I never troubled him, nor in any
wise hurt or abused his Cattle, nor did take half so much as the damage did
amount unto, yet for this I am accused, this is the whole case, and for this
very thing, I in this pretended charitable man's judgment deserved to be
excommunicated: certainly this pretended loving brother must believe that
excommunication extends no further than to Purgatory; or if he believes it
reaches further, I then do believe that his brotherly charity is turned into
that love which is of a hellish nature.

But this of the Story I cannot forget ( viz.) That as the thing in his conceit
was a sin by which I dishonored God and wronged my Neighbor, yet he never
tells me I deserved this punishment until I had displeased his new Lord and
Master; so that sin committed against God may be born with several years without
rebuke; but a pretended sin against this new Lord cannot be suffered nor born
with one whole day; does it not therefore appear, in his conceit, that this
Lordly person is equal, if not more than equal with the most high, which is
most horrible blasphemy to conceive. Now judge ye which, in this loving
brothers conceit, was the greatest sin, my sin against God, or my sin committed
in refusing to bow to the Image which they had set up, whose Law forbids to buy
and sell, so that of the two be serves his Idol God rather than the true.

Bear with me, I pray you, oh! my pretended loving Friends; you have your
Infirmities as well as I, know you not that I was not suffered to clear with
you in place convenient, surely if I had, there should not have been occasion
for this thing, especially if your New Lord had been honest, but he proving to
be an Usurping Tyrant, and you to be his Confederates and adherents to him, and
all other lawful means for Reconciliation, by me offered, being by you
scornfully Rejected; I therefore, according to my duty, to convince you of your
delusions, shall take the boldness to speak a little farther.

And therefore further, to show wherein your Idolatry does appear, as thus,
when this your New Lord had declared that Patents were of the Devil, and to be
of that damnable Nature, so that according to his New Laws, none might justify
them upon pain of suffering his High displeasure, which in his and your
judgments, is punishable with no less then eternal Damnation, unless they
submit.

He having thus seduced the Brethren, one who is very often a Preacher amongst
them, being asked the question, what he thought of their proceedings against
me, and whether he thought Patents were such dangerous things, to which he
answered and said, He could as freely Steal a Horse as to have a Patent. I pray
Sirs, observe how great Zeal appears in this Deluded Person, for the
observation of the New Laws and Precepts of this his New Lord; for rather than
to sin against, and transgress his Commands, he had rather sin a against, and
transgress the Commands of the most high God, in such degree, as to incur his
Wrath and Indignation; for do you not know that by stealing, you transgress
both the Law of God and good Men, and by the transgressing of these, do you not
know, that you endanger your Souls to damnation together, with the loss of your
Life and Estate, and will you do this rather than sin against or displease your
New Lord, and yet is he not your Idol, Judge, oh ye that are not seduced!

Again, another person who was not at this Meeting, to whom I said, that this
New Lord was an Usurper and Tyrant, etc. To which he said, I do not, nor cannot
believe it; to whom I replied, and said, That if it be not true, then I am the
Liar, and have done him greater wrong, and it is impossible for me to give him
satisfaction, nevertheless said I, it is my duty to acknowledge my sin, and to
desire mercy, is it not? yea said he, it is so, but said I, suppose that all
that I have said be true, and that I prove it to be so how then? ought not he
to do the like? Now to this take notice, I could not by all the means I could
use, get any answer, though often provoked him thereunto, do not all these
things prove that you Idolize him in a high degree, or otherwise that you
believe he is Infallible, and cannot Err.

Again, another, person, who at the last Meeting that I was at, before they
thus dealt with me, called me to go with him, and being at a little distance
from the people, he then standing still said nothing to me, I therefore said to
him, what have to say to me, he answered with a sour countenance, and said, I
am sorry that your Condition is so bad, and said he, it does exceedingly
trouble me that you cannot see it; I pray said I, what do you mean, he
answered, the Patent, To which I replied, why? how does it offend? said he, it
does offend every body, wherefore shall I name any, To which I said, That to my
knowledge that was not true, for it did not offend every body, no said he,
that is true, well said I, who then does it offend? he answered, The weak
Brethren, then said I, which of them? he would not at present tell me, but
through much importunity, he told me who they were, and that was Matthew
Caffin, and that person that said I deserved to be Excommunicated for taking
money of a man for wrongs he had done, and these two who are the most knowing
men, and able to Preach too, and deceive the honest weak Brethren; but as for
those who were really weak upon honest account, and conscientiously were
oppressed or grieved by it, I never yet could find or hear any to be amongst
them to this day.

I then put the Question, saying, what have thee to say against it? to which he
said, I do not know what a Patent is, nor what it means, To which I replied, I
am sorry that thou should be so weak as to be under so much sorrow and
trouble for that which thou know not, nor do understand, yet could he not,
but must believe that it was but a very bad thing, and why? because he must
believe as his Popeship believes, and do as he commands, and who more, zealous
and earnest against me at the time appointed for the Condemnation of Patents.
Now, if this man had not been more zealous, for the Adoration of his New Lord,
than he was to do the Will of the most high God: Why should he be so urgent for
to punish me in Hell for that which is no Transgression of the Law of God, what
think you of it Sirs? Has not this Idol eat up all love, and swallowed up all
mercy and compassion; for does it not appear that Transgression committed
against this New Lord is unpardonable; and does it not plainly appear that he
in their judgment is Infallible; if not, why do you do these things without any
other Rule or Scripture authority, and that before it was proved that I had
transgressed any known Law of God or the King, or that I had wronged any man; I
therefore demand of you (oh ye my pretended tender loving Brethren) whose
Majesty I have offended, that my Soul must be offered up in sacrifice to
pacify his Wrath and Indignation; If he be not the true God, was it not your
Idol? Thus they feared the Lord, and served their Idol, and yet will they lean
upon the Lord, and say, I not the Lord amongst us, and no evil can come upon us.

But one thing more which is not altogether impertinent to the case, take as
follows, One person more, with whom I was very conversant, who was at both
meetings, In which their infallible Apostle practiced his design against me,
and notwithstanding he (as I hope) is a man as honest as any amongst them, were
he not seduced and deluded, so as in all points to please his Idol, for
notwithstanding he never did believe nor could charge the thing to be unlawful,
or that it was against the mind and will of the most high God, yet when he was
at the solemn adoration of their Idol, he not considering that he should do, as
he would be done unto, did give his consent to this horrible cruelty, and from
that time is become a great defender of his Idols Tyranny; and such is the
force of his delusion, that he is constrained to believe that what his Idol
says, is as Oracles, and therefore cannot but express the strange alteration
of his whole mind and affection. And now in his judgment I ought not only to be
damned for opposing his Idol, but also to be hanged, drawn and quartered; for
said he to me, you never had had your Patent, if you had not stole the Seal, To
which person, I say, I do not remember that I at any time was reputed or
suspected to be a Thief before, nor yet known to be an obstinate offender of
the most high God, nor of those who are his faithful and honest people, and yet
will you think it pleasant for such an one, if you were the party your self, to
be hanged, drawn, quartered, and afterward damned for ever: But shall I be
angry with him, no, I will not, but sorry I am, and pity him I must, because
he cannot see his strong delusion.

But possibly he will say, no I would not have a man suffer death for such a
thing; To which I answer, that if he were not strangely deluded and seduced, he
then would say, that it is much honester to hang a man for transgressing the
Law of a King, than it is to punish both Soul and Body for ever in Hell, for
transgressing the Laws of him, who is no less than a Usurper, Tyrant, and an
Idol, and that before you know that you have any command from God for it, or
that you know that the party accused, is an obstinate offender of God, which
indeed, no person in the world can prove. Now my beloved, observe whether this
his, and your practice and principles, be not the same with his brethren beyond
the Seas, who command the ignorant to believe as they believe, and do as they
bid, and whether he has not so far deluded you, as to put you upon such
practices as do justify the Church of Romes usurped Authority rather than the
Church of Christ, whose government is according to Scripture authority, let him
that reads judge, and though Hypocrite like in words he does disown them, yet
how can he honestly disown them when both he and you act by the same authority
And though at a distance he may call her Whore and Harlot; yet if she be so, is
it not clear, that in matter of fact, he has committed Fornication with Her,
by approving of her corrupt and wicked ways?

And therefore now my beloved, you may no longer wonder that he should have
Communion with Idolators and unclean persons, rather than with those that keep
themselves from Idols, and approve of Letters Patents; for if Idolatrous zeal
has not blinded your Eyes, you may see that he himself is an Idol and a
Fornicator, and has fellowship with Idolators every day.

But whereas some of you cry out against me, for saying, That he is a false
Apostle and does contemn the Authority of all that are above him, I am
therefore apt to conceive some objections will be raised, or shifting excuses
endeavored to be made by this Lordly Usurper, to wave or deny what he has
said or done, notwithstanding all may be proved by many persons, if they were
enjoined to speak but the Truth of what they know; ( viz.) his saying, If there
be a Statute for it, what is that to us, what have we to do with the Laws and
Statutes of Men? That Patents are of the Devil; And that he could as freely
have Communion with Idolatrous and unclean Persons, as with that man that
should have a Patent; Nothing of which was opposed by you, although, all those
expressions savor strongly of contempt of All Authority whatever, and seem
directly to oppose that Precept of Peace, Loyalty and Obedience enjoined by the
Apostle to a11 true Christians, 1 Pet. ca. 2. v. 13. and 14. Submit your selves
to every Ordinance of Man, etc.

But possibly he will allege, That several persons of good quality subscribed
their hands against me in procuring the Patent, To which I answer, that those
worthy persons opposed my proceedings only upon a mistake, and the false
Informations of one or two Conspirators, and that some of them since they came
to understand the truth of the matter, have freely declared to me, in the
presence of several persons, that they were sorry they did appear against me,
and did now believe it was both just and right for me to enjoy my Privilege.

But suppose he should deny the truth, and say he did not affirm that Patents
were of the Devil, then observe I pray, whether it does not appear very plainly
by his actions in the very Case of the before mentioned Covetous Person, who is
suffered by Deceit and fraud, unlawfully to exercise or enjoy his Neighbors
privilege or Calling; for notwithstanding they know it is contrary to all Law,
yet in Contempt thereof, he and his covetous practices are allowed of.

But suppose this covetous person should have obtained a Patent from the King,
whereby he might enjoy the Trade or Livelihood of other men, then according to
his Law, it must come under the same condemnation; so that it appears evident,
That it is Patents, not Covetousness; Patents not Fraud; simply Patents, not
Deceit, that is the forbidden fruit of him whom you adore. Again, if he did not
condemn Patents abstractedly and merely as such to be of the Devil, why are
Patents worse in his conceit than Idolatry and Uncleanness? but if you should
say, That you condemn me for justifying of Patents, that by false information,
and so to unlawful Ends were obtained; I answer this cannot be, for I ever
said, That if any other Persons did make the Discovery before my self, then it
was their Privilege and not my own, and that in such case my endeavors had
been evil; since (as I always declared) Patents are grantable only to the first
Inventors and not otherwise, and that if it could be proved that any person
before my self did find out the thing I should immediately desist. Again, if
Patents, were not of the Devil, in his conceit, why should he condemn me for
justifying of a Patent? and not because I endeavored to secure the thing it
self, but judged it lawful for me to prevent other Persons of cleansing of the
Seeds, and also did justify me for engaging my Servants by promise not to
cleanse the same, or to instruct any other therein; Therefore, most plain it
is, That my withholding persons from doing the thing, is not the Sin or Evil,
but Patents, and Patents simply that is sinful, and of the Devil; if not, why
is not one means lawful as well as the other, seeing they both tend to one
thing and one end.

Furthermore, if he did not judge Patents in themselves to be of the Devil, why
should he and you upon deliberate consultations agree, That it should be
unlawful for any Brother to Buy or Sell for him that should have a Patent?
Whence it must be concluded, that either Patents or this your Apostles practice
must be of the Devil; And what he has done, is either to please the most High
God, or himself; If you say it does please the most High, I demand of you to
prove it.

But if you will say, That it was his and the Churches Duty to practice these
things only to satisfy the Weak Brethren and Common sort of People; Show me
your Commission for it; if not, then give me leave I pray to show the danger of
this seducing Error, which you conceit is a righteous and charitable principle
to preserve peace, love and unity in the Church; to which purpose be pleased to
consider, If a person that shall obtain a favor of a Prince, or do any other
thing, which the weak Brethren may interpret or call an Offense to them, may
not be suffered upon pain of Excommunication or Damnation, which is all one in
your sense; whether the thing for which they are offended, be lawful or
unlawful, (as your new Lawmakers has asserted, and endeavored to prove to be,
as you well know to be true) observe then, I say, whether this be not a Stirrup
to mount himself into a Saddle of Supremacy, or a foundation Step to exalt him
into the Seat of the highest Dignity and Authority; so as that all from the
King on his Imperial Throne, to the meanest Subject, must Truckle to him, and
be in subjection under him, and his pretended weak Brethren, and Common sort of
Men, since no person may offend them in any Case, upon pain of Excommunication,
nor oppose his Lordships Design, he having the commanding power, and the weak
Brethren on his side; for they like so many Children are easily persuaded and
deluded by their Strong Lord and Master.

This must needs open a wide Gap for all kind of Usurpation and Tyranny, and
makes Excommunication merely an Instrument to gratify the malicious revenge of
a private person on his Brother, under color of offense: For if any one
displease his Lordship, who has the commanding power, he then may make it his
work (and who shall hinder him) to render such person and his Case as odious as
he pleases. And at this work he is not a little Arch and Dexterous, but can
forecast his devises so as to accomplish his Design, and when he has thus, by
his subtilty, instigated the weak Brethren against the person whom he resolves
to Crush, then they must declare that they are offended, although they have
nothing to say therein, nor do understand the matter, However having declared
against the party or thing according to his pleasure, and the words by him put
into their mouths, he then assembling again with these his weak Brethren, and
in the Congregation makes it his business to engage them also against the
person, for that he lies under the most abominable Crime of accepting a lawful
favor from a King, which is an offense to the weak Brethren; And for this
offense without proving the matter to be any Breech of the Law of God, the
party must suffer Excommunication, and had He but the Privilege of a
Torturing. Inquisition, all that dare oppose his Designs doubtless should be
sure to be (according to his own word) Severely dealt with.

But to proceed in his disorderly Order; you must observe in the next place,
That he himself is to manage the Trial between the supposed Offender, and the
pretended Offended, though the quarrel be still his own, and the thing designed
only to bring about his Revenge, or what pleases him best, which he is able to
manage without Control as you well know, for by his twenty years Prerogative,
he will not suffer the Case to be debated between the Offender and his
Accusers, and those of the Court, nor is it necessary in his Government (though
prescribed in Scripture) that the weak offended Brother should endeavor first
by himself, and afterward with one or two more to admonish the Offender: But
such is his Arbitrary Order, That the Party accused shall never know who his
accusing weak Brethren are, nor do I know to this day, though I did several
times demand the same.

Having thus settled his absolute Government, wherein himself in effect has
Authority to all, viz. Accuse, Judge, and Condemn, whilst all the rest are
silent, or speak according to his pleasure, not daring to oppose, so as to take
the Prisoners part, upon pain of damnation: What then, I pray, shall hinder him
from exercising his Usurped Authority, and making his Tyranny and Cruelty, his
unlimitted Power and greatness known, so that he may as he lifts prosecute his
Revenge against those that will not ADORE him, (the refusal whereof, I verily
believe was my great Crime.) He therefore calls a Court, Commands one of his
Subjects (as he thought) to appear before his Lordship, and there accuses him
as aforesaid for accepting of a lawful Favor from a King(but subtly pretends
it an Offense to the weak Brethren and common fort of Men, as he calls them)
This thing, faith he, Is odious and abominable; and according to our Law
unsufferable, Whoredom, Fornication, or Idolatry, We allow of, rather than
This. What say thou? Thou may plead for thy self, but it is to no purpose;
For if thou have offended me, and my deluded weak Ones, thou shall know, that I
am thy Accuser, Lord and Judge my Self; and thou must not expect any benefit in
this Court, by pleading thy Cause, with any others besides my self; For it is
my Privilege, and has been so these Twenty Years, and, What, Do you think I
will loose it now? And then, after an insulting manner, render such an one as
odious, as malice and a lying Tongue subtly can express: As you may likewise
well remember; All which perhaps Strangers may suppose to be only a Chollerick
fit, and that he speaks in passion, but I must therein undeceive them, for I
would not abuse him, I think all the world cannot put him into the least show
of Passion, and that Matchiaevel might have been his Pupil in the Arts of
Dissimulation; He salutes you as Joab did Abner; with a Kiss, and all hail my
Brother, but at the same time fails not to smite you under the fifth rib: In
brief, he kills you with pure kindness, and under pretense of the highest Love,
makes you an example of Sober Revenge; By which means he so far deludes, the
poor weak Brethren, that they cannot but believe, whatever he does is for holy
ends.

But further, observe, I pray, Whether this great pretended Charitable
Principle will lead: If the Case be so, That whoever offends the weak Brethren,
must be condemned, and that they may be offended with persons for doing that
which is honest and lawful, and merely of a civil nature, (as he says they
may) then suppose that the Church did consist of the greatest number and
strongest party in the Nation, and that the Baser or Common sort; as he calls
them, whose part he has taken, were agreed, and this New Lord their chief
Conducter, Command^r and Law-given; And the weak Brethren, through his
Instigation, or otherwise declare, That it is a very great Offense to them,
That the King should have his Crown, Dignity and Prerogative, and all Persons
within his Dominions to be his Subjects, and therefore they cannot but be
offended till he has otherwise disposed of the same (for the wearing of Gold,
Silver and Ribonds, he has already voted insufferable; And as we say, in the
vulgar Proverb, If his Cap be made of Wool, he shall pay the Debt; so if his
Majesty's Crown be made of Gold, It seems he must submit, or be dealt
with)considering I say, you are not to have respect of persons in judgment, nor
any amongst you, dare make opposition upon pain and peril of Excommunication:
What I pray, what may the King do in this Case? for as he is a member, he may
not by your Law, offend a weak Brother upon pain of suffering Eternal Damnation
(if he believe as the Church believes;) and also to resist the Commands of this
upstart Lord Ecclesiastic, he may not, because they are the greatest number,
and at his request must prosecute with the greatest force and vigor.

Again, what if the weak Brethren should take a fancy, or be persuaded to make
a King of him, who is so humble, so holy, and always ready to please them, by
making the rich and strong submit to his and their own wills and pleasures,
would he not say, within himself, Ob! this is pleasant. But suppose (as the
Popes at their Election) he should pretend himself unwilling, and with
hypocritical prayers (and perhaps Tears, but of joy) seem to beg heartily to be
excused, yet at last rather than offend the weak Brethren, he must yield and
give them satisfaction; For may he not say, It is better for me to be a Rebel,
than be damned for offending the weak Brethren; I cannot in Conscience deny, it
is my duty to accept it, when they will not be contented without it, etc.

But possibly it may be objected, and said, That I am upon the Extremes in this
supposition, and speak of things so far from being heard of heretofore, or
apprehended hereafter, that they are wholly unimaginable, To which, I answer,
that in some measure, the like has been practiced by John the Tailor, King of
Leyden, and that to the great infamy and abuse of many innocent, honest and
peaceable Professors to this very day; Be not therefore over Confident, but
know that wiser men, and I do believe; no less strict, holy, and zealous then
your selves, have been deluded and seduced; For, Zeal without true knowledge is
most dangerous; I will only give you one instance, in that godly man A^hington,
who was learned both in Scripture and Law, and a very sober, conscientious,
religious person, yet he and another being stronger in zeal than Judgment,
were so far deluded and seduced, as verily to believe, That one Hacket (by
reason of his great protestations of holy zeal, for Gods glory, and the
Churches Reformation) was the most holy man that ever was born (the Lord Jesus
excepted.) And secondly, ^at he was immediately fent from the Lord in Heaven,
to prepare his way before him, To deal severely with all opposers, and do
great things for such, as would be conformable and obedient to their Lord and
Savior. And thirdly, That the said Hacket should be Emperor, of all Europe,
and all other Kings and Princes be in subjection to him; Nay, further, in short
time they proceeded to that height of blind zeal and impiety, That by such
delusions, they were led and constrained to go into Cheapside, and there openly
Proclaim him, the said Hacket, to be the Lord Jesus come from Heaven, and that
in such a place people might find him.

Lastly, when they all three, to wi^, the Seducer and the seduced, were
apprehended and sent to three several Prisons, that they could not see each
other till they were brought before the Queen ( viz. Elizabeth) and her
Honorable Council, where seeing Hacket again, this poor deluded Arthington
possessed with a transport of misplaced zeal, could; not refrain, but fell down
to him on his Knees before them all, saying, God save the King of Europe: Nor
could he be dispossessed of this Spirit, of Delusion, till he heard, that the
said Hacket was executed, and those, wretched and blasphemous Speeches he
uttered upon the Ladder, viz. If there be a God in Heaven, he will rid me out
of these Villains hands; If he do not, I will pull him from his throne, and
within few days destroy this City with Fire and Brimstone; meaning London, for
you must note, This poor seduced man, did believe they had not power to put him
to death; This news coming to Arthingtons Ears, he was immediately dispossessed
of that seducing Spirit, and through Grace recovered out of that wretched
estate, and became again a very godly Man, but his Companion (whose name was
Coppinger) when he heard of the Villain Hackets desperate end, fell distracted
and dyed mad.

Be not therefore, my beloved, pressumptuously confident; but beware, I pray
beware, how you close with, justify, or defend any usurped Power, when there
is no Scripture Authority for it; Remember that this Hacket was altogether as
great a Pretender to Holiness as your Seducer, See the Book entitled,
Athington's Seduction and Repentance, and although the Story seem strange, yet
most true it is, and acted in London no longer ago than in the days of Queen
Elizaheth

Now my beloved, if you find, that he yet will justify, or endeavor by deceit
and subtilty to excuse what he has wickedly done, let not his former
righteousness be regarded, until by plain demonstrations, he show that such his
Evil is repented of; Keep close to your unerring Rule, the Divine Word, for
otherwise who knows into what Extremes you may run, which brings me back
further, to answer your aforesaid objection, That I am upon the Extremes, As to
what I have supposed was poss:ible to be accomplished by this pretended holy
Politician, and those his weak Brethen, if power and opportunity were not
wanting; For I pray, what shall hinder your Extremes in Action, from answering
my Extremes of Imaginations: since it is plain that your Liberties are in his
own Judgment boundless, (mark that) For let the Case be lawful or unlawful
Civil or Ecclesiastic, if it do but offend the weak Brother it is all one, as
he most vainly endeavored to inser from those words of St. Paul, If meat make
my Brother to offend, I will eat no meat whilst the world stands; whence he
concluded. That the weak ought to be born with, in all Cases, so that if one
that were strong, had a just and lawful right to do or act any thing in Civil
matters it might not be suffered, if any weak Brethren should say they were
offended with it.

But, say you, can it be believed, that any such wickedness as you suggest,
should be ever attempted, by M. C. What? an Innocent, a Turtle, to turn
devouring Eagle; or a Lamb Couchant on a sudden start up into a Lion Rampant;
surely, no wise people will think it possible.

To which I answer, That his Brethren, Innocent the third and others, as honest
as himself, did pretend to as great holiness and humility as himself can do,
declaring themselves in words to be so far from affecting the Supreme Dignity,
that they always styled themselves Servants of the Servants of Christ, nothing
seemingly more humble, nothing more Innocent; But observe if either Emperor,
King or Prince offended them, down they must to receive Correction, and on
their Knees, they must Kiss the Great (and perhaps the Gouty) Toe of this
Metamorphosed Creature: Remember that no man grows horrible wicked all at once,
Usupations steal upon us by Degrees, and several steps; What is once done by
permission, shall next time be exacted as by Right, and every President of
Encouragements pact, serve as a Lam to justify those to come; Till at last
having forsaken the Polestar of Gods word, which ought to limit all Spiritual
Authority, they come to Launch into a boundless Ocean of Tyranny, where they
have no Card to steer their Course by, but the mere will and pleasre of an
Usurper.

Now, my Brethren, although this new deluding principle, which faith, A man
shall either submit to the wills and pleasures of the weak Brethren in all
cases, whether lawful or unlawful, or otherwise be damned; and that all others
who oppose this Doctrine, must be dealt seberely with; be such an one as I
never heard of before, either here or beyond the Seas: yet is it a most proper
Engine to mount an ambitious and domineering Spirit, unsuspectedly, to a state
of Su^remacy. For now he would have you believe the weak Brethren (who shall
certainly be on his side) are Infallible, if he can but prevail with them to
say they will be offended if a thing be not done thus or thus; so it must be,
without any dispute upon what grounds or warrants; which indeed is a fly new
Cheat, not inferior to any invented by the most politic and ingenuousest
Jesuit whatever; as seeming to have nothing of self in it, but wholly gilded
over with tender innocence, and in tire love to the weak Brethren. And for as
much as your pretended Apostle Caffin, when the Author of this new minted
Cheat, which leads no man knows whether; it is pity he should be denied the
glory of the Invention, and therefore I case not if I call it, The Caffetman,
or Caffinian error.

Be not deluded, my Brethren; why should you that acknowledge your selves weak,
conceit your selves wiser than the strongest: certain it is, Christian
Emperors, Kings and Princes, yea whole Churches, have been deluded and abused
by their pretended innocent holy Fathers. Thus Pope Innocent III. called his
Brethren before him, as your pretended innocent Lord may do; and being
assembled, it was Enacted by them, That this Innocent Lamb, the Pope, and his
Successors, should have the correction of all Christian Kings and Princes. And
also, That no Emperor should be acknowledged to be Emperor, until he had sworn
obedience unto him: verifying that saying of the wise. King Solomon; I have
seen a sore evil under the Sun, Servants on horseback, and Princes as Servants
walking on the earth. For he being thus mounted and set up above all, makes
open protestation, That his Pontificial Dignity: was rather to give Laws to
Emperors, Kings and Princes, than to receive any from them: As your innocent
Leader would do; who says, What have we to do with the Laws and Statutes of
men? And what, I pray, shall hinder your, new Lord, or Chief Officer, from
doing, as well as saying the same thing, if his Horn were but as strong as his
Brother Innocent's was? What do all his pretenses to holiness signify to the
contrary, since with your consents he can do as it pleases himself, without
Scripture Authority? No doubt Pope Innocent could alleadg as plausible holy
ends for what he acted, as your pretended innocent Lamb can do for correcting
the King's Royal Prerogative, as it has relation to the lawfulness of Letters
Patents: And why may not he correct the same in other cases, as well, as this,
if by his instigation the weak Brethren should be offended, therewith? I
therefore think it my duty to oppose this dangerous erroneous Principle, and
crush this Cockatrice in the Egg, before it be grown into a devouring Serpent.

Further my Friends, I pray consider, whether he has not deluded and seduced
you, to believe, that he is a most innocent, humble, and faithful Apostle, by
means of his Hypocritical exclaiming against the Pope, for Usurpation and
Tyranny; against Bishops for their Lordly authority, against Presbyters, for
being as Rigid and Corrupt as any; against, Independants, for Errors; and with
a high hand against the Quakers charging them with Pride and
Self-conceitedness, that they will not say, most noble Festus, but despise
Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities, and that their look it more stout then
their Fellows, (see his Book against Quakers, page 55.) After all this judging
and condemning Pride, Usurpation, Cruelty, and unwarrantable Teners and
Practices in others, who amongst the weak and blind would, suspect, That this
meek seeming Lamb or gentle Dove, should be or act like a ravenous Woolf, or
Lion Rampant himself? But may not the Quakers and those that he does thus
Condem, Reply to him in the words of our blessed Savior, Thou Hypocrite, first
cast out the Beam out of thine own Eye, and then may thou see more clearly to
cast out the Mote out of thy Brothers Eye; For is it not hiypocrisie for your
new Lord to condemn his Brother at Rome, for that which he himself does
practice and allow of at home? For if at Rome a man offends the Pope, who
orders the matter so, That such person shall be condemned, although no known
Law of God be transgressed; Does not your Lord Act the same things? Nay, may it
not be said, without injuring Truth, That the Church of Rome is not altogether
so cruel; For they only separate the Soul from the Bodies of some persons,
because they will not go their way, which they believe is the only way to
Heaven; But you my pretended loving Brethren! will shut a man out of Heaven,
and send him to Hell Torments for ever (in your own apprehensions) merely
because he will not submit to a groundless, boundless, quarrel some humor

Again, has not this pretended Innocent man (as he says of the Quakers)
despised Dominions and spoke evil of Dignities, and is not his look more stout
than his Fellows? since if one that is under his Authority, shall obtain and
accept of a favor and privilege from a King, whereby it appears he owns his
Authority above himself, what is it less then high Treason against the Lord
Caffin, seeing he will immediately declare that it is of the Devil, and (in
effect) that the person must be damned for the same, and therefore charge it
as a Crime against me, because I said, they had not any thing to do with things
of that nature.

Object. But say you, Is it not a sin to offend a weak Brother?

Sol. To which I answer, That it is so as the Case may be, and that it is my
Duty, if I be the supposed offender, to clear my self, and convince my Brother
of his mistake, and show him his failing, if in Truth such his offense be taken
without cause, and upon no just grounds, and that such pretended offended
Brother is to blame rather than the pretended offender, when he has given no
just cause of offense.

I do further believe, That it is wickedness in him, whoever he.be, that shall
after a Lordly and insulting manner with high hand and proud look disturb and
interrupt those persons, who are willing to reason together, in order to be
reconciled one to another; As I for my own part was ready to do; And what, I
pray. Sirs! was lie that hindered our Reconciliation and Christian Friendship,
being the first time I ever had opportunity to treat with you, Is he not a
disturber and quareller? who perpetually interrupted these our reasonings, and
labored to make the Breach wider than it was before, hypocritically acting
under pretense of Love, Innocence, and Peace, and yet an enemy to Peace and
Peacemakers?

Further, consider, Is it not their sin also, that shall take such quartellers
part, seeing those that will be conscientious for that which is another man's
Right, the Church of God has no such Customs? Lest you also be found
Transgressors again God for not only allowing of disorderly Contenders, but for
condemning him, who has given no just cause for them to be offended, as ever
yet was proved, as you well know; and your own Consciences must testify, if
not seared.

But this I most freely confess, That suppose I have knowledge and do believe,
That I may eat Flesh that is offered in Sacrifice to Idols, without offense to
God, yet if by my so doing I cause my brother to offend, and because that by my
eating unknown to him that I eat without respect to the Idol, he not haying
such a degree of knowledge, Is by me imboldened to eat thereof, as sacrificed
to Idols, and so this my weak brother, becomes an offender and Idolater; For
me thus, I say to make or occasion my Brother to trangress the Laws of God, is
sin and that I deserve in such a case to be publicly blamed, if I do
obstinately persist therein.

Again, If my brother being a Jew, newly converted to the Faith, and, whilst he
is yet young and weak, dares not eat Swines Flesh, and therefore will have no
Communion with those whom he knows to eat thereof; Because the Mosaical Law
forbids it, shall I therefore eat Swines Flesh or the like, that has been
forbidden whereby to offend this weak Brother? God forbid, I with the holy
Apostle will say, That I will eat no meat whilst the world stands, rather than
he for whom Christ dyed, should perish through my means, and doubtless in all
such cases, as it has relation to matters of Religion and worship, the strong
ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, according to the Apostles Doctrine;
For whoeverdoth otherwise, becomes an offender; but in matters and things
merely Civil, and never by any Law forbidden, as there can be no Real Ground
for any such offense; so does there not lie any such obligation; As suppose
(pardoning the lightness of the comparison, which yet is suitable enough to
some persons childish dealings) one of you should meet me at a Fair, and cry
for a Fairing, and nothing would give satisfaction, but a Romance or a Ballad,
and if my weak brother will not be satisfied without it, will you say I am
bound in duty to gratify his fancy? But if I do not, he may complain that he
is offended, and I may according to your rule, incur an Excommunication for
denying him. But if you shall seriously reply, That these things do not destroy
the Faith of a weak Brother, nor may he perish because of such my crossing his
desire; I answer, the very same may be said for Legal Patents, they are quite
of another nature, and in no wise to be construed as a means to cause any
honest impartial man, that is in the truth, to deny our Lord Christ, and adore
Idols, or the like.

But the Truth is, as touching Letters Patents to be an offense to weak
Brethren, and that his design was to do them a kindness in defending their
Privilege, I know very well the same was but a mere pretense and suggestion,
neither had any of you been offended, if it had not FIRST offended him; Bur the
main thing hereby intended was to bring about his own vain Glory, and make
himself famous above all his Brethren, and to be admired by those that do adore
him; For as he has often to boasted of great things he has done, how he has
corrected and rebuked great persons, and cast them out of the Church; so might
he by this means have had an occasion to boast of far greater things than ever;
For now he has corrected the Kings Royal Prerogative and Authority, and that
with such an high hand, that those who are under him, dare not, upon pain of
Excommunication, justify what is thereby granted, when his Lordship pleases to
call it in question, This I believe verily was one great thing he aimed at.

Oh! what wickedness will not be practiced to gratify an ambitious Heart under
pretense of love and innoceney? what? send a man to Hell for not satissying a
proud Majestical quarrelsome boundless humor! for so I must call it, because
there is no Scripture Authority for his practice, and does he now complain that
I design to betray him or endanger his Life? As he has said I do, because I
would have a public hearing of the Controversy, and some of those present at
it, whom he calls the world, to prevent which he has endeavored to provoke
all the Officers against me, saying, I had a design to bring with me some great
Persons to the Meeting, and so signified that I might betray them into danger,
and therefore advised them to beware, as though they also had been of as
dangerous principles as himself; But I could not perceive by their words or
actions, that they apprehended any reason they had to fear any such thing.

But I pray Sirs! does he not think that those in Authority are as tyrannical
as himself, for other wise, if he know himself innocent of whom shall he be
afraid? But if by what he has done or declared, he be a Transgressor, and
ought to be corrected for it, why, should he expect more mercy from them,
whereby to preserve himself, and his actions, from the chastisement due for
that which is sin, since he himself without mercy, would send another man to
Hell, for that which is no sin, as ever yet was proved?

However, suppose the worst imaginable, viz. That the civil Magistrate for
contempt of Authority (or only to please themselves, as he has done) should
cause him to be punished, can he complain of them or be offended with me,
cons:idering what himself has done infinitely beyond it? What? shall I punish
a man with eternal Torments for doing that which is no Transgression of any
known Law, and yet cry out by reason of so little pain, as may be over in a
quarter of an hour? would you not for this compare me to those unmerciful and
tyrannical Hypocrites, that would not touch the grievous and intolerable
burden with one of their Fingers, much less set their Necks and Shoulders to
it?

To make the Case more plain, suppose (my unmerciful Brethren) A Person whom
the King has appointed to represent his Royal Person on the Seat of Justice,
to put his Majesty's Laws in execution against such as are Rebellious and
Disturbers of the Peace, suppose, I say, this Judge contrary to such his Office
and Trust, should cause some one of you to be brought before him, and falsely
accuse you with Treason, or contempt of his Majesty's good Laws, when you are
altogether innocent in that case, and better Subjects than your Accuser; But
yet the said Judge subtly, by flattery and threats, corrupts all the Justices
that sit with him on the Bench, so as that they are constrained to be his
Assistants, or at best, dare not take your parts upon pain of Death, which
being done, he commands you into the Court, and there he himself charge you
with Rebellion against the King, and as a Disturber of the Peace of his
Subjects, when in truth it is because you have according to duty opposed his
usurped and abused Authority, and for not humoring those that are deluded
Subjects, and so do not like nor regard the Kings Prerogative, nor his Subjects
Privilege; But he having thus overawed the Jury, and stopped the mouths of them
that with him should do Justice, and so orders the matter according to his
pretended privilege (which possibly may be a usurpation of twenty years
standing,) That the party accused shall not Plead for himself, with those of
the Bench or Jury, whereby to give them a right understanding of the matter,
but declares to the Court, That several of his Brethren or Consederates, and
also those of the common sort, which are ready to take his part, do accuse you
of that unpardonable Crime, of justifying that which he and his Brethren, and
rude multitude condemn without any just cause, But by no means will suffer you
and them to hear each other; so that by such his usurped Authority and
Privilege (contrary to his Commisson) he himself both Accuse, Judge, Condemn
and pass Sentence, and now without MERCY executed you must be; and all this
before it be proved that you have transgressed any known Law, or wronged any
person whatsoever; Judge now, my unkind friends! is not this the Case, lay but
aside partiality and you may plainly see it as in a Glass, to be so and not one
(...) or Little better, as you may well remember, and your own consciences must
testify; and must you believe that all this which such a Judge so does is in
Love, and that it is for the Honor of the King and his righteous peaceable
Government? And must you still believe it is your sin to complain? or say, that
this pretended loving Brother is your unmerciful unjust Judge, and a tyrannical
Usurper? would you not rather (if the case were your own) think your complaint
in such Case most just? And that it is the duty of those whom he has deluded
and through flattery and threats, over-perswaded without understanding the
merits of the Cause, to join with him in this corrupt Judgment to endeavor
speedily to reverse the same as Erroneous, and see Justice executed upon this
Seducer and unjust Judge? Tell me I pray, if you are good and loyal Subjects to
the most High (before whom the greatest Monarchs on Earth are but animated
shadows) how dare you do otherwise?

But, my Beloved! what will the King do when these things come to his Majesty's
Ears, seeing one of his Subjects is barbarously murdered, and that it is proved
before him, That this Judge in a rebellious manner has to the great infamy and
dishonor of his Crown^ and Dignity, rendered his righteous Laws and Government,
tyrannical and barbarous, and that to the view of those Nations that despise
his Sacred Government? will be not take his Commission from him, and banish him
his Court, till he has repented and amended his manners? This certainly is the
best he can expect from him, who is most merciful; Moreover may not the King be
sore displeased with those Confederates, who with silence gave their Consents
to the tyranny of this unjust Judge (even although he be sensible, that they did
it through a delusion) if they do not acknowledge their iniquities and repent
likewise thereof.

But in the mean time, let him now no more complain of rigid and illegal
proceedings of the Judges of Assize and Sessions, as he has done; I have been
often at those Courts, and particularly at Chichester (if I be not mistaken) I
observed the Judge himslf to be the chief Accuser, but when he had declared the
matter of the Charge against the Accused, he then sat down, as a person
unconcerned notwithstanding himself was the proper Judge of the Court, and
although the offender had been abusive to him, yet he desired savor for the
Prisoner rather than severity; But never did I know or hear of any of them so
severe or rather tyrannical as to accuse, judge condemn, and pass sentence
before any other in the Court did prove that he was a Trangressor of any known
Law, nor can I believe that any Justice on the Bench would be so corrupt and
base, as to give their consents with such a Judge, that a man should be executed
for that which is no transgression; For this reason, I say, let him ever lay
his hand on his mouth and speak no more of others rigidness, etc. since he has
reason to fear that the worst of them may rise up in judgment against him
another day.

What you think here of I know not, but I do verily and upon good grounds
believe, That the most high King of Kings is angry, and also that you may not
expect mercy until you are reconciled to him whom you have thus abused with
your Acts of Injustice etcruelty; I also do believe, That the Party who has
suffered the wrong ought not to be reconciled unto his causeless, yet
unmerciful Adversaries, until they have done their duties by acknowledging and
repenting of their wickedness; so as to give reasonable satisfaction, which if
through Grace they should do, then let me tell you, that if I my self am the
person, who have received the injury, I ought readily, and in love freely to
forgive them, when they confess their debt although they have not wherewith, or
cannot, make satisfaction.

But in the mean time to give some brief answer to his late accusations.

1. Whereas he has been pleased to report, that I am very angry with him.

I answer and declare. That I have as great respect and kindness for him, as I
have for the greatest Ecclesiastical person in the world, and know no reason
for the contrary but that all good, people should love them both a like: For I
hope no honest man will hate the Pope, as he is a man, but as he is an Usurper,
Tyrant, etc.. So in like manner as M. C. is a person reformed, he is to be
beloved, and in that regard, notwithstanding all his uncharitable thoughts,
unchristian acts, and all that I have said (however you may construe it) yet I
solemnly declare, That if you (my pretended friernds) were ten times more my
Adversaries, than what your actions have shown you and He ten times worse than
the worst of those that hate me most, yet if you and He would but acknowledge
your evil, with demonstrations of godly sorrow, making reasonable satisfaction,
I should as freely, as willingly, and from my Heart, forgive all such persons;
as I would eat, drink, or sie^p, at a time when for want of those natural
refeshments, I were ready to perish; But otherwise, know ye, that it is as
easy for you to persuade the Idol of Rome, to come to Horsham and kiss the
great Toe of him, who is the Idol of Southwater; as to persuade me on any other
unwarrantable terms or means whatsoever to reconciliation.

2. Whereas, he with open mouth exclaimed against me in the Assembly at London,
for comparing him to the Antichristian Beast, it may not be impertinent to let
you know, I had some reasons for so doing, and I hope better than any he can
produce, for dooming a person to Hell for that which is no trangression.

1. Because it is said, That the Beast shall forbid and prevent Persons the
privilege of buying and selling Revelations 13.17. And accordingly this new
Lord, with the advice and consent of his Adherents, has by usurped Authority,
agreed and inacted, That no person that is of the Church, although my Servant,
may buy or sell for me; If it be objected that this was intended in the Case of
buying and selling of Seed, only; I answer, suppose it so, But why may not he
and you, who have thus Decreed, as well Decree the same in all other Cases
whatsoever, since the Law of God forbids the one no more than the other? 2.
Because it is said that the Beast shall forecast his devices and think to change
time and Laws, that so he may have the sole commanding power over all; Now
consider, whether this new Lords principles do not look the same way; For says
he, contemptuously, what have we to do with the Laws and Statutes of men? And
speaking of honest christian Brethen, we do not own them, etc.
With respect to which Texts of Scripture, and other the like passages, I did
indeed by way of allusion and similitude compare him to the Beast
beforementioned; But that he is strictly and properly the Beast there intended,
that shall wear cut the Saints of the most High, etc. I was ever far enough
from believing, though I must acknowledge, his looks to be more stout than his
Fellows, and am more than a little confident, If he had but power, as some
other Usurpers have had, He would be as cruel and unmerciful to those that
resist his pleasure, as any of those his Predecessors have been, and the ground
of my so believing is this (to wit) his sending both Soul and Body (not to the
Inquisition, but) but to Hell Torments, unto all eternity; For disobeying, not
the Law of God, but the Law of himself only; And yet must it be my sin, because
I will not conceal these things? Let me tell you, Sirs, had it been a piece of
wickedness confessed and repented of, or had it been a sin committed through
weakness, it had doubtless then been evil in me to bring it to public view;
But forasmuch as I am convinced it is otherwise, know ye, That if I should hold
my peace and pass it in silence, I should, be accessory to it, and do assuredly
believe, that as I have the high displeasure and indignation of the Lordly
Usurper against me on the one hand, so should I then be sure to incur the
displeasure of my blessed Lord and Savior (whose favor is better than life)
on the other hand, therefore durst I not omit what I have done, and for as much
as I have seriously endeavored otherwise for peace and reconciliation, and all
is slighted, together with the Christian advice of the honest peaceable
Brethren, I shall not value the displeasure of those that for this Cause may
prove my Enemies, no more than that holy man Luther did the rage of the Pope
and his Idolizers, when it pleased God to open his Eyes to see the Church of
Romes wickedness.

Yet one thing more there is, which I and others cannot but much admire at,
viz. That notwithstanding all his barbarous partial and tyrannical dealings, he
the said pretended Apostle would have every body believe, that All that he has
done and said, concerning my self is of unsained Love, I do wonder (faith he)
how any can think otherwise; For I have received more profit or kindness of
him, than of any other person whatever, and therefore none may believe I can
hate him, but Love him above all others.

To which ingenious, hypocritical pretense of mighty Love, which on all
occasions he is pleased to enlarge upon; I answer.

First, That then certainly his love is according to his nature, viz. Cross and
diverse from all others, for if these his dealings with me be the fruits of his
Love, then most true it is, That his Love is of a strange kind, well deserving
a peculiar Name to distinguish it from the Love of all others; and I having
never met with nor heard of the like before, and seeing, because, he says it
is Love, you necessarily must and will believe it is Love indeed, let it
therefore I say, since you will have it, be so, but to signalize it as more
rare and famous than any other, may it henceforth be known by the Name of
tyrannick love, or love by antipathy.

But Secondly, Judge I pray ye, whether it be not Hypocritical also, for I
verily believe him to be as great an Artist, in laying grievous Burchens on
other men's shoulders, which he will not touch with one of his own Fingers, as
ever was bred in the School of the Pharisees; so craftily can he carry the
matter, by masking his revenge with endearing pretenses of admirable tenderness
and holy ends. That it can very hardly be perceived, or so much as suspected
that he can do wrong or oppress in any Case, be the matter never so
unwarrantable or notorious; since to accomplish his Desings the more plausibly,
he will (I know it by unhappy experience) so forecast his devices as
unperceivably to render, such whom he despises and levels his Arrows at, as
hateful as the Devil, and as black, as Hell; yet in the mean time will signify
his great grief, sorrow, pity and compassion for them, and how sensibly he does
bemoan them, that he can hardly express the invaluable Love that he has for
them, etc. And all this only, that himself may appear as an Innocent Dove, and
shine as bright as an Angel of Light in the Face of his deluded ones, by means
of which insinuating deportment he dazleth their understandings and judgments
to that degree, that they cannot perceive a subtle Fox like Woolf lurking in
Sheeps clothing, but are still (ignorantly) ready to vouch his Innocence, and
justify his Actions on all occasions right or wrong; oh! the greatness and
depth of his VVisdome and Love! How admirable is it! As for his Wisdom is it
not from beneath: And his love as deep as Hell? Oh rare Love? The only love to
requite him, whom be confesses, has excelled in kindness toward him; And
must it be a Sin to complain of this wonderful great Tyrannick Love? Why my
pretended loving Brethren, may I not complain? and why must my Complaints be
contemned? Did I come amongst you for any sinister or selfish ends? Did I ever
gain so much as one penny thereby? But suppose I had received profit by you,
have you not received of me for every penny some pounds? and that not by
constraint, but willingly? Sure I am that of late years, I have been very
careful not to come short of any of you all, in what I might serve you in; So
that against the Church, I know not that I have Transgrest in any Case,
although to my grief in many things I have transgrest against my Lord and
Savior, of whom through Grace, I comfortably do hope to find Mercy, although I
could find none from you, who are his pretended zealous People.

And now, what if the greatest part of Professors in the Nation, should disown
me, for opposing a second Popish Infallibility and Tyrannical Cruelty? Or what
if all the World should wonder after him, who Antichrist like does in Words
signify, and Actions declare of the Laws and Prerogative of the Supreme
Magistrate, and of the Christian Advice and Admonition of the Church and People
of God, That he has nothing to do with them? As for the one they are unjust,
and as for the other, We do not own them, nor regard what they say; Must I
therefore needs be silent? Must it be a Crime in me to oppose such things? Must
I believe, because he says? Must I obey implicitly, and merely because he
Commands?

I tell you Nay, I dare not for this Reason:

Because that as in this Generation; so by the instigation of the Antichristian
Spirit, the like Acts of Usurpation and Tyranny in the next generation may be
practiced, and for their justification, they may quote the Doings of their most
Famous Apostle ^ALLHE^ CAFFYN, as their President and Authority.

Obj. But possibly some may say, If this pretended Apostle knew you to be thus
profitable to himself, and his poor Brethren, why then should he cast you off?

Sol. To which I answer, That I know right well, That his confidence in me was
such, that he did believe, I would submit to his own terms, and so beyond
others might become one of his chief supporters to uphold his tyrannical
Government, he little thinking that I durst thus rebel against him, for that he
knew I had more than a little confidence of his being faithful and honest
according to his outward profession and appearance; Although to my present
knowledge I was then as much mistaken in him, as he now is mistaken in me;
Besides, whether he thought himself beholding to me, for any Contributions of
mine, I know not, but this I know, that he never gave me thanks for it, nor did
I ever desire any; But possibly he might not know what my Contributions were,
because I never gave him any thing that I remember, but always delivered it to
one of his Deacons, to be disposed of according to their discretion: And
whether Bell devoured all, and the Poor eat none, and the Idol ignorant (till
of late) from whence he had his Belly full, I know not, But this I certainly
know, that he makes use of my kindness, as a Cloak to cover his malicious arts
of cruelry unmerciful oppression and tyranny.

He that hates, dissembleth with his Lips, and lays up Deceit within Him;

When he speaks fair, believe him not, for there are seven Abominations in
his heart.

Whose heart is covered with Deceit, his wickedness shall be showed before the
whole Congregation.

A lying Tongue hates those, that are afflicted by it, and a flattering Mouth
works ruin. Prove. 26. the 21. v. and so on to the end of the Chapter.

Obj. But possibly you will now complain, and say, That my design now is, to
prosecute Revenge against him, and so become as great a Trangressor as himself.

Sol. To which I answer, by declaring that if I should accuse you or any of
you, as you are my Brethren in the Truth, or as you are Christians, or Children
of the most high God, by acting according to his Laws and Precepts; or if I
should accuse you for that which is no Trangression, and would have you
punished with the greatest Torments for displeasing my self, I were then a
person desperately wicked indeed, no less than a Rebel against God, and a
Traitor to my Brother, yet if the worst were true, I could be punished for so
doing, but as you would have me punished for disobeying the whimsical Commands
of your new Lord; But this is far from being my present Case, For take notice,
That what I do is not out of Revenge, but Conscience of my Duty, and that I
accuse younot as you are the Servants of the most high God, nor him as an holy
Apostle, Minister, or Messenger of Christ; For all such I truly love and honor
as they are faithful, and so I did him; whilst his wickedness lay covered with
Sheeps clothing; But now I justly must, and cannot but Accuse him as an
Usurper, a Rebel against God, a Tyrant to his ^rethre, ^ as he is guilty of
partiality and wickedness; Not that these Crimes are committed through weakness
or Infirmities, or acknowledged and Repented of, But as they were done
wilfully, persevered in, and still endeavored to be justified by Authority;
And therefore know ye, that if it be any thing, it will be his own words and
deeds (not mine) That shall Condemn him.

But whereas he has said to me, that what he and you have done against me, is
also in like manner done in Heaven, except I submit.

I answer, That the thing for which you have Excommunicated me, is none other,
but my contempt of his Lordships usurped authority, and therefore, as I am not
convinced of any sin therein committed; so I cannot, nor shall repent thereof,
until you do by Scripture authority prove it to be the transgression of a
righteous Law, or that his unlimitted power is equal to or greater than the
holy Scriptures, or till he have so proved, that such his usurped authority is
more lawful than the Royal prerogative of the Supreme Magistrate, and that he
or his weak Brethren, whose part (at least pretendedly) he has taken be
infallible; in the mean time for as much as I was not conscious of any known
sin by me committed; but what through Grace was repented of, so as that with a
good conscience, I through mercy do, and then did to my great comfort believe,
that I, whom you have unmercifully condemned, my Lord and Savior, does and
will justify; and therefore I believe, and that upon good grounds to, that
such his sentence of Excommunication is no more, then as though his
Triple-Crown'd Brother beyond the Seas, with his Bell, Book, and Candle, had
done it.

And so, my unkind Friends! As you are erred from Truth and Righteousness, to
conceal and defend wickedness, I must tell you, that according to what is my
farther duty, I am resolved to prosecute, what I have undertaken against him;
as though I never knew him, but as an usurping Tyrant; for I do believe, if a
godly man transgress a righeteous Law, he ought to suffer as an other man, much
rather such an one, who is so far from godliness, as to justify, and by Lies
and deceit, defend his Acts of Impiety.

Therefore let none think, that I am become a persecutor of those whom I own to
be my Brethren, or that I oppose any, but as the oppressed may lawfully
endeavor for the execution of Justice upon the unmerciful and tyrannical
oppressor; For if I should persecute the People of God in their Innocence,
doubtless (as the holy Apostle in another Case said) I then of all men should
be most miserable; For I verily believe (and heartily wish, that all good
people were of the same Faith, from the King on his Throne to the meanest
Subject, That to persecute and afflict the People of God in their Innocence,
for doing that which upon Scripture Authority they ought to do, is a great and
most dangerous sin, and of the highest provoking nature that can be committed,
it appearing in my judgment so grievous to the most High, That he can in no
wise bear therewith; For, says he, the Lord to his persecuted Children, He
that touches you touches the Apple of my Eye; whence I observe that the Lord
has not by any Metaphor expressed any such intolerable provocation to him, as
that of persecution; And oh! that none would give entertainment to that
dangerous persecuting spirit, until they can bring their Commission from Christ
himself, and until they see and have an infallible knowledge, that it is the
will of their Maker, and that themselves be without sin and errors, for the
Almighty ordains his Arrows against Persecutors, and be sure he will not miss
the Mark. He will not do as men, shoot at a rebellious or stubborn Sinner, and
kill an humble penitent Saint. Besides, I observe, and wish it might be the
observation of all, That many through Grace in time, and others too late, have
repented of this grievous Sin; But never did I hear of any good man, nor scarce
any so wicked, As to repent because they had not been Persecutors; or that they
had not persecuted more than they did. Oh! that due consideration might swage
the judgments of all Persons who are inclined to this Evil which is subject to
so great danger

Nevertheless, Wickedness ought not to be tolerated anywhere, much less in the
Church of Christ, especially when practiced and defended; for doubtless in such
Case, great will be the Sin of him that shall know it, a not endeavor to the
utmost of his Power to Oppose and Reform it: Wherefore since you have again and
again Contemned my other Lawful Means and Endeavors, that so Justice might be
wrested, and Wickedness justified, saying, All Excommunicated Persons will
Complain, and that it is nothing if I do so, let me tell you; It had bin good
for all such Confederates, that they had at first hearkened to the voice of the
Oppressed, and done their Duty. But seeing there is no probability thereof, I
hope not to omit any lawful means, whereby I may discover, whether you do not
ldolize your New Lord to that degree, as to love him more than God and your own
Souls, by defending him with Lies; or by refusing to speak the Truth, where by
his wicked Words and Deeds may be discovered and made manifest. And whatever
you may think, yet may you not expect any Favor upon the Account of your
outward Profession of Holiness, but as you are Loverg of Truth and
Kighteousness; therefore be advised to take heed how you make your solemn
Prote^ations, when called to bear Withess to the Truth, lest you sell Heavens
glory, and purchase to your selves Hells eternal misery: For Liars, Idolaters,
etc. shall have their Portion in the Lake.

Beware likewise of False Accusations: As for my own part, I have not, nor will
Accuse you or him with any thing but what I know is true, or can make appear by
those who were never known to be false Accusers. But for my own part this I
say, That as I would not part with my Just, Civil, Temporal Privilege, to
gratify the quarrel some boundless Humor of that unjust Judge, whose part you
have taken; so will I not (God assisting) part with my Spiritual Privilege, or
sell my Birthright in Heaven, purchased for me by the precious Blood of my dear
Lord and Savior only, for a Mess of Pottage; or that by which I may only
please my self or any other.

Beware my Friends how you sin against light and your own knowledge, to desend
that which is no less than a Damnable Erroneous Principle, For if it be true,
as you have in words said, That the Church of Rome he become a Harlot, which
once was the Spouse of Christ, Then Usurpation is a Damnable Error; For if she
had not Usurped Authority to Compel Persons to do and practice more or less
then what is by their Supreme Lord and Master required, and appointed for
Discipline and. Government of the Church according to the Holy Scriptures, then
no doubt but she had continued a true Church unto this day.

Again, If the Church Officers had not through Usurpation been corrupted, but
had governed the Church according to the Will of our Lord and Savior revealed
in Scripture, and not mixed their own Inventions with Christ's Institutions, Then
doubtless, the Officers of the Church of Rome had still deserved the Honor to
be styled The Holy Successors of the Holy Apostles, But if as you say, by
usurpation she be now come a Whore, and her Officers none of Christ's
Ministers; Then I infer, that Usurpation is a Damnable Sin: For ever since such
Usurpation her Officers are ceased to be the holy Successors of the Apostles,
and are become the Antichristian Successors of Usurpers, Tyran^s, and
Murderers, and notorious Enemies to all true Christian Emperors, Kings and
Princes; Whence it is evident that Usurpation is a Damnable destroying Sin, and
most dangerous to Church and State.

But you may possibly say, That Usurpation cannot be the greatest and most
damnable Sin, since it is the Sin of the Holy Ghost that is the greatest Sin,
and never to be forgiven.

To which I answer, That the Sin committed against the Holy Ghost (in my
opinion) is that Sin only which is committed under the highest degree of saving
means, (to wit) God by his holy Spirit and Word opposing, and the person
persevering in his intended wickedness, so that whether it be the Sin of
Usurpation, Rebellion, Tyranny, Hypocriste, Idolatry, etc. any of these may
thus be committed against the Holy Ghost, and so become impardonable. And
therefore, my Brethren, look to your Consciences; if Baal be God, serve him;
but if the Lord be God, how dare you go beyond his Word and unerring Rule?

Believe not, trust not the best of men in matters of Religion, in any thing
that is not according to the Word of the Lord: remember that a man of God was
torn in pieces by a Lion, because he believed one who was not as then a
Prophet; an Example worthy the observation of those that incline to trust any
private man, rather than the Word of God.

Be no longer deluded, Oh ye my Beloved, although unkind Friends; and bear with
me for endeavoring at once to defend my own Innocent Just Cause, and show you
your Delusions, and how you are Betrayed; For has he not corrupted your
Authority and Government, so as to render it to be Lordly, Arbitrary, and
Tyrannical, contrary to the Will and Mind of Christ, whom you suppose is the
Head of your Church. Yea, and I do also believe, That you think that you Act
under Christ, by virtue of Authority and Commission received from Him only, and
not otherwise; which if really true, then are you the true Church, or part of
the true Church, and so ought to go no further than the Lords Commission; which
so long as you observe, you are undoubtedly his beloved Children; and true
Subjects to him here, and such as shall Reign with him in his Kingdom forever;
which I also believe is your hope and expectation: And to this you are often
encouraged by your pretended true Apostle; and to believe, that the Order of
his present Government will bring you to this happy estate.

But if like a pretended Angel or Light, he with smooth Words, and hypocritical
Speeches, and Pretenses of Tender Love to you, and Honor to the Church, have
led you out of this good way and order, in which you might stand and remain in
safety; and has inveigled you into a Government under which you are become
Servants to another Master, and Rebels to Him whom you conceit you serve and
honor, like those grievous Transgressors of whom the Lord complains, Isaiah
58. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that
did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God, They ask of me
the Ordinance of Justice; they take delight in approaching to God. What, I
pray, have you done more than they? Oh! that you would lay it to heart, and
consider, Whether you are not as much deluded as they were? Which if so,

Then beware of vain Confidence, and be sure that you are in danger; wherefore
for your Reformation I pray consider,

First, That you ought to do nothing in obedience to your true Lord and Master,
but what you believe is your duty; because Whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

Secondly, That your Faith and Belief has a firm and sure Foundation for what
you do, and especially for what you do compel in matter of: Religion; otherwise
your Building may come to sudden ruin. Add not therefore sin to sin, but
haste, haste for Reformation; apply yourselves to the Law and to the
Testimonies. In case he compells person to submit to his or your Wills, without
that Authority, then know, It is because his pretended Holiness is turned into
Wickedness: Haste then, I say, and do Justice, when by the Lord it is required
of you, although it be to the cutting off of your right hand, when by reason of
a Gangrening malignant distemper it is destructive to the whole Body.

But if notwithstanding all that I have said, you are so strongly deluded that
he cannot appear in your Judgments a Rebel and an Usurper, Then tell me, I
pray, who it is gave him Commission and Authority to Accuse, Condemn, Judge,
and pass sentence against a member of the Church for that which is no
Transgression, and not suffer him to plead his Cause with the Congregation,
whom in words you declare are the proper Judges, or reason with those that were
offended in order to give them Satisfaction; But contrary to the way of peace
and peacemakers, perpetually to Interpose with malicious Agravations, So that
we were not suffered to propose any Terms of Reconciliation each to other;

Do you verily, believe, Christ gave him Commission to Exercise this Arbitrary
Government? If you do, show me good grounds for such ( your) faith and I will
believe it also; otherwise remember the Popes Acts of Tyranny are of as good
Authority as yours, and he as honest as your Apostle and not half so much an
Hypocrite!

Secondly, Who requires you to be so Slavishly at the dispose of this pretended
Apostle, as through his Instigation to Condemn a member, before ever it was
proved that he had Transgressed any known Law, wronged Man Woman or Child, or
ever despised any Admonition, or indeed that he was ever so much as Admonished
at all by any Two persons, or that there ever was any occasion for it;

Thirdly, Who gave him Commission to say and affirm, That Patents were of the
Devil, and that, He could as freely have Communion or fellowship with Idolaters
or unclean Persons as with those that should have a Patent; Or to question the
Kings Royal Prerogative, and that merely in Relation to Secular things?

Forthly. Who gave him Commission to say, If he has a statute for it, what is
that to us? What have we to do with the Laws and Statutes of men? And so be
it, with Law or without it, is all one to the lawless and disobedient; and by
what Authority could he call those Laws and Statutes unjust, Since they are for
the praise and Encouragement of those that do well?

Fifthly, Who gives Commission or Warrant, for such. strange partiality so as
in Contempt of the Kings Authority, To send a man most maliciously to Hell ( in
his own Conceit) for Justifying of the same, and accepting a favor thereby,
only to secure a Just privilege from being a prey to the Common sort of men,
(as himself calls them) and all this to be Condemned under the notion of
Covetousness, and rendered as odious as possible, and yet in the mean time to
allow of unlawful Covetousness and that defended by deceit and defraud, He
himself well knowing the same?

Sixthly, By what rule did he walk; who did Receive an acousation against me by
one that was not of the Church, and Condemn the thereupon when the accuser was
both witness and party; and yet refuse an accusation brought in against another
who was guilty of Cruelty profane Cursing, and that proved by several honest
and unintersted Persons, I say, what rule had he for this but his own will like
Nebuchadrezzor that whom he had a mind to save, he saved and whom he had a mind
to distroy, he destroyed.

Seventhly Who gave him Commmission, To rebuke a man, and that in the face of
the Congregation, For keeping Company with great Persons (As he calls them)
who are known to be Sober men and much honester then himself. And this before
it was or ever could be proved, That any Sin was by this means Committed?

Eighthly, Who gave him Commission, To appear like an Enemy to peace and good
Neighborhood, so as to forbid me to make peace between Neighbor and
Neighbor, and to blame me for being often Concerned therein, though he could
never prove, That there was any Acts of Injustice or disorder thereby knowingly
Committed.

Ninthly, Who gave him Commission, To move for the denying Communion to
several Congregations, Because some that were rich, were suffered to were a
Gold Ring, or Silver Buttons, or Ribbons, etc.

Tenthly, Who gave him Commission, To make it unlawful for those that are in
subjection to his Corrective power, to trade or have any Trade or Commerce with
me, so as they might not buy or sell for me, though Servants?

Lastly, Who gave him Commission, to Condemn the Counsel and Admonition of our
London Brethren, so as to say, We do not own them, nor are to regard what they
say?

Now Sirs, If for all these things he have not Scripture Authority for their
Justification, Then remember henceforth that wholesome Advice, When he speaks
fair BELIEVE him not BELIEVE him not, for their are more than Seven
Abominations in his Heart; For are not such principles and Practices Dangerous
both to Church and state, and besides other wickedness, do they not render the
Government of the Church Lordly and Tyrannical, and the Authority of the State
Contemptible, so as to make the one Dangerous to the well being of the other,
For as the Church does increase, the safety and Authority of the Civil
Magistrate must proportionably decrease VVitness the like Usurpation of the
Church of Rome, making Kings and Emperors Submit; And can you alleadg any
better Authority from Scripture for these things, than Papists can for their
Ceremonies and Traditions?

If not, Where are you: my Beloved, Where are you Got? Are you not within
less than a Sabbath days Journey of Rome, And whilst he with a high hand
opposes the Quakers pretended perfection, and Condemns many others ( more
honest than himself) for Idolatry, Superstition, and Usurpation, As though he
himself were of a Holy lamb like Spirit, has he not in the mean time by fair
flattering words and smooth pretenses Subtlely and Slily under pretense of Holy
Ends Crept into your affections before, you are aware, That now you are
Conjured so to Rely on his Infallibility, As to make it a Bridge whereby to
Step over the Authority of the Holy Scriptures that Sacred Boundary which as a
River of Life divides the Church of Christ from that of Antichrist.

Thus my beloved Brethren, But his weak Little Children, whilst he is as it
were Singing to you a pleasant Song of Romes ruin being at hand and Rocking you
into the peaceable sleep of vain Confidence in his Cradle of pretended safety,
Has he not all on a sudden Lead you over this Bridge of Infallibility quite A
CROSS Scripture Authority, and Squat, you down in the very Lap of the Great
Whose of Babylon; Whence if you would but awake you need not VVonder why he
does not own those honest Christian Brethren, that are in the City of London,
For now you may see, That it is the order of his Infallible Brethren Citizens
of Rome that he do^ most Resemble and approve of

Obj. But possibly you may say, Why did you not before this time disown him for
these things, if you did not allow thereof.

Sol. To which I Answer, That I was wholly ignorant of his great Office and
Authority, and also of his deceits, and even when I had Cause in some measure
to suspect him, my Charity was such that I could not Conclude him to be thus
dangerous and deceitful; But if the Case on your side be otherwise, and that
you were acquainted with such his Authority and Order of Government, so as to
know he has power to be at once both an Accuser and Judge, and that an
absolute Submission and obedience ought to be performed to this High-Brave
Lordly-Person, as aforesaid.

Then let me tell you, That you your selves who pretend to be my weak Brethren,
are most strong, and my self most weak and simple, And therefore forasmuch as
you have offended me who am so weak; according to your own Law, you your selves
ought to be Excommunicated except you submit, whether the matter for which I am
offended be lawful or unlawful, Civil or Religious. The Case is as broad as
long; and as you are honest, I hope you will not think it too much, if you
without mercy should be paid with your own Coin, especially when your Actions
whereby you have so offended me, were tyrannical and unmerciful. Forget not,
forget not, my pretended tender loving Brethren, what measure you have made.

But further, to demonstrate that his Lordship, in his own conceit, is in as
great Power and Authority as any the Pope pretends to, give me leave to say,
That at a certain time, before his Acts of Cruelty practiced against me, I
taking an occasion to speak of the sudden death of a Woman of his Congregation,
he said, He could not see how she could enter into the Kingdom (meaning
Heaven,) for that she died under Admonition without Confession; or to that
effect. Whereupon I alleging, that for ought any one knew, she might Repent
of her Sin before she died. He replied, That it was all one if she did, unless
she had made Consession, that so she might be forgiven by himself. For you must
know, the Controversy lay not between the poor Woman and the Church, but
between her self and his Lordship, who would have been her Confessor; nor did
he at this time know, but that she might confess her Sin to some other Person:
But did she, or did she not, for want of articular Cofession, and his Pardon,
he could not see any Hope. Judge now, I pray you, Oh all ye whose
Understandings and Judgments are not clouded with Idolatrous Zeal, Whether this
be not an infallible mark of Popish infallibility, That he has (in his his own
conceit) the Keys of Heaven and Hell; so that whom be himself binds on Earth,
are bound in Heaven; and whom himself loses on Earth, is loosed in Heaven. As
if there were none in Heaven that has power above him, that may make any
Alteration without his License or Consent.

But for as much as many be apt to suppose that this offense in the good Woman,
(and I think a very good Woman too, for I never heard that any could accuse her
besides the unjust Judge) was very great, I therefore will give an account of
her Crime, which was thus, This Woman's Daughter in Law being always cross and
unkind, as was observed by many, went out (because of their disagreements) to
service, and home she came again with a great Belly; at which the honest old
Woman was greatly displeased, and would not give her entertainment. This was
the whole matter and fact he charged against her, which she must acknowledge to
be sin, and make Confession to him, that she is sorry for so doing; or else,
according to his Popeships principle, she must be damned eternally. I pray Sirs
observe the charity of this tender tyrannical lobing Brother and Judge, which of
the two he had most kindness for, the Mother or the Daughter?

Some of you perhaps may blame me, saying, These are private things; and that
if I did see an evil tendency in them, I ought not after this public manner to
detect it; but first admonish the offender in the spirit of love and meekness
in private; and if that will not do, to take two or three more; and if he
refuse to reform, then to bring it to the Church, and not render him odious to
all.

Whereunto I answer, first, That to the knowledge of some of you, and of my
self, his Popeship has taught me another Lesson; nor did I ever find such
Christian carriage from him or his Legate, that would have a man damned for
offending his Idol, rather than for displeasing the most High. Let it not then
be grievous to receive the same measure you have already meeted; and withal
remember, That the difference between sin committed through delusion or
weakness, being repented of, and never justified, and wickedness practiced upon
deliberation, justified by Authority, or defended by Lies and Deceit, is very
great. Nor had I been so large on this particular, had I not certain knowledge
of his great delight in auricular Confession, which thing he improves to bring
persons into subjection.

Secondly, That I had not learnt this Lesson from your own practice; and taken
this way, had it not been that you are constrained (as it were) not to believe
me: For, say you, All excommunicated persons will complain; and therefore I may
not be believed, nor the truth of what I say regarded. But whether I be
believed or not, this I know, and with a good Conscience I can say, That I have
said no more of him than what I know to be true, or what will be justified by
others.

But here perhaps some of the weak Brethren may say, That they have heard him
preach against the Church of Rome, and call her Whore and Harlot, but never
heard him preach against their pretended Infallibility; and therefore methinks
I hear some of them putting the Question to me, saying,

Object. You speak much against Infallibility, but pray tell us what it is; and
show us why it is dangerous to believe that our dear Apostle is Infallible

Answ. To which, for the benefit of such as are really weak, according to the
best of my understanding, I readily answer.

First, That for a person, or persons, to be Infallible, is as much as to say,
That they cannot Err; or that it is Impossible for them to be Mistaken.

Secondly, If you believe any person Infallible, you must also believe, That
whatsoever he or they Enjoin or Compel in Matters Religious or Civil, whether
in point of Faith or Obedience, you who are under their Government must of
necessity Embrace or Submit unto, or otherwise be Damned hereafter; or
presently sent to Hell, by separating of your Soul from your Body with Fire and
Faggot, or what other Torments they shall please to Invent, since they cannot
Err, but whatever they do here on Earth is pleasing to God, who may not make
any Alteration without their Consent.

Thus if he whom you own for Infallible, shall declare, That Scriptures are
corrupt and dangerous, because they, say, Submit your selves to every Ordinance
of Man, you must believe they are so, or else be damned; and all the
Congregation must say, Amen.

If he shall declare the good Laws and Statutes of the Supreme Magistrate are
unjust, and not to be regarded; you must believe it, and act accordingly on the
same penalties.

If he who is Infallible, to cover his Deceit, and carry on a Design, require
you to tell a Lie, and say, That such a thing is an offense to you, when in
truth the offense is his own, and not yours, for you understand not what it
means; yet you must do it, or be damned.

If he or they who are thus Infallible, shall Condemn a person for that which
in its self is lawful, and by him lawfully used, and not abused; you must join
with them, though against Gods Word, Reason, and your own Conscience; and may
not Trade with such person, so as to buy or sell for him, though you are his
Servant, or be damned.

If he who is Infallible, shall Declare against those who are honest godly
Officers, and Members of several Congregations in London, that he does not own
them; you must thenceforth never regard what they do or say, or be damned.

If he who is Infallible, judge it lawful to be an Evesdropper, to creep into a
House, and stand behind a Wall to hear the secret Discourse of Women; you must
by no means say, It is a thing of ill report; if you do, into the Inquisition
you must go, or be severely dealt with.

If he who is Infallible, command you to approve of a Usurped Authority, and
disown all other Government; to make himself only your Confessor; to murder
and destroy Kings, Emperors, or Princes, or any other Persons; to believe that
the Bread and Wine after Consecration; is really and substantially the Body and
Blood of our blessed Savior; Believe and perform it you must, or else be
Damned, And all the Congregation must say, Amen. But if some of the Services
are too hard, if you can but purchase as much kindness of him as your New Lord
has for his Kinswoman, you then may have Pardon or Indulgence without Penance.

Obj. But now I suppose you will say, although He nor we had no Scripture
Authority for what he and we have done; yet we do not pretend that he is
Iafallible; for if you remember, you were accused because by the Patent you did
offend the weak Brethren, and you may call to mind, That our dear Brother did
prove, that whatever did offend the weak Brethren, If the Offender persist in
justifying the thing, although in it self lawful and honest, and no way
relating to Religion or Religious Worship, ought to be punished, and because you
did persist, we therefore at his Request gave our Consents that you should be
Damned, except you submit, although you might not know who those weak Brethren
were.

To which I answer, That by what has been pretended and practiced, you would
have me believe that it is the weak Brethren that are Infallible, for otherwise
you would not send a man to Hell for offending them that are subject to a
quarrelsome boundless humor: What your Apostle said, I remember pretty well,
but that he proved his groundless Affertions, I cannot so easily grant, for let
me tell you this is one of his Popeships New cheats, by which his Police is
Improved, the better to seduce you, so as to give him occasion to boast and
rejoice in his unlimited Power and admirable Greatness.

For now it is So, that his and his weak Brethrens Power and Authority, is
equal with the Usurped Power and Authority of his pretended Infallible Brethren
at Rome; For now he and they may Damn whom they please, and for what they
please, except they submit, for what they please shall offend them.

But I knowing that many of you, notwithstanding all his new Devices, Tricks,
and Deceits, do really believe that still his design is good, and his heart
toward God perfect and upright.

I therefore, in Love to regain you, am as it were constrained to show you what
great dangers this groundless Belief is attended with.

The best of those who was Seduced by Pope Innocent, John the Tailor King of
Leyden; that pretended holy man Hacket, or any other the greatest Deceivers
that ever were in the Church, were drawn in by this Bait, viz. A Belief that
although they might Act strangely, and practice things without Scripture
Authority, yet their design was to promote Gods Glory, and that his heart was
upright. Be wise now therefore, and remember that the most Unerring and
Infallible Rule is without him, not within him; by that try his heart, bring
the counterfeit Gold to the Touchstone, and whatever out of fondness or excess
of Charity you may have Believed; compare the same with that of Solomon, and
who knows but you may find it appear so after all his pious pretenses and
solemn Protestations, viz. That his Heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it.

But if you will shut your eyes, and be still seduced to Believe that whatever
he does is for Gods glory, etc. What may he not allure and draw you unto,
having already brought you merely on his request to commit spiritual Murder,
and most uncharitably and unjustly Damn a man, without the least Authority from
Scripture? Dare any of you my Beloved (though most unmerciful Brethren) say
that his Precepts and your Practices are Authorized by the most High? Do they
not rather look like the hair-brained Proclamations of John of Leyden, or the
Extravagancies of a Popish Bull?

Do you own the holy Scriptures for the only and Infallible rule for Church
Government, Worship and Religious Exercises? search then I pray, peruse them
diligently, and if you find not his Commission for what he has done therein
Recorded, you have too much cause to believe that you are Betrayed, and if so,
look to your selves, delays are dangerous; Have to the work, keep close to your
unerring Rule, and eber remember that Council of Christ, Beware of false
Prophets which come in Sheeps Clothing, but inwardly are ravenous Wolves, Te
shall know them by their Fruits Therefore see his Commission.

But suppose he should solemnly Protest; That he is led by the Spirit, yet (as
I wish the worst of you well) let me beg of you to remember, That the Spirit of
the Lord does not contradict his own will and mind revealed in Scripture; Be
not too confident, consider that others, like himself and his Confederates, did
in their wickednss lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us, No
evil can come upon us: Is not the Case plain, has he not deceived and abused
you at his pleasure, through and by reason of his pretenses to an extraordinary
Zeal, and unheard of Love.

And may not all good people, whose eyes are not blinded with partiality,
easily see his Commissions and Authority, by which he acted as aforesaid,
proceeds from the Devil, the Father of Usurpers, Rebels, and Tyrants, the
Authorizer of all wickedness, whereby he may destroy Christian Peace both of
Church and State; and will you condemn the Pope as his only darling Child for
putting in Execution his devises, and yet justify him that does the same thing
at Home; are they not Brethren serving one Master, both Usurping Tyrants? and
will you separate from one here, and yet receive your Portion with them both
hereafter; If so, Then I say, Adieu to you my unkind friends, Adieu to you for
ever.

But to prevent the worst, I would yet in Love, with all plainness, further
admonish you, in hopes that you will hear, as your Apostle said, What have we
to do with the Laws and Statutes of Men; So let me entreat you seriously to
say, Oh! what have we to do any more with Idols: Consider, and lay to heart,
what an exquisite piece of Cruelty you have committed, even offered up a Soul
as a Sacrifice to your Idol; for since you cannot prove your doings therein
were required by, or pleasing unto the most high God, Is not the thing evident,
that it was wholly performed to the Solemn Adoration of your Idol, who alone
commanded, and is well pleased with your Actions.

And further, to convince you that he is no true Apostle, do but observe, I
pray, what manner of Persons they were he makes choice of above all others to
attend his Person, and help to defend his Acts of Tyranny, when called to
London to give an account thereof; for by the Dispositions and Actions of the
Servants, may be discerned what manner of Spirit the Master is of; they being
the only Three (three more such I would hope he may not find) amongst you so
fit to serve him. The first was he in whose Judgment I deserved to be
Excommunicated for offending his Lordship, rather than for offending the most
High and Holy One. The second Assistant was he that defended his own unlawful
Acts of Covetousness, by means directly unlawful, viz. Deceit and Fraud, and
yet condemns me for coveting a Patent: Of whom I would ask this Question,
Whether he be willing to receive the same measure as he has meered: The last
and more eminently zealous in his Masters business than the other two, was he
who with his fist of wickedness did abuse his Brother; and after his exercise
of Cruelty to his abused Beast, wished the Plague and the Pox to the poor tired
Creature. Think you that these Spirits will strain at a Gnat, that can swallow
such Cammel-Impieties? Or will you be offended, if to such a triple Knot of
Preaching Conspirators I recommend that Text, You Hypocrites, first cast out
the Beams that are in your own Eyes, and then may you see more clearly to pluck
out the Mote that is in your Brothers Eye?

And whereas your Lordly Apostle has as it were scoffingly called me Dreamer,
give me leave to say, That though I am far from Practicing or Justifying any
Superstitious Observation of Dreams, as knowing that they are often times caused
by Natural means, and prove only Delusive motions of the ever-busie Fancy,
retained by the waking Memory, whilst the Judgment and distinguishing
Faculties, together with the external Senses, lie fast locked up in the Charms
of Sleep; yet since we have both Examples, and positive Texts, showing, That in
Dreams was one way whereby the Lord was pleased heretofore to communicate
himself to his Servants, I dare not censure all Representations of that kind as
vain, casual, or signifying nothing. Nay some Reasons I have, considering the
Time and several Circumstances, to apprehend, that a certain Dream of mine (the
Relation whereof might occasion such his Lordships Scoffs) may prove no less
certain in the Event, than the Dreams of him, who for his Dreams was envied by
his Brethren. And for the satisfying your curiosity who have not heard it, I
shall here faithfully relate it, as it happened, thus.

On the Day on which you were pleased to deal with me as an Offender of the
weak Brethren, I arose early in the morning, resolving, as at other times, not
to omit the performance of any thing that might be my duty toward God; in
order whereunto I prepared by Fasting and Prayer, to rely on him only for his
guidance and assistance, without the least premeditation what to Answer. And
with sincerity I can say it, as I went out, so did I come home, with a gracious
confidence of his Mercy and Favor; But it being then somewhat late in the
Evening, so soon as I had refreshed my self, and performed my Duty as at other
times, I went to Bed; and in my Sleep I had a Dream, That I was standing a
little distant from that House wherein this unhappy and ill-managed Meeting
was; and as I stood still, observing the House to be full of People, and my
self at a distance, as a Person not regarded; Behold, a great Fire did on a
sudden appear in the House; at which I stood amazed, crying out, Your House is
on Fire; but immediately it seemed to me to Blaze through all the Windows on
the South Side of it; whereupon with a loud voice I cried to them within to
depart the House; telling them what danger they were in, and often saying, The
House is on Fire: But all the care and pains I could take to persuade them was
in vain, and wholly contemned. But whilst I was busy thus warning them to
escape, behold, all the House seemed to be in a Flame, the Fire breaking
violently forth, even through the Roof of it. Then did I observe every Person
suddenly to be in motion, and every hand set work, whereby the Fire began to
ab^te, and in short time after was quenched. This being done, I then came into
the House, where I found all the People in a little disorder, some walking
about, and others sitting still (in that Room where they had compassed their
unhappy Act of unmerciful Tyranny) but at the upper End of the Table where the
unjust Judge or false Apostle used to stand and perform his Devotion, I beheld
the perfect form of a Pulpit with the door open, and on the outside of the
Pulpit door there was a little woodden-pin, on which there hung a very bright
key (of which I did often take notice) but the Pulpit being empty I inquired
for the person that should be in it, but none made me Answer, till at last it
was observed by all, that the Party belonging to the said place was lost, and
could no where be found, and also that my Company was Acceptable.

This was my Dream, as one (to wit) my Servant that then was, and was one of
their Company, and knew more of my mind than any other can (if he will) witness
that I related the same to him the next day; but this is observable that in all
my dream, I was not sensible of any thing that had passed between the Church
and my Self, nor did I awake till the morning Light, and then my dream came to
my remembrance;

Another dream some what remarkable I had some few days before, there was a
slop put to my obtaining the great Seal of England, for the Confirmation of his
Majesty's grant before the late Lord Keeper, by reason of the untrue
Information of two Conspirators, who suggested, That I was not the first
Inventer, and that I designed to prohibit all persons from Cleansing of
Clover, All which was utterly false; Some few days I say before this stop was
made I being at London, in my sleep had this dream. That as I was going about
my business, in Order to have his Majesty's grant Confirmed under the great
Seal, behold there stood in my way a Church, as it were quite Cross the street,
so that I could not pass by it, whereupon I stood still to Consider, whether
there was no other way by which I might go whither my business lay, but whilst
I was thus Considering methoughts a strange thing came into my mind, viz. That
I must go over the Church which seemed to be of a considerable Height, and on
the middle of it stood a very High and Stately Steeple, which seemed to overtop
all the Churches in London, At the sight whereof I was somewhat afraid of
Climbing so High as to get over the Church, but so it was, over it I must, and
up I got to the Top of the Church, and being there, the losty Steeple standing
in my way, over that I must go also, which I did, and went down again to the
ground on the other side, where looking up to the top of the Steeple. I
returned thanks that I came over so dangerous a place without hurt, but passing
toward my business, methoughts I was discouraged, and given to doubt, that at
that time I should be frustrared of my intent, and was moved to go home with
Content, there to settle my self to the work I should find my self most
concerned in, and afterward I should have my Expectation, as in relation, I
mean to the Confirmation of the Patent;

This dream I confess I did little heed, though it of^ came into my thoughts,
till such time as the day of hearing before the Lord Keeper came, who upon
their false Allegations was pleased to put a stop to my business, and then home
I came, where I not only found how these Conspirators had Alarmed the Country
with news of the great things they had done, one of them boasting (as I was
told) that they were promised, That if I did go any more to private meetings It
should cost me every time 100, pound. But also that my pretended Brethren were
lifted up above measure, beginning to boast that they were Justified on all
hands, and that they were glad they had done it, viz. Excommunicated me, before
that time; All which Considered, together with the premifes herein before
declared, I was then and not till then fully Convinced, That it was my duty to
Publish their Acts of Injustice, and defend my own Innocence thus beyond
measure abused!

Whereupon I did apply my self to the Lord by Fasting and Prayer several days,
Desiring that he would assist me in the work, or otherwise withhold me from it,
by what means best pleased him; yea I did desire the Lord to bring upon me
those Evils which that false Apostle did predict Should befall me, rather than
that, I by this means should dishonor his glorious name.

But the work lay before me, and as well as I could I then drew up the greatest
part of what is here presented to public view, And then to London I went with
a full Intent to Printthe same, and and also to move for a Rehearing of my Case
concerning the Patent.

About which making some Inquiry, I found all things seemed to smile upon, and
in order to obtain a Rehearing, I went to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Shaftsbury, then Lord High Chancellor of England, and without Petition, Bribe,
or Fee, was admitted to treat with his Honor, who after several times
discoursing the matter, was pleased to Confirm what His Majesty had graciously
granted unto me under the Great Seal of England; But the cause of my not
publishing this Narrative at that time, I have truly declared in my Epistle to
the Reader.

Thus part of my last dream being accomplished in such good success in my
Business of the Patent, after I had applied my self with diligence to make a
discovery of the Usurpers Wickedness, why may I not rationally Imagine, that no
part of the rest will pass unfulfilled in its kinds, Yet cannot I boast any
Certainty, nor dare pretend to Divine Revelations, acknowledging that what I
have related were really dreams, but whereas this false Apostle (as I hinted
before) has prophesied, saying to me at a time when I was not well in Health,
That if I would not be ruled by him, and decline the said business of the
Patent, I should not prosper in Body nor Estate, and to another, That I should
not be able to subsist, or to that effect, my Condition would be so strange:
Blessed and for ever Blessed be the most High God, Even the God of my
Salvation, I have found him a false Prophet, and though at his Instigation I
was Cast out by my pretended Loveing, but deluded Brethren, saying, Let the
Lord be Glorified, I comfortably hope, That be will appear to my Joy, when they
shall be Ashamed, If. 66. 5.

Oh! What shall I say unto you, my most unkind, yet pretended tender Loveing
Friends! May I flatter you as your seducer has done, whereby to Engage you on
my part? No, I dare not, the matter is weighty; A Soul Concern, and most
dangerous it is to play with Thunder-Boults, and Jest with things that are
sharp and burning?

Did you not believe, that what your pretended Apostle with your consents has
done on Earth, was also done in Heaven? I know that you did believe it, And yet
how easily were you drawn to Consent, to this horrible Cruelty, though youhad
no Command for it; Why would you to that degree punish where no Law was
Transgressed? Why would you Condemn where no sin was proved? As for my
offending weak Brethern, I have I suppose sufficiently proved that to be a mere
pretense, and Juggling Stratagem to Engage you to Join and become ignorantly
his instruments to accomplish his design before resolved upon, And yet even in
this I was ready and earnest to have given you Satisfaction, if he like an
Enemy to Peace and good Order had not perpetually disturbed our Reasoning
together as aforesaid; Let not, I beseech you a fond veneration for him, or
prejudice against me, any longer prevent your laying to heart, this Act of rash
Cruelty, and your dealings equally unjust and unkind toward a person, who can
with a good Conscience say, That he has been, and is still ready to be kind to
you all, according to his Duty; Consider I say, my Beloved! what was become not
only of mercy and Compassion, Christian Love and mutual pity, but even of
Justice and Common, right in that day when you Condemned me, so that I could
not find so much as a little Heathenish Equity; I speak not this to insilt
over, but to regain you and Convince you of your Condition, for whatever you
may think, I cannot but Believe, That without Repentance for such unjust and
uncharitable deeds, you must be in danger.

And think not my friends, That I am such a son of Belial that in a way of
Love, you may not without Interruption speak unto me, for I can truly say I
have longed for an opportunity to Converse with you, so as the Usurper be not
present to disburb our friendly Reasonings continually with his Clamorous
interposeings, Nor should I after this manner have spent one hour in this work,
had I not believed that it was indispensably my Duty to endeavor by this means
to make you senfible of your Delusions; And I pray God that it may prove
effectual to that purpose, so that henceforth you may say of him, who like a
seducer has Caused Confusion and Disorder, What have we to do with thee, Ob;
full of all Subtlety, etc.

For until you Repent and acknowledge your Acts of Injustice, practiced under
pretense of Authority, how shall you and I be reconciled, For my self I am
always ready to do my part so far forth as it Concerns me, declaring hereby,
That upon the performance of your Duties, I am as ready and willing to forgive
the worst of you that has hated me most, as you can be willing that I should;

But if you shall will fully neglect the means, and we be not Reconciled, what
will ANSWER when God arises up, and in Judgment shall say, who has REQUIRED
this offering or Sacrifice at your hands: Oh! forget not, What manner of
measure you have made, Therefore if you expect mercy and pardon for your Sins
and Trespasses, If you desire your iniquities to be Covered with the imputation
of the Righteousness of JESUS, If you would find Deliverance in Distress, or
Grace to help in time of Trial, are you not in the Exercise of your faith, To
offer up your prayers and performances of your Duties unto the Lord as a means
in order to obtain these mercies.

But, my Beloved! When thus you do, Then remember that Obedience is better and
more acceptable than such your Sacrifice, and forget not to remember your own
Evil ways, and to consider Whether your abused Brother has not ought against
you, Knowing that your Prayers are unacceptable to the Lord, until you have
done your Duty, that is to say, To be reconciled to your abused Brother; If you
will not perform this your first work, or do not Believe it your Duty so to do;
Tell me, I pray, how can you believe that you shall obtain mercy; Is not the
Case Plain, He shall have Judgment without Mercy that has Showed no Mercy; If
therefore you believe the Word of God, and that he will be as good as his
Word, have a care you add not Sin to Sin, but have for Reconciliation, that so
the obstruction, which hinders the acceptance of your Duties, may be removed
out of the way.

But there is yet one Objection behind, for possibly you may say That he
Preaches up Holiness and Godliness of life and Conversation, and Rebukes, and
Admonished Persons many times that are worthy of Blame, and therefore we cannot
but in Charity Judge the best of Him, and accordingly must Love Him.

To which I Answer, That I know all this may be true, for the most Counterfeit
Coin is gilded all over, with some good metal, and the greatest Hypocrisy
walks in a Masque of sanctity, so is his Lordly Tyrannical Authority, veiled
with the fairest pretenses of the greatest degree of Love and Humility; I
accuse him not, for those things which are good, But be not deceived, what if
he had Faith so as to remove Mountains, Suppose he gave all his Goods to
relieve the poor, or (which is more than all that) should he give his body to
be Burned, If he has not Charity, what will all this avail him? and do you not
know that true Charity and solid Honesty are both wanting? Are not all his
plausible pretenses like rotten wood in the dark, of more show than Substance?
A Pharisaical Holiness, like painted Tombs, finely varnished over, but within,
nothing but stench and Putrefaction; Let not then shows and outsides, Words,
Titles and Gestures, deceive you, bring all his Practices to the Touchstone,
Compare all his motions with the Sacred Dyal, and weigh his pretended Gold in
the Balance of the Sanctuary, but let neither Superstition nor prejudice touch
the Scales. And let Sound Judgment not your Affections hold the Balance; And
then as you find him regard him, still remembering that the before mensioned
wicked Seducer Hacket did express as great Zeal for Gods glory, as much Care to
reforms the Church, and defend it against its Adversaries, nor was there any
one thing whereby he might show himself Famous omitted by him, nor does your
Leader go beyond him in any respect; But well do I know that he cannot be idle
but will use all means Just and Unjust, to maintain his interest in your
affections, But though he sold raise a thousand Reasons, or if it were
possible for him, to make fire come, down from Heaven, in your sight, to make
you believe that his practices are approved of by the Lord on high, yet if they
are not warranted, in Scripture, Let it Signify no more to you than if he had a
Thousand Legs without Ground to stand upon, For if he should venture to walk
over the Sea, notwithstanding all his Legs, he must sink to the Bottom, So if
his mighty reasons have not the word of God for their sure Foundation, they
cannot stand, but in a little time must Sink into the bottomless Pit, from
whence he had them.

Nor think it, my Friends, notwithstanding your great Confidence, a thing
impossible or incredible, That so many of you sold be mistaken, it is no new
thing for a Congregation to be deluded And why may not you, as well as others,
conceit, That you are rich, and have need of nothing; and yet whilst you insult
over others, and justify your selves, take heed lest you appear in his
presence, who sees not as man sees, wretched and miserable, poor, blind and
naked. Consider the state of the Laodicean Church; and remember, that if your
Zeal for God be more then Lukewarm, yet considering what you have done, you may
perceive your Zeal has been much more servent for the Adoration of your Idol.

Be not overwise in your own conceits; why should you who call your selves
weak, think your selves wiser than those knowing and eminent Brethren, who at
London had the hearing of the matter, and though they knew not of half his
Devices, declared their dislike of his illegal practices; Asking him, How he
dared to do such a thing, having not one Word of God for it? How can you now
call me obstinate, because I will not conform, when your selves slight all
Admonition anb Advice; and rather then acknowledge your Errors, will create a
Schism and Division, so far as to contemn our City Friends, and disown them.

Why should your Envy, my Brethren, be thus stirred up against me? Have I been
such an one as have to your discredit, and the dishonor of the Truth, which I
have professed, lived in any notorious Sins? or have I through infirmities
transgressed against my God, and refused to be reformed? Have I ever despised
any orderly rebuke, (if any such has been given) slighted any Christian
Counsel, or cast Admonition behind me? Have I not been careful to make good my
Place at the Meeting to which I usually went, insomuch that some in time of
Persecution said, If they could but persuade me not to come, or were it not tor
me, they would not spare you? but by means of my constant being there, your
Meeting was never yet disturbed, whilst all those round about were visited,
Have I failed to supply your wants? or came short of any one therein? Have I
carried my self loftily to the meanest? or would I not willingly be in peace
with those, who without cause are my Enemies, and envy my prosperity? Or can
you think that I now neglect my Business, and spend my Time and Labor, hereby
to make a Party, or for any self ends to engage you to my self? Be not
mistaken, my Friends, it is the knowledge of your dangerous Condition, into
which you are betrayed, that moves me to perform my Duty of Love unto you.

These things, my Beloved, according to what I believe I am bound to do, have I
endeavored to lay before you, and all others whom it may concern, That it may,
if possible, awaken and convince you, and that the Iniquities before mentioned
may not be laid to my charge for concealing thereof; nor to the charge of the
Innocent, who do not allow of, but abhor the same.

And now, whether you my deluded Friends will hear, or whether you will
forbear, I know not. But if the Case should be with you, as it was with the
Church of God in the days of the Prophet, who rebuked them for that they
embraced Idols: And you, through hardness of Heart, and blindness Eyes, should
Answer as they did, and say, There is no hope; no, we have loved strangers, and
after them we will go. Yet I have discharged my Conscience, and I hope done my
Duty to my Ability; which, I trust, may be-profitable to you and my self, and
all read it, fea^ing the Lord; so as they in spirit and truth do serve and obey
him according to his own Word, which is the alone infallible and unerring Rule.

But if notwithstanding all I have said, and all the Admonition, Chrisian
Counsel, and Advice of the faithful Ministers and Officers of the Church Of
Christ, you still persist in, and justify your Acts of Usurpation, Oppression,
Tyranny, Cruelty, etc. or shall endeavor to defend or excuse what has been
done by Lies, Falsehood, and Deceit, or by refusing to Testify the Truth of the
Case, then again must I say Adieu to you, my dearly Beloved, although deluded
and unmerciful Brethren, whom my Soul mourns for. Adieu to you, who were my
Beloved Ones; and to Him whom you have Adored, and by your Actions declare to
be Infalling; I bid Adieu for ever, unlesa he shall Repent and Acknowledge his
Wickedness.

FINIS.

