The Trial of William Howard Ld. Viscount Stafford in Westminster hall.

His Execution on Tower hill.

A. Ld. high Steward. B. B. The Peers in yr. Robes. C. C. The Commons. D The
Judges. E. The Prisoner. F. The Ks. Box. G. The Managers of ^ Trial. H. The
Evidence.




HISTORICAL Collections: OR, A Brief Account of the most Remarkable
Transactions of the Two Last PARLIAMENTS. Consisting of I. The Speeches, Votes,
Accusations, Addresses, and Articles of Impeachment, etc. II. The Bills of
Association, Exclusion, and Repeal of 35 Eliz. etc. III. The several
Informations, Messages, Narratives, Orders, Petitions, Protestation of the
Lords, and Resolves of both Houses, etc. IV. The Trial and Sentence of William
Howard Lord Viscount Stafford in Westminster Hall, his Speech and Execution on
the Scaffold at Tower Hill, with many other memorable passages and proceedings
of the two last Parliaments, held and dissolved at Westminster and Oxford. V. A
perfect List of each Parliament. VI. His Majesty's Declaration, showing the
Causes and Reasons that moved him to dissolve the two last Parliaments.
The Second Edition.

London, Printed for Simon Neale, at the Three Pigeons in Bedford street over
against the New Exchange, Strand. 1682.

TO THE READER.
MEthod and Order are the chiefest Helps and Assistances of Memory. And
therefore the ensuing sheets being only a bare and brief Collection of the most
memorable and Important Passages which occurred in the two last Parliaments
held at Westminster and Oxford we have observed that method and connection in
the series of Affairs, which is most acceptable to the Memory, by separating
the perfect from the imperfect Matter, that the Reader may read, with more
delight, the carriage of things, and make his own observations. To which end we
have made no Comments or Reflections of our own, to show either favor or
affection, partiality, or biased humor; contracting what might seem tedious,
and cutting off the superfluities of a Diurnal way of writing. They that have
not been so careful to preserve the loose Sheets of the daily Occurrencies, or
have not had the opportunity to buy all the Narratives concerning the Popish
Plot, may here find the substance of all together, and by the help of the Index
at the latter end, have recourse to what ever they shall have occasion to bring
to mind, within the short compass of those few Months. So that we doubt not but
the benefit of the design will far exceed the price of the Volume. Some
omissions there may be, but by those that have viewed these Sheets, it is not
believed, that there are any of any great Moment. Whatever they are, it is hoped
the Reader will pardon small defects and judge charitably of the work it self,
considering the Variety, and the nicer nature of the several Subjects. For as
for the Truth of the matter, there is no question of it, there being no where
any deviating from Authentic Hands and Approbation.

HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS. OR, TRANSACTIONS OF THE LATE PARLIAMENT, IN A DIALOGUE
BETWEEN FAME and TRVTH.
Fame. WHile the last Parliament sat, I was so tired with carrying News to and
fro, from the City to the Country; then back to the City again, day and night,
night and day, that upon the Dissolution of the Session, I resolved to retire
altogether into the Country, to recruit my self, and refresh the wearied
Pinions of my Wings.


Truth. It Is a happiness I can seldom enjoy; for I still find my self so much
abused and scandalized by Rumor and False Report, that daily affront me
wherever I come, that I hate to come near a Market Town, as I hate to tell a
lie.


Fame. That Is the business which I come now to thee about, to seek a Remedy how
to avoid this Inconvenience for the future.


Truth. And have thou found out the way, do think?


Fame. Yes. -- For though the Parliament, last Session, took a most Excellent
way, to give a daily account of their Proceedings, yet by reason of the many
interferings of private with public business, people are confounded in their
Memories, and forget the Coherence of the main Transactions, while they
endeavor to separate the more from the less important.


Truth. I must confess, indeed, that Order and Method are the main Assistances
of Memory.


Fame. Therefore I say, that if Thou would but assist me in this Business,
and recollecting thy just Memory, would but give me an Exact, easy, and
methodical Relation of the Proceedings of the late Session, without
Animadversions or Flourishes, but plainly and impartially, I believe it would
be very much both for thy advantage and mine too.


Truth. That I shall most willingly do, not only for my own, but the advantage
of all those that, as I am persuaded, read with more delight a successive and
cohering, then a disordered, and interrupted Story.


Fame. Thereby will Fame be beholding to Truth, for the Truth which she
reports, and Truth be no less beholding to Fame for reporting the Verity of
Things.


Truth. Where then would thou have me begin?


Fame. Just where the Parliament it self began. For that, in the procedure of
Affairs, is just like a full Stop and a Break in Writing.


Truth. The Parliament then, as is well known, assembled, at the usual Places
at Westminster, upon Tuesday the 21. of October in the year 1680.

So soon as they were met, a Message was sent from his Majesty to the House of
Commons by Sir Edward Carteret, Usher of the Black Rod, commanding the Members
to attend him in the House of Peers. Whither the Commons accordingly repairing,
his Majesty was pleased to declare himself to the effect as follows.

That the several Prorogations he had made had been advantageous to the
Neighboring States, and useful to Himself; as having employed that time in
makng and perfecting an Alliance with the Crown of Spain, suitable to what he
had before with the United Provinces.

That he had all the reason in the world to believe, that what was so much
desired by former Parliaments must needs be acceptable to them.

Which as they were the best Measures that could be taken for the safety of
England, and repose of Christendom, so they could not but attain their ends, if
our home-Divisions did not render our Friendship less considerable abroad.

That for prevention thereof, he gave them all Assurances that nothing should
be wanting on his part, to give them the fullest Satisfaction their hearts
could wish, for the security of the Protestant Religion, which he resolved to
maintain against all Conspiracies of our Enemies; and to concur with them in
any proposed Remedies, that might consist with preserving the Crown in its Due
and Legal Course of Descent.

To which purpose he recommended to them the speedy Examination of the Plot,
and that the Lords in the Tower might be brought to their speedy Trials.

Then he laid before them the matter of Tangier, and the Expenses he had been
at to relieve and maintain that place; upon which he desired their Advice and
Assistance.

But that which he valued above all the Treasure in the World, was a perfect
Union at home, as being that which only could restore the Kingdom to that
Strength and Vigor which it seemed to have lost.

All Europe, he told them, had their Eyes upon that Assembly, so that a
Misunderstanding of each other, would render the Friendship of England unsafe
to trust to.

Lastly, he exhorted them to take care not to gratify the public Enemy, and
discourage their Friends, by unseasonable disputes, which if they should
happen, the world would see, it was no fault of his, who had done what was
possible for him to do, to keep them in peace while he lived, and to leave them
so when he died.

Concluding, that from their prudence and good affections, he could fear
nothing of that kind; but that he relied upon them, that they would use their
best endeavors to bring the Parliament to a happy conclusion.

Having so done, he commanded the Commons to return to their House, and make
choice of their Speaker.


Fame. Did the Lord Chancellor make no Speech at all?


Truth. Not this time.


Fame. Do ye know the Reason?


Truth. Not I, but only by conjecture, which has no place in this Rehearsal.


Fame. Then Proceed.


Truth. So soon as the Commons were returned to their House, a Motion was made,
That William Williams Esquire might be elected Speaker. Which was presently
resolved, Nemine Contradicente. Mr. Williams being thus chosen, modestly at
first excused himself, telling the House,

That he needed not to reckon up his Infirmities, which were better known to
many of the Members than to himself. That as they had experience of his
unfitness for their Service, so they had sufficient Demonstrations of the
aptness of other Members then present. That the Choice of a Speaker was the
Effect of much time and consideration, and that it would be no excuse for them
to say, They had not time for deliberation in so great a Matter; and therefore,
since they had time, a more deliberate Election would be expected from them.
That the security of the Protestant Religion; the safety of the King and
Kingdom, and the preservation of the Justice of the Land, were the Grand
Affairs in prospect, enough to prevail with them to depart from their first
Intentions of the Honor proposed to him that day. Acknowledging himself to be
sufficiently honored with the proposal alone. For which reasons he desired
them, not only for his own sake, but for their Honor, to proceed to the
Election of another Person more proper for their Service, and to leave him in
that place where his Country had seated him.

But this excuse being rejected by the House, he was by two of the Members
conducted to the Chair, where being seated, he again spoke to this Effect,

That he trembled to reflect, under what difficulties experienced, learned, and
wise men had labored in that Chair. Yet that he was not terrified with the
Presidents of those who had impared their Estates and Healths therein; nor of
those who had lost their lives in the Service, as being Sacrifices he owed his
Country. But when he considered that some Gentlemen had maimed their
Reputations in their Trusts, those were the thoughts that wounded him most
deeply, and would yet strike deeper, did not they that called him thither stand
by him, to support him in all the difficulties of the Place.

He farther acknowledged that he held the place by their courtesy, and during
their pleasure, and that if he fell, he fell into the hands of Gentlemen, that
made him what he was in their Service. Concluding,

That he was theirs alone, and their own entirely, placed in their Service
without seeking or recommendation; and that he expected no Boon, but by their
Grace and Favor to depart as he came, when they should please to command him.

The Ceremony of the Election being thus over, the House was informed that his
Majesty had, appointed the next day at three a Clock, for the Members to
present their Speaker, which made them adjourn till the next day in the
Afternoon.

The day following being the twenty Second of October, the House met again in
the Afternoon, at what time a Message was delivered them by the Usher of the
Black Rod, commanding them to attend his Majesty in the House of Peers.

Thereupon the House attended accordingly, and humbly presented their Speaker
to his Majesty, who presently made claim, according to Custom, in the Name of
the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, of the ancient Rights of the
Commons, for them and their Servants, in their Persons and Estates, to be free
from Arrests and other disturbances; to have freedom and liberty of Speech in
all their Debates, and to have access to his Majesty's Person, as occasion
should require. All which was allowed by the King.

Being returned to the House, the Speaker took the Chair, and having made
report of what had been done, the House adjourned till Monday following.


Fame. Hitherto I hear of nothing of Business.


Truth. No more then what I tell you; for it was necessary that these matters
of Form and Ceremony should be first dispatched. Besides that by these Acts of
Condescension in the one, and Homage in the other, the King asserted his
Prerogative, and the People by their Representatives acknowledged their
Subjection.


Fame. I am satisfied; go on to the next.


Truth. On Monday then, being the twenty fifth of October, both Houses being
met again, the first thing that found the Commons work, was a Message from the
Peers by the Lord C. J. Schroggs, and the Lord C. J. North, acquainting them
that they had made an Address to his Majesty, and had received his Majesty's
Answer thereunto, which they thought fit to communicate.

The Address, which was delivered to his Majesty by the Lords attending him
with their White Staves, was to this Effect, That whereas there had been a
discovery made of a horrid Conspiracy by the Papists against his Majesty's
Person and Government, which still continued, that his Majesty would be
Graciously pleased to issue out his Royal Proclamation, that all Persons who
within two Months after the date of the same, should come in and give Evidence
of any Treason or Conspiracy against his Majesty's Person and Government,
should have a full Pardon for all such Treasons, Misprisions, and all Offenses
of Concealment, to the time limited by the said Proclamation.

To which his Majesty's Answer was to this Effect. That having considered of
the said Address, and being willing to encourage the discovery of any Treasons
and Conspiracies, as aforesaid, he would issue forth his Proclamation
accordingly, and pardon all such Discoverers according to the desires of the
Address.

Tuesday 26. of October, the Commons fell upon the Regulation of Elections of
Members to serve in Parliament, and appointed a Committee to draw up a Bill or
Bills, as they should see cause, for that purpose, more especially to take care
to insert a Clause, that an Action of the Case might be brought and maintained
for Damages sustained by undue Returns.

Then taking into consideration the Message which had been sent them the day
before by the Lords, They also in concurrence with the Peers, voted an Address
to be made to his Majesty on their part, to request the same Pardons and Favor
for limited Discoverers, as the Lords had already done. Which being done, Mr.
Dangerfield (of whom I question not but that you have had a sufficient account
already) was called to the Bar, there to deliver his knowledge concerning the
Plot.


Fame. That will be very necessary for my Packet.


Truth. It will so; and therefore you shall have it as briefly as possibly I
can sum it up.

He declared to the House, That when Mrs. C. and He waited on the Lord
Peterborough, to be introduced to his R. H. his Lordship asked him whether the
Lady Powis had given him any directions how to discourse the D. and desired to
know what they were. Whereupon he produced a little Book which contained a
scheme of the pretended discovery he had made of the Presbyterian Plot. Wherein
his Lordship finding some Omissions, ordered him to Write from his own Mouth,
that the Presbyterians intended to rise in the North, and join with the Scots;
which done, his Lordship carried him with Mrs. C. into the Dukes Closet at
White Hall, where he delivered the said Book to the Duke, who not only thanked
him for it, and his diligence in the Catholic Cause, but wished him success in
his Undertakings. Adding withal, of what mighty consequence the Presbyterian
Plot was, if well managed; and that he questioned not but that the effects of
it would answer expectation, especially in the North, where he was assured of
the Major Part of the Gentry.

That after that his H. in the hearing of the Lord Peterborough ordered him and
Mrs. C. to be careful what they communicated to such as were to be Witnesses in
the Plot, for fear they should be caught in the Subornation. That the D. also
informed them, that in a Month or two Cmmissions would be ready as from the
Presbyterians, to which purpose he was ordered to find out trusty persons that
would be ready to accept them, which should be delivered them by a person that
should be known by them to be no other then a Presbyterian, that they might be
the more fit to swear in the Plot. That the D. also for their Encouragement to
proceed in that sham-Plott, promised them, that he would take care that Money
should not be wanting, and bid them discover the same to the King with all
expedition they could. That the D. made diverse Vows and bitter Execrations to
stand by them in the thing, and engaged on his Honor to be their Rewarder.

That being withdrawn from thence to the Lord Peterborough's Lodgings, they
continued there till his Lordship had introduced Sir Robert Peyton to the Duke.

That about four days after the said Earl took the said M. D. again to the D's.
Lodgings at White Hall, who then told him that he had gained by his diligence a
good reputation among the Catholics, adding withal, that he should in a short
time see the Catholic Religion flourish in these Kingdoms, and Heresy torn up
by the Roots.

That the D. gave him twenty Guinies, and said, if he would be but vigorous in
what he had undertaken already, he would so order it, that Mr. D's life should
not be in the least danger, with several other Circumstances relating to the
said Plot, too tedious to relate.


Fame. It Is well enough, so long as here is the main, and chief substance of
the rest.


Truth. There is so; and we are not to make Enlargements, where we intend
Epitome's.

Mr. Dangerfeild having made an end of his Relation withdrew. But the House
taking a more particular notice, that he had made mention of Sir Robert Peyton
in his Information, presently ordered a Committee to examine the matters
touching Sir Robert Peyton, and to report the same, and came to a Resolution
Nemine Contradicente, to proceed effectually to suppress Popery, and prevent a
Popish Successor.

Upon the twenty seventh of October, the Address of the Commons to his Majesty,
in concurrence with the Lords, for a Proclamation, to assure all such Persons
their Pardons, as should make their Discoveries within two Months after the
date of the Proclamation, being prepared and finished by the Commitee, was read
in the House upon the Report of Mr. Treby; and ran much to this Effect,

We your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, the Commons of England assembled, being
highly zealous for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, your Majesty's
Sacred Person and Government, and resolving to pursue with a strict and
impartial enquiry, the execrable Papist Plot, which was detected in the two
last Parliaments, and has been supported and carried on by potent and restless
Practices and Machinations, especially during the late Recesses of Parliament,
whereby several Persons have been terrified and discouraged from declaring
their knowledge thereof, most humbly beseech your Majesty, that for the
security of such Persons, who shall be willing to give Evidence, and make
further satisfactory discovery concerning the same to this House, your Majesty
would be pleased to issue your Royal Proclamation, assuring all the said
persons of your Gracious Pardon, if they shall give such Evidence or make such
Discovery, within two Months after the date of the Proclamation.

With this Address, the Speaker attended by several Members of the House,
waited upon his Majesty the next day in the Afternoon. To which his Majesty was
pleased to return his Answer to this Effect.

That he did intend to direct such a Proclamation, and was resolved not only
to prosecute the Plot but Popery also, and to take care of the Protestant
Religion established by Law, adding, That if the House did but go on Calmly in
their Debates without heat, that he did not doubt, but to beat down Popery and
all that belonged to it.

But to return where we left off, so soon as the report of this Address had
been made; and that it had passed Approbation, the House fell the same day upon
the business of Petitions, which they resented so high, that they came to
several Resolves: First, that it was the undoubted Right of the Subjects of
England, to Petition the King for the calling and sitting of Parliaments, and
Redressing of Grievances.

That to traduce such Petitioning as a violation of Duty, and to represent it
to his Majesty, as Tumultuous and Seditious, was to betray the Liberty of the
Subject, and contributed to the design of subverting the ancient Legal
Constitutions of this Kingdom, and introducing Arbitrary Power.

Which Resolves passing Nemine Contradicente, they appointed a Committee to
enquire of all such Persons as had offended against the Rights of the Subjects.

Thereupon the House being informed that Sir Francis Withens, one of the
Members, had offended against the said Right of the Subject, he was ordered to
attend the next Morning.

After which they passed a Resolve, to make an Address to his Majesty, with a
declaration of their Resolution to preserve and support the Kings Person and
Government, and the Protesstant Religion both at home and abroad.

The next Morning, Sir Francis Withens appearing in his Place, according to the
Order made the day before, the Clark of the Peace for Westminster was ordered
to attend the next Morning with the Roll of Orders for the last Easter Sessions
for the City of Westminster.


Fame. What could that signify?


Truth. Thou may be sure they knew what they did.


Fame. I guess the business.


Truth. Why then do interrupt me with thy Impertinencies?


Fame. Thou know, I was always guilty of that fault and cannot help it, --
but prithee now go on.


Truth. Having thus done with Sir Francis for that time, they took Sir Robert
Yeoman's and Sir Robert Can, a Member of the House, to task; for that they in
October 1679, had publicly declared that there was no Plot, but only a
Presbyterian Plot.

The words were attested by Mr. Row the Sword Bearer of Bristol, and Sir John
Knight a Member of the House also.

To which Sir Robert Can being called upon by the House to make his defense,
said little for himself, but only flung several reflecting and reproachful
expressions upon Sir Robert Can. For which as for an offense against good
Manners, he was presently ordered to receive a Reprehension from the Speaker
upon his knees. Nor was this all, for Sir Robert being now withdrawn, the House
proceeded to take the matters charged against him into farther Consideration,
and after some time of debate, resolved, that it did appear by the Evidence
given to the House, that Sir Robert Can was guilty of the words before
mentioned, and ordered him as a Member of the House, to be expelled the House,
and committed to the Tower.

Whereupon he was presently called to the Bar and received the Judgment of the
House upon his knees from the Mouth of the Speaker.

As for Sir Robert Yeomans, he not being in Town, was ordered to be sent for in
custody of the Sergeant attending the House.

The next day being the twenty ninth of October, as they had been severe in
punishing, so they they began to think of rewarding, and ordered that Dr.
Tongue should be humbly recommended by the House to his Majesty, for the first
considerable Church-preferment, that should become void in the Kingdom, and
that such of the Members as were of the Privy Council, should represent the
same to his Majesty.

The same day the Address for the preservation and support of his Majesty's
Person and Government, being prepared and finished, was read in the House to
this Effect.

That they did with most thankful hearts acknowledge, not only his Majesty's
many former Royal Declarations of his adherence to the Protestant Religion, but
his farther Manifestation of the same, in his Gracious Speech to both Houses,
at the opening of the Parliament. And therefore as the Eyes of all the
Protestants abroad were upon them, and that looking upon his Majesty as the
Royal Head of so many Protestant Countries, they could not but hope that his
Majesty would be the greatest Protection to them, from whom the Kingdom has
Reason to expect a Mutual Assistance as being invovl'd in the same Danger.

They did humbly assure his Majesty, that they would be always ready to
preserve his Majesty's Person and Government, and to support the Protestant
Religion both at home and abroad. Beseeching his Majesty to esteem those that
should otherwise represent them to his Majesty, as such who designed to divide
between the King and his People, and defeat the meeting of Parliaments, that
the Popish designs might succeed. Which has been made Evident by the
Contrivance of a wicked design, to transfer the Guilt of their own Crimes upon
his Majesty's Loyal Protestant Nobility and Gentry.

This Address being read and consented to by the whole House, they proceeded to
the business of Sir Francis Withens, and to that purpose examined several
Witnesses at the Bar. At length it appearing not only by the Evidence, but by
the Confession of Sir Francis hmself, that he had presented an Address to his
Majesty, expressing an abhorrency to Petition for the calling and sitting of
Parliaments, it was Resolved, That he had betrayed the undoubted Rights of the
Subjects of England: And Sir Francis was ordered to be expelled the House, and
received his Sentence upon his knees accordingly.

Saturday, the thirtieth of October, concluded the Parliamentary Transactions
of this Month, and little occurred but that Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquainted
the House, that his Majesty, being attended by such of the Members as were of
the Privy Council, with the Address relating to Dr. Tongue, was pleased to
answer, That he had already taken care of him, and would also take him into his
farther Consideration.

Then it was also that the Votes of the House were first ordered to be Printed,
being first perused and signed by the Speaker, who had likewise Power to
Nominate and appoint the Persons that were to Print the same.

The same day also Francisco de Feria delivered his Evidence at the Bar of the
House, concerning the Plot; the Effect whereof in short was,

That being preferred to be Interpreter, and Secretary of Languages to the Lord
Gaspar Abrew de Freitas, Ambassador in Ordinary for the Prince of Portugal to
the King of England; That being in great Favor with the said Ambassador, he
the said Ambassador did entrust him with several of his Secrets; and that at
the Trial of the five Jesuits, being then private with his Lord, the
Ambassador expresed much sorrow for the Oppression of the Catholics, and
wished that Oats and Bedlow were made away; and then told him, that he might
do the Catholic cause great Service, and might make his own Fortune, if he
would join in destroying Oats and Bedlow: That 50000 Reales d' Ocho should be
given for that piece of Service, and that two sufficient Persons should be
joined with him to kill the said Oats and Bedlow. That afterward
understanding that Bedlow was not dead in Ireland, as had been reported, the
said Ambassador renewed his Solicitations to him to kill Oats and Bedlow,
promising to make good the said sum of Money to him, to pay his Debts and carry
him into Portugal. That the said Ambassador tempted him to kill the Earl of
Shaftsbury, by throwing a hand-Granado into his Coach as he was traveling upon
the Road into the Country.

That after the acquittal of Sir George, he was sent to the said Sir George to
tell him from the Ambassador, That his Fortune and Estate were all at his
Service, and so was his Princes. That the Catholics were all bound to pray for
Sir Philip Floyd for his Generosity. To which Sir George replied, That had it
not been for him, he had not been saved.

That after the Trial was over, the Ambassador went to visit the Lord C. J.
Schroggs in his Sedan with his Coach of State. That the Complement was in
Portugueze, interpreted by himself to this Effect, My Lord, I am come to visit
you, as you are a Minister of State, and as I am sent as Ambassador from the
Prince of Portugal to the King of England, and am likewise to thank you for the
Justice you have done yesterday to Sir George Wakeman. To which my Lord C. J.
answered, I am placed to do Justice, and will not be curbed by the Rabble.

Which Information, amongst the rest, was Printed as it was delivered more at
large, by order of the House.

The same day also the Commons made new Resolves, Nemine Contradicente, to
proceed to the full Examination of the Popish Plot, in order to the bringing of
the Offenders to Justice. To which purpose they appointed a Committee to
inspect the Journalls of the two last Parliaments, and make their Report, and
ordered an humble Address to be made to his Majesty, that all the Letters,
Papers and Evidences, which had been delivered to the Privy Council, relating
to the Popish Plot, might be delivered in to the House.

And thus ended October.


Fame. By the way, what became of the Address for the preservation of his
Majesty's Person and Government?


Truth. Thou shall hear. For though the Address were made upon the Saturday
before, according to his Majesty's appointment, yet, the House had no account
of it in a Parliamentary way till the Monday following, which was the First of
November.

But first Mr. Secretary Jenkins made his Report concerning the Address that
had been orderd to be made for delivery to the House of all Papers, Letters and
Evidences concerning the Plot, in the Custody of the Privy Council; To which he
gave an account in short, That they were already delivered to the Committee of
Lords appointed for the examination of the said Plot. Which being done, Mr.
Speaker acquainted the House with his Majesty's Answer to their Address,
declaring their Resolutions to preserve and support his Person and Government,
etc. which was to this effect.

That he thanked them heartily for their Zeal to the Protestant Religion, and
assured them that there should be nothing wanting both at home and abroad to
preserve it.

Little was done the rest of this day, nor much the beginning of the next,
which was Tuesday the Second of November, till Mr. Treby having given a full
Information to the House of all matters by him reported in the last Parliament
relating to the Popish Plot, the House came to three most Remarkable Resolves,
of which two were carried with a Nemine Contradicente.

The first was, That the D. of York's being a Papist, and his hopes of coming
to the Crown, had given the greatest countenance to the present designs and
Conspiracies against the King and the Protestant Religion.

Secondly, That in defense of the Kings person and Government, and of the
Protestant Religion, the House did declare, That they would stand by his
Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes, and that if his Majesty should come by
any Violent death (which God forbid) they would revenge it to the utmost upon
the Papists.

Thirdly, That a Bill should be brought in to disenable the D. of York to
inherit the Imperial Crown of England.

In order whereunto a Committee was appointed to sit and prepare a Bill.

Upon Wednesday the third of November little passed of remark, only that the
Lords by a Message desired their concurrence to an Act for the better
Regulating of Peers in England; and that in the House of Commons a Resolve was
made, Nemine Contradicente, That a Bill should be brought in for the better
Uniting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

Thursday the Fourth of January was less remarkable for business then the day
beforegoing; unless I should trouble thee, Fame, to carry the relation of
preparatory Votes, or the Examinations of breaches of privileges, or contests
about Elections, which are nothing to the General Concernment.


Fame. Thou art in the right, they are not for my purpose, and therefore thou
do well to leave it out.


Truth. However I must not omit to tell thee, that the Bill for disabling James
Duke of York to inherit the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, was this day read the first time.

The next day being the Fifth of November the Houses were both adjourned till
Saturday the Sixth of November; at what time the House taking into their
Consideration the business of the dissenting Protestants, came to a unanimous
Resolve, that it was The Opinion of the House, that the Acts of Parliament made
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, ought not to be extended
against Protestant Dissenters. And thereupon they ordered a Bill to be brought
in for repeal of all or any part of the Act of Parliament made in the Thirty
fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, Chapter the first, printed in the Statute-book
of Pulton.

This done, Mr. Jenison, being called in, gave his Information at the Bar,
relating to the Popish Plot. At the conclusion of which, he was orderd to put
it in writing, and present it to the House on the Monday following. The Sum of
the Information was this.

That about the beginning of the year 78. he had heard Mr. Ireland, and Mr.
Tho. Jenison, both Jesuits, discourse of a design by the Roman Catholics, to
obtain a Toleration for the open profession of their Religion in England; which
was to be done by collecting a good round Sum of Money among them, and bribing
the Parliament. That they also discoursed of securing the Duke of Yorks
succession, by granting out Commissions to those of the Religion to rise upon
the death of the King. That he heard the said Ireland say at another time, that
there was only one in the way who hindered that Religion from flourishing in
England; and that it was an easy thing to poison the King by the means of Sir
George Wakeman.

That in August of the same year, coming from Windsor, he went to Mr. Irelands
Chamber, where he found him pulling off his boots, being as he said newly come
Post from Wolverhampton. That discoursing of the Kings pastimes at Windsor, and
particularly of his going a fishing with a small retinue of two or three, the
said Ireland made answer, that then he might be easily taken off. That the said
Ireland offered him to quit him of a debt if he would be assisting to the
taking off the King, urging how meritorious it would be, and how much to the
glory of God.

That upon his refusal, Mr. Ireland asked him if he knew any stout Irish
Gentlemen? upon which he named Lavallin, Karney, and Brahal, together with one
Wilson, an Englishman. Of which Gentlemen the said Mr. Ireland did approve as
fit for the design.

That at another time he heard Mr. Tho. Jenison say, that if C. R. would not be
R. C. he should not be long C. R. Adding, that the King being excommunicate and
deposed, he was no longer King.

Having heard this Information, the Bill against the Dukes Inheritance was read
a Second time, and two Resolves made.

First, That the Bill should be committed to a Committee of the whole House.

Secondly, which was done Nemine Contradicente, That the exclusion in the said
Bill should not extend any further then the Person of the Duke of York only.
After which the House adjourned till Monday the Eighth of November; the most
remarkable passages of which day were, first a Conference with the Peers,
managed by the Lord Privy Seal, at what time his Lordship did deliver to Mr.
Hampden, and the rest of the Members, several Examinations in writing relating
to the Popish Plot, acquainting them farther, That all other Papers of the same
Concern, in the Custody of their Clerk, should be delivered to the Clerk of the
House of Commons, upon his giving a Receipt for the same.

The Second was the Release of Sir Robert Can from his imprisonment, upon his
petition and acknowledgement of his offense. And

The third was the Resolving of the whole House into a Grand Committee, to
proceed in the Bill of Exclusion, which was done so effectually, that after
several Clauses added, and Amendments made, the Bill was orderd to be
engrossed.


Fame. Was that Bill never to be seen?


Truth. Yes, I have seen it my self in several Coffee-Houses. And therefore to
save thy longing, I will here briefly recite the Heads of it.


Fame. That Is as much as I desire, for the rest is but matter of Form.


Truth. That whereas the D. of Y. was notoriously known to have been perverted
from the Protestant to the Popish Religion, whereby not only great
encouragement has been given to the Popish party to carry on a devilish
Conspiracy for the destruction of his Majesty's Person and Government, but that
if the D. should succeed to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom, nothing would
be more manifest than a total Change of Religion: Be it therefore Enacted, That
the said I. D. of Y. be made for ever incapable to Inherit the Imperial Crown
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland etc. And that if the said D. of Y. shall
at any time hereafter challenge or attempt to possess or enjoy, or take upon
him to exercise any Authority or Jurisdiction within the said Kingdoms etc.
That he shall be deemed Guilty of High Treason and suffer accordingly. And that
all Persans that shall assist him in such Challenge or Attempt, or shall
themselves attempt or endeavor to put or bring him into the Possession of the
Regal Power, or by Preaching or Writing maintain that he has any Right or
Title to the same, shall be deemed Guilty of High Treason, and suffer
accordingly. And that the said D. of York after the Fifth of November 1680
shall not return into any of the Kingdoms aforesaid; or if he do, he shall be
adjudg'd Guilty of High Treason. That being so Guilty of the Treasons
aforesaid, neither the Duke or any other Person, shall be capable of the
benefit of any Pardon otherwise then by Act of Parliament, wherein in they
shall be particularly named.

All Magistrates, Officers, and other Subjects, are also empowered to apprehend
the said D. or any other Persons offending in any of these Premises.

The Act to extend no farther than the Person of the D.

Lastly, The Act to be given in Charge at all Assizes and Sessions of the
Peace, and to be openly read in all Cathedrals and Parish Churches, etc. upon
the Twenty-fifth of December, and Easterday, during the life of the Duke.

The next day being Tuesday, the ninth of November, the King sent a Message to
the House in writing, by Mr. Secretary Jenkins, desiring the House, as well for
the Satisfaction of his People as of himself, to expedite such Matters as were
depending before them, relating to Popery and the Plot, and to rest assured,
that all Remedies they should tender to his Majesty, conducing to those ends,
should be very acceptable to him; Provided they were such as might consist with
preserving the Succession of the Crown in its due and Legal Course of Descent.

Then Mr. Turberville being called in, gave in his Information, first by word
of Mouth, and when he had done, delivered the same in writing.

The effect whereof (in short) was, That he living in the Family of the E. of
Powis grew very intimately acquainted with William Morgan, Confessor to the
said Earl and his Family; being a Jesuit, and Rector over all the Jesuits in
those parts; and that he had often heard the said Morgan tell the said Earl,
and his Lady, that the Kingdom was in a high Fever, and that nothing but
bloodletting could restore it to health. That Father Cudworth, Guardian of the
Friars at Doway, had told him, that this King should not last long. That in the
year 1675 he was introduced into the acquaintance of the Lord Viscount Stafford
at Paris, to whom he had great freedom, and liberty of access: Who at length,
after many solemn promises of exacted secrecy, told him in direct Terms, That
he might make himself and the Nation happy by taking away the Life of the King,
who was a Heretic and a Rebel to God. Lastly,

That he was present at Mass with the Lord Powis in Vere-Street, where the E.
of Castlemaine said Mass in his Priestly habit.

Wednesday the tenth of November little past of Consequence, more then that the
Peers sent down to the House of Commons for their Concurrence to an Act which
they had passed for freeing the City of London and his Majesty's Court, and
Parts adjacent, from Popish Inhabitants, and providing against other dangers
which might arise from Papists.

Then taking into Consideration the short Message sent them the day before by
his Majesty, and delivered by Mr. Secretary Jenkins, they made two Resolves,

That a Committee should be appointed to draw up an Address to his Majesty in
Answer to his speech

And in the second place, That they would proceed in the Prosecution of the
Lords in the Tower, and forthwith begin with the Lord Viscount Stafford.


Fame. I have heard say, that several Addresses were made to his Majesty, for
the Pardons and Maintenance of the several Witnesses that had given in their
Informations.


Truth. It Is very certain; and 'twas no more than what you might have related
almost upon supposition. So that it will be enough to say, for the effects
showed it to be real, That all the humble Addresses in that nature were
answered. Besides that it is our business to pass over Things of lesser moment
as lightly as we can. And thus from the tenth we come to Thursday the Eleventh
of November, taken up for the most part with rectifying Elections, till Sir
William Jones reporting, That the address in answer to his Majesty's last
Message was ready, having read it in his place, delivered it to the Clerks
Table; after which it was again read by the whole House, and agreed upon.

Which being done, and the engrossed Bill of Exclusion this day read a third
time; the Resolution of the House was, That the Bill should Pass, and that the
Title should be, An Act for securing the Protestant Religion, by disabling
James D. of York to inherit the Imperial Crowns of England and Ireland and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging; and the Lord Russel was ordered
to carry it up to the Lords for their Concurrence.

Friday the Twelfth of November some time was spent in reading the Engrossed
Bill sent up on the Wednesday before from the Lords, for freeing the City and
Court, etc. from Popish Inhabitants, etc. Of which, and of others no farther
proceeded in, it is enough to speak of their transmitment from one House to
another, as being such as died among the rest in the Birth.

After this, and some Amendments made of the Returns for the Borough of
Haslemere in Surrey, Mr. Bourk, Mr. Macnamarr, and Eustace Comine, being
severally called in, gave their several Accounts of some proceedings relating
to the Popish Plot in Ireland. Of their Informations I shall briefly recite the
Heads in their Order.

That of Mr. Bourk was briefly thus, That being by the Kindness of one Major
Butler admitted to the knowledge of the Earl of Tyrone, and by that means
frequently keeping his Lordship Company in his pastimes both at home and
abroad, he observed that the said Earl and the Major would be allway extrolling
the French King, and praying for his Prosperity: That he farther observed a
Continual resort of Papists and Suspicious Persons to the said Earls House:
That being one Morning private with his Lordship, his Lordship told him, That
he had intelligence out of France, that the French were very Powerful, and that
Parlez Francois, would be plentifully heard in Ireland ere long.

That in farther discourse, his Lordship drew out of his Pocket a great
Quantity of Papers rol'd up and delivered him to subscribe his name in one of
them, and that upon a sudden Glance he could read the names of some that he
knew to be persons ill affected to his Majesty and his Government. That upon
his refusal to Subscribe, his Lordship called him Cowar'd, and drew his Sword
half out of his Scabbard to have killed him, but was prevented by the
unexpected coming in of another Gentleman. That from that time forward his
Lordship used several means to Ruin him, and threw him into Waterford Gaol.
From whence he wrote five Letters to the Lord Lieutenant of his hard Usage, and
what he had to say as to the Conspiracy; but could have no Answer. That being
got out of Waterford- Gaol, he gave in his Informations against the said Earl
at Dublin, where though his Lordship were bound over to answer the Informant at
Waterford- Assizes, yet such was his power over the Judges and the Jury, that
he easily got himself acquitted. So that finding Ireland then too hot for him,
the Informant was forced to retire into England to make his Appeal.

The heads of Macnamar's Information were these, That one William Bradley Esquire a
Justice of the Peace in the County of waterford, having first made him take an
Oath of Secrecy, gave him to understand, that the Earl of Tyrone had received
a Commission from the French King to be a Colonel of Horse, in the County of
Waterford, and that the said Bradley was to be his Lieutenant Col. and
therefore desired him to provide himself of Horse and Arms, and get as many as
he could trust, promising him a Captains Place.

That after Bradley had unfolded to him the aforesaid Treason, he met with the
E. of Tyrone, who asked him privately, whether Bradley had said any thing to
him; who answering, he had; the E. bid him be very private, and then showed him
a List of several that were to be Superior Officers in several Counties of
Ireland, which he took special notice of, as knowing several of the Persons.

That the said E. at the same time told him, that he had a Commission from the
French King under his Hand and Seal, to be a Col. of Horse in the County of
Waterford, and that there was hardly a County in Ireland, where Persons were
not appointed by the French King for the same purpose, with other discourse of
the same Nature.

The Substance of Eustace Comins Information was this, That living with one
Keadagh Magher, his Relation, in Karignisurie in the County of Tipperary,
Treasurer for the Confederates in Ireland, he was privy to the Payment of
several Considerable Sums to several Considerable Persons upon the account of
the Plot, by the directions of Plunket* titular Primate of Ireland, Bremand
Titular Archbishop of Cashel, and Powes Deane of Waterford; who had the
disposal of the said Money.

That there was a meeting of the Irish Clergy with the Titular Primate, at John
Walshe's House, who was Lawyer for the D. of Ormond in the County of Tipperary,
where they agreed to give every Judge that would go the Circuit, and befriend
them upon Occasion 200 l. a piece.

That the Sum of 200 l. was secured to Sir John Davis upon the same account, he
being then a Judge at Clonmel, of which he was an Eye Witness.

Lastly, after the recital of many other Circumstances, of his being pursued
and imprisoned by Sir John Davis, and several other Justices of the Peace,
Contrary to their duty, for his discovery, he affirmed that the Papists had
Barbarously Murdered the said Keadagh Magher their Treasurer, when they found
that he detested their design and was turned Protestant.

The House having heard these Informations, ordered that an Address should be
made to his Majesty for their several Pardons, and that his Majesty would be
pleased to take them into his care and protection.

After this a Message was sent to the Lords, to acquaint them with the
Resolution of the House to proceed to the Trial of the Lords in the Tower, and
that they intended to begin with William Viscount Stafford, and therefore
desired their Lordships to appoint a day; as also that the Lords in the Tower
might be confined, and kept from a Correspondence one with another, as Persons
Impeached and Committed for high Treason ought to be.

To which the Lords returned for answer, That as to that part of the Message,
relating to Confinement and Correspondence, they had already given Order
therein, as the House had desired; and for the latter, for appointing a day for
the Trial, they did appoint Tuesday come fortnight.

Thereupon they ordered a farther Address to be made to his Majesty, That all
Papers, Writings, Examinations, and Evidences, relating to the Popish Plot,
which had been delivered to the Clerks of the Council or the Secretaries, since
the dissolution of the last Parliament, should be transmitted to the House; and
ordered that Sergeant Maynard. Mr. George Pelham, and Mr. Paul Folly should be
added to the Committee appointed to prepare Evidence against the Lords in the
Tower.

They likewise ordered, That another Address should be made to his Majesty,
That he would be pleased to give orders for Issuing out a Sum of Money to
defray the Charges of Summoning the Witnesses, and other Expenses incident to
the prosecution of the said Lords.

And farther that Such Money as his Majesty should be pleased to direct to be
set out for the use aforesaid, should be deposited in the hands of Mr. Charles
Clare.


Fame. All this while you do not (...) me how the Lords received the Bill of
Exclusion.


Truth. All in good Time. For it was impossible for me to interrupt the Series
of the foregoing Orders that depended one upon another. You must know then in
short, that this Bill as it was of great weight, so it occasioned a long debate
in the House. But at length when it came to the Vote, it was utterly rejected
by the Number of Voices; there being no less then Sixty three against the
passing of it, and but Thirty one for it.

Saturday the Eleventh of November, Mr. Secretary Jenkins acquainted the House,
with his Majesty's Answer to several of their Late Addresses.

That, as to the issuing out of Money for the Expenses of the Trials, he had
directed a hundred pound to be paid to the Person that should be appointed by
the House to receive it.

That, as for the delivery of the Papers, writings, and Evidences concerning
the Plot, upon the Sitting of the Committee of the Lords, he had directed them
to be transmitted thither, where they remained,

And that as for the pardons for the Irish Evidence, he would grant them all
Pardons for all Treasons, Misprisions of Treasons, Felonies and outlaries for
Felonies.


Fame. All this while I hear nothing of the Address, which was ordered to be
made in answer to his Majesty's Message of the Ninth of this Month.


Truth. All that I can say is, that his Majesty appointed the House to meet him
this very day at three of the Clock in the Banqueting House in order to that
Address; But because I find no farther mention made of it in the Votes of the
House, I made no farther Inquiry after it.


Fame. Since then you have proposed so good a Rule to your self observe it.


Truth. It Is what I am bound to do, if I intend to be what I profess my self*

To go on then, the next remarkable Passage of this day, was the forgiving Sir
Robert Yeomans, who being called to the Bar, acknowledged the Offense he had
committed; For which submission and his begging pardon, he was only put to
receive the rebuke of the House upon his knees, and so discharged.

Mr. Norris was then called in, who gave an Information in writing relating to
the Popish Plot, which occasioned an Order, for appointing a Committee to
receive Informations concerning the Popish Plot; to which Committee it wa^ also
at the same time referred, to examin^ the matter of Mr. Norris's Information and
to report the same; of which more hereafter.

Mr. Trenchard then reported from the Committee, to which the Petition o^
diverse Citizens of London against Sir George Jefferies, was referred, That the
Committee had heard the Evidence on both sides, and that it was the Opinion of
the Committee, upon the Evidence given them, that the said Sir George Jefferies
by traducing and Obstructing Petitioning for the sitting of the Parliament, had
betrayed the Rights of the Subjects. Upon which it was resolved that the House
did agree with the Committee, and ordered an Address to be presented to his
Majesty, for removing Sir George Jefferies out of all public Offices, and that
the Members serving for the City should Communicate the Vote and Resolution of
the House relating to Sir George Jefferies, to the Court of Aldermen.

The Address was to this effect.

That having received a Complaint against Sir George Jefferies, and having
heard the Evidence against him, and his defense, and being satisfied that the
said Sir George, to serve his own ends, to create a misunderstanding between
his Majesty and his People, did declare the Petitioning of the Citizens of
London for the Sitting of the Parliament, to be Tumultuous, Seditious and
Illegal, and threaten that if they did so Petition there should be no meeting
nor sitting of the Parliament, thereby traducing his Majesty, as if he meant
not to pursue his gracious intentions, they did therefore most humbly beseech
his Majesty to remove the said Sir George from the Chief Justiceship of
Chester, and from all other his public Offices and Employments.

They likewise appointed a Committee to enquire into all such Persons as had
been advising or promoting the Proclamation, Entitled, a Proclamation against
Tumultuary Petitioning, empowering them to that purpose, to send for Persons,
Papers, and Records.

Monday the Fifteenth of November, Mr. Secretary Jenkins delivered a short
Message in writing from his Majesty, Intimating That his Majesty had at the
opening of the Sessions, in his speech desired the advice and Assistance of his
Parliament in Relation to Tangeir. The Condition and importance of which place,
obliged him to put them again in mind that he relied upon them for the
support of it: Without which it could not be much longer preserved. And
therefore earnestly recommended Tangeir to the due and speedy care and
consideration of the House.

This Message being read and some other debates being over, Mr. Dugdale was
called in, and gave his farther Information, relating to the Popish Plot in
writing. The most considerable heads whereof were these.

That about the Twenty first of September, 1678. He being in Company with Mr.
Ewers and one Hosbon, amongst other discourse they both declared, That their
design in carrying on the Plot, was to kill the D. of Monmouth as well as the
King; which horrid Acts the Lord Stafford at the same time proposed for him to
do.

That in a Letter directed to Mr. Ewers, which he brake open and found to be
the Lord Staffords hand, he read the following words, That things went well
beyond the Seas for Carrying on the Plot, and hoped it did so here in England.
And that for the pardoning of those that were concerned therein, Mr. Ewers told
him, that there were several Indulgences, which he believed came from Ireland,
to whom they were transmitted from Rome.

That he very well remembered that there was a meeting of the Jesuits in April
1678. for that Mr. Ewers and other Jesuits went out of Staffordshire up to
London, to be there at it.

That several Sums of Money were collected from several Gentlemen in the
Country to carry on the design; and that he himself received 500 l. of Mr.
Vavasour and Mr. Gawen at Wolverhampton, which he returned up to Mr. Harcourt.

That at another time Mr. Ireland told him, that when he came to London, he
would give him Instructions how to proceed in his business; for that he could
not well tell how the business went, till he had spoken with the Lords Bellasis
and Arundel af Warder, who would prove the Loyallest persons for Trust and
Counsel in the world.

That at another time, questioning Mr. Ewers what Persons of Quality did
countenance the design? He made answer, Several in several Places; and that the
Lord Arundel of Warder was to undertake the most part of the design, and with
the Lord Bellasis to give orders both as to the taking the Kings life away, as
also the D. of Monmouths, for the Establishing the Romish Religion and
Government in this Kingdom.

That rewards were agreed to be given to such as should deserve them; and that
the Informant was to have an Equal share with one Capt. Aderly. Which rewards
were to be distributed by the D. of York, the Lord Belasis, and some other
Persons: it being alleged by the Conspirators, that there would be Lands
enough of the Protestants to reward every one.

That he had intercepted several Letters from St. Omers and Paris to Mr. Ewers,
wherein mention was made of several Sums of Money laid out for Arms,
particularly two Sums of 500 l. and 700 l. upon the account of the Popish Plot
in England.

That in September 1678. The Lord Stafford discoursing Mr. Ewers and the
Informant in the great Parlour at Tixal, told them that the reason of his
dissatisfaction against the King was, that he saw his favors rather disposed
to Rebels and Traitors, than to those that had served him; which was enough, if
there were not the Consideration of Religion, which was above all others.

That at the General Meeting at Tixal in September aforesaid, the Lord
Stafford, Lord Aston, and others, upon a full debate of all their preceding
Transactions and Instructions for carrying on their design, resolved to confirm
the Oath's which they had severally before taken, which was to kill the King,
and Establish the Romish Religion in this Kingdom. At what time the Lord
Stafford engaged to make good his promises to the Informant both of Money and
other necessaries for his encouragement.

Thursday the Sixteenth of November, nothing more was done, but only that the
Bailiff of Westminster amended one of the Returns for that place, and put in
Sir William Wallers name instead of Sir Francis Withens: Which being done, the
House adjourned till the next day, being Wednesday morning the Seventeenth of
November. At what time they took into Consideration on his Majesty's Message
relating to Tangier; and appointed a Committee to draw up an Address, to
represent to his Majesty the dangerous Estate and Condition of the Kingdom, in
Answer to the said Message.

The same day also they ordered another Address to be made to his Majesty for
the Removal of George Earl of Halifax from his presence and Councils for ever.

The Substance of the Address was as follows,

That being deeply sensible of the dangers and mischiefs occasioned to the
Kingdom, by the dissolution of the last Parliament, and the frequent
Prorogations of the present, and having just reason to believe that the said
dissolution was promoted by the evil Counsel of the E. of Halifax. They did
therefore most humbly pray his Majesty, for the taking away all occasions of
mistrust between his Majesty and them, and for their greater encouragement, to
perfect such matters as lay before them for the preservation of his Majesty's
Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion, that he would be graciously
pleased to remove the said Earl from his presence and Councils for ever.

To which his Majesty returned for Answer,

That he did not find the Grounds in the Address, to be sufficient for him to
remove the said Earl. But he assured them, that whenever they should in a Due
and Regular Course prove any Crime either against him, or any other Person, he
would leave both him and them to their own Legal defense, without interposing
his mediation.

Thursday the Eighteenth of November, Mr. Treby was sent to the Peers, to
desire their Lordships to communicate to the Commons such Writings and
Evidences which they had received from the Clerks of the Council; to which the
Lords readily condescended according to their desire.

The next day being Friday the Nineteenth of the Month, Benjamin Harris,
Bookseller, then and still a Prisoner in the Kings Bench, ad sectam Regis, for
a Fine of 500 l. for a Misdemeanour by him Committed, having presented a
Petition to the House, the same was read, and thereupon a Resolve made, that
Address should be presented to the King to desire him to Pardon the said Fine.

After which followed an Order, that a Commitee should be appointed to draw up
a Bill for the ascertaining of Fines upon misdemeanors.

The same day Sergeant Rigby reported from the Committee appointed to enquire
after Obstructors of Petitioning, that the Grand-Juries of Devon and Somerset,
were more especially found to be tardy, and that Capt. William Castle being
summoned to attend the Committee, had contemptuously neglected so to do.
Thereupon the House ordered that Sir Giles Phillips, Mr. Wiliam Stawel, Mr.
Hutchinson, and Mr. Walrond should be sent for in Custody of the Sergeant of
Arms.

The same day Mr. Zeal, being called to the Bar of the House, delivered his
Information at the Bar

The Effect whereof in short was this; That being a Prisoner in the Marshalsea,
Mrs. Celier came several times to him, and treated with him to be not only
Instrumental himself, but to procure others to join with him to fire the Kings
Ships as they lay in harbor; as also to swear against the Earl of Shaftesbury
such Articles of High Treason, as she should get ready prepared for him to that
purpose.

His Information being heard, the House ordered, that Application should be
made to his Majesty for his Pardon, and some present Allowance.

Other Applications were also ordered to be made to his Majesty in the behalf
of Mr. Hethrington, and the Irish Evidence, for their Expenses and present
Support; as also in the behalf of Mr. Smith, who had made a Considerable
discovery of the Popish Plot, for some Eclesiastical Preferment.

To which and some other Addresses formerly made, his Majesty, upon the meeting
of the House the next day, being Saturday the Twentieth of the Month, by Mr.
Secretary Jenkins, returned his distinct Answers.

That as to the Address in relation to Sir George Jefferies, He would Consider
of it.

That as for Lewis, He would Pardon him all Offenses but Perjury, and that
Consideration should be had of a reasonable Allowance for him.

That as for the Irish Evidence, That in regard of their number, and
Circumstances of their Persons not yet well known, he had referred it to the
Lords Commissionours of the Treasury.

And, that for Mr. Smith, he would take him into Consideration.

But the House not satisfied with his Majesty's Exception in the Pardon of
Lewis, resolved upon another Address, That all Pardons granted to any of the
Persons for whom Application had been made, should extend to all Crimes and
Misdeameanours whatsoever, till the last of their respective discoveries.

After which Mr. Trenchard reported from the Committee for Enquiring, after the
Obstructors of Petitioning, that Information had been given them, that
Examinations had been taken upon Oath by Five Justices of the Peace in
Monmouthshire, viz. John Herbert, Henry Baker, William Herbert, William James,
and Robert Gunter Esquires against John Arnold Esquire for promoting Subscriptions
to a Petition for sitting of the Parliament, and that the said Examination was
sent up to the Council, and Exhibited in charge as an Article against the said
Mr. Arnold, and Prosecuted by Thomas Herbert Esquire

The House ordered, That the said Mr. Tho. Herbert should be sent for into
Custody.

They also Voted Mr. Thomas Staples, and Sir Thomas Holt, Sergeant at Law, for
the same offense guilty of betraying the rights of the Subject, and ordered
them to be sent for in Custody, likewise to answer at the Bar for the
Misdemeanors they had Committed.

The same day Mr. Treby acquainting the House that he had made an Abstract in
writing of several Letters and Papers relating to the Plot, it was ordered,
that the said Letters and Papers should be Printed, and that Mr. Treby should
take care therein.

These Letters were soon after Printed and Contained several Correspondencies
between Coleman, and the King of France's Confessor, the Popes Internuncio,
the Late Earl of Berkshire, St. German, Father Sheldon, all Agitators, and
busy Sticklers for the Plot and the D. of Torks Interest.

Together with several Instruments and Privileges granted by the Pope to the
English and Scottish Roman Catholics, and Proselytes, found in the hands of the
Five Jesuits, and Mr. Daniel Arthur.


Fame. But what was contained in all those Letters? For I find them to be a
great many.


Truth. In the first place, a continued Intelligence of the Transactions and
Proceedings of the Popish Party.

In the next place a plain discovery of the Negotiations and Correspondency of
the Duke with the Pope, the Emperor and the King of France.

And lastly frequent importunities for Money and other Assistances for the Duke
to carry on his most important designs, which were to make himself Master of
the King, and prevent the sitting of Parliaments.

Sir Gilbert Gerard then acquainted the House, that he had Articles of High
Crimes and Misdemeanors against Edward Seymour Esquire a Member of the House,
which he gave in at the Clerks Table. Upon which the House ordered Mr. Seymour
a Copy of the Articles, and prefixed him a day to make his defense.


Fame. Were there no Bills brought into the House all this while?


Truth. There were several under debate and preparation: But because they never
came to perfection, I shall only content my self to give you a List of them at
the latter end of the Book, which will be sufficient to show you what was
really intended. And so I come to

Monday the Twenty second of November.

Upon which day the most remarkable Occurrences were his Majesty's Answers to
the Addresses of the House, First in behalf of Mr. Zeal, to which his Majesty
was pleased to Condescend, in reference both to his Pardon and Allowance*

Secondly, in behalf of all those for whom Application had been made, that
their Pardons should be general for all Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever,
without Limitation.

To which his Majesty returned for Answer, That he would Pardon them for all
Treasons, Misprisions, Felonies and Outlaries after Treason or Felony, and give
order that a Noli prosequi should be entered to stop all Prosecutions against
them for all Crimes and Misdemeanors whatsoever. But that his Majesty
apprehended there might be some Inconveniency in granting Pardons so general as
was then desired. However rather than the Trials should be hindered or
Prejudiced he would give such order as should be agreeable to Justice.

Tuesday the Twenty third of November, the Address for appointing a public
fast and day of Humiliation through the whole Kingdom was reported and agreed
to, and confirmed by the Concurrence of the Lords.

The same day several Persons who had been of the Grand Jury the last Trinity
Term for the County of Middlesex, being called in, gave an account of the
Proceedings of the Court of Kings Bench in Reference to the discharging of
Grand-Juries.

Other Persons being called in, gave an account of the Charge given by Baron
Weston the last past Summer Assizes for the County of Surrey: Upon the debate
of which two Informations, it was resolved Nemine Contradicente,

That the discharging of a Grand Jury before the end of a Term, Assizes or
Sessions, while business was depending before them, was Arbitrary, Illegal,
contrary to the Judges Oaths, and tending to the Subversion of the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom; and that therefore a Committee should be appointed to
Examine the Proceedings of the Judges in Westminster Hall, and report their
Opinions.

The next day being Wednesday the Twenty fifth of this Month an Address was
resolved upon to desire his Majesty's favor, that all Dissenters prosecuted
upon the penal Statutes of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, against Popish
Recusants might be admitted to a Composition in the Exchequer without Paying
Fees.

The Attorney General being then called in, and Examined in reference to the
Proclamation against Tumultuous Petitioning, and declaring that Sir Francis
North was advising and assisting in the drawing up and passing the said
Proclamation, It was thereupon resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the
Evidence given against Sir Francis North, was a Sufficient ground for the House
to proceed against him upon an Impeachment for High Crimes and Misdemeanors:
And ordered the Committee appointed to Examine the proceedings of the Judges to
draw up an Impeachment accordingly.

Thursday the Twenty fifth of November, nothing in the morning was done
Conducing to the Series of this Relation; only that the Undersheriff of Norfolk
being complained against, was ordered to be sent for, to answer several abuses
and miscarriages laid to his Charge.

But in the Afternoon according to Appointment, the House attended his Majesty
in the Banqueting House with their Address for a Public Fast, to this Effect.

That being deeply sensible of the sad and Calamitous Condition of the Kingdom,
occasioned by the Impious and Horrid Conspiracies of the Popish Party; still
persisting in the same detestable Machinations, notwithstanding the many
discoveries by Gods mercy and Providence brought to light, which impending
judgment not being otherwise to be prevented but by Gods particular blessing
upon his Majesty's Great Council the Parliament, they did in all Humility
beseech his Majesty that a day might be solemnly set apart by his Royal
Proclamation, to the end that by Fasting and Prayer the Goodness and Power of
God might be implored to divert his Judgments and defeat the Wicked Counsels
and devices of the Enemies.

To which his Majesty's Answer was, That he would give order for a Day of
Humiliation as was desired.

Friday the Twenty eighth of November, his Majesty returned his Answer in the
behalf of the Protestant Dissenters, That they should be discharged, and that
without Fees, as far as might be done according to Law, and that they should be
recommended to the Judges.

The same day the House resumed the debate relating to the Impeachment of Mr.
Seymour, and at length resolved, That there was matter sufficient in the Four
Articles upon which to Impeach him. Whereupon an Impeachment was drawn up to
this Effect,

That whereas the Sum of Five hundred Eighty four thousand nine hundred seventy
eight Pounds two shillings two pence was raised by Act of Parliament for the
speedy building Thirty Ships of War, and thereby appropriated to that use; and
whereas it was Provided by the said Act, That the Treasurer of the Navy should
keep the said Money apart, and pay it forth to no other use or intent but only
for the building and Rigging of the said Thirty Ships. Yet that he contrary to
the said Act, and his duty did lend the sum of 90000 l. Parcel of the said
Money, at Eight percent, for the support and continuance of an Army that then
ought to have been disbanded by Act of Parliament, whereby two Acts were Eluded
and the Army Continued, to the great hazard and danger of the Peace and Safety
of the Nation.

Secondly, That whereas the Pole-mony was raised by Act of Parliament to enable
his Majesty to enter into an Actual War against the French King, and only for
that use, And whereas certain Eastland Merchants did undertake to furnish his
Majesty's Stores upon assurance of Forty thousand pounds, parcel of the said
Money deposited in the hands of the said Mr. Seymour as was by him acknowledged,
yet that he the said Mr. Seymour paid away the said Forty thousand pounds to
the Victuallers of the Navy by way of advance, and for Provisions not brought
in. Whereas by the Provision of the Act, the said Money should have been paid
to the said East-land Merchants.

Thirdly, That norwithstanding he had 3000 l. a year for attending the Office
of Treasurer, yet that out of the Money appointed for secret service he
received 3000 l. a year more, which was duly paid him, as well during the
Sessions, as during the Intervals of Parliament; and particularly during the
Prorogation of Fifteen Months.

Fourthly, That on or about the Eighteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, during
the Dutch War, the said Ed. Seymour being one of the Commissioners of Prize
Goods did fraudulently and in deceit of his Majesty unlade a certain prize Ship
taken from the Dutch without any Authority for so doing, and sell the Goods,
pretending them to be only Muscovado Sugars, And accounted with his Majesty for
such, whereas in truth the Ship was laden with Cocheneel, and Indico, goods of
great value.

Saturday the Twenty seventh of November, nothing was done to the advantage of
this Compendium, only that whereas the Commons had sent a Message to the Peers,
to desire them to appoint a Committee to join with a Committee of theirs for
adjusting the Methods and Circumstances relating to the Trials of the Lords in
the Tower; the Lords returned their Answer this day, That they had appointed a
Committee of their Members in Compliance with the Message of the Commons, to
which purpose they had appointed five Lords to meet in the afternoon in the
Court of Wards. Where upon the Commons elected ten of their Members to meet the
said Lords according to the appointment.

Monday, November 29. nothing was done remarkable to our purpose.

In the afternoon, according to appointment the House attended his Majesty in
the Banqueting House, where they presented him with their Address in Answer to
his Message relating to Tangier, to this Effect.

That having taken into their serious consideration his Majesty's late Message
relating to Tangier, could not but account the present Condition of it, after
so vast a Treasure expended to make it useful, not only as one Infelicity more
added to the afflicted State of the Nation, but as the result of those Counsels
which had brought his Majesty's Person and Kingdoms into those imminent
Dangers, which at present surrounded them, that they were the less surpised to
hear of the Exigence of Tangier, remembering that since it became a part of the
English Dominions, it had been several times commanded by Popish Governors, in
particular a Lord impeached, and in the Tower for the Popish Plot, and that the
supplies sent thither consisted most of Popish Officers and Soldiers. And
therefore as to his Majesty's recommendation of it to their Care, they did with
all Humility and reverence Answer, That though in due time they should omit
nothing incumbent upon them, for preservation of every part of his Majesty's
Dominions, yet when such a storm of Ruin and Confusion threatened the Land, to
come to any resolutions in that matter, before they were secured from the
dangers arising from the Power of Popish Persons and Councils, they did not
conceive would consist either with their duty or their Trust.

Then they dilated upon the restless endeavors of the Popish Party, the
miraculous discovery of their designs, and their Continued influence at Court,
and the Arbitrary proceedings of corrupted Justice in the intervals of
Parliament, all which they represented at large to his Majesty.

And therefore out of their Allegiance to his Majesty, their Zeal to Religion,
their faithfulness to their Country, they had upon mature deliberation proposed
one Remedy of those great Evils, without which all others would prove vain and
fruitless. So that if after all the Private Suggestions of the accomplices of
the Popish Party should yet prevail to obstruct their faithful Endeavors, they
should have this remaining Comfort, to have freed themselves from the Guilt of
that blood and desolation which is like to ensue. But yet that their only hope
next under God was in his Majesty, that by his great wisdom and goodness they
should be secured from Popery and all the Evils attending it: and that none but
Persons of known Fidelity to his Majesty, and sincere affection to the
Protestant Religion should be put into any employment Civil or Military; that
while they should give a Supply to Tangier, they might be assured, they did not
augment the strength of the Popish adversary nor increase the public danger.
Which desires of theirs if his Majesty would vouchsafe to grant, they would not
only be ready to assist his Majesty, in defense of Tangier, but do whatsoever
else should be in their power to enable his Majesty to protect the Protestant
Religion both at home and abroad, and to repel the attempts of his and the
Kingdoms Enemies.


Fame. What was the Answer which his Majesty was pleased to give to this
Address?


Truth. I find no mention of any in the account which the Commons gave of their
own Transactions; which makes me forbear to insert the Vulgar Reports,

And now between the next day, which was the Thirtieth of November, and the
Eighth of December, you must expect a vacancy of Parliamentary business, both
Houses being busied in the Trial of the Lord Stafford, from day to day till
that time. For though the House did sit in the Afternoons, yet it was either to
release Prisoners, or hear Petitions, which are things altogether out of our
Diocese.

The Trial began the Thirtieth of November 1680. and continued till the
Seventeenth of December following.

The first day, the Lord High Steward, Heneage Lord Finch, Lord High Chancellor
of England, the Nobility, and the Commons of England, having taken their
several and distinct places in Court, And the Prisoner being brought to the
Bar, the Lord High Steward spoke to him to this Effect,

That the Commons of England had impeached him of High Treason, for which he
was then to he Tried, that he was not tried upon the Indictment found by the
Grand Jury, but prosecuted by the Loud complaints of the Commons, and to be
tried upon the presentment of the Grand Inquest of the whole Nation.

That he was to be therefore Judged by the whole Body of the House of Peers,
where the balance would be exactly kept.

And that therefore if his zeal had engaged him in such deep and black designs
as he was charged with, he must expect to reap what he had sown. Admonishing
him lastly, to hear with patience what should be said against him,

The Charge being then read, the substance of the Impeachment was, I. That
there had been a Traitorous Plot and Conspiracy both in England and other
Places, to alter and subvert the Ancient Government, and true Religion
established in the Land. which Plot was carried and contrived by Persons of
several Qualities and Degrees. II. That for the accomplishing of the said
wicked and traitorous design, he had agreed and conspired with others to
imprison, depose and murder the King and to Subject the Kingdom to the Pope,
and his Government. To restore the Abbys, Monasteries etc. so long ago
Suppressed, for their Idolatry and Superstition: And by that means to destroy
his Majesty, Extirpate the Protestant Religion, and overthrow the Rights and
Properties of his Majesty's Subjects. III. That he with the rest of the
Traitors had held several Meetings and Consultations, where it was contrived
and designed by what means, and what Instruments should be used to murder his
Majesty. That it was there resolved to Effect the same by Poisoning, Shooting,
Stabbing; and that at the same places rewards were offered to several Persons
to execute the same. IV. That he with the rest had Consulted to raise Men,
Money, Arms and Ammunition, and had Corresponded with the Pope, his Cardinals
and Nuntio 's, and with other Foreign Ministers for the raising and obtaining of
Men, Money, etc. for the raising of War within the Kingdom and invading the
same with Foreign Forces. V. That he with the rest had procured and delivered
out several Instruments and Commissions, made and granted by the Pope and other
unlawful Authortities for the raising and disposing Men, Money, etc. and
particularly for him the said Lord Viscount Stafford to be paymaster of the
Army. VI. That to hinder the discovery af the said Plot and to secure
themselves from Justice, He with the rest had caused Oaths of Secrecy to be
administered to the Confederates and the Priests to give them absolutions for
their encouragement aforesaid to conceal the Conspiracy. VII. That he with the
rest had contrived to lay the Imputation of their crimes upon the Protestants
aforesaid. To this his Lordships Plea was, That he was not Guilty, and for his
Trial put himself upon his Peers.


In the opening of this Impeachment Mr Sergeant Maynard beginning, told the
Lords that the Charge was General and Particular; General, the Subversion of
the Nation, Murder of the King, and suppression of the Protestant Religion,
which General was charged in Particular upon the Prisoner, in regard that in a
general design as this was, wherein so many were concerned, the Act of One is
the Act of All, and the Act of All is the Act of every One.

But his part being only to open the General Conspiracy, he made out the
Universal Hatred of the Papists against the Protestants, by their continual
Practcies of Murders, Massacrees and Treasons, in Spain, France, England and
other parts of Europe, and their Doctrine of the Legality of deposing, and
Killing Heretic Kings.

Then bringing his Arguments home he called to mind the Murder of Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey.

The Tampering with Bedlow to corrupt and lessen his Testimony, and,

Their Charging Oats with Infamous Crimes by falsehood and Subornation, to
invalidate his Testimony.

The particular Evidence was opened by Sir Francis Winington. Showing first,

The extraordinary advantages the Papists had to enter upon the Conspiracy. The
creeping of Papists at the bottom, and others that drove on their Interest into
his Majesty's Councils.

The easiness of some Men to favor the Papists: new projects set on foot for a
Reconciliation between the two Religions, by distingushing the Church from the
Court of Rome, Papists of Loyal and disloyal Principles. Which gave them great
Encouragement to see how freely the Pen was drawn in their favor.

The Kings Commands of putting the Laws in Execution frustrated by the Public
Ministers of their faction; and the severity of those Laws turned upon the
Protestant dissenters.

Lastly their great hopes of a Popish Successor.

As for the proof of the Plot in general, he Cited the Attainders of Coleman
and Langhorn, and several Priests and Jesuits; The Attainders of Sir
Edmund-Bury Godfrey's Murder; and the Conviction of the Assassinator of Mr.
Arnold. And in short the Convictions not only of Treasons, and Murders, but of
almost all other Villianies whatsoever.

To this he added, that proof would be made of the discourses of the Priests
and Jesuits abroad, of the great alteration that would be in England e're long.
And that the King was a Heretic and might be destroyed, which Doctrine was
dispersed by the industry of several in England.

As to particulars against the Prisoner, he urged that proof would be made of
his being at a Consult at the Lord Aston's House at Tyxal for the Killing the
King.

That he offered 500 l. out of his own purse for carrying on the Plot, and
particularly that part of Killing the King.

That the Prisoner himself had tempted one of the Witnesses to Kill the King,
with several other Circumstances tending to that and the General design.

Then Mr. Treby proceeded to call the witnesses to show the Universal
Conspiracy.

The first was Mr. Smith, whose Education had given him great Opportunities of
knowing the inside of the Papists Affairs.

He testified,

That upon his first arrival in France he came acquainted with Abbot-Montague,
Gascoyn, and several other Priests and Jesuits who promised him preferment
both among them and in England, if he would turn Catholic, for that they did
not doubt but that the Popish Religion would come into England very soon, as
not questioning a Toleration first, by which they should bring it in without
Noise: And Secondly, because their party was very Strong in England, and in a
few years would be able to bring it in right or wrong. That Cardinal Grimaldi,
whom he met by Accident in Provence, told him, he had great Assurances the
Popish Religion would prevail in England; and that there was but one that
obstructed it, who though a good natured Person, yet they could not so far
prevail upon him, but that they must be forced to take him out of the way.

That in Rome he saw Colemans Letters and read them once a Month, wherein he
gave Intelligence of several Passages, that happened in the Court; how that the
Duke, the Queen, and the chief of the Nobility were of their side: How they
carried Matters, what ways the Lord Clifford and Sir William Godolphin used to
effect the work; and that they did not Question but to get the Lord Treasurer
Danby on their side. That coming into England, he found the Popish Clergy of
England of the same Opinion, that they did not doubt the Romish Religion would
soon come in.

That he knew nothing as to the Lord Stafford, but only that one Smith wrote a
Letter up to the Lord Stafford out of the North, near where he lived, to
complain of two or three Justices of the Peace that were active against Popery.
Upon which Sir Henry Calverley was turned out of Commission.

That upon the first Glimpses of the discovery, the aforesaid Smith, writing to
the Prisoner whether he intended to make over his Estate or no?

The Prisoners Answer was That several did, but he would not, in regard he
expected a sudden alteration of the Government and Religion.



Mr Dugdale being called next upon the General Plot, gave an account, That he
had been acquainted with a design for bringing in the Popish Religion about
Fifteen years.

That he had been several times informed by Ewers, his Ghostly Father, that
several Lords in several Parts of England were to carry it on, that is, that
they were to have Money and Arms ready for those that wanted upon the death of
the King.

That he had seen several Letters from Paris, Rome and St. Omers, encouraging
Mr. Ewers to go on and encourage the rest that were engaged.

That he heard nothing till lately about Killing the King; That there came a
Letter from the Prisoner to Ewers, to show that things went on all well beyond
Sea, and hoped they did so here.

That of late he had been with several Priests and Gentlemen in the Country,
when they have had Consultations for introducing their own Religion and taking
away the Kings Life, which was always intended to be effected either in
November, December, or January, 1678.

That he received 500 l. at one time, which he gave to Mr. Ewers, who returned
it to London to carry on the design.

That it was agreed that the Lord Aston, Sir James Symons and others should go
in October 1678. to dispose of a certain Quantity of Arms which they had
received somwhere to the value of 30000 l.

That he was by, when he heard it discoursed, that the King of France was
acquainted with the design, and that he had promised to furnish the Papists
with Men, and that he would not be wanting with other Assistances.

That he opened a Letter sent to Mr. Ewers, dated the day of Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey's Murder, containing this Expression, This night Sir Edmund-Bury
Godfrey is dispatched.

That Sir James Symonds, the Lord Aston, Mr. Draycot, Mr. Howard and Mr.
Gerard, did to his knowledge contribute toward the carrying on of the charge
for raising Arms and paying for them; and saw Letters from beyond Seas, that
all things were ready as to the Arms and that there wanted only Orders how they
should be disposed.

That Mr. Gawen declared in the private Chapel at Boscobel, that whosoever was
active for introducing the Romish Religion or killing the King, should have a
free Pardon of all his sins.

That he had heard that when the King should be killed, several should be
provided with Arms, and rise of a sudden upon the Protestants and cut their
Throats.

That he had heard of Mr. Oats and Bedlow, before the Plot was detected, that
they were Messengers entrusted, but no otherwise.

That he saw a Letter from Whitebread to Oats, cautioning him whom he
entrusted in the design not mattering who they were, so they were stout and
trusty.

That he heard the Pope had promised to assist the Irish with Men and Money,
and that there should be nothing wanting on his part.



Mr. Prance being next called, declared, That one Singleton a Priest, in the
year 1678. told him at one Hall's a Cook in Ivy-Lane, that he did not fear but
in a little time to be a Priest in a Parish Church, and that he would make no
more to stab forty Parliament Men, than to eat his Dinner.



Dr. Oats being called, declared, That in the year 1676. he was advised by one
Kemish, and one Singleton, both Priests, to hasten betimes home to the Church
of Rome, for that the Protestant Religion was upon its last Legs.

That being sent by the Jesuits to Valladolid, he opened certain Letters which
the Jesuits in England had given him to deliver to their Cor-respondents;
which Letters did express what hopes they had to effect their design in England
for carrying on the Catholic cause, and for advancing the Interest of the Pope
of Rome.

That Coming into England with Letters to Strange Provincial of the Jesuits,
he found Keines lying ill upon Strange's Bed, at what time Keines said he was
sorry that honest William (meaning Grove that was hanged) had miscarryed. All
this in the year 1677. But generally that they had been brooding over their
design long before the Fire.

In 1678. He observed by several Letters that they were as busy in Ireland as
in England, and that the Talbots and others were very busy in raising Forces,
and were resolved to let in the French King, if the Parliament should urge the
King to break with France. And that Morgan was sent into Ireland as a Visitor,
to take an account of the readiness of the Irish.

That in March, intelligence came to the Jesuits of an Attempt that had been
made upon the King, but that he had escaped, through the negligence of
Pickering in fixing the Flint of his Fire-lock.

Mr. Dennis, an Irish man being then sworn, confirmed Dr. Oats's being in
Spain, and particularly at Valladolid, where he knew him a Student: That from
thence he carried a Letter from him to the Archbishop of Tuam, who in discourse
told him that Oats would be a fit man for their Purpose, saying farther, that
Plunket, the Titular Primate of Ireland, was resolved with the first
convenience to go for Ireland, to carry over a French Power with him, to
support the Roman Catholics in England and Ireland; and that he himself would
not be long out of Ireland to assist in that pious work.

That he had both heard of and seen money gathered in Ireland, for the support
of the Plot.

Then Mr. Jenison declared, that he had heard Mr. Ireland and Mr. Jenison, both
Jesuits speak of a Design on foot to gain a Toleration, by procuring a great
sum of Money from their Party, and bribing the Parliament; and also of securing
the D. or York's Succession.

That at another time he heard Mr. Ireland say, that the Roman Catholic
Religion was like to come into England; and that there was but one stood in the
way; and that it was an easy thing to poison the King.

That at another time his Brother Jennison told him, that there was a design in
England so laid, that it could not be easily discovered, and that the greatest
Papists, and the greatest Catholics in England were in the design.

That there was an Army to be raised, to bring in the Catholic Religion.

And that at another time, one Mr. Cuffil a Jesuit declared, that he thought
Mr. Coleman infatuated, to give notice to Harcourt, Ireland, and Fenwick, to
burn their Papers upon the discovery of the Plot, and not to burn his own.



Then the Clerk of the Lords Comittee delivered in the several Attainders and
Judgments entered upon Records, upon the Conviction of Coleman, Langhorn, and
the rest. And upon the motion of Mr. Treby, the Attainder of Mr. Coleman was
openly read in Court; in regard there was more of special matter in that, than
in any of the rest; more especially among many other things; mentioning his
proceeding, in Relation to the carrying on of the Plot, viz. his traiterous
Correspondence with La Chese, the King of France's Confessor; and with Monsieur
Rovigni, the French King's Envoy in England, for the bringing in of a Foreign
Force, to carry on the design. After which the Court adjourned.

The next day being Wednesday the first of December.

The Court being sat, the Witnesses were called to give in their particular
Evidence against the Prisoner, of whom the first was Mr. Dugdale, who being
sworn, declared, That at a meeting at Tixall, either at the latter end of
August, or beginning of September, in the Year 1678, where several were
present; the business of that meeting was to debate and determine upon their
former Resolutions both beyond Sea, and at London before, both to take away the
Life of the King and Introduce the Popish Religion, wherein they came at that
time to a full Conclusion; and that the Prisoner, was there present, and did
with the rest consent to it.

That at another time, coming from Stafford to Tixal to Mass he made his
Complaint to the Evidence, that it was a sad thing the Papists could not say
their Prayers but in a hidden manner, but that ere long if things took Effect,
the Romish Religion would be Established.

That at another time, the Prisoner sending for him to his Chamber, commended
his fidelity; and for his taking away the life of the King offered him 500 l.
for his Charges and Encouragement, and that he should go to London with him and
be under his care.

That the Prisoner, giving the reasons at another time of his being such an
Enemy to the King was, because he had been a great sufferer for the King, but
not taken notice of, but that rather Traitors and Rebels were rewarded. Which
was enough were not Religion in the case, which was of a higher Nature.

That the Prisoner had told him, that in case he did kill the King, he should
have a free pardon for it, the King being an Excomunicated Traitor and an Enemy
to Jesus Christ.

That he saw a Letter under the Prisoners hand, to this Effect, That all things
went well for carrying on the design, and so he hoped, they did here.

Dr. Oats, being sworn declared, That while he was in Spain, he met with
several Letters signed Stafford, wherein he assured the Jesuits that were of
the Irish Nation, how Zealous he would be in promoting the Catholic design.

In other Letters the Prisoner blamed Colemans openness, and for Communicating
great Secrets to Men, of whose fidelity his Lordship was not secure.

That in the Month of June 1678. The Prisoner came to Mr. Fenwick's Chamber,
and there received a Commission from him to pay an Army, or as near as the Dr.
could remember, to be paymaster General of the Army, assuring Fenwick that he
was going into Staffordshire and did not question but to give a good account
how affairs stood, not doubting but at his return, Grove should do the business.

Mr. Turbervile, upon his oath, declared, That being Cast off by his Relations
for refusing to enter into Popish Orders, he was put to shift for himself, to
which purpose he went beyond Sea, to seek for employment. That having spent
some time at Paris without success, and being upon his Return into England, he
was recommended to the Prisoner then at Paris, who beeng informed of his
Condition, after he had been with his Lordship some time, told him there was a
way whereby he might not only retrieve his Reputation with his Relations, but
make himself a happy Man, and at length after many Obligations to secrecy, told
him the King was a Heretic and a Rebel against God Almighty, and that it was
to take away his life.

To this the Prisoner made, first a general reply, That he looked upon the
House of Commons as the great Representative Body of the Commons of England;
and to be accused by them, was such a load, which so afflicted him, that he was
scarce able to bear up under it. Which with other things had so disordered his
sense and reason, that he scarce knew how to cheer himself to their Lordships,
as he ought to do; and therefore with all Humility begged their Lordships
pardon, if he said that which might give offense, or urged any thing that might
not be to the purpose.

That he looked upon Treason to be the Greatest sin in the world.

That as to the Doctrine of King-killing and absolving persons from their
Allegiance, he could not say, the Church of Rome did hold it, he never heard
so, it may be it did, it may be not. But that there was an English College of
Priests at Rhemes, that in their Annotations upon the Fourteenth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans declared their dislike and detestation of this Opinion;
and that the Doctors of the College at Sorbonne, owned it to be a damnable
Principle. And that for his own part he did in the presence of Almighty God,
solemnly declare, that he detested any such Opinion, as he did Damnation to
himself.

That the Mannagers began their Charge with telling their Lordships that there
was a horrid design to Murder the King, etc. wherein the Roman Catholics, and
all the Church of Rome were concerned; but how did that concern him? for that
they had not offered one Proof, that he was of that Religion.

That he was accused of having endeavored to kill the King: But that all
accusations of Treason ought to be accompanied with circumstances, Antecedent,
Concomitant and Subsequent. And the whole Compass of his life, had been
otherwise. That in the beginning his late Majesty had made him a Peer. That in
the beginning of the war, he retired into Flanders; whence afterward he came
into England and served his Majesty Loyally and faithfully; and that he waited
upon the present King in his Exile.

That after he heard of the discovery of the Plot, had he known himself Guilty,
he had a fair opertunity to have run away. That he was offered the Kings Pardon
if he would confess his fault: If then after notice he came to Town, suffered
himself to be taken, refused his Pardon, and yet had been guilty, he ought to
die for his folly as well as his Crime.

Descending to particulars, he desired, that the depositions of Dr. Oats, upon
which he was committed by the Lord Chief Justice, the depositions of Mr. Dugdale
taken in the Country by Mr. Lane and Mr. Vernon, and that of Mr Turbervil's
taken before Sir william Poltney, and Mr. Warcup might be produced, that he
might be able to confront what they had then sworn in Court.

To which the Mannagers for the Commons replied, That if his Lordship could
tell wherein the Witnesses had contradicted themselves, he might produce the
Depositions. That what was sworn was entered in the Lords Journal two years
before, whither any Man might repair, but after two years time and three weeks
given him to prepare for his Trial, to desire the producing of Depositions,
which he might have done before, was only to gain time for the Viva voce
Evidence to be forgotten, and therefore humbly prayed it might not be admitted.
For that for a Prisoner to call for Depositions at the Bar from the
Prosecutors, was a very strange and unreasonable demand.

Nevertheless the Prisoner still urged the producing of the aforementioned
Affidavit, affirming, Mr. Turbervile had sworn false in point of Time; as
having sworn one Time in his Deposition, another in his Testimony at the Bar.

The Prisoner was asked, whether there were any other variation than that of
the Time, in Mr. Turbervile's Deposition; But his Lordship could allege no
other that he knew of.

Thereupon the Lord High Steward demanded of the Mannagers, why the Prisoner
might not have the avail of his Exception.

To which the Mannagers replied, That they were not conscious of any Variation,
and that they were confident that if the thing were produced it would make
against the Prisoner, for that the Variation to which the Prisoner excepted,
had been corrected in time by the Evidence himself; however that they could not
do it of themselves without the leave of the House.

Thereupon the Lords withdrew to consider, and upon their return, the Lord High
Steward told the Prisoner, That their Lordships found an Order entered, for his
Lordship to have Copies of every thing that concerned him in that House; and
that if he had not taken out Copies 'twas his fault. And that as for his demand
of Turbervile's affidavit, their Lordships did not find any Obligation at all
upon them (as a Court, to concern themselves in that Matter.

To this the Prisoner submitted; howeuer he desired, That the Journal and other
Papers might be brought into Court, together with the two Affidavits of Dugdale
taken by Mr. Lane and Mr. Vernon.

To which the Lord High Steward made answer, that those demands were under the
same Rule; that what Evidence was before the Court of Peers he should have, but
as for the Evidence not in Court he ought to have come provided with it.

This dispute being over, the Prisoner desired longer time, and fain would have
had the Court have adjourned till the morrow after the next day.

But this also the Mannagers of the Trial opposed, urging, what an advantage it
would be to the Prisoner to choose his own time to answer their Evidence;
instancing the endeavors that had been used to suborn and destroy Witnesses.

Thereupon the Lords adjourned to their own House and after a short Stay sent
word to the Commons, that they had ordered the Prisoner to be brought again to
the Bar the next day by ten of the Clock.

The Third and Fourth Day

Was wholly taken up by the Prisoner in making his Defense.

And first, he pleaded the Statute of the 13 th. of this present King, by which
no man is to be prosecuted but within so many Months.

But to that he received a short Answer, that he was not impeached upon that
Statute, but upon the Common Law, and the Statute of the 25 th. of Ed. 3. which
was only declarative of the Common Law; besides, that though the Statute of the
13 th. of this King, limited the Prosecution of some Offenses to be within six
Months, yet the Prosecution for Treason might be at any time.

After that, he fell to impeach the Credit of the Witnesses, thereby to render
invalid the Testimony that had been given against him.

His first Exceptions were against Mr. Dugdale, for that his Lordship was not
at Tixal, as the Witnesses had sworn, neither at the latter end of August, nor
at the beginning of September till the 12 th. To this purpose, his Daughter,
the Marchioness of Winchester; and one Mrs. Howard affirmed, the first, at the
Trial of Sir George Wakeman, Mr. Dugdale should say, That he was to receive
Orders from his Lordship in June or July, and that his Lordship was at a
Consult at Tixall in August.

Mrs. Howard affirmed, that at the same Trial, being asked to be positive in
the Month of my Lord Stafford's coming down, he said, that his Lordship came
down in June or July; but that the Consult was in August, where the Prisoner
was present.

To which it was answered, that the Ladies did not agree in their Testimonies;
one affirming, that the Witness swore he was to come down, and the other, that
he did come down; and therefore, considering their Relations to the Prisoner,
their Testimony was to be looked upon as partial.

His Second Objection was, that when his Lordship was at Tixhall, he never sent
for the Witness into his Chamber; but that the Prisoner's Servant, upon his own
Request, brought him; and that there was no opportunity for private Discourse,
because his men were in the Room all the while.

For this, the Prisoner brought two of his Pages, Furnese and Leigh, who
attested, that they were with his Lordship all the while that Dugdale was in
the Chamber; that he did not remember that ever Dugdale was there but once; and
that he does not remember, that ever his Lordship bid him go out of the Room.

To which it was answered, That it was a hard Matter for men to come thus in
the Negative, to remember how often Dugdale had been in my Lord's Chamber; and
that it was a hard matter for a Servant to gain Credit, by saying, his Master
never bid him go out of the Room in his Life: Things that might be done, and
yet escape the Memory of a Servant of more Age, and less Inclination to serve
their Masters. To which might be added, that the two Young Men were Servants to
the Prisoner, and of the same Religion; there being also no small reason to
believe, that more than ordinary practice had been used to prepare Evidence on
the Prisoner's behalf: Besides, it was observed, that Leigh's Memory was
something imperfect, not remembering that Dugdale was with his Lordship all that
day, which his Lordship acknowledged, and the other Witnesses agreed.

It was also remarkable, that Furnese was asked by the Lord High Steward,
whether he ever saw Dugdale alone in his Life? He answered, Never in his Life.
To which the Lord High Steward replied, Why, you saw them together that Morning
you brought them to the Chamber.

But to show, that it was not such an unusual thing for Dugdale and the
Prisoner to be alone, two Witnesses were brought for the King, Hanson and
Ansel, who swore, that they had seen them more than once alone in private
Discourse together.

The next thing the Prisoner endeavored to prove, was, that Mr. Dugdale ran
away from the Lord Aston's for Debt; to which purpose, he called Thomas Sawyer,
who attested the same; and that he heard him say, he would be revenged of the
Lord Aston, if ever it lay in his Power: And farther, that he took a Glass of
Drink, in his presence, and wished it might be his Damnation and Poison, if he
knew any thing of the Plot.

To the first Objection, it was sworn, that the Discourse of the Country, was,
that he went away for fear of the Plot; and three Justices of the Peace
affirmed, that he was apprehended upon Suspicion of being in the Plot; who
therefore tendered him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which he took.
Others swore, that Mr. Dugdale endeavored to come to an Account with the Lord
Aston while he was in the Tower; but that the Lord Aston refused to speak with
him; and that one time, Mr. Dugdale going to the Tower upon the same occasion,
one of the Lord Aston's Servants came where he was, and paying him a great deal
of Respect, said, he was as honest a Gentleman as ever lived in a Family.

Other Witnesses swore, that being Steward to the Lord Aston, there was no
other person between his Lordship and him; but that he was next to my Lord, and
governed the rest of the Family.

That he had always had a good Report, not only with the Lord Aston's Tenants,
but also with the Workmen, and those people that had Dependence upon the
Family.

As for Mr. Dugdale's Denial of his knowledge of the Plot, it was urged, that
that proceeded only from the Apprehension of the danger he was in; especially
before he had taken a Resolution to discover.

The next Objection was, that he swore falsely, when he said, he told of the
Letter about the Death of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, before it was known he was
killed; which was attested to the contrary by the persons, who were sworn to be
the persons acquainted with the said Letter.

But this was refuted by two Witnesses, that swore, the said persons were by,
when the News was told; in Confirmation of which, two Gentlemen of Quality
swore, that the Report of such a thing was spread all over the Country, before
it was possible for it to come by the ordinary way of Intelligence. Besides,
that one of the Prisoner's Evidence was an Ancient deaf Man; and so no wonder
he should attest that he never heard of any such thing.

The next Objection was, That he had corrupted persons to swear false against
him and others, Robinson, Murral and Holt.

As for Robinson, he was proved, by no less Persons than the Earl of
Macclesfield, and one Mr. Booth, a Member of Parliament, to be a mere Scoundrel
and Cheat, and one that confessed himself to be a Rogue.

As for Holt, he was known to be a Vicious, Lewd Fellow; and one that had
threatened to murder the King's Evidence, for coming in against the Lord Aston.

As for Murral, who attested, that Money had been offered him by Mr. Dugdale,
to swear against Sir James Simmons, and Mr. Howard; he was proved to be a poor
needy Fellow that went vagabonding about the Country.

But besides all this, in opposition to these Witnesses on the Prisoner's side,
in this particular, other Witnesses were brought, who swore, that there, had
been Endeavors to have suborned them to swear against Mr. Dugdale; of which
one of them was profer'd 700 l. to take off his Evidence, or destroy him; which
was done by one Plessington, Steward to the Lord Bellasis: And that at another
time they found a Letter, for him to subscribe for the blasting of Mr.
Dugdale's Reputation.

His Objection to take off the Credit of Dr. Oats, was this, That he said, he
knew nothing of any other Persons engaged in the Plot; and yet after that, he
accused the Queen.

But Sir Phillip Floyd being called upon by my Lord, to attest this Passage,
could remember nothing of it.

The Lord Privy Seal was also desired to declare his Knowledge in this Matter;
but he remembered nothing of it neither.

Neither did the Earl of Berkley remember any such thing said by the Doctor in
the Council; but in the Lords House, he remembered, that the Doctor being asked
the Question, said, he had no more to accuse in relation to England, but that
in Ireland he had. To which it was answered, that this was said after the
Doctor had accused the Prisoner at the Bar, and so could not concern him.

As to the Accusation of the Queen, it was not positive, nor of his certain
Knowledge, but only Circumstantial Proof: And secondly, it might not be then so
clear at that time to the Doctor, whether the Queen were a person capable of an
Accusation; and then again, that the Answer of a Man to a sudden Question, who
had said so much, and had so many things in his Mind, should be taken so
strictly; and that he should be held for perjured, because that he did not at
that instant remember that particular or the Queen, was a very severe
Construction.

His next Objection against the Doctor, was, that he went to be of the Popish
Religion, and so was of that Religion which was Idolatry; and being a Turn-coat
from his Religion, was not to be credited.

To which it was answered, that there had been Men of Great Fame in the Church
of England, and of great Learning too, that had changed their Religion more
than once.

His Objections against Mr. Turbervill, were, that he had sworn, in his
Affidavit, 73 and 76, for 72 and 75.

But it was proved by Sir William Poultney, that he came the next Morning,
before any body in the World had questioned him upon it, and rectified the
Mistake upon his own accord.

The next Objection was, That Mr. Turbervill was a Coward, and ran away from
his Colors.

But to that, Mr. Turbervill produced, in Court, an Honorable and Authentic
Discharge from his Commander, under Hand and Seal, which was viewed by the Duke
of Monmouth, and others of the Lords, without Contradiction.

Next, he brought Furnese and Leigh again, to attest, that they never saw
Turbervill with the Prisoner, at Paris; which was a Negative proved by his own
Servants.

In Answer to which, it was observed, That Turberville was introduced by
greater Confidents than they were; and that it might be easy for Mr.
Turbervill to come in the Company of such Persons, and the Boys not take notice
of him.

Another Objection was this, That Turbervill had sworn, he was not well used by
the Lord Powis and his Lady, when he was well used. To attest which, he brought
one to attest, that he was permitted to lie in a Room near the Lord Powis's
Chamber. To which it was replied, that that Testimony might not hear what
unkind Words might pass between them; or how he was thwarted in his
Expectations from the Earl. And as to the Kindness of Mr. Turbervill's
Relations, all that the Prisoner could prove, was, that his Brother and Sister
had given him Seven Pounds never to see him more.

The next Objection was, That Turbervill had sworn, that the Earl of Castlemain
was at Powis-Castle such a time, which must be in the Years 72, 73, or 74;
which he endeavored to prove by the Attestation of one Lydcot, once a Servant
to the Earl of Castlemain, and with him all those Years: But he was observed to
be so out in his Calculation, so mistaken in the Year, and such an exact
Follower of the Romish New Style, that Notice was taken of it by the Court.

On the other Side, it was sworn by Mr. Arnold, That he had not heard a better
Character of any Man, from all sorts of People, in his Life.

By Mr. Hobby, That he had never known or heard, but that he had behaved
himself like a Worthy, Honest Gentleman.

By one Mr. Matthews, a Divine, that he never knew him guilty of an Evil
Action; but that he was a person of a fair Reputation.

By one Mr. Seys, That he never knew, in his Life any person, that could
asperse him.

The same also, or to the same Effect, was sworn by Captain Scudamore.

It was farther objected, That Mr. Turbervill was a Stranger to the Prisoner,
and that the Design of the King's Death, was too great a Secret for a Stranger
to be acquainted with.

To which it was answered, That the Quality of the Persons that introduced him
to his Lordship, was to be considered.

They were Priests, and therefore it was no wonder, that when they brought him
to his Lordship for such a purpose, that they should prevail with his Lordship
to give him Credit; and to deal with a person so likely in his Circumstances to
make such an Attempt.

But the main Objection was, That Mr. Turbervill had sworn, that his Lordship
returned into England by the way of Calice, with Count Grammont; neither of
which was true.

To which it was answered, That Mr. Turbervill swore, only according to
Information, and by a Lettet which signified to him, that his Lordship would
return by the way of Calice; and he knew nothing of the Change of his Lorships
Resolution. That it appeared upon Oath, that Mr. Turbervill staid at Diep, in
expectation of his Lordships coming; but being informed, that he went another
way, took the first Opportunity of a Passage; without which Information, there
was no Reason for him to have invented such a thing; or to have advised his
Companion to make haste to Calice, to take the Advantage of my Lord's
Convenience; a thing which he did out of Friendship.

The Evidence on both sides, being thus closed, as it was thought, the Court
adjourned, and the Lords being returned to their House, gave notice to the
Commons, that they had ordered the Prisoner to be sent for again the next day
by ten of the Clock.

The First Day, being Saturday Dec. 4.

The Prisoner being brought to the Bar, made a new Request, that he might call
some Witnesses that he had forgot the day before, to impeach the Evidence that
had sworn against the Credit of his Witnesses, and farther, to impeach those
that had sworn against himself; which though it were at first opposed, as a
thing not customary, was at length condescended to by the Managers, to spare
the Lords the trouble of withdrawing.

The first was the Lord Ferrers, as to the Reputation of Mr. Southal, one of
Mr. Dugdale's Witnesses, who attested, that all he could say, was by Hearsay:
That he had the Reputation of being active in the late Times against the King,
and was counted a pernicious Man against the Government. In answer to which,
the Lord Brook being desired to speak what he knew of the said Mr. Southal,
gave him the CharaCharacter of an honest, an able, and a good Churchman; and
Mr. Levenson Gower, called to the same purpose, gave him the Character of a
Zealous Prosecutor of the Papists; and one of whom they that were principled by
the Preservation of the King and the Protestant Religion spoke well.

The next was one Dale, to whom the Prisoner put the Question, what he knew
about Dugdale's offering him Money, and whether Dugdale never persuaded him to
swear against my Lord Aston something he knew not?

To which be answered positively in the Negative.

After this, the Prisoner having summed up all his Objections before recited,
against the King's Evidence, insisted upon several Points of Law.

First, That there was no President, that Proceedings Criminal did ever
continue from Parliament to Parliament, this having continued three.

Secondly, Whether a Man, in Capital Cases, was not to be proceeded against by
Indictment, first found by a Grand Jury, and not by Impeachment either of a
single Person or Body of Men.

Thirdly, He conceived there was no Overt Act alleged in the Impeachment.

Fourthly, He desired to prove they were not Competent Witnesses that swore
against him; for they swore for Money.

Fifthly, Whether a Man could be condemned for Treason by one Witness, there
not being two Witnesses to any one Point.

As to the First, it was answered, that it could be no doubt, in regard their
Lordships had resolved, and sent it down to the Commons; and that it was
entered in their Books as the Law and Constitution of Parliaments; that not
only Impeachments, but all Judicial Proceedings, continue from Parliament to
Parliament; that it was now the Law of their House, and consequently, the Law
of the Kingdom. And therefore they having declared it, and sent it down to the
Commons, they had good reason to proceed upon the present Impeachment.

To the Second, That an Impeachment of the House of Commons, which is the Grand
Inquest of the Nation, was more than an Indictment, and more effectual to bring
an Offender to Justice.

To the Third, That there were Overt Acts enough in Proof, and sufficient in
the Impeachment; as the receiving a Commission to be Play Master of an Army; the
offering Money to a person to hire him to kill the King, and consulting with
several persons met together about killing the King, and changing the
Government of the Nation: All which were laid in the Impeachment, as fully as
made out in Proof.

To the Fourth, His Lordship insisted very much, that his Council might argue
it, whether there were a necessity of two Witnesses to every Overt Act,
alleged as Evidence of High Treason? But the Council for the Prisoner, waving
the Argument, as a thing impossible, to apply themselves to the Study of a Case
unforeseen; the Lords returned to their House to consider upon it.

In an hours time they returned, and the Judges, according to Directions,
delivered their Opinions in order, That if there were several Overt Acts, which
were Evidences of the same Treason, if there were one Witness to prove one
Overt Act, at one time, and another Witness, to prove another Overt Act at
another time, both the Acts being Evidences of the same Treason, they were two
sufficient Witnesses of the same Treason, and would maintain an Indictment, or
an Impeachment of Treason.

To the First, it was answered, That as to the hiring of the Witnesses to
swear, it could be no point of Law, till the Fact be proved; that His Majesty's
Grace and Bounty to his Witnesses, was no Objection to their Testimony, when
every private person allows his Witnesses a Maintenance, without prejudice to
his Cause. Neither would he tax the House of Commons, who were the Prosecutors,
as his Lordship had proved, to their Advantage against himself.

After this, the House adjourned, and appointed the Prisoner to be brought up
again on Monday, by Ten of the Clock.

The Sixth Day, being Monday, December 6.

The Prisoner being again brought to to the Bar, a Petition was read, which he
had presented to the House of Peers.

That whereas he had something to offer to their Lordships, to clear himself;
he therefore besought their Lordships, that he might offer some Things to their
Lordships Consideration.

When he came to be heard, they were only the same Objections, somewhat varied,
which he offered the day before, viz. Whether an Impeachment were to be
prosecuted in Parliament without an Indictment? Whether words did amount to an
Overt Act; and whether two Witnesses, in several places, did amount to a Legal
Testimony?

Upon which, being asked by the High Steward, whether he had any thing more to
say? He went on again with new Repetitions, That he had not been proved a
Papist; that he hoped he had cleared his Innocence, by making appear the
Perjury of the Witnesses.

Then, as if he had intended to make a kind of a Discovery, he told a long
Story, That he believed, that ever since the Reformation, the Papists had had
several wicked Plots and Designs, as Babington's, and the Earl of Westmerland's
Plot, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; the Lord Grey's, Lord Cobham's, and Lord
Brooks's, in the Reign of King James.

That he did believe, that Coleman's endeavoring, by Money out of France, to
keep off Parliaments, was that which he could not justify by Law; and he did
believe by the same Letters, that some Consultations had been had, for a
Toleration; and that if he had known as much then, as he did since, he might
have prevented many things.

Then he fell again to his points of Law, and a third Repetition of his former
Objections against the Witnesses; and at last, concluded with an Application to
the Lords, courting their Consideration of his Innocence, and giving them to
understand the great Confidence he had of their Justice and Impartiality.

Being asked again, whether he had done? He would fain have prevailed again,
for his Council to have been heard upon the points of Law beforementioned; But
the Managers of the Trial replied, That there was nothing that deserved an
Answer; that there had been nothing offered new, but what had been overruled
already, unless it were a point of Law that arose upon matter of Fact not
proved. That the last day, all had been said by his Lordship that he had to
say; and therefore to begin the matter again, was a thing not to be admitted.
After which the Court adjourned.

The Seventh Day, being Tuesday, December 7.

The Lords took their Places in Court, at what time, the Lord High Steward,
attended by Garter, Principal King at Arms; the Usher of the Black Rod,
collected the Verdicts of the Lords, beginning with the Youngest Baron; the
Prisoner being absent.

The Names of the Lords that found the Prisoner Guilty.
LOrd Crew Lord Cornwallis Lord Rockingham Lord Astley Lord Leigh Lord Herbert
of Cherbury Lord Howard of Escriek Lord Maynard Lord Lovelace Lord Gray of Wark
Lord Brook Lord Chandois Lord North and Gray Lord Paget Lord Wharton Lord Eure
Lord Cromwell Lord Conyers Lord Viscount Newport Lord Viscount Falconberge Earl
of Conway Earl of Macclesfield Earl of Sussex Earl of Guilford Earl of
Shaftsbury Earl of Burlington Earl of Carlisle Earl of Essex Earl of Scaresdale
Earl of Sunderland Earl of Winchelsea Earl of Stamford Earl Rivers Earl of
Mulgrave Earl of Barkshire Earl of Manchester Earl of Westmerland Earl of Clare
Earl of Bristoll Earl of Northampton Earl of Leicester Earl of Bridgewater Earl
of Salisbury Earl of Suffolk Earl of Bedford Earl of Huntington Earl of Kent
Earl of Oxford Duke of Monmouth Duke of Albemarle Duke of Buckingham Lord Privy
Seal Lord President Lord High Steward Duke of Cumberland
The Names of the Lords that found the Prisoner Not Guilty.
LOrd Butler of Weston Lord Arundel of Trerice Lord Hollis Lord Wootton Lord
Lucas Lord Ward Lord Byron Lord Hatton Lord Drincourt Lord Norreys Lord
Windsore Lord Ferrers Lord Morley Lord Mowbray Earl of Berkley Earl of Hallifax
Earl of Feversham Earl of Alisbury Earl of Craven Earl of Bath Earl of
Clarendon Earl of St. Albans Earl of Thanet Earl of Chesterfield Earl of
Carnarvan Earl of Peterborough Earl of Denbigh Earl of Rutland Lord Chamberlain
Marquess of Worcester Duke of Newcastle


Being thus found Guilty, by the Surplusage of twenty four Voices, the Prisoner
was brought to the Bar, and asked what he had more to say for himself, why
Sentence of Death should not be pronounced against him, according to the Law?

To which he made Answer, for respite of Judgment; That he never saw any Trial,
where the Party tried did not hold up his Hand; which he never was asked to do.

2. That though he had been tried by the Act of 25 Ed. 3. yet there being
nothing more in that Act, than what was included in the Act of the 13 th. of
this King, he humbly conceived, that by that Act, and the last Proviso in it, a
Peer that is found Guilty of the Crimes therein mentioned, was only to lose his
Seat in Parliament; and that was to be all his punishment.

Which being all he had to say, the Court adjourned into the Lords House, at
what time, the Commons, with their Speaker, went to the Bar of the Lords, and
there, in the Name of the Commons of England, demanded Judgment against the
Prisoner.

Whereupon the Lords took it into Consideration what Judgment was to be given:
Some Debate there was upon the Matter; but at length, the Judges being
demanded, gave in their Opinions, That there was no other Judgment for Treason,
appointed by Law, but to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered.

The Attorney General also declared, That any other Judgment would be
prejudicial to his Majesty, and be a Question in the Inferior Courts, as to
his Attainder of High Treason.

Whereupon it was ordered by the Lords, that the ordinary Judgment by the Law
appointed, in Cases of High Treason, should be pronounced upon the Prisoner.

Which being concluded, the Lords returned to the Court; and the Lord High
Steward, attended by all the Officers beforementioned, upon their Knees,
directed his Speech to the Prisoner, to this Effect.

That what his Lordship had said in Arrest of Judgment, was found to be of no
Moment at all, it being no Essential part of any Trial; neither was there any
Record made of it when it was done.

That as for the Proviso's of the 13 th. Year of this King, their Lordships
found, that they were in no sort applicable to his Lordships Case; the
proceedings against him not being grounded upon that Statute.

That no Man would have thought, that a Person of his Quality, so nobly
descended, so considerable in Estate, so eminent a Sufferer in the late Times,
so interested in the Preservation of the Government, so obliged to the
Moderation of it; and so personally and particularly obliged to the King and
his Royal Father, should ever have entered into a Conspiracy, to contrive the
Murder of the King, Ruin of the State, and Subversion of Religion; and yet his
Impeachment amounted to no less, and the Lords have found him Guilty.

That as the Plot in general had been most manifest; so his Lordships Part in
it had been too plain.

Three things therefore he recommended to his Lordship's Consideration, That he
was now fallen into the very Pit that he was digging for others.

That he would think a little better than he had done, what kind of Religion it
was that had brought him to the Destruction that was like to befall him.

Lastly, That he would consider, that true Repentance is never too late.

That there were some that thought it a Mortal Sin, to confess that Crime in
Public, for which they had been absolved in Private; but that God forbid, his
Lordship should be found among the number of those poor, mistaken Souls.

Then assuring him, that their Lordships would not cease to pray, that the End
of his Life might be Christian and Pious. He concluded, That it was then the
last time he was to call him My Lord; for that his next words would attaint
him: And having so said, he pronounced the Sentence of the Court; which was,
That he was to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered.

The Day for Execution, being appointed to be the 29 th. of the same Month, two
Writs were issued out, under the Great Seal of England; the first to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, in Form following.

CAROLUS Secundus Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex,
Fidei Defensor' etc. Locumtenenti Turris nostrae London' salutem; Cum Will'
Vicecomes Stafford, per Communes Regni nostri Angliae in Parliamento
assemblat', de alta proditione, necnon diversis aliis criminibus and offensis
per ipsum perpetrat' and commissis, impetit' fuit, ac superinde per Dominos
Temporales in praesenti Parliamento nostro convent', triat', convict', and
debita juris forma attinct' fuit, and morti adjudicat', existit: Cujus quidem
Judicii Executio adhuc restat facienda. Cumque praedictus Vicecomes Stafford in
Turri nostra London,, sub custodia tua de^ent' existit: Praecipimus tibi and
per praesentes firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod in and super vicesimum nonum
diem instantis mensis Decembris, inter horas nonam, and undecimam, ante
Meridiem ejusdem dici, ipsum Vicecomitem Stafford, usque locum usualem extra
Portam Turris praedict^ ducas; ac ipsum Vicecomitibus Civitatis nostrae London
and Middlesex, adtunc and ibidem deliberes: Quibus quidem Vicecomitibus, nos
per aliud Breve eis inde direct', praecepimus praedictum Vicecomitem Stafford
adtunc and ibidem recipere, ut fiat Executio Judicii praedicti, modo and forma
prout dictis Vicecomitibus London and Middlesex, per aliud Breve nostrum
praedictum praecepimus: Et hoc nullatenus omittas, sub periculo incumbente,
aliquo Judicio, Lege, Ordinatione, seu Mandato praeantea habit', fact',
ordinat', seu dat' in contrarium non obstante. Test meipso apud Westminster. decimo
octavo die Decembris, Anno Regni nostri tricesimo secundo.

BARKER.

Englished thus: CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Lieutenant of
Our Tower of London, Greeting. Whereas William Viscount Stafford has been
impeached by the Commons of our Kingdom of England, in Parliament Assembled, of
High Treason, and several other Crimes and Offenses by him perpetrated and
committed; and thereupon by our Lords Temporal, in our present Parliament
convened, has been tried and convicted, and in due Form of Law, was attainted,
and adjudg'd to die: Of which Judgment, Execution yet remains to be done: And
whereas the said Viscount Stafford is detained, in your Custody, in our Tower
of London, We charge, and by these presents firmly enjoining, command you, That
in and upon the twenty ninth day of this Instant December, between the hours of
Nine and Eleven, before Noon of the same Day, you conduct the said Viscount
Stafford, to the Usual Place, without the Gate of the Tower aforesaid; and him
then and there deliver to the Sheriffs of our City of London and Middlesex: To
which Sheriffs, We, by another Writ to them directed, have given Command the
aforesaid Viscount Stafford, then and there to receive; that Execution of the
aforesaid Judgment may be done in Manner and Form, as we have given Command by
our other Writ, to the said Sheriffs of London and Middlesex. And of this you
are not to fail upon peril thereon to ensue: Any Judgment, Law, Ordinance, or
Command before had, made, ordained or given to the contrary, notwithstanding.
Witness Our Selves at Westminster, the 18 th. Day of December, in the 32 d.
Year of Our Reign.



The Second Writ was directed to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex in Form
following.

CAROLUS Secundus, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc. Vic' London, and Vic' Middlesex salutem; Cum Will'
Vicecomes Stafford, per Communes Regni nostri Angliae, in Parliamento
assemblat', de alta proditione, necnon diversis aliis criminibus and offensis
per ipsum perpetrat' and commissis' impetit' fuit; Ac superinde per Dominos
Temporales in praesenti Parliamento nostro convent' triat', convict', and
debita juris forma, attinct' fuit, and morti adjudicat' existit: Cujus quidem
judicii Executio adhuc restat facienda; praecipimus vobis, and per praesentes
firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod in and super vicesimum nonum diem hujus
instantis Decembris, inter horas nonam, and undecimam, ante meridiem ejusdem
diei, dictum Vicecomitem Stafford, extra Portam Turris nostrae London vobis
tunc and ibidem deliberandum, prout per aliud Breve Locumtenenti Turris nostrae
London directum, praecepimus, in custodiam vestram adtunc and ibidem
recipiatis, and ipsum sic in custodia vestra existentem, statim usque usualem
Locum super le Tower Hill ductatis: Ac Caput ipsius Willi. Vicecomitis
Stafford, adtunc and ibidem amputari, ac a Corpore suo omnino separari
faciatis, aliquo Judicio, Lege, Ordinatione, seu Mandato preantea habit',
fact', ordinat' seu dat' in contrarium, non obstante: Et hoc (sub periculo
incumbente) nullatenus omittatis. Test meipso apud Westminster. decimo octavo die
Decembris, Anno Regni nostri tricesimo secundo.

BARKER.

Englished thus: CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriffs of
London, and Sheriffs of Middlesex, Greeting. Whereas William Viscount Stafford,
has been Impeached by the Commons of our Kingdom of England, in Parliament
Assembled, of High Treason, and other Crimes and Offenses, by him perpetrated
and committed; And thereupon, by the Lords Temporal, in our present Parliament,
convened, was tried, convicted, and, in due Form of Law, attainted, and is
adjudg'd to die; of which Judgment, Execution yet remains to be done. We
charge, and, by these Presents firmly conjoyning, command you, That in and upon
the 29 th. Day of this Instant December, between the hours of Nine and Eleven,
before Noon of the same Day, that the said Viscount Stafford, without the Gate
of our Tower of London; then and there to be to you delivered, as by another
Writ, to the Lieutenant of our Tower of London, directed, we have given
Command, you then and there receive into your Custody, and him so being in your
Custody, that you presently conduct to the usual place upon Tower Hill, and
cause the Head of him William Viscount Stafford, then and there to be chopped
off, and altogether separated from his Body; any Judgment, Law, Ordinance, or
Command, before had, made, ordained, or given to the contrary, notwithstanding.
And of this, upon penalty thereof to ensue, you are not to fail. Witness our
selves at Westminster, the 18 th. day of December, in the 32 d. year of our
Reign.



Upon Wednesday the 29 th. of December, about Ten of the Clock in the Morning;
the Sheriffs received the Prisoner from the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
conducted him to the Scaffold: Upon which the Prisoner being come, after a
short pause, produced a Paper out of his Pocket, which contained the following
Speech; which he read with his Hat off, and gave several Copies thereof, Signed
with his own Hand, to Sheriff Cornish, and other Gentlemen about him.


THE SPEECH OF WILLIAM HOWARD Late Lord Viscount Stafford, Upon the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, immediately before his Execution, Wednesday, December. 29. 1680.
BY the permission of Almighty God, I am this day brought hither to suffer
Death, as if I were guilty of High Treason: I do most truly, in the presence of
the Eternal, Omnipotent, and All-knowing GOD, protest upon my Salvation, That I
am as Innocent as it is possible for any man to be, so much as in a Thought, of
the Crimes laid to my Charge.

I acknowledge it to be a particular Grace and Favor of the Holy Trinity, to
have given me this long Time to prepare my self for Eternity: I have not made
so good use of that Grace as I ought to have done, partly by my not having
recollected my self as I might have done, and partly because, not only my
Friends, but my Wife and Children, have, for several days, been forbid to see
me, but in the presence of one of my Warders. This has been a great Trouble
and Distraction unto me: but I hope God of his Infinite Mercy will pardon my
Defects, and accept of my good Intentions.

Since my long Imprisonment, I have considered often what could be the Original
Cause of my being thus accused, since I knew my self not culpable, so much as
in a Thought; and I cannot believe it to be upon any other Account, than my
being of the Church of Rome. I have no reason to be ashamed of my Religion; for
it teaches nothing but the Right Worship of God, Obedience to the King, and
due Subordination to the Temporal Laws of the Kingdom; And I do submit to the
Articles of Faith believed and taught in the Catholic Church, believing them
to be most consonant to the Word of God. And whereas it has so much and often
been objected, that the Church holds, That Sovereign Princes Excommunicated by
the Pope, may, by heir Subjects, be Deposed and Murdered: as to the Murder of
Princes, I have been taught, as a matter of Faith in the Catholic Faith, that
such Doctrine is diabolical, horrid and detestable, and contrary to the Law of
God, Nature and Nations; and as such, from my Heart, I renounce and abominate
it. As for the Doctrine of deposing Princes, I know some Divines of the
Catholic Church hold it; but as Able and Learned as they have writ against it;
But it was not pretended to be the Doctrine of the Church, that is, any point
of Catholic Faith: Wherefore I do here in my Conscience declare, That it is my
true and real Judgment, That the same Doctrine of deposing Kings, is contrary
to the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, injurious to Sovereign Power, and
consequently would be in me, or any other of his Majesty's Subjects, impious
and damnable. I believe and profess, that there is one God, one Savior, one
Holy Catholic Church, of which, through the Mercy, Grace, and Goodness of God,
I die a Member.

To my great and unspeakable Grief, I have offended God in many things, by many
great Offenses; but I give him most humble thanks, not in any of those Crimes
of which I was accused.

All the Members of either House having liberty to propose in the House what
they think fit for the Good of the Kingdom, accordingly I proposed what I
thought fit: the House is judge of the fitness or unfitness of it: and I think
I never said any thing that was unfitting there, or contrary to the Law and use
of Parliaments; for certainly if I had, the Lords would, as they might, have
some way punished me: So t am not culpable before God or Man.

It is much reported of Indulgences, Dispensations, Pardons to Murder, Rebel,
Lie, Forswear, and commit such other Crimes, held and given in the Church. I do
here profess in the Presence of God, I never learned, believed, or practiced
any such things, but the contrary; and I speak this without any Equivocation or
Reservation whatsoever: And certainly, were I guilty either my self, or knew of
any one that were guilty, whosoever that were so, of any of those Crimes of
which I am accused, I were not only the greatest Fool imaginable, but a perfect
Madman, and as wicked as any of those that so falsely have accused me, if I
should not discover any ill Design I knew in any kind, and so upon discovery
save my Life, I having so often had so fair occasions proposed unto me, and so
am guilty of Self-murder, which is a most grievous and heinous sin. And though
I was last impeached at the Lords Bar, yet I have great grounds to believe,
that I was first brought to Trial on the belief, that to save my Life I would
make some great Discovery; and truly so I would, had I known any such thing of
an ill Design, or illegal dangerous Plot, either of my self, or any other
person whosoever, without exception. But had I a thousand Lives, I would lose
them all, rather than falsely accuse either my self, or any other whosoever: And
if I had known of any Treason, and should thus deny it, as I do now upon my
Salvation, at this time, I should have no hope of Salvatition, which now I have
through the Merits of Jesus Christ.

I do beseech God to bless his Majesty, who is my Lawful King and Sovereign,
who I was always by all Laws Humane and Divine, bound to obey. And I am sure,
that no Power upon Earth, either singly or altogether can legally allow me, or
any Body else, to lift a Hand against him or his Legal Authority. I do hold,
that the constitution of the Government of this Kingdom, is the only way to
continue Peace and Quietness; which God long continue.

Next to Treason, I hold Murder in abhorrence, and have ever done, and do; and
I do sincerely profess, that if I could at this time free my self immediately,
and establish what Religion I would, and what Government I would, and make my
self as Great as I could wish, and all by the Death of one of those Fellows
that by their Perjuries have brought me to the place where I am, I so much
abhor to be the cause of any man's Death, that I would not any way be the Cause
of their Murder. How much less would I endeavor the Assassination of his
Majesty, whom I hold to be as Gracious a King, as ever this, or any other
Nation had, and under whom the People may enjoy their Liberties as much as ever
any did: And if it please God to grant him Life and Happiness, according as I
have always wished and prayed for, I am morrally persuaded, that he and all his
Dominions will be as happy and prosperous as ever any People were; which I
beseech God grant.

I do most humbly ask Pardon of the Almighty and All-Merciful God, all the
great Offenses I have committed against his Divine Majesty; and I know he would
not have the Death and Confusion of a Sinner, but that he may repent and live:
in that Assurance I hope, knowing he never despises a Contrite Heart; and
though I have not so feeling a Contrition as I would, yet I have it as well as
I can; and I doubt not, but that God will accept of the Good Will.

I desire, that all People will forgive me any injury that I have done them in
any thing, either wilfully or by Chance; and I do heartily-forgive all People
in the World that have injured me; and I forgive even those perjured Men that
so falsely have brought me hither by their Perjury.

I do now upon my Death and Salvation aver; that I never spoke one word either
unto Oats or Turbervill, or to my knowledge; ever saw them until my Trial; and
for Dugdale, I never spoke unto him of any thing, but about a Foot-by, or
Footman, or Foot-race; and never was then alone with him. All the punishment
that I wish them, is, That they may repent, and acknowledge the Wrong they have
done me; then it will appear how innocent I am. God forgive them, I have a
great Confidence, that it will please Almighty God, and that he will in a short
time bring Truth to Light; then you and all the World will see and know what
injury they have done me.

I hope I have made it appear that I have some Conscience; for if I had none,
certainly I would have saved my Life by acknowledging my self Guilty* which I
could have done, though I know I am not in the least Guilty. And I having some
Conscience, make very ill use of it; for I throw my self into Eternal Pain, by
thus plainly and constantly denying thus at my Death, the Knowledge of what I
am accused of in the least.

I have said thus much in discharge of my Conscience, and do aver, upon my
Salvation, what I have said to be really true.

I shall say little of my Trial; and whether it were all according to the known
Law, I am too much a Party to say much of it; if it were not so, God forgive
him or them that were the cause of it.

My Judges were all Persons of Honor, who were all as much bound to judge
rightly, as if they had been upon Oath upon what was legally proved; and not to
Vote, but according as in their Consciences they were satisfied; and if any of
them did otherwise upon any account whatsoever, I beseech God forgive them, I
do so heartily.

I shall end with my hearty Prayers for the Happiness of his Majesty, that he
may enjoy all happiness in this World and the World to come, and govern his
people according to the Laws of God; and that the People may be sensible what a
Blessing God has so miraculously given them, and obey him as they ought. I ask
Pardon, with a prostrate Heart, of Almighty God, for all the great Offenses
that I have committed against his Divine Majesty, and hope through the Merits
and Passion of Christ Jesus, to obtain Everlasting Happiness; into whose Hands
I commit my Spirit, asking Pardon of every person that I have done any wrong
unto: I do freely forgive all that have any ways wronged me; I do with all the
Devotion and Repentance that I can, humbly invoke the Mercy of our Blessed
Savior.

I beseech God, not to revenge my innocent Blood on the Nation, or on those
that were the Causers of it, with my last Breath. I do with my last Breath,
truly assert my innocence, and hope, the Omnipotent, All-seeing, Just God will
deal with me accordingly.

Having read out his Paper, he desired permission to pray after his own Form;
which being granted, he kneeled down by the Block; and pulling another Book out
of his Pocket, read a Latin Prayer; which when he had concluded, he gave the
Paper to Sheriff Bethel; and then directing his Speech to the People, he
desired God to bless them all, and to preserve his Majesty, whom he exhorted
the People to faithfully obey, being as good a Prince as ever governed them;
and so after some short Discourses, in Private with his Friends, he stretched
himself upon the Block, and bidding the Executioner take his Opportunity, his
Head was soon severed from his Body, and held up to the view of the People.

The Trial being thus over, the House was again free for Business.

Wednesday the 8 th. of December, was the day subsequent to the Sentence; but
in regard it was only spent in amending Elections, and discharging Offenders
upon their Petitions, we are obliged to pass it over.

The next day, being Thursday the 9 th. of December, Colonel Birch reported,
from the Committee, appointed to examine the Matter of Information, given by
Mr. Peter Norris, that the Committee, having taken the same into their
Consideration, had not thought fit to come to any Resolution therein; but had
ordered him to report the Matter specially, which he did, accordingly to this
Effect.

That upon the Complaint of Mr. Norris, that several Papers had been taken from
him, sent for the said Papers, then in a Chest, in the Council Chamber.

That the occasion of Mr. Norris's going beyond Sea, both by the said Papers,
and by a Certificate delivered by the Earl of Essex, to the Chairman of the
Committee, and by Dr. Tong's Instructions, appeared to be, to fetch over one
Dowdel, an Irish Priest, who had been conversant with the Priests in France and
Ireland, that managed the Plot in England and Ireland; and by that means was
privy to the whole Plot, which he had made known, by several Leters, to Dr.
Tongue, perused by the Earl of Essex; besides that, Satisfaction was given by a
known Merchant in London, that the said Dowdal was an understanding Person, and
fit to be credited.

That by an Order of Council, the 18 th. of July, 1679. the said Dowdal was
permitted to come from Dover, and stay for a Month.

That after the said Order for his coming, Dowdal died, not without Suspicion
of a violent Death.

That upon Examination how it came to pass, that Norris was in so much danger
beyond Sea, particularly at his coming Aboard the Calice Pacquet-Boat, that he
was Imprisoned at Dover, brought from Dover by a Messenger, was a particular
Descriprion given of him, to Mr. Secretary Jenkins, the 29 th. of May, 1680.

That upon Examination, who gave this Description? They found, that Thomas
Sheridon, who had lately been with the D. at Brussels, and came over with him
in the same Yacht, carried the said Description to the Duke, and that it was
brought him by one Anthony Day, Doctor of Physic to the late Army in Flanders.
That Day confessed, That coming one day to visit Mr. Sheridon, he told him in
Discourse, That now the whole Plot would be discovered: For he heard, there was
one gone beyond Sea, to fetch over a Priest that knew it all. That Mr. Sheridon
desired him to describe the Person; to which he replied, He knew neither the
Person nor the Priest; but that one John Butler, near the French Ambassador's,
had told him so. That Mr. Sheridon desired him to get a Description; which he
did, writing the same from the said Butler's own Mouth, all but the last Line;
which Butler was since dead.

That Sheridon had confessed, that he did go to the said Secretary Jenkins, and
told him, that there was one gone over, who knew as much of the Plot as any Man.

That the Secretary commanded him to give him a Description of the Person. That
thereupon he did go to Mr. Day for the Description, which Mr. Day gave him, and
so he delivered it to the Secretary.

They found also, that the Description so delivered, a Letter was written by
Mr. Cook, which the Secretary declared, he would take upon himself, to this
Effect:

That the Secretary being called away hastily, to wait upon the King at
Windsor, had commanded him to send the Enclosed Description of a Person to such
a one, who was to keep a strict Eye over him and his Company, if they Landed at
Dover, till they should be carried before a Magistrate, who was to tender them
the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy; which, if they refused, then they were to
be sent to Prison; if they took them, some handsome Course was to be taken to
detain them, till the Secretary was acquainted with what was done: Upon which,
Norris was committed to the Common Prison.

All which, being of a more than ordinary Nature, was referred, by the
Committee, to the Wisdom of the House.

The next day, being Friday, the 10 th. of December, the House took the Report
aforesaid into Consideration; and the Secretary having given an Account of his
Proceedings therein, withdrew. Nor was it long after, before the House came to
a Resolve, That the Imprisonment of Norris was illegal, and that the
Proceedings of Sir Lyonel, in describing the Person of Norris, and directing
his Imprisonment, was Illegal and Arbitrary, and an Obstruction to the Evidence
for Discovery of the Plot.

Saturday, December 11. nothing remarkable occurred.

Neither did Monday, the 13 th. of the same Month, produce any thing more
considerable, than an Order, that the Respective Members of Parliament, and
Barons of the Cinque Ports, should, for the Places for which they served, with
all convenient speed, bring in Lists of all Papists and reputed Papists, within
the several Counties, Cities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports of England.

The next day, being Tuesday the 14 th. of December, Sir Robert Peyton was
called to an Account, upon a Report from the Committee, appointed to examine
the Information against him given in by Sir William Roberts, which being read,
it was Voted by the House,

That it appeared, both by the Reports, and by his own Confession, that he had
had secret Negotiation with the Duke of York, by means of the Earl of
Peterborough, Cellier and Gadbury, when they were turning the Popish Plot upon
the Protestants. Whereupon it was presently ordered, that he should be expelled
the House; which was done the next day, with so severe a Reprimand, as
sufficiently showed the Indignation of the House against his Proceedings.

Wednesday, the 15 th. of this Month, his Majesty having sent for the Commons
to attend him in the House of Peers, was pleased to declare himself in a short
Speech, to this Effect:

That at the opening of the Parliament, he had acquainted them with the
Alliance made with Spain and Holland, as most conducing to the Safety of
England, and Repose of Christendom; and that if the Friendship of England
should prove unsafe to trust to, it could not be wondered, that the
Neighboring States should take such Resolutions as might prove Fatal to us.

That he was then to tell them how little had been done since their Meeting, to
encourage their Dependence upon us; and that he found that unless we could be
so united at Home, to make our Alliance valuable, it would be impossible to
hinder those Abroad from making our Alliances inconsistent with the public
Safety.

As for Tangier, he told them, That if they thought the place worth the
keeping, they must take it into speedy Consideration; being an Expense
otherwise above his Power.

Promising for his own part, the fullest Satisfaction they could wish, for the
Security of the Protestant Religion, and a Concurrence with them in any
Remedies, consistent with the preservation of the Succession, in the Legal
Course of Descent.

Concluding, That being so ready on his part, to satisfy their Desires, he
desired to know how he should be assisted by them, and what they expected from
Him?

This Speech being reported by the Speaker, they resolved into a Committee of
the whole House. After which, the Speaker resuming the Chair, they came to
several Resolves, Nemine contradicente, 1. That one way for the suppressing of
Popery, was to banish all the Considerable Papists out of England. That as long
as the Papists had any hopes of the D. of York's Succession, both the
Protestant Religion, and the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the King's
Protestant Subjects were in Danger to be destroyed. 3. That there should be a
Bill brought in, for the Association of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, for
the Safety of King, Religion and People, against all Invasions, or Oppositions
whatsoever; and to prevent the Succession of the D. of Y. or any other Papist.

Thursday the 16 th. was spent for the most part in reading of Bills.

The next day, being Friday, the 17 th. of December, upon a Report, by Sir
William Poultney, from the Committee, appointed to draw up the Impeachment
against Mr. Seymour; the Articles of Impeachment were ordered to be Engrossed,
and Mr. Seymour to be taken into Custody, by the Serjant at Arms, who was
empowered to take Security for his forthcoming.

Saturday, being the 18 th. they took into serious Consideration, his Majesty's
Last Speech; and after some debate, resolved, that an Address should be
prepared in answer to it.

Monday the 20 th. produced nothing at that time remarkable, but only the
Address, which was then read and agreed to, and presented the next day.

Tuesday, the 21 th. of December, not much more was done than upon the day
before, only that an Information was given into the House, that one Henry
Carew, a Friar, of Saint Maloes, in France, had, for several Years last past,
executed the Office of Surveyor of the Customs in the Port of Bristol; and
thereupon, it was referred to the Committee, appointed to receive Informations
concerning the Plot, to examine the Business, and make their Report.

In the Afternoon, they presented their Addresses to his Majesty, in the
Banqueting House, in Answer to his Last Speech; of which, the Chief Heads were
these:

That they did gratefully acknowledge his Majesty's Goodness, in renewing his
Assurances of his Readiness to concur with them for the Security of the
Protestant Religion; but that they observed, there was a Reservation annexed,
which if insisted on, would render all his other Inclinations of no Advantage
to them.

That as to the preservation of the Succession in its Legal Course, they had
not endeavored any Interruption, except only of the Descent upon the Person of
the D. of York, whom the Instruments of the Church of Rome, had perverted to
their Religion. For which Reason they did represent it as the Issue of their
most deliberate Thoughts, That for the Papists to have their Hopes continued in
the Expectation of a Popish Prince, was utterly inconsistent with the Safety of
his person, the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Welfare of his
people.

They farther represented to him the Danger of his Person, from the principles
of the Papists, which allow the Excommunication and Deposition of Princes.

That the Expectation of a Popish Successor, had not only increased the Number
of Papists in the Kingdom; but also prevailed with others to desert
Protestantism, that they might be prepared for the Favor of the Popish Prince.

That it had hardened the Papists of this Kingdom to make a Common purse,
provide Arms, and solicit the Aid of Foreign Princes, to impose Popery upon
the Nation.

That it was his Majesty's Glory and true Interest to be the Protector of all
Protestants both, at Home and Abroad: But if such Hopes should remain, what
Alliances could be made for his Majesty's Allies, and the Protestants abroad to
trust to?

Then they laid before his Majesty the Evils that would befall from a Popish
Succession.

The Protestant Religion would be totally overthrown.

The Pope would be acknowledged a Supreme, and all things be brought under his
Jurisdiction.

The Lives, Liberties and Estates of all Protestants that value their Souls,
will be adjudged forfeited; in regard, that the Extirpation of Heretics was
used as an Argument to invite Foreign Princes to assist the Duke.

Farther, they desired him to consider, whether, in Case the D. should attempt
to Succeed, whether the Opposition probable to be made against him, might not
endanger the Descent of the Royal Line, but even Monarchy it self.

For which Reasons, they besought his Majesty, that when a Bill should be
tendered him in a Parliamentary way, he would give his Royal Assent thereto;
and, as necessary to fortify the same, that he would also assent to another
Bill, to enable his Protestant Subjects to associate for the Defense of his
Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Security of the Kingdom. And that as a
farther Means for the Preservation of the same, the Judges might be Persons of
Integrity, and true Zeal to the Protestant Religion, and might hold their
Employments only, quamdiu se been gesserint; and that the Lord Lieutenants,
Deputie-Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, might be persons of the same
Principles, and all others displaced; and so likewise for the Military
Officers, and Commanders in the Fleet.

Which Requests of theirs being granted, they would be ready to assist his
Majesty for the preservation of Tangier, and to put the Fleet into a Condition,
both to preserve the Sovereignty of the Seas, and defend the Nation.

Fa. What Answer was given to this Address?


Tr. You shall hear more of that in due time.

The two next days, being the 23 d. and 24 th. of December, produced little for
our purpose: Only, that upon the last of the two, upon a Report from the
Committee, appointed to examine the Complaint against Mr. Thompson, a Minister,
it was unanimously resolved, by the House, That the said Thompson had publicly
defamed his Majesty, preached Sedition, villify'd the Reformation, and promoted
Popery, by asserting Popish Principles, denying the Plot, and turning the same
upon the Protestants; and that he had endeavored to subvert the Liberty and
Property of the Subject, and the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; and that
he was a Scandal and Reproach to the Function; and thereupon ordered a
Committee to prepare an Impeachment against him. After which, the Holydays
approaching, the House adjourned till the 30 th. of the same Month.


Fa. Can you tell me what Mr. Thompson had done to deserve so severe a Sentence?


True. Yes.


Fa. Pray do then, as short as you can.


True. The First Witness upon Examination at the Committee, said, That in a
Sermon preached by the said Mr. Thompson, upon the 30 th. of Jan. 79. He
publicly declared, That the Presbyterians were persons which the Devil blushed
at; and that they were worse than either Priests or Jesuits; and that the
Villain Hampden, grudged more to give the King Twenty Shillings, which was his
due by Law, for Ship Money and Loan, than to raise a Rebellion against him.

The Second Witness said the same, and added, that Thompson should say, He
hoped the Presbyterians would be pulled out of their Houses, and that the Goals
would be filled with them; and wished their Houses burnt.

The third said, That Mr. Thompson, at another time averred, That for a man to
receive the Sacrament from any other Minister, than of the Parish where he
dwelt, was Damnation to his Soul; and that he would maintain the Doctrine.

The Fourth Witness said, That in the Forementioned Sermon, Mr. Thompson
declared, That there was a great talk of a Plot; but said he, a Presbyterian is
the Man.

The Fifth, That in the same Sermon, Mr. Thompson asserted, That a Presbyterian
Brother qua talis, was as great a Traitor, as any Priest or Jesuit; and then
condemned all the Proceedings of Parliaments.

A Sixth, That speaking of the Act for Burying in Woollen, affirmed, That the
Makers of that Law, were a Company of Old Fools and Fanatics; and that he
would bring a Schoolboy, should make a better Act than that.

A Seventh said, That in a Sermon, while the Petitions were on Foot, he very
much derided and scoffed at them, comparing them with the Scotch Petition,
delivered at Durham, at the Head of their Army.

The Eighth Witness said, That in a Funeral Sermon of one Mr. Wharton, speaking
in Commendation of the Deceased, he said, he was no Schismatical, Petitioning
Rebel. And at another time declared, That such as went to Lectures, were the
Brats of the Devil.

A Ninth, That he inveighed bitterly against Petitioning, saying, It was the
Seed of Rebellion; that the Devil set 'em on Work, and would pay 'em their
Wages; and that before he would set his Hand to such a Petition, he would cut
it off.

A Tenth, That being with Mr. Thompson in the Chancel of St. Thomas's Church in
Bristol, where Queen Elizabeth's Efsigies is, he the said Thompson, pointing
his Finger to it, said, That she was a Lewd, Infamous Woman; that she was a
Church-Robber; and that Hen. 8. began it, and she finished it.

The Eleventh, That in the Year 78. Mr. Thompson railed in his Sermon against
Henry the Eighth, saying, he did more Hurt in robbing the Abby-Lands, than he
did Good by his Reformation.

The Twelfth, That he said the Plot was nothing but a Presbyterian Plot.

The Thirteenth said the same with the Ninth.

The Fourteenth confirmed what the Second had declared.

The Fifteenth and last Evidence declared, That he heard Mr. Thompson in
Discourse affirm, That if he were as well satisfied of other things, as he was
of Justification, Auricular Confession, Penance, Extreme Unction, and Chrism in
Baptism, he would not have been long separated from the Catholic Church.

That he had endeavored to prove Auricular Confession and Extreme Unction out
of the Epistles.

That he heard him say, the King was of a mean and soft Temper, easily led to
any thing; but yet a Solomon in Vices: But that the D. was a Prince of a brave
Spirit, faithful to his Friends; but it was our own Faults that he was a Roman
Catholic, in that we forced him to fly into France.

That he would rather cut off his Hand than Sign a Petition for Sitting of the
Parliament.

That Bedloe was not to be credited on any thing he said.

That it was better for a Clergyman to be gelt, than to marry; and that the
Calvinists of France were lecherous Fellows.

Mr. Thompson being asked, whether he were guilty of the Matters laid to his
Charge, and desired to make his Defense, did for the greatest part confess
words spoken to that Effect; and in other things, endeavored to turn the words
with more favor toward himself.

But the Credit of the Witnesses was such, that the Committee was soon
satisfied, and made their Report to the House; upon which ensued the Sentence,
and Judgment of the House before recited.

Upon Thursday the 30 th. of December, the House met again; at which time,
among other things, not proper for this Continuation, it was unanimously
resolved, That no Member of the House should accept of any Office, or place of
Profit from the Crown, without the leave of this House; or any promise of any
such Office or place of profit, during such time as he should continue a Member
of the House.

Friday, the last of December, passed without any material Transaction that
requires Relation.

The next day of Sitting, was the 3 d. of January; upon which day, the Peers
sent a Message to the Commons, intimating, that they had received a Petition
from Mr. Seymour, wherein he desired a day might might be appointed for his
speedy Trial; of which they thought fit to give them Notice, not finding any
Issue by Replication.

Thereupon the Articles against Mr. Seymour were read, and a Committee ordered
to prepare Evidence against him, and manage the same at the Trial.

At the same time also, the Articles of Impeachment against Sir William Scroggs
were read, as having been prepared some days before, by the Committee appointed
to examine the proceedings of the Judges, etc. The Heads of which Report, and
of the Articles themselves, were as follows:

In the first place, the Committee found by the Information of Charles
Vmphrevile, Foreman of the Grand Jury, for the Hundred of Ostulston, in the
County of Middlesex, and others of the same Jury, that upon the Second of June,
1680. the Constables were found defective, in not presenting the Papists as
they ought; upon which they were ordered to make farther Presentiments by the 26
th. day following; upon which day they met again to receive them. That upon the
said day, a Bill was brought them against James, D. of York, for not coming to
Church. That about an hour after, they received the said Bill, some of the Jury
attended the King's Bench with a Petition for the Sitting of the Parliament*
Upon which, the Lord Scroggs raised many Scruples, and pretending all the Jury
were not in the Court, though twenty had subscribed, sent for them, saying, he
would dispatch them presently. Then the Jury being come and called over,
renewed their desire concerning the Petition; To which the C. J. said, we will
not make two words of the Business; adding, that the Petition was no Article of
their Charge; that no Act required the Court to deliver the Grand Juries
Petition, or to run of their Errands; and that there was a Proclamation
concerning them; and that 'twas much they should come to alter the King's Mind,
declared in the News Book; that the Jury replied, that they only desired it
with Submission, as other Juries had done; that the Court answered, that they
had meddled with what was never given them in Charge, but had brought in no
Bills; that the Jury replied, they had many before them: notwithstanding which,
Judge Jones told them they were discharged from farther Service: which by the
Evidence of Mr. Astry, Mr. Waterhouse, and Mr. Ward, appeared not to have been
done in their memory before.

The next thing was, that there was a Rule of Court made, all the Judges
present, and nine dissenting, against the Printing and Publishing The Weekly
Packet of Advice; or the History of Popery.

Thirdly, That there had been a very great Latitude taken by the Judges, in
imposing Fines upon persons found guilty before them.

Particularly, that John Brown of London, Gentleman, for publishing a Printed
Book, called, The Long Parliament dissolved, was fined a Thousand Marks, bound
to his good Behavior for seven years, and his Name struck out of the Roll of
Attorneys, without any Offense alleged in his Practice. For which fine, not
being able to pay it, he lay in Prison three Years; and though his Majesty was
graciously pleased to pardon him, and recommended him, by his Warrant, to be
restored again to his place of Attorney, yet he could not obtain his said
Restoration from the Court of Kings Bench.


Fa. Pray, what was the great Crime which gave so great a Provocation?


Tr. A certain passage, which seemed to be a kind of Exhortation, or rather a
Memorandum, as it were to the Parliament, not to betray their Trusts, to this
Effect, That no man ought to think it strange, that it should be thought
Treason for a Parliament, to sit and act contrary to the Laws of the Land: For
that, if in the first Parliament of R. 2. Grimes and Weston, only for lack of
Courage, were adjudg'd guilty of High Treason, for surrend'ring the Places
committed to their Trust. How much more the Parliament, should they turn
Renegadoes to the People that entrusted them, surrender all the Legal Defense
of the People of England, their Lives, Liberties and Properties at once, etc.

2. That John Harrington of London, Gent. for speaking these words in Latin,
Quod nostra Gubernatio consistebat de tribus Statibus; et si Rebellio eveniret
in Regno, et nec accideret contra omnes tres Status, non est Rebellio, was
Fined 1000 l. bound to his good Behavior for 7 Years, and to recant the words
in open Court.

That Been. Harris of London, Stationer, for Printing a Book called An Appeal
from the Country to the City, was Fined 500 l. to stand in the Pillory an Hour,
and to give Security for his good Behavior, for 3 Years; that the Lord C. J.
Scroggs pressed the Court, that he might be publicly whipped; but Judge Pemberton,
holding up his Hands in admiration of such a Severity, Judge Jones pronounced
the Sentence as before.


Fa. What was the Crime laid to the Charge of that Book?


Tr. This particular Passage; We in the Country, have done our parts in choosing
for the generality good Members; but if they must be dissolved or prorogued,
when ever they come to redress the Grievances of the Subject, we may be pitied,
not blamed, if the Plot take effect.

That notwithstanding the Severity of the Court, in these Cases, their Mercy
and Compassion was extraordinary in others.

Particularly, That Tho. Knox, Principal in an Indictment of Subornation and
Conspiracy, against the Testimony of Dr. Oats for Sodomy, and the Testimony of
William Bedloe, was only Fined 200 Mark, a Year Imprisonment and security for
the good Behavior for 3 years; that Lane for the same Offense, was only Fined
100 Marks, Pillory'd for an hour, and Imprisoned for one year.

That John Tasborough, on an Indictment for Subornation of Stephen Dugdale,
tending to the Overthrow of the whole Plot, though affirmed to be a person of
Quality, was only Fined 100 l.

Ann Price, for the same Offense 100 l.

Nathaniel Thompson, and Will. Badcock, for exhibiting a weekly Libel, called,
The True Domestic Intelligence, and known to be Popishly affected, Fined only
each of them, 3 s. 6 d.

Matthew Turner, for vending and publishing a Book, called, The Compendium,
wherein the Justice of the Nation, in the Trials of the Conspirators, even by
some of those Judges themseves, is highly arraigned, and the King's Evidence
horribly aspersed, though known to be the Common, notorious Bookseller about
the Town, Fined only a 100 Marks.

One Loveland, upon an Indictment, for a notorious Conspiracy, and Subornation
against the Life and Honor of the D. of Buckingham for Sodomy, Fined only 5 l.
and Pillory'd for an Hour.

Richard Christian Esquire for the same Offense, Fined 100 Marks, and pillory'd for
an Hour.

Arth. Obrian, for the same offense, fined only 20 Marks, and pillory'd for an
hour.

Whereupon, it was the unanimous Opinion of the Committee, that the Court of
Kings Bench, had acted arbitrarily, illegally, and partially, in favoring
Papists, and Persons Popishly affected, and oppressing his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects.

Proceeding farther, they found, that several of his Majesty's Subjects had
been Committed, for Crimes Bailable by Law; and that their Sureties, though
sufficient, were refused. Among the rest, that Henry Care had been so refused
the common Right of a Subject.

2. That George Brown, a Constable in London, having Committed some of the L.
C. Justice's Servants for great Disorders, was seized by a Tip-staff, by the L.
C. Justice's Warrant, and committed to the Kings Bench, though he tendered two
able Citizens, and Common-Council-Men of London, for his Bail.

3. That Francis Smith Bookseller, for Printing certain Observations upon Sir
George Wakeman's Trial, was by the C. J. committed to the Kings Bench, though he
tendered three sufficient Citizens for his Security.

That the said C. J. committed Jane Curtis, a Feme Covert, for publishing a
Book, called, A Satyr against Injustice; and though her Friends tendered
sufficient Bail, he swore by the Name of God, she should go to Prison, and that
he would show her no more Mercy, than they could expect from a Wolf that came
to devour them.

That about the same time, Edward Berry, a Stationer in Greys Inn, being
accused for selling the Observations upon Sir George Wakeman's Trial, was
committed by the said C. J. who said, he should go to Prison, though he tender a
1000 l. Security; and that after he had got his Habeas Corpus, he was forced to
attend five Terms before he could be discharged.

Upon which, it was the Result of the Committee, that the refusing Bail, where
persons were Bailable by Law, was illegal, and a high Breach of the Liberty of
the Subject.

After that, the said Committee, taking into Consideration an Information
against Baron Weston, they found, by the Testimonies of John Colt, Richard
Mayo, and John Peiron, Gentlemen, that the said Baron had used these following
Expressions in his Charge at Kingston Assizes, That Zuinglius set up his
Fanaticism, and that Calvin built upon that blessed Foundation: And, said he,
all his Disciples are seasoned with such a sharpness of Spirit, that it much
concerns Magistrates to keep a strict hand over them. And now they are
restless, amusing us with Fears, and nothing will serve them but a Parliament,
etc.

Upon which, the Opinion of the Committee was, that the Expressions in the
Charge given by Baron Weston, were a Scandal to the Reformation, in derogation
of the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments; and tending to raise Discord
between his Majesty and his People.

The Committee then falling again upon the Business of the L. C. J. Scroggs,
they found by the Examination of Sir Robert Atkins, that at Dinner, at the Old
Baily, Sir Robert Clayton being Mayor, he had openly condemned petitioning for
Parliaments, as Factious, and tending to Rebellion; which the Lord Mayor
justifying as the Right of the Subject, put the C. J. into a very great Passion.

That at the Summer Assizes, at Monmouth, Mr. Arnold, Mr. Price, and Mr. Bedloe
being in Company, he fell very severely in public, upon Mr. Bedloe, to to the
disparagement of his Evidence, and upon Sir Robert's defending Mr. Bedloe, he
fell into a passion, and said, he believed Mr. Langhorn died innocently.

These things being reported to the House, the House confirmed the Resolutions
of the House in each particular, and ordered an Impeachment against Baron
Weston, and Judge Jones, for his illegal proceedings against Mr. Dare, at
Somerset Assizes.


Fa. Well, but those were things only ordered: Come now to the Articles against
my L. C. J. which you say were perfected and drawn into Form.


Tr. The Articles against Sir W. Scroggs were eight in all.


1. That being Chief Justice of the King's Bench, he had endeavored to subvert
the Fundamental Laws and the Established Religion and Government of the
Kingdom, and to introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government.

2. That contrary to his Oath, taken duly to administer Justice, he had
discharged the Grand Jury for the Hundred of Ossulston, before they had made
their Presentiments, or found the Bills of Indictment that were before them,
contrary to the known course of the said Court; by which illegal Discharge, the
Presentiments of many Papists, and other Offenders, were obstructed, and a Bill
against the D. of Y. for not coming to Church, was prevented from being
proceeded against.

3. That he had caused an illegal and arbitrary Rule to be entered into the
Kings Bench, against the Printing of the Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome; or
the History of Popery; wherein the Cheats, and Superstitions of the Church of
Rome, were from time to time exposed; to the manifest countenancing of Popery,
and Discouragement of Protestants.

4. That he had most notoriously departed from all Rules of Justice and
Equality, in the imposition of Fines upon persons convicted of Misdemeanors.

5. That he had frequently refused to accept of Bail, though sufficient and
legally tendered him by several persons accused before him, for Crimes which
were Bailable by Law; several of the said persons being only accused of
Offenses against himself; declaring at the same time, that he refused Bail, and
committed them only to put them to Charges.

6. That he had granted diverse General Warrrants for attacquing the persons,
and seizing the Goods of his Majesty's Subjects, not named, or particularly
described in the said Warrants; by means whereof their Houses have been entered,
and their persons oppressed contrary to Law.

7. That though he had Tried and Condemned several of the Offenders in the late
horid Horid Popish Plot, for murdering the King, etc. Yet he had at diverse
times and places openly defamed and scandalized several of the Witnesses who
had proved the Treasons of the Conspirators; by which means, he did as much as
in him lay, endeavor to suppress and stifle the Discovery of the said Plot.

8. That his frequent and notorious Excesses and Debaucheries, and his profane
and Atheistical Discourses, were a daily affront to God, a dishonor to his
Majesty, and gave Countenance to all manner of Vice and Wickedness.

Thereupon it was prayed, that the said Sir William Scroggs might be put to
answer the Premises, and be in the mean time committed to safe Custody.

But the Crimes objected against him, not being looked upon as Capital, he was
Bailed by the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, and the Lord Hatton, who became
Security for his Forthcoming; during which time, his Lordship ceased to act in
his Place, or to appear in Westminster Hall, as Chief Justice.

Tuesday, the 4 th. of January, Sir William Temple delivered a Message from his
Majesty to the House, in answer to their last Address, to this Effect:

That he had received their Address, with all the disposition they could wish,
to comply with their reasonable Desires; but that he was sorry to see their
Thoughts so wholly fixed upon the Bill of Exclusion, as to determine all other
Remedies for the suppressing of Popery ineffectual; but that he was confirmed
in his Opinion against it, by the Judgment of the Lords who had rejected it;
and that therefore there remained nothing more for him to answer, but to
recommend to them all other means for the preservation of the Protestant
Religion, in which they could have no reason to doubt of his Concurrences, when
they shall be presented him in a Parliamentary way. As also, to consider the
present State of the Kingdom, as well as the condition of Christendom; so as to
enable him to secure Tangier, and secure his Alliances abroad.

The same morning, a Message was sent from the Lords, to acquaint the House
with a Vote which they had passed, declaring, that they were fully satisfied,
that there was, and, for diverse years, had been, a horrid and Treasonable Plot
and Conspiracy carried on by the Popish Party in Ireland, for Massacring the
English, and Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the Established Government
of that Kingdom.

Wednesday, the 5 th. of Jan. passed without any thing remarkable to our
purpose.

The next day, being Thursday the 6 th. of Jan. the E. of Tyrone being ordered
to be impeached of High Treason, the Lord Dursley was ordered to go up to the
Bar of the House, and perform the Commands of the House, and to pray, that he
might be committed to safe Custody.

Friday, the Articles of Impeachment against Sir William Scroggs, were carried
up to the Lords, by the Lord Cavendish.

The same Morning, the House taking into consideration his Majesty's last
Message, made several Resolves.

1. That there was no Security for the Protestant Religion, the King's Life, or
the Established Government of the Kingdom, without passing a Bill for disabling
the D. of Y. to Inherit the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland, etc. And
that to rely upon any other means or Remedies, was not only insufficient, but
dangerous.

2. That unless a Bill were passed for Excluding the D. of Y. the House could
not give any Supply to his Majesty, without danger to his Majesty's Person, the
hazard of the Protestant Religion, and Breach of Trust in them to the People.

3. That they who had advised the King to insist upon an Opinion against the
Bill, had given him pernicious Counsel, and were promoters of Popery, and
Enemies ^o the King and Kingdom.

4. That it was the Opinion of the House, that the E. of Hallifax, the Marguess
of Worcester, and the E. of Clarendon, were the persons that gave the King that
pernicious Advice: And that therefore an Address should be made, for their
Removal from the King's Person and Presence, and from their Offices and
Employments.

The Earl of Feversham was also voted a promoter of Popery, and the French
Interest, and a dangerous Enemy to the King and Kingdom.

The same day also, they made two other Resolves, That whosoever should lend,
or cause to be lent, any Money, upon the Branches of the King's Revenue, arising
by Customs, Excise, or Hearth-mony, should be adjudg'd Obstructors of the
Sitting of Parliaments, and be responsable in Parliament.

2. That whosoever should accept or buy any Tally of Anticipation, upon any
part of the King's Revenue; or whoever should pay such Tally, should be deemed
guilty of of the same Offense, and be liable to be questioned in Parliament.

Saturday the 8 th. of Jan. the Lords gave notice to the House, that they had
appointed the Saturday following, to hear Mr. Seymor's Cause upon his
Impeachment; and that the House might reply, if they thought fit.

Monday the 10 th. of Jan. being the last day of their Session, several
Resolves were made.

1. That whoever advised his Majesty to prorogue the Parliament, to any other
purpose, than in order to the passing the Bill of Exclusion, was a Betrayer of
the King, the Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion, and a Pensioner to France.

2. That the Members for the City of London, should return the Thanks of the
House to the City, for their manifest Loyalty to the King, their Charge, and
Vigilance, for the preservation of his Majesty, and the Protestant Religion.

3. That it was their Opinion, that the City was burnt by the Papists,
designing to introduce Popery and Arbitrary Power in the Nation.

4. That the Commissioners of the Customs had wilfully broken the Law, for
prohibiting the Importation of French Wines and other Commodities; which, if
they should continue, they should be questioned in Parliament.

5. That it was their Opinion, that the D. of Monmouth, had been removed from
his Offices and Commands, by the Influence of the D. of York; and therefore
ordered, that Application should be made to his Majesty, to restore him to all
his said Commands and Employments.

6. That it was their Opinion, that the prosecuting of Protestant Dissenters,
upon the Penal Laws, was a grievance to the Subject, and an Encouragement to
Popery, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, and dangerous to the Peace of
the Kingdom.

These Resolutions were no sooner past, but they were summoned by the Usher of
the Black Rod, to attend his Majesty, in the House of Peers; at what time his
Majesty was pleased to signify his pleasure for a Prorogation, till the 20 th.
of the Month.

Before the Prorogation was pronounced by the Lord Chancellor, his Majesty was
pleased to sign three Bills, two public, and one private.

The two public Acts were, an additional Act for Burying in Woollen; and an Act
for prohibiting the Importation of Cattle from Ireland.


Fa. Seeing then there were no more Bills signed, there is no question to be
made, but that there were the more depending; and if I do not mistake, you
promised to give me a Catalogue of all those that were under Consideration.


Tr. I did so; and to show you I did not intend to deceive your Expectation, I
have here collected them together, as they came in their Order to be debated;
the Bill of Exclusion excepted, of which you have already had the Heads.

Bills depending in the last Parliament. 1. A Bill for the Encouragment of
Woollen Manufacture. 2. A Bill for Exportation of Leather. 3. An Act for the
better regulating the Trials of Peers in England. 4. Two Bills for the
regulating Elections of Members in the Commons House of Parliament. 5. A Bill
for the continuance of two Acts, An Act for preventing Planting Tobacco in
England; and a Bill for Exporting Beer, Ale and Mum. 6. A Bill for Repeal of an
Act made the 35 th. of Q. Elizabeth. 7. A Bill for taking away the Court holden
before the President and Council, in the Marches of Wales. 8. A Bill for
ascertaining Fines upon Convictions of Misdemeanors. 9. A Bill for supplying
the Laws against Bankrupts. 10. A Bill for Exportation of Cloth, and other
woollen Manufactures. 11. A Bill to restrain Papists from coming or residing
within the Cities of London and Westminster, or within 20 miles of the same;
and from wearing any Arms. 12. A Bill that the Judges should hold their Places
and Salaries only quamdiu se been gesserint. 13. A Bill prohibiting Importation
of Cattle from Scotland. 14. Two Bills for the ease of Protestant Dissenters.
15. A Bill for Banishing all the most considerable Papists in England, out of
his Majesty's Dominions. 16. A Bill for uniting all his Majesty's Protestant
Subjects to the Church of England. 17. A Bill for repealing the Act for the
well Governing of Corporations. 18. A Bill to prevent Simony. 19. A Bill to
prevent Vexatious Actions. 20. A Bill to prevent Brewers from being Justices of
the Peace, in the place where they exercise that Trade. 21. A Bill for the
better Discovery of Settlements of Estates for superstitious uses. 22. A Bill
for the more easy collecting the Duty of Hearth-Mony.


Several other Bills were ordered to be brought in, which never came to be
debated; As,

A Bill for regulating and preventing the increase of the Poor.

A Bill for the regulating Hackney Coaches, repairing, paving and cleansing the
Streets, and opening of passages in and about the City.

A Bill for repair of the High ways.

A Bill to punish Atheism, Swearing and Debauchery.

A Bill for regulating abuses in making of Casks, Barrels, etc.

A Bill for Naturalization of Foreign Protestants; And,

The Bill of Association.

The Bill of Ease to all Protestant Dissenters being perfected by the House of
Commons, though not assented to by the Peers, was afterward Printed at large; of
which these are the Chief Heads.

1. That all persons, convicted or prosecuted by virtue of an Act made in the
35. year of Q. Eliz. and another Act made in the 3. of K. James, for Recusancy,
that shall take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and make and sue for
such Declaration to be made in the Court of Exchequer, Assizes, or Quarter
Sessions, shall be discharged of all penalties, forfeitures, and seizures, by
force of the said Statutes, without Composition or Fee.

2. That no Persons taking the Oaths aforesaid, and subscribing the Declaration
foresaid, shall be prosecuted upon the said Acts in any Ecclesiastical Court,
by reason of their Nonconforming to the Church of England. Provided that no
persons, dissenting from the Church of England, and meeting in any place for
Religious Worship, with the Doors locked and barred, during their so meeting
together, shall receive any Benefit from this Law: Neither shall any of the
persons aforesaid be exempted from paying Tithes, or other Parochial duties.

3. That if any person, dissenting from the Church of England, shall be chosen
into any Parish-Office, it shall be lawful for him to execute the same by a
sufficient Deputy: Provided the said Deputy be allowed by two or more of the
Justices of the Peace.

4. That no Dissenter in Holy Orders, or pretending thereto, that shall take
the said Oaths, and make and subscribe the aforesaid Declaration, together with
his Assent and Consent to the Articles of Religion, mentioned in the 13 th.
year of the Queen, except only the 34, 35, and 36. and these words, in the 20
th. Article, viz. That the Church has Power to decree Rights and Ceremonies,
and Authority in Controversies of Faith, shall be liable to the Pains and
Penalties of either of the Acts made in the 17 th. or 22 th. years of his
present Majesty's Reign: Provided they do not preach in any place with the
doors locked or barred.

5. That all persons pretending to holy Orders, that shall subscribe the
Articles aforesaid, except before excepted, together with part of the 27 th.
Article, concerning Infants Baptism, and take the Oaths, and make the
Declaration aforesaid, shall enjoy all the Benefits and Advantages of this Act.

6. The Justices of the Peace are required to tender the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy to any person, or persons that go to private Meetings; and upon
refusal, to take them, and make the Declaration aforesaid, to commit them to
Prison, without Bail or Mainprise; and being so committed, if they shall
refuse, upon a second tender, to take the said Oaths, or to make Declaration of
their Allegiance, they shall be thenceforth taken for Popish Recusants,
convicted, and suffer accordingly.

7. For those that scruple the taking of any Oath, the following Declaration
shall be sufficient, being by them made and subscribed.

I acknowledge and declare, etc. That K. Charles the II. is Lawful King of this
Realm, etc. and that the Pope, neither by himself, nor any Authority of the
Church of Rome, or by any other means, with any other has any Power to depose
the King, or dispose of his Dominions, or to authorize any Foreign Prince to
invade or annoy his Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance or Obedience to him, etc.

8. Such Persons as shall conform to this Act, are empowered to keep Schools.

Lastly, This Act not to extend to any Papists or Popish Recusant; or to any
that shall deny the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity.

But now the Term of Prorogation being near at hand, his Majesty was pleased to
issue forth his Proclamation, bearing date the 18 th. of January, for the
Dissolving of this present Parliament, and calling a New one, to meet, and be
holden at Oxford, upon the one and twentieth day of March, next ensuing.


A LIST OF BOTH HOUSES OF Parliament, Which met at Westminster, upon the 21 st.
of October, 1680. and was Dissolved on the 18 th. of January following.
[Note, That those that have this Mark * after them, were not Members of the
last Parliament.]

The LORDS.
JAMES Duke of York and Albany Rupert Duke of Cumberland Heneage Finch, Baron
of Daventry, Lord Chancellor of England Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy
Seal Henry Duke of Norfolk George Duke of Buckingham Christopher Duke of
Albemarle James Duke of Monmouth Henry Duke of Newcastle Charles Lord Marquess
of Winchester Henry Lord Marquess of Worcester Henry Lord Marquess of
Dorchester Robert Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great Chamberlain James Earl of Brecon,
Lord Steward of the Household Henry Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of the
Household Aubrey Earl of Oxford Anthony Earl of Kent William Richard George Earl
of Derby John Earl of Rutland Theophilus Earl of Huntingdon William Earl of
Bedford Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery Edward Earl of Lincoln Charles
Earl of Nottingham James Earl of Suffolk Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex
James Earl of Salisbury John Earl of Exeter John Earl of Bridgewater Philip
Earl of Leicester James Earl of Northampton William Earl of Devonshire William
Earl of Denbigh John Earl of Bristol Gilbert Earl of Clare Oliver Earl of
Bullinbrook Charles Earl of Westmorland Robert Earl of Manchester Thomas Earl
of Berkshire John Earl of Mulgrave William Earl of Malborough Thomas Earl of
Rivers Henry Earl of Peterborough Thomas Earl of Stamford Heneage Earl of
Winchelsea Charles Earl of Carnarvon Henry Earl of Newport Philip Earl of
Chesterfield Nicholas Earl of Thanett Thomas Earl of Portland William Earl of
Strafford Robert Earl of Sunderland Nicholas Earl of Scarsdale John Earl of
Rochester Henry Earl of St. Albans Edward Earl of Sandwich Henry Earl of
Clarendon Arthur Earl of Essex Robert Earl of Cardigan John Earl of Bath
Charles Earl of Carlisle William Earl of Craven Robert Earl of Ailesbury
Richard Earl of Burlington Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury John Earl of Guilford
Thomas Earl of Sussex Charles Earl of Plymouth Lewis Earl of Feversham George
Earl of Hallifax Charles Earl of Mackelfield John Earl of Radnor Robert Earl of
Yarmouth George Earl of Berkley Francis Viscount Montague William Viscount Say
and Seal Edward Viscount Conway Baptist Viscount Campden Thomas Viscount
Faulconbridge Charles Viscount Mordant Francis Viscount Newport Henry Lord
Mowbray James Lord Audley Charles Lord La War Thomas L. Morley and Mounteagle
Robert Lord Ferrers Conyers L. Darcy and Meynell Benjamin Lord Fitzwater
Charles Lord Gray William Lord Stourton Henry Lord Sandys Thomas Lord Windsor
Thomas Lord Cromwell Ralph Lord Eure Philip Lord Wharton Charles L. Willoughby
of Parham William Lord Pagett Charles Lord North-Grey of Rolleston. James Lord
Chandos Robert Lord Hunsdon James Lord Norreys Christopher Lord Tenham Fulke
Lord Grevill Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton Ford Lord Gray of Wark John Lord
Lovelace John Lord Paulet William Lord Maynard George Lord Coventry William
Lord Howard of Escrick Henry Lord Herbert of Cherbury Thomas Lord Leigh
Christopher Lord Hatton Richard Lord Byron Richard Lord Vaughan Francis Lord
Carrington William Lord Widdrington Edward Lord Ward Thomas Lord Culpeper Jacob
Lord Astley Charles Lord Lucas Edward Lord Rockingham Charles Henry Lord
Wootton Marmaduke Lord Langdale Denzill Lord Holles Charles Lord Cornwallis
George Lord Delamere Horatio Lord Townesend John Lord Crew John Lord
Frescheville Richard Lord Arundel of Trerise Thomas Lord Butler of Moor-Park
Richard Lord Butler of Weston John Lord Manors of Haddon
Archbishops and Bishops.
Dr. William Sancroft Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Dr. Richard Stern Lord
Archbishop of York Dr. Henry Compton Lord Bishop of London Dr. Nathaniel Crew
Lord Bishop of Durham Dr. George Morley Lord Bishop of Winchester Dr. Herbert
Crofts Lord Bishop of Hereford. Dr. Seth Ward Lord Bishop of Salisbury Dr.
Edward Rainbow Lord Bishop of Carlisle Dr. John Dolben Lord Bishop of Rochester
Dr. Anthony Sparrow Lord Bishop of Norwich Dr. Peter Gunning Lord Bishop of Ely
Dr. Isaac Barrow Lord Bishop of St. Asaph Dr. Thomas Wood Lord Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield Dr. John Pritchet Lord Bishop of Gloucester Dr. Peter
Mew Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells Dr. John Pearson Lord Bishop of Chester Dr.
Humphrey Lloyd Lord Bishop of Bangor Dr. William Lloyd Lord Bishop of
Peterborough Dr. Guy Carleton Lord Bishop of Chichester Dr. Thomas Barlow Lord
Bishop of Lincoln Dr. James Fleetwood Lord Bishop of Worcester Dr. John Fell
Lord Bishop of Oxford Dr. Thomas Lamplugh Lord Bishop of Exeter Dr. William
Thomas Lord Bishop of St. David's Dr. William Gulston Lord Bishop of Bristol Dr.
William Beaw Lord Bishop of Llandaff
The COMMONS.
Bedfordshire. 4. William Lord Russell Sir Humphrey Monoux Bar.
Town of Bedford. Pawlet St. John Esquire. Sir William Franklin Knight.
Berks 9. William Barker Esquire. Richard Southbey Esquire. *
Borough of New-Windsor. Richard Winwood Esquire. Samuel Starkey Esquire.
Borough of Reading. John Blagrave Esquire. Nathan Knight Esquire.
Borough of Wallingford. William Lenthall Esquire. * Scorie Barker Esquire.
Borough of Abbington. Sir John Stonehouse Bar.
Bucks 14. Thomas Wharton Esquire. John Hampden Esquire.
Town of Buckingham Sir Richard Temple Knight. of the Bath and Bar. * Edward Lord
Latimer
Borough of Chipping Wiccomb. Sir John Borlase Bar. Thomas Jews Esquire.
Borough of Aylisbury. Sir Thomas Lee Bar. Sir Richard Ingoldesby Knight. of the
Bath.
Borough of Agmondesham. Sir Roger Hill Knight. Sir William Drake Knight.
Borough of Wendover. Richard Hampden Esquire. Edward Backwell Esquire.
Borough of Great Marlow. John Borlace Esquire. Sir Humphrey Winch Bar.
Cambridge 6. Sir Levinus Bennet Bar. * Sir Robert Cotton Knight. *
University of Cambridge. Sir Thomas Exton Knight. Sir William Temple Bar. *
Town of Cambridge. William Lord Allington Sir Thomas Chicheley Knight.
Chester 4. Henry Booth Esquire. Sir Robert Cotton Knight. Bar. *
City of Chester. William Williams Esquire. Sir Thomas Grosvenor Bar.
Cornwall 44. Francis Robarts Esquire. Sir Richard Edgcomb Knight. of the Bath
Borough of Dunhivid, alias Lanceston Sir John Coryton Bar. Sir Hugh Pyper Knight. *
Borough of Leskard. Sir Jonathan Trelawny Bar. John Buller Esquire.
Borough of Lestwithiel. Sir John Carew Bar. Walter Kendal Esquire.
Borough of Truro. William Boscawen Esquire. Edward Boscawen Esquire.
Borough of Bodmin. Hendar Robarts Esquire. Nicholas Glyn Esquire.
Borough of Helston. Sir Viel Vivian Bar. Sydney Godolphin Esquire.
Borough of Saltash. Sir John Davie Bar. * William Jennings Esquire. *
Borough of Gamelford. Robert Russel Esquire. Sir James Smith Knight.
Borough of Port-Pigham alias Westow. John Trelawny of Trelawney Esquire. John
Trelawney of Westmin. Esquire.
Borough of Crampound. Nicholas Herle Esquire. * John Tanner Esquire.
Borough of Eastlow. Sir Jonathan Trelawney Bar. Henry Seymour of Langley Esquire.
Borough of Penryn. Charles Smith Esquire. * Sir Nicholas Slanning Knight. of the Bath
and Bar. *
Borough of Tregony. Hugh Boscawen Esquire. Charles Trevannian Esquire.
Borough of Bossiney. Charles Bodvile Roberts Esquire. Narcissus Luttrel of
Gray's Inn Esquire. *
Borough of St. Ives. Edw. Noseworthy Senior Esquire. Edw. Noseworth Junior Esquire.
Borough of Foway. Jonathan Rashlegh Esquire. John Trefry Esquire.
Borough of St. Germans. Daniel Elliot Esquire. Richard Elliot Esquire.
Borough of St. Michael. Sir John S. Aubin Bar. Walter Vincent Esquire.
Borough of Newport. William Coryton Esquire. Ambrose Manaton Esquire.
Borough of St. Mawes. Sir Joseph Tredenham Knight. Henry Seymour Jun. Esquire.
Borough of Killinton. Richard Carew Esquire. * William Trevisa Esquire. *
Cumberland 6. Edward Lord Morpheth Sir John Lowther
City of Carlisle. Sir Philip Howard Knight. Sir Christopher Musgrave Knight.
Borough of Cockermouth. Sir Richard Grahme Bar. Orlando Gee Esquire.
Derby 4. William Lord Cavendish William Sacheverell Esquire.
Town of Derby. Anchitel Gray Esquire. George Vernon Esquire.
Devonshire 26. Sir William Courtenay Bar. Sam. Roll Esquire.
City of Exeter. William Glyde Esquire. Malachy Pine Esquire.
Borough of Totnes. Sir Edward Seymour Bar. Edward Seymour Esquire.
Borough of Plymouth. Sir John Maynard Knight. His Majesty's Sergeant at Law. John
Spark Esquire.
Town of Okehampton. Sir Arthur Harris Bar. Josias Calmady Esquire.
Borough of Barnstable. John Basset Esquire. Richard Lee Esquire.
Borough of Plympton. George Treby Esquire. John Polexfen Merchant *
Borough of Honiton. Sir Walter Young Bar. Sir Thomas Putt Bar.
Borough of Tavistock. Edward Russel Esquire. Sir Francis Drake Bar.
Borough of Ashburton. Thomas Reynell Esquire. Richard Duke Junior Esquire. *
Borough of Clifton, Dartmouth and Hardness. John Upton Esquire. Edward Yard Esquire.*
Borough of Beralston. Sir John Trevor Knight. Sir William Bastard Knight.
Borough of Tiverton Samuel Foot Esquire. Sir Henry Ford Knight.
Dorsetshire 20. Thomas Strangeways Esquire. Thomas Freke Esquire.
Town of Pool. Henry Trenchard Esquire. Thomes Chafin Esquire.
Borough of Dorchester. Sir Francis Hollis Knight. and Bar. Nicholas Gould Merchant.
Borough of Lyme-Regis. Henry Henley Esquire. Thomas Moore Esquire. *
Borough of Weymouth. Sir John Coventry Knight. of the Bath. Sir John Morton Knight.
and Bar. *
Melcom-Regis. Thomas Brown Esquire. Michael Harvey Esquire.
Borough of Bridport. Sir Robert Henley Bar.* William Brag Esquire.*
Borough of Shafton alias Shaftsbury. Sir Matthew Andrews Knight. * Thomas Bennett
Esquire.
Borough of Wareham. Thomas Earl Esquire. George Savage Esquire.
Borough of Corf-Castle. Nathaniel Bond Esquire.* Sir Nathan Naper Knight. and Bar.
Durham 4. William Bows Esquire. * Tho. Fetherston Hough Esquire. *
City of Durham. Sir Richard Lloyd * William Blakeston Esquire. *
Essex 8. Henry Mildmay Esquire. John Lemot Honywood Esquire. *
Borough of Colchester. Sir Harbottle Grimston Bar. Sir Walter Clarges Bar.
Borough of Malden. Sir William Wiseman Knight. and Bar. Sir Thomas Darcy Bar. *
Borough of Harwich. Sir Philip Parker Bar. * Sir Thomas Mydalton Knight.
Gloucestershire 8. Sir Ralph Dutton Bar. Sir John Guise Bar.
City of Gloucester. Evan Seys Sergeant at Law by one Indenture. Sir Charles
Berkley * by one Indenture. Evan Seys Sergeant at Law by another Indenture.
William Cook Esquire. by another Indenture.
Borough of Cirencester. Sir Robert Atkins Junior Knight. Henry Powle Esquire.
Borough of Tukesbury. Sir Hen. Capel Knight. of the Bath Sir Francis Russel Bar.
Herefordshire 8. John Viscount Scudamore Sir Edw. Harley Knight. of the Bath
City of Hereford. Bridstock Hartford Esquire. Paul Foley Esquire.
Borough of Lempster. John Dutton Colt Esquire. Thomas Coningesby Esquire.
Borough of Webley. John Birch Esquire. John Booth Esquire.*
Hertfordshire 6. Sir Jonathan Keat Bar. * Sir Charles Caesar Bar.
Borough of St. Albans. Thomas Pope Blount Esquire Samuel Grimston Esquire. *
Borough of Hertford. Sir Thomas Bide Knight. Sir William Cooper Bar.*
Huntingtonshire 4. Sir Thomas Proby Bar.* Silus Titus Esquire.
Borough of Huntington. Sidney Wortley, alias Montague Esquire. Lyonel Walden Esquire. *
Kent 10. Sir Vere Fane Knight. of the Bath. Edward Dering Esquire.
City of Canterbury. Sir Thomas Hardress Knight. His Majesty's Sergeant at Law.*
Edward Hales Esquire.
City of Rochester. Sir John Banks Bar. Francis Barrel Serj. at Law. *
Borough of Maidston. Sir John Tufton Knight. and Bar. Thomas Fane Esquire. *
Borough of Quinborough. Sir. Edward Hales Bar. William Glanvil Esquire.
Lancaster 14. Charles Lord Brandon Sir Charles Houghton*
Borough of Lancaster. Richard Kirkby Esquire. William Spencer Esquire.*
Borough or Town of Preston in Amounderness. Sir John Otway Knight. Edward Rigby
Sergeant at Law.
Borough of Newton. Sir John Chicheley Knight. Andrew Fountain Esquire.
Borough of Wigorn. Charles Earl of Ancram Banks Esquire.*
Borough of Clithero. Sir Ralph Ast on Bar. Sir Tho. Stringer Serj. at Law.
Borough of Leverpool. Ruishee Wentworth Esquire. John Dubois Merchant
Leicester 4. Bennet Lord Sherrard Sir John Hartop Bar.
Town of Leicester. John Gray Esquire. Sir Henry Beaumont Knight.
Lincoln 12. George Lord Viscount Castleton Sir Robert Carr Knight. and Bar.
City of Lincoln. Sir Thomas Meers Knight. Henry Mounson Esquire.
Borough of Boston. Sir Anthony Irby Knight. Sir William York Knight.
Borough of Great Grimsby. William Broxholme Esquire. George Pelham Esquire.
Town of Stamford. Sir Richard Cust Bar. William Hyde Esquire.
Borough of Grantham. Sir William Ellis Bar. Sir John Newton Bar.
Middlesex 8. Sir William Roberts Bar. Sir Robert Atkins Bar.
City of Westminster. Sir William Poultney Knight. Sir William Waller Knight.
London. Sir Robert Clayton Knight. Sir Thomas Player Knight. William Love Esquire. Thomas
Pilkinton Esquire.
Monmouth 3. Sir Trevor Williams Bar. William Morgan Esquire.
Borough of Monmouth. John Arnold Esquire.
Norfolk 12. Sir John Hobert Bar. Sir Peter Gleen *
City of Norwich. William Lord Paston Augustine Briggs Esquire.
Town of Lyn-Regis. John Turner Esquire. Simon Tailor Esquire.
Town of Great Yarmouth. Richard Huntington Esquire George England Esquire.*
Borough of Thetford. Sir Joseph Williamson Knight. William Harbord Esquire.
Borough of Castlerising. Sir Robert Howard Knight. James Host Esquire.
Northampton 9. John Parkhurst Esquire. Miles Fleetwood Esquire. *
City of Peterborough. Francis St. John Esquire. Charles Orme Esquire *
Town of Northampton. Ralph Montague Esquire. Sir William Langham Knight.*
Town of Brackley. Richard Wenman Esquire. * Sir Will. Egerton Knight. of the Bath*
Borough of Higham Ferrers. Sir Rice Rudd Bar.
Northumberland 8. Sir John Fenwick Bar. Sir Ralph Delaval Bar.
Town of Newcastle upon Tine. Sir William Blacket Bar. Sir Ralph Carr Knight.*
Borough of Morpeth. Sir George Downing Knight. Bar. Daniel Collingwood Esquire.*
Town of Berwick upon Tweed. Ralph Gray Esquire. John Rushworth Esquire.
Nottingham 8. Sir Scroop How Knight. John White Esquire.
Town of Nottingham. Robert Pierrepoint Esquire. Richard Slater Esquire.
Borough of Eastretford. Sir William Hickman Bar. Sir Edward Nevile Knight. Bar.
Town of Newark upon Trent. Sir Robert Markham Knight. Sir Richard Rothwell*
Oxon 9. Sir John Cope Bar. Thomas Hoard Esquire.*
University of Oxon. Sir Leoline Jenkins* Dr. Charles Perrot*
City of Oxon. Broom Whorwood Esquire. William Wright Esquire.
Borough of New-Woodstock. Sir Littleton Osbaldeston Bar. Nicholas Baynton Esquire.
Borough of Banbury. Sir John Holman Bar.
Rutland 2. Sir Abel Barker* Philip Sherrard Esquire.
Salop 12. Richard Newport Esquire. Sir Vincent Corbet Bar.
Town of Salop. Sir Richard Corbet Bar. Edward Kinaston Esquire.
Borough of Bruges alias Bridgenorth. Sir William Whitmore Bar. Sir Tho.
Whitmore Knight. of the Bath.
Borough of Ludlow. Francis Charleton Esquire. Thomas Walcot Esquire.
Borough of Great Wenlock. William Forrester Esquire. John Woolryche Esquire.*
Town of Bishops-Castle. Edward Waring Esquire. Richard Schriven Esquire.*
Somerset 18. Sir William Portman Bar. and Knight. of the Bath. George Speak Esquire.*
City of Bristol. Sir Robert Cann. Knight. Bar. Sir John Knight, Knight.
City of Wells. John Hall Esquire. William Coward Esquire. Recorder
Borough of Taunton. John Trenchard Esquire. Edmund Prideaux Esquire.
Borough of Bridgewater. Sir Haswell Tynt Bar. Ralph Stawell Esquire.*
Borough of Minehead. Francis Lutterell Esquire. Thomas Palmer Gent. *
Borough of Ilester. William Strode Esquire. ^ohn Speak Esquire.
Borough of Milbornport. ^^hn Hunt Esquire. ^enry Bull Esquire.
Southampton 26. W^lliam Lord Russel Sir Francis Roll Knight.*
City of Winchester. Jam^s Lord Annesley Sir John Clobery Knight.
Town of Southampton. Sir Benjamin Newland Knight. Sir Ch^rles Wyndham Knight.*
Town of Portsmouth. George Leg Esquire. Richard Norton Esquire.
Borough of Yarmouth. Sir Richard Mason Knight. Thomas Windham Esquire.*
Borough of Peterfield. Sir John Norton Bar. Leonard Bilson Esquire.
Borough of Newport alias Medona. Sir Robert Dillington Bar. John Leigh Esquire.*
Borough of Stockbridge. William Strode Esquire. Henry Whitehead Esquire.
Borough of Newton. Sir John Holmes Knight. Lemuel Kingdon Esquire.
Borough of Christ Church. Sir Thomas Clarges Knight. George Fulford Esquire.*
Borough of Whitchurch. Henry Wallop Esquire. Richard Ayliffe Esquire.
Borough of Limmington. John Button Esquire. John Burrard Esquire.
Town of Andover. Sir Robert Henley Knight.* Francis Powlett Esquire.
Staffordshire 10. Sir Walter Bagott Bar. Sir John Bowyer Bar.
City of Litchfield. Daniel Finch Esquire. * Michael Biddulph Esquire.
Borough of Stafford. Sir Thomas Wilbraham Bar.* Sir Thomas Armstrong Knight.
Borough of Newcastle under Line. Sir Thomas Bellot Bar. William Leviston Gower
Esquire.
Borough of Tamworth. Thomas Thynne Esquire. Sir Andrew Hacket Knight.*
Suffolk 16. ^ir William Spring Bar.* ^ir Samuel Bernadiston Bar.
Borough of Ipswich. S^^ John Barker Knight. and Bar. Jon Wright Esquire.
Borough of Dunwich. Sir Robert Kemp Bar. Sir ^hilip Skippon Knight.
Borough of Orford. Sir John Duke Bar. Henry Parker Esquire.*
Borough of Asbborough. John B^nce Esquire.* John Corrance Esquire.*
Borough of Sudbury. Sir Gervase Elwes Bar. Gervase Elwes Esquire.
Borough of Eye. Charles Fox Esquire. * George Walch Esquire.*
Borough of S. Edmondsbury. Sir Thomas Harvey Knight. Thomas Jermyn Esquire.
Surrey 14. Arthur Onslow Esquire. George Evelyn of Wotton Esquire.
Borough of Southwark. Sir Richard How Knight. Peter Rich Esquire.
Borough of Blechingly. George Evelyn of Nutfield Esquire. John Morris Esquire. *
Borough of Ryegate. Roger James Esquire. Dean Goodwyn Esquire.
Borough of Guilford. Morgan Randyl of Chilworth Esquire. * Richard Onslow of
West-Clandon E^q.
Borough of Gatton. Sir Nicolas Carew Knight. Thomas Turgis Esquire.
Borough of Haslemere. Francis Dorington Esquire. Denzil Onslow Esquire.
Sussex 20. Sir John Pelham Bar. Sir Nicholas Pelham Knight. *
City of Chichester. Richard Farrington Esquire. * John Braman Esquire.
Borough of Horseham. Anthony Eversfield Esquire. John Michell Esquire.
Borough of Midhurst. John Lewkener Esquire. John Alford Esquire.
Borough of Jews. Richard Bridger Esquire. Thomas Pelham Esquire.
Borough of New Shoreham. John Cheale Senior Esquire. John Hales Esquire.
Borough of Bramber. Henry Sidney Esquire. Henry Goreing Esquire.
Borough of Steyning. Sir John Fagg Bar. Philip Gill Esquire.
Borough of East-Grimstead. Goodwyn Wharton Esquire. * William Jephson Esquire. *
Borough of Arundel. William Garway Esquire. James Butler Esquire.
Warwickshire 6. Sir Edward Boughton Bar. Robert Burdet Esquire.
City of Coventry. Richard Hopkins Esquire. John Stratford Esquire. *
Borough of Warwick. Thomas Lucy Esquire. Richard Booth Esquire.
Westmorland 4. Alan Bellingham Christopher Phillipson Esquire. *
Borough of Apulby. Anthony Lowther Esquire. Richard Tufton Esquire.
Wiltshire 34. Sir Walter St. John Bar. * Thomas Thynne Esquire.
City of New Sarum. Sir Thomas Mompesson Knight. Alexander Thistlethwaite Esquire.
Borough of Wilton. Thomas Herbert Esquire. Sir John Nicholas Knight. of the Bath *
Borough of Downton. Sir Joseph Ash Bar. Maurice Bockland Esquire.
Borough of Hindon. Sir Richard Grobham How Knight. Bar. Richard How Esquire.
Borough of Westbury. William Trenchard Esquire. Edward Norton Esquire.
Borough of Hersbury. William Ash Esquire. Edward Ash Esquire.
Borough of Calne. Sir George Hungerford Knight. Lionel Ducket Esquire. *
Borough of the Devizes. Sir Giles Hungerford Knight.* John Eyles Esquire.*
Borough of Chiphenham. Sir Edw. Hungerford Knight. of the Bath.* Samuel Ash Esquire.*
Borough of Malmsbury. Sir William Escourt Bar. Sir James Long Bar.
Borough of Cricklade. Edmund Webb Esquire. William Lentham Esquire.
Borough of Great Bedwin. William Finch Esquire. * Francis Stonehouse Esquire.
Borough of Lugdersale. Thomas Neal Esquire. John Garrard Esquire.
Borough of Old Sarum Henry Lord Colerain* Sir Eliab Harvey
Borough of Wooton Basset. Henry St. John Esquire. * Laurence Hyde Esquire.
Borough of Marleborough. Thomas Lord Bruce * Thomas Bennet Esquire.
Worcestershire 9. Samuel Sandys Esquire. Thomas Foley Esquire.
City of Worcester. Sir Francis Winnington Knight. Thomas Street one of His
Majesty's Sergeants at Law.
Borough of Droitwich. Henry Coventry Esquire. Principal Secretary of State. Samuel
Sandys Junior Esquire.
Borough of Evesham. Sir James Rushout Bar. Henry Parker Esquire.
Borough of Bewdley. Philip Foley Esquire.
York 30. Charles Lord Clifford Henry Lord Fairfax
City of York. Sir Henry Thompson Knight. Sir John Hewly Knight.
Town of Kingston upon Hull. Sir Michael Warton Knight. * William Gee Esquire. *
Borough of Knaesborough. Sir Thomas Slingsby Bar. William Stockdale Esquire.
Borough of Scarsborough William Thompson Esquire. Francis Thompson Esquire.
Borough of Rippon Richard Stern Esquire. Christopher Wandesford Esquire.
Borough of Richmond. Thomas Craddock Esquire. Humphry Wharton Esquire.
Borough of Heydon. Sir Hugh Bethell Knight. Henry Guy Esquire.
Borough of Corfe Boroughbrig. Sir Thomas Mauliverer Bar. Sir John Brook Knight. *
Borough of Malton. William Palms Esquire. Sir Watkinson Payler Bar.
Borough of Thirske. Nicholas Sanderson Esquire. Sir William Franklan Knight.
Borough of Aldborough. Sir Brian Stappleton Bar. Sir Godfrey Copley Bar.
Borough of Beverly. Sir John Hotham Bar. Michael Warton Esquire.
Borough of North-Allerton. Sir Gilbert Gerrard Bar. Sir Henry Calverly Knight.
Borough of Pontefract. Sir John Dawney Knight. Sir Patience Ward Knight.

BARONS Of the CIN QUE-PORTS (16.)
Port of Hastings. Sir Robert Parker Bar. John Ashsburnham Esquire.
Town of Winchelsea. Creswel Draper Esquire. Thomas Austin Esquire.
Town of Rye. Sir John Dorrell Knight. Thomas Frewen Esquire.
Port of New Rumney. Sir Charles Sedley Bar. Paul Barrett Esquire.
Port of Hythe. Sir Edward Dering Bar. Edward Hales Esquire. *
Port of Dover. William Stokes Esquire. Thomas Papillon Esquire.
Port of Sandwich. John Thurban Esquire. Sir James Oxenden Knight. Bar.
Port of Seaford. Sir William Thomas Bar. Herbert Stapley Esquire.

WALES (24.)
ANGLESEY II. Richard Bulkeley Esquire
Town of Bewmorris. Henry Bulkeley Esquire
BRECON II. Richard Williams Esquire
Town of Brecon. John Jefferys Esquire
CARDIGAN II. Edward Vaughan of Trouscoad Esquire.
Town of Cardigan. Hector Phillips Esquire
CARMARTHEN II. John Lord Vaughan Knight. of the Bath.
Town of Carmarthen. Altham Vaughan Esquire
CARNARVAN II. Thomas Bulkley of Dinas Esquire
Town of Carnarvon. Thomas Mostin of Glotheth Esquire
DENBY II. Sir Thomas Mydelton Bar.
Town of Denbigh Sir John Salisbury Bar.
FLINT II. Mutton Davis Esquire
Town of Flint. Roger Whitley Esquire
GLAMORGAN II. Bussy Mansel Esquire
Town of Cardiffe. Sir Robert Thomas Bar.
MERIONETH I. Sir John Win Knight. Bar.
PEMBROOK. III. Sir Hugh Own Bar.
Town of Haverford West. Thomas Owen Esquire
Town of Pembrook. Arther Owen Esquire
MONTGOMERY II. Edward Vaughan Esquire
Town of Montgomery. Matthew Price Esquire
RADNOR II. Rowland Guynne Esquire
Town of Radnor. Griffith Jones Esquire

The COMMONS in all 513.

Historical Collections. OR THE CONTINUATION Of the PROCEEDINGS Of the
PARLIAMENT, Begun and Dissolved AT OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1681.

Historical Collections. OR THE CONTINUATION Of the PROCEEDINGS Of the
PARLIAMENT Begun and Dissolved AT OXFORD.
Fame. BEing fully satisfied with the account which you gave me, of the
Proceedings of the last Parliament at Westminster, I took my flight into the
Country, thinking to have opened my Packet: But when I came there I could
hardly find any Body at home; all People were so busied with the New Elections,
and taken up with future expectations, that they little minded what was past.
Thereupon I resolved to stay a while before I exposed my self to those, whose
thoughts I found were bent another way. Upon these considerations, I followed
the Crowd to Oxford. But I had hardly trimmed my Weather beaten Wings, before
the Parliament was dissolved there too. So then I thought it my best way to
come up to London again, and find out my Old Friend Truth, and then to take my
Progresses with a complete and perfect Relation.

Now therefore I desire thee to favor me with an Account of the main
Transactions in this same short Parliament at Oxford.


Truth. That Is soon done.


Fame. It Is so; and therefore the trouble being the less, I am the more bold to
desire it; in hopes that by keeping Thee company, I may convince the World of
the ill Opinion it has of me of being a Liar.


Truth. Falsehood in things of this Nature is of a dangerous importance, and
therefore I will tell the Relation barely without Welt or Guard; and do thou be
sure to make no Additions thy self.


Fame. I shall be very punctual in observing thy Instructions.


Truth. Know then that the Parliament being appointed to meet upon the 21st. of
March 1681. And the time of Sessions approaching, the King upon the Twelf of
March removed to Windsor, Upon the Fourteenth he removed to Oxford, and in his
way was met upon the Borders of the County, by the High Sheriff with his
Attendants, and at Whateby by the Lord Norris, Lord Lieutenant of the County,
with such an appearance of the Gentry, that hardly any were found missing, but
such as were known to be hindered by Sickness, or other lawful Impediment. By
whom together with the Two Troops of the County Militia; his Majesty was
conducted to the Eastgate of the City, where he was received by the Mayor, and
the rest of the City Magistrates; and the Recorder, Sergeant Cook, welcomed in
a set Speech; and after the usual Presents made by the Mayor, and among the
rest of the Mace, which was returned; the Mayor then carrying the Mace before
his Majesty, with the rest of the Brethen, attended his Majesty to
Christ-Church-Gate. After that the King passing to his Appartment in the
College, was received by the Bishop with a Latin Speech upon his Knes attended
by the Canons; and the next Morning was attended by the Vice Chancellor, the
Doctors, Professors, Proctors and University Orator. The Vice Chancellor laid
the Beadle's Staves at the Kings Feet; and then the Orator addressed himself in
Latin to the King -- and in English to the Queen, the Vice Chancellor, Orator,
and Doctors kneeling all the while.


Fame. These Ceremonies do not happen every day, and therefore you have obliged
me with the Relation.


Truth. Upon the 21st of March, the parliament met according to Summons, at
Oxford, in the Convocation House; at what time his Majesty went to the House of
Lords, which State in the Geometry-School and being seated in his Throne, with
his Royal Robes and the usual Solemnities, declared himself in a Gracious
Speech to Both Houses, to the Effect as follows.

That the unwarrantable Proceedings of the last House of Commons, were the
reason of his parting with them; for that he who would never use Arbitrary
Government himself, would not suffer it in others. That whoever calmly
considered the Assurances he had renewed to that last Parliament, and what he
had recommended to them, his Foreign Alliances, the Examination of the Plot,
and the Preservation of Tangier, and reflect upon their unsuitable returns,
might rather wonder at his Patience then that he grew weary of their
Proceedings; that it was his Interest, and should be as much his Cause as
theirs to preserve the Liberty of the Subject, the Crown not being safe when
that is in danger. That by calling this Parliament so soon, he let them see,
that no Irregularities of Parliament should make him out of Love with them: by
which means he gave them another Oppertunity to provide for the Public
security, and had given one Evidence more, that he had not neglected his part.

That he hoped, the ill Success of former heats would dispose them to a better
Temper.

That as for the further Prosecution of the Plot, trial of the Lords, etc. he
omited to press them, as being obvious to consideration, and so necessary for
the Public safety. But desired them not to lay so much weight upon any one
Expedient against Popery, as to determine that all other were ineffectual.

'That what he had so often declared 'touching the Succession, he should not
recede from. But that to remove all reasonable Fears, that might arise from the
Possibility of a Popish Successor, if means could be found that in such a Case
the Administration should remain in Protestant hands, He should be ready to
hearken to any such expedient by which Religion might be secured and Monarchy
not destroyed.

Lastly, He advised them to make the Known and Establish Laws of the Land the
Rules and Measures of their Votes.

Which done he commanded the Commons to return to their House and make choice
of their Speaker. Thereupon Mr. Williams Speaker of the last Parliament being
again made choice of, and conducted to the Chair, made a short Speech to the
House upon his Acceptance.

That the Unamious choice of the House had lest him without excuse to disable
himself for their Service, it being to be supposed that who the Commons Elected
was fit for the Trust.

That it did not become him to offer assurance of his Constancy, Fidelity, and
Vigilance, the just Sense of the Honor conferred upon him, being an Engagement
for him to do and suffer whatever Flesh and Blood could do and suffer in their
choice.

That it was a time not to speak much, but act well, and therefore desired that
their Debates might be regular and orderly without reflection or passion, and
that his behavior might have their kind and candid Construction.

Upon Tuesday the 22d of March, the Commons attended his Majesty in the Lord's
House; at which time Mr. Speaker humbly represented in another Speech.

That the Commons in obedience to his Royal pleasure for the disposal of
themselves in that great Assembly to serve him, had with one voice elected him
their Speaker, as having had the Honor to serve his Majesty and the Commons in
that Trust in the last Parliament.

Whereupon with all humility he did again by their Command to receive his
pleasure with a Head and Heart full of Loyalty to his Sacred Person, armed with
a settled resolution never to depart from his Majesty's ancient and well
settled Government.

To which the Lord Chancellor in few words made Answer, That his Majesty had
well considered the Choice, and did very well approve of the Election, and
allowed him for Speaker.

Then Mr. Speaker made another Address to his Majesty, setting forth how much
his Majesty's Grace and favor in the last Parliament, continued by the Honor
he had in the next, did increase his Obligations to Loyalty. That as he was set
in a High Station, so he would endeavor to manifest his uprightness in it;
believing that his Majesty's service in that great Place was one and the same
with that of his Commons, no more to be divided then his Crown and Sceptor.

After which, he made an humble claim in the Name of the Commons of England, of
all the Ancient Rights for them and their Servants, freedom of Speech in their
debates, and liberty of access to his Person, according to Custom.

Concluding by way of Petition to his Majesty, that nothing by him said, either
through weakness or inadvertency, should tend to the prejudice of the Commons,
and that his behavior and proceedings might receive a favorable
Interpretation from his Majesty.

To which the Lord Chancellor by his Majesty's command reurned for Answer, That
their Petitions were fully and freely granted, in as large and ample manner as
ever any House enjoyed them; his Majesty being assured that the House would
make as prudent a use of them, as ever any of their Ancestors; and that his own
particuar Petition was grateful to the King too, knowing that he would be as
ready to avoid, as the King to forgive mistakes. The next day being the
Twenty-third, was spent in taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
subscribing the Declaration directed by the Act made in the Thirteenth year of
the King.

Thursday the Twenty-Fourth produced little remarkable, several Petitions about
Elections were presented; and an Order made for setting the next Saturday aside
to consider of a means for securing the Protestant Religion, and the safety of
the Kings Person.

The Twenty-Fift of March, being Friday, the Lords sent down the Answer of Sir
William Scrogs to the Articles of Impeachment exhibited against him by the
former Parliament, together with his Petition to the house of Peers. But
nothing was done in it; for the House fell upon three affairs of Higher
concernment.

The first was the consideration of the matter relating to a Bill, which had
passed both Houses in the last Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Repeal of a
Statute made in the Thirty-Fift Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, but was
not tendered to his Majesty for his Royal Assent. Whereupon it was resolved
that a Message should be sent to the Lords, to desire a Conferencc as to
matters relating to the Constitution of Parliaments in passing of Bills; and
Ordered a Committee to prepare what was fit to be offered at the said
Conference.

Another Message was also Ordered to be sent to the Lords to put them in mind,
that the Commons had formerly by their Speaker demanded judgment of High
Treason at their Bar against the Earl of Danby; and therefore to desire their
Lordships to appoint a day to give judgment against him the said Earl upon the
said Impeachment.

The same day the Examination of Ed. Fits-Harris, relating to the Popish Plot
was read in the House. Upon which the said Examination was Ordered to be
Printed, the said Fits-Harris to be impeached at the Lords Bar, and a
Committee appointed to draw up Articles against him.

The Sum of Fits-Harris's Examination was this, That in the Year 1672. One
Father-Gough, an English Priest should tell him at Paris, that within two Years
after, he should see the Catholic Religion established in England. To which
purpose if the King would not comply, that Order was taken that he should be
taken off and killed.

That the same Priest told him, that the D. of T. was a Catholic, so made by
his Mother, in whose Reign there would be no difficulty of doing it.

And farther, that the Declaration of Indulgence, and the War against Holland
were in Order to the introducing of the Catholic Religion into England.

And the same Author reported to him, That Madam came over to Dover, about the
same design.

That he knew several Commanders in the Army mustered upon Black Heath, to be
Roman-Catholick's, and that it was the common Intelligence and Opinion among
them that the said Army was raised to bring in the Romon-Catholick-Religion
into England.

That in the Year 1679. Marquess Montecuculi, the D. of Modena's Envoy, told
him, if he would undertake to kill the King, either in his own Person, or by
any other, he should have Ten-Thousand pound.

That the same Marquess told him, that upon killing the King, the Army in
Flanders and Parts adjoying to France, was to come over to destroy the
Protestant-Party, after which there should be no more Parliaments in England;
and that the D. of Y. was privy to all these designs. That in the Year 1680.
He met Kelley the Priest at Calice, who owned himself to be one of the
Murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that the same was done, much as
Prance had related it; and,

That Monsieur De-Puy a Servant to the D. of Y. had told him, soon after the
said Murder was committed, that the said Murder was consulted at Windsor; and
farther told him, that there was a necessity of taking off the King, and that
it would soon be done; with some other passages of less remark to the same
purpose. Upon this Information Mr. Secretary Jenkins was Ordered to go up and
impeach the said Fits-Harris, at the Bar of the Lords House.

In the mean time, that is to say, in the forenoon of the next day, being
Saturday the 26 of March; other Examinations of Mr. John Sergeant and David
Maurice, relating to the Popish-Plot were Read, and Ordered to be Printed. That
of Sergeant was short, that a Gentlewoman an Acquaintance of his in Flanders,
one Mrs. Skipwith told him, That Gawen, one of the Five Jesuits which were
Hanged, had maintained against a scruple of Conscience by her put, that the
Queen might not only lawfully kill the King for violating her Bed, but was
bound to do it, and that if she did not, she was guilty of his greater
Damnation in letting him continue so long.

Maurice's Information was shorter, That he heard the Gentlewoman confirm the
Truth of Gawens words.

Presently after, the House taking into debate the means for the security of
the Protestant Religion, and safety of his Majesty's Person, came to a
Resolution, that a Bill should be brought in for excluding James D. of York
from Inheriting the Imperial Crowns of England and Ireland, and the Dominions
and Territories thereto belonging.

The same Day in the Afternoon, the House being informed that the Lords had
refused to proceed upon their Impeachment of Edward-Fits-Harris, and had
directed, that he should be proceeded against at Common Law, They came to three
Resolves.

That it was the undoubted Right of the Commons in Parliament assembled to
impeach before the Lords in Parliament: any Peer or Commoner for Treason, or
any other Crime or Misdemeanour, and that the Refusal of the Lords to proceed
in Parliament upon such an Impeachment was a denial of Justice, and a violation
of the Constitution of Parliaments.

Secondly, That in the Case of Edward Fits-Harris, who had been impeached by
the Commons for High Treason before the Lords, with a Declaration, that in
convenient time they would bring up Articles against him, for the Lords to
resolve, That the said Fits-Harris should be proceeded against according to the
Course of Common Law, and not by way of Impeachment in Parliament, at that
time, was a violation of the Constitution of Parliaments, and an Obstruction to
the farther Discovery of the Popish-Plot, and of great danger to his Majesty's
Person, and the Protestant-Religion.

Thirdly for any Inferior Court to proceed against Edward Fits-Harris, or any
other Person lying under an Impeachment in Parliament, for the same Crime, for
which they stood impeached, was a High breach of the Privilege of Parliament.

After this, they Ordered two Bills to be brought in, The one for the better
Uniting his Majesty's Protestant-Subjects;

The other for banishing the most considerable Papists in England by their
Names out of his Majesty's Dominions.

Monday the Twenty-eighth Day of March, and last of the Session little
remarkable passed, only the Bill of Exclusion was read a Second time.

But these and all other their debates that Morning put a sudden Conclusion,
for soon after being sent for by the King to the House of Lords: his Majesty
told them, That their beginnings had been such that he could expect no good
success of this Parliament, and therefore thought fit to dissolve them, and
accordingly the Chancellor by the Kings command declared the Parliament
dissolved.

After the Dessolution of the Parliament, the King went back to Windsor, the
same Day, and from thence after a stay of some few Hours, returned to
White Hall*


Fame. I will not ask Thee, what were the Coffee-Houses Censures and Comments
upon an Action of so much importance, and so sudden as this.


Truth. No, for if Thou did, it would be to no purpose: For Thou know I
have little to do there; but the first thing that I saw in Public upon the
Stalls, was a Half-sheet of Paper entitled,

The Protestation of the Lords,
Upon rejecting the Impeachment of Mr. Fits-Harris; giving for Reasons, why it
was the undoubted Right of the Commons so to do, because great Offenses that
influence the Parliament, were most effectually determined in Parliament, nor
could the complaint be determined any where else. For that if the Party should
be Indicted in the Kings Bench, or any other Inferior Court for the same
Offense, yet it were the same Suit; an Impeachment being at the suite of the
People, but an Indictment at the suite of the King. Besides that they conceived
it to be a denial of Justice, in regard the House of Peers, as to Impeachments,
proceeding by Virtue of their Judicial, not their Legislative Power, could not
deny any Suitors, but more especially the Commons of England, no more then the
Courts of Westminster, or any other Inferior Courts could deny any Suite or
Criminal Cause regularly Commenced before them.

Signed according to the Printed Copy, Monmuoth Kent. Huntington. Bedford.
Salisbury. Clare. Stamford. Sunderland. Essex. Shaftsbury. Macclesfield.
Mordant. Wharton. Paget. Gray of Wark. Herbert of Cherbury. Cornwallis.
Lovelace. Crew.


Upon the Monday next after Easter-Week, came forth His Majesty's Declaration,
showing the Causes and Reasons that moved him to dissolve the Two last
Parliaments.

Wherein after he had set forth with how much reluctance he did it, and how
absolute his Intentions were to have complied, as far as would have consisted
with the very being of the Government, with any thing that could have been
proposed to him for preserving the Established Religion, the Liberty and
Property of the Subject at home, and supporting the Foreign Alliances, he took
notice of the unsuitable Returns of the House of Commons; their Addresses in
the Nature of Remonstrances; their Arbitrary Orders for taking Persons into
Custody for Matters that had no Relation to their Privileges; and their
strange Illegal Votes declaring diverse Emminent Persons, Enemies to the King
and Kingdom, without any Order or Process of Law or hearing their Defense.

That besides these Proceedings they had Voted,

That whoever should Lend any Money upon the Branches of the Revenue, or Buy
any Tally of Anticipation, or pay any such Tally should be adjudged to hinder
the sitting of Parliaments, and be answerable to the same in Parliament. Which
Votes, instead of giving him Assistance, tended rather to disable him, and to
expose him to all dangers that might happen at Home or Abroad, and to deprive
him of the possibility of supporting the Government it self, and to reduce him
to a more helpless Condition then the meanest of his Subjects.

That they had Voted the Prosecution of Protestant Dissenters, upon the
Penal-Laws a grievance to the Subject, a weakening to the Protestant Interest,
an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom. Whereby
they assumed to themselves a Power of suspending Acts of Parliament. Which
unwarrantable Proceedings were the Occasion of his parting with the first
Parliament. That having Assembled another at Oxford, he gave them warning of
the Errors of the former, and required them to make the Law of the Land their
Rule, as he resolved it should be his. Adding withal, that though he could not
depart from what he had so often declared touching the Succession, Yet to
remove all Reasonable fears that might arise from a Popish Successor; if means
could be found that in such a Case the Administration of the Government might
remain in Protestant Hands, he was ready to hearken to any expedient for the
preservation of the Established Religion without the Destruction of Monarchy.

Notwithstanding all which, no expedient could be found, but that of a Total
Exclusion, which he was so nearly concerned in Honor, Justice and Conscience
not to Consent to. Nor did he believe, as he had Reason so to do, but that if
he had in the last Parliament at Westminster consented to a Bill of Exclusion;
that the Intent was not to have rested there, but to have attempted some other
great and important Changes.

That the business of Fits-Harris, impeached by the Commons of High Treason,
and by the Lords referred to the Ordinary Course of Law, was on a sudden
carried to that Extremity by the Votes of the House of Commons, March 26. That
there was no possibility left of a Reconciliation.

Whereby an impeachment was made use of, to delay a Trial directed against a
professed Papist, charged with Treasons of an extraordinary Nature.

That nevertheless he was resolved that no Irregularities in Parliaments should
make him out of love with them, but by the Blessing of God to have frequent
Parliaments, and both in and out of Parliament, to use all his utmost
endeavors to extirpate Popery, and to redress the Grievances of his good
Subjects, and in all things to Govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom.
This Declaration being published, was likewise ordered to be read in all
Churches and Chapples thoroughout the Kingdom. And thus my dear Friend Fame
(for thou art some times a Friend to me as well as to Falsehood) I have been
Candid toward thee, in giving Thee plainly without Comment or Observations
either on the one side or the other, a true Account of the most Memorable
passages of the Two last Parliaments, in due Series and Connection for the aid
and assistance of thy Memory. Now take thy flight, and make the best Use of thy
Packet which thou can. If thou seek'st for more, go look among the
Intelligences; which though they will deceive Thee: may perhaps better tickle
the Fancies then the Judgments of the People.


A NEW AND TRUE CATALOGUE OF THE HOUSE of LORDS, Together with the Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, and Barons OF THE CINQUE PORTS; That were Returned to
serve in the Parliament of ENGLAND Assembled at OXFORD the twenty-first of
March 1681.
Note, That those that have this Mark (*) after them, were not Members of the
foregoing Parliament.

The LORDS
JAMES Duke of York and Albany. Rupert Duke of Cumberland Heneage Finch Baron
of Daventry, Lord Chancellor of England. John Earl of Radnor Lord President of
the Council. Arthur Earl of Anglesey Lord Privy Seal. Henry Duke of Norfolk.
Charles Seymore Duke of Somerset under Age. George Duke of Buckingham.
Christopher Duke of Albemarl. James Duke of Monmouth. Henry Duke of Newcastle.
Charles Lenox Duke of Richmond, under Age. Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of
Southampton, under Age. Henry Fitz- Roy Duke of Grafton. Charles Lord Marq. of
Winchester. Henry Lord Marq. of Worcester. Robert Earl of Lindsey, Lord Great
Chamberlain. James Earl of Brecon, Lord Steward of the Household. Aubrey Earl of
Oxford. Charles Talbot Earl of Salop, if at Age. Anthony Earl of Kent, William
Richard George Earl of Derby. John Earl of Rutland. Theophilus Earl of
Huntingdon. William Earl of Bedford. Philip Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.
Edward Earl of Lincoln, Charles Earl of Nottingham. James Eral of Suffolk.
Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex. James Earl of Salisbury. John Earl of
Exeter. John Earl of Bridgewater. Philip Earl of Leicester. James Earl of
Northampton. Edward Rich Earl of Warwick and Holand, under Age William Earl of
Devonshire. William Earl of Denbigh. John Earl of Bristol. Gilbert Earl of
Clare. Oliver Earl of Bullingbrook. Charles Earl of Westmorland. Robert Earl of
Manchester. Thomas Earl of Barkshire. John Earl of Mulgrave. Thomas Earl of
Rivers. Henry Earl of Peterborough. Thomas Earl of Stamford. Heneage Earl of
Winchelsea. Charles Earl of Carnarvon. Philip Earl of Chesterfield. Richare
Earl of Thanet. William Earl of Strafford. Robert Earl of Sunderland. Robert
Earl of Scarsdale. Charles Earl of Rochester. Henry Earl of St. Albans, Edward
Earl of Sandwich. Henry Earl of Clarendon. Arthur Earl of Essex. Robert Earl of
Cardigan. John Earl of Bath. Charles Earl of Carlisle. William Earl of Craven.
Robert Earl of Ailesbury. Richard Earl of Burlington. Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury. Edward Henry Lee Earl of Lichfield under Age. John Earl of
Guilford. Thomas, Earl of Sussex, Lewis Earl of Feversham, George Earl of
Hallifax. Charles Earl of Mackelsfield. Robert Earl of Yarmonth. George Earl of
Berkley. Edw. Conway Earl of Conway. Leicester Devereux Viscount Heriford under
Age Francis Viscount Montague. William Viscount Say and Seal. Baptist Viscount
Camden. Thomas Viscount Faulconbridge. Charles Viscount Mordant. Francis
Viscount Newport. Henry Lord Mowbroy, George Nevil Lord Abergavenny under Age.
James Lord Audley. Charles Lord La War. Thomas Lord Morley and Mounteagle.
Robert Lord Ferrers. Coniers Lord Darcy and Meynel. Charles Lord Fitzwater,
under Age. Henry Lord Gray, under Age. William Lord Stourton. Conyers Lord
Conyers. Henry Lord Sandys. Thomas Lord Windsor. Thomas Lord Cromwell. Ralph
Lord Eure. Philip Lord Wharton. Tho, Lord Willoughby of Parham. William Lord
Pagett. Charles Lord North Gray of Rolleston. James Lord Chandos. Robert Lord
Hunsdon. James Lord Norreys. Digby Lord Gerrard, under Age. Christopher Lord
Tenham. Fulk Lord Brook. Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton. Ford Lord Gray of
Wark. John Lord Lovelace. John Lord Paulet. William Lord Maynard. John Lord
Coventry. William Lord Howard of Escrick. Charles Lord Mohun under Age. Henry
Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Thomas Lord Leigh. Christopher Lord Hatton. Richard
Lord Byron. Richard Lord Vaughan. Francis Lord Carrington. William Lord
Widdrington. Edward Lord Ward. Thomas Lord Culpeper, Jacob Lord Astley. Charles
Lord Lucas. Edward Lord Rockingham. Robert Sutton Lord Lexington* under Age
Charles Henry Lord Wooton. Marmaduke Lord Langdale. Charles Lord Berklay of
Stratton, under Age. Francis Lord Holles. Charles Lord Cornwallis, George Lord
Delamere. Horatio Lord Townsend. Thomas Lord Crew. John Lord Frescheville.
Richard Lord Arundel of Trevise* James Lord Butler of Moor-park, under Age.
Hugh Lord Clifford, under Age. Richard Lord Butler of Weston. Edward Noel Lord
Titchfield.
Archbishops and Bishops.
Dr William Sancroft, Lord ArchBishop of Canterbury. Dr Richard Stern, L.
Archhishop of York, Dr Henry Compton, Lord Bishop of London. Dr. Nathaniel
Crew, Lord Bishop of Durham. Dr George Morley, Lord Bishop of Winchester. Dr.
Herbert Crofts, Lord Bishop of Hereford. Dr. Seth Ward, Lord Bishop of
Salisbury. Dr. Edward Rainbow Lord Bishop of Carlisle. Dr. John Dolben, Lord
Bishop of Rochester. Dr. Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Norwich. Dr. Peter
Gunning, Lord Bishop of Ely. Dr. Thomas Wood, Lord Bishop of Lichfield and
Coventry. Dr. Peter Mew, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. Dr. John Pierson, Lord
Bishop of Chester Dr. Humphry Lloyd, Lord Bishop of Bangor. Dr. William Lloyd,
Lord Bishop of Peterborough. Dr. Guy Carlton, Lord Bishop of Chichester. Dr.
Thomas Barlow, Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Dr. James Fleetwood, Lord Bishop of
Worcester. Dr. John Fell, Lord Bishop of Oxford. Dr. Thomas Lamplough, Lord
Bishop of Exeter. Dr. William Thomas, Lord Bishop of St. David's. Dr. William
Gulston, Lord Bishop of Bristol. Dr. William Beaw, Lord Bishop of Lland^ff. Dr.
William Lloyd, Lord Bishop of St. Asaph.
Note that the LORDS under Age are not Called by the King's WRIT. And Papists
are excluded by Law.

The COMMONS.
BEDFORDSHIRE. 4. William Lord Russel Sir Humphrey Monnox, Baronet.
Town of Bedford. Pawlet St. John Esquire. Sir William Franklin Knight.
BARKS. 9. William Barker Esquire. Richard Southby Esquire.
Borough of Reading. John Blagrave Esquire. Nathan Knight Esquire. Borough of
Wallingford. Scory Barker Esquire. * Taverner Harris Esquire

Borough of Abington. Sir. John Stonehouse.
BUCKS. 14. Thomas Wharton Esquire Richard Hambden Esquire.
Town of Buckingham. Sir Richard Temple Kinght of the Bath., and Baronet. * Sir
Ralph Varney Knight and Baronet.
Borough of Chipping-Wiccomb. Sir John Borlase Baronet. Thomas Lewis Esquire.
Borough of Aylsbury. Sir Thomas Lee Baronet. Sir Richard Ingoldesby Knight of
the Bath.
Borough of Agmondesham. Sir William Drake Knight. * William Cheyney Esquire.
Borough of Wendover John Hambden Esquire. Edward Backwel Esquire.
Borough of Great Marlow. John Borlase Esquire. * Thomas Hobby Esquire.
CAMBRIDGE 6 Sir Levinus Benet Baronet. Sir Robert Cotton Knight.
University of Cambridge. Sir Thomas Exton Knight. * Robert Bradey Dr. of
Physic.
Town of Cambridge. William Lord Allington. Sir Thomas Chicheley Knight.
CHESTER 4. Henry Booth Esquire. Sir Robery Cotton Knight and Bar.
City of Chester, William Williams [Speaker.] Roger Whitley Esquire.
CORNWALL. 44. Francis Roberts Esquire. Sir Richard Edgcomb Knight of the Bath.
Borough of Danhivid, alias Lanceston. Sir Hugh Piper Knight. William Harbord
Esquire.
Borough of Leskard. Sir Jonathan Trelawney Baronet. John Buller Esquire.
Borough of Lestwithiel. Sir John Carew Baronet. Walter Kendal Esquire.
Borough of Truro. Edward Boscawen Esquire. * Henry Ashhurst Esquire.
Borough of Bodwin Hender Roberts Esquire. Nicholas Glynn Esquire.
Borough of Helston. * Charles Godolphin Esquire. Sidney Godolphin Esquire.
Borough of Saltash. Bernard Greenvil Esquire. Sir John Davie Baronet.
Borough of Camelford. Robert Russel Esquire. Sir James Smith Knight.
Borough of Port-pigham alias Westlow. John Trelawney of Westminster. Esquire. *Jonathan
Trelawney of Coldrunoch.
Borough of Crampound. John Tanner Esquire. Nicholas Herle Esquire.
Borough of Eastlow. Sir Jonathan Trelawney Baronet. * John Kendal Esquire.
Borough of Penryn. Sir Nicholas Slanning Knight of the Bath and Baronet.
Charles Smith Esquire.
Borough of Tregony. Hugh Boscawen Esquire. Charles Trevannian Esquire.
Borough of Bossiney, Charles Bodvile Roberts Esquire. * Sir Peter Coryton Baronet.
Borough of St. Ives. Edward Noseworthy junior Esquire. *James Prade jun. Esquire.
Borough of Foway. Jonathan Rashleigh Esquire. John Trefry Esquire.
Boroagh of St. Germans. Daniel Elliot Esquire. Richard Elliot Esquire.
Borough of St. Michael. * Sir William Russel Knight. *Henry Vincent Esquire.
Borough of Newport. *William Morris Esquire. Ambrose Manaton Esquire.
Borough of St. Mawes. Sir Joseph Tredenham Knight. Henry Seymour jun. Esquire.
Borough of Killinton. William Coriton Esquire. Richard Carew Esquire.
CUMBERLAND 6. * Sir George Fletcher Baronet. Sir John Lowther Baronet.
City of Carlisle. Edward Lord Morpeth. Sir Christopher Musgrave Knight.
Borough of Cockermouth. Sir Richard Grahme Baronet. Orlando Gee Esquire.
DERBY 4 William Lord Cavendish. William Sacheveril Esquire.
Town of Derby. Anchitel Gray Esquire George Vernon Esp.
DE^ONSHIRE 26. Sir William Courtenay Baronel. Samuel Roll Esquire.
City of Exeter. * Sir Thomas Carew Knight. *Thomas Walker Esquire.
Borough of Totnes *John Kelland Esquire. *Charles Kelland Esquire.
Borough of Plymouth. Sir John Maynard Knight Sir William Jones Knight.
Town of Okehampton Sir Arthur Harris Baronet * Sir George Carry Knight.
Borough of Barnstable. John Basset Esquire. Richard Lee Esquire.
Borough of Plympton. Sir George Treby Knight. John Pollexfen Merchant.
Borough of Honiton, Sir Walter Young Baronet. Sir Thomas Putt Baronet.
Borough of Tavistock. Edward Russel Esquire. Sir Francis Drake Baronet.
Borough of Ashburton. Thomas Reynel Esquire. *William Stawel Esquire.
Borough of Clifton, Dartmouth and Hardness. Edward Yard Esquire. John Vpton Esquire.
Borough of Beralston. * Sir Duncomb Colchester Knight *John Elwell Merchant.
Borough of Tiverton. Samuel Foot Esquire. Sir Henry Ford Knight.
DORSETshIRE 20 Thomas Freke Esquire. Thomas Strangeways Esquire.
Town of Pool. Thomas Chafin Esquire. Henry Trenchard Esquire.
Borough of Dorchester. James Gould Esquire. Nathaniel Bond Esquire.
Borough of Lime. Regis. Henry Henly Esquire. Thomas Moor Esquire.
Borough of Weymouth. Sir John Coventry Knight. of Bath. Michael Harvey Esquire.
Melcomb-Regis. Sir John Morton Baronet. * Henry Henning Esquire.
Borough of Bridport. William Brag Esquire. * John Michel Esquire.
Borough of Shafton, alias Shaftsbury. Sir Matthew Andrews Knight. Thomas
Benn^t Esquire.
Borough of Wareham. Thomas Earl Esquire. George Savage Esquire.
Borough of Corfe-Castle. Sir Nath. Naper Knight and Baronet. *Richard Fowns
Esquire.
DURHAM 4. William Bows Esquire. Thomas Fetherstone Hough Esquire.
City of Durham. Sir Richard Lloyd Knight. * Samuel Tempest.
ESSEX 8. Henry Mildmay Esquire. John Lemot Honywood Esquire.
Borough of Colchester. Sir Harbottle Grimston Baronet. * Samuel Reynolds Esquire.
Borough of Malden. Sir William Wiseman. Knight. and Baronet. Sir Thomas Darcy
Baronet.
Borough of Harwich. Sir Philip Parker Baronet. Sir Thomas Mydalton Knight.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE 8. Sir Ralph Dutton Baronet. Sir John Guise Baronet.
City of Gloucester. Charles Lord Durseley. * Charles Somerset Lord Herbert.
Borough of Cirencester. Sir Robert Atkins Jun. Knight. Henry Powle Esquire.
Borough of Tukesbury. Sir Henry Capel Knight of the Bath. Sir Francis Russel
Baronet.
HEREFORDSHIRE 8. John Viscount Scudamore. Sir Edward Harley Knight of the Bath.
City of Hereford. Paul Foley Esquire. * Henry Aubrey Esquire.
Borough of Lempster. John Dutton Colt. Esquire. Thomas Conings by Esquire.
Borough of Webley, John Birch Esquire. John Booth Esquire.
HERTFORDSHIRE. 6 Sir Charles Caesar Knight. *William Hales Esquire.
Borough of St. Albans. Sir Thomas Pope Blount Baronet. Samuel Grimston Esquire.
Borough of Hertford Sir Thomas Bide Knight. Sir William Couper Baronet.
HUNTINGTONSHIRE 4 Sir Thomas Proby Baronet. Silas Titus Esquire.
Borough of Huntington. Sidey Wortley alias Mountague Esquire. Lionel Walden Esquire.
KENT 10. Sir Vere Fane Knight of the Bath. Edward Dering Esquire.
City of Canterbury. * Lewis Watson Esquire. * Vincent Denn Esquire.
City of Rochester. Sir John Banks Baronet. * Sir Francis Clerk Knight.
Borough of Maidstone. Sir John Tufton Knight and Baronet. Thomas Fane Esquire.
Borough of Quinborough. William Glonvil Esquire. * Gerard Gore Esquire.
LANCASTER. 14. Charles Lord Brandon. Sir Charles Houghton Barronet.
Borough of Lancaster. Richard Kirkby Esquire. William Spencer jun. Esquire.
Borough or Town of Preston in Amounderness, Sir Robert Carr Knight and
Baronet. Sir Gervas Elwes Baronet.
Borough of Newton. Sir John Chicheley Knight. Andrew Fountain Esquire.
Borough of Wigon* * Richard Lord Colchester. Charles Earl of Ancram.
Borough of Clithero. Sir Thomas Stringer Knight. * Henry Marsden Esquire.
Borough of Leverpool. Ruishee Wentworth Esquire. John Duobois Merchant.
LEICESTER 4. Bennet Lord Sherrard. Sir John Hartop Baronet.
Town of Leicester. John Gray Esquire. Sir Henry Beaumont Knight.
LINCOLN 12 George Lord Viscount Castleton. Sir Robert Carr Knight and Baronet.
City of Lincoln. * Sir Thomas Hussy Knight, Sir Thomas Meers Knight.
Borough of Beston Sir Anthony Irby Knight. Sir William York Knight.
Borough of Great Grimsby. William Broxolme Esquire. George Pelham Esquire.
Town of Stamford. Sir Richard Cust Baronet. William Hyde Esquire.
Borough of Grantham. Sir William Ellis Baronet. Sir John Newton Baronet.
MIDDLESEX 8. Sir William Robarts Knight. *Nicholas Raynton Esquire.
City of Westminster. Sir William Poultney Knight. Sir William Waller
Knight.
London. Sir Robert Clayton Knight Alderman. Thomas Pilkington Esquire. Alderman.
Sir Thomas Player Knight. William Love Esquire.
MONMOUTH 3. Sir Trevor VVelliams Baronet. Sir Edward Morgon Knight.
Borough of Monmouth. John Arnold Esquire.
NORFOLK 12. Sir John Hobart Baronet. Sir Peter Gleen Baronet.
City of Norwich. William Lord Paston. Augustine Briggs Esquire.
Town of Lyn-Regis. * Sir Henry Hobart Knight. Simon Tailor Esquire.
Town of Great Yarmouth. * Sir James Johnson Knight. George England Esquire.
Borough of Thetford. Sir Joseph Williamson Knight. William Harbord Esquire.
Borough of Castlerising. Sir Robert Howard Knight. James Host Esquire.
NORTHAMPTON 9. John Parkhurst Esquire. Miles Fleetwod Esquire.
City of Peterborough. *William Lord Fitz-Williams. Francis St. John Esquire.
Town of Northampton. Ralph Montague Esquire. Sir William Langham Knight.
Town of Brackley. Sir Richard VVenham Baronet. * William Lisle Esquire.
Borough of Higham-Ferries Sir Rice Rud Baronet.
NORTHUMBERLAND 8. Sir John Fenwick Baronet. Sir Ralph Dalaval Baronet.
Town of Newcastle upon Tine. Sir Ralph Carr Knight. Sir Nathaniel Johnson
Knight.
Borough of Morpeth. Sir George Downing Knight and Baronet. Daniel Collingwood
Esquire.
Town of Berwick upon Tweed. Ralph Gray Esquire. John Rushworth Esquire.
NOTTINGHAM 8. Sir Scroop How Knight. John White Esquire.
Town of Nottingham. Robert Pierrepoint Esquire. Richard Slater Esquire.
Borough of East-Retford. Sir Edward Nevile Knight and Baronet. Sir William
Hickman Baronet.
Town of Newark upon Trent. Sir Robert Markham Baronet. Sir Richard Rothwel
Baronet.
OXON. 9. Thomas Hord Esquire. * Sir Philip Harcourt Knight.
University of Oxon. Sir Lionel Jenkins Knight. Charles Perrot Dr. of Laws.
City of Oxon. William Wright Esquire. Broom Whorhood Esquire.
Borough of New-woodstock. * Henry Barty Esquire. Nicholas Baynton Esquire.
Borough of Banbury. Sir John Holman Baronet.
RUTLAND 2. Philip Sherrard Esquire. * Edward Fawkener Esquire.
SALOP. 12. Richard Newport Esquire. William Levison Gower Esquire.
Town of Salop. Sir Richard Corbet Baronet. Edward Kinnaston Esquire.
Borough of Burges alias Bridgnorth. Sir William Whitmore Baronet. Sir Thomas
VVhitmore Knight of the Bath.
Borough of Ludlow. Francis Charleton Esquire. * Charles Baldwyn Esquire.
Borough of Great VVenlock. John VVoolriche Esquire. William Forrester Esquire.
Town of Bishops Castle. Sir Richard Mason Knight. * Richard More Esquire.
SOMERSET. 18. Sir William Portman Baronet. George Speak Esquire.
City of Bristol. * Sir Richard Heart Knight. * Thomas Earl Esquire.
City of Bath. * Maurice Viscount Fitzharding. * Sir William Basset Knight.
City of Wells. William Coward Esquire. John Hall Esquire.
Borough of Taunton. Edmund Prideaux Esquire. John Trenchard Esquire.
Borough of Bridgwater. Sir Haswel Tynt Baronet. * Sir John Mallet Knight.
Borough of Minehead. Francis Lutterel Esquire. Thomas Palmer Esquire.
Borough of Ilcester. * Sir John St. Barb. * Thomas Hoddy jun. Esquire.
Borough of Milburn-Port. John Hunt Esquire. Henry Bull Esquire.
SOUTHAMPTON 6. * Charles Earl of Wiltshire. Sir Francis Roll Knight.
City of Winchester. James Lord Annesly. Sir John Cloberry Knight.
Town of Southampton. Sir Charles Wingham Knight. Sir Benjamin Newland Knight.
Town of Portsmouth. George Leg Esquire. Richard Norton Esquire.
Borough of Yarmouth. * Sir Thomas Littleton Baronet. Lemuel Kingdon Esquire.
Borough of Petersfield. Sir John Norton Baronet. Leonard Bilson Esquire.
Borough of Newport alias Medona. Sir Robert Dillington Baronet. John Leigh Esquire.
Borough of Stockbridge. * Essex Stroud Esquire. Oliver St. John's Esquire.
Boroagh of Newton. Daniel Finch Esquire. Sir John Holmes Knight.
Borough of Christ-Church. Sir Thomas Clarges Knight. George Fulford Esquire.
Borough of Whitchurch. Richard Ayleffe Esquire. Henry Wallop Esquire.
Borough of Limington. Henry Dawley Esquire. John Burrard Esquire.
Town of Andover. * Charles West Esquire. * John Collins Esquire.
STAFFORDSHIRE 10. Sir Walter Baggot Baronet. Sir John Bower Baronet.
City of Lichfield. Daniel Finch Esquire. Michael Biddulph Esquire.
Borough of Stafford. Sir Thomas Armstrong Knight. *Edwyn Skrymsher Esquire.
Borough of Newcastle under Line. Sir Thomas Bellot Bar. William Leveston Gower
Esquire.
Borough of Tamworth. Sir Thomas Thynne Bar. by one Indent. * Sir John Swynfen
Esquire. by one Indent. John Swynfen Esquire. by another Indenture. *John Turton Esquire.
by another Indenture.
SUffOLK 16. Sir Samuel Barnardiston Bar. Sir William Spring Bar.
Borough of Ipswich. John Wright Esquire. Sir John Barker Bar.
Borough of Dunwich. Sir Robert Kemp Bar. Sir Philip Skippon Knight.
Borough of Orford. Sir John Duke Bar. *Thomas Glemham Esquire.
Borough of Alborough* John Bence Esquire. John Corrance Esquire.
Borough of Sudbury. Sir Gervase Elwes Bar. Garvasa Elwes Esquire,
Borough of Eye. * Sir Robert Reve Bar. * Sir Charles Gaudey Knight Bar.
Borough of St, Edmondsbury. Sir Thomas Harvey Knight. Themas Jermyn Esquire.
SURREY 14. Arthur Onslow Esquire. George Evelyn of Wotton Esquire.
Borough of Southwark. Sir Richard How Knight. Peter Rich Esquire.
Borough of Bletchingly. * Sir William Gulston Knight. George Evelyn of Nutfield
Esquire.
Borough of Ryegate *Ralph Freeman Esquire. Dean Goodwin Esquire.
Borough of Guilford. Richard Onslow Esquire. Morgan Randyl Esquire.
Borough of Gatton. Sir Nicholas Carew Knight. Thonas Turgis Esquire.
Borough of Haslemeere. * Sir William More Bar. George Woodroffe Esquire.
SUSSEX 20. Sir William Thomas Bar. Sir John Fagg Bar.
City of Chichester. John Braman Esquire. Richard Farrington Esquire.
Burough of Horseham. * John Machell Esquire. John Michell Esquire.
Burough of Midhurst. * William Montague Esquire. * John Cook Esquire.
Burough of Lewis. Thomas Pelham Esquire. Richard Bridger Esquire.
Burough of New Shoreham. * Robert Fagg Esquire. John Hales Esquire.
Burough of Bramber. * Peirey Goring Esquire. Henry Goring Esquire.
Burough of Steyning. Sir John Fagg Bar. * Sir James Morton Knight.
Burough of East-Grinstead. * Sir Cyril Wych Knight. Henry Powel Esquire.
Burough of Arundel. William Garway Esquire. James Butler Esquire.
WARWICKSHIRE 6. * Sir Richard Newdigate Bar. * Thomas Mariot Esquire.
City of Coventry. Richard Hopkins Esquire. John Stratford Esquire.
Burough of Warwick. Thomas Lucy Esquire. * Thomas Coventry Esquire.
WESTMORELAND 4. * Sir John Lowther of Lowther, Bar. Allan Bellingham Esquire.
Burough of Apulby. * Sacvil Tufton Esquire. * Sir John Bland Bar.
WILTSHIRE 24. Sir Walter St. John Bar. Thomas Thine Esquire.
City of New Sarum. * John Windham Esquire. Alexander Thistlewait Esquire.
Burough of Wilton. Thomas Herbert Esquire. Sir John Nicolas Knight. of the Bath.
Burough of Downton. Sir Joseph Ash Bar. Maurice Bockland Esquire.
Burough of Hindon. Sir Richard Grobham How Knight. and Bar. * John Thynne Esquire.
Burough of Westbury William Trenchard Esquire. * John Ash Esquire.
Burough of Hetsbury. William Ash Esquire. Edward Ash Esquire.
Burough of Calne. Sir George Hungerford Knight. * Walter Norbon Esquire.
Borough of Devizes. * Sir Walter Earneley Bar. * George Johnson Esquire.
Borough of Chipengham. Sir Edward Hungerford Knight. of the Bath. Sir George Speak
Bar.
Borough of Malmesbury. Sir William Escourt Bar. Sir James Long Bar.
Borough of Cricklade. William Lenthal Esquire. Edmund Webb Esquire.
Borough of Great Bedwyn. * Sir John Earnly Knight. * John Wildman Esquire.
Borough of Ludgersale. Thomas Neal Esquire. by one Indenture. John Garrard Esquire. by
one Indenture. * Sir John Talbot K. by another Indenture. * John Smith Esquire. by
another Indenture.
Borough of Old Sarum. Sir Eliab Harvey Knight. Sir Thomas Mompesson Knight.
Borough of Wotton Basset. Henry St. John Esquire. * John Pleydal Esquire.
Borough of Marleborough. Thomas Lord Bruce. Thomas Bennet Esquire.
WORCESTERSHIRE 9. Thomas Foley Esquire. * Bridges Nanfan Esquire.
City of Worcester. Sir Frances Winington Knight. * Henry Herbert Esquire.
Borough of Droitwich. Henry Coventry Esquire. Samuel Sandys senior, Esquire.
Borough of Evesham. Sir James Rushout Bar. * Edward Rudge Esquire.
Borough of Bewdly. Philip Foley Esquire.
YORK 30. Charles Lord Clifford. Henry Lord Fairfax.
City of York. Sir Henry Thompson Knight. Sir John Hewly Knight.
Town of Kingston upon Hull. Sir Michael Warton Knight. William Gee Esquire.
Borough of Knaesborough. Sir Thomas Slingsby Bar. William Stockdale Esquire.
Borough of Scarborough. William Thompson Esquire. Francis Thompson Esquire.
Borough of Rippon. Richard Stern Esquire. Christopher Wandesford Esquire.
Borough of Richmond. * John Darcy Esquire. Humphrey Wharton Esquire.
Borough of Heydon. Henry Guy Esquire. William Boynton Esquire.
Borough of Boroughbrigg. Sir Thoms Mauliverer Bar. Sir John Brook Bar.
Borough of Malton. William Palms Esquire. Sir Watkinson Payler Bar.
Borough of Thirske. Sir William Franckland Knight. * Sir William Ascough Knight.
Borough of Aldborough. Sir Godfrey Copley Bar. * Sir John Reresby Bar.
Borough of Beverly. Sir John Hotham Bar. Michael Wharton Esquire.
Borough of Northallerton. Sir Gilbert Gerrard Bar. Sir Henry Calverly Knight.
Borough of Pontefract. Sir John Dawny Viscount Down. Sir Patience Ward Knight.

BARONS Of the CINQUE PORTS 16.
Port of Hastings. Sir Robert Barker Bar. * Thomas Mun Esquire.
Town of Winchelsea. * Sir Stephen Leonard Knight. Cresheld Draper Esquire.
Town of Rye. Sir John Dorrel Knight. Thomas Frewen Esquire.
Port of New Rumney. Sir Charles Sedley Bar. Paul Barret Esquire.
Port of Hythe. Sir Edward Deering Bar. Edward Hales Esquire.
Port of Dover. William Stokes Esquire. Thomas Papillon Esquire.
Port of Sandwich. Sir James Oxinden Knight, and Bar. John Thurhane Esquire.
Port of Seaford. * Edward Montague Esquire. * Edward Selwyn Esquire.
WALES 24.
ANGLESEY 2. Richard Bulkeley Esquire.
Town of Bewmorris. Henry Bulkeley Esquire.
BRECON 2. Richard Williams Esquire.
Town of Brecon. John Jefferies Esquire.
CARDIGAN 2. Edward Vaughan Esquire.
Town of Cardigan. Hector Philips Esquire.
CARMARTHEN 2. John Lord Vaughan Knight. of the Bath.
Town of Carmarthen. Altham Vaughan Esquire.
CARNARVAN 2. Sir Thomas Bulkly Knight and Baronet.
Town of Carnarvan. Thomas Mostyn Esquire.
DENBIGH 2. Sir John Trevor Knight.
Town of Denbigh. Sir John Salisbury Baronet.
FLINT 2. * Sir John Hanmer Knight and Bar.
Town of Flint. * Thomas Whitley Esquire.
GLAMORGAN 2. * Sir Edward Mansel Bar.
Town of Cardiffe. Bussy Mansel Esquire.
MERIONITH 1. * Sir Robert Owen Knight.
PEMBROOK 3. * William Wogan Esquire.
Town of Haverford-West. * Thomas Howard Esquire.
Town of Pembrook. Arthur Owen Esquire.
MONTGOMERY 2 Edward Vaughan Esquire.
Town of Montgomery Matthew Price Esquire.
RADNOR 2. Sir Rowland Gwynne Knight.
Town of Radnor. * Sir John Morgan Baronet.

The COMMONS, in all 513.

New Members Returned, 110.

THE CONTENTS.
A.
ADdress of the Lords. Page 11. Address of the Commons. Page 16.155. For
preservation of his Majesty's Person and Government. Page 23. Concerning Sir
Gorge Jeffereys. Page 47. Address in Answer to the Message about Tangier. Page
66. Address of the Commons for Dissenters. Ansel a Witness. Arnold John Esquire. a
Witness. Page 107. Attorney General Examined. Page 61.
B.
Beckley Earl, a Witness. Page 104. Bill of Association. Page 154. Bill of
Exclusion at London 32. at Oxford 244. Rejected Page 447. Bill for repeal of
the 35 of Eliz. not tendered* and questioned. Page 238. Mr. Bourk's Information.
Page 38. Lord Brook a Witness. Page 110.
C.
Sir Robert Can questioned Page 19. Is released Page 32. Carew Henry a Friar.
Page 155. Mr. Comin's Information. Page 41. Commons demand judgment against L.
Staf. Page 121.
D.
Date a Witness. Page 111. Dangerfield His Narrative ibid. Page 12. Kings
Declaration. Page 246. Dissenters. Page 61.6^. Mr. Dugdal his Narrative. Page
48.
E.
Elections considered. Page 11.
F.
Fast. Page 62. Feria his Narrative. Page 23. Lord Ferrers a Witness. Page 110.
Fitzharris Examination read. Page 239. Ordered to be impeached. ibid. Floyd Sir
Philip, a Witness. Page 104. Furnis a Witness. Page 99.106.
G.
Leveston Gowre a Witness. Page 111. Grand Juryes Examined. Page 61. Their
discharging Voted illegal.
H.
The Earl of Hallifax, his removal desired. Page 52. Hausel a Witness. Page
100. Ben. Harris Petitions the House. Page 54. Mr. Herbert sent for. Page 57.
Hobby Mr. a Witness. Page 108. Holt a Witness. Page 103. Sir Tho. Holt an
Obstructer of Petitioning Page 57. Mrs. Howard. Page 98.
I.
Mr. Jennison, his Information. Page 30. Irish Evidence. Page 55. Grand Jury
called into the House. Page 61.
K.
Kings Message concerning Tangier. Page 48. King goes to Oxford. Page 231.
Received by the Major and Bishop. Page 232. His Speech to the Parliament at
Oxford. Page 233.
L.
Leigh a Witness. Page 99.106. Lists of Papists names ordered to be returned
throughout England. Page 151. Lo. debate what judgment to give upon Lo. St.
Page 121. Lydcot a Witness. Page 107.
M.
Macnamars Information. Page 40. Marchioness of Winchester. Page 98. Mr.
Mathews a Witness. Page 108. Maurice's Examination. Page 241. Morrel a Witness.
Page 103.
N.
Norris complaint reported. p. 147. His Imprisonment judged illegal. Page 151.
Lo. C. J. North. ordered to be impeached. Page 62.
O.
Obstructers of Petitioning sent for Page 54.57.
P.
Papers Printed by Mr. Treby. Page 58. Parliament met. 3. at Oxford. Page 232.
Peyton Sir Robert. Page 15.151. Plessington Lord Bellasis Steward. Page 104.
Polteney Sir William a Witness. Page 106. Preparatians for Stafford's Trial.
Page 42. Proclamation for Discoverers. against Petitio. Page 16. Considered.
Page 48. Protestation of the Lords. Page 245.
R.
Resolves of the House concerning Petitioning Page 17. Concerning the Plot.
Page 25.27. Concerning the Duke of York. Page 27.28.31. Resolves touching
Popery. Page 153. Robinson a Witness. Page 103.
S.
Sawyers a Witness. Page 100. Lord C. J. Scrogs. 165.174. His Answer P. 238.
Mr. Scudamore a Witness. Page 108. Mr. Seymor impeached Page 59.63.154. Mr.
Seys a Witness. Page 108. Serjeant's Examination. Page 241. Speaker chosen.
Page 6. Speech Kings. Page 4.152. Speech Speak^rs 6.8. at Oxford. Page 235,
236. Staf. Trial begun 70. His Plea upon the Statu. 93. His Exceptions astainst
the Witn. 93. etc. He desires to call more Witn. 110. he insists upon points of
Law. 111. His objections answered 114. He Petitions 115. found Guilty. 117.
what he said after for himself. 121. Senten'd 124. brought to the Scaffold.
131. His Speech, 132. etc. Executed Page 146.
Lord High Stewards Speech. Page 123. Mr. Staples an obstructer. Page 57.
T.
Mr. Thompson a Minister. Page 158. etc. Dr. Tongue recommended to his Majesty
Page 20. Mr. Treby's Letters commanded to be Printed Page 58.
V.
Votes ordered to be Printed. Page 23. Votes concerning Fitzharris. Page 243.
W.
Sir William Waller a Parliament Man for Westminster. Page 52. Baron Weston
accused. Page 173. Sir Fra. Withens ordered to attend the House Page 19.
Expelled the House Page 52. Writs for Executing Lord Stafford. Page 125. etc.
Y.
Sir Rob. Yeomans questioned 19. discharged Page 46.
Z.
Zeal's Information 55. Pardoned Page 59.
FINIS.

