PROPOSALS For Building in every COUNTY A WORKING-ALMS-HOUSE OR HOSPITAL; As
the Best Expedient to perfect the TRADE and MANUFACTORY OF Linen Cloth.

LONDON, Printed by W.G. for R. Harford, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhil,
1677.

PROPOSALS for Building in every County a WORKING-ALMS-HOUSE or HOSPITAL, as
the best Expedient to perfect the Trade and Manufactory of Linen Cloth.
WHEREBY, I. All Poor people and their Children from five or six years old may
be employed and maintained; as also all Beggars, Vagrants, etc. restrained and
for ever prevented, and so all Parishes eased of that intolerable Burden. II.
Many Hundred Thousand Pounds kept at home, which now every year goes out of the
Kingdom for Linen, whereby our Wealth becomes a prey to other Nations. III.
Much Land improved in every County to great advantage of Landlord and Tenant.

Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the great Wisdom of the whole Nation,
now Assembled in Parliament.
COnsidering the great Complaints of Poverty, the heavy Burdens most Parishes
lie under to maintain their Poor, which daily increase; the Swarms of Beggars,
Vagrants and Idle People in City and Country; the great, and it is feared,
irrecoverable decay of our Ancient Trade for Woollen Cloth; the vast Charge we
are yearly at in purchasing Linen, etc. from other Nations, whereby our
Treasure is exhausted, and our Lands fall for want of being improved some other
way, besides planting Corn, breeding for Wool, etc. Which are become of so low
a price, as scarce to turn to Account: And understanding, that for remedying
thereof, the Improving the Manufactory of Linen is now under Debate, I have
taken the boldness to Offer the following PROPOSAL, which if thought fit to be
put in practice, will (in my opinion) infallibly conduce to all the good Ends
desired and intended; viz. That there may be Erected in every County according
to its Extent or Populousness, a greater or lesser Working-AlmsHouse, wherein
the Poor may be continually employed in the Manufactory of Linen Cloth.

The Advantages whereof are evident; For, I. This Manufactory is an Employment
for the weakest people, not capable of stronger Work, viz. Women and Children,
and decrepit or aged people, now the most chargeable; as likewise for Beggars
and Vagrants, who live idly, and by the sweat of other men's Labors, and can no
way so effectually be brought to Industry and Order, as when reduced into so
narrow a Compass or Consinement under fitly qualified Rulers, Officers, and
Regular Government. II. These Working-Alms-Houses may raise and supply the
Nation yearly with a sufficient Stock of Linen Cloth (the finest sort
excepted) if true measures be taken, and the Design effectually prosecuted; As
for example, 1352000 pounds worth of Cloth may yearly be spun in; them only,
besides what is made in private Families -- Thus demonstrated; 1. It Is well
known by experience, that three quarters of a Pound of Thread worth 12 d. per
Pound spinning, will make one Ell of Cloth worth 2 s. per Ell; which Three
quarters of a Pound two Spinners may spin in one day; Hence it follows, 2. That
2000 Spinners will spin Thread enough in one day to make 1000 Else of Cloth,
worth 100 l. And working but 260 days in the year, may spin 26000 Pounds worth
of Linen Cloth in a year. 3. Suppose then there be as many public
Workhouses, as there are Counties, which are 52, and in every Workhouse, one
with another, 2000 Spinners (though in some more, some less) then according to
these reasonable measures, there will be the forementioned Sum of 1352000 l.
worth of Cloth spun in one year; which is what we undertook to demonstrate.


This or some such prodigious Sum of Money might yearly be raised to the
Nation, whereby a Treble Benefit would ensue, First, we might save so much
Money now yearly sent out of the Nation for Linen, which, as computed by very
worthy Intelligent persons, has of late cost us more than a Million per Annum.
Secondly, By employing those hands, which for the greatest part are idle, it
being reasonably supposed that there are at least 100000 Beggars or others who
want a lawful Employment. Besides, almost all both Men, Women and Children that
can but pull Tire or Tow from the Distaff, or such easy work, may be speedily
employed and removed from being chargeable; so that there will be no fear of
any Parish in the Kingdom being oppressed, or indeed charged, save only in case
of extreme Age, or Children in their Infancy, neither of which continues long.
And Thirdly, Much Land throughout England will be greatly improved by sowing
Hemp, Flax, etc.

Obj. It may be objected, That if the House stockt with so many weak, ancient
people and Children, this will cross the great Design, because they will not be
capable to spin their quantity of Cloth, nor so finc.

Answ. As to Fineness, it matters not, if but one in five be employed in it to
an exquisite degree; for there is enough occasion for courser, for Sacking,
Sails, Ticking, Common Table-Linnen, Sheets, etc. And as to Quantity, it may
not be the less, because the most laborious thing in Spinning is turning of the
Wheel.

Now for the better effecting a Design so profitable and honorable to the
Kingdom, I have improved my small Genius to the utmost, notwithstanding I above
all Projectors, have been most discouraged: And I know whoever will attempt any
thing for public Benefit, may expect these Three things. (The first is
Necessary, the second Customary, and the third Diabolical) viz. To be the
Object of wise men's Censure, other men's Laughter, and if advantageous to
himself, Envies implacable displeasure; of which last, I have had share to the
highest degree that Revenge could express; and this too from a pretended loving
Brother, a person of an honest Profession, and of as debauched a Conscience;
yet I say, notwithstanding such discouragements, I have spent some time for
Public Advantage, viz. To find out an Expedient both for Ease and quick
Dispatch, so as that the weak may do as much as the strong, and the strong much
more than before.

As thus; One man may turn 50 Spinning Wheels, which shall serve 100 persons to
Spin with at once; so that the Spinners shall have nothing to do but employ
both hands to draw Tire from the Distaff. The Demonstration of the
Infallibility of this Invention may be easily made when commanded.

As also, An Engine by which 50 men may, without striking a stroke, beat as
much Hemp in one day, as 100 shall do in two days,

Besides the Advantage of this Spinning Engine in Ease, Its expedition will
also be considerable; For if (as we doubt not) by this help Spinners can earn 9
d. per day, as easy as 6 d. per day without: By that means computing only 1000
Spinners in each of the 52 Workhouses, in one years time will be gained the
Sum of 163968 Pounds and upwards, as by Calculation appears; and the Invention
for Hemp-beating (which is the hardest work of all) will likewise in its kind
be very considerably advantageous.

Obj. 2. But some will be ready to object, and tell us, That we talk of brave
things, if words would do the Work; but where is the Money for the Building of
such great Hospitals? and providing all Tools and Materials will cost many
Thousand Pounds.

I confess here is the Knot, which seems knit by Magic Art; but if it can be
untied without cutting or breaking the Thread, then I hope our Proposals will
not be rejected.

Answ. To this therefore I humbly Answer, That it may be done by a
County-Charge, with as much Satisfaction, Pleasure and Advantage, as to part
with 5 l. to prevent paying 50 s. per An. which I think no wise people will
judge to be an hard Bargain; especially if they consider the other vast profit
to the Nation, and that thereby they purchase (in the Country) 50 s. per Annum
more by improvement of their Lands for Hemp or Flax. -- As thus;

Suppose every Parish, one with another, throughout the Nation, relieves as
many poor People, Beggars, etc. as does amount to 12 d. in the Pound, so that
every 100 l. per Annum, pays 5 l. per Annum to the poor; Now if every 100 l.
per Annum, pay 5 l. toward Building such Hospital, then whereas more than half
their poor consists of Children, Women, and decrepit weak persons, unfit for
any other Employment, but such as may fitly be removed to this Hospital; it
follows, more than half their Charge will for the future be abated; yea, many
Parishes have scarce any poor to provide for.

Wherefore as for raising Money, we will take our measures thus; In England
there are commonly accounted 9725 Parishes, and 52 Counties; so that one with
another, there are 187 Parishes to each County, and each Parish supposed to be
worth 1500 l. per Annum (some more, some less) at the Rate of 12 d. per Pound,
it will amount to the Sum of 14025 l. in each County, which undoubtedly will
complete the House and Materials.

Obj. 3. But this Method will not hold, because one County has not so many
Parishes as another.

Answ. It matters not; Let each County build proportionably to their Money as
it will arise at 12 d. per Pound, we doubt not but it will be sufficient.

Obj. 4. It may further be Objected as impossible, That the Spinning Engine
should turn to account, because as often as one Spinner has occasion to stop, all
the rest must be idle; and again, since every Wheel has its motion alike, and
several Spinners work some faster, some slower, therefore all considered, this
Project will make but a Confusion.

Answ. To this I reply; Any one may stop, and the rest work on, and also may
vary the motion of each Spinning Instrument, so as the nimblest and the slowest
may have their desire: Nor may these Instruments be contemned, since they are
as cheap as the other, and so ordered that the Spinners may sit or stand when
they please; which doubtless will be a good convenience.

The Invention of these Engines is wholly mine, and if they prove effectual, I
hope I shall not be deprived of receiving some benefit thereof; because I am so
free, as in effect to discover it beforehand. However, I submit to what the
Pleasure of Authority shall allow: And to the intent these Hospitals may never
fail of encouragement, that the Invention may be for ever secured to them, and
prohibited to all others, so that the same may be improved only for their
benefit, and private persons not take the advantage thereof to the prejudice of
this our pious and necessary Design: I doubt not but many will say, Tush! this
is easy; any body may invent such things as these. -- Thus the Industry of one
is gratified with the contempt of others: Howbeit I leave it with all humble
submission to the grave Wisdom aforesaid, to consider,

1. Whether these great Hospitals may not become Nurseries for bringing up all
poor peoples Children to Industry, and how by a Methodical Government every one
may be so encouraged, that one striving to excel the rest, in very short time,
the finest Linen may be made at home upon far better terms than what comes
from beyond the Seas; and whether there be not a probability, if the Engines
take, that we may come to transport Linen upon as good terms as other Nations,
since Flax and Hemp may here be as plentifully produced as in any other
Country.

2. Whether this great and profitable Trade may not be managed for the most
part by those who at present are a burden; so that those which before were
industrious, may follow their former employments, and so no want of People for
Husbandry, etc.

Obj. 5. But what shall we do for Weavers?

Answ. I propose it to consideration, whether it might not be a more Christian
and effectual course to suppress notorious Malefactors (except only in cases of
Treason and Murder) to condemn them hither for life or years, where they may be
serviceable to turn Wheels, fit Tier to the Distaffs, reel Yarn, swingle or
hitchel Hemp or Flax, Weave, etc. which an ordinary Ingenuity may learn in few
days, rather than to send them out with a Brand to commit fresh Villainies, or
transport them, whence they presently return: And this the rather to be heeded,
for that Foreign Plantatious have now so little occasions for them, that
Merchants refuse to take them off the She riffes hands, without being paid for
their Passage; so that above 80 Convicts in Newgate lately obtained a General
Parpon on that very score, because they knew not what to do with them: Besides,
how many overstockt Trades are there that complain for want of Trade, etc.
Those may quickly learn to weave, and never fear an employ.

Obj 6. But as to Convicts brought hither, it will be Objected, That they must
be kept more secure, lest they escape and do Mischief.

Answ. They may be secured well enough, and those that turn the Wheel, etc. may
be separated by an Iron Grate from the rest: -- And here by the way, the pious
wisdom of the City of London may find out a means, whereby all those Impudent
Night-walkers, and Nurses of Debauchery may be wholly removed, which at present
are a destruction both to the Estates, Bodies and Souls of many Hundreds, and
cannot be reclaimed by ordinary Bridewels, because, their Labor there is only
a punishment, and turns not to advantage, to keep them there all their days, or
at least until they marry, and keep within doors.

Obj. 7. Some may imagine an inconvenience in sending so many people from all
parts of the County to one place, and say, Why were it not better to build many
little Workhouses rather than one great one?

Answ. I Answer, By no means; for then we shall miss one great and chief
Design, viz. the maintenance of good Government; by which the whole Family may
be instructed in good Manners both toward God and Man; only as some Counties
are greater, more populous, etc. they may have more or less proportionably.

Obj.8. There still remains one Objection; and that is, What shall we do for
Hemp And Flax?

Answ. To which I Answer, That Hemp or Flax (one or the other) may plentifully
be had in every County of England: Take Sussex as an example; any indifferent
good Land, Chalky, etc. from the foot of the Downs to the Seaside, with
double Folding or Dunging, and twice Plowing, will produce Hemp in abundance;
yet though their Land be rich enough, dry, etc. it will not produce good Flax:
But to supply that, many Thousand Acres of the Wild of Suffex will produce
Crops of Flax, worth some four, some five, some six Pounds an Acre, and that
kind for Hemp, as aforesaid, worth as much. Besides, for encouraging the
Planting the same at home, it may be convenient to lay an Imposition of Four or
Five Shillings in the Pound, or upwards, upon all Hemp, Thread, Cordage, or
Linen Imported from Foreign parts; by means whereof, we may raise it at home
cheaper than buy them abroad, and then everybody will Plant Hemp and Flax
abundantly, as a thing of course, enriching those that promote it.

But why 4 or 5 Counties should (as some have proposed) enjoy this great Wealth
and Advantage of promoting the Linen Manufactory and Improvement of Lands, and
not the rest, I cannot understand; nor for what reason so many people should be
drained out of all the Nation into four or five Midland Counties, since those
Counties next adjoining to the Sea, ought to be kept most populous.

But to what purpose should so much Hemp be planted?

I Answer, Hemp is of greater strength than Flax, therefore of more excellent
use for great advantage, as Cables, Ropes, and all kinds of Cordage, Sails,
Sacking, etc. As also Thread for all Nets for Fishery; for which, and other
purposes, we now buy yearly several hundred Thousand Pounds worth from beyond
the Seas; so that without controversy, there is as much Hemp to be used as
Flax, and consequently the Hemp-Mill may be as useful as the
Spinning-Instrument.

Having, we hope, satisfactorily Answered all Material Objections against the
main Body of this Design, it remains to consider of the Order and Method of
Governing these great Families or Corporations; but the Particulars thereof we
leave to the deeper Wisdom and judicious Care of Authority; only in general
propose,

1. That for the better encouragement and support of so many poor people
laboring in so profitable a Manufactory, each Almshouse be provided with and
allowed a public Granary, for stocking themselves with Corn when it is
cheapest, against the time of Dearth; a privilege we conceive not to be so
properly advisable for other Companies or Handicrafts (as some propose and
desire) because that would always keep Corn too cheap, and consequently undo
the Tenant, or Landlord, or both: For what makes Wheat as often at 4 s. a
Bushel (under which it is known the Farmer cannot live) as at 2 s. 6 d. but
because all people in the Nation that have occasion, must buy of the
Land-Occupiers at the same time when it is scarce? But by such general
Granaries the hopes of 4 s. per Bushel will be banished the Markets; but in our
case painful Husbandry, that ancient Employment may well allow Granaries, both
because this Manufactory and Design eases their Charge to the poor, and is of
more advantage to the Public, than some 20 Trades besides; and particularly,
because it helps to improve their Lands by Flax and Hemp, that now they need
not so much rely upon Corn for raising their Rent: Besides, if other
overstockt Trades want Bread, let them quit their Station, and come to Weaving,
and then they may enjoy the benefit of these Granaries also.

2. That the Maiden-Children brought up in this Corporation, may after they
attain to the Age of 15 Years, or other fit time, be permitted to go forth to
Service to learn good Huswisry, and the Lads to Husbandry or Trades, if they
think fit; nor will there be need of so great caution to prevent the Marriages
of the meaner fort, since now the Parishes need not so much fear a Charge,
knowing a means how to employ all their Children as fast as they come to be
five or six Years old; nor can a young man have better choice for a Wise than
here, amongst so many, all bred up industriously under strict Discipline, and
in a way to live: And therefore this Method will be so far from causing any
depopulation, that it may increase our Inhabitants; and the more, the better,
since we know how to dispose of them in such laudable Employments: Moreover,
hereby the distracting cares of poor honest Parents, often occasioned by a
foresight of their incapacity to provide for their Children, will be removed;
so that they may pass their time in peace, knowing that a good honest
comfortable Employment and Education is provided for their Children, and their
Childrens Children; nor may this less remove the Temptations both in Parents
and Children, which cause them to be guilty of such Misdemeanors as sometimes
bring them to the Gallows; so that the Expedients offered for the accomplishing
this Manufactory, will produce a happy change in the whole Nation, viz. no more
want of Work or Bread for the poor, no more Parishes oppressed, no more
Beggars, a great abatement of Felons, Thieves, Cheats, Nurses of Debauchery,
etc. many Lives preserved, and (which is an hundred thousand times more than
all the rest) many Souls saved: Much more might be said in this cafe, to set
forth the excellence of this Design; but I leave it as a work more deserving
the skill of the most Learned and Godly Divine, and shall only add,

In order to that last mentioned incomparable end, and for the better Education
and Instruction of this great Family, That there may be placed in each House an
Able, Honest, Godly Minister, of a good, peaceable, kind disposition and
exemplary Conversation;that so no means may be wanting for promoting Gods Glory
and their Edification: To which purpose, on Holidays and other spare times, all
or the most docible part of the People trained up here, may likewise be taught
to read, etc.

So may our most Great Prince, and Worthy Senators become further Instruments
for the Nations Prosperity, and the Salvation of many Souls: Thus may the
Blessing of Heaven crown all their Honorable Enterprises and Prudent Counsels
with most prosperous Success; which that it may be so, is the hearty Desire of

Your most Humble, Obedient and Faithful Subject and Servant, R. H.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving received the princely Approbation of that most Judicious and public
spirited Promoter of Englands Weal and Prosperity, and all such Ingenuites as
tend to general Good, and whose Noble Actions have given matchless proofs of
his great zeal thereunto, viz. His Illustrious Highness Prince Rupert, who
having condiscended to peruse the preceding Proposals, was pleased to Honor
me with his Approvement, Advice, and Encouragement therein; Judging it
necessary, that I should first offer the same to His Majesty's Consideration;
and in order thereunto, did Introduce me to His Royal Presence, who was
Graciously pleased to order me to deliver it to one of His Secretaries of
State, to the intent he might peruse it, and bring in his Report thereof;
whereupon I carried it to Mr. Secretary Coventry, who gave his Approbation
thereof to His Majesty at the Council Table, where it passed without any
obstruction:

Which gave me the greater Encouragement to put the said Proposals in Print,
for the deliberate Perusal, and grave Consideration of both Houses of
Parliament; who, I humbly conceive, are as greatly concerned to encourage all
such humble Endeavors, tending to such General Wealth and Honor of the whole
Nation.

And for as much as I have the opportunity, by reason of the Adjournments of
Parliament since whit suntide last, immediately after which, my Proposals came
out of the Press, I thought it might not be superfluous to add a few Lines for
the Answering some further Objections, but first shall add a few Words to the
Answer already given to the second.

Obj. page 5. where I say, That the laying out of 5 l. for the Building of
Working Almshouses, will purchase 50 s.per Annum for ever, Whereas I now find,

That it will purchase 20 l. per Annum in most Parishes; as may thus appear.

Suppose every Farm worth 100 l. per Ann. Plant but Eight Acres of Flax or
Hemp, and that worth 7, 6, or 5, l. per Acre, which last sum is the least that
may be expected from good Land to be worth, as it stands on the Ground,
wherefore to avoid mistakes, we will take our measures from 5 l. per
Acre-05-00-00

For Rent we will Deduct 20 s. for 20 s. for Seed and for Plowing, Sowing, and
Harrowing 10 s. In all -- 02-10 00 Which Deducted out of 5 l. there remains
mains clear Profit for one Acre of Land -- 02-10 00 So that eight Acres, at the
least value; must yield clear Profit, all Charges Deducted -- 20-00-00 To which
add 2 l. 10 s. which will be saved out of the Poors Book, and it makes --
22-10-00

So that a Farm which was worth 100 l. per Ann. will by this Expedient, be
worth Six score and Two pounds and Ten Shillings per Ann.; and to be Sold, will
yield 450 l. more than before.

Which is a plain Demonstration, that the laying out of 5 l. toward the
building and furnishing these Hospitals, will purchase above 20 l. per Ann. or
bring in 450 l. And this is the lowest Calculation that may be made of the
Profits and Advantages that may arise by Planting of Hemp, and Flax, if well
Husbanded.

And most true it is, there is no one Manufactory in England so generally
profitable as this may be made, especially to be raised from Land, with so
little hurt done to the same; as may be Demonstrated thus;

Suppose the Crop of one Acre, as it stands on the Ground to be worth 7 l.
(which is a very moderate supposition.) This Seven Pounds worth being well
Dressed fit for the Spinners, may be worth 14 l. This Fourteen Pounds worth being
well Spun and made into good Cloth, may be worth from 40 l. to 60 l. Yea I have
been informed beyond the Seas, that the Cloth which might be made of one Acre
of Flax well Dressed, and well Spun, might be worth more than a 100 l.

Let us not forget, that we have idle hands enough in our Nation to perfect
this most profitable Improvement; and also, that little more than half the
Money which in one year goes out of the Nation for Linen, will pay for
accomplishing the same: Nay, if the thing were rightly considered, it might be
easily Demonstrated, That the Money which goes out of the Nation for Linen in
one year, will pay for making of all the Cloth that may be made in 20 years;
although in every year of that twenty, there be as much made, as now we buy in
a Year of other Nations: As thus;

Money being kept at home within the Body of the Nation, is (as it has no less
aptly, than frequently been resembled) like the Blood in its Circulation in the
Body of Man, which is not the less for its perpetual Motion; but the whole Body
thereby the better supplied, strengthened and nourished in every Part. So it is
with our Money; For, suppose Twelve hundred Thousand pounds goes out of the
Nation in one year (which, some say, is much more) This never returns again;
But if the same sum be paid for making so much Cloth at home, there is not one
Groat the less at the years end; So that the very Money which pays for one
years work, may pay for two years; and consequently for 20 years, and yet pass
through all necessary Trades, and as well to the Land Occupier, as any.

The 9th Obj. But possibly, your Engines for Expedition may fail, which if so,
then notwithstanding, the Spinners, etc. may earn their, own Food, yet there
will be nothing toward the maintenance of good Government, which is the great
thing you aimed at, whereby all persons who axe brought into the Hospital, may
be well Educated, and effectually Instructed in a Methodical way for expedition
and advantage; Administering encouraging Rewards to the Ingenuous and
Industrious; and Correction to those that deserve it, without which it is almost
impossible to perfect your good design.

Answ. It Is very true: But first, I am confirmed in my Judgment, that the
riddance these Engines will make, cannot be less than what I have already
proposed in page the 5 th.

Secondly, Suppose the worst, viz. that the Engines fail; What then; If every
100 l. per Ann. in each County contribute 3 d. per Week, which would
undoubtedly be sufficient to maintain good Government amongst them? Nay, what,
If for the better Encouragement, and more Comfortable maintenance of all the
whole Family, six pence per Week be paid, it would amount but to 26 s. per Ann.
to be allowed out of the Profits which each 100 l. per Ann. will reap thereby;
which according to our lowest Calculation, is not less than 22 l. 10 s. a year:
And I hope the great wisdom of the Nation will not think it too much to part
with 5 l. for the Building these Hospitals, and after they are built, to allow
26 s. per Ann. for the maintenance of good Government, etc. since by so doing,
the whole Nation is enriched thereby: The truth is, these Hospitals and
Government is so Essential, that the thing cannot be brought to pass without
them; for whatever we may promise our selves; yet the Work is otherwise as
unlikely to be effected, as a great Multitude of unhappy Scholars to learn
their Books, where there is neither Master nor Tutor, to Rule, Teach, or Govern.

And who knows, but in very few Ages, each Hospital may have a plentiful
Revenue bestowed thereon: For what can be a fitter object for the Charity of
such well disposed People, who out of their Abundance, may please to leave a
Legacy behind them for Pious and Charitable uses, seeing here it will ever be
employed to the comfort of distreffed Widows; the Maintenance and good
Education of Fatherless Children; The Feeding the Hungry; Clothing the Naked,
etc. yea, the Posterity of the Donor (according to the Revolutions of humane
things) and the Posterity of his Relations, may reap such benefit by these
deeds of Charity, as that they may be ever presrerved from Extremity.

Or, why should we think it too much out of rool. per Ann. to east 5 l. a year
into the Treasury of this House, to be scattered amongst the Poor; since it is
but a fourth part of what we gain by them: By this means, I am confident the
Poor of each Parish would be so few, that there would be scare enough to eat the
spare Meat that comes from other men's Tables: Howbeit, it were good, that a Law
were made, that every person that gives any Alms to any idle Beggars, or
wandering People, (the Poor of their own Parish only excepted) should forfeit 5
l. to the Treasurer of the Hospital of that County in which they dwell, which
would be no violation of the Precepts of Charity; but an effectual expedient to
restrain all Beggars and idle people for the future.

If we believe (as I hope we all do) that the happiness of a Nation has its
dependence on the good Will and Pleasure of God Almighty, and that the more we
please him, the greater Blessings we may receive from him. Let it then be
considered, How acceptable an Offering it would be to the most High, when by so
pious an Act of Our Gracious King and Parliament, together with the free Will
Offerings of all able godly disposed people, so many Thousands, yea Thousands of
Thousands, in procese of time, may be restrained, and prevented from living in
that broad way of Idleness and Lewdness, in which is all manner of Debauchery.
And now by this Reformation, from from Generation to Generation, may become
attentive Hearers of his Holy Word, which is the most Infallible Directory to
being them to Heaven.

Obj. You talk of great Profits made of Flax in other Countries: But some are
of the Opinion, That to raise the Linen Manufactory here to that degree, is
utterly Impracticable; as well, because our Domestic Flax is not so good as
that which comes from beyond the Seas; as also, because our people cannot work
it sowell.

Answ. This Objection, (which some are pleased to think very considerable)
consists of two Branches: The first is an Exception to the goodness of our
Flax; The second, to the Skill and Dexterity of our People.

As for the first; Whether ours be as good as Outlandish Flax? It must be
considered, and cannot be denied, but, that the far greatest part of the Flax
which we Import from beyond the Seas, is East-Country Flax, I say, the far
greatest part, ten to one in proportion; Now I am credibly informed by several
well experienced Flax-Men (who have dealt in both Sorts) That English Flax is
full as good, to all intents, as this EastCountry Flax, and do not doubt, but
it will appear so upon Examination; So that the Objection, as in Comparison
with such East-Country Flax, vanishes; of which yet, (although we have but
little Cloth made in England) there is, (as I am informed) several Hundred
Thousand Pounds worth yearly Imported.

But then, as to Dutch Flax, indeed the Case is somewhat more difficult: It
being a common opinion, that their Flax, in its nature, is better for making of
Fine Cloth, than ours generally is: But even this is denied by persons of great
Judgment and Experience, who affirm, that much Land in England may produce as
kind Flax, to the full: Besides, the Dutch Flax Imported, is but little, and
comparatively Inconsiderable, as is indeed the Use and Consumtion of very Fine
Cloth, in respect of the vast quantities of Course and Ordinary Cloth; so that,
if the Trade be Encouraged, we need not fear, but we may find ground enough in
England, fit to produce as excellent Flax as any now brought from Holland, I
mean, so much as we have occasion for; And consequently, may make as good
Linen; If we do not spoil it in Working: Which is the second Charge of the
Objection.

To which I Answer, That I have credibly been informed by some persons, that
they have, and can now already make as good Cloth here, as that which we
commonly Buy for 5,6,7, or 8 s. per Ell: And why should not our people, when
they find the Manufactory Encouraged, and especially by the Emulation and
desires to outvie each other in good Work-man-ship in these public Working
Almshouses; Why, I say, May we not arrive at as great Perfection in the
Mystery as any people in the World? The English once had the Reputation of the
only excellent Artificers for Woollen Cloth; other Nations knew nothing, or very
little of it; yet now we find, by unhappy experience, they equal, if not exceed
us therein: Why may we not retaliate, and outstrip them in another Mystery?
Or, Why should we more scandal our selves with suggestions of Dullness and
Indocility, than our Neighbors.

But to give more full satisfaction, That this Manufactory, especially that
part which is most advantageous to the Nation, as being most Consumptive of our
Hemp and Flax, and most promoting Trade and Employment for the Poor; which
indeed is common and ordinary Cloth, of which there is a Thousand Else to one
Transported into all His Majesty's Plantations.

That this I say is suddenly to be perfected, I cannot but give a signal
Instance, from the laudable practice and experience of that worthy Gentleman,
Mr. The. Firmin, Citizen of London, who at this time Imploys in his House
(built for that purpose) several Flax-men, Weavers, etc. And also above 600
Spinners abroad. This Judicious person showed me more than 500 l. worth of very
good substantial Cloth, of his own working. And in truth, I have conversed with
many; but never found any man so able and free to resolve all doubts in this
case; who told me for a Truth, that a Child of 5 or 6 years old, that had its
Health, and a moderate Apprehension, might be taught in 6 Weeks to earn its
living in Spinning; Which, if so, as from the Veracity and Experience of the
Relator, I have no reason to doubt. It is most plain, that the most profitable
part of this Manufactory may be both easily and speedily accomplished, and
perfected, to the happy Reformation of many Thousands, who now live by Begging,
etc. giving scarce any thing for whatever they Eat, Drink, or Wear.

Besides, let it be considered, How greatly this Manufactory will quicken and
revive our decayed Markets and dying Trade, especially, that of Husbandry;
which may easily be domonstrated, thus;

As the Case now stands, every Family in the Nation, either directly or
indirectly, send their Money every year to the Drapers for Linen, the Drapers
they pay it to the Merchants, and away it goes every year beyond Sea, and never
returns; whereby our Wealth is made a Prey to other Nations, whose Poor are
employed and maintained thereby, whilst in the mean time our Nation is in a
Consumption, our Poor live by Begging, Poverty increases, and our Lands lie
unimproved, for want of this Manufactory.

But now under this Reformation, every Family that sends their Money to the
Drapers, the Draper sends it to the Masters of these Hospitals, and they
scatter it amongst all the Trades in the Nation; especially to the Farmers, and
Tillers of Land, ready Money for Hemp and Flax; ready Money for Corn and Fat
Cattle of all sorts; and the like for Butter and Cheese, or any thing they have
to spare: And all this, or the greatest part, from those who before lay a
Begging at their Doors, or were maintained by Contribution; and now, the more
people Increase, the better it will be for the whole Nation: And doubtless, if
an Imposition sufficient were laid on Foreign Linen, Hemp and Flax, and
Encouragement due to ingenious and industrious people given, (as in this Case,
the Nation might well afford) then to be sure, our Hospitals would be suddenly
stocked with curious Artists, by which our new Manufactory would speedily be
brought to perfection.

It Is worth consideration also, how great, an Ornament, besides the great
Wealth these Hospitals would be to His Majesty's Kingdom, and how much they
would add to the Trade, Wealth, and greatness of those Towns near which they
are erected.

13. Obj. You talk much of Charity, Let Charity begin at home with good
Husbandry: If this course be taken, we shall pay dearer for Linen, than now we
do, and it must needs be best Husbandry to Buy where we may have it Cheapest.

Answ. If we send our Money Beyond Sea for what we want, then the more we Buy,
the less Money we have to pay, which causes scarcity of Money, and also, want
of Trade, whereby to get more; but if we bestow our Money for Commodities made
at home, our Money and Trade will continually Increase; and though for a little
while we pay somewhat more, yet it is easier to part with 9 d. when Money and
Trade are plenty and increasing, than to part with 6 d. when Money and Trade is
both wanting; especially, seeing the 9 d. remains at home, and returns again,
but the 6 d. is carried into another Nation, and lost irrecoverably.

14. Obj. In page 5. you suggest, That by your Engine, one Spinner may, earn 9
d. as easily as 6 d. without it; But how can that be? since every Spinner, now,
may have a Wheel to turn with her foot, and so have both hands at liberty, as
well as with your Engines: And again, its a more usual fault to over-twist the
thread, than to do it too slack; therefore no need of help to turn the Wheel.

Answ. To this I Answer, First, That the thing we chiefly design, is to employ
and maintain such as cannot any other way earn half their living by any other
Employ, so that more than half the Spinners would be very young, and of little
strength, and consequently to employ one foot all the time they Spin, will be
very tiresome; nay, the strongest: body cannot do it, without easing the same,
neither can they imply both hands so freely, as when they are discharged of
that burden, or encumbrance.

As for Example: Two men of equal strength, skill, and nimbleness in all
points, were to run a long Race, and one of them must carry such a weight in
his hand, as is more tiresome to him than the motion of his Legs, and
oft-times, must ease the Burden with his foot: May not the other, who has all
his Limbs free, be at the end of the Race and halfway back again as soon, and
more easily than this can get to the end of the Race. Possibly some may say,
This Simile is not parallel, and that I make it better on my side than it is.
To which I say, for the Resolution of this Question, Do but inquire of those
that Spin, which of the Two is most tiresome, The turning of the Wheel, (either
by the Foot or Hand, no matter which) or the other part of the Work. I have
almost as often asked the Question, as I see any a Spinning (since I invented
this Engine) and the Answer has always been, The turning of the Wheel; although
they employ both hand and foot by turns to do it: Besides, it is burdensome,
and also injurious to the body; especially for youth, which are growing, to be
from Morning till Evening, always sitting.

Secondly, Although it be true, That over-twisting the Thread is commonly a
fault, rather than slack twisting the same; yet the Cause of this fault is,
that they do not draw the Thread fast enough: But to the better advantage, this
will be easily cured, for now all the aforesaid inconveniences being removed,
which render the Work most burthensom; they may for their ease stand or sit,
when, and as often as they please, and freely employ both hands from morning to
evening, much more easily than they could one hand before; and the faster they
draw the Thread from the Distaff, the more they Spin, with less danger of
over-twisting the same; so that I do not know, but those that are some-time
used to this easy way, may Spin as much in one day, as now in two.

Furthermore, these Spinning Instruments may in like manner be for Expedition
very serviceable for Spinning of Woollen, I mean Serges, Worsted, Camlets, and
Stockings, which being well made, are much more to be encouraged than Hair and
Silk, these being Foreign Commodities, the other of our own Growth, especially,
since it is so, that our home Markets for Wool, and Foreign Markets for our
Cloth grow worse and worse and in the opinion of most, scarce ever to be
recovered; which, if so, it must needs be the best Husbandry to promote such
Manufactories, as may be for the Consumption of our own Materials.

Obj. If you intend these Hospitals for the Employment of such as have Families
of their own to maintain, the business will be confused and Impracticable.

Answ. Possibly so, at least, in some respects and circumstances; but that was
never intended, the main design of these Hospitals being only for the relief of
all oppressed Parents Families, and Parishes, by taking off their young
Children, and single people, who have neither Habitation, nor Parish willing to
receive them, there to be comfortably maintained well educated and instructed
in all good manners toward God and Man; Nor are any of them to be confined to
this House longer than until they can well earn their Livings by other means;
unless it be such as are committed as persons deserving perpetual or temporary
Confinement, which is far better than to Hang or Transport, except it be for
Capital Crimes.

The second Benefit aimed at, is the procuring the most Fine and curious Cloth,
as well as quantities sufficient of Courser, for Domestic and Foreign Trade,
to be obtained with great expedition: For so it is, That when so many are
employed in sight of each other (especially, where encouragement is given, and
good Discipline maintained) the strife of all, both small and great, will be to
excel each other, both in quantity and curiosity of Work.

Obj. This Manufactory being thus encouraged, a considerable part of His
Majesty's Revenue now arising by Custom for Linen Cloth will be diminished.

Answ. I humbly Answer, That the same may be easily compensated another way, it
being (with all submission) conceived, That it would be happy for this Kingdom,
if an Imposition of 12 d. per quart more than now is, were to be paid for all
French-Wine and Brandy; As also 5 s. in the Pound for all Hemp, Flax, and
Linen, that is Imported.

It Is possible some may suppose, that my being thus intent and tedious, is only
an itch of Fame; but I can justly assure the World, I am so far from any such
contemptible Vanity, That I am rather a beggar for the Poor and Distressed, and
for their sakes, would imitate the importunate Widow, in the 18th of St. Luke's
Gospel, who obtained her request merely for the sake of her Importunity; only
this difference there is, Her suit was for Revenge, Mine for an Act of Charity;
she made her suit to such a Judge as neither feared God, nor regarded man; but
my humble, though, earnest suit is, To the Most Christian King, a Defender of
the Faith; as also to the Great Wisdom of a Christian Nation, all which
strengthens my hopes, that I shall not be more unfortunate than was that
importunate Widow.

And why should I doubt it, since it is so, that even an unjust and ungodly
Judge will redress the Grievances of the Oppressed, shall not the Best and Most
Christian Government exercise its power, for suppressing and reforming
intolerable Evils, Oppressions, and Disorders, seeing the Welfare and
Prosperity of the whole Nation is as it were Entailed to such an Act of Justice
and Mercy. It is said of Faith, Hope, and Charity, That the greatest of these
is Charity; yes, if a Man had all Faith, and all Hope, (both which are most
excellent and necessary) yet it avails nothing, if Charity be wanting. And
since it is a Maxim, That the best of Men cannot be Uncharitable: I cheerfully
hope, that my humble Proposals for an Act of Charity, will not be contemned by
our Greatest Worthies, since now in our view, the Wealth and Prosperity of the
Nation, is in pursuit of the same.

I would not flatter my self or others, but do confidently believe, That what
with the Decrease of Poor People, The happy Reformation, and total Restriction
of Beggars, Vagrants, Nurses of Debauchery, etc. The yearly increase of Ten or
Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, which now will be kept at home, that before
went beyond the Seas for Linen; The great improvement of Lands; The
Exportation of Linen of our own growth, etc. The worth and advantage of the
whole cannot amount to less than Two or three Millions Sterling, per Annum, to
the Nation: and over and above many lives preserved, and (with Gods blessing on
the means) many souls saved; which, if so, certainly it will be the best
Bargain and happiest that ever the Nation made, all circumstances considered;
Because where so much Money is disburs'd as will compass this great Wealth
(without which it is almost impossible to be attained,) our Posterity will have
it for nothing; yea, the present Inhabitants have their Purchase Money still
amongst themselves, as it were, in their own Sacks with their Corn, seeing we
Buy not this profitable Expedient of other Nations; which, if we were obliged
to do, to be sare they would make us pay dearly for it.

But suppose neither of these Advantages were to be reaped for our Money, only
the Poor provided for, and Reformation of Vagrants accomplished, Must we do
nothing for Charity? Suppose any Opposers of this Dsign, were worth 5000 l. or
10000 l. per Ann. a piece, Can they be certain, that none of their Posterity
may within 200 years come to Poverty? Why then should they be unwilling now to
contribute freely, seeing the Method proposed, may secure both Rich and Poor
from Extremity? And how dishonorable is it to this Kingdom, that so fruitful a
Soil as England, which by the Industry of its most unuseful Inhabitants might
so easily become the Garden of Europe, should, by their sloth and obstinacy,
lie unimproved? How many Hundred Thousand Beggars, Vagrants, Drones, Nurses of
Debauchery, etc. who are not only a Dishonor, but a great Disadvantage to the
Nation, living in continual sinful Practices against the Laws of God and good
Government, depriving themselves of all means of Religious and Civil Education,
to the great danger of their own Souls; Ill Example of others; and destruction
of their Posterity, being neither serviceable to the Public, nor capable of
raising themselves to any better condition, might by this Method, be wholly
reformed, or prevented?

Wherefore upon these several weighty considerations, and for that, besides the
Princely Encouragement beforementioned, I have had the Approbation of that
great lover of Ingenuity, The Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Brouncker,
President of the Royal Society, who was pleased to peruse my Proposals, and
express his Sentiments very favorably thereupon; As also having received by
letter some considerable and pressing Incitements, to proceed from an Eminent
public spirited Divine, the Reverend, Dr. John Beale, one of His Majesty's
Chaplains, and a Member of the said Royal Society. I am therefore emboldened,
particularly to entreat the Christian consideration of the most grave and pious
Divines, and all the Honorable and Ingenious Associates of that August Society
in this matter, and accordingly, to give their Encouragement, Approbation, and
Assistance; or otherwise to discover my mistakes, and rectify any false
Measures, which through Inadverrency, or over-zeal, to the design I may have
committed, by publishing some more Feazible Methods from their better improved
Reason, whereby I shall at once be confuted and instructed; and though failing
in the means, shall not miss of my desired End, viz. The Glory of God, the
Prosperity of the Nation, and the Happy Reformation of many thousands, who are
a dishonor to Both

FINIS.

