IACOBUS II.ds D. G. Angliae: Scotiae: Fran: et Hiber. REX. Printed for W Crook
at the green Dragon wthout Temple (...)


THE Historian's Guide, OR, BRITAIN's REMEMBRANCER. BEING a Summary of all the
Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battles, Designs, Attempts, Preferments, Honors,
Changes, etc. and whatever else is worthy Notice, that has happened in His
Majesty's Kingdoms, from Anno Dom. 1600. to this time. SHOWING, The Year,
Month, and Day of the Month, in which each Action was done. With an
Alphabetical Table for the more easy finding any thing out.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1690.

TO THE READER.
TWo Impressions of this little Book having already found a favorable
Acceptance, notwithstanding the many Errors and Omissions that were therein; I
am not now in the least Sollicitous, what Entertainment this Third may find,
presuming upon the Pains and Care which have been taken in Correcting and
continuing this History by several Persons of known Abilities, assisted by the
Opportunity of private Minutes and Journals, never yet in Print: Whereby this
small Tract is arrived to the Perfection, whereof a Book of this Nature is
capable. For, here is History with Chronology, wherein not only memorable
Actions are mentioned, but the Reader may be satisfied of the exact Time, to a
Day, when these Actions were performed, which all other Books great and small
put together cannot show. If you enquire who the Author or Authors were, I do
tell you, the very Recital of their Names would make no small Addition to the
Book, but would afford very little Benefit to the Reader; For, well nigh as
many Persons as there are Leaves in the Book, have lent a helping Hand toward
the Composure of this Manual. So that, if (as has been endeavored) you may
find Benefit and Satisfaction herein, then has he obtained his End, who is,

Your humble Servant, W C.

THE Historian's Guide: OR, BRITAINS REMEMBRANCER.
French K. married to the D. of Florence his Daughter.

Charles the First, born at Dunfernling in Scotl.

Essex Beheaded.

The Archduke defeated at Newport by Prince Maurice of Nassaw.

Died this year of the Plague besides other diseases in London and the Suburbs,
6360.

SPaniards Landed in Ireland, but beaten off.

Elizabeth began.



Elizabeth died, and K. James VI. of Scotl. Proclaimed King.

A Great Plague began at London. Prince Charles created Duke of Albany, Marq.
Ormond, etc.

James began his Journey out of Scotland.

Southampton discharged out of the Tower.

Charter House, London.



London, for going to Court when his House was infected.

Anne with Pr. Henry came to York.

Erston in Northamptonshire.

They entered London.

Westminster.

Cobham's Conspiracy discovered.

Gowry's Conspiracy.

Cobham, Lord Gray, Sir Walter Rawleigh and others Condemned.

Clerk, Brook and Watson Executed.

A Conference at Hampton Court about Religion.



Died this year in London, of all diseases 38244. whereof of the Plague 36578.



Spain.

Charles brought to Windsor.

Bath.

York, and this year K. James styled King of Great Britain.



Westminster.

Everard Digby, I. Grant, Tho. Bates, Rob. Winter, Condemned.

West end of St. Paul's.

Guy Faux, Ambrose Rockwood, etc. executed in the Parliament-Yard, Westminster.

Oath of Allegiance, first, Administered.

Garnet, another Conspirator in the Powder Plot, executed in St. Paul's
Churchyard.



Christianus K. of Denmark came into England.



Earls of Northumberland and the Lords Sturton and Mordant censured in the
Star Chamber.

Tyrone began a Conspiracy in Ireland.

Aldgate.

AN Insurrection in Northamptonshire, and the adjacent Counties, whereof one
Captain Pouch was the chief Incendiary.

Tho. Garnet a Jesuit executed at Tyburn.

A Translation begun of the Bible into English.

Wappin.

Edmunds Bury burnt.

Tho. E. of Dorset, L. Treasurer, died suddenly.

Virginia planted by the English.

Matthias Archduke of Austria made K. of Hungary.

Exchange, was first opened and named by K. James, Britains Burse.

English Coast forbid to Foreigners without leave first had.

Alum brought to perfection, by Sir I. Bouchier.

Silkworms brought to England.

K. I. laid the foundation of Chelsey College.

League with France.

Chelsey College ordered by King James.

K. Henry IV. of France Murdered at Paris by Ra^illac.

Henry Created Prince of Wales.



Robert Carr made Viscount Rochester.

Landgrave of Hessen came into England.

Barthol. Legate condemned by the Convocation for an Arian Heretic, was
afterward delivered by a Significavit to the Secular Power.

Sutton the Founder of the Charter House Hospital died.

Prince Charles made Knight of the Garter.

The new Translation of the Bible finished.

Legate was burnt in Smithfield for an Arian.

This year Matthias Archduke of Austria, and K. of Hungary was made K. of
Bohemia.

EDward Wightman of Burton burnt at Lichfield for an Heretic.

Sanguire, a Scot, for murdering Turner executed.

Frederick; P. Palatine of the Rhine, arrived in Eng.

Guild Hall, London.

Henry fell sick.

Jameses.

Westminster.

Eliz. wedded to Frederick the V. Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, at
Whitehal.

A Marriage betwixt France and Spain.

Plantations settled in Ireland by some of the Companies of London.

England.

Dorchester burnt.

Rochester Created Earl of Somerset.

The Lady Frances Howard Divorced from the E. of Essex, and married to the E.
of Somerset.

The Globe Playhouse burnt.

The Artillery Company revived.

Wadham College in Oxon Founded.

A Parliament suddenly called, and as suddenly dissolved.

Denmark came into England the second time.



Stratford upon Evon burnt.

The New River brought to London by Sir Hugh Middleton from Ware.

Moorfields made into Walks.

LAdy Arabella died in the Tower.

Thomas Overbury poisoned: For which, E. of Somerset and his Lady, arraigned
and condemned, and Sir Gervis Elvis, Lieutenant of the Tower, Mrs. Turner and
diverse others, Executed.

Peace concluded this year between the Spaniard and the Duke of Savoy.

Charles Created Prince of Wales.

Spalato arrived in England.

James his progress into Scotland.

James returned from Scotland.

William Butler, the famous Physician of Cambridge, died.

Ferdinando the Second, Elected Emperor.

The Destruction of the Spanish Army sent against the Venetians.

Walter Rawleigh beheaded.

Synod of Dort began.

Engl. before the Death of Q. Ann.



SYnod of Dort ended.

Anne died at Hampton Court.

P. Charles of Spain Crowned King of Portugal.

The Bohemians, Austrians, and Hungarians, rebel against the Emperor.

BErnard Calvert of Andover, went from Southwark to Callis this day, and back
again the same.

Peace with France.

Palatine of the Rhine styled King of Bohemia.

The French King's Subjects rebel against him.

Bacon was outed and sent to the Tower.

G. Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, casually killed a Keeper in Bramshil Park.

Spalato commanded to leave the Realm within twenty days.

English Treat with the Spaniards, for the Restitution of the Palatinate.

Charles embarks for Spain.



Peace between his Holiness and the King of Spain, upon condition of restoring
the Valtolin to his Holiness.

Spain.

Portsmouth.

London.

Blackfriars.

James enters into a War for the Recovery of the Palatinate.

This year Pope Gregory being dead, Urban the VIII. was chosen Pope.

THe Marriage with Franoe accorded.

Count Mansfield Shipwracked.

Amboyna's bloody Cruelty.

The Siege of Bredah.

James died at Theobalds.

King Charles Proclaimed.

London, whereof died 35417.

King James removed to Denham House.

France; soon after which the Lady Henrietta Maria sets forth on her Journey
toward England from Paris to Amiens.

Charles calls his first Parliament.

James Intombed at Westminster.

Charles's Royal Consort lands at Dover.

Canterbury.

Whitehal.

King and Queen remove to Hampton Court.

Doct. Montague questioned by the Parliament.

Oxford.

Oxford, House of Commons in the Divinity-School.



Michaelmas Term adjourned to Reading because of the Plague.

Cadiz Voyage.

Charles the First Crowned at Westminster.

Westminster.

Earl of Arundel committed, but soon released.

A League with Denmark, Sweden, and the States, against Spain.

Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, displac't.

York-house about Arminian Tenets.

Buckingham charged with High Treason by the Earl of Bristol.



Sir John Elliot and Sir Dudley Diggs, committed to the Tower, but soon
released.



Wars Proclaimed by the French against the English.

Earl of Arundel confined to his House.

Earl of Bristol sent to the Tower.

Denmark routed by Tilly.

Sir Francis Bacon Visc. of St. Albans died.

Buckingham Embarked for the Isle of Rhee, from Portsmouth.

Manifesto.



Martins Fort besieged.

Jo. Buroughs slain by a shot.

Martins Fort relieved by Marshal Schomberg.

Duke raised the Siege, defeated, and many Noble Englishmen slain.

Rochellers besieged by the Duke of Guise, crave Aid of the English.

Westminster, wherein the Petition of Right was granted by the King.

October, and by Proclamation, to January the Twentieth following.

Denbigh set sail for the Relief of Rochel, but failed.

Charles-Iames, the first Son of King Charles the First, born at Greenwich.

Stoadt, an English Garrison, rendered to the Imperialists.

Lamb murdered in the Streets of London.

Lambs death 6000 l.



October the Twentieth next.

Earl of Marlborough removed from his Office of Lord Treasurer, Sir Richard
Weston preferred.

Sir Thomas Wentworth Created a Baron.

Another Fleet designed for Rochel, commanded by the Duke of Buckingham.

Buckingham basely murdered at Portsmouth by John Felton, a discontented
Officer.

Rochel from Portsmouth, commanded by the Earl of Lindsey.

Buckingham's Funeral.

Rochel attempted, but unsuccessful, by reason of contrary winds.

Rochel surrendered, and called Borgo Maria.

January the Twentieth.

John Felton hanged at Tyburn, his body carried to Portsmouth, and there hanged
in Chains for murdering the Duke of Buckingham.

March following.



Charles-Iames died.

THe Marquess Huntly and others proclaimed Rebels in Scotland, fly into England.

William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward of the Kings household, dies.

France concluded.



Fleetstreet upon a Rescue of one Billingham, sometime a Captain at the Isle of
Rhee, from an Arrest by certain Templers.

Sir Robert Anstruther sent Ambassador to the Emperor.



James's by Bishop Laud by the Name of Charles, after K. Chapter 2.

Dr. Leighton a Scot, for a seditious Pamphlet entitled Sions Plea, censured
to have his Nose slit, his Ears cropped, and his Forehead branded, which soon
after was inflicted.

Spain proclaimed.

Essex married to Mrs. Elizabeth Pawlet.

Prince Charles committed to the Care of the Countess of Dorset.

Castlehaven arraigned.

Beheaded on Tower Hill.

Sir Giles Alington Censured.

Lady Mary born.

SIgismund K. of Poland died.

St. Paul's Church in London begun to be repaired.

The Building of Covent Garden begun by the Earl of Bedford.

London Bridge.

Some Broils begun in Ireland, but soon appeased.

Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, slain at the Battle of Lutzen.

Scotland. Edinburgh.





Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, died.

Laud succeeds him, being translated from the Sea of London to that of
Canterbury.



James, afterward Created Duke of York.

White Hall.

Guild Hall.

Frederic Prince Elector styled King of Bohemia, died of the Infection he took
at Mentz.

The Dispute begun of Englands Right to the Sovereignty of the British Seas,
and defended by the Learned Seldom against Hugo Grotius.

Noy designed the raising Ship Money.

Died.

The Scots begin their Designs against the King.

Prince Charles committed to the Government of the Earl of Newcastle.

His Majesty set out a gallant Fleet this Summer, under the Conduct of Robert
Earl of Lindsey.

Arundel went Ambassador to the Emperor.

Thomas Par reported to be aged 152 years died.

Elizabeth born.



Prince Rupert arrived at London.

Commotions began about the Ceremonies of the Church.

Juxon, Bishop of London, made Lord Treasurer.

FErdinand, King of Hungary, elected King of the Romans.

Matthias, Emperor of Germany, died.

Anne, the King's third Daughter, born.

Burton, Prin, and Bastwick sentenced in the Star Chamber.

Ship Money debated.



Rupert set sail for Holland.

Edinburgh, which occasioned a great tumult.

Galloway assaulted.

Scots Petition against the Liturgy.

Roxborough sent into Scotland.



The Scots entered into Covenant.

John Lilburn whipped at the Carts tail.

^amilton sent into Scotland.

Hamilton.



Service Book in Scotland.

Maria de Medicis, Queen Mother, arrived in England.

Argile declares for the Scots Covenanters.

Marquess Hamilton returned into England.

Covenanters began to Arm, and chose Lesly their General.

Solicited France for Aid.

Scotch Covenanters.



York to Newcastle.

Scotland.

Dissolved by His Majesty.

Barwick, in view of the Scots Army.

Marquess Hamilton at Forth with the English Navy.

Scots treated with the King.





The Prince Elector comes into England.

Theobalds, from the North.

Whitehal.

Earl Traquare sent Commissioner into Scotland.

Lord Deputy of Ireland arrived at London, and Created Earl of Strafford.

Scotland.

Downs between the Spanish and Dutch Fleets.

Charles resolves to call another Parliament, in case of the Scotch Rebellion.

Earl of Strafford goes for Ireland, and calls a Parliament.

Coventry dies, after fifteen years prudent and faithful Discharge of that
Office.

Strafford returned for England.

England.

Prince Charles took his Seat in this Parliament.

The Convocation began.

The Scots Letter to the French King, read in the House.

Earl of Lowden accused for penning it.





Surrey dispersed.

A Paper set on the Exchange, encouraging the Rabble to assault the Bishop of
Canterbury.



Scotch Parliament met again at Edinburgh.

Henry, and afterward created Duke of Gloucester.

Charles set out toward the North, with Prince Charles.

Newburn Fight, and Newcastle deserted.

Scots.

Durham the like.

York.

York, where it was resolved a Parliament should be called to sit on the third
of November. following.

Commissioners consisting of eight Earls, and eight Barons to treat with the
like number of Scots, who met at Rippon.





The Bishop of Lincoln released.

hor. 1. min. 30. post Merid.

Strafford impeached of Treason, and committed to the Black Rod.

One hundred thousand pounds Voted to the Scots, and borrowed of the City.

The Lords denied the Earl of Strafford Bail and Council.

John James stabbed Mr. Howard a Justice of Peace of Westminster, in Westminst.
Hall.

Strafford committed to the Tower.

Prin and Burton enter triumphantly into Westminster, and followed by many
thousands.



Prin and Burton presented their Petitions to the House of Commons for damages
against their Prosecutors.

Windebank fled into France.



The Judges questioned about it.

Anne died at Richmond.

Pennington, and a rabble of People, Petition the Parliament against Bishops.

Laud, committed to the Black Rod.



Prin, Burton and Bastwick to have been wrongfully prosecuted.

Strafford read in the House of Commons.



our dear Brethren of Scotland, for a Supply of their Losses.



Berkly voted guilty of High Treason by the Commons for having given his voice
for Ship Money.

Usher of the Black Rod, and sent away to Prison.



The Bill for a Triennial Parliament.

Strafford made his Defense in the Lords House, and remanded to the Tower.

Laud impeached of High Treason.

Tower.



Strafford's Trial began.

Prince Charles is made at York Captain of a Guard of Noblemen.



Strafford's Trial ended; after which the Bill of Attainder against him was
debated by the House of Commons, and he Voted guilty of High Treason.

Orange came to London.

Strafford Voted the second time guilty of High Treason.

A Bill against him read in the house of Lords.



Strafford.

Mary married to William of Nassaw, the Prince of Orange, at Whitehal.





Strafford Voted the second time guilty by the Lords.



1. For the Execution of the E. of Strafford. 2. For Continuation of the
Parliament, not to be Dissolved without their own consent.



The Earl advised the King to Sign the Bill for his Execution.

Some Bishops advised him to Pass the Bill.



Strafford Beheaded.

The Earl of Liecester declared Lord Leut. of Ireland.



Scotland.

October next.

The Irish Rebellion broke out, where were 20000 persons barbarously Murdered.

Scotland.

Hampton Court.

Westminster against the Bishops.



Irish proclaimed Rebels.



The same day the House adjourned to Grocers-Hall in London.

To your Tents, O Israel, the people at the same time crying out, Privilege of
Parliament.

York, retire to Hampton Court.

Windsor.

Militia.

Windsor to Hampton Court.

Greenwich,

Rochester.

Canterbury.

Dover with the Queen, and Princess of Orange.

Orange embarked for Holland.

Canterbury.

Greenwich, whence he sent for the Prince of Wales and Duke of York.

Theobalds.

R^yst^n.

Newmarket.

Huntington.

Stamford.

Grantham.

Newark.

Doncaster.

York.

John Hotham denied the King entrance into Hull; therefore proclaimed Traitor.

Hotham justified by the Parliament.



The Providence, landed at Kenningham Creek near Hull, with some Powder and
Ammunition; till which time the King had none.

Essex to be their General of Foot, and the Earl of Bedford of Horse.

Beverley. Hull besieged.

Essex divided his Army into two Squadrons.



Bedford routed by the Marq. of Hertford.

Hamden first in Arms in Chalgrove Fields.

Nottingham.



Nottingham.

Portsmouth besieged.

Lord Viscount Say came to Oxford with his Forces.

Rupert defeated some of the Parliaments Forces at Wickfield, near Worcester.

Leg escaped from the Gatehouse.

London.

Edgehil Fight, being on Sunday, where was slain the Noble Earl of Lindsey,
General for His Majesty, and Lord Aubigney, Lord Ber. Stuart, etc.

The same day the Kings Declaration to his loving Subjects was published.

Prince Charles committed to the Care of the Marquess Hertford.

Banbury and Broughton-house surrendered to the K.

The Kings Proclamation of pardon sent to the City of London.

The King entered into Oxon with one hundred and fifty Colors taken in Edgehil
Fight.

Brainford Fight, where the Parliament had two of their Regiments discomfited,
and about Five hundred taken prisoners.

London, upon fear of the King's approach.

Exchecquer, be employed for Public uses.

Essex advanced from Kingston, to pursue the K.

The King made good his Retreat and returned to Oxford.

Marlborough taken by the Lord Wilmot.

Tadcaster by the Earl of Newcastle.

Winchester delivered up to the Rebels.

Chichester surrendered to the Rebels.

Aubigney interred at Oxford.

Bodwin Fight, and Liscard taken for the King, by Sir Ralph Hopton.

Belvoir Castle surprised for the K. by Col. Lucas.

Leeds taken by the Rebels.

Saltash taken by Sir Ralph Hopton.

Hamden assaulted the Brill, but beaten off by Sir Gil. Gerrard, the Governor.

Doncaster and Wakefield quitted by the King.

Yarum Fight.

Cirencester taken by Prince Rupert, by storm.

England left the Hague, and went to Shieveling.

Shudley Castle taken by Massey.

England.

Burlington Key in Yorkshire.

Brook killed in assaulting Saint Chads Church in Litchfield.

Burlington to Norburton.

Malton.

York

Capuchin Friars, belonging to Somerset House, banished by the Parliament.

Hopton-heath Fight in Northamptonshire, where the Noble Earl of Northampton
was slain.

Malmsbury surrendered to the Rebels.

Litchfield-Close.

Grantham taken by Col. Cavendish, for the King, and demolished.

Hugh Cholmondley declared for the King, and Scarborough delivered to His
Majesty.

Tho. Fairfax defeated at Bramham Moor.

Burningham taken by Prince Rupert, at which the E. of Denbigh received his
Deaths wound.

Rupert entered Litchfield.

The Moorelanders of Staffordshire, got together in a body were taken up by
Col. Get, for the Parliaments service, and called Gett's Brigade.

Hotham routed at Ancaster by Collon. Cavendish.

Litchfield surrendered to P. Rupert.

Essex sat down with his Army before Reading.

Oxon to Wallingford, for the Relief of Reading.

Cavecham Bridge.

Reading surrendered to the Earl of Essex by Col. Feilding.

Reading marched out in warlike manner to Oxford.

Cheap Side Cross pulled down.

James Earl of Northampton, routed some of the Parliament Forces at Middleton
Cheiny field near Banbury.

Warder Castle surrendered to the Rebels, Monmouth the like.

Stratton in Devonshire by the Lord Hopton.

Wakefield.

Rob. Yeomans and Mr. George Bouchier, Citizens of Bristol, executed at Bristol
for their Loyalty, by Col. Nathan. Fiennes.

London and Westminster discovered.

Oxford of the Lady Catharine, who dyed soon after.

Taunton and Bridgewater delivered to the Rebels.



Dunington, by Col. Cavendish.

etc. taken throughout Land.

Newark.

P. Rupert beat up the Parliaments Quarters at Postcomb and Chinner in
Oxfordshire.

Chalgrove Field.

In this Fight, Col. Hampden, one of the Five Members, received his mortal
wound, being the place he first drew up his Men, to put the Ordinance for the
Militia in execution.

Howley House taken by the E. of Newcastle.

Tamworth Castle yielded.

Hampden died.

Fairfax defeated on Adderton Heath, by the Earl of Newcastle.

Middleton's Horse and Dragoons routed at Padbury, near Buckingham, by Sir
Charles Lucas, being accidentally discovered (coming to surprise Sir Charles in
his Quarters) by Mr. Paul Terry, then a Soldier, now an honest Citizen of
London.

Bradford besieged by the Earl of Newcastle.

Bradford taken, and Hallifax and Denton-house quitted by the Rebels.

Burton upon Trent taken by the Lord Jermin.

Tompkins and Chaloner executed for their Loyalty to his Majesty.

Lands-down Hill Fight, where Sir Bev. Greenvill was slain.

Gray of Wark Mr. Darley, and Sir William Armine, ordered by the Parliament, to
be sent to invite the Scots to their Assistance.

Rupert met the Q. at Stratford upon Avon.

Edgehil.

Lord Wilmot and Earl of Carnarvan, gave a great defeat to Sir William Waller,
on Roundway Down.

P. R. sat down before Bristol.



William Waller Voted General of the Flying Army.

Gainsborough surrendered to the Rebels.

Oxford to Bristol.

Dorchester yielded to the Earl of Carnarvan.

Basing-house first attempted.

Portland reduced.

Weymouth and Melcomb submitted.

Gloucester besieged and summoned by the King's Forces.

Oxford.

Gloucester.

Holland and Bedford return to the King.

Scotland, for putting that Kingdom into a posture of Defense.

The Covenant sent from Scotland, and read in Parliament.

Beverly taken by the Earl of Newcastle.

Bidleford, Appleford, and Barnstaple, surrendered to the King.

Exeter taken by Prince Maurice.

Gloucester.

Windsor-Chapel defaced.

Sir John Hotham brought to the Bar of the house of Commons.

Young Hotham brought to the Bar of the House of Commons.

Waller routed at Winchester.

Gloucester raised by Essex.



Ireland.

Lynne yielded to the Earl of Manchester.

Rupert, with His Majesty's Horse, gave a great defeat to the Rebels, near
Auburn in Wiltshire.

Newbury and Emborne Heath, in which action were slain, the most valiant Earls
of Carnarvan, and Sunderland, and Lord Visc. Faulkland.

Rupert in pursuit of them, fell upon their Rear at Theale, beat them into
Reading; but staid not long there.

Oxford.

The National Covenant taken by the House of Commons at St. Margaret's
Westminster.

Earl of Essex returned to London.

Reading Garrisoned by the King.

Dartmouth surrendered to Prince Maurice.

Westminster.

London, and other places in Arms against him.

Hertford installed Chancellor of Oxford.





Sir William Armin, etc. arrived at Edinburgh, sent by the Parliament to hasten
the Scots Invasion of England.

Daniel Kniveton, put to death at London for serving his Majesty's Writ, one of
his Majesty's Messengers.

Hawarden Castle yielded to the King.

Arundel Castle to the Lord Hopton.

Beeston Castle taken for the King.

Lapely House likewise.

Grafton House also.

Crew House in Cheshire, taken for the King.

Colonel Nathanael Fienes sentenced in a Court of War to be hanged for a Coward.

Hamilton sent prisoner to Pendennis.

Arundel Castle yielded to Sir Will. Waller.

Scots invaded England.

Oxford, being summoned by the King.

Sir Thomas Byron died at Oxford.

The Scots crossed Tine.

Thomas Fairfax and Mitton routed at Drayton in Shropshire, by Prince Rupert.

Hopton Castle taken for the King.

Warder Castle the like.

Newark relieved by Prince Rupert and Sir John Meldrum with 7000. men totally
routed; upon which, Gainsborough, Lincoln, and Sleeford, were quitted by the
Rebels.

Sturton surrendered to the King.

BRandon or Chericondown Fight.

Longford House in Shropshire, surrendered to Prince Rupert.

Lord John Stuart died at Abbington.

Oxford.

Tongue-Castle surrendered to Prince Rupert.

Oxford to the West; took her leave of the K. at Abbington.

Stutcomb taken by Prince Maurice.

Reading dismantled by the King.

Stopford in Cheshire taken; and

Latham House relieved by Prince Rupert.

Rupert stormed and took Bolton in Lancashire, in which were killed about eight
hundred, and six hundred taken prisoners.

Oxford toward Worcester.

Essex's Army passed Chatwel.

Chipping-Norton.

Burford, and there deputed Waller to pursue the King.

Bristol House taken by Colonel Gage.

Henrietta born at Exeter.

Shuttleworth defeated at Blackburn by Prince Rupert.

Waller defeated at Copredy Bridge.

York relieved by Prince Rupert, after which happened that Fight on Marstone
Moor.

Breast in Bretany.

York delivered to the Rebels.

Burleigh House near Stamford, stormed by Oliver Cromwell.

Lesthithiel taken by the King.

Essex fled in a Cock-boat to Plymouth.



Basing relieved by Col. Gage.

Newbury.

Oxford.

Newcastle, after a long Siege surrendered to the Scots.

Banbury Siege raised by the E. of Northampton.

Newbury second Battle.

Oxford.

Charles to Oxford.

The Lord Macmahone having been tried and found guilty of high Treason, was
executed at Tyburn.

The King Rendezvouzed on Burlington Green.

Dennington Siege raised by the King.

Hungerford.

Basing Siege raised.

Three Suns appeared in London.



Oxford.

John Hotham and his Son, sentenced to be beheaded.

Alexander Carey beheaded.

William Leg made Governor of Oxford.

Tho. Fairfax voted General for the Rebels The Earl of Essex cashiered.

Mr. L'Estrange (niw Sir Roger) condemned to die for an Attempt upon Lyn Regis.

Hothams, the Father and Son, beheaded.

L'Estrange reprieved.

Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, beheaded.

Cullom Bridge, where Sir H. Gage was slain.

Maurice set out from Exeter toward Worcester.

Uxbridge Treaty began.

Fairfax with great formality received his Commission from the House of Commons.

Macquire, an Irish Baron, having been tried and found guilty of High Treason,
was hanged at Tyburn.

Uxbridge Treaty ended.

Shrewsbury surprised by the Rebels.

Rossiter defeated near Melton Mowbray.

Pontefract relieved, and the Rebels defeated by Sir Marmaduke Langdale.

Scots come over the River Tine.

Charles sets out from Oxford toward the West.

Oxford adjourned till October the tenth next.

Prince Charles came to Bristol.

for the Preservation of his Majesty's Person) should be left out in Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Commission.

HIgh Archal Siege raised.

Massey defeated at Ledbury by Prince Rupert.

Blackington House delivered up to the Rebels.

Windebank sentenced for it.

Windebank shot to death at Oxford.

Aldern Battle in Scotland won by Montross.

Oxford.

Oxford the first time besieged.

Godstow House quitted.

Feversham taken by the Rebels.

Leicester besieged by the King.



Gaunt House yielded.

Oxford, after which General Fairfax raised his Siege.

Naseby.

Leicester and Hougham Garrison near Grantham regained by the Rebels.

Highworth surrendered.

Carlisle yielded to the Scots upon honorable Terms by Sir Thomas Glenham.

Scotch Army at Tamworth.

Langport.

Scotch Army sat down before Hereford.

Pontefract Castle delivered to the Rebels.

Bridgewater also.

Scarborough the like.

Bath surrendered.

Hamilton Hill.

Sherbourn Castle taken by the Rebels.

Montross defeated the Scotch Army at Ketsith, near Glascow in Scotland.

A Marriage proposed betwixt Prince Charles and Portugal.

Huntington taken by the King.

Fairfax sat down before Bristol.

Littleton died.

The King came to Oxford.

Morton Henmarsh.

Scots raised their Siege from before Hereford.

Tamworth. Captain Gardener was slain there.

Bristol surrendered to General Fairfax.

Montross defeated at Philiphaugh in Scotland.

Routon Heath, and slain there the L. Berty Staart E of Litchfield.

Winchester taken by Cromwell.

Sandal Castle surrendered to the Rebels.

Basing-House taken, and in it the noble Marquess of Winchester.

Digby defeated at Sherbourn in Dorsetshire.

Oxford.

Bolton Castle yielded to the Rebels.

Beeston Castle the like.

Latham House also.

Hereford surprised.

Wormleighton House burnt.

Dartmouth stormed and taken by the Rebels.

Belvoir Castle delivered to the Rebels.

Westchester the like.

Torrington stormed and taken by the Rebels.

Launceston quitted by the King.

Saltash likewise.

Lizzard also.

Mount Edgcomb yielded.

Foy quitted by the King.

Litchfield interred at Oxford.

Hopton accepted ^f Conditions for disbanding his Army near Stow.

Jacob Astley, who was the last hopes of the King's Army, defeated near Stow.

DEnnington surrendered to the Rebels.

Barnstable Town surrendered to the Rebels, and the Fort some few days after.

Ruthen Castle delivered:

Corfe Castle taken.

Exeter delivered.

Michaels Mount yielded.

Rupert's Troops disbanded.

Dunster Castle delivered.

Woodstock surrendered.

Oxford.

Oxford besieged the second time by General Fairfax.

Scotch Army at Southwel.

Oxford first opened.

Banbury and Newark surrendered.

Newcastle by the Scots.

Dudley Castle surrendered to Sir Will. Brereton, by Col. Levison Governor for
the King.

Oxford.

Radnor surrendered.

Isis, at Oxford, turned into the old Channel.

Ca^narvan surrendered by the Lord Byron.

Ludlow delivered.

Berstal the like.

Oxford.



Oxford and Farrington surrendered.

York's Servants discharged.

Rupert went for France, and Prince Maurice for the Hague.

(...) Close surrendered.

Worcester the like.

Henrietta conveyed from Oatlands by the Lady Dalkeith.

Wallingford Castle surrendered.

Gothridge the like.

Pendennis yielded.

Conway taken by storm.

England broken and defaced.

Scots sold the King for 200000 l.

I. Stowel committed Prisoner to Ely house.

Ragland surrendered.

Essex died at Essex House.

Scilly Island and Castle surrendered.

Dunkirk surrendered to the French.

Essex's Funeral.

Denbigh Castle surrendered.

Fairfax triumphantly marched to London.

Scotch Army marched into Scotland, having received their money for the King.

Berwick quitted by the Scots.

Charles brought prisoner to Holmby.

Orange, aged 63 years, died of a Fever.

MOntross commanded by the King to lay down Arms till his Majesty's further
Pleasure.

Holmby, by Cornet Joyce, and carried to Childersley.

Newmarket.

Royston.

Hatfield.

Windsor.

Caversham, where the Prince Elector visited him.

Maidenhead, where his Royal Highness the Duke of York dined with him.

Pembroke surrendered to Cromwell upon Articles.

Latimer.

Stoke.

The City declared against the Army.

London, where the Forts and Outworks were slighted.

Oatlands.

Sion House.

Hampton Court.

Isle of Wight from Hampton Court, but was kept Prisoner by Col. Hammond in
Carisbroke Castle.



Burleigh murdered at Winton.

Jenkins brought to the Bar, where he denied the Power of the Court.

London in behalf of the King.

Poyer shot to death as by his Lot cast, betwixt Powel and Langhorn.

York, escaped from St. James's in woman's Apparel.

Berwick surpised by Sir Marmaduke Langdale.

Chepstow taken by surrender for the King.

Surrey petitioning for an Accommodation with the King, are set upon by the
Soldiers, and many of them slain.

Kentish Gentry rise for the King.

Carlisle taken by Sir Philip Musgrave.



Tenby surrendered.

Maidstone Fight.

Kent served as those of Surrey.

Pontefract Castle surprised.

Goring at Stratford-Bow with his Forces.

Colchester, being-seized on by the King's Friends, was summoned by Fairfax.



Francis L. Villiers, Brother to the present D. of Bucks, slain at Kingston
upon Thames.

Tinmouth Castle revolted to the King.

Scotch Army under D. Hamilton de^^ated.

Colchester surrendered, and the Inhabitants fined 14000 l.

Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle were shot to death.

Wight.

Rainsborough slain.

Wight broken off.

Weight, and carried to Hurst Castle.





Winton.

Farnham.

To Windsor.

Pitcher shot to death in St. Paul's Churchyard.







Voted that Writs should no longer run in the King's Name.

Hillary Term adjourned.

Brown sent Prisoner to Windsor.

The King brought from Windsor to St. Jameses.







John Bradshaw.



Charles the Second began his Reign from the same day.

Capel escaped from the Tower.

King Charles II's Proclamation for King, dated Feb. 1. 1648.

Capel retaken and sent back.

Charles the Second proclaimed in Scotland.

An Act for the Trial of the L. Capel, etc.





Windsor.



Humphrey Marston slew three Messengers, that were sent to apprehend him.

The pretended High-Court of Justice sat at Westminster in Trial of Duke
Hamilton, etc.





Holland sent for.

Mr. Beaumont executed.

Charles the Second proclaimed in Ireland.

Warwick put by from his Command of the Navy.

Hamilton, E. of Holland, L. Capel, L. Goring, and Sir J. Owen sentenced to die.

Norwich, and Sir J. Owen reprieved.

Hamilton, Earl of Holland and Lord Capel beheaded.

Pontefract Castle surrendered.

Reynolds imprisoned and put out of his Mayoralty, for not proclaiming the Act
against Kingly Government.

Lockier shot to death in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Dorislaus slain in Holland.

Burford, and Col. Thomson slain.

Andrews proclaimed the Act for abolishing Kingly Government.

Cromwell being made Genesis marched into Scotl.

Tower Street.

Poyse shot to death in Covent Garden.

Montross defeated in Scotland.

Aston.

Edenborough, and sentenced.



Charles II. landed in Scotland.

English advance toward Scotland.

Cromwell and the Army came to Barwick.

Fairfax laid down his Commission.

Levens suffered.

Carisbroke Castle.

Old Exchange broken down by the Usurpers.

Scots Army routed at Dunbar.

Eliz. died at Carisbroke Castle.

Newport in the Isle of Wight.

Edenborough Castle delivered to the English by Dundas the Governor.

Charles II. Crowned at Schoon in Scotland.

Henry Hide beheaded.

BRown Bushel beheaded for delivering Scarborough to the King.

Christopher Love, a noted Presbyterian Minister, and Mr. Gibbons, beheaded on
Tower Hill, for a Plot against the usurped Government.

Scotch Army entered into England.

Scotch Army came to Worcester.

Worcester.

Scotch Prisoners brought to London, and five hundred Pounds offered to any
that would detect his Majesty King Charles the Second.

Charles II. safely landed at New Haven in France.

Darby beheaded at Bolton.

Timothy Fetherstonhaugh beheaded at Chester.

Jersey Island taken.

Man surrendered.

Corn Castle in Guernsey surrendered.

Barbado's the like.

Downs, between the English and Dutch.

French Fleet beaten by the English.

Dunkirk taken by the Spaniard.

Blake worsted by the Dutch.

Wight and Portland, and the Dutch beaten.

The English Fleet in the Levant, worsted by the Dutch.



English and Dutch.

Little Convention began, commonly called Barbones Parliament.

John Lilburn tried and quitted.



Oliver Cromwell, who takes upon him the Style of Protector.

Protector so called, feasted at Grocers-Hall by the City.

Gray of Grooby Prisoner to Windsor Castle.

Salisbury, and other parts of the West of England dispersed.

Hollander.

W. Pen, sent by Cromwell to the West Indies.

Vowel executed.

Don Patalcon Sa of Portugal, and Col. Gerrard beheaded on Tower Hill.

JAmes Duke of Lenox dies.

Archbishop of Armagh dies.

Hains slain before St. Domingo.

Penruddock and others executed.

English Fleet takes the Island of Jamaica from the Spaniard.

MIles Sindercom one of O. Cromwell's Guard sentenced to die, for plotting his
death. Having poisoned himself in the Tower, w^^ staked on Tower Hill.

Thames ebbed and flowed ^wice in three hours.

Harvey died.

Mardike surrendered to the French, and put in the possession of the English.

DUnkirk taken by the English.

Henry Slingsby and Doctor H^wi^, beheaded on Tower Hill.

Cromwell died.

Richard Cromwell proclaimed Protector.

Oliver Cromwell's pompous Funeral.

Dick's Parliament, met at Westminster.

Richard Cromwell, published by the Officers of the Army.

Richard Cromwell's Party deserting him, he consented to dissolve his
Parliament. After which, himself had a quietus est.





White Hall and Somerset House Voted by them to be sold.

Cheshire, headed by Sir George Booth, now Lord de la Mere.

Lambert advances with his Forces against Sir George Booth.

Desborough advances toward the West.

George Booth routed and taken Prisoner at Newport Pagnel.

George Booth committed to the Tower, and Chrik Castle surrendered.

A Proclamation against Mr. I. Mordant, since Viscount Mordant, and others,
suspected to be engaged with Sir George Booth.



Lambert.

Fleetwood nominated Commander in Chief by the Army.

Monk signified his dislike of the Armies proceedings, and advanced out of
Scotland toward England.

Bradshaw, that bold Villain and Traitor died.

Lambert advanced with his Forces toward General Monk.

London (occasioned by the Apprentices delivering a Petition to the Lord Mayor,
to use his Endeavors for a Free Parliament) wherein many were slain by Col.
Hewsons Soldiers.



Windsor Castle surrendered to the Rump Parliament.

James.

They proclaim pardon to Lambert, and all others, that should submit to them by
the 9. of Jan. upon which his Forces dispersed themselves.

General Monk arrived at Newcastle.

Morley made Lieutenant of the Tower.

Tho. Scot and Luke Robinson ordered to meet General Monk, and congratulate his
Arrival.



Monk.

Monk came to Land. with his Army, being petitioned by all the Counties which
he marched through, for a Free-Parliament.

Monk pulled down the Gates and Portcullisses of London, by order of the Rump
Parliament.

Monk dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Rump Parliament, withdraws with
his Army into London. The City receives him with Bone^ires, etc.



Westminster, Apr. 25. 1660.

LAmbert escaped out of the Tower. His Majesty's gracious Letters and
Declaration, dated from Breda.

Lambert proclaimed Traitor.

Daventry by Col. Ingolsby.

Lambert brought to London, and committed to the Tower.

Westminster.

read in the House, presented by Sir John Greenvil. After which followed seveal
Resolves, in order to his Majesty's speedy Return to his People.

The like gracious Letters and Declaration to General Monk.



Montague and the whole Fleet submitted joyfully.

Easter-Term adjourned till Quinque Pasch. being May 8.

Charles the First his Statue set up again in Guild-hall-yard.

Charles the Second most joyfully proclaimed in London and Westminster; and
afterward all his Dominions over.

His Majesty K. Charles the Second left Breda.

Hague.

York and Gloucester for England.

Dover, where the Lord General Monk and some part of the Army attended him with
several voluntier Troops of the Nobility and Gentry.

Thence to Canterbury.

Rochester.

London to his Palace of White Hall.

William Outred, that famous Mathematician died.

John Robinson made Licutenant of the Tower of London.

Guild Hall by the City.

George Monk for those Signal and Eminent Services performed by him, for the
King and Kingdom, created Duke of Albemarle, etc. And Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter.

Albemarle took his place in the House of Peers.

Henry Earl of St. Albans went Ambassador into France.

Edward Montague, Admiral at Sea, for his good Services created Earl of
Sandwich, etc. and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and took his
place in the House of Peers.

Ormond the like, as Earl of Brecknock.

Denmark.

Spain proclaimed.

November the sixth next, having passed an Act for disbanding the Army: as also
an Act of Indemnity.

The Regicides excepted out of the pardon.

The Prince de Ligne, Ambassador from Spain, came to London.

Henry Duke of Gloucester died.

Orange.

London.

Hicks's-hall.

Old Bailey.

Thomas Harrison (one of them) hanged, drawn, and quartered at Charing Cross.

John Carew executed in the like manner, being another.

John Cook and Hugh Peter's two more, executed in the same manner.

Thomas Scot, Gregory Clement, Adrian Scroop, and Jo. Jones executed in the
same place and manner.

Daniel Axtel, and Francis Hacker, only hanged at Tybourn.



Henrietta, and Prince Edward of the Rhine.



Orange died.

Orange was interred in Henry the Seventh's Chapel.

Scotland.

Charles, the First Son of the Duke of York, born and christened, was created
Duke of Cambridge.

Henrietta, set forward for France.

Venner and his party in Arms, in the City of London dispersed.

Venner their chief Captain with several others taken.

Venner, and nineteen of his Confederates arraigned.

Venner and Ho^gekins executed in Coalman-street, Prichard and Oxmin at
Woodstreet end.



Scotland by the Parliament. Who declare the power of the Militia in his
Majesty.

The Parliament in Scotland pass an Act for the Attainder of the Marquess of
Argile.

The Queen Mother, and the Princess Henrietta embarked for France.

O. Cromwell, H. Ireton, and I. Bradshaw, hanged at Tybourn, and buried under
the Gallows.

Their Heads set on Westminster Hall.

Southampton sworn Lord High Treasurer of England.

Argyle brought to his Trial.



Ireland Dissolved.

England to convene on May 8. 1661. were sealed.

Mazarine, that great Minister of state in France, removed by death.



Bath, Created to attend his Majesty at his Coronation according to Custom.

Hide Created Earl of Clarendon, Arthur Lord Capel made Earl of Essex, with
four Earls more, and six new Barons.

Tower, through London to Whitehal, toward his Coronation.

Charles the Second Crowned at Westminster.

London in Hide Park, consisting of two Regiments of Horse, and Twelve
Regiments of Foot.

Westminster, wherein the House of Lords were restored to their ancient
Privileges.

The Convocation likewise began.

The Parliament began in Ireland.

Montross taken up and Interred in great State.

Elizabeth, Q. of Bohemia, arrived at London.

London and Westminster, and afterward all England over, by Order of the
Parliament.

Argyle condemned in Scotland for High Treason, and Sentenced to death.

Edinburgh.

The Act for the Trial of His late Majesty Charles the First, burnt by Order of
Parliament in Westminster Hall.

C. Lucas and Sir G. Lisle solemnly celebrated at Colchester.

Mounson, Sir H. Mildmay, and Mr. Wallop sentenced by the House of Commons to
be drawn on Sledges, from the Tower to Tyburn and back again, as a yearly
Penance, on the day of the late King's Murder.

England, first read in the French Tongue, at the French Church in the Savoy.

November the twentieth next. Passed

An Act declaring the Militia His Majesty's.

An Act for the safety of His Majesty's Person, etc.

French Ambassador, and the Spanish for precedence, at the public entry of
Count Brohe, Ambassador Extraordinary from Sweden to England, on Tower Hill.

Marches of Wales, Earl of Carbery first President.

James Duke of Ormond, made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

John James arraigned for Treason.



Lincoln's Inn, to renew the ancient Custom of that House, in the choice of a
Lord Lieutenant, and Prince of the Grang. Elected I. Lort Esquire, to that
dignity.

Charles Coot, Earl of Montrath in Ireland, died.

January the seventh next.

An Act for purging of Corporations, etc.

Henry Earl of St. Albans returned from France, arrived at Whitehall.

Wildman and several others committed to the Tower for treasonable practices.

John James hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn.



Frederick Lord Cornwallis died.

Marches first sitting.

Peterborough took possession of Tangier.

Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia died.

Fleetstreet was blown down.

John Stowel died.

Christopher Lord Hatton made Governor of Guernsey.

Catharine of Portugal, now Queen Dowager, embarked for England.

Miles Corbet, John Okey, and John Bar^stead, three Regicides, hanged, drawn
and q^artered at Tyburn.

Argiers, by Sir John Lawson.

York delivered of a daughter at St. James's.

Fienes and his Party cut off at Tangier, by the Moors.

Portsmouth.

Febr. 18. next.

Charles the 2d. and Donna Catharina, Infant of Portugal, were married by
Gilbert, Lord Bishop of London, at Portsmouth.

Hampton Court.

London present their duty to his Majesty.

Henry Vane indicted, and found guilty of Treason.

John Lambert the like.

Lambert reprieved.

Henry Vane beheaded.

English Forces arrived at Lisbon.

Greenwich.

Catharine came first to White Hall.



William Lenthal Speaker of the Long Parliament died.

Cuba attacked by his Majesty's Forces of Jamaica. The Spaniards routed, and
some Towns destroyed.

Sir Henry Bennet sworn one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State.

Tunis, by Sir John Lawson.

Tripoly.

Tangier.

Russia, were conducted to their Audience with great State, carrying many
presents in view from York House.

Argiers and thereabouts, by the Charity of the Right Reverend the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy.

Archibal Johnson, Lord Warreston, brought over into England.

Tower.

Westminster.

Windsor.

Tiveot set sail for to be Governor of Tangier.

Ireland, wherein Colonel Thomas Scot, Colonel Edward Warren, Major H. Jones,
Jephson Lackey, and others concerned.

Rothes made High Commissioner of Scotland.

William Iuxon, Archbishop of Canterbury, departed this life.

Bramhal, Lord Primate of Ireland died.

Peterborough arrived at White Hall, from his Government of Tangier.



James.

Warreston executed at Edinburgh, according to Sentence in Parliament, on a
Gibbet two and twenty foot high.

March 16. next.

Bath; the first night to Maidenhead.

Reading, and thence to Norberry.

Marlborough.

Bath.

White Hall.

His Majesty's Judges, by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, for the
Trial of several persons concerned in a Conspiracy in the North.

York.





James Turner, a notorious Splitter of Causes, was executed in
Leadenhall-street for Burglary.

Gibbons and Baker two of the Northern Conspirators Executed.

John Twine was Executed in Smithfield, for Printing a treasonable Libel
against His Majesty, according to Sentence against him in the Old Bailey
Sessions House.

Westminster.

Cheapside, London.

April instant.



The Parliament resolved to assist His Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes
against all opposers.

Tiveot who succeeded the Earl of Peterborough in the Government of Tangier,
and his party cut off by the Moors, near the Jews River at Tangier.

August next.

George Downing arrived at London, from Holland.

Thomas Moddiford arrived at Jamaica, Governor.

Goch Ambassador from Holland had Audience.

Aug. 20. till November. 24. next.



Henry Coventry Esquire, sent Envoy Extraordinary to Sweden.

James his Fields for all sorts of Provisions, every Monday, Wednesday and
Saturday; and every Monday and Wednesday, for all sorts of Cattle, in the
Hay-market in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields.

Rupert, then designed for Guiny.

John Lawson arrived at Portsmouth, from the Streights.

Rupert, with his Squadron, came to the Spithead.

London Voted One hundred thousand pounds to be lent His Majesty.

Argiers, by Sir Thomas Allen, Admiral in the Mediterranean.

York, Lord High Admiral, set forth toward his charge at Portsmouth.

William Pen with part of his Majesty's Fleet, set sail from Dover.



l. sterling.

The Fleet from the Downs arrived at Spithead.

Hellens Road.

Whitehall.



Jan. 12. next.

England.

Allen took four Prizes from the Dutch in the Streights.

Portsmouth, took One hundred and twelve Prizes small and great from the Dutch;
most of which adjudged lawful prize.

Holmes committed to the Tower.



Dutch.

Dutch Impostor (under the disguise of a Swede, come from Guiney) who reported
the utter destruction of the English there, by de Ruyter, was this day whipped
through the Streets of London.

June Twenty first next following.

War proclaimed against the Dutch.

London Frigate was blown up.

Allen arrived from the Streights.



London; which was graciously accepted, and to honor it with the Epethite of
Loyal.

Holmes having fully cleared himself, is released of his imprisonment.

Dutch.

Vernevel, and Mounsieur Courtine, Ambassadors extraordinary from France
arrived at London.

Bellasis Governor of Tangier, in the room of the Earl of Tiveot, arrived
there.

Evertson taken after a sharp dispute, and three Frigates, by the Diamond and
the Mairmaid.

De Ruyter attempted the Barbado's with his Fleet, but beaten off.



Texel.

Dutch Prizes taken by His Majesty's Frigates.

French Ambassadors, with Monsieur Comings, make their Entry.



A great Plague began in London, in which year died 97306. whereof of the
Plague 68596.

Bath.

Holland Fleet about the Dogger-Sands.

Gun-fleet.

The Parliament further Prorogued by Proclamation, from June 21. next, to a
time which should be prefixed at their actual Prorogation.

Hamburgh Fleet fell into the possession of the Dutch.

Southold-Bay.

Dutch Fleet.

Dutch Fleet; wherein above thirty Capital Ships were taken and destroyed, and
near eight thousand men killed and taken Prisoners.

Persons of Note of the English slain were the Earls of Falmouth, Portland and
Marleborough, and the Lord Muskerry.

Rupert arrived at White Hall.

Dutch Prisoners brought to Colchester, whereof thirteen Commanders.

London and Westminster, and places adjacent.

Westminster, and was Prorogued to August the first, next.

His Majesty conferred the honor of Knighthood upon Captain Christopher Mings,
and Captain Jeremy Smith, for their good services in the late Engagement.

Sir John Lawson died of his wounds, received in the late Engagement.

Willian Coventry Knighted by His Majesty, and sworn of the Privy Council.

Rupert, etc. arrived at the Buoy in the Nore, with the Queen Mother going for
France. His Majesty taking his leave this night.

His Majesty went aboard the Royal Charles, and conferred the honor of
Knighthood on Rear Admiral Tiddiman, Captain Jordan, Captain Spragge, and
Captain Cutings.

Greenwich, from thence to Hampton Court.

England and Wales for the late Victory.

Soulbay toward Holland.

A general Fast observed in London and Westminster by occasion of the Plague
then raging there; and the first Wednesday in every Month for the future, till
it should please God to remove that judgment.

Salisbury.

Farnham Castle,

His Majesty for Portsmouth.

Salisbury.

Isle of Wight.

Salisbury.

The Parliament again Prorogued to October ninth next, to Oxford.

York.

Exchequer (being removed to Nonsuch) opened there.

Hull.

Captain Owen Cox in the Nathan Frigate, cast away with all his men near
Yarmouth, his Ship having split against a Rock.

The Dutch Smyrna, and Streights men, De Ruyters, and their East India Ships,
Attacked by Rear-Admiral Tiddiman in the Harbor of Bergen in Norway; in which
Action was slain Edward Montague, Son to the Lord Montague of Boughton.

Sandwich, set sail for the Coast of Holland.

Norway.

Dutchmen of War.

East India Ships, and several other Merchantmen taken by the Earl of Sandwich,
with the loss only of the Hector.

London in all the streets, etc. three days and nights to purify the Air.

Holland Fleet joined with the rest of their Merchantmen.

Hollanders, took the greatest part of them, whereof four Dutch men of War,
with above one thousand Prisoners.

Salisbury to the Lord Ashleys.

Pool.

Luckworth Castle in the Isle of Burbeck.

Weymouth.

Portland.

Dorchester, from thence back to the Lord Ashleys.

Salisbury.

York for Oxon.

Salisbury to Oxford, where he arrived, and met his Royal Highness this night.

Oxford.

Oxford.

Oxford.

Christ Church, where His Majesty made a Gracious Speech to them.

1250000l. Part of Michaelmas Term from the first Return thereof, called Tres
Michaelis, to the fifth, called Octabis S. Martini. Adjourned from Westminster
to Oxford, by His Majesty's Proclamation.

Dutch Fleet returned to Harbor.

Thomas Bloodworth sworn Lord Major of London, at the outmost Gate of the
Bulwark, by Sir John Robinson Lieutenant of the Tower, by virtue of His
Majesty's Commission to him directed.

The Parliament Prorogued from Oxford to Westminster, to sit February the
twentieth next.

Oxford.

Albemarle went to Oxford.

Albemarle returned to London from Oxford.

Exchequer, from Nonsuch to Westminster.

His Majesty ordered the next Term to be kept at Windsor.

The Parliament Prorogued from February the twentieth, to April three and
twentieth next.

Hampton Court.

The French King set out his Declaration of War against England.

Christopher Mings set sail with the Fleet under his command for the Downs.

London, after so long absence, to the great joy of the Inhabitants.

Mings with his Squadron in the Downs.

The Lord Major and Sheriffs of London waited upon His Majesty and Royal
Highness, with the Complement of the City in an humble welcome for their happy
return.

Windsor, to be held on the ninth instant at London.

Christopher Mings came to the Downs, the Dutch having sailed home.

Sir Jeremy Smith His Majesty's Admiral in the Medite^ranean, passed this way
by Cadiz.

Thomas Clifford arrived at White Hall, from his Ambassy in Sweden.

English Fleet under the command of Admiral Mings chased the Dutch into the
Weilings.

Westminster Hall.

French.

Mountjoy Earl of Newport, died at Oxford.

White Hall from Oxford.

April the three and twentieth next coming.

Sir Christopher Mings sailed out of the Downs toward the Coasts of Flanders.

Harwich a third Rate Ship, named the Rupert.

Sandwich set forward on his Embassage extraordinary for Spain.

Sir Christopher Mings with his Fleet at the Mouth of the Elve.

French Church in the Savoy, attended His Majesty with the humble thanks of
that Church, for his great protection and indulgence expressed toward them in
his late Declaration against the French.

White Hall for Audley-end.

Jeremy Smith with his Squadron at Tangier.

Yarmouth a fifth Rate Frigate named the Sweepstakes.

Deptford, a stout Ship of Sixty four Guns, named the Defiance, in the presence
of His Majesty, who conferred the honor of Knighthood on Captain Robert
Holmes, designed to command her.

September the eighteenth next following.

Gilbert Talbot, His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary late to Denmark, arrived at
Whitehall from thence.

Munster.

John Desborough, Colonel Thomas Kelsey, and several others, Officers in the
late disbanded Army, to return into England by the two and twentieth of July
next, or else to stand guilty and be attainted of High Treason.

Sir Jeremy Smith, with his Squadron, arrived at Plymouth from the Streights.

Pupert and the Duke of Albemarle, His Majesty's Generals at Sea for this
Summers expedition, went this day toward the Fleet, to enter upon their
Command.

The Parliament met, and were actually Prorogued according to His Majesty's
Proclamation, till September the eighteenth next.

The Foundation Stone laid of a Grammar School at Mere, in by Thomas Andrews
Esquire the Builder and Endower thereof.

Old Bailey, London, John Rathbone, and some others, Officers in the late
Disbanded Army, for conspiring against the Royal Person of His Majesty. In
order to which, they had laid their Plot for the surprise of the Tower, the
killing of the Lord General; And the better to effect their design, the City of
London was to have been fired. The third of September next was pitched upon for
the attempt, as being found by Lilies Almanac (as they construed it) to a
lucky day. Evidence against them, being very clear, they were found guilty of
High Treason, and hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyburn.

French Protestants of Dublin, having the favor to have a Church granted them
in that City; this day met in their first Assembly, where my Lord Lieutenant
honored them with his presence.

The Lord Morley arraigned at Westminster by his Peers, and found guilty of
manslaughter (for the death of Mr. Hastings) his Lordship had the benefit of
his Clergy; the Lord Chancellor Hide was Lord Steward for the Trial.

Buoy in the Nore.

White Hall.

Bellasis arrived at White Hall, from Tangier.

Rupert, and the Duke of Albemarle, with His Majesty's Fleet, under their
Command, set sail from the Buoy in the Nore, and arrived at the Gun-fleet.

Hollis arrived at White Hall, from his Ambassy in France.

Albemarle, with that part under his command at the back of the Goodwins,
arrived in the Downs.

Sandwich, His Majesty's Ambassador Extraordinary to the Crown of Spain,
arrived at Madrid.

Albemarle set sail from the Downs.

Dutch Fleet, about ninety capital Ships, near the Coast of Flanders, made up
to them, and engaged them.

Rupert passed by Dover toward the Gun-fleet with his Squadron to join with
the Duke of Albemarle.

Rupert joined with the Duke.

The Royal Prince unhappily stranded on the Galloper, and burnt by the Dutch.
The Commander Sir George Aschough taken prisoner, and carried to Holland.

Fretchevile Hollis lost his Arm.

Rupert, and the Duke of Albemarle, after a sharp Engagement of three days, in
two of which the Duke of Albemarle maintained the fight with fifty Ships,
against eighty odd Ships of the Enemy.

Buoy in the Nore: and this day died that valiant Seaman Sir Christopher Mings.

Douglass and his Regiment arrived at Rye, from France.

There was launched at Deptfort, the Loyal London, carrying an hundred Guns;
built at the charge of the City of London, for the service of His Majesty.

Launched at Blackwall, a Ship named the Warspight.

Ossery sworn of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

Buoy in the Nore, to view his Fleet.

Henry Coventry Esquire, arrived at White Hall, from his Ambassy to Sweden.

Madrid Sir Rich. Fanshaw, Ambassador in that Court from the King of England.

George Flemming, the Lord Peter Julius Coyet, Ambassadors Extraordinary from
the Crown of Sweden, made their public Entry through the City of London.

Dutch Fleet hovering about the North Foreland.

Longsands.



Gayland utterly routed and defeated by Taffaletta, near Tangier.

English Fleet under the Command of Prince Rupert, and Duke of Albemarle sailed
from the Buoy in the Nore.

Rupert, and the Duke of Albemarle, a manifest and undoubted victory, against
the whole Dutch Fleet, who were most shamefully chased into their Harbors.

The Lord Willoughby, Governor of the Caribbee Islands for His Majesty, was
unfortunately lost in a Hurricane near Martineco.

English Fleet before the Maes in Scheveling.

Texel.

Robert Holmes in burning and destroying above 150. sail of Dutch Ships in the
Fly, most of them richly laden. As also the Town of Bandaris upon the Island of
Schelling, containing at least one thousand Houses.

London and Westminster, for the late victory and successes against the Dutch;
to be kept by the rest of the Kingdom the 23. instant.

English Fleet arrived at Southwould-Bay, from the Coast of Holland.

Dutch Fleet passed by Dover, the English Fleet making all the sail after them
in sight.

London, beginning in a place called Pudding-Lane, near New-Fishstreet, which
burnt down and consumed, in the space of four days, the greatest part of that
City.

Albemarle arrived at Whitehall, from the Fleet, leaving his Highness Prince
Rupert the sole command of the Fleet, in his absence.

Dutch Fleet weighed from Bulloign-Road, and stood for their own Coast.

Pupert, in St. Hellens Road.

His Majesty set forth his Declaration, showing his Princely care, and Royal
intention for the speedy Restoration of the City of London.



His Majesty's Fleet under Prince Rupert sailed by Dover-Road.

Three or four French Men of War separated from the rest of their Fleet, fell
amongst some of our Fleet; of which we took one Ship of fifty four brass Guns,
and Captain De Roche Prisoner.

The Earl of Ossery being called by His Majesty's Writ to the House of Peers,
this day took his place.

Rupert arrived at Whitehall, having left his Majesty's Fleet at the Buoy in
the Nore.

London.



Denmark.

Denmark, a Ship of Fifty two Guns, was taken by some of His Majesty's Frigates
on the Coast of Scotland.

Tiltyard; but soon happily quenched.

London and Westminster, a day of Thanksgiving to God for asswaging the late
Contagion and Plague in the said Cities.

Scotland being got together, to the number of fifteen hundred, having
committed several hostilities and rebellious pranks against His Majesty's good
Subjects, were this day discomfitted and totally routed by His Majesty's Forces
in that Kingdom.

Thomas Clifford made Comptroller of His Majesty's Household, and admitted of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, December. 5.

James Duke of Cambridge, eldest Son of his Royal Highness, installed into the
Order of the Garter.

Scotland, executed at Edenbourgh.

Robert Earl of Lindsey, Lord High-Chamberlain of England, sworn of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Captain Robinson with the Squadron under his command, took and destroyed three
Dutch men of War near the Texel.

Patrick taken by the Dutch off of Portsmouth, deserted by her own Fireship.

London. 2. An Act for erecting a Court of Judicature for determining of
differences arising touching Houses burnt and demolished by reason of the late
Fire in London. After which the Parliament was Prorogued to October the tenth
next.

Bridgewater, sworn of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.

Seely, Captain of the Fireship that deserted the Patrick, was this day shot to
death aboard his own Vessel.

Buckingham.

Utbert arrived from the Streights with the Squadron under his command, and
seven Prizes, at Plymouth.

Cleveland, Captain of His Majesty's Band of Pensioners, his charge conferred
on the Lord Bellasis.

Dean, a stout Frigate, named the St. David, of Sixty Guns.

England, according to His Majesty's promise to both Houses of Parliament, for
taking the account of the several sums of Moneys assigned to His Majesty,
during the present important Wars, sat this day the first time.

Sweden, this day took their parting leave of His Majesty.

Hollis and Henry Coventry Esquire, Ambassadors Extraordinary, designed by His
Majesty for the Treaty at Breda, set forward on their Ambassy.

Dutch Ships attempted Burnt Island in Scotland, but beaten off with loss.

Southampton Buildings, Thomas Earl of Southampton, Lord High-Treasurer of
England.

Manifesto to all the Princes his Allies, declaring his pretensions to Brabant,
Hainault, etc.

Hollis, and Honorable Henry Coventry Esquire, Ambassadors Extraordinary, made
their Entry into Breda.

John Duncomb admitted of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

James's the Duke of Kendal, second Son to His Royal Highness.

England, constituted the Duke of Albemarle, the Lord Ashley, Sir Thomas
Clifford, Sir William Coventry, and Sir John Duncomb, His Majesty's
Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High-Treasurer of England.

Dutch Fleet, upward of seventy Sail, came to an Anchor in the Gun-fleet.

Dutch Prizes, and sunk two upon the Coast of Norway, and this day the Dutch
Fleet came up Chatham River, where they lost two of their greatest Ships.

Richmond the Duke of Cambridge, first Son to his Royal Highness.

Taken by some of His Majesty's Ships, and brought into Scotland, a rich
East India Dutch Ship, outward bound having seventy four Brass Guns in her
Hold.

John Harman with sixteen sail of English Men of War, engaged the French Fleet,
about thirty Men of War, near Martinego, and burnt and destroyed the most part
of them.

October next, His Majesty for diverse urgent causes, issued out His
Proclamation to both Houses of Parliament, to sit and reassemble at Westminster
the twenty fifth of July next.

Eight Dutch Prizes laden with Masts and Deal, taken by His Majesty's Frigates,
Northward.

Breda by His Majesty, with France, Denmark, and the States General.

Whitehall his Excellency Henry Coventry Esquire, with an account of the late
concluded Peace at Breda.

Dutch appeared in sight of Plymouth.

Torbay, but beaten off.

Dutch Fleet, about twenty three in number, make up for the River of Toames,
and near the Hope are encountered and fought with by Sir Edward Spragge, with
some Frigates and Fireships under his command; at last were forced to draw off,
being still pursued by our Frigates, till out of the River.

Westminster, in obedience to His Majesty's Proclamation of the twenty sixth of
June last, and Adjourned to the twenty ninth instant.

Dutch came to an Anchor in the Gun-fleet.

Prorogued till the tenth of October next being the former prefixed Prorogation.

Rupert returned to Whitehall, from expediting the Fortification at Sheerness.

Westminster Abbey, Abraham Cowley (who died the twenty eighth past) that
excellent Poet.

Holland, etc. was mutually interchanged by the several Plenipotentiaries at
Breda, and solemnly Proclaimed.

de Ruyter attempts the destroying of the Virginia Fleet, put into the Harbor
at Foy, but successess.

Dutch Ships, whereof they took three Men of War, and one Merchantman.

Peace with the States General, France and Denmark, was this day Proclaimed at
London and Westminster.

England from the Earl of Clarendon, the late Lord-Chancellor, was pleased this
day to give it to Sir Orlando Bridgeman, with the title of Lord Keeper.

Orlando Bridgeman, Lord Keeper, having the usual Oaths administered to him,
took his place at the Council Board.

Whitehall, the Lord Hollis, and Henry Coventry Esquire, from their Ambassy
from Breda.

James's.

Buckingham admitted to His Majesty's favor, and his place at the Council
Table.

Spithead, from the Streights, Sir Robert Holmes with a Squadron of His
Majesty's Ships under his Command.

Canary Company their Charter of Incorporation, issued out His Proclamation,
declaring His Pleasure* That all His Subjects might have a free Trade into
those Islands as formerly.

Hellens Road, Sir Jeremy Smith, with a Squadron of His Majesty's Ships, with
two rich East India Dutch Ships outward bound, taken on the Coast of Ireland.

London, sat the first time at Clifford's Inn.

Pett was this day brought to his Examination before His Majesty's Council,
about the late miscarriage at Chatham.

Westminster, according to the Prorogation, and Adjourned to the fourteenth
instant.

Royal Exchange, with the usual Ceremonies; and afterward to confer the honor
of Knighthood upon the Sheriffs of London, Denis Gauden Esquire and Thomas Davis
Esquire and Bookseller.

Royal Exchange likewise.

Borrel and Here Merman, Ambassadors Extraordinary from the States General to
His Majesty, made their solemn Entry through London.

Sir George Ascough being returned from his severe restraint in Holland, was
this day admitted to the Honor of Kissing His Majesty's Hand.

Dutch in the River of Thames.

Holland, had their public Audience from His Majesty.

Clarendon this day being made public, His Majesty was pleased to declare,
That he the said Earl of Clarendon be divested of his place of Privy-Councillor.

Woodmongers surrendered their Charter to His Majesty.

Harwich, a third Rate Frigate named the Resolution.

February next, and an Act passed for the Banishing of the Earl of Clarendon.

England, for settling Trade between the Kingdoms of England and Scotland. The
Commissioners of the Kingdoms met this day in the Star Chamber accordingly.

William Car stood in the Pillory at Westminster by Order of the House of
Lords, for Libellous Papers published against the Lord Gerard of Brandon.

Sandwich, His Majesty's Ambassador Extraordinary in the Court of Spain,
arrived in the same quality at Lisbon to that Crown, to mediate a Peace between
Portugal and Spain.

The Duke of Monmouth, arrived at Paris from England.

His Kingdom, That certain standing Committees of His Honorable Privy Council
for business, should be established;

1. For Foreign Affairs. 2. For the Admiralty and Navy. 3. For Trade, and His
Plantations beyond Sea. 4. For Grievances.




de Donah, Ambassador Extraordinary from Sweden, made his public Entry.

London and Westminster, the late Peace with Spain, concluded at Madrid, May
the thirteenth last.

Spain and Portugal, by the Mediation of the Earl of Sandwich, Ambassador
Extraordinary from His Majesty of England.

Deptford, in presence of His Majesty, a large Ship, designed to carry One
hundred and six Guns, named Charles the Second.



London, and other idle persons joining, abusing the Liberty given them these
Easter Holidays, tumultuously got together under the notion of pulling down
Houses of ill fame about the Suburbs, of which several were seized on and put
in custody.

Easter Holidays, were this day Indicted of High Treason and Rebellion, at
Justice-Hall in the Old-Bailey, and found guilty.

Downs Sir John Harman, with the Squadron of His Majesty's Ships under his
Command, from the West Indies.

Barbado's, which in short time consumed the most part of that Town.

Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Embarked at Dublin for England.

Ossory was sworn Lord Deputy of Ireland during his absence.

Ormond arrived at Whitehall.

August next coming.

Four of the persons concerned in the tumult in Easter Holidays last, being
sentenced as Traitors, were this day hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyburn.

England, and of the States General of the United Provinces, attended his most
Christian Majesty at Paris, with the Ratification of the Treaty concluded
between that Crown and Spain, which was mutually exchanged by them.

John Vaughan this day took his place in the Common Pleas, at Westminster Hall,
as Lord Chief Justice.

Whitehall, Charles Viscount Fitz-Harding, Treasurer of His Majesty's Household.

Arrived at Whitehall, Sir William Temple, His Majesty's Ambassador
Extraordinary at Aix la Chappelle.

Thomas Clifford made Treasurer of His Majesty's Household, and the Right
Honorable the Lord Newport advanced to be Comptroller of His Majesty's
Household.

John Trevor arrived from his Ambassy in France.

Rupert, went this day for Sheerness, to view the Fortifications there.

Downs this day, to take a view of His Majesty's Fleet riding there, under the
Command of Sir Thomas Allen.

Downs to the Westward.

Whitehall.

Francis Lord Newport, was sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Manchester had the honor to entertain His Majesty, his Royal Highness, and
Prince Rupert, at a Dinner at his House at Waltham.

c. went for Hampton Court, and to London, the same day.

His Majesty issued forth His Proclamation, declaring His Pleasure, That the
Parliament should Adjourn themselves from August the eleventh next, till Nov.
the tenth following.

Devon, with His Presence at Dinner, at her House at Rochampton.

Thence to Hampton Court.

Whitehall.

Bristol, a stout Frigate of 1100. Tuns, named the Edgar.

Daniel Harvey set forward on his Ambussy for Constantinople.

May last, met at Westminster, and Re-adjourned themselves in pursuance of His
Majesty's Proclamation till the tenth of November next.

Colbert, Ambassador from His most Christian Majesty, made his public Entry.

Thomas Allen with his Fleet under his Conduct sailed by Plymouth, toward the
Mediterranean.

Dover.

Rupert departed for Bagshot.

Windsor, and back the same night to Bagshot, having offered in St. George his
Church according to the Statutes of the Order.

Rupert, etc. from Bagshot to Portsmouth. And,

Whitehall.

Monmouth, in Hide-Park, was placed by His Majesty in the Command of Captain of
His Life Guard of Horse, void by the Resignation of the Lord Gerrard of Brandon.

Pietro Moccenigo, Ambassador from the State of Venice, made his public Entry.

Nov. next, till the first of March next coming.

Sandwich came to Portsmouth, from his Ambassys Extraordinary to Spain and
Portugal.

John Trevor, by the Resignation of Sir William Morris, was sworn one of His
Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State.

Sir Thomas Allen, with His Majesty's Fleet came before Algiers.

c. went for New Market.

Ipswich on His way to Harwich.

Ipswich, and the same day to New Market.

Whitehall.

Whitehall.

New Market.

Whitehall.

Westminster according to their Adjournment, and in obedience to His Majesty's
Proclamation of September eighteenth, adjourned till the first of March next
coming.

March next, the time of their Adjournment, till October. nineteenth next
following.

Portsmouth a Frigate named the New Nonsuch.



Henrietta.

October nineteenth next.

c. went to New Market.

Whitehall.

Hellens Road, Sir Thomas Allen from the Streights.

London the Prince of Tuscany.

Tuscany arrived at Cambridge.

Oxford.

Tuscany, at St. Albans House in St. James's Fields.

Tuscany took his leave, and departed for Holland.

Albemarle at his House at Newhall.

John Earl of Tweddel was admitted of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

Winchelsea arrived from his Ambassy at Constantinople.

Oxford, with great solemnity, took the possession of that magnificent
Structure, the New Theater, being the benefaction of his Grace Gilbert Sheldon,
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Weymouth was observed this day to ebb and flow seven times between six and
nine in the morning.

Berkshire.

Westminster Abbey.

Prince George of Denmark, having lately arrived in England, was this day
conducted to His Majesty.

The Lord Roberts, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland arrived at Dublin.

Sir Thomas Allen set sail from Portsmouth, with his Squadron for the Streights.

Howard, imbarqued at Plymouth, on his Ambassy from His Majesty to the Emperor
of Morocco.

Sheerness.

Whitehall.

Oxford, upon the Resignation of Gilbert Sheldon, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Elected the Duke of Ormond their Chancellor.

Guldenlack, Ambassador Extraordinary from Denmark, made his public Entry.



Rupert, etc. went for Southampton.

Colombe in France, Henrietta Maria, Queen Mother of England.

Sir Thomas Allen arrived before Algiers, with His Majesty's Fleet under his
Command, the Algerines refusing satisfaction to his demands.

Horsley, in Surry, Sir Edward Nicholas, late one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State.

Thomas Allen declares War against the Algerines.

etc. returned from Southampton to Whitehall.

London met for the first time, in the new built Royal Exchange.

Portsmouth a stout and large Ship, designed to carry One hundred Guns, called
the St. Michael.

Deal, the Nonsuch Ketch, having been endeavoring to find out a North-West
Passage.

Westminster, according to their Prorogation.

The Earl of Lauderdale, His Majesty's Commissioner for Scotland, being arrived
at Edinburgh, this day rid in state to the Parliament House.

Dennis in France, the solemn Funeral Service for the Queen Mother of England.

James's the Lady Henrietta, Daughter to their Royal Highnesses.

Edinburgh, An Act asserting His Majesty's Supremacy over all Persons in all
Causes Ecclesiastical, etc.

Scotland, an Act for the Naturalization of Strangers of the Protestant
Religion, that should bring their Estates, or set up new Works and Manufactures
amongst them.

England was Prorogued by Commission till the fourteenth of Feb. next.

Westminster, that notorious Highway Robber, Claude de Val formerly proscribed.

Cockpit, the Duke of Albemarle, Captain General of His Majesty's Forces. The
sad news of which being brought, together with the Garter, His Majesty to
express the great value he had for the memory, and incomparable merits of that
Great Person, was pleased to return the Garter to his Son, the Earl of
Torrington, now Duke of Albemarle, and to declare, That he should succeed his
Father in Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and of the Lord Lieutenant of the
Country of Devon. And that as the last mark of His Majesty's gratitude to the
memory of the deceased, His Majesty would Himself take care for his Funeral to
be celebrated with a solemnity, such as might become the glorious things he did
in the service of the Crown.

Aubrey de Vere, Earl of Oxford, sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

Falconbridge on his Ambassy Extraordinary to the Princes of Italy.

Tyburn, Claude du Val, to the great grief of the women.

Cockpit, the Duchess of Albemarle.

Lauderdale arrived at Whitehall from Scotland.

Sergeant Littleton sworn one of the Barons of the Exchequer.

Westminster according to their Prorogation.

Albemarle, in Henry the Seventh's Chapel at Westminster.

JOhn Lord Berkley, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, began his journey toward his
charge.

October next.

Berkley, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland entered upon the possession of Government.

Monmouth, admitted of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

George Duke of Albemarle, set forward from Somerset House, toward the Abbey at
Westminster, with extraordinary order, pomp and magnificence.

Whitehall, and the next day came to Dover.

Orleance.

Henry Earl of Ogle, sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable Council.

Clou in France, her Royal Highness the Duchess of Orleance, His Majesty's
Sister.

Nower the Herald Painter burnt in his Bed, at his House behind the Exchange,
with two Children and two Servants.

Beach, and some more of His Majesty's Ships near Cape Spartel, against the
Algerines, in which were destroyed six lusty Ships of Algiers.

England and Spain, in America, was this day ratified at Madrid.

Pierce and his Lieutenant, late Captain of the Sapphire, according to the
sentence of a Court Martial, for losing the said Ship cowardly, were executed
aboard the Dragon at Deptford.

Westminster, according to their Adjournment.

Whitehall his Highness the Prince of Orange.

Thomas Allen arrived from the Streights in the Plymouth, leaving the command
of His Majesty's Fleet there to Sir Edward Spragge.

London, complemented his Highness the Prince of Orange, with his welcome to
England.

London, at Dinner at Drapers-Hall.

A bold and barbarous attempt was made upon the person and life of his Grace
the Duke of Ormond, before Clarendon House, by six persons mounted and armed,
forcing him out of his Coach, and endeavoring to have carried him away along
with them.

Orange went to Windsor.

Oxford.

Where he was pleased to accept of a Degree from that University.

London.

Wapping.



Orange parted from Whitehall, in order to his return for Holland.



Paul in Shadwel, formerly belonging to the Parish of Stepney, being made
lately Parochial, was this day Consecrated by John Lord Bishop of Rochester,
Commissioned thereto by the Lord Bishop of London.

James's, after a long indisposition, her Royal Highness, Ann Duchess of York.

Was launched at Portsmouth, a stout and large Frigate, of above one hundred
Guns, named the Royal James.

Whitehall from New Market, whither he went the twenty fourth past.

Westminster Abbey, the Corpse of her Highness Ann Duchess of York, in a Vault
on the South Side of Henry the Seventh's Chapel.

Downs, for Jamaica, two of His Majesty's Frigates, in one of which was embarked
Sir Thomas Linch, His Majesty's Deputy Governor for that Island.

April next.

Oxford, in a Street called Grand Pool, which consumed in few hours, above
forty dwelling Houses.

Whitehall Edward Earl of Manchester, Lord-Chamberlain of the Household.

Blood and others attempted to carry away the Royal Crown out of the Tower of
London.

Edward Spragge, and his Squadron, that gallant and successful enterprise, in
destroying and burning ten Ships of War of Algiers, at Bugia.

Henry Earl of St. Albans, preferred to the Dignity and Office of
Lord-Chamberlain to His Majesty.

Matthew Hale, late Lord Chief-Baron of the Court of the Exchequer, took his
Seat in the Court of the Kings Bench, as Lord Chief Justice of that Court, in
the room of Judge Keeling lately deceased.

Edward Turner, late Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, was this day
sworn Lord Chief-Baron of the Court of the Exchequer.

Chatharines nigh the Tower.

Whitehall to Windsor.

Cambridge having chosen the Duke of Buckingham their Chancellor, this day the
Vice Chancellor, and the Body of the University, attended his Grace at
York-House in the Strand, and was presented with the Statutes and Patent of
that University, and was admitted with the usual Ceremonies.

Richmond, Edgar Duke of Cambridge, Son to his Royal Highness the Duke of York.

English Plantation of the Island of St. Christopher, taken by the French in
the last War, to Sir Charles Wheeler, His Majesty's Governor of the Leeward
Islands.

etc. arrived at Portsmouth, from Windsor.

Isle of Wight.

Plymouth, His Majesty having parted with his Royal Highness.

Exeter.

Wilton.

Whitehall.

Whitehall.

April sixteenth next, till October thirtieth, in the year One thousand six
hundred seventy two.

Rupert, parted from Whitehall for New Market, where he arrived the same day.

Arlington's house at Euston.

Yarmouth.

Norwich.

etc. returned this day to New Market.

His Majesty in consideration of that stout and memorable action performed by
Captain Baddison, Captain of the Swallow, Merchant of one hundred and fifty
Tuns, and twenty six Men, fought against an Algerine of thirty six Guns, who
having boarded the Swallow several times, was forced at last shamefully to
leave him and six of his men behind him, was pleased to order a Gold Chain and
Medal for him, this October. 28.

Cambridge.

And back again to New Market.

Whitehall.

London, having all its public Buildings recovered out of the late Ruins, to
a greater splendour and beauty than heretofore, made an humble invitation to His
Majesty, to honor their Lord Mayors Feast with His Presence, to which His
Majesty was pleased to consent; and this day accordingly Dined at their
Guildhall.

Algiers, by Sir Edward Spragge, His Majesty's Admiral in the Mediterranean.

George Downing parted from Whitehall, on his Ambassy to the States General of
the United Provinces, from His Majesty.

Whitehall the Lady Catharine, youngest Daughter to his Royal Highness.

Christ Church in Winchester Park in Southwark, being made Parochial, was this
day Consecrated by John Lord Bishop of Rochester, Commissioned thereto by the
Lord Bishop of Winchester, in whose Diocese it lies.

Montague, His Majesty's late Ambassador in the French Court, was admitted of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Joseph Williamson Esquire, had the honor of Knighthood conferred upon him.
And was sworn one of the Clerks of His Majesty's Council in Ordinary.

Whitehall Sir George Downing, His Majesty's late Ambassador to the States
General.



Robert Car made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

etc. were pleased to honor the Society of Lincoln's Inn, with their presence
at the Readers Feast, Sir Francis Goodrich.

Robert Holmes with six of His Majesty's Ships, met the Dutch Smyrna, and
Streights Fleet, convoyed by eight of their Men of War off of Portsmouth; upon
refusing to strike and lower their Topsails, fought them, and took five of the
richest of them.



United Provinces.

Whitehall Sir Edward Spragge, His Majesty's late Admiral in the Streights.

Rupert, etc. went down the River for Chatham.

United Provinces.

Del. Fresno, Ambassador Extraordinary from his Catholic Majesty, made his
public Entry.

Westminster according to their Adjournment, and was in pursuance of His
Majesty's Proclamation, Prorogued till October thirtieth next.

Henry Marquess of Worcester, Arthur Earl of Essex, Thomas Viscount
Falconbridge, and George Viscount Hallifax, were admitted and sworn of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Whitehall, a Chapter of the Knights Company of the Order of the Garter, and
the Earl of Lauderdale elected in the Order.

His Majesty was pleased to Create the Earl of Lauderdale, Duke of Lauderdale;
the Lord Arlington, Earl of Arlington; the Lord Ashley, Earl of Shaftsbury; and
Sir Thomas Clifford, Baron Clifford of Chidley.

Thomas Osborn, Treasurer of the Navy, sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

de Estrees, with the French Squadron at St. Hellens Road, parted this day for
to take a view of them, to Portsmouth.

His Royal Highness with the English Fleet passed by Dover, in order to a
conjunction with the French Squadron.

Dutch Fleet were riding in Dover Road.

Rye in Sussex; returned this day to Whitehall.

Dutch Fleet upon the Winds V^ering to the South, weighed from Dover Road, and
stood for Calice.

Dover, Westward.

Falls.

Alborough.

Gun-fleet.

Southwold-Bay.

Katharine's without the Iron Gate, near the Tower of London, which consumed
near a hundred Houses.

Southwold-Bay. After a sharp dispute of about eight hours, the Dutch Fleet
gave way and retreated. In this Engagement was unfortunately lost that Noble
and Gallant Sea-Commander Edward Montague, Earl of Sandwich and Vice Admiral of
England: As also Sir Fretchevil Hollis, Captain Digby, and Sir John Cox.

Died Sir John Trevor, one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State.

Stocks Market in London, erected at the sole charge of Sir Robert Viner,
Citizen, was first opened, which continued running with Wine for diverse hour.

The Dutch Fleet lost in a Fog.

At a Chapter held at Whitehall by the Sovereign and Company of the Honorable
Order of the Garter, were elected into that Order, Henry Marquess of Worcester,
Henry Earl of St. Albans, and William Earl of Bedford.

Little St. Bartholomew's, L^^don, the Corpse of Sir John Trevor, late one of
His Majesty's Secretaries of State.

Rochester, Monsieur Rabiniere tres le Boys, Rear Admiral of the French
Squadron, dead of his wounds, received in the last Engagement.

Edward Earl of Sandwich slain in the last Engagement with the Dutch, being
found and taken up at Sea, notice whereof being given to His Majesty, His
Majesty out of His regard to the great deserts of the said Earl, and his
unexampled performance in this last act of his Life, resolved, that at His
charge he should receive the Rites of Funeral due to his great quality and
merit.

Henry Earl of Arlington, Elected into the Noble Order of the Garter.

Harwich.

Holland.

Edward Earl of Sandwich set forward by Water from Deptsord, toward the Abbey
at Westminster, with extraordinary pomp and grandeur, attended by the Lord
Mayor of London, and numbers of the Nobility in their Mourning Barges, and was
Interred in a Vault on the Northside of Henry the Seventh's Chapel.

Henry Coventry Esquire sworn one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State,
being likewise together with Sir Robert Long, admitted of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.

Buckingham, the Earl of Arlington, the Lord Viscount Hallifax, from their
Ambassies extraordinary in Holland, having effected nothing with those States.

Arthur Earl of Essex, began his Journey for Ireland, as Lord Lieutenant of
that Kingdom, in the room of the Lord Berkly.

Henry Earl of Euston, afterward Duke of Grafton, married to Isabella the only
Daughter of the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Arlington.

Essex arrived at Dublin, and entered upon his charge as Lord Lieutenant of
that Kingdom.

Ruart Van Putten, and Pensionary de Wit, at the Hague, by the multitude.

Holland, with the French King at Utrecht.

October thirty next, till February the fourth next after.

Whitehall from the Fleet.

The Earl of Ossory, Elected one of the Knights of the Honorable Order of the
Garter.

Sparr, and the Sieur Ehensteyn, Ambassadors Extraordinary from the Crown of
Sweden, were conducted in great state to their public Audience.

Sir Orlando Bridgeman, late Lord Keeper, having resigned, by reason of his
great age, and a continual indisposition of Body, the Great Seal into the hands
of His Majesty;

Anthony Lord Ashley, Earl of Shaftsbury, with the Title of Lord Chancellor of
England.

John Duncomb, made Chancellor of the Exchequer.

Thomas Lord Clifford, Baron of Chidley, to the Office of Lord High Treasurer
of England.

The Lord Newport, succeeded to be Treasurer of His Majesty's Household.

The Lord Maynard Comptroller.

Elsynour, in Denmark, Charles, Duke of Richmond, His Majesty's Ambassador
Extraordinary to that Crown.

Exchequer, or to be brought, till May first next following.

Tobaga in the West Indies taken from the Dutch, by the English.

Helena in the East Indies, surprised and taken by the Hollander, from the
English.

Blankfort, Captain of his Royal Highness Horse-Guard, a Baron of England, by
the Title of Lord Dura^, Baron of Holdenby.

Shaftsbury, Lord Chancellor of England, being attended, according to the
ancient and laudable custom, with the Judges, and Officers of Chancery, and the
Body of the Law, went from his House in the Strand, to Westminster Hall.

Southampton, Elected into the noble Order of the Garter.

Westminster, according to the Prorogation, and chose Sir Job Charlton, Chief
Justice of Chester, for their Speaker, in the room of Sir Edward Turner.

Job Charlton by reason of an indisposition of health, desired his dismission
from being Speaker; and this day was chosen in his place, Edward Seymour,
Esquire.

James Earl of Northampton, sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

Portsmouth, a large first Rate Ship, named the Royal Charles.

1238000l. sterling. An Act for a Free Pardon, which done, both Houses adjourned
till October twentv, next coming.

Algiers, Sally, etc. by the Moneys raised in England and Wales, by virtue of
His Majesty's Letters Patent to that purpose dated Sept. 10. 1670.

Edward Seymour Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, was sworn
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Monmouth, was made by the most Christian King, one of the Lieutenant Generals
of his Army, during this Summers Campaign.

Rupert, under Sail, returned this day to Whitehall.

The whole Dutch Fleet upwards of Seventy Sail of Capital Ships, passed by
Alborough-Bay.

Helena, in the East Indies, was this day regained by Captain Monday, with some
other of His Majesty's Ships from the Dutch, and three rich East India Dutch
prizes taken in the Harbor.

Rupert, passed by Dover, in order to their conjunction with the French
Squadron.

French Squadron, under the Command of the Count de Estres, sailed from
Portsmouth for the Downs.

His Majesty and his Royal Highness, etc. went for Rye, near which place both
Fleets intended to join.

This day both the Fleets came to a conjunction.

Ossory, Rear Admiral of the Blew Squadron for the Summers Service.

Whitehall.

Rupert, weighed Anchor from the Northforeland, and stood for the Coast of
Holland.

Dutch Fleet, about five Leagues off the Wielings.

English Fleet engage with the Dutch, and after a sharp dispute, forced the
Dutch to retreat and shelter among their Shallows.

Dutch, upon their Coast.

Buoy in the Nore to see the Fleet.

Whitehall.

Clifford having resigned his Staff, as Lord High-Treasurer, His Majesty was
pleased to deliver it to Sir Thomas Osborne, who was also created Viscount
Dumblayne, in the Kingdom of Scotland.

Monmouth arrived at Whitehall, from the French Camp in Flanders.

Buoy in the Nore, to hasten the going out of the Fleet.

Rupert, set Sail from the Buoy in the Nore, being accompanied by His Majesty
as low as the Middle-Ground.

Whitehall.

Robert Howard, made Auditor of His Majesty's Exchequer, in the room of Sir
Robert Long deceased.

Dutch Fleet, after a stout contest by His Majesty's Fleet, under the Command
of Prince Rupert, wherein that Gallant Seaman Sir Edward Spragge was unhappily
lost, near Schonevelt.

English Fleet come to an Anchor near Harwich.

etc. went down to Woolwich, to see the working of two Water Engines, invented
by Sir Samuel Moreland.

His Majesty commanded the Earl of Ossory to take the command of His Majesty's
Fleet now at the Buoy in the Nore, in the absence of Prince Rupert.

Richard Monday came into the River of Thames, with five East India English
Ships under his Convoy, and three Dutch East India Prizes, taken at the
regaining of St. Helena.

Charles Duke of Richmond (who died at Elsynour) at Westminster, in Henry the
Seventh's Chapel.

Westminster according to their Adjournment, and were Prorogued by Commission,
till the twenty seventh instant.



January seventh next.

England, from the Earl of Shaftsbubury, Lord Chancellor, and deliver it to Sir
Heneage Finch, His Majesty's Attorney General, with the title of Lord Keeper.

Dover, her Royal Highness, with (the Duchess of Modena) her Mother being at
the same time met by his Royal Highness, the Duke of York, in order to the
consummation of their Marriage.

Thames, to meet their Royal Highnesses, who together arrived at Whitehall the
same day.

Richard Monday for his good service in regaining St. Helena.

Robert Robinson, Captain of the Monmouth Frigate.

Westminster, according to their Prorogation; His Majesty was pleased to be in
the House of Lords, and make a gracious Speech to them.

United Provinces, was this day signed by His Majesty's Commissioners, and by
the Marquess Del Fresno, Ambassador extraordinary from the Crown of Spain to
His Majesty, on the part of the said States, commissioned by them thereto.

November next.

Holland publicly Proclaimed in London and Westminster.

Mulgrave, Elected into the Order of the Garter.

Harwich a stout third Rate Frigate, named the Harwich.

Leoline Ienkins, and Sir Joseph Williamson, His Majesty's late
Plenipotentiarys at Cologne, arrived this day at Whitehall, from thence.

Reed, Van Beuninghan, and Van Haren, Ambassadors Extraordinary from the States
General of the United Provinces, to His Majesty, made their Entry through
London.

His Majesty accompanied with his Royal Highness, etc. went for Windsor with
the whole Court.

Robert Earl of Sunderland, admitted of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

Portsmouth from Windsor.

The battle of Saniein between the French and the Confederates.

Peterborough sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Monmouth, upon the Resignation of the Duke of Buckingham, was Elected
Chancellor of Cambridge.

Seneff, in which the Prince of Aurange remained Master of the Field.

Whitehall from Windsor.

Henry Earl of St. Albans, having resigned into His Majesty's hand the Staff as
Lord Chamberlain, His Majesty was pleased to deliver it to Henry Earl of
Arlington.

Sir Joseph Williamson made one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State.

November next, till April thirteenth next after.

September, was Prorogued to the thirteenth of April in the year ensuing.

Strafford admitted of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Guildhall in the City of London, the twenty ninth of October last, to accept
of the Freedom of the City, by the hands of Sir Thomas Player, their
Chamberlain; This day the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen waited upon His
Majesty at Whitehall, and humbly presented Him with the Copy of the Freedom of
the City in a Box of massy Gold; the Seal thereof hanging in a Golden Box, set
over with Diamonds, to a considerable value.

Catharina Laura.

Tripoli men of War burnt in the Port of Tripoli by Sir John Narborough.



Shirly to the House of Lords against Sir John Fag, Prorogued to the thirteenth
of October following.

Barbados, which destroyed at Sea eight Ships and Ketches, and at land 300
Houses, and above 200 persons.

Northampton very near burnt down to the ground by an accidental fire.



February in the year following.



Leolin Ienkins His Majesty's Plenipotentiary for the Treaty at Nimegin took
his leave in order to his journey.

Heneage Lord Finch, Baron of Daventry, and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, delivering up the Seal to His Majesty, received it immediately back
again with the Title of Lord High-Chancellor of England.

Algiers and Sea-briefs.



Indians in Virginia headed by one Bacon.



24th of June following.

Henry Lord Bishop of London, sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Mary and the Lady Ann, confirmed by the Dean of the Chapel at Whitehall.

COnde in Flanders taken by the French King's Forces.

Courtin arrived here in Quality of Ambassador Extraordinary from the Most
Christian King.

Buchain.

Vivonne, before Palermo over the Spanish and Dutch Fleets.

Philipsburg after a long siege by the Imperialists surrendered upon Articles to
Prince Herman of Baden.

22d of November last past.

de Cross Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Sleswick Holstein had his
Audience of His Majesty.

Valenciennes taken by the French.

de Maurice, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy, had his Audience.

Orange, and the Duke of Orleans at Mount Cassel.

The Town of Cambray taken by the French, and some few days after the Citadel,
etc.

Also the Town of St. Omer.

de Bergerick, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Spain, had Audience of His
Majesty.

21st of May following.

Henry Duke of Newcastle, and Thomas Earl of Danby, High-Treasurer of England,
elected into the most noble Order of the Garter.



French and the Dutch at Tabago.





His Majesty answers the Commons Address.

The Parliament Prorogued till July 16th next.

Aaron Smith for Seditious words against the being of the present Parliament.
Charles Church Wallistein Envoy, Extraordinary to the Emperor, had audience of
His Majesty.

December the third next.

Ormond constituted Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and began his journey thither.

Barrillon arrived here, Ambassador Extraordinary from the most Christian King.

Ormond arrived at Dublin.

Orange arrived at Harwich, came that morning to His Majesty at New Market.

Orange entertained at Euston by the Lord Chamberlain.

December to the fourth of April next.

Orange and the Lady Mary at St. James's by the Bishop of London.

York brought to Bed of a Son.

Orange with his Princess departed for Holland.

Holland.

April, as His Majesty's Proclamation directed; but His Majesty was pleased to
Adjourn them for a shorter time, viz. but to January fifteenth next.

January fifteenth.

Cambridge dyed at St. James's.

Stetin after a long Siege surrendered on honorable terms to the Elector of
Brandenburg.





de Serinschamp, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Lorrain, had his Audience.

Sieur de Renter, Envoy Extraordinary from the Prince of Mechlenburg also had
his Audience.

Ghent surrendered to the French King.

de Lorge sat down against Ipre.





A disorder happened in Bruges in Flanders by the means of a Dutch Captain in a
procession.

In this month the English Army went for Flanders.



de la fueillade quitting of Messina, and the French coming away.



Swansie of a Female Child, which had two perfect Heads and Necks upon one Body.

Sieur Lindenaw Chamberlain to the King of Denmark, and Envoy Extraordinary,
had his Audience.

Leeuwe surprised by the Sieu de Mellac.

Spanheim Envoy Extraordinary from the Prince Elector Palatine, had his
Audience.







James Smith was indicted and convicted of Felony for running away from his
Colors, and hanged on Hounsloheath.

August.



The Peace concluded at Nimeguen, betwixt the French and Dutch.

D'Estrees losing of seven Men of War, and five other French Ships on the sands
nigh the Isle of Birds, etc.

Orange seconded by the English, forced the Duke of Luxemburg to quit the siege
of Mons.

T. Otes, Dr. Tongue and Kirkby contrive their villainous Information at
Fox-Hall.

Tongue is sent for before the King and Council.

T. Otes swears to his Information before Sr. Edmondbury Godfrey.

T. Otes Dr. Tongue and Kirkby examined before the Privy Council, they
pretending to discover a Plot against His Majesty's Person and Government.

Sir George Wakeman summoned before the King and Council.



Dr. Fogarthy, Ireland, Fenwick, Grove, Pickering, Johnson, Smith, committed
for High Treason.

Coleman's House searched, and his Papers seized.

Hearing of an Information against him, he forthwith surrenders himself to a
Secretary of State.

New Market.

Coleman is sent to Newgate, being accused of High Treason.

Rich. Langhorn, Councellor at Law, committed to Newgate on the same Account.

Edward Peter's also committed to Newgate.

Edmundbury Godfrey, having been missing three or four days, was found dead in
a Ditch nigh Primrose-hill, with his Sword run through his Body.

Edmondbury Godfrey.



T. Otes examined before the House of Commons.

T. Otes examined before the House of Lords.

William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord Arundel of
Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis hearing that they were
accused by these Informants, did of their own accord, immediately surrender
themselves.

A Proclamation for a general Fast Appointed to be the thirteenth of November.

London.

Mr. Rich. Langhorn jun. ordered into Custody.

The House of Commons Resolve, That there is a Plot of the Papists to murder
the King and alter the Government.



William Bedlow (formerly servant to the Lord Bellasis) becomes another
Discoverer of the Plot, and also of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Murder.





Charles Price, two Mr. Vaughans, Mr. Thimbleby, Captain Spalding, Mr. Charles
Wintore, Mr. James and Mr. Charles Milbourn are all ordered into Custody upon
Bedlow's Oath.

George Conyers, le Phair, Pritchard, Symonds, Walsh and Beeston.

l. to any that shall apprehend a Priest or Jesuit.

William Stayley a Goldsmith was tried and condemned for Treasonable Words.



Edward Coleman Esquire was convicted at the King's-bench-bar, and sentenced to dye.

l. to any person concerned in the Plot, if he will come in before the twenty
fifth of December and discover.



Rich. Vaughan and Mr. I. Vaughan ordered to appear before the Lords, and
Bedlow to be present.

Rich. Vaughan committed to the King's Bench, and Mr. I. Vaughan discharged on
Bayl.

Edward Coleman Esquire was executed at Tyburn, avowing his innocence to the last.

Ellis Leighton being accused by Otes, appears at the Lords Bar, where Otes
having little to say against him, he was discharged upon his Recognisance.

Whitaker committed to Newgate.

Nevil committed.

A false Alarm of the French landing in the Isle of Purbeck.

Langhorn in Newgate.

Mr. John Thimbleby discharged by the Lords.

Prance a Silver-smith being accused (by Bedlow) to be one of the Murderers of
Sir Edmond. Godfrey, is apprehended.

Prance after some time owns himself guilty (although after he denis all again and
accuses others as Assassinates, whereof Green, Berry and Hill are apprehended.

Dugdale (formerly a servant to the Lord Aston) sets up for another Evidence,
and gives in an Information to the Lords of strange things against his own
Lord, and several others.

Prance and Bedlow fall out about sharing the 500 l. reward for making the
(pretended) Discovery of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Murder.

Come in Herefordshire discovered to be a College of Jesuits.

Feb. the 4th.

Father Beddingfield, one of the pretended Plotters, died in Newgate.

Salisbury was sworn one of His Majesty's Privy Council.

T. Otes not content with ten pound a Week, petitions for more.

Clarendon, sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Otes tells the Lords in plain Terms, That if they will not help him to more
Money he must be forced to help himself.

Dugdale complains to the Council, That one Mr. Fr. Gage of Staffordshire, had
aspersed him by saying, He had run in Debt in Staffordshire, and played the
Knave, and now pretended to make a Discovery of a Plot to heal himself.

Mr. Boyce acquaints the Council, That being with Prance in Prison, he told
him, in great Disorder, that my Lord Shaftsbury had threatened, If he did not
agree with Bedlow in what concerned the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, he
should be hanged.

Evers, Mr. Gavan, Mr. Gifford, Mr. Levison, Mr. Broadstreet, all Priests and
Jesuits; with a Reward of 100 l. to take Mr. Evers, and 50 l. any of the rest.

Adland condemned for a Priest, but reprieved.

Pickering, Ireland and Grove, being brought to their Trial in the Old Bailey,
and convicted of High Treason, are sentenced to dye.

Arthur complains to the Council, That his House being lately searched by
Bedlow, there were five broad Pieces, a Silver Seal, and a Silver Egg taken out
of his Counting House.

Otes desires the Council to let him have all the Names of the Jesuits, that he
may sue them to an Outlawry.

Ireland and Grove, executed at Tyburn, denying the Fact for which they
suffered.

The King of Sweden's natural Brother came in at Dartmouth.

March next.

Temple.

Will. Aston refusing to be examined about a Wallet, said by Dugdale to have
been in Mr. Evers's Closet, is sent for into Custody.

Otes tells the Council, he suspects the Temple-Fire was a contrivance, and
that he hopes shortly to inform them further therein.

Foulk, the Minister, was executed at Tyburn.

Sunderland was made Secretary of State in the place of Sir Joseph Williamson,
who resigned.

Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Lawrence Hill, were brought to their trial for
the Death of Sir Edm. Godfrey, and convicted.

Green and Hill were Executed at Tyburn, denying the Fact to the last.

Richardson, the Keeper of Newgate, denis upon Oath before the Council, that he
ever heard any of the three Persons executed for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, confess the Fact.

Flanders.

Westminster, and choose Mr. Seymour Speaker.

15th instant.

Gregory Speaker.

Thomas Earl of Danby may be committed to safe Custody.

Prance's Examination read in the Lords House. An Address to the King by both
Houses for a Fast.

Mr. Hill and Mr. Edwin attended the House of Commons Bar.

The House of Commons desired his Majesty, That Mr. Bedlow might have the five
hundred pounds for the discovery of Sir Edm. Godfrey's murder, well paid him.

Danby from his Office of Treasurer.

Danby's pardon.

Ed. Sackvile sent to the Tower by the House of Commons, upon a Complaint of
Otes.

Mr. Edward Turner ordered to the Gate House.

Thomas Earl of Danby to render himself to justice.

Redwood and Mr. Glascock ordered into Custody.

Rich. Tasborough Esquire (under Bail) ordered into Custody.

Sackvile to be released.

Tower, viz. William Earl of Powis, William Viscount Stafford, Henry Lord
Arundel of Warder, William Lord Petre, and John Lord Bellasis.

Mr. Reading committed to Custody by order of the House of Commons.

Tangier to the Crown of England.

Thomas Earl of Danby.

Oyer and Terminer is granted for trial of Mr. Reading.

England.

Elizabeth Oxley fired her Masters House, and afterward said one Stubs prompted
her to it.

Danby rendered himself to the Black Rod.

Tower.

Danby, by a Committee of ten Members.



Five Commissioners for the Treasury, and seven Commissioners for the Admiralty.

Gilbert Gerrard, Sir Thomas Player, Colonel Birch, and Colonel Whitley are
appointed Commissioners to disband the Army.

Reading is tried at the King's-Bench-Bar upon Bedlow's Accusation, for
endeavoring to corrupt the King's Evidence; is brought in Guilty, sentenced to
stand in the Pillory, to pay a hundred pound Fine, and to suffer a whole years
Imprisonment.

Danby put in his Answer and Plea to the Impeachment of the Commons against him.

York to be the Ground of the Papists Designs.

William Andrews sent to the Tower a Prisoner.

Sharp Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, was most barbarously murdered
in his Coach by twelve assassinates.

Danby's Pardon Illegal and void.

His Majesty sent to the House of Commons to wish them to secure the Fleet,
proceed in the discovery of the Plot, and Trial of the Lords in the Tower.

Lauderdale.

Harcourt the Priest sent to Newgate.

London and Westminster.



But notwithstanding this, most audaciously presume the same day to order a
Bill to be brought in, to disinherit His Royal Brother the Duke of York.

Both Houses agree upon a Committee of twelve Lords, and twenty four Commoners,
to consider of the Methods and Circumstances of the Trial of the Lords in the
Tower.

Pepis and Sir Anthony Dean, committed to the Tower by the House of Commons.

August.

Scotland, where they proclaimed the Covenant, and put forth a Declaration;
some of the chief were Robert Hamilton, Patton, Balfour, Haxton, etc. some of
which were the Assassinates of the Archbishop of St. Andrews.



One Mr. Nevil lately come from Portugal, was discovered by Otes in Whitehall,
and thereupon committed to the Gatehouse.

John Narborough from the Streights, arrives at Plymouth with fifteen Sail.

D' Auronches Ambassador from Portugal, had his Audience of the King at
Whitehall.

John Narborough, arrived at the Spithead.

Whitebread, Fenwick, Gaven, Turner, and Harcourt, tried at the Old Baily, and
brought in guilty.

Langhorn the Counselor, condemned likewise in the same place, and received
Sentence for Execution with the aforesaid five, this day.

Monmouth set out for Scotland.

Whitebread, Harcourt, Gaven, Turner, and Fenwick, are executed at Tyburn, but
affirm their Innocence to the very last.

Scotch Rebels routed at Bothwell Bridge.

Algerein Men of War seen off the Coast of Portland.

England to Newfoundland.

Tangier.

Windsor.

East-Dearham, burnt down.

Scotland against Field-Conventicles.

Anthony Dean and Samuel Pepys Esquire obtain their Liberty upon Bail.

The Earl of Castlemain continued under Bail.

England, and calling another on Tuesday the 7th of October following.

A Treaty betwixt the French King and Duke of Brandenburg.

Don Jaspar d' Abreu de Freitas, the Portugal Ambassador, had his Audience at
Windsor.

Langhorn executed at Tyburn, asserting his Innocence of the Crime for which he
suffered.

Thomas Gascoign sent Prisoner to the Tower.

George Wakeman, Mr. William Marshall, Mr. William Rumney and Mr. John Corker,
were tried in the Old Bailey for Treason, and Acquitted.

William Plessington executed at Chester, for exercising his function contrary
to Law.

George Viscount Hallifax, made Earl of Hallifax; John Lord Roberts, Earl of
Falmouth and Viscount Bodmin; and Charles Lord Gerrard, Earl of Newbury and
Viscount Brandon.

George Wingfield, Captain William Langley, Captain William Mathews and Captain
Charles Wingfield had Commissions granted to raise four Companies for Tangier.

Captain John Holmes came to the Fleet at Deal.

Falmouth's Title is changed to Earl of Radnor.

The Lord Viscount Yarmouth, made Earl of Yarmouth.

John Evans and William Lloyd, two Priests, were executed at Cardiff in Wales.

James Morgan and John Davies make their escape out of Prison in Caermarthen in
Wales.

Lime.

de Mayan, Envoy from the Duke of Savoy, had his Audience.

John Berry came to Plymouth with his Fleet.

London.

William Atkins and Mr. Andrew Brumwich condemned at Stafford for Priests.

Newbury's Title is changed to Earl of Macklesfield.

The Lady Ann and the Lady Isabella, Embarked in the Greenwich Frigate for
Flanders.

Lewis executed at Uske in Monmouthshire.

Johnson executed at Worcester.

Windsor.

27th. in the Morning he had another Fit, but more gentle than the first, yet
he remained indisposed to the 2d. of September.

Windsor from Flanders.

The Streights Fleet set sail from Plymouth.



Monmouth his Commission of General.

London, and the Court of Aldermen, go in their Scarlet Gowns to Windsor to
congratulate the King's Recovery.

White Hall, to the great joy of all the Loyal Citizens.

Don Juan of Austria died.

London enter a Declaration in their Book, against Sir Thomas Player's Petition
for doubling the City Guards.

George Lord Berkley, of Berkley-Castle, made Viscount Dursley, and Earl of
Berkley in the County of Gloucester.

30th of October.

The Duke of Monmouth goes toward Holland.

Mary Yacht, a second time for Flanders.

The King and Queen went to New Market.

etc. of Cambridge waited on His Majesty at New Market.

Scotland.

Bridgwater, the Tide rose so high, that it over-turned all the Haycocks, and
filled all the Houses thereabouts, the Fields and Roads being like a Sea.

Ann and Lady Isabella, arrived at White Hall in their way to Scotland.

New Market to Whitehall.

26th of January next.

The Earl of Shaftsbury removed from being President of the Council.

Sir. Thomas Williams committed to the Gatehouse by Order of Council.

London came to Congratulate His Majesty's safe return from New Market.

Morstein, Chamberlain to the King of Poland, had his Audience.

Raymond and Mr. Lewis, Sheriffs of London, were knighted.



Tho. Dangerfield brought before the King and Council upon the Complaint of
Roderick Mansel, about some Papers said to be found in his Lodgings.

Dangerfield examined a Second Time in Council, where the Keeper of Newgate
affirmed, He never had a greater Rogue in Custody.

Radnor made President of the Council.

Sir Creswell Levins, made Attorney General in Sir William Jones his place.

Ann set forward on their Journey for Scotland, lying this night at Hatfield.

Dangerfield being further examined, is committed for Treason.

Biggleswade.

The Lady Ann returned to White Hall.

Huntington.



A Proclamation against Treasonable and Seditious Books.

Their Royal Highnesses set forth from Stamford October 30th, and arrived
safely at Edinburgh in Scotland November 24th.

Castlemain is committed to the Tower upon Dangerfield's Information.

Mris. Celier, Mr. Gadbury, and Mr. Rigaut are also sent to several Prisons
upon his information.

Powys is also sworn into the Tower, by the same Villain Dangerfield.

The Earl of Peterborough appears before the King and Council, being accused by
Dangerfield.

Sergeant, a Secular Priest, had his Pardon.

A fight began by the English and Moors at Tangier, that lasted eleven days.

Thomas Dangerfield gets his Pardon.

The Marquess de Aronches, Ambassador from Portugal, had his Audience on the
Marriage of the Duke of Savoy to the Infanta.

etc. with a Reward of 100 l. for each brought in.

Effigy, attended with the Effigies of Sir George Jeffreys, Mr. L' Estrange,
etc. is pompously brought through London, and carried to Temple Bar; where they
are all of them, together with a loud Acclamation, thrown into a Fire prepared
for that purpose.

Henry Sidney Esquire His Majesty's Envoy, went for Holland.

A Great Fish appeared at Deal, and was struck with a Hook, but got away.

Edinburgh for the murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews.

Laurence Hide Esquire made 1st Commissioner of the Treasury.

An Indictment preferred against T. Oats for Sodomy.

Mr. Nappier committed to Newgate for a Priest.

Waterford in Ireland, killed by a Sentinel.

Conway, created Earl of Conway.

Albemarle made Captain of the King's Life Guards.

Mr. Tasborough set at Liberty upon his habeas Corpus.

The Earl of Mulgrave made Governor of Hull, and Lord Lieutenant of the
East Riding of Yorkshire.

Chesterfield made Warden, and Lord Chief Justice in Air, etc. on this side
Trent.

London.

The Earl of Tyrone committed prisoner to the Castle in Dublin.

Francis Guynne Esquire sworn Clerk of the Privy Council in the Room of Sir Robert
Southwell, who had leave to surrender.

The Sieur Abraham Marin, the Duke of Courland's Resident, had Audience.

Plunket was committed to the Castle at Dublin.

11th of November following.



Sheres, the Surveyor of the Mole at Tangier, arrived at White Hall.

Frank Smith, the Factious Bookseller, committed to Newgate.

Dryden Assaulted in Covent Garden.

Edward Wood His Majesty's Envoy to Sweden, returned home.

Monmouth Master of the Horse, revoked.

The Earl of Feversham made Master of the Horse to the Queen.



by the City of Edinburgh in their Town Hall.

Stephen Fox, Sir Richard Mason, Sir Nicholas Armorer, Thomas Windham, and
Roger Pope Esquires, made Commissioners for Master of the Horse.

Mowbray and Baldron pardoned.

Edward Deering Esquire Knighted.

Mr. William Banks taken into Custody on the Complaint of Baldron.

Dover-Cliff fell, about thirty yards in length, and as much in breadth.

Mr. Gadbury the Astrologer informs the King and Council of what he heard Sir
Robert Payton say of a Phanatical Plot.

Celier accuses Sir Robert Payton of the same thing before the King and
Council, whereupon he is committed to the Tower.

Ordered that the Garrisons at Chepstow, Dartmouth, Chester-Castle, Holy Land,
St. Maws, and Scarborough, be disbanded.

The Attorney General ordered to prosecute the Authors and dispersers of false
News.

Sunderland, the Earl of Essex, and Mr. Secretary Coventry, go to the Tower to
examine Sir Robert Payton.



Sir George Carteret, Vice-Chamberlain to His Majesty, died in the 80th year of
his Age.

Somersetshire, Wiltshire and Essex Grand-Juries rejected the Petition for
sitting of a Parliament.

Middlesex, London, Dorsetshire, Hartfordshire and Darbyshire rejected the
Petition for sitting of a Parliament.

Seven Persons Arraigned for High Treason at the Old Bailey, on the statute of
the 27 Elizab. and six of them Convicted.



Oats and Bedl^w's Articles against Sir William Scroggs debated in Council, and
Sir William cleared.

Oxford Canterbury and Bridgwater Grand-Juries reject the Petition for sitting
of a Parliament.

Westminster. His Majesty walked on foot to the Parliament House, and Prorogued
them to April 15th following.



The Grand Jury of Durham rejected the Petition for sitting of a Parliament.

Bristol: And that day Mr. Row and Mr. Diley were sent Prisoners from thence to
London, for seditious words against the Government.

Russel, Lord Cavendish, Sir Henry Capel and Mr. Powel had leave to depart the
Council.

His Royal Highness acquainted the Lords of the Council of Scotland, that His
Majesty had sent for him.

Ben. Harris sentenced (for publishing Libels) to pay 500 l. and to stand in
the Pillory; which last he suffered.

Robert Atkins had his Quietus.

Francis Smith and Langley Curtis found guilty at the Guild Hall, for
publishing Scandalous Libels.

Mr. Baron Raymond made Judge in the Common Pleas, Sir Richard Weston made
Baron of the Exchequer, and Sir Charles Littleton made Governor of Sheerness.

Whitfield, etc. tried for tearing the Petition for the sitting of a
Parliament, and acquitted of the Indictment.

Robert Payton had his habeas Corpus.

The Lord Brunkard and Sir Thomas Littleton added to the Commissioners of the
Admiralty.

Thomas Gascoign had his Trial, and was acquitted.

Sir Leoline Ienkins sworn of the Council, and Secretary of State, in the Room
of Mr. Coventry.

Powys Bailed at the King's-Bench-Bar.

Mr. Gadbury also appears at the King's-Bench-Bar, and is discharged.

Henry Care indicted for Scandalous Reflections in his Packet of Advice.

Sir Anthony Dean and Samuel Pepys Esquires discharged.

Their Royal Highnesses were treated by the Earl of Murray.

Mary Yacht in Leith-Road, for England.

Robert Southwell appointed Envoy to the D. of Brandenburg.

A Great Fire in Gray's Inn, consuming near sixty Chambers.

Sir Francis Pemberton, being a Judge, had his quietus.

Thomas Dare of Taunton, committed for Dangerous Words.

Philip Bisse also committed for Dangerous Words.

Palms Fairborne made Lieutenant Governor of Tangier.

Ossory leave to Beat Drums for the recruit of the Regiments in the service of
the States of Holland.

Argiers.

White Hall.

John Na^ler, and James Baker indicted at the Old Bailey for Priests.

A List of Papists returned into the House of Commons, ordered by the King to
be delivered to the Judges in the Circuits.

A Proclamation to give 10 l. for any that takes a Highway-man.

Bodmin goes Ambassador to Denmark.

Sir Robert Southwell goes Ambassador to Brandenburg.

Gabriel Sylvius goes Envoy to the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg.

Tempest committed to Prison.

Black-wall, and dined with Mr. Henry Johnson, whom the same day the King
Knighted.

Robert Clayton Lord Mayor of London, at his House in the Old-Iury, where the
King was pleased to confer the Honor of Knighthood on William Gulston Esquire



New Market.

Tempest, Mr. Thomas Thwing, and Mris. Mary Preswick, were Arraigned at York,
but their Trials put off till the next Assizes.

Two Sergeants found guilty of Manslaughter at Dublin, for killing a Constable.

Cambridge, about 200 in number, waited on the King at New Market, and
complemented his Royal Highness on his return from Scotland.

The Duchess of Modena arrived at St. James's.

James s, where the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs waited on him.

Tho. Alsord committed to Newgate for high Treason.

THo. Dare fined at Taunton 500 l. for seditious and dangerous words, etc.

New Market to White Hall, and the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London came the
same day to pay their Duties to them.

Rothes, Chancellor of Scotland, etc. came to White Hall.

17th of May.

The Attorney General was ordered to prosecute Will. Barns^y Esquire (lately
put out of the Commission of Peace) Mr. Edward Whitaker, Mr. Tudman, etc. for
their illegal practices with Phillip le Mar relating to the Duke of Buckingham.

William Waller put out of the Commission of Peace, for illegally taking Hi^ky
out of the Gatehouse, and keeping him all night at a Tavern.

An order to forbid Bonefires on the 29th of May next, or on any other
Festival, without permission.

John Edwards of Salop and Richard Dereham Esquires, Knighted.

Hubert Burk, and John Macnemarra, two Irish witnesses, ordered by the Council
to return to Ireland.

Captain William Dodson, of London, Knighted.

de Mayon, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy, took his leave, and
presented Count de Piertenge to succeed him.

The Parliament meet and are prorogued until May 17 next.

John Arnold Esquire pretended to be assaulted in Bell-yard, nigh
Lincolns-Inn-fields.

Ossory took his place as Privy-Counsellor.

Francis Withens Esquire, had the Honor of Knighthood conferred upon him.

White Hall to Windsor.

The Marquess de Bourgomeyne, Envoy from the King of Spain, took his leave, and
left for his Successor Don Pedro de Ronquillo.

l. promised to him that shall discover any of the Assaulters of Mr. Arnold.

Arnold.

Leoline Ienkins is sworn one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State.

The Lord Shandois elected by His Majesty to go Ambassador for Turkey.

Sir Gilbert Gerrard sworn in Council, and subscribed his Name; That he knew
nothing of any Contract 'twixt the King and the Duke of Monmouth's Mother.

George Jefferys is made Chief Justice of Chester, Sir Job Charlton one of the
Judges of the Common Pleas, and Justice Raymund one of the Judges of the Kings
Bench.

New Market to White Hall, Supped the same night with Sir Jonathan Raymund at
Skinners-Hall, and next morning went to Windsor.

A Messenger brought four Priests from Ireland to Chester.

etc. A Proclamation accordingly was ordered to be drawn up.

Dangerfield's Evidence) was preferred to the Grand Jury of Middlesex against
the Countess of Powys, but the Jury brought it in Ignoramus.

Mr. Edgar sentenced for Seditious words against the King, to pay a Fine of 500
Marks.

George Jeffreys, Sir John Keeling, Sir Francis Manley, Sir Joh. Beynton, Sir
Rob. Wright; Robert Hampton, Edward West, Thomas Walcot, Edward Bigland,
William Rawlinson, William Rugby, Esquires; took the Oaths of Sergeants at the
Chancery Court in Westminster, and on the 15th made a splendid Entertainment at
Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet.

Windsor.

John Moyer, Edward Marsey, James Calighan, and Daniel Finan, were ordered to
return into Ireland.

etc.

1st of July next.

Aston, Sir James Symmonds, Mr. Heveningham, and Mr. Peter's were indicted at
Westminster for High Treason, and pleaded Not Guilty.

Richard Tasborough of Flixton in Suffolk, Esquire indicted at Westminster for
High Treason and acquitted.

Stafford, moved the Court for Bail, but was refused.

Henry Tichburn, Mr. Rooper, and Mr. Carill, Prisoners in the Tower, were
Bailed.

Miles Stapleton and Mr. Robert Howard, were arraigned at Westminster for
High Treason, and pleaded Not Guilty.

Mr. Tasborough and Mrs. Price Fined.

The right Honorable the Countess of Powys discharged.

Sir Robert Peyton and Mr. Bedingfield discharged.

Mr. Ratcliff, Mr. Dormer, and Mr. Blundel Bailed.

Windsor to White Hall to the Council, (where was ordered 1200 Foot and 120
Horse to be sent to Tangier with speed) and returned the same Night to Windsor.

The Earl of Clarendon Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

John Giles taken in Monmouthshire upon Suspicion for assassinating Mr. Arnold.

Edinburgh: Among other things were 50 old Men in Blew Gowns, each of which had
given him 50 s. being the 50th year of His Majesty's Age.

Rothes, Lord Chancellor of Scotland, made Duke of Rothes and Marquess of
Bambreick, Earl of Lesly, Viscount of Lugtown, Lord Achmuty and Cascuberry.

John Giles ordered by the Council to be brought to London.

Catharine, and caused the Declaration to be entered in the Council-Book, and on
the 15th of June it was enrolled in the Chancery.

Don Phillip de Guarra, made the Spanish Consul at London.

Tangier of the great Fight with the Moors, who took several Forts at that time.

Celier Tried at the King's Bench for High Treason, and acquitted; and
Dangerfield, a witness against her, committed.

The Earl of Middleton appointed Envoy Extraordinary to the Emperor.

Mulgrave, with the Earl of Plymouth, the Lord M^rdaunt, and Lord Lumley,
imbarqued with the Forces for Tangier.

Castlemain arraigned at the King's Bench Bar for High Treason, and pleaded Not
Guilty.

Tangier for four Months.

John Culp^per was tried at Westminster for High Treason committed at Carolina,
and acquitted.

William Dawson of Azarly, in the County of York, Esquire was Knighted.

Castlemain was tried at the King's Bench Bar for High Treason, Oats,
Dangerfield, etc. being Witnesses against him, but the Jury not believing their
Evidence, his Lordship was acquitted.

His Majesty declared in Council, That he had concluded a defensive Alliance
with the King of Spain, That more Forces were to be sent to Tangier, And that
the Parliament was Prorogued to the 22. of July.

Aston, Sir James Symmonds, Mr. Heveningham, Mr. Howard, Mr. Peter's, all set at
Liberty upon Bail till the next Term.

Mr. Thomas Blood, Mr. Edward Christian, Arthur O Brian, etc. were indicted at
the King's Bench Bar for a Conspiracy against the Duke of Buckingham, and found
Guilty.

Richard Radley, Convicted for Scandalous words against the Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs, was sentenced to stand an hour at each Court at Westminster with a
Paper on his Breast signifying his Offense, and the same for 2 hours at
Brentwood in Essex in Market time, and to pay 200 l. for a Fine.

Anthony Dean and Mr. Pepys discharged out of the Tower.

Sir John Gage, Mr. Rooper, Mr. Howard, Mr. Heveningham, etc. are discharged
from Prison.

The Here Zitters, Ambassador Extraordinary from the States of Holland, had
Audience.

Donald, Cargile, Hall, etc. apprehended at Queens-ferry in Scotland, for
Preaching against Kingly Government and Prelacy, and disowning the King.

Howel's General History of the World, was first Published in 2 Volumes fol.

August.

John Giles being convicted at the Old Bailey for Assassinating Mr. Arnold, was
sentenced to stand 3 times in the Pillory, Fined 500 Pounds, and to give
Sureties for his good Behavior for his Life.

A Riot committed at the House of Count de Pertengue, Envoy Extraordinary from
the Duke of Savoy, while he was at Windsor with the King.

Simon Lewes's at Fishmongers-Hall, and next day went to Windsor.

Scotland, led on by one Cameron, is dispersed by Coll. Bruce, and Cameron is
slain.

Mulgrave arrived at Windsor from Tangier.

White Hall that most Honorable and Loyal Person, Thomas Earl of Ossory, and
next day carried privately to the Abbey at Westminster.

Tempest and Mrs. Preswick, were tried at York-Assizes, and acquitted; but Mr.
Thwing being tried for a Priest, was found Guilty at the same time.

Phineas Pett Esquire made one of the Commissioners of the Navy, and Knighted.

William Temple, nominated Ambassador Extraordinary to Spain.

Jonas Moore Esquire Surveyor of the Ordnance, Knighted.

Chatham, and came back and Dined at Whitehall, and in the Afternoon went to
Windsor.

William Bedlow died at Bristol.

The Parliament ordered to be Prorogued to the 21 of October following. A
Proclamation accordingly came out August 28.

A Proclamation to give notice, that George Carey Esquire had no Letters Patents
for setting out a Ship of Reprizal against the United-Provinces.

White Hall, his Highness the Electoral Prince Palatine.

Bethell, and Mr. Cornish, signed their Bonds to serve for Sheriffs of London.

Windsor, where, the Sovereign being present, there was Elected into the
Vacancies of that Order, the Duke of Graston, and the Earl of Salisbury.

Henry Savile Esquire was Sworn Vice-Chamberlain to the King in the Place of Sir
George Carteret deceased.

Carlisle, Governor of Jamaica, arrived (from Jamaica) at Portsmouth.

Palatine, was Entertained at Oxford.

Feversham made Lord Chamberlain to the Queen * and the Lord Viscount Lumley,
Master of the Horse to Her Majesty.

The L^d^ d'A^^e; (Mother to the Countess of Sussex) created Countess of
Sheppey.

Mrs. Celier tried at the Old Bailey, for Publishing a Book called, Mal^^e
Defeated, etc. and found Guilty.

Palatine Dined at Hamp^m-Court* and the same day came to White Hall.

Celier sentenced to stand three times in the Pillory, to pay 1000 l. and to
continue in Prison till all this be done.

Windsor, the Sovereign being present, where the Prince Elector Palatine was
Elected Knight of that Order.

His Royal Highness Dined with the Artillery Company at Merchant-Taylors Hall.

New Market.

Palatine imbarqued in one of His Majesty's Yachts at Greenwich, in order to
his return Home.

News came, that Vice Admiral Herbert with several Men of War lay before
Tangier.

New Market to Euston, to the Earl of Arlington's.

Sympson Tongue committed to Newgate upon Oats his Complaint.

London.

Parma, Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, to Ostend.

Shipton fined at Westminster 100 l. for defaming Oats, Bedloe, and Dugdale.

His Majesty and Royal Highness come from New Market to White Hall.

Van Leeuwen, Ambassador from the United Provinces, had his Audience.

Robert Carr, Chancellor of the Duchy, Sworn of the Privy Council.

White Hall for Scotland, His Majesty accompanying them to Woolwich.

de Tounn, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor, had his Audience.

The Parliament met at Westminster, and chose William Williams Esquire Speaker to
the House of Commons.

Frith. Dangerfield gives his Information in to the House of Commons.

Sept. 23. 1680. from Tangier, give an Account of a great Success the Garris^^
had against the Moors.

Tongue be recommended to His Majesty for the first Ecclesiastical Preferment
that shall fall in his Gift.



Mr. Plunket on the 27th instant arrived at Chester, being in Custody of a
Pursuivant, and this day is brought to London, and committed to the Tower.

Jenison gives his Information in at the Commons Bar.

Thomson of Bristol is ordered into Custody.

Turbervil gives his Information in at the Commons Bar.

Capt. Ashby, and another Captain, with two Mates, the Surge^n, and Thirteen
Men, are drowned in the James at Kingsale.

Don Pedro de Ronquillo* Ambassador from the King of Spain, made his Public
Entrance.

Don Pedro, etc. had his Public Audience in the Banqueting House.

Hetherington, Murphey, and two Fitz-Geralds, give in to the Commons their
Information of a Plot in Ireland.

Hubert Bourk, Tho. Samson, E^stace Commyns, and Joh. Macnamarra, give their
Informations in to the House of Commons.

George Jeffreys from all Offices.

James Skein, Archibald Steward, and John Spruell, Arch-Rebels in Scotland,
being taken and Examined, they justified Cargile's Excommunication of the King,
and said, 'Twas Just to Kill him, his Council, and Soldiers, and Burn his Acts
and Proclamations: They justified the Archbishop of St. Andrew's Murder, with
other most horrid and boldfaced Treasons.

The Earl of Plymouth died of a Bloody Flux at Tangier.

Fr. Withens struck out of the Roll, and Sir William Waller put Burgess for
Westminster.

Effigies of Sir George Jeffreys and Mr. L'Estrange, etc. is carried about the
City in Procession, a great Rabble attending, and are all burnt together at
Temple Bar.

Will. Lewis gives in his Information to the Commons Bar.

John Wetwang Knighted.

Alexander Farnese, Son to the Prince of Parma, arrived here.

Falmouth for a Week together, two hours every morning before day, the Tail 20
Foot long, December 10. it appeared at Portsmouth, Dec. 16. at Falmouth, Dec.
17. at Kingsale.

Bedloe (Widow to the late notorious Capt. Will. Bedloe, the pretended
Discoverer of a Popish Plot) Petitions the Commons for a Maintenance in
consideration of her Husband's Services.

Francis North, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, should have an
Impeachment drawn up against him.

Seymour be impeached.

William Else Esquire made by the Dean and Chapter, High Bailiff of Westminster.

Sir William Waller by appointment of the Commons added to a Committee, for
preparing Evidence against the Lords in the Tower.

they order an Address to him about it.

William, Viscount Stafford, brought to his Trial at Westminster Hall by his
Peers.

I. Skein, A. Steward, and John Potter, Executed at Edinburgh for Treason.



London and Westminster.

W. Viscount Stafford, found Guilty of High Treason, and Sentence of Death
passed upon him.

Tyrone committed to the Gate House.

Graston arrived at Falmouth from the Straights, in the Leopard, under the
Command of Sir John Berry, and the 23d at Deal.

Robert Peyton to be expelled the House.

Robert Peyton, kneeling at the Commons Bar, is with an uncouth reproach turned
out of the House.

The Commons Address His Majesty concerning Tangier.

The Sheriffs of London Petition, and the Commons declare themselves contented,
that the Execution of William Viscount Stafford be performed by Beheading.

Resolved by the Commons unanimously, that all the Judges be impeached.

Kirk arrived at White Hall from Tangier and brought News of the
Morocco-Ambassador coming over to conclude a Peace.

The Prince of Hanover arrived at White Hall.

William Viscount Stafford Beheaded on Tower Hill, insisting on his Innocence
to the very last.

of that House shall accept of any Office, or Place of Profit from the Crown
upon pain of being expelled the House.

Edward Seymour Esquire prefers an Answer to the Impeachment against him, and
desires his Trial may be speedy.

The King returns a gracious Message to the Commons in answer to their Address
about Tangier.

The Noble Peer's Speech, was Burnt by the common Hangman at the Royal
Exchange, and in the Palace-yard in Westminster.

Tyrone's Impeachment ordered.



Oxford, March 21. next.

Charles Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Prince Elector, being Elected to the
Garter at White Hall, Sept. 15. last, was this day installed at Windsor in the
4th Stall on the Princes side by Proxy and Commission.

George Treby Esquire Recorder of London, was Knighted.

Portsmouth was staved 30 Hogsheads of French Wine, and burnt 1200 yards of
French Linen.



Sir Robert Peyton goes to Mr. Williams, the late Speaker's Chamber, and
Challenges him.

Oxford, the Earl of Chesterfield, and the Earl of Ailesbury, were Sworn of His
Majesty's Privy Council.

Robert Napier Junior Esquire High Sheriff of Dorsetshire, Knighted.

Eliz. Freeman, the Maid of Hatfield, pretends a Vision.

Williams complains to the Council, and Sir Robert Peyton is sent to the Tower.

The Depositions of the Irish Witnesses are carried to the Council by Mr.
Warcup.

Edinburgh, (having ordered the College of Edinburgh to be shut up for some
Misdemeanour of the Students, did this day give leave to have it opened on
Conditions.

Edward, Earl of Conway, made Secretary of State.

Falmouth some Persons having set fire to some Furrs, caused a terror to a
great many Persons at a distance, thinking the Earth was on fire.

Signior de Vignola, Resident of Venice, had his Audience.

Creswell Levins made Judge of the Common Pleas. Sir Robert Sawyer made
Attorney General.

An Order of Council to encourage the Plantation-Trade.

Shandois Ambassador for Turkey, arrived at Deal, and went on Board the Oxford
Frigate for his Voyage, and sailed out of the Downs the 28th instant with 16
Merchants Ships under her Convoy.

Edw. Fitz-harris Esquire is siezed by Sir William Waller, brought before the King
and Council, examined before them for writing a Treasonable Libel against the
King, and committed to the Gate House for it.

Edward Fitz-harris removed from the Gatehouse to Newgate, in order to his
Trial.

The Lady Elizabeth, youngest Daughter to his Royal-Highness, died at St.
James's.



Craven, Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Hanover parted from England.

Windsor.

Oxford.

Amoy in the East Indies.

London set out for Oxford attended with a Crowd, having Ribbands in their
Hats, with these words woven in them, No POPERY, No SLAVERY.

Oxford, and the Commons choose Mr. Williams for their Speaker.

His Majesty is solicited by the Earl of Shaftsbury and others, about Mr.
Fitz-Harris.

Fitz-Harris, ordered to be Printed; and thereupon by them he is impeached of
High Treason.

Fitz-Harris sent up by the Commons to the Lords; but they reject it.

Voted by the Commons, that the Lords throwing out the Impeachment of Mr.
Fitz-Harris, is a denial of Justice.

Windsor.

White Hall.

White Hall, Charles Duke of Richmond was Elected Knight of the Garter; and on
the 18th instant was installed at Windsor.



L'Estrange began to Publish his Observators, a Work, in those difficult Times
altogether as perilous to himself as serviceable to the Crown; wherein,
steering by the undoubted Maxims of Policy, he stemmed the Tide of a Popular
Current, and kept Men's Loyalty steady against all the Blasts of a Democratical
Hurricane: An irrefragable Instance of what Learning and Parts are able to do,
managed with an honest Resolution.

Francis Smith, commonly known by the name of Elephant Smith, was by Order of
the Council Board committed to Newgate for High Treason.

Tho. Dereham Esquire Resident at Tuscany, was Knighted.

Richmond Knight of the Garter.

Titus Oats had his Pension cut short.

Edw. Fitz-harris indicted at Westminster for High Treason.

Laurence Hide Esquire first Commissioner of the Treasury, was created Visc. Hide
of Kenilworth, and Baron of Wotton-Basset.

Windsor.

Fitz-harris brought to his Trial at the King's Bench Westminster, and demurred
to the Jurisdiction of that Court.

Fitz-harris at the second time of his Trial, produces a Plea signed by
Council, whereto the Attorney General demurred.





Fitz-harris's Plea overruled; who pleading Not Guilty, obtained time of the
Court to bring in his Witnesses.

Heneage Lord Finch, Lord Chancellor of England, created Earl of Nottingham.

The Earl of Danoy moved for Bail, but was denied.

l. to any Person that should Apprehend any Highway-man, to be paid 15 days
after Conviction.

An Indictment of High Treason found against the Earl of Danby upon Mr.
Fitz-harris's Evidence.

Tho. Kirk Esquire made Consul of Genoua.

Rochester and to Chatham, to view the Navy and the Dock.

Richard May Esquire and Capt. John Farrington of Chichester, Knighted.

Langston arrived from Tangier with the Articles of Peace, concluded by Sir
James Lesly for 4 years with the Emperor of Morocco.

Thomas Ashenden, did publicly make his Recantation in the Cathedral Church in
Peterborough, at the time of Divine Service, for writing an abuse on the Lord's
Prayer, Creed and Ten Commandments.

Oliver Plunket, Titular Archbishop of Dublin, was found Guilty of High Treason
at the King's Bench Bar at Westminster.

His Majesty came from Windsor to Council at White Hall, and returned that
Night to Windsor.

Edward Fitz-harris Esquire was found Guilty of High Treason at the King's Bench
Bar at Westminster.

William Lord Howard of Escrick was committed to the Tower on the Information
of High Treason against him.

Lime in Dorsetshire was publicly staved several Tuns of French Wine, Pursuant
to the Act.

Sentence of Death passed on Oliver Plunket, and Edward Fitz-harris, at the
King's Bench Bar.

Gray's Inn Address presented to the King by young Sir Will. Scroggs and Mr.
Fairberd.

Howard of Escrick denied by the Court of King's Bench to be Bailed.

Buckingham Address presented by Mr. Charles Blunt, etc.

Scotland to his Royal Highness to represent his Person, and bear his Authority
during the Parliament.



John Rouse, and Stephen College were apprehended and committed to the Tower
for High Treason.

Oliver Plunket and Edward Fitz-harris, were Drawn on Sledges to Tyburn, and
there Hanged and Quartered.

Anthony Earl of Shaftsbury was apprehended at his House in Aldersgate Street,
and brought before the Council, who committed him to the Tower for High Treason.

Stephen College the Joiner, returned Ignoramus at the Old-Bailey.

Edward Whitaker, was apprehended and committed to the Tower for High Treason.

A motion made in Court by the London Grand Jury, that the Condemned Priests in
Newgate be speedily executed.

Richard Dutton was safely arrived at Barbados at his Government.

Shaftsbury's Papers, siezed by Mr. Guynne, who find the wicked Association
among them.

Anne parted from White Hall to go to visit their Royal Highnesses in Scotland.

Stephen College was indicted at Oxford for High Treason, and the Grand Jury
found the Bill.

Anne arrived in Scotland.

Miles Stapleton was Tried at York Assizes for High Treason, and the Jury
brought him in Not Guilty.

Orange arrived at White Hall, and Dined at Sir Stephen Fox's, and then went to
Windsor. The 28th his Highness came from Windsor to Arlington-House; the 29th
Dined with the Duke of Albemarle, and the 30th returned to Windsor. Aug. 3.
came from Windsor to Arlington-House; the 4th he went to New-hall, and on the
5th he went to Harwich, in order to imbark for Holland.

Cargile, the great Rebel at Bothell-Bridge, was Hanged at Edinburgh high-Cross.

Scotland.

Philip Carteret created Baron Carteret of Hawnes in the County of Bedford.

London Apprentices dined at Sadlers-Hall. His Majesty sent them a Brace of
Bucks.

Christopher Buckle of Surrey, Esquire was Knighted at Windsor.

John Wilmore, was apprehended for High Treason; the 16th he was Examined
before the Council, and sent to the Tower.

Scotland passed two Acts.

Stephen College sent from the Tower to Oxford, there to take his Trial.

Stephen College (commonly known by the name of the Protestant Joiner) was
Tried at Oxford, and condemned for High Treason.

Windsor to White Hall.

Titus Oats for his Impudence, is turned out of his Lodgings at Court, and
forbid the Council Chamber.

College Executed at Oxford.

Don Joseph de Faria, Envoy from Portugal, had his Audience.

George Rainsford of Lincoln's Inn Esquire was at White Hall Knighted.



New Market.

Cambridge.

Mr. George Witheridge was committed to the Gate House for High Treason.

John Moore, (after a long and tedious Pole) carried it by about 300 Votes for
to be Lord Mayor of London, to the confusion of the factious Party.

Shaftsbury, upon his Petition to the King and Council.

Glascow and Dumbarton.

Samuel Wilson committed to the Gate House for High Treason.

John Rouse was indicted at the Old Bailey for High Treason, where Eight
Witnesses swore matter of Fact positively against him, yet the Jury would not
find the Bill.

The French Church in London and the Savoy, returned His Majesty thanks for his
Declaration in favor of the French Protestants.

Moscovite Ambassador came to Plymouth.

John Moore sworn Lord Mayor of London.

James Galley and Adventure, had taken the Half Moon and the Two Lions and
Crown of Algiers, two of their best Ships.

Major George Vernon, was Knighted at Whitehall.



Francis Smith was tried at Guildhall, and found Guilty of Printing of a
Seditious Pamphlet, called, The Noble Peer's Speech.

Tyrone Bailed.

Katharine's Birthday kept at Court, where at Night there was a Mask.

Frederick Harvey was committed to Newgate for High Treason.

A Proclamation to restrain all but the East India Company, from trading to the
East Indies.

Moscovite Ambassador made his Public Entrance through London, and on the 23d
had his Audience.

Shaftsbury was this day indicted at the Old Bailey; and tho there was full and
clear Proof of matter of Fact against him, by Eight or Ten Witnesses; yet the
Grand Jury would not find the Bill.

Firmin settles some French Protestants at Ipswich.

London, and the Justices of Middlesex, ordered to put the Laws in Execution
against unlawful Meetings, the King in Council declaring this Order to extend
also to the Country.

Grafton chose by the By-Corporation of Trinity-House, to be one of their Elder
Brothers.

Turberville the Evidence, died of the Small Pox.

Argile was Tried and found Guilty of High Treason, but Judgment was respited;
who presently after, made his Escape out of the Castle of Edinburgh (where he
was a Prisoner) in a disguise: On the 23d Sentence passed on him for Execution
for High Treason when he should be taken.

Grafton constituted Colonel of the first Regiment of the Foot Guards, which
was Coll. Russel's.

Sympson Tongue declares, that his own Father (Dr. Tongue) and T. Oats, were the
Contrivers of the Popish Plot.

Fez and Morocco, made his Public Entrance through the City of London; had his
Public Audience on the 11th instant, and on the 17th he had a Private Audience
of His Majesty.

Oats found out to be false in his Evidence between the Lord North, and the
Lady Dowager Gray, concerning Mr. Elliot's Business.

Guild Hall, London, cut and spoiled by the hand of some Villain unknown.

Scotland adjourned to the 17th of April.

Thomas Linch, Governor of Jamaica, sailed from Plymouth in the Sweepstake for
that Island.

Richard Basset of Beaupre in Glamorganshire Esquire was Knighted at White Hall.

The Officers at Alt^arr in Lancashire siezed several Goods of Popish
Recusants, and were beaten, and the Goods taken from them.

Peter Wiche, late Resident at Hamburgh, being returned, kissed His Majesty's
Hand.

Thomas Thynne Esquire on Sunday was most barbarously Shot with a Musketoon in his
Coach in the Pall Mall, that he died on Monday about Six of the Clock in the
Morning: 200 l. offered to any that could take Count Coningsmark.

Christopher Vratz, George Borosky, and John Stern, apprehended and sent to
Newgate for the Murder of T. Thynne Esquire.

Morocco to the French King departed thence on his return.

l. to any that should discover the Person that did maliciously abuse his Royal
Highness's Picture in the Guild Hall, London.

Coningsmark apprehended at Gravesend in a Seaman's habit.

Coningsmark sent to Newgate by the Lord Chief Justice.

Thomas Cutler, was Knighted in the Bedchamber at White Hall.

Pertengue, Ambassador Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy, made his Public
Entry; March 2d. he had his Audience.

Coningsmark, Christopher Vratz, George Borosky, and John Stern, Tried at the
Old Bailey for T. Thynne Esquire's Murder; of whom, the Count was acquitted,
and the other three, upon being found Guilty, Sentenced to Death.

George Leg Esquire Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

White Hall to New Market.

Noel took Possession of the Government of Portsmouth.

Vratz, George Borosky, and John Stern, were Hanged in the Pall Mall for the
Murder of Thomas Thynne Esquire and George Borosky (who did the Murder) was hung
in Chains a little beyond Mile-End Town, by His Majesty's Command.

His Royal Highness Landed at Yarmouth, and Lodged that Evening at Norwich, and
went to New Market next day.

de Grana arrived at White Hall from Plymouth; next day in the Afternoon he
Embarked in the Isabella Yacht for Flanders.

John Knight Esquire one of the Sheriffs of Bristol, Knighted.

Thames ebbed and flowed three times within four hours.

Morocco.

Cambridge made choice of the Duke of Albemarle for their Chancellor in the
room of the Duke of Monmouth.

His Majesty and Royal Highness came from New Market to White Hall, the day
before Her Majesty came. On the 10th the Lord Mayor of London, etc. came to
White Hall to pay their Duty to His Majesty; afterward went to wait on his
Royal Highness at St. James's, to Congratulate his safe return into England.

Don Antonio de Leyva, Ambassador from the Marquis de Grana, came and
Complemented their Majesty's, and his Royal Highness upon his coming to that
Government. He had Audience of His Royal Highness the 11th at Night.

John Reresby Baronet, made Governor of the Garrison at York, in the place of
the Lord Fretcheville, deceased.

Nicholas Johnson Esquire being deceased, His Majesty was pleased to confer the
Office of Play Master of his Forces, upon Charles Fox, Esquire.



London, where his Royal Highness honored them with his Company.

Windsor. And the next day were waited on by the Mayor, Stewards, Bailiffs,
etc. of Windsor.

Thames on Board the London, Eight Bantam Ambassadors, with a Train of about 25
or 30 Persons.

Dover, at a Sessions of the Admiralty, for Robbing a Dutch Ship.

Charles Skrinshaw Esquire High Sheriff of Staffordshire, Knighted.

Windsor to White Hall, and the same day went down the River to Embark in the
Gloucester Frigate for Scotland.

The Bantam Ambassadors Landed at the Tower. Capt. Aylmer arrived with the
Articles of Peace made by Admiral Herbert on the 10th of the last Month, with
Algiers.

Gloucester Frigate, run on the Sand on the Lemon-Ore, and was lost. His Royal
Highness escaped safe, and came to Scotland the 7th instant.

The Duke of Ormond, his Duchess, the Earl of Ossory, etc. arrived at Chester
from Ireland, and came to White Hall on the 10th instant.

de Pertengue, Ambassador Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy, had Audience of
leave at Windsor.

Bantam, made their Public Entrance through London; on the 13th went to
Windsor, and on the 14th had their Audience there.

Cambridge, to the number of nigh 250, went from Northumberland-House to
Albemarle-House, to install their new Chancellor, the Duke of Albemarle.

Lord Haddo, President of the Sessions, Lord Chancellor of the Kingdom of
Scotland; the Earl of Queensborough, Lord Treasurer; and the Earl of Pearth,
Lord Justice General.

Westminster against Mr. Wilmore, for Kidnapping, and Spiriting a little Boy,
and sending him to Jamaica, who was found Guilty.

Windsor, and passed by White Hall in his Barge down the River to meet his
Royal Highness, who in the Afternoon came to Arlington-House; and that
Afternoon their Majesty's went to Windsor, and their Royal Highnesses to St.
James's.



Morocco Ambassador Entertained at Oxford.

Lime the Tide ebbed and flowed several times in half an hours time.

Bantam Ambassador waited on his Royal Highness at St. James's.

Trinity-House of Debtford-Strond, chose the Duke of Graston their Master.

Richard How constituted Alderman in the place of Sir Thomas Bloodworth
deceased.

Raphael Coots of Bruge^, Knighted.

de Thun, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor, had his Audience at Windsor, on
the Birth of the Emperor's second Son.

John Berry had the Command of the Henrietta, a Third Rate Frigate, given him,
the King being satisfied it was not his fault the Gloucester Frigate was lost.

Pilkington and Mr. Shute, the Sheriffs of London, for making a Riot (in
continuing a Pole after the Mayor had adjourned it) at the Election of
Sheriffs, were sent Prisoners to the Tower, and Bailed out on the 30th.

Chatham was Launched that brave Ship called the Britannia.

Lindsey, Great Chamberlain of England, was Sworn of His Majesty's Privy
Council.

Aaron Smith, Tried at the King's Bench, and found Guilty of Scandalous and
Seditious Words and Writinas, whereupon he fled; but was after taken, and on
the 27. of October. Fined 500 l. and to stand twice in the Pillory.

The Sheriffs of London continue a Poll riotously.

Goodenough, the Undersheriff, fined 100 l. for not altering the Panel of a
Jury, at the command of the Bench at Hicks's-Hall.

Bantam Ambassadors took leave at Whitehall of His Majesty, and the two Chief
of them were Knighted, and the Swords given them that they were Knighted with;
They lay at Deal the 21st instant.

The Loyal young Men of London, Address against the Association.

Morocco Ambassador was Conducted to take his leave of His Majesty; and on the
20. Jonas, his Renegado, run from him; was apprehended and brought him again
the 22. went aboard His Majesty's Yacht at Woolwich the same day; August. 6. at
Plymouth; 15th he came ashore.

London, to begin the Election of Sheriffs anew; and then was elected Mr. Box,
and Mr. North confirmed.

Edward Cranfield Esquire His Majesty's Governor for New Hampshire in New England,
Embarked in order to pass to his Government.

Ormond and the Earl of Anglesey argued in Council.

Dyer accused of High Treason by one Samuel Winder, and sent for from New York
to answer it here in England.

Falmouth, for two Nights together about Ten at Night.

James's; next day His Royal Highness came from Windsor* to Visit Her, the 17.
the Young Princess was Christened (by the Bishop of London) Named Charlotte
Mary, the Duke of Ormond being Godfather; the Countess of Arundel, and the
Countess of Clarendon Godmothers.

Cornwall Bradshaw Esquire Knighted at Windsor. The East India Company received
news from Beachy in Sussex, that four of their Ships passed by that way for the
River.

Lauderdale died.

Hallifax made Marquis of Hallifax.

Samuel Morland's New Engine Play at Windsor.

Winchester; the second, came back to Windsor; the tenth, with the whole Court,
came to White Hall.

Derby received its New Charter.

Sunderland readmitted a Privy Councellor.

The Lady Henrietta Berkeley went away from her Father, who promised 200l. as a
reward to any that should give notice of her.

Hamilton was Elected Knight of the Garter, at a Chapter held at White Hall.

Dudley North and Mr. Peter Rich, sworn Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.

White Hall to New Market.

Salamanca published, That Oats never took a Degree there.

Hallifax made Lord Privy Seal.

Maidstone in Kent receives its New Charter.

William Pritchard was sworn (before the Barons of the Exchequer) Lord Mayor of
London.

Edward Whitaker indicted at the King's Bench Bar, for seditious Words spoken
at Bath, and found guilty.

17th ensuing.

Middlesex, to prevent Bonefires, etc. and disorderly Companies.

Will. Booth, Commander of the Adventure Frigate, in the late War with Argiers,
Knighted.

Czars of Moscovy had his Audience.

Wapping broke out in Cinnamon Lane, and consumed many hundreds of Houses.

Sir John Bennet Knight of the Bath, made a Baron of the Realm, by the title of
John Lord Ossulston.

Dockw^^y and others, cast in a Trial about the Penny-Post.

Ev^sh^m in Worcestershire surrendered their Charter to His Majesty at
White Hall.

Richard Gibbs Esquire Master of the Revels of Gray's Inn, Knighted at White Hall.

London, at which his Royal Highness honored them with his Presence.

Ormond of Ireland, was created James Duke of Ormond of England. The Marquis of
Worcester created Duke of (...). The Lord Norris created Earl of Abbington.

Died of a Fever and Pl^uri^y at his House in the Spring-Garden, Rupert, Prince
Palatine of the Rhine, etc. in the 63 year of his Age.

Edward Viscount Cambden, made Earl of Gainsborough.

Coniers Lord D'Arcy, made Earl of Holdernesse. Thomas Lord Windsor, made Earl
of Plymouth.

Horatio Lord Townsend, made Viscount Townsend of Raynham.

Sir Thomas Thin Baronet, made Baron Thin of Warmister, and Viscount
Weymouth.

Coll. George Leg, made Baron of Dartmouth.

William Lord Allington, made Baron of Wimondley.

Coll. Churchill, made Lord Churchill of Aymouth in Scotland.

The Duke of Grafton made Vice Admiral of England, vacant by Pr. Rupert's Death.

Henry Earl of Arundel, made Constable of Windsor, and Lord Lieutenant of the
Counties of Berks and Surrey; and March 24. of Norsolk.

Rupert buried in Henry the Seventh's Chapel in Westminster, on the South side.

Old Bailey, fined 20 Marks a-piece, and to stand in the Pillory; for a Riot
committed Nov. 6.



Monsieur d' Haxthausen, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke Sleswick Holstein,
had his Audience.

Nottingham, Lord Chancellor of England, died at his House in Queen Street, in
the 61 year of his Age.

Francis North, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, made Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal.

The Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sir Francis Pemberton, Sworn one
of His Majesty's Privy Council.

John Moore thanks for his good Service last year, when Mayor of London.

Arundel took Possession of his Government of Windsor Castle.

Humphrey Mackworth, of the Middle Temple, Esquire Knighted.

Edmund Saunders made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the room of Sir
Francis Pemberton, removed to be Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and made
Privy Councellor.

Monsieur de Schmettau, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector Palatine, had his
Audience.

Sunderland made Secretary of State in the Room of the Lord Conway, and Sworn
the 31.

Ralph Stawell Esquire created a Baron of England, by the Name of Lord Stawell of
Somerton.



Dudley North Esquire one of the Sheriffs of London, Knighted.

Theophilus Earl of Huntington, and Henry Earl of Peterborough, were Sworn of
His Majesty's Privy Council.

New Market.

Nath. Thompson committed to the Gate House, for Printing and Dispersing False,
Scandalous, etc. News.

Thomas Duppa Esquire made Usher of the Black Rod, in the Room of Sir Edward
Carteret, and was invested and Knighted May 6. following, and Henry Bulstrode
Esquire made one of the Gentlemen Ushers daily Waiters.

New Market, which though it burnt half the Town, yet was the happy means of
Preserving His Majesty and Royal Highness from the horrid Assassination
intended against them by the Rye-House Conspirators.

New Market to White Hall.

Arundel made Lord Lieutenant of the County of Norfolk, in the room of the
Right Honorable the Earl of Yarmouth.

Norwich, was brought to the City of Norwich by the Earl of Yarmouth's Brother.

Windsor.



London, the Sheriffs, and several Aldermen, Arrested at the Suits of Mr.
Papillion and Mr. Du Boise, the pretended Sheriffs of London and Middlesex

Robert Fitzgerald, Esquire for making Salt water fresh.

Tho. Pilkington, S. Shute, Esquires; Ford Lord Gray, Henry Cornish Alderman,
Sir Thomas Player, Slingsby Bethell, and others, found Guilty of a Riot and
Assault on Sir John Moore, late Lord Mayor of London, and were all Fined at the
King's Bench Bar, on June 26.

London disclaim their having any Concern in the rude Arrest lately made upon
the Lord Mayor, Sir William Pritchard.

The Duke of Albemarle Mustered the Militia of the County of Devonshire, being
above 30000 in the Field.

Holloway Knighted at Windsor.

de Zinzendorf, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Saxony, had his
Audience; and on the 30th of June had his Audience of Leave.

Abraham Jacob Esquire Knighted at Windsor.

Quo Warranto against the City Charter. On the 18th the City Petitioned His
Majesty in Council about the Charter. Then the Lord Keeper told the Lord Mayor
His Majesty's Pleasure, what Rules he would have observed. On the 21. the
Sheriffs waited on His Majesty at Windsor, to satisfy him they submitted to
his Rules, and had put off the Election of Sheriffs from June 24. to July 6th.

This Day Mr. Keeling made a Discovery of that horrid and dismal Conspiracy to
Assassinate the King and His Royal Highness at Rye-House, as they came from
New Market.

John Rumsey, Richard Rumbold, Richard Nelthrope, Nathanael Wade, Richard
Goodenough, Capt. Walcot, William Thompson, James Burton, and William Hone, for
High Treason.

Mr. Robert West's Examination concerning the Horrid Conspiracy, taken before
Sir Leol. Jenkins.



Rumsey being examined concerning the Horrid Conspiracy, before the Duke of
Albemarle and Sir Leol. Jenkins, makes a large Confession.

Turney, the pretended Mayor of Rye, Fined 200 Marks for a Riot.

Shepherd's Information of the Hellish Conspiracy taken by the Right Honorable
the Earl of Sunderland.

Monmouth, Ford Lord Gray, Sir Thomas Armstrong, and Robert Ferguson.

Lee, a Dyer in Old-street, gives in his Information concerning the Horrid
Conspiracy.



Grafton set Sail from Deal in the Ship called the Grafton, with 4 Men of War
more. On the 17th. came to Anchor at Spithead.

Capt. Tho. Walcot, was Tried for High Treason at the Old Bailey, and found
Guilty: And on the 14th Sentence of Death passed on him.

William Lord Russel, William Hone, and John Rouse were Tried for High Treason
at the Old Bailey, and found Guilty: And on the 14th, Sentence of Death passed
upon them. Captain Blague was also Tried, but acquitted.

Vienna in Germany besieged by the Turks.

Herbert arrived at Deal from the Streights.

Mr. Rouse desires to be examined in Newgate, declares the whole Conspiracy,
and accuses the Lord Shaftsbury and Titus Oats as the Principal Engines in it.

Prince George of Denmark arrived at Whitehall.

Walcot, William Hone, and Mr. Rouse Hanged and Quartered at T^burn, and own
themselves Guilty of the Fact for which they suffered.

William Lord Russel Beheaded in Lincolns-I^n Fields.

Denmark and the Lady Anne, were Married at St. James's by the Bishop of London.

Edward Wine Esquire chose, by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, Steward of
Southwark.

White Hall to Windsor.

William Halford of Welham, and Edward Wigley Esquires of Leicestershire,
received the Honor of Knighthood ^^ Windsor.

John Radeliff Esquire Sworn one of the Grooms of His Majesty's Privy-Chamber in
Ordinary.

Winchester from Windsor.



Peter Daniel and William Dashwood Esquires, made Sheriffs of London, and
Deputy Ailworth Chamberlain.

Vienna raised (after the Besieged had-lost 10000 men, and Besiegers 70000) by
the King of Poland and Duke of Lorrain.

de Kenitzki, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Poland, had his Audience at
Winchester.

Winchester to White Hall.

Francis North, Lord Keeper, made Baron of Guildford.

de Ballati, Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Hanover, had his Audience:
And October. 5. had his Audience of Leave.

George Jeffreys, Knight and Baronet, was Sworn Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, (in the room of Sir Edm. Saunders deceased) and October. 4. was
Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Sir Tho. Jones made Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in the Place of Sir
Francis Pembert^n, who had his Quietus.

Sir Richard Holloway Sworn one of the Judges of the King's Bench, in the room
of Judge Raymond, deceased.

William Pritchard, Lord Mayor, and Peter Daniel and William Dashwood Esquires,
Sworn before His Majesty in Privy Council to be Lord Mayor and Scheriffs for
London, and then received their Commissions under the Great Seal from His
Majesty, to be held during his Pleasure.

Thomas Jenner of the Inner Temple, Esquire, made Recorder of London, and
Knighted.

New Market, next day his Royal Highness and the Prince went thither.

Tho. Walcot Sworn one of the Judges of the King's Bench.

Graston brought to Bed of a Son at Arlington-House, and Christened by the Name
of Charles --

Algernon Sidney Esquire was Arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, for High Treason;
on the 21. was brought to his Trial, and found Guilty; the 26th received
Sentence of Death, and on Dec. 7. Beheaded on Tower Hill.

His Majesty, on the Dutch Ambassador's Complaint of being abused by Squibbs in
the Streets, ordered that no Bonfires, Squibbs or Fireworks, should be made in
the Streets of London, etc.

Merchant-Taylors-Hall, where his Royal Highness and the Prince of Denmark
honored them with their Company.

19th of October last, the Lord Dartmouth had declared at Tangier, That it was
His Majesty's Pleasure to demolish that place and to bring away all the
Inhabitants, etc.

Johnson was Tried at Guild Hall, and found Guilty of Writing of a Seditious
Book, called Julian the Apostate.

Andrew Makdougal Esquire, received the Honor of Knighthood.

Monmouth had surrendered himself to Secretary Jenkins.

The Lord Howard of Effingham went to his Government of Virginia.

Hambden, Mr. Booth, Lord Brandon, Mr. Trenchard, Mr. Wildman, Mr. Charleton,
Prisoners in the Tower, were Bailed at the King's Bench Bar: And Jan. 23. Mr.
Mildmay, Mr. Barbar, and Mr. Bateman, appeared at the King's Bench Bar, and
their Recognizances were continued, and Mr. Hambden had notice of his Trial to
be Feb. 1. And Feb. 12. they were all discharged.

France was brought to Bed of a Son, whose Title is the Duke d'Anj^u.

White Hall in the Presence of the Sovereign, where Prince George of Denmark
was Elected, and invested with the George and Garrer: And on the 10th, the
Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland were Elected and invested Knights of the
Garter at White Hall also: and on April 8. 1684. all three Installed at Windsor.

Charles Earl of Burford, created Duke of St. Alban's.

Wells in Somersetshire.

Westminster Hall, were Sworn Sergeants at Law. Sir Tho. Jenner, Jo. Windham,
Edwin Wyatt, Edw. Burch, Henry Bedingfield, Esquires; Sir Edw. Nevile, Sir Paul
Barret, Knights; Anthony Farrington, John Ieffrison, Edward Lutwiche, Richard
Heath, Henry Selby, John Millington, Tho. Powel, Owen Win, Esquires, and Sir
Geo. Pudsey; on the 31. they walked to Westminster in the usual form.

Braddon and Mr. Speak (who were Imprisoned for spreading a false and
scandalous Report that the Earl of Essex was murdered by some Persons about
him, and for endeavoring to Suborn Witnesses to testify the same) had notice
their Trial would be the first Thursday in the next Month. On Feb. the 8. they
had their Trials, and were Cast. On the 21. of April; Braddon was Fined 2000 l.
and Speak 1000 l.

George Cawdron, late Steward to the Earl of Clare, and Samuel Packer, Servant
to Rich. Goodeno^gh, brought to their Trials. Cawdron May 12. was Fined 100 l.
and to stand in the Pillory; Packer was Fined the same day 20 Marks, and to
stand three times in the Pillory.

This Month was so hard a Frost, that the River of Thames was so frozen, that
many Hundred of Booths were built thereon, Coaches in Term time went to and
from the Temple to Westminster, and foot Passengers as thick as in any Street
in London. There were Shops of most sorts of Trades. There were also several
Diversions, as Bull-baiting, Ninepin-Playing, etc. and a whole Ox roasted on
the Ice against White Hall.

Danby brought to Westminster, but was returned again to the Tower; brought up
the 12. and then Bailed.

His Majesty constituted Arthur Herbert Esquire Rear-Admiral of England.

Thomas Archer Esquire of Warwickshire, submitted himself to His Majesty and
Council.

John Hambden Esquire Tried for High-Misdemeanor, and found Guilty of the same, and
the 12. Fined 40000 l. to the King.

Powys, the Lord Arundel of Warder, the Lord Bellasis, the Earl of Tyrone, etc.
were Bailed.

Sam. Barnardiston Tried at the Guild Hall, for Writing 4 Seditious Letters
against the Government, and was found Guilty; and on the 17. was Fined 10000 l.

Langley Curtis Tried at Guild Hall for Publishing a Pamplet, called The
Night-Walker of Bloomsbury, and was Fined Apr. 21. and stood in the Pillory.

Anthoine Nigreli, Envoy Extraordinary from the D. of Modena, had his Audience
at White Hall.

White Hall to New Market.

Henry Proger Esquire, Serjeant-Porter, was Knighted.



Dartmouth came with His Majesty's Ships to an Anchor at St. Helens Road, and
the 8th. came into the Downs.

White Hall to Windsor.

Dublin, which lasted three hours very violent, and burnt a great part of the
Castle.

William Bows, of the County of Durham, Esquire was Knighted.

Leoline Ienkins resigned his Place of Principal Secretary of State, and the
King gave his Place to Sydney Godolphin Esquire and on the 17. he was Sworn.

William Wright, Alderman of Oxford, was committed to the King's Bench Prison,
for Publishing Scandalous Libels: And on the 19. was Bailed.

James Holloway, was Sentenced at the King's Bench Bar for High Treason, to be
Executed at Tyburn: And on the 30th instant he was accordingly Hanged and
Quartered.

Nottingham, for a Riot there; and they were found Guilty.

John-Dutton Colt Esquire Tried at the King's Bench, in an Action of Scand Magnat,
a^ai^st ^is Royal Highness the Duke of York, (...) 100000 l.



Hicks-Hail against (...).

Francis Smith, ((...), Elephant Smith) was Tried ^^ Guild Hall, for Publishing
a Pamphlet called, The Raree Show, and found Guilty. And on the 18. Fined 500
l. and to stand three times in the Pillory, and find Sureties for his good
Behavior during his life.

Sir Thomas Armstrong, taken for High Treason at Leyden in Holland, was this
day committed to Newgate. On the 14. brought to the King's Bench Bar, and a
Rule of Court made for his Execution at Tyburn. And on the 20th. he was
Executed accordingly.

Titus Oats, Assessed by a Jury on a Writ of Enquiry, 100000 l. for a Scandal.
Magnat. against his Royal Highness the Duke of York.

William Sachererell, George Gregory, Charles Hutchinson, Esquire etc. (levied upon
them for a Riot committed at Nottingham) to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses
of the Town.

London were Exercised, and his Royal Highness (as their Captain General) did
them the Honor to Lead them, accompanied with the Prince of Denmark, etc.

Plymouth receive their New Charter.

Durham surrendered their Charter to the Bishop, and his Lordship gave them a
new Charter again, with some Alterations.

Murray, and Earl of Middleton, Secretaries of Scotland, Sworn at
Hampton Court, of His Majesty's Privy Council of England.

Simon Tailor, and John Turner, Esquires, and Aldermen of Lynn Regis, Knighted.

Beaufort, in his Visiting of North Wales, was Conducted in great. Splendour,
from Porshere to Worcester, to Ludlow; 19. to Welchpool, to Powys-Castle; 21.
to Chi^k-Castle; 23. to Holy-Well, and so to Mo^sten; 25. to Conway, to
Beaumorice; 28. to Gwidder; 29. to Rulas; 30. to Lloydyarth; 31. to
Powys-Castle, Aug. 2. to Ludlow; all done with great Ceremony, Pomp, and
Respect; and in August, His Grace visited South Wales also, etc.

Bedford received their new Charter.

Buckingham received their new Charter.

Rochester, made Lord President of the Council, (in Place of the Earl of
Radnor, who had his Quietus.) Mr. Secretary Godolphin, first Commissioner of
the Treasury. The Earl of Middleton, Secretary of State.

Windsor to Winchester.

Buccaniers of America, about 100 in Number, with the assistance of some
Indians, came into the South Seas, and made a bold Attempt on the Spaniards;
but were beaten off by the Assistance of some Forces sent by the Governor of
Panama.

Sidney Godolphin, first Commissioner of the Treasury, made Baron Godolphin of
Rialton in Cornwall.

Jeffreys waited upon His Majesty at Winchester, to deliver up the Charter of
Lincoln, and Charters of several other Corporations in the Northern Circuit.

Winchester to White Hall.

Peter Vandeput, and Sir William Gostlin, to be Sheriffs of London.

Oxford received their new Charter.

New Market.

Grafton, Sworn Recorder of St. Edmond's-Bury.

Thomas Witherley, one of His Majesty's Physicians in Ordinary, and President
of the College of Physicians, London, was Knighted.

Street, made Judge of the Common Pleas, (in place of Mr. Justice Windham) and
Sir Robert Wright, Baron of the Exchequer.

Spratt, Dean of Westminster, made Bishop of Rochester, Dr. Turner being
removed from thence to Ely, which was vacant by the Death of Dr. Gunning.

Bom-Bay in the East Indies, was surrendered to Sir Thomas Grantham, for the use
of the East India Company.

Guild Hall in London, was Sir William Pritchard's Trial against Mr. Papillon
(Mr. Dubois being dead) where the Jury gave him 10000 l. Damages.

Exeter received their new Charter.

Canterbury received their new Charter.

A Treasonous Paper affixed on Crosses of several Towns, and the Doors of
several Churches in Scotland, Denouncing War against the King, by the Name of
Charles Stuart.

Rosewell, indicted for High Treason uttered in a Sermon Preached in a
Conventicle in Rotherhythe, and found Guilty.

Nottingham Bridge over the River Trent was finished; it being broken down by
the last years great Frost.

Elias Best, Fined 1000 l. for Scandalous and Seditious words against the
Government: To stand in the Pillory three times, and find Security for his good
Behavior during life. Committed till the Payment of the 1000 l.

The Rebels of Scotland, about 50 of them, came at Night to Swine-Abbey, 13
miles from Edinburgh, and most inhumanely Murdered two of the King's Servants
in their Beds.

A Proclamation against Foreign Playing-Cards.

Colchester, in Essex, receive their new Charter.

Mew, Bishop of Bathe and Wells, Translated to the Bishopric of Winchester, on
the Death of Dr. Morley.

Dalby and Nicholson, two of Titus Oates's Men, were Convicted for speaking
most Scandalous and Seditious words against His Majesty and the Government.

Butler, of Northamptonshire, who was formerly Convict for Reading and
Presenting to the Knights of the Shire, a Scandalous Paper; now Fined 500
Marks, was to find Sureties for his good Behavior during Life, and committed
till the Money paid.

John Clarke of London, Knighted.

London, Dined at Merchant-Taylors-Hall; where his Royal Highness, and Prince
George, honored them with their Company.

Cornwall surrendered, all presented to His Majesty by the Earl of Bathe; and
six Towns in Devonshire.

Edmond Warcup Esquire of Northmore in Oxfordshire, Knighted.

Leicester, received their new Charter.

for the Discovery and Apprehending of Highway-men.

Vlessing in Zealand, in the Night ran over the Francis Pacquet-Boat, betwixt
Dover and Calais, sunk the Boat, 2 Mails of Letters, and some Passengers.

Robert Bailey of Jerraswood, was Hanged and Quartered* at Edinburgh, for
High Treason.

Kendall, received their new Charter.

William Creach, of New Castle upon Tine, Esquire Knighted; being presented to His
Majesty by the Duke of York.

Lincoln, received their new Charter.

Leeds, received their new Charter.

Henry Danvers, offering a Reward of 100 l. for any Person that should
Apprehend him.

Carlisle, received their new Charter.

Lancaster, received their new Charter.

John Drummond Esquire one of the Secretaries of State in Scotland, was Sworn of
His Majesty's Privy Council in England.

William Bridgeman, and Philip Musgrave Esquires, were Sworn Clerks of His
Majesty's Privy Council, in the place of Sir Tho. Doleman Knight, and Francis
Gwynn, Esquire.

Henry Brabant of Newcastle, Esquire Knighted.

Charles the Second, was seized with a violent Fit of an Apoplexy.

Charles the Second died at White Hall. And the same day in the Afternoon, King
James the Second was Proclaimed at Whitehall, Temple Bar, and the Royal
Exchange.

George of Denmark, Sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Gilbert Staunton, Fined at Westminster Hall 380 l. for carrying Letters
contrary to the Statute.

Charles 2d. interred in Henry the 7th's Chapel at Westminster.

Ormond, made Lord Steward; Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain; Viscount
Newport, Treasurer; the Lord Maynard, Comptroller; Hen. Savile Esquire
Vice-Chamberlain of the Household; in which Offices they respectively served
King Charles the Second.

Rochester (who was then Lord President of his Council) Lord High-Treasurer of
England, and accordingly gave him the White Staff; and the 19th he took the
usual Oaths on that Occasion before the Lord Keeper at Westminster.

Hullifax, made President of the Council; Earl of Clarendon, Privy Seal; the
Duke of Beaufort, Lord President of Wales; and the Right Honorable the Lord
G^dolphin, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen.

The same day, Hen. Bulkeley Esquire was appointed Master of the Household; Sir
Stephen Fox, Eldest Clerk of the Green-Cloth; Sir William Boreman, second Clerk
of the same; Sir Winston Churchill, eldest Clerk Comptroller; and Sir Richard
Mason, youngest Clerk Comptroller; in which Places they served the late King.

Sercl^es de Tilly, Envoy from the Marquis de Grana, had his Audience at
White Hall. The second of March, had Audience of the Queen Dowager, and Mar.
15. had Audience of leave.

William Haman Esquire Mayor of Bristol, Knighted.

de Lorge, and the Marquis d' Estampes, had Audience of the Prince of Denmark.
Apr. 1. they had Audience of Leave.

d' Ebrenschil, sent by the King of Denmark to Congratulate His Majesty's
Accession to the Crown; and likewise to notify the Death of the Queen Mother
of Denmark, had Audience of their Majesty's, and the Queen Dowager at
White Hall: and April 3. 85. had Audience of Leave.



Marmaduke Dayrel Esquire, Knighted.

Queensborough, and the Earl of Perth in Scotland, Sworn of His Majesty's Privy
Council in England.

de Laun^y, Envoy Extraordinary from the D. of Zell, had his Audience; as also
Monsieur Spanheim, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Brandenburgh.

de la Trinite, Envoy Extraordinary from the D. of Sa^^y, had Audience of His
Majesty.

de (...), Envoy Extraordinary from the D. of Brunswick W^^^embutt^^, ^^d
Audience of the King at White Hall.

de la Rouere, Envoy from the Duchess of Modena, had Audience of His Majesty;
and, May 3. had his Audience of Leave.

Van Duyvenvoorden, the Here Van Citters, and the Here Dyckvelt, Ambassadors
Extraordinary from the States General of the United Provinces, had their
Audience of their Majesty's; and the 21. of the Q. Dowager at Somerset House.
And the 30th, had Audience of their Royal Highnesses.

Peterborough, Sworn Groom of the Stole of His Majesty.

George, the Coronation of their Sacred Majesty's, King James the Second and
Queen Mary, was Performed at Westminster.

Roger L'Estrange Esquire in Consideration of his eminent and un^^aken Loyalty to
the Crown in all Extremities; and as a Mark of the singular Satisfaction His
Majesty had in his present as well as past Services; with repeated Declarations
of Royal Grace and Bounty toward him.

Norfolk, constituted Knight of the Garter, at a Chapter held at Whitehall.

The same day, the Baron de Reek, Envoy from the D. of Hanover, had Audience of
the King; the 8th of the Queen, and the 10th of the Queen Dowager at White Hall.

Titus Oats, (who under pretense of a Popish Plot, had Sworn several Persons
out of their Lives) was tried upon two several Indictments for Perjury, and
upon a full and clear Evidence, was Convicted of Perjury upon both the said
Indictments.

de Velbr^c^e, Envoy from the D. of Newburgh, and the Baron de Kettler, Envoy
from the ^antgrave of Hesse-Cassel, had Audience of the Queen, having had
Audience of the King the 8th, and the 17th had Audience of the Queen Dowager.

George Radzevil, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Poland, had Audience of
His Majesty; the 17. of the Queen Dowager, and their Royal Highnesses.

The Here Heynsius, the Here Goes van Abs^^ade, the Here Vander Heurel, and the
Here Borselle Vander Hoogen, Deputies of the States General of the United
Provinces; the Here Hooft, the Here Van Horn, the Here Van Blocquery, and the
Here Paetz, Deputies of the Dutch East India Company, had Audience of His
Majesty.

Titus Oats being brought to the King's Bench Bar, the Court awarded Judgment
against him as follows, That he should be divested of his Canonical Habit for
ever, That on Monday following, he be carried round Westminster Hall with a
Paper on his Head declaring his Offense in these Words, Titus Oats, Convicted
upon full Evidence for two Horrid Perjuries, And that afterward he stand in
the Pillory before Westminster-hall-Gate, and on Tuesday before the
Royal Exchange; That on Wednesday he be whipped from Aldgate to Newgate by the
Common Hangman, and on Friday following from Newgate to Tyburn; That he stand
in the Pillory every 24th of April during his Life before Tyburn, every 9th of
August in the Palace-Yard at Westminster, every 10th of Aug. at Charing Cross,
every 11th of Aug. at Temple Bar, and every 2d. of Sept. before the
Royal Exchange; That he Pay a Fine of 1000 Marks for each Perjury, and that he
suffer Imprisonment during Life.

Westminster, and chose Sir John Trevors their Speaker.

Argyle, Landed at Cample-town in Scotland in an Hostile manner.

Anne of Denmark, Delivered of a Daughter at White Hall, named Mary, Christened
by the Lord Bishop of London.

de Cattaneo, Envoy Extraordinary from the D. of Modena, had Audience of His
Majesty.

Landsdown, returned from his Embassy to the K. of Spain.

de Martinitz, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor, had Audience of His
Majesty; and the 23. had his Audience of Leave.

James, late Duke of Monmouth, Landed at Lime in Dorsetshire, with about a
Hundred and fifty Rebels.

James D. of Monmouth.

Argyle, is deserted by the Rebels, and taken.

Peterborow, Elected Knight of the Garter.

Augustine de Pallavicini, Envoy Extraordinary from the Republic of Genoua, had
Audience of the King, and the 23. had Audience of the Queen, the Queen Dowager,
and of the Prince of Denmark.

William Disnie Esquire Tried for Printing Monmouth's Declaration; and found Guilty
at a Commission of Oyer and Terminer in Southwark.

Rumbold the Maltster, (one of the Rebels that Landed with Argyle) Tried in
Scotland, found Guilty, and Executed the same day.

Thomas Dangerfield, being Convicted upon an Information for Writing and
Publishing a most Villainous and Scandalous Libel called his Narrative,
received Judgment at the King's Bench Bar, That he should stand in the Pillory
before Westminster-hall-Gate, and before the Royal Exchange, That he should be
Whipped from Aldgate to Newgate, and from Newgate to Tyburn; That he Pay a Fine
of 500 l. and find Sureties for his good Behavior during his Life.

Mr. Rich. Baxter, for Writing and Publishing Scandalous and Seditious
Annotations on the New Testament, was Fined 500 Marks, and to find Sureties for
his good Behavior during Life.

Argyle Beheaded.

Arrived at Gravesend, three Scotch Regiments from Holland.

England Adjourned till the 4th of August next.

Monmouth, and his Rebels routed.

Gray taken.

Monmouth taken.

John Cotton of Botreaux-Castle in Cornwall, Knighted.



Monmouth, the Lord Gray, and a German Rebel sent to the Tower.

Monmouth was Beheaded.

Goodenough taken and brought to Exeter.

De la mere to Surrender himself.

Henry Stere Esquire Knighted at Whitehall.

Norfolk, E. of Peterborow, and the E. of Rochester, Installed Knights of the
Garter at Windsor.

Mulgrave, Sworn of the Privy Council.



A Proclamation to Summon in George Speak Esquire Francis Charleton Esquire John
Wildman Esquire Col. Danvers, and John Trenchard, Esquire

The E. of Stamford, the Lord Brandon, and the Lord De la mere, Committed to
the Tower for High Treason.

The Baron d' Ehrlenchamp, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Mentz, had
Audience of their Majesty's.

Arlington, died at Arlington-House, being in the 67. year of his ^ge.

Aylesbury, constituted Lord Chamberlain of the Household.

Feversh^^n, elected Knight of the Garter; and Aug. 25. Installed at Windsor.

The same day the E. of Berkely Sworn of the Privy Council.

Westminster. and were adjourned again till the 9th of November. next.

The same day in the Afternoon, His Majesty went to Windsor.

d' Humieres, sent by the most Christian King, and the Count de Tonnerre, by
the D. of Orleans, to Congratulate His Majesty's Victory over the Rebels; had
Audience of the K. at Windsor, and the 9th of the Queen, and the 11th of the
Queen Dowager.

de Velparaiso, Envoy Extraordinary from the K. of Spain, had Audience of the
King at Windsor, and the 24th of the Queen; and the 28th had Audience of the
Queen Dowager at White Hall, and Sept. 13. of their Royal Highnesses at Windsor.

Richard Bulstrode, sent Ambassador to Brussels.

de Thun, Envoy Extraordinary from the Emperor, had Audience of Leave of the
King, and the 2d. of the Queen at Windsor; and the 5th of the Queen Dowager at
White Hall.

The same day, Don Simon de Souza de Magethaens, Envoy Extraordinary from the
King of Portugal, had Audience of the King, and the 3d. of the Queen at Windsor.

Alicia Lisle, Executed at Winchester for High Treason, in harboring John
Hicks, a Rebel.

Mourbach, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of Cologne, had Audience of
their Majesty's at Windsor; the 12 had Audience of Leave of the King; and the
13. of the Queen and their Royal Highnesses at Windsor.

Francis Lord Guildford, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England; died at his
House at Wroxton in Oxfordshire.

Macclesfield.

A Proclamation for the due Execution of the Acts of Parliament, for erecting
the Post Office.

A Proclamation for quieting the Post-master-General, his Deputies, and
Assigns, in the Execution of his Office.

Don Joseph de Faria, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Poland, had Audience
of Leave of their Majesty's at Windsor; and the 19. of the Q. Dowager.

Windsor to Winchester; and the 18. returned again to Windsor.

Leoline Ienkins Buried in the Chapel of Jesus-College in Oxon.

de Velparaiso, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of Spain, had Audience of
Leave of their Majesty's at Windsor; and the 23. of the Q. Dowager at
White Hall.

George Lord Jeffreys of Wem, Lord Chief Justice of England, had rendered the
Crown, as well in the late King's time, as since His Majesty's accession to the
Crown; was pleased to make him Lord high Chancellor of England.

Windsor to White Hall.

Count Hamilton, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector Palatin, had Audience of
their Majesty's, the Q. Dowager, and their Royal Highnesses at White Hall.

The same day the Baron Lo, Envoy Extraordinary from the Elector of T^ier, had
Audience of their Majesty's, and the Q. Dowager; the 9th of their Royal
Highnesses. The 23. he had Audience of Leave of His Majesty.

Van Duyvenwoorden, the Here Van Citters, and the Here Dyckvelt, had Audience
of Leave of their Majesty's at White Hall; the 8th of the Q. Dowager, and the
9th of their Royal Highnesses.

Edw. Herbert, made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench; His Majesty having
appointed Sir Edw. Lutwich to succeed him in the Place of Chief Justice of
Chester. Sir Robert Wright, removed to the Court of King's Bench, in the room
of Sir Tho. Walcot; and Sir Edw. Nevil made Baron of the Exchequer in his room.
Roger North, and Oliver Montague Esquires, both of His Majesty's Council at
Law, made, the first Attorney, the second Sollicitor-General to the Queen.

A Proclamation for the Parliament to meet the Ninth of November next.

E. Herbert, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Sworn one of the
Privy Council.

Hen. Cornish Esquire William Ring, John Ferneley, and Eliz. Gaunt, found Guilty of
High Treason at the Old Bailey.

Preston, Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council.

The same day Paul Ricaut Esquire was Knighted.

de Blomberg, Envoy from the D. of Courland, had the 17. Audience of the King;
the 18. of the Queen, the 19. of the Queen Dowager, and this day of their Royal
Highnesses.

Earl of Mulgrave made Lord Chamberlain in the Place of the Earl of Aylesbury,
who died the 20th at Ampthil in Bedfordshire.

Henry Cornish Esquire Executed in Cheapside over against Kingstreet; Elizabeth
Gaunt, Burnt at Tyburn; and Edward Lindsey, Hanged on Tower Hill, for running
away from his Colors.

Plymouth, Sworn one of the Privy Council.

Richard Nelthorp, executed before Gray's Inn; and John Ayloff, before the
Temple-Gate, for High Treason.



Westminster.

Feb. 10. following.

Brandon Gerard, before found Guilty of High Treason, had this day Sentence
passed upon him; but was after Pardoned.

Sunderland, Principal Secretary of State, made President of the Council.

Charles Bateman found Guilty of High Treason, had Sentence passed upon him the
11th; and the 18. Executed at Tyburn.

Robert Nightingall Esquire High Sheriff of Norfolk, Knighted.

Zeno, and Signior Giustiniani, Envoys Extraordinary from the Republic of
Venice, made their Entry; and the 18th had Audience of their Majesty's, the 22.
of the Q. Dowager at Somerset House, and the 23. of their Royal Highnesses at
White Hall.

Clarendon set forward for Ireland, being made Lieutenant thereof.

Tiviot, Col. Rob. Philips, and John Evelyn, appointed to Execute the Office of
Privy Seal, during the Earl of Clarendon's Absence.

Theophilus E. of Huntington, made Lord Chief Justice and Justice Air of all
His Majesty's Forests, Chaces, Parks and Warrens on the South Side Trent, in
the room of the Earl of Chesterfield.

Durham, Sworn Dean of His Majesty's Chapel-Royal; and the Bishop of Rochester,
Sworn Clerk of the Closet.

John Hambden Tried for High Treason, cast himself upon the King's mercy.

Capponi, Envoy Extraordinary from the great Duke of Tuscany, had Audience of
their Majesty's; the 4th of the Queen Dowager, and the 6. of her Royal
Highness, and the 7th of his Royal Highness; and Feb. 2. had his Audience of
Leave of their Majesty's.

Durham, Sworn of the Privy Council.

The Parliament Prorogued by Proclamation, till the 10th of May next.

Zeno, and Signior Giustiniani, had their Audience of Leave of their Majesty's
and the Queen Dowager, the 15. of her Royal Highness, and the 16. of his Royal
Highness.

De la mere being Tried at Westminster, for High Treason, (the Lord Chancellor
Jeffreys, constituted Lord High-Steward for that purpose) was acquitted; the
Evidence against him appearing to be plainly perjured.

Edmand King, Knighted by His Majesty in his Bedchamber.

Tho. E. of Stamford, Bailed out of the Tower.

Tho. Saxon found Guilty of Perjury, had his Sentence the 12th.

Mr. Philibert Vernatti, Attainted by Utlawry, for the Death of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey, was acquitted.

Dr. Edes of Chichester, found Guilty of High-Misdemeanours, and committed to
the King's Bench.

The same day the Parliament met at Westminster, and was Prorogued till the
10th of May next.

Tho. Genner, made one of the Barons of the Exchequer; Sir Henry Bedingfield,
one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, in the Place of Judge Levinz; and John
Holt of of Gray's Inn Esquire Knighted, and made Recorder in the place of Sir Tho.
Genner.

John Bucknall, of Oxlie in Hertf. Knighted.



Martin Beckman, Knighted.

THomas Earl of Stamford, Pardoned. A Proclamation for further Proroguing the
Parliament, till the 18th of September next.

Holland, robbed near Ilford, by two Horsemen.

Dort and Hamburgh, till the 25th of December. next.

Tho. Jones, W. Montague Esquire Sir Job Charleton, and Sir Edward Nevill, had
their Quietus: And Sir H. Bedingfield made L. C. J. of the Common Pleas, Sir
Edw. Atkins Sworn L. C. B. of the Exchequer, Sir Edw. Lutwich Sworn one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, and Rich. Heath Esquire made a Baron of the Exchequer.

Sir Job Charleton, made Chief Justice of Chester.

A Proclamation for John Desbrough, and 9 or 10 more, to return into England by
the 22. of July next.

I. Holt, Sir Ambrose Philips, Christopher Milton Esquire I. Powel Esquire John Tate
Esquire William Rawlinson Esquire Will. Killingworth Esquire Hugh Hodges Esquire Thomas Geers
Esquire and George Hutchins Esquire made Sergeants at Law; The two first being made the
King's Sergeants at Law.

September next.

Satarar, Envoy from the Marquis de Gastanaga, had his Audience of their
Majesty's at White Hall; the 27. of the Q. Dowager, 29. of his Royal Highness,
and May 9. had Audience of Leave of their Majesty's.

Christopher Milton, made a Baron of the Exchequer; Sir John Powel, one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas; and Sir Thomas Powys, Sollicitor-General in place
of Heneage Finch Esquire

James Kennedy, made Consul of Rotterdam.

French Ambassador complained to the King of a Scandalous Book, entitled, Les
Plaintes des Protestants cruellement opprimes dans le Royaume de France.

Ann of Denmark delivered of a Daughter, at Windsor.

John Lytcott Esquire Knighted.

Windsor.

The same day, Miles Prance (one of the Pretended Discoverers of the Murder of
Sir Edmondbury Godfrey) was Convict of Perjury at Westminster; and June 15.
received Sentence.



Beville Granville, Knighted at the Head of the Earl of Bath's Regiment on
Hounsloc-Heath.

W. Soames, His Majesty's Ambassador to the Grand Signior, died of a Fever at
Malta, in his Voyage.

Rich. Alborough, Oliver Haley and John Condon, Tried for Robbing the Holland
Mails, found Guilty; and the next day the two last received Sentence.

Sarotti, Resident of Venice, had Audience of the Queen Dowager, 26. of the
Princess Ann, and the 27. of the Prince of Denmark.

Tho. Jeffreys Esquire His Majesty's Consul at Alicant, Knighted at Windsor.

Powys, Lord Arundel of Wardour, Lord Bellasis, and the Lord Dover, Sworn of
the Privy Council, at Hampton Court.

Tho. Rawlinson, Alderman of London, Knighted at Windsor.

Nath. Johnson, made Captain General of the Leeward Islands in America, in
place of Sir W. Stapleton, deceased.

Tho. Montgomery Esquire Knighted by the King at Windsor.

Dr. Cartwright was made Bishop of Chester, and Dr. Parker, Bishop of Oxford.

Windsor in his Progress toward the West; and the 31. returned to Windsor
again.

The famous Fortress of Buda, was this day taken by the Imperialists; which had
been 145 years in the Possession of the Turks.

Bristol about Five in the Afternoon.

Bristol about 6 in the Morning, and arrived at Bridgewater about 5 Afternoon.

Trelawney's Regiment, hanged at Plymouth, for running away from his Colors.

Edward Thornton, a Soldier in the Regiment of the Right Honorable the E. of
Huntington, was Executed at Tyburn, for running from his Colors.

Tho. Foul Esquire by the King at Windsor, one of the Aldermen of the City of
London. Afterward he and Sir Thomas Rawlinson, were constituted Sheriffs of the
City of London, for the year following.

Windsor to Whitehall.

Tyrconnil, Sworn of His Majesty's Privy Council in England.

A Proclamation for Proroguing the Parliament till the 15 day of February.

Lloyd, Bishop of St. David's; Dr. Parker, Bishop of Oxford; and Dr.
Cartwright, Bishop of Chester, were Consecrated at Lambeth, by the Archbishop
of Canterbury, assisted by the Bishops of Durham, Norwich, Ely, and Rochester.

Path to Somerset House.

William Bridgeman Esquire Sworn one of the Clerks in Ordinary to His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, in the Place of Sir Philip Lloyd, deceased. At
the same time likewise was William Blaithwayt Esquire constituted Clerk of the same
Council, and Sworn.

Richard Allebon of Gray's Inn Esquire received the Honor of Knighthood; and at the
same time was constituted one of the King's Counsel at Law.

John Peake, Lord Mayor of the City of London for the ensuing year 1687. Sworn
at Westminster, before the Barons of the Exchequer.

Tho. Duppa, Gentleman Usher, and Daily Waiter to His Majesty and others;
having brought an Action at Westminster, against Sir William Stevens of the
Isle of Wight for his Knight Fees; the said Sir William Pleaded, that his
Knighthood was conferred on him without his consent: To which Plea, the
Plaintiff Demurred; and it was this day argued at the Common-Bar, where the
King's Servants had Judgment against him.

White Hall.

Samuel Johnson, being the last Term Convict of High-misdemeanours in
Publishing two Seditious Papers, had this day Judgment against him as
follows; viz. To stand in the Pillory on Monday following at Westminster; on
Wednesday, at Charing Cross; and the Monday after that, at the Royal Exchange:
To Pay a Fine of 500 Marks, and to be whipped from Newgate to Tyburn. The 20th
day he was degraded from performing his Office, as Minister of the Gospel.

The same day, Mr. Attorney General obtained a Fine of 1000 Marks against
Edward Whitaker, who was Convicted in 82. for justifying the Rebellion of Forty
One, and the Murder of King Charles the First.

Westminster, and was Prorogued till Febr. 14. next.

George Speak Esquire adjudged to Pay a Fine of 2000 Marks, upon his being
Convicted of a Riot, and rescuing John Trenchard from His Majesty's Messengers.

Richard Neale Esquire constituted Sheriff of the County of Northumberland for the
year 1687. was Knighted by the King at Whitehall.

Edmund Gardener Esquire, Deputy-Recorder of the Town of Bedford, had the Honor
of Knighthood conferred on him.

Charles Cottrell laid down his Office of Master of the Ceremonies, by reason
of his Age; and was succeeded by his Son Charles-Lodowick Cottrell Esquire his
Grandson John Dormer Esquire being made Assistant-Master in his Son's Place.

Richard Raines (Judge of the Prerogative Court) made Judge of His Majesty's
High-Court of Admiralty; and at the same time Knighted.

Franciscus Knuydyt of Rotterdam, Knighted.

Te Deum to be Sung in his Chapel for the Recovery of his Master.

John Lord Bellasis, Sidney Lord Godolphin, Henry Lord Dover, Sir John Ernley
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Sir Stephen Fox, made Commissioners for
executing the Office of Lord High-Treasurer of England.

April.

James Tillie of Pillaton in the County of Cornwall Esquire Knighted.

Caunitz, Envoy extraordinary from the Emperor, had Audience of His Majesty;
and the 23d of the Queen: Feb. 6. of Queen Dowager. 28. Of her Royal Highness
the Princess Ann, and March 1. of his R. H. Prince George of Denmark.

Tho. Jeffreys constituted Agent and Consul General in the Kingdoms of Valencia
and Mursia, and the Islands of Majorca, Minorca, Ivica and Sardinia.

Ann Sophia, youngest Daughter of their Royal Highnesses, Prince George and
Princess Ann of Denmark, dyed this day in the Afternoon, having been ill about
a Fortnight.

Henry the Seventh's Chapel at Westminster.

Tyrconnil arrived at Dublin, appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland by His Majesty.

Mary, another Daughter of their Royal Highnesses, Prince George, and the
Princess Ann of Denmark, dyed about seven at Night, having been ill about three
weeks.

Yarmouth Treasurer of his Household, and the Right Honorable the Lord
Waldegrave Comptroller of the same.

Barbary, be immediately paid in.

Clarendon yields his place of Lord Lieutenant of Ireland to the E. of
Tyrconnil, who was deputed thereto by His Majesty.

Westminster, and was Prorogued till the 28th of April next.

Charles Cottrell, Master of the Ceremonies, and at the same time put about his
Neck a Gold Chain and Medal, the mark of his Office.

Van Dyckvelt had private Audience of the King in His Bedchamber. March 3. Of
Her Majesty. 5. Of the Queen Dowager. 6. Of her Royal Highness the Princess Ann
of Denmark, and 7. of his Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark.

of the distressed French Protestants, be immediately paid into the Chamber of
London.

James Porter made Vice-Chamberlain of the King's Household.

Henry Lord Wardour sworn Keeper of the Privy Seal.

James Fitz-Iames, the King's Natural Son, made Duke of Berwick, Earl of
Tinmouth, and Baron of Bosworth. The same day His Majesty was pleased to confer
the Style and Dignity of a Marquess of this Kingdom upon the Right Honorable
William Earl of Powys, by the Title of Marquis of Powys.

The Lord Tho. Howard made Master of His Majesty's Robes in the place of Arthur
Herbert Esquire.

November.



William Grant, Soldier in Captain Parson's Company, Hanged in Covent Garden,
for running from his Colors.

Richard Cane, of Sir Edward Hales's Regiment, was Executed on Tower Hill, for
running from his Colors.

Ordered a second time by His Majesty in Council, that the Money which has been
collected, be Paid in for the Relief of the French Protestants.

Robert Wright, one of the Justices of the King's Bench, Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas; and Mr. Justice Powel was thereupon removed from the Court of
Common Pleas to the Court of King's Bench; and Mr. Baron Milton from the
Exchequer to the Common Pleas.

The same day Died his Grace George Duke of Buckingham, at his House in
Yorkshire.

Herbert to the Common Pleas, and the Lord Chief Justice Wright to the
King's Bench: Sir Francis Withens, one of the Justices of the King's Bench,
having his Quietus.

Sunderland, Lord President of the Council, and one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, was Elected Knight Companion of the Garter, a Place being
vacant by the Death of his Grace the late Duke of Buckingham.

Westminster, but was farther Prorogued till the 22. of November next.

The same day Sir Richard Allebon, and Charles Inglesby Esquire called by the
King's Writ to be Sergeants at Law, took their Places.

The same day also Sir Rich. Allebon was Sworn before my Lord Chancellor, one
of the Justices of the King's Bench; and Mr. Se^jeant Powel, one of the Barons
of the Exchequer.

England.

Samuel Grant Esquire, by several of the Pari^hioners of St. Dunstan's, whom
he had sued for Tithes, His Majesty upon his humble Petition directed Mr.
Attorney General to consent to a new Trial, which was this day had, and the
said Samuel Grant acquitted.

Windsor. The same day the Here van Dyckvelt had his Audience of Leave of the
King and Queen; and May 20 of the Queen Dowager.

Sunderland, Installed Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, in St.
George's Chapel at Windsor.

Berwick took his leave of the King at Windsor, and began his Journey for
Hungary, intending to pass the Summer in the Imperial Army; Edward Vaudrey
Esquire, that waits upon his Grace, being at the same time Knighted.

George of Denmark, Embarked with his Retinue, on Board two of His Majesty's
Yachts, appointed to attend him, in order to their passing to Denmark, where he
intended to stay about a Month.

Holland Mail Robbed between Colchester and Harwich.

Watson, Bishop elect of St. David's, was consecrated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury; being assisted by the Lord Bishop of Rochester, and the Lord Bishop
of Chester, in the Chapel of Lambeth-House.

William Phipps, Knighted at Windsor, for his good Service in bringing home a
very considerable Treasure, after it had lain in the Sea 44 years; he having
been presented to the King by his Grace the D. of Albemarle.



John Sparrowe Esquire received the Honor of Knighthood at Windsor.

Grafton, Vice Admiral of England, went from London to the Gunfleet, to take
the Command of His Majesty's Ships; with which he was ordered to receive the
Queen of Portugal at Rotterdam, and Conduct her to Lisbon.

etc.

Windsor an Express from Rome, that brought News of the Death of the Duchess
of Modena, the Queens Mother of England. She died July 19. in the 53 year of
her Age, after 11 days Sickness.

The Count de Caunitz had his Audience of Leave of His Majesty.

Hampton Court.

de Caunitz had Audience of leave of Her Majesty at Windsor; as he likewise had
of Her Royal Highness, the Princess of Denmark, the 29th of July.

George of Denmark Landed at Harwich; came to London the 15th after noon; and
went thence immediately for Windsor.

Zeulestein, sent from the Prince of Orange, to make the Complements of
Condoleance in his Highness's Name upon the Death of the late Duchess of
Modena, had his Audience, and Audience of Leave, of their Majesty's, the Queen
Dowager, and her Royal Highness, the Princess of Denmark, at Windsor.

Windsor, the King going to Portsmouth on his Progress, and the Queen toward
the Bath.

The 17th His Majesty arrived at Portsmouth: The 18th about 5 in the Evening at
Bath; and about an hour after, her Majesty arrived also at that place. 22.
About five in the Afternoon His Majesty arrived at Gloucester. 23. About Six in
the Evening at Worcester. 24. He came to Ludlow. 25. About 5 in the Evening to
Shrewsbury. 26. to Whitchurch. 27. About 4 in the Afternoon to Chester. 29. To
Holy-Well in Flintshire. 30. To Newport. 31. To Litchfield. Sept. 1. To
Coventry. 3. To Banbury. 5. About 5 in the Evening he arrived at Oxford. 6.
About 6 in the Evening at Cirencester; the same day he came to Bath, having met
with very Dutiful Acknowledgments in all Places where he came. The 12. their
Majesty's Dined at Bristol. 14. The King went to Winchester. 17. He returned to
Windsor; Her Majesty staying something longer at the Bath, having found a
Benefit by it.

Spencer went Envoy Extraordinary to his Highness the Duke of Modena, to make
the Complements of Condoleance upon the Duchess her Death, in their Majesty's
Names.

The same Day, Sir Francis Ratcliffe of Dilston in the County of
Northumberland, Baronet, was dignified by His Majesty with the Title of an Earl
of this Kingdom, by the Name of Baron of T^ndale, Viscount Ratcliffe and
Langley, and Earl of Darwentwater.

Albemarle set Sail from Spithead, in order to his Voyage for the Government of
Jamaica.

De Torcy, Envoy Extraordinary from the King of France, had Audience of the
Queen Dowager at Somerset House.

Don Simon de Souza de Magelhaens, Envoy from Portugal, had Audience of His
Majesty this day, to notify the Consummation of that King's Marriage, being
Conducted by Sir Charles Cottrell, Master of the Ceremonies.

de Torcy, Envoy Extraordinary from France, had Audience of their Royal
Highnesses Prince George, and the Princess Ann of Denmark; being Conducted by
Sir Charles Cottrell, Master of the Ceremonies.

Roger Earl of Castlemain, His Majesty's late Ambassador Extraordinary at Rome,
was Sworn of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

Albemarle set Sail from Plymouth for His Government in the Western Islands,
with several Vessels in Company.

The Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England, etc. first held his Court of
Chivalry in the Painted Chamber, according to the Ancient Custom and Law of
Arms.

Windsor in very good Health from the Bath.

White Hall with the whole Court, from Windsor.

Valsassine, Envoy Extraordinary from the Governor of Flanders, had Audience of
their Majesty's, to make the Complements of Condoleance on the Death of the
late Duchess of Modena.

Their Royal Highnesses Prince George, and the Princess Ann of Denmark,
returned from Hampton Court to White Hall.

William Duke of Hamilton, and Sir Nicholas Butler, one of the Commissioners of
His Majesty's Customs, were Sworn of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

Valsassine, Envoy Extraordinary from the Governor of Flanders, had Audience
of the Queen Dowager.

The Marquis de Torcy, Envoy Extraordinary from France, had his Audience of
leave this day of His Majesty, and of the Queen the 16th.

Don Simon de Souza de Magelhaens, Envoy from Portugal, had Audience of Her
Majesty.

de Torcy, Envoy Extraordinary from France, had this day Audience of leave of
the Queen Dowager, and the 18th of their Royal Highnesses Prince George, and
the Princess Ann of Denmark.

Valsassine, Envoy Extraordinary from the Governor of Flanders, had Audience of
his Royal Highness Prince George, as he had yesterday of her Royal Highness the
Princess Ann of Denmark.

Charles Carteret, Esquire

de Valsassine, Envoy Extraordinary from the Governor of Flanders, had his
Audience of Leave of His Majesty.

Denmark, the Pope's Nuncio, French Ambassador, etc. and attended by the
Principal Officers of the Court) was pleased to Dine this day at the
Guild Hall, it being the Anniversary Festival of the Entrance of the new Lord
Mayor upon his Office.

John Bawden, and William Ashurst, Esquires.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed and Sold by William Crook Bookseller, at the
Sign of the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple
by Devereux-Court, 1688.
Divinity.
1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the Truth of the Christian Religion, proved by
Reason, 120. price Bound 10 d. 2. Chillingworth's Book, called The Protestant
Religion, a Safe way to Salvation, made more generally useful with some
Additions in 40. price 1 s. 6 d. 3. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience,
delivered in a Sermon on the 30th of January, by I. Ellesby Vicar of Chiswick,
40. price 6 d. 4. Mr. Howel's Visitation-Sermon before the Bishop of
Chichester, 40. price 6 d. 5. Dr. Hascard's three Sermons, one on the Fifth of
November, the other two before the Lord Mayors of London, both in 40. 6. Mr.
Manningham's Six Sermons; one before the Lord Mayor, one at St. Marie's in
Oxford, two at the Rolls on the 30th of January, and the 29th of May, one at
Hampshire Feast, the other at Sir John Norton's Funeral; in 40. 7. A Sermon
Preached at the Savoy-Church in French, and since Printed in French and
English, 120. price bound 8 d. 8. A Modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is
considered the reasons why the Clergy are so contemned and neglected. By L. A.
D. D. and Dean of Litchfield. Price 1 s. 6 d. 9. Hugo Grotius his Catechism,
Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis of all the Greek words therein
contained. In 80. price bound 2 s. 10. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving that
Christ and his Apostles were Prophets: written by the directions of, and
recommended to the Press, by the late Peter Gunning, then Lord Bishop of Ely.
In 80. price 2 s. 6 d. 11. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits, in a
sincere Discourse to the French King: written by a Roman Catholic. In 40.
price 1 s. 12. Justifying Faith; or the Faith by which the Just do live,
together with the excellency of the Common Prayer Book. In 80. price bound 1 s.
13. Mercy Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow
bounds which have been wont to be set to it. By Ed. Lane, M. A. and Rector of
Sparshalt. 14. Du Moulin's Reflections reverberated, being a full answer to the
damning Doctrine of Dr. Lewis de Moulin: also, a Confutation of Edmond
Hickeringill against the Ecclesiastical Courts. By E. Lane, etc. In 40. 1 s. 6
d. 15. A Discourse about Conscience, relating to the present Differences among
us, in opposition to both extremes of Popery and Fanaticism. In 40. price 6 d.
16. A Thanksgiving-Sermon for the Discovery of the late Fanatic Plot September.
9. 1683. By John Harison, D. D. Rector of Pulborrow, 40. 17. An Introduction to
the Sacrament: or, a short, plain, and safe way to the Communion Table, being
an Instruction for the worthy receiving the Lord's Supper; Collected for, and
familiarly addressed to every particular Communicant. By L. Addison, D. D. Dean
of Litchfield. To which is added, the Communicant's Assistant, being a
Collection of Devotions to be used, Before, At, and After(...)
A CONTINUATION OF THE Historian's Guide, OR, BRITTAIN'S Remembrancer, etc.
Albemarle arrived at Barbados.

Constantinople.

Ireland.

James II. to prize Canaries, to be sold at 18d. the Quart.

Tho. Shaft^ executed at Wapping-dock, being condemned by the Admiralty.

Bedmar, Envoy from the King of Spain, had Audience.

A Proclamation against Pirates in America.

Berwick made Governor of Portsmouth.





Chelmsford to enquire after money levied on Dissenters.

Grafton arrived in the Downs.

Exeter new Charter brought down by the Mayor.

etc.



Chatham.

Chester Mail robbed nigh Coventry.

Froud arrived at Plymouth from the West Indies.

de Lent, Envoy from the King of Denmark, had his Audience of Conge.

Canterbury, and six Bishops more, committed to the Tower for Petitioning the
King not to read the Declaration of Toleration in Churches.

Roger Strickland with 20 Sail of Men of War in the Downs.

Canterbury, Bishops of St. Asaph, Ely, Chichester, Bath and Wells,
Peterborough, and Bristoll, were brought to the King's Bench Bar, from the
Tower, (where they were sent the 8th.) and arraigned, tried, and acquitted the
29th of May, Instant.

Prince and Princess of Denmark came from the Bath.

Wales, that was said to be born on Trinity Sunday, about 10 of the Clock in
the morning.

Naples almost ruined by an Earthquake.

Garstorf, Envoy from the King of Denmark, had Audience.

Cattaneo, Envoy from the Duke of Modena, had Audience.

Seignior Zeuglestin, Envoy from the Prince of Orange, had Audience.

viz. W. Leffant, John Rotheram, V. Denn, Sol. Lovell, Sir H. Chancy, W. Moses,
H. T^inder, H. Fuller, and W. Tomson.

Tho. Jifford, Mayor of Exeter, Knighted.

Wales, the Recorder did present the Marchioness of Powis, his Governerness,
with a Purse of Gold.

Thomas Elmes, Esquire Knighted.

Thames, for the Birth of the Prince of Wales.

James, Duke of Ormond, dyed in the 79th year of his Age, at Kingston-Hall in
Dorsetshire.

Windsor, and went the third of August to Richmond, and on the ninth to
Whitehall.

Newcastle upon Tyne.

Samuel Gerrard, Esquire Knighted.

The Mayor of Scarbrough tossed in a Blanket by a Captain that quartered in the
Town.

Judge Allybone dyed.

Robert Vyner dyed.

John Shorter, Lord mayor of London, dyed, and was buried the 12th at St.
Savior's in Southwark.

Belgrade taken by Storm by the German Forces.

John Eyles sworn Lord Mayor of London.

Feversham dyed at Tunbridge.

Beaumont, Captain Paston, and four Captains of the D. of Berwick's Regiment,
(...) at a Council of War at Windsor cashiered for not admitting of Irishmen
into their Companies.

Tho. Lane, of St. Lawrence Lane, Knighted.

Denmark came from Tunbridge.

Coll. Bevile Skeleton, Esquire sent to the Tower.

Windsor to Whitehall.

Chatham.

Wales came from Windsor to Whitehall.



Sir Tho. Fitch, that made Fleet-Ditch, was buried at Eltham.





London was restored.

London restored by the Lord Chancellor, and Sir W. Pritchard desired to take
the Chair, but he refused it: The same day the general Pardon came out again
with Alterations.

I. Chapman sworn Lord Mayor of Land.

Wales named at St. James's Chapel, James-Francis-Edward.



The Earl of Derby made Lord Lieutenant of Cheshire and Lancashire.

Orange set sail with 50 Capital Men of War, 26* smaller, 25 fire Ships, 300
fly Boats, Pinks, etc. for England, but by a Storm that Night was driven back
again.

Wales was examined before the Privy Council.

Sunderland put out of the Council and Secretary of State.

Preston made Secretary, etc. in his room.

Orange set sail with the Fleet that he had put out on the 19th of October. with
about 100 small Ships more than was then, so here was 500.

Orange's Manifesto.

Dover, and lost a small Vessel of about 100 men.

Orange landed at Torbay, nigh Dartmouth, in Devon, with the Dutch Army, about
15000 men.

Lovelace, and thirteen of his party, were taken at Cyrencester, as they were
going to the Prince of Orange.

Lamplugh, Bishop of Exeter, having lost Exeter on the Prince of Orange's
coming, came up to London, and K. James made him Archbishop of York.

James for a Parliament.

Windsor in order to his Journey to Sarum.

James came from Sarum to Whitehall.

Coll. Bevile Skeleton made Lieutenant of the Tower.

James for a Parliament to sit Jan. 15.

The French King's Ordinance for a War with the Dutch came out.

James's the Countess Dowager of Ossory.

London, which Allarm spread over all England.

The Rabble up in several places for several days, pulling down Mass houses,
and Papist's houses; (among others,) great mischief done to the Spanish
Ambassadour's: It ceased December. 12.

The Lord Chancellor Jeffreys taken in Wapping, and sent Prisoner to the Tower
of London.

London and Middlesex quiet.

The Lords and Citizens waited on the Prince of Orange at Henley with an
Address.

K. James stopped in a Smack nigh Feversham in Kent; with him, the Earl of
Peterborough, Sir Ed. Hales, etc. Four Coaches were sent for him, and on the
16th he came to Whitehall; on the 18th he left Whitehall, and went to Sir
Richard Head's, nigh Rochester; on the 23d he withdrew for France.

Orange came to Windsor.

The Duke of Grafton assaulted in the Strand at the head of his Regiment: The
person shot dead that assaulted him.

The Lords publish an Order for the quieting of the Irish.

Orange came to St. James's, and his Forces to London.

Orange visited the Queen Dowager at Sommerset-house, and this day the Prince
and Princess of Denmark came to Whitehall.

London waited on the Prince of Orange at St. James's.

Orange published an Order to return the Arms into the publik Store, and an
Order about quartering of Soldiers.

Westminster, and ordered F. Guine, Esquire to sign such Orders as were made by
them.

Orange ordered the French Ambassador to leave England.

Orange two Addresses; the first, of Thanks, etc. and to desire his Highness to
accept the Government till Jan. 22. next; the second, to issue out Letters to
the Coroners to choose Conventionmen, to sit Jan. 22.

London agreed to the said Address.

Orange gave his Answer to the said Addresses.

Orange put out his Declaration, authorizing Sheriffs, Justices, etc. to act;
the same day his Highness received the Sacrament at St. James's by the hands of
the Bishop of London.

Orange published a Declaration for the better collecting the Revenue.

Dartmouth with the Fleet came into the Downs.

Orange published an Order for regular Election of Convention-men.

The Sedgmore Frigot lost nigh Plymouth.

Seth Ward, Bishop of Sarum, dyed.

John Darcy, Heir to the Earl of Holderness, dyed.

James Howard, Earl of Suffolk, dyed.

The Prince of Orange published a Declaration for quartering of Soldiers.

Huntingdon was carried through London in order to her Interrment.

Scotland address the Prince of Orange to take their Government upon him till
March next.

Orange's Declaration for paying the Seamen.

Orange's Order for paying and keeping the Soldiers in order.

Westminster; the Marquess of Hallifax made Speaker of the Lords House, and Mr.
Powle of the Commons: then they desired the Prince of Orange to take on him the
Administration of the Government for a farther time; also, ordered that a
Thanksgiving-day be kept Jan. 31. at London, etc. and Feb. 14. in all England.
The Prince of Orange sent a Letter to the House of Lords about settling the
Government.

Feb. 6. to be kept a Thanksgiving-day.

A great number of people go to Westminster to desire the Convention to crown
the Prince and Princess of Orange.

Westminster.

Orange's Proclamation to prevent the abuses in Forests.

and that the Prince and Princess of Orange ought to be King and Queen,

Orange landed at White Hall.

Orange proclaimed King and Queen of England, France, and Ireland, by the name
of William and Mary, at London; on the 19th at Rippon, Beverly, Lancaster,
Hartford, Ware, Royston, Baldock, Tri^^, St. Albanes, Stamford, Alesbury,
Wendover, Chesham, Beaconsfield, Rewsborrow, Colebrook, Burnham, Ivingo, Marlo,
etc. the 18th at Bath, Cardigan, etc. the 23d at York, Taunton, etc. March 5.
at Bridgewater, Bristoll, etc. the 6th at Sandwich, etc.

William put out a Proclamation for the collecting of the Revenue to continue
as in December last.

William's Order in Council for alteration of the Royal Family's Names in the
Common Prayer.

William made a Speech to the Lords and Commons at Westminster.

London, and the Clergy of the City, waited on K. William at White Hall.

William's Declaration to order the Irish to lay down their Arms by April
following.

William signed the Act for the sitting, of the Parliament, and after, the King
and Queen went to Hampton Court.

John Read's House was robbed at Bracket-hall in Hartfordshire.

Brent. Another for bringing in Arms imbezelled.

Maynard, Serj. Rawlinson, and Sir Anthony Keck, are made Commissioners of the
Great Seal of England.

Henry Pollexfen, Esquire Attorney General.

Sir Geo. Tre^y, Solicitor General.

Lord Willoughby, Chancellor of the Duchy.

Lord Lovelace, Captain of the Band of Pensioners.

Lord Lucas, chief Governor of the Tower of London.

Sandwich his Funeral.

William Harbord, Esquire sworn of the Privy Council.

The Brandenburghs got a Victory over the French at Nuis.

The Lords and Commons present an Address to stand by K. William with their
Lives and Fortunes. K. William desires their care of the Dutch, Ireland, and
the Fleet.

Arthur Herbert, Esquire John Earl of Carbury, Sir Michael Wharton, Bart. Sir Tho.
Lee, Bart. Sir John Chichesly, Sir John Lowther, Bart. of White-haven, and
William Sacheveril, Esquire Commissioners for the Admiralty.

Gilbert Burnet elected Bishop of Sarum, (in the place of Dr. S. Ward,
deceased) and consecrated at Fulham, by the Bishops of London, Winchester,
Lincoln, Landaff, St. Asaph, and Carlisle.

London made an Address to K. William.

Charles Sedly, Esquire of Southfleet, in Kent, Knighted.

K. James II. arrived at Kingsale in Ireland, and on the 24th entered Dublin on
Horseback, and the next day published three Proclamations.

William made a Speech in the House of Lords, and passed two Acts.

The Parliament addressed the King to put his Proclamation out against the
Soldiers that disserted.

The Sheriffs of all Counties of England were appointed by K. William.

A Proclamation for Crowning K. William and Q. Mary, and Proclaimed at London
on the 20th, for the Coronation to be on the 11th of April next.

The Convention of Scotland met, and chose Duke Hamilton Speaker, and on the
23d sent their Answer to K. William's Letter, by the Lord Rosse.

John Chapman, Lord Mayor of London dyed.

John Berry came into the Downs with a Squadron of Men of War.

England appointed by K. William.

Pilkington chose Lord Mayor of London for the remainder of the year.

K. William signed the Act for a present Aid of 412000 l.

Coo^ made Treasurer and Receiver General to Q. Mary.

Geo. Lockhart was shot dead as he came from Church at Edinburgh; he was Lord
President of the Sessions of Scotland.



Scotland voted the Throne vacant; and on the 4th, voted to settle the Crown on
K. William and Q. Mary; and on the 10th proclaimed them, and declared against
Bishops, and made a new Oath of Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary.

William passed three Acts of Parliament at Westminster.

Coll. Cunningham and Coll. Richards shipped their Regiments at Liverpool, in
Lancashire, for Ireland.

Duke Frederick Marshall de Schomberg, and William Earl of Devonshire, made
Knights of the Garter; Dr. Burnet, Bishop of Sarum, sworn Chancellor of that
Order.

William's Declaration to secure all Soldiers of English Pay, though sent
beyond Seas.

Ormond installed Knight of the Garter.

Admiral Herbert sailed with his Fleet from Spithead.

d'Avaux, the French Ambassador, made his public entrance into Dublin, and
had his Audience of K. James II. at the Castle.

Colerain.

Charles, Viscount Mordant, (since Earl of Monmouth,) Henry Lord de la Mere,
Sidney Lord Godolphin, Sir Hen. Capell, Rich. Hambden, Sen. Esquire made
Commissioners of the Treasury.

Jonathan, Lord Bishop of Bristol, elected Bishop of Exeter.

K. William passed the Act for the Coronation Oath, and 2 Acts more,

Dyed at Rome Queen Christiana of Sweedland.

George of Denmark made Baron of Ockingham, Earl of Kendale, and Duke of
Cumberland.

The Marquess of Winchester made Duke of Bolton.

William Bentinek, Esquire made Baron of Cyrencester, Viscount Woodstock, and Earl
of Portland.

Viscount Faulconberg made Earl of Faulconberg.

Viscount Mordant made Earl of Monmouth.

Lord Mountague made Viscount Mounthermer, and Earl of Mountague.

Lord Churchill made Earl of Marlborough.

Henry Sidney, Esquire made Baron Milton, Viscount Sidney, of Sheppy in Kent.

Lord Lumley made Viscount Lumley of Lumley-Castle in Durham.

Lord Cholmondly made Baron of Cholmondly, of Which Malbanch, alias Nantwich, in
Cheshire.

Tho. Pilkington, Esquire Lord Mayor of London, Knighted.

Sir Geo. Hewit made Baron of James-Town, and Viscount Goran in Ireland.

William and Q. Mary crowned at Westminster, by the Bishop of London, and the
day kept with great Ceremony in most of the chief Towns in England.

Westminster to White Hall, to congratulate their Majesty's on their
Coronations.

Herbert arrived at Kingsale, in Ireland.

George Jeffereys, Baron of Wemm, and late Lord Chancellor of England, dved in
the Tower of London, and was buried in the Tower privately the Sunday night
following, by an Order his Relations got from K. William.

The Sieur de Schmittan, Envoy extraordinary from the Duke of Brandenburgh had
Audience of the King and Queen, at Hampton Court.

George Booth, Esquire Sir Richard Temple, Sir John Worden, Sir Robert Southwell,
Sir Robert Clayton, Sir Patience Ward, made Commissioners of the Customs.

William to support the Church of England, and to call a Convocation.

Sir Henry Fane, Sir Hen. Ashurst, Sir Hum. Edwin, Tho. Frankland, Esquire Fran.
Parry, Esquire John Danvers, Esquire and John Wilcox, Iun. Esquire made Commissioners for
the Excise.

Danby made Marquess of Caermarthen.

K. William passed six Acts of Parliament.

William, for a War with France, and the King's Answer to it.

The Baron de Schutz, Envoy extraordinary from the Dukes of Lunenburgh, etc.
had Audience of their Majesty's at Hampton Court.

Two Proclamations came out, 1. To encourage French Protestants. 2. For
prohibiting French Goods.

The Estates of Scotland named the Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and
Sir John Dalrimple, to go Commissiones for England, to offer the Crown of
Scotland. to K. William and Q. Mary, which was done accordingly, on the 11th of
May, in great solemnity, in the Banqueting House at Whitehall, to which place
the Commissioners came by Post.

Portsmouth the Wolf, from Virginia, having on Board the Lord Howard of
Effingham, Governor of Virginia.

William put out two Proclamations for prohibiting Seamen to serve foreign
Princes, etc.

William passed at Westminster the Poll Act, and two more.

A Fight betwixt Admiral Herbert and the French at Bantry Bay in the N. W. of
Ireland.

Scotland adjourned to the 21st instant.

viz. Sir Hen. Pollexfen, Nich. Lechmore, Tho. Rookesby, John Thurburn, Will.
Wogan, Will. Pawlet, Nath. Bond, Gyles Eyres, Hen. Hatsell, John Blencow,
Peyton Ventris, John Powell, Roger Bellwood, John Tremain, John Trenchard, and
John Turton, Esqs;

The same day the Judges were constituted, viz. Sir John Holt, Chapter Just. Sir W.
Dolben, Sir W. Gregory, and Gyles Eyres, Esquire of the King's. Bench; Sir Henry
^ollexsen, Chapter Just. Sir John Powell, Tho Rookeshy, and Peyton Ventris, Esqs;
of the Common Pleas; Sir Robert Atkinson, Chapter B^ron, Sir Ed. Nevile, Nich.
Lechmore, and John Turton, Esqs; of the Exchequer.

John Trenchard, Esquire Chapter Just. of Chester.

Sir Geo. Treby, Attorney General.

John Summers, Esquire Solicitor General.

Downs, richly laden.

France came out.

A Proclamation against a Libell called The History of the Convention, offering
100l. reward to discover Author or Printer.

Scotland for their Deliverance from Popery and Slavery.

William gave his Royal Assent to five Acts at Westminster.



William came to Portsmouth, and on board the Elizabeth Frigot dined with
Admiral Herbert, where he declared his Royal intention to make Admiral Herbert
an Earl; and there Knighted Capt. John Ashby, and Capt. Clouds. Shovell, and
the King returned that Evening to Hampton Court, after giving 2600l. amongst
the wounded, etc. Seamen.

A great Sally by the Protestants at Londonderry, with success.

George Lord Me^^ill made sole Secretary of State in Scotland.

Frederick Count de Schomberg made General of all his Majesty's Forces, Master
General of the Ordinance, and of his Majesty's Privy Council, Baron of T^ys,
Earl of Brantford, marquess of Harwich, and Duke of Schomberg.

Norwich to serve his Majesty, and about 150 more went by Land to Portsmouth on
the same account.

Robert Casor, Master of the Advice, a Cole Ship, beat two French Prizes.

Robert Wright, late Lord Chief Justice, dyed in Newgate.

Plymouth with the Body of the late Duke of Albemarle.

William's Declaration, with an Order of Council, for encouraging Seamen.

K. William's Proclamation for a Fast to be kept about London, on the fifth of
June, on the 19th all England over.

William gave his Royal Assent to the Act for Toleration of Dissenters, and two
Acts more.

The Estates of Scotland read K. William's Letter to make them a Convention,
which they acccepted with thanks, and adjourned to June 5. and ordered all
their Members to meet then.

Engelenburg, Witsen, Odyck, Citters, and Dyckvelt, Ambassadors extraordinary
from Holland, made their public Entrance, and on the 30th had their public
Audience at the Banqueting House at Whitehall.

William gave his Royal Assent to two Acts of Parliament.

Vice Admiral Almonde arrived at Portsmouth with part of the Dutch Fleet.

The Scanderoon Fleet came to Plymouth.

Albemarle arrived at Plymouth, from Jamaica.

The Duke of Somerset was installed Chancellor of Cambridge, at Northumberland
Hou^e in the Strand.

Kirk set Sail from High-lake, nigh Leverpole, with his Forces for
Londonderry.

Herbert created Earl of Torrington, and Baron Herbert of Torbay.

Assistant Frigate with fourteen Merchant men from the West Indies, came into
the Downs.

John Ashburnham Esquire Created Baron Ashburnham of Ashburn-Hall in Sussex.

The Dutch Ambassadors had Audience.

Dutch Fleet of Thirty Capital Ships came to the Spit-head.

Edward Mosely, Esquire of Lancashire Knighted.

Edinburgh Castle deliverd up, by the Duke of Gourdon.

Spit-head.

Londonderry made another advantageous Sally.

Major General Kirk came to the Lough before Londonderry.

Keyseawreart surrendered by the French to the Duke of Brandenburgh.

London went in a Body to take the Oaths at Westminster Hall.

The Parliament of Scotland met, and passed an Act to ascertain King William's
Authority.

William went to the Parliament at Westminster, and passed Ten Acts.

William's Proclamation to offer one Hundred Pound to discover either Sir Adam
Blair, or Doctor Robert Gray, for dispersing King James's Declaration.

John Studer was executed at Kingston for deserting His Majesty's Service.

William went to the House of Lords and made a Speech to the Parliament.

Sweden's Envoy had Audience.

Scotland to take away the Supremacy over Ecclesiastical Affairs.

James Ermendenger made Master of their Majesty's Hand-Guns.

A Plot discovered to have fired Edinburgh, and to have destroyed the Estates,
on the Eight instant, on which discovery about Forty Persons were secured.

Pembroke had Audience of the States of Holland.

Argile-shire in Scotland, from Carrick fergus.

William called by Writ to sit as Barons in the House of Lords, Charles Lord
Dursley, and Robert Lord Viscount Lisle, who took their places.

The Protestants at Inniskilling by a Sally beat a Convoy of four hundred, and
took two Firkins of money, and fifteen Wagons of Ammunition and Provisions.



Robert Serle Esquire appointed to be Consul of Leghorne.

Schomberg left White Hall in order to his journey to Chester, toward his
Relief of Ireland.

Schomberg came to Chester, being received with great respect, next day viewed
the ground where the Camp was to be.

Plymouth, which came from Ireland.

Scotland, was touched with the Scepter.



Anne of Denmark was brought to Bed of a Son, and on the Twenty seventh was
Christened by the name of William, by the Bishop of London at Hampton Court,
where his Majesty declared him Duke of Gloucester.

William passed nine Acts of Parliament.

Salt Petre.

Martin Wiscomb made Consul of Cadiz, and Saint Mary's.

Londonderry in Ireland was relieved after it was brought to that extremity,
that five hundred ninety one Bombs had been shot into the Town, and six
thousand dyed for want of Provisions, and five thousand fighting men left in
it; the same night the Duke of Berwick with King James's Forces raised the
Siege, and went away burning all places they left behind.

Scotland betwixt General Mackay, and the Lord Dundee, where the latter was
killed.

Scotland Adjourned to the eighth of October.

Pope Innocent XI. dyed in the 79th year of his Age, and was the sixth buried
at Saint Peter's Church at Rome, after he had lain three days in the Church for
public view.

Torrington with the Fleet nigh the Isle of Silly, designed for the Coast of
Ireland.

Highlake to Londonderry.

Launceston in Cornwall, did present an Address to King William, being the
first of any County of England.

Schomberg set Sail from Highlake, and on the thirteenth landed at Bangor (in
the North of Ireland) with the English Forces.

Waldeck, with the English, and Dutch Forces, and Marshall d'Humieres with the
French, where near two thousand of the latter were killed.

Dunkell in Scotland.

William Forester, and James Forbes, Esqs; and Clerks of the Green-cloth, were
Knighted at Hampton Court.

Francis Blake of Ford Castle, Knighted at Hampton Court.

Carrick fergus in Ireland surrendered to Duke Schomberg after four days Siege.

The North Male Robbed nigh Newington; in Middlesex.

Walker, late Governor of Londonderry, waited on their Majesty's at Hampton
Court, where the King presented him five Thousand pound as a Reward.

The Earl of Levins is made Governor of Edinburgh Castle.

The Earl of Torrington with the Fleet at Torbay.

Walker late Governor of Londonderry, waited on King William at Hampton
Court, and presented an Address.

Chester Male Robbed betwixt Highgate, and Whe^stone.

d. in the pound.

Hamilton sworn of his Majesty's Privy Council at White Hall.

Edward Smith Esquire appointed Consul for the Canary Islands.

East-land Fleet of 34 Sail passed by Weymouth.

October the 19th following.

Dutch Ambassadors had their Audience of leave.

John Holt, Lord Chief Justice of England, sworn of the Privy Council.

Thomas Pilkington continued Lord Mayor of London for the ensuing year.

The King left White Hall toward his journey for New Market.

Torrington Sailed out of Torbay to the Spit-head.

New River Water.

The University of Cambridge waited on King William at New Market.

The King dined at New Market.

Bonn taken by the Duke of Brandenburgh after 55 days being blocked up, and 26
days close Siege.

William returned from Cambridge, and New Market to Hampton Court.

Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, Doctor Patrick, Bishop of Chichester,
Doctor Ironside Bishop of Bristol, were Consecrated at the Bishop of London's
Chapel at Fulham, by the Bishop of London, Bishop of St. Asaph, and Bishop of
Rochester.

Westminster, where King William made a Speech to them.

Portugal was brought to Bed of a Son.

London by the Irish Protestants the Anniversary for the deliverance from the
Massacre in 1641.

William was made free of the Grocers Company, and on the presenting his
Freedom Ralph Box Esquire was Knighted.

George Davis made Consul of Naples.

Richard Lord Coot made Earl of Earls of Bellomont in Ireland.

Falmouth a French Vessel taken going to Ireland, with 4000 Arms, and Powder,
and Officers.

Danes, Sailed by Hull for Scotland.

Spanish Flanders had his Audience.

Thomas Kirk Esquire made Consul of Genoua.

The Danish Forces arrived at Hull.

l. for apprehending of Edmund Ludlow.

Lambert Blackwell Esquire made Consul of Leghorne.

Walter Doleman Esquire made Consul of Alicant in Spain.

l. to discover the Person that offered an Indignity to King William's Picture
in Guild Hall.

Thomas Papillion, Simon Ma^ne, John Agur, Humphrey Ails, and James How were
appointed Commissioners for the Victualing their Majesty's Navy.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF Persons, Places, and Things, etc. mentioned in the Historians
Guide, etc.
To this little Book an Alphabetical Table was wanting: To prevent the swelling
of the Book, all contracting possible was to be used; so that you have often
but one word for Place, and Person; and sometimes by Name, othertimes by Title:
In the main I hope it will be useful.

A
ABbington, 12, 148. Abbot, 6, 11. Acts of Parliament, 199, 200, 201, 202, 204,
205, 206, 207. Adderton Heath. 22. Address, 196, 197, 198, 200, 203, 204.
Admiral, 159. Admiral Herbert, 202, 203, 204, 205, 207. Admiral Almonde, 207.
Admiralty, 116, 117, 182, 200. Agur, 213. St. Alban's, 41, 45, 80, 93.
Albemarle, 41, 58, 55, 59, 61, 76, 77, 151, 189, 191, 206, 207. Aldermen, 197,
193. Aldern, 28. Aldgate, 3. Alford, 119. Alisbury, 174. Allarm, 196.
Allegiance, 3, 201. Allen, 49, 50, 75. Allington, 10. Alum, 3. Allybone, 194.
Ambassadors, 139, 148, 166, 167, 168, 169, 171, 172, 173, 175, 176, 178, 179,
182, 183, 192, 193, 196, 197, 202, 203, 204, 206, 207, 209, 211. Amboyna, 7.
America, 78, 192. Andrews, 34, 107. Anglesey, 146. Anjou, 156. Annasophia, 182.
Queen Anne, 6. L. Anne, 12, 15, 92, 111, 135. Anstruther, 10. Appleby, 23.
Appleford, 23. Apprentices, 60, 137, 149. L. Arrabella, 5. Argier, 45, 49, 73,
75, 78, 80, 82, 95, 118, 139, 140, 144. Arlington, 86, 93, 165, 171. Argyle,
12, 42, 43, 44, 196, 170, 204. Argyle-shire, 208. Armagh, 37. Armin, 24.
Arminian, 7. Arms, 197. Armstrong, 160. Army, 13, 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 43, 106.
Arnold, 120. Arthur, 103. Artillery, 4, 156, 160, 163. Arundel, 7, 8, 11, 24,
25, 149, 150. Ascough, 59, 67. Ashburnham, 207. Ashby, 205. Ashenden, 135.
Ashurst, 190. Astly, 29. Aston 35, 104. Atkins, 116. Attorney Genesis 200, 205.
Aubig^ey, 19, 20. Auburn, 23. Ails, 213.
B.
Bacon, 6, 8. Bail, 122, 124, ib. Banbury, 19, 26, 30. Bantam, 142, 143, 145,
146. Bantry-Bay, 204. Barbados, 36, 94, 1^7. Barbary, 183. Barbones
Parliament, 36. Barnardiston, 158. Barnstable, 23, 29. Basing, 26, 29.
Basing-House, 23. Basset, 141. Bastwick, 12, 15. Bateman, 175. Bath, 2, 28, 43,
47. Bawden, 190. Baxter, 170. Beaufort, 148, 160, 165. Beaumont, 194.
Beddingfield, 102. Bedford, 18, 23. Bedlow, 101, 105, 125, 129. Beeston, 24,
29. Belgrade, 194. Bellasis, 51, 58, 63. Bellingham, 10. Belvoir, 20, 29.
Bennet, 46, 148. Ber^ly, 15. Berkley, 77, 111, 141, 147. Berkshire, 74. Berry,
110, 145, 201, 209. Berty, 29. Berwick, 13, 31, 32, 184, 186, 192, 194. Best,
162. Bethel, 126. Beverley, 18, 23. Bible Engl. 3, 4. Biddleford, 23. ^^^hops,
15, 16, 17, 19, 47, 180. 192. Bisse, 117. Black-friars, 6. Black Rod, 16, 150.
Blake, 36, 210. Blazing-Star, 50. Blackwell, 212. Blood, 80, 124. Bodman, 118.
Bodwin, 20. Bohemia, 4, 11, 43, 45. Bolton, 25, 29, 201. Bon^^ires, 119, 1 48 1
174. Bonne, 211. Booth, 38, 148. Bows, 159. Box, 212. Boyce, 103. Brabant,
164. Brackethall, 199. Braddon, 157. Bradford, 22. Bradshaw, 33, 38, 147.
Bramhall, 47. Brandenburgh, 109, 200. Brandford, 19, 206. Brandon, 25, 72, 109.
Bredah, 7, 39, 64, 65, 66. Brent, 199. Brereton, 30. Breast, 26. Bridgewater,
21, 28, 63. Brill, 20. Bristol, 8, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 116, 165, 201.
Britain, 2, 145. British Seas, 11. Brook, 2, 20. Brown, 33. Bruges, 98.
Buccaniers, 161. Buckingham, 8, 9, 66, 81, 86, 119, 124, 136, 185. Buckle, 137.
Budah, 179. Bulstrode, 172. Burford, 25, 34. Burleigh, 26, 32. Burlington, 26.
Burnett, 200, 202. Burningham, 20. Burton, 12, 15, 22. Bushel, 35. Butler, 5,
163, 189. Byron, 25, 30.
C
Cadiz, 7, 209. Caermarthen, 204. Calvert, 6. Cambrey, 96. Cambridge, 42, 62,
64, 81, 97, 119, 138, 142, 144, 211. Canary, 67. Canterbury, 18. Capel, 33, 34.
Cards, 163. Care, 117. Carey, 26, 125. Cargile, 137. Carickfergus, 210.
Carisbroke, 32. Carlisle, 28, 32. Carnarvan, 24, 30. Carr, 4, 68, 8^, 127.
Carribee, 60. Carteret, 115, 137, 190. Cartwright, 179. Casor, 206. Castle,
96. Castlehaven, 10. Castlemain, 109, 112, 12^, 129. Q. Catharine, 45, 46. L.
Catharine, 82. Catharine Laura, 94. Cavendish, 21. Caversham, 31. Cawdron, 157.
Celier, 112, 115, 123, 126, Chalgrove, 22. Chaloner, 22. Chapel Windsor, 23.
Chapman, 195, 201. K. Charles I. 7, 14, 17, 19. K. Charles II. 33, 35, 69, 165.
Pr. Charles-James, 8, 9. Pr. Charles, 1, 45, 6, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 27, 28.
Royal Charles, 89. Charleton, 89. Charlotte Mary, 147. Charter, 7, 148, 15^,
160, 161, 162, 163, 164. Charter House, 4. Chatham, 64, 83, 192, 194. Chatwell,
25. Cheapside, 21. Chelsey-College, 3. Chepstow, 32. Chester, 29, 192, 20^.
Chesterfield, 114. Chichester, 20. K's Children, 35. Chinner, 22.
Chipping-norton, 25. Cholmondley, 20, 203. Christ-Church, 82. Christian, 124.
Sr. Christophers, 81. Churchill, 149, 203. Cirencester, 20, 195, 202.
Clarendon, 43, 66, 68, 103, 122, 165, 175, 183. Clark, 163 Clayton, 118.
Cleaveland, 63. Clergy of Land. 199, 207. Clerk, 2. Clifford, 56, 62, 71, 88.
Cobham, 2. Coffee-house, 95. C^in new, 34. Colchester, 32, 52. Coleman, 100,
101. Colerain, 202. College, 136, 137, 138. College Jesuits, 103. Cologne, 93.
Comet, 5, 129, 146. Commissioners, 63, 199, 200, 202, 203, 204, 205 213.
Common Pleas, 205. Commons, 203, Common Prayer, 26. Commotions about Church
Ceremonies, 12. Could, 95. Condon, 62. Coningsmark, 141. Consecration, 166.
Convention, 198, 201. Convention-men, 23, 198. Convocation, 43, 201. Conway,
113, 132. Coot, 45, 201. Copredy, 26. Corse, 29. Cornish, 126, 174, Cornwallis,
45. Coronation, 43, 167. Corporation, 45, Cotterell, 181, 183. Cotton, 170.
Covenant, 21, 24, 43. Covenanters, 13. Covent Garden, 10. Coventry, 13, 49, 52,
60, 66, 86. Council, 116, 138. Privy Council, 106, 131, 179, 184. Council of
Peers, 14. Council of State, 34. Courland, 114. Court, 2, 159. H. Court of
Justice, 33. Court Officers, 165. Cowley, 66. Craven, 133. Creation of Honors,
84. Crew, 24. Cromwell, 29 34, 36, 37. Crown, 80. Culpeper, 123. Cumberland,
202. Cunningham, 201. Curtis, 116, 158. Cuttings, 52. Cutler, 141.
D.
Dalrimple, 204. Danby, 105, 106, 107, 135, 158, 204. Danes, 212. Dangerfield,
112, 127, 170. Daniel, 154. Danvors, 164. Darcy, 198. Dare, 117, 119.
Dartmouth, 29, 149, 159, 197. Dashwood, 154. St. David, 63. Davis, 67, 212.
Dawson, 123. Dean, 108, 109, 117, 124. Deans, etc. 16. Declaration, 134, 192,
194, 197, 198, 199, 205, 206. Deering, 115. D'Estrees, 90, 99. Defiance, 56.
Delamere, 170, 176. Denbigh, 8, 31. Denmark, 3, 5, 7, 8, 41, 62, 74, 75, 153,
154, 164, 166, 178, 183, 186, 187, 189, 193, 194, 197, 202, 209. Dennington,
26, 29. Derby, 36, 195. De Roche, 61. Desborough, 38, 57. Devises, 29.
Devonshire, 202. De Wi^t, 87. Digby, 29. Diggs, 8. Disnie, 169. Doleman, 212.
Doncaster, 18, 20. Don John, 111. Dorchester, 4, 23, Dorislaus, 34. Dorset, 3.
Dover, 18, 40. Dover Cliff, 115. Douglas, 59. Downs, 13, 201, 207. Downing, 48,
82. Drapers-Hall, 79. Drummond, 164. Dryden, 114. Dublin, 119, 200, 202. Du
Bois, 151. Dugdale, 102, 103. Dudley, 30. Dunbar, 35. Duncomb, 64, 88. Dundee,
209. Dunkell, 210. Dunkirk, 31, 37, 46. Dunster, 30. Duppa, 180. Duras, 88.
Durham, 14, 175, 176. Dursley, 28. Dutch, 47, 50, 52. Dutch-Fight, 36.
Duttoncolt, 159. Du Vall, 76.
E.
Earl Marshal, 189. Earthquake, 194. East India, 53, 67, 88, 133, 139, 162.
Edes, 176. Edgar, 72, 121. Edgcomb Mount, 29. Edghill, 19. Edinburgh, 35, 76,
113, 114, 130, 132, 164, 207, 208. Effingham, 204. Elizabeth, 133. Q. Eliz. 1.
L. Eliz. 4. Pr. Eliz. 35. Elliot, 8, 140. Ellis, 5, 129. Elmes, 193. Emperor,
5, 6, 97. Episcop^cy, 209. Ermendenger, 208. Essex, 1, 4, 10, 18, 20, 24, 25,
26, 27, 31, 43, 87. Estates Scotland, 204, 206. Evertson, 51. Euston, 87.
Exchange, 3, 14, 35, 67, 75. Exchequer, 88, 205. Excise, 23, 152. Ex^r^r, 23,
26, 27, 29, 192, 193, 195, 202. Eyles, 194.
F.
Fairfax, 28, 30, 31, 35, 117. Falmouth, 52. Fanshaw, 60. Farnham, 33.
Farrington, 30, 135. Fast, 206. Faulconberg, 74, 202. Ferdinando, 5.
Fetherstonhaugh, 36. Feversham, 28, 126, 194, 196. Fienes, 24. Fight, 210.
Finsh, 92, 95. Fire, 61, 62, 70, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85, 95, 104, 106, 109, 117,
132, 148, 151, 159. Fireworks, 3. Fish great, 113. Fishing, 3. Fishmonger,
125. Fitch, 4. Fitzharding, 70. Fitzharris, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136. Flanders,
98. Fleer, 11, 40, 42, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 64, 65,
72, 73, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 108, 110, 195, 197, 205, 207, 210, 211, 212.
Fleetwood, 38. Florencce, 1. Fly, 60. Forbes, 210. Forester, 210. Foulk, 104.
Fox, 143. Foy, 29. France, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 30, 42. Freedom, 94. Freeman, 132.
French, 1, 36, 58, 95, 97, 98, 109, 110, 131, 139, 184. French K. 55. Friars,
20. Frost, 157. Froud, 192.
G.
Gadbury, 112, 115, 117. Gage, 26, 27. Gainsborough, 23, 148. Gallaway, 12.
Game, 187. Garrisons, 115. Garter, 85, 96, 126, 131, 133, 134, 156, 167, 169,
170, 171, 185, 186, 202. Gascoign, 109, 117. Gauden, 67. Gaunt, 28. Gayland,
60. Germany, 12. Gerrard, 120, 175, 193. Ghent, 95. Gibbons, 35. Gibbs, 148.
Giles, 121, 122, 123, 124. Glascock, 105. Glemham, 28. Gloucester, 14, 23, 40,
41, 144, 209. Godfrey, 100. Godolphin, 159, 161. Godstow, 28. Goodenough, 146,
170. Goods Prohib. 116. Goran, 203. Goring, 32, 34. Gowry, 2. Grana, 142, 143.
Grand Seignior, 191. Grafton, 24, 130, 140, 145, 149, 155, 187, 192, 196.
Grant, 185. Grantham, 18, 20. Gravesend, 170. Gray, 36, 170. Great Seal, 24,
30. Greenvill, 40. Greenwich, 17, 18. Gregory, 105. Greencloth, 21^.
Grocers-hall, 17. Guernsey, 36. Guild Hall, 11, 40, 82. Guilford, 172. Guinne,
114, 197. Guinney, 50. Gunfleet, 64, 65. Guns, 139.
H.
Hague, 40. Haines, 37. Hales, 80. Halifax, 109, 147, 165, 198. Hambden, 18,
22, 158, 175. Hamilton, 13, 25, 147, 201, 211. Hamilton Hill, 28, 34, 189.
Hampton Court, 17, 31. Hanover, 130, 133. Harboard, 200. Harcourt, 107. Harman,
65, 70. Harris, 116. Hartfordshire, 199. Harvey, 37, 72. Harwich, 93, 206.
Hatton, 45. Hawarden, 24. Hawkers, 110. Head, 196. St. Hellens, 61, 74.
Henrietta, 26, 42, 73, 76. Pr. Henry, 2, 4. Herbert, 155, 158, 173, 174.
Hereford, 28, 29. Hertford, 18, 24. Hewit, 37, 203. Hewson, 38. Hide, 35, 113.
Hide-Park, 43. Highway, 135, 166. Highway-men, 150, 163. Highworth, 28. Hill,
105. Holderness, 149. Holland, 34, 48, 68, 82, 83, 92, 93, 124. Hollaway, 152,
155, 159. Hollis, 58, 59, 63, 64, 66. Holmby, 31. Holmes, 50, 51, 60, 67, 83,
109. Holstein, 96. Holt, 211. Hone, 153. Hopton, 20, 25, 29. Mr. of the Horse,
115. Hotham, 18, 23, 26, 27. Howard, 4, 15, 75, 91, 136, 198. Howell, 124.
Howley, 22. Hull, 18. Hungarford, 26. Hungary, 12. Huntington, 18, 28, 150,
175. Huntley, 9. Hurst, 33.
I.
Jamaica, 46, 126, 128. James, 44. K. James, I. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 15. K. James,
II. 62, 196, 200. Royal James, 79. St. James's, 33, 49. Jeffereys, 120, 128,
155, 161, 173, 179, 180, 196, 203. Jenkins, 117, 120, 173. Jenner, 155.
Jerison, 128. Jersey, 36. Jesuits, 100, 103, 108, 109, 110, 118, 121, 136.
Jifford, 193. Indemnity, 41. Ingolsby, 39. Inniskilling, 208. Inns of Court,
11. Inundation, 191. Johnson, 47, 181. Joice, 31. Jones, 155. Jordan, 52. Ipre,
98. Ipswich, 73, 139. Ireland, 10, 17, 43, 47, 67, 77, 84, 113, 191. Irish,
199, 202, 208. Ironside, 212. Isabella, 111. Isis, 30. Isle of Wight, 33, 35.
Judges, 15, 17, 121, 130, 176, 177, 178, 184, 205. Julian, 156. Juxon, 12, 47.
K.
Keck, 199. Keeling, 152. Kelsey, 57. Kendall, 64, 202. Kennedy, 178. Kent, 32.
Keysearweart, 207. King, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 41, 46, 47,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 60, 71, 73, 75, 78, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84, 90, 91, 93,
100, 104, 105, 109, 110, 111, 116, 118, 119, 121, 122, 125, 126, 127, 131, 133,
134, 135, 138, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 149, 150, 151, 154, 155, 158, 161, 162,
164, 171, 173, 178, 179, 181, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194. Doctor
King, 176. Kingsale, 128. King's Bench, 156, 205. Kingstone, 32. Kirk, 135,
207, 212. Knight, 142, 179, 181. Kniveton, 24.
L.
Lamb, 9. Lambert, 38, 39, 46. Lampleugh, 195. Landsdown, 165. Landsdown-hill,
22. Lane, 194. Langdale, 27, 32. Langhorn, 100, 101, 102, 108, 109. Langport,
28. Lapely, 24. Latham, 25. Latimer, 31. Laud, 11, 16, 27. Lauderdale, 76, 77,
84, 147. Launceston, 29, 210. Lawson, 49, 52. Lee, 153. Leeds, 20. Legate, 4.
Leg, 19, 26, 142. Leicester, 16, 28. Leighton, 10, 102. Lenox, 37. Lenthall,
46. Lesly, 13. Lesthithiel, 26. L'Estrange, 27, 132, 167. Letter, 198, 201,
206. K's Letter, 39. Levins, 112, 132, 211. Levison, 30. Libellers, 95. Liberty
of Conscience, 184. Lord Lieutenants, 201. Lilbourn, 12, 36. Lime, 136. Linch,
80, 140. Lincoln, 14. Lindsey, 9, 11, 19, 62, 145. Lisbon, 46. Lisle, 33, 172,
208. Litchfield, 20, 21, 29, 30. Littleton, 28, 77, 116. Liverpool, 201.
Lizzard, 29. Lockhart, 201. Lockier, 34. London, 19, 21, 24, 31, 32, 38, 40,
46, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54, 55, 60, 62, 67, 82, 111, 112, 141, 143, 146, 148, 150,
151, 179, 190, 194, 199. Bishop London, 95. Loyal London, 59. London Bridge,
10. Londonderry, 206, 207, 209, 210. Longford, 25. Lords, 35, 106, 158, 184,
188, 197, 198. Lorrain, 98. Lort, 45. Love, 35. Lovelace, 195. Lowdon, 14.
Lucas, 33, 200. Ludlow, 30, 212. Lumley, 126, 20^. Lynne, 2^. Lynne Regis, 160.
M.
Macclesfield, 171. Macmahone, 26. Macquire, 27. Maldenhead, 31. Maidstone, 3^.
Maile, 177, 178, 186, 210, 211. Malbanch, 203. Malmsbury, 20. Man, 36.
Manchester, 71, 80. Manifesto, 195. Mansfield, 7. Marches of Wales, 44, 45.
Mardike, 36. Marlborough, 9, 19, 52, 203. Marriage, 7, 36. Martins-Fort, 8.
Marston, 33. Marston-Moor, 26. Mary, 95, 97, 169, 183. Q. Mary, 42, 46, 52, 75,
76. Pr. Mary, 16. Lady Mary, 10. Massacre, 196, 212. Massey, 27. Pr. Maurice,
25, 27, 3^. May, 135. Maynard, 88, 199. Mayor, 138, 193, 194, 195, 201, 203,
211, 213. Mazarine, 43. Meclenburgh, 98. Melvill, 206. Members Five, 17.
Memorials, 4. Mere, 57. Messina, 98. Mew, 163. St. Michael, 75. St. Michael's
Mount, 29. Middleton, 21, 123, 161. Militia, 17. Millenaries, 2. Milton, 203.
Mings, 52, 55, 56, 59. Modena, 92, 119, 187. Monday, 90, 91, 92. Monk, 38, 39,
40. Monmouth, 68, 72, 77, 90, 91, 93, 108, 110, 111, 114, 156, 169, 170, 203.
Mons, 99. Montague, 7, 41, 82, 203* Montgomery, 204. Montross, 28, 29, 31, 35,
43. Moor, 125, 138, 139, 150, 151. Moorfields, 5. Moorlanders, 21. Mordant, 3,
38, 203. Morland, 147. Morley, 39, 58. Morocco, 75, 140, 141, 145, 146.
Morton-Henmarsh, 28. Moseley, 207. Mount Edgcomb, 29. Mounthermer, 203.
Mulgrave, 93, 114, 123, 125, 171, 174. Munster, 57. Musgrave, 164.
N.
Napier, 132. N^ples, 193. (...), ^03. (...), 108. (...) ^8. (...), 158. (...),
13, ^^. Nevill, 108. Newark, 18, 25, 30, 73. Newberry, 14, 24, 26. New Castle,
13, 14, 26, 30, 193. New England, 146. Newgate, 206. New Market, 18, 31.
Newport, 1, 56, 71, 88. News, 115. Nicholas, 75. Nimeguen, 95, 99. Noel, 142.
Nonconformists, 46, 69, 139. Nonsuch, 53, 55, 73. Norfolk, 167, 189. North,
129, 147, 149, 150, 154, 172, 173. Northampton, 9. Northumberland, 3.
North-West-Passage, 75. Norway, 53. Norwich, 34, 206. Nottingham, 19, 135, 149,
159, 160, 162. Noy, 11. Nuncio, 190.
O.
Oath, 37, 207. Oatland, ^1. Oats, 99, 100, 103, 104, 113, 134, 138, 140, 147,
159, 160, 167, 168. Oates-men, 163. Ockingham, 202. Office Kingly, 34. Ogle,
^8. Old Bailey, 41, 56, 70, 103, 116, 153, 173. St. Omers, 96. Pr. Orange, 16,
18, 41, 42, 78, 79, 97, 99, 195, 197, 198, 199. Order, 19^, 195, 196, 197, 199,
206, 213. Ordinance, 196. Orleance, 78. Ormond, ^1, 44, 70, 75, 79, 144, 146,
148, 165, 193, 202. Osl^rn, 84, 87, 90. Ossory, 59, 61, 90, 117, 120, 125.
Overbury, 5. Oughtred, 40. Owen, 34. Oxford, 7, 19, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
54, 55, 74, 75, 133. Oxly, 106.
P.
Packer, 157. Packet-Boat, 164. Padbury, 22. Pr. Palatine, 4, 6, 42, 99, 125,
126. Pamphlet, 121, 131, 150, 158, 159, 160, 162, 163, 169, 170, 178. Paper,
185. Papillion, 151, 162. Papists, 114, 127, 130, 141. Pardon, 39, 177, 194.
Paris, 70. Parliament, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
27, 32, 33, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54,
55, 56, 57, 61, 62, 63, 65, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81,
84, 86, 87, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105,
106, 107, 108, 109, 111, 114, 116, 119, 120, 121, 124, 125, 127, 130, 131, 133,
140, 168, 170, 171, 173, 175, 176, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 211,
212, Parma, 127, 129. Parre, 11. Paston, 194. Patrick, 212. St. Patrick, 63.
St. Paul's, 10. Payton, 115, 117, 122, 130, 131, 132. Peak, 80. Pedlars, 159,
181. Pierce, 78. Pemberton, 117, 149. Pembroke, 9, 31, 124. Pen, 37, 49.
Pendennis, 25. Pennington, 15. Penny-Post, 148. Penruddock, 37. Pensioners, 10.
Pepys, 108, 109, 117. Peterborough, 47, 93, 113, 135, 150, 167. Petition, 15,
114, 115, 116, 131, 195. Petitioners, 14. Pett, 67, 125. Philipsburgh, 96.
Phipps, 186. Picture, 140. Pilkington, 145, 201, 20^* Pitcher, 33. Plague, 1,
2, 7, 50, 62. Plate-Fleet, 205. Player, 94. Playhouse, ^. Plymouth, 26, 65,
149, 198, 206, 207, 209. Plot, 3, 100, 101, 112, 115, 128, 129, 152, 153.
Poland, 10, 112. Pollexfen, 200. Pontefract, 27, 28, 32, 34. Pope, 6, 113, 129,
210. Portland, 23, 36, 51, 202. Portsmouth, 19, 192, 204, 205, 206, 207.
Portugal, 28, 108, 109, 113, 138, 212. Post Office, 154, 172. Powle, 198.
Powys, 113, 117, 122. Poyer, 32. Prance, 102, 105, 178. President, 201.
Preston, 173, 198. Prin, 12, 15. Prince, 59. Pritchard, 147, 155, 194.
Privy Seal, 175, 184. Prizes French, 206, 212. Proclamation, 118, 191, 192,
194, 195, 198, 199, 200, 201, 204, 205, 206, 208, 209, 211, 212. Protestation,
16. Purbeck, 102. Purse, 35. Pirates, 3.
Q.
Queen, 7, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 47, 53, 54, 167, 189, 193, 194.
Queen Mother, 12. Q. Dowager, 197. Q. Mary, 201, 203. Q. Christiana, 202.
R.
Rabble, 196. Radcliff, 154. Radley, 124. Radnor, 30, 109, 112. Ragland, 31.
Rainsborough, 33. Rainsford, 138. Rawleigh, 5. Rawlinson, 199. Raymond, 116.
Read, 199. Reading, 21, 106. Rebellion, 17. Receiver-General, 201. Recusants,
69. Redwood, 105. Regicides, 41. Reresby, 143. Resolution, 68. Revenue, 199.
Reynolds, 34. Rich, 147. Richards, 201. Richardson, 104. Richmond, 88, 91, 193.
Rioters, 151. Rippon, 14. Roberts, 74. Robinson, 40, 62, 92. Rochell, 9.
Rochellers, 8, 17. Rochester, 4, 86, 161, 165. Roehampton, 71. Romans, 12.
Rome, 202. Rosewell, 162. Rosse, 201. Rossiter, 27. Rouse, 136, 138, 153.
Routon Heath, 29. Roxborough, 12. Royston, 18, 31. Rumbold, 169. Rumsey, 15^.
Rundway Down, ^3. Rupert, 12, 19, 21, 2^, 26, 27, 3^, 49, 5^, 5^, 58, 59, 61,
^5, 148, 149. Ruthen, 29. Russell, 153, 154. Russia, 46. Rye-House, 152, 153.
S.
Sackvile, 105. Sacrament, 197. Salisbury, 36, ^3, 103. Saltash, 20, 29.
Saltpeter, 209. Salt Water fresh, 151. Sandal, 29. Sandwich, 56, 58, 68, 73,
86, 200. Sanguine, 4. Saniein, 93. Sarum, 197, 198, 200. Savile, 126. Saunders,
150. Savoy, 44, 56, 96, 110, 195, 141. Sawyer, 132. Saxon, 178. Scanderoon,
207. Scarborough, 28, 193. Schomberg, 202, 206 209. Scilly, 31. Scotland, 10,
17, 28, 2^, 35, 42, 47, 62, 64, 108, 109, 116, 119, 122, 12^, 12^, 128, 1^6,
138, ^^^, 16^, 1^^, 166, ^^^, ^^^. (...) Scroggs, 116, 136. Seamen, 98, 2^6.
Secretary, 206. Sedgmoor, 198. Sedley, 200. Seely, 63. Seneff, 93. Serle, 208.
Sergeants, 121, 156, 177, 193, 204. Seymour, 89, 1^5, 129, 131. Shadwell, 79.
Shaftesbury, 87, 88, 111, 1^6, 137, 138, 13^. Shafto, 192. Shandois, 132.
Sharp, 107. Sheerness, 66, 71, 75. Sheers, 114. Sheppard, 15^. Sheppey, 126.
Sherbourn, 28. Sheriffs, 161, 201. Ship Money, 11, 12, 15. Shipton, 127.
Shorter, 194. Shovell, 205. Shrewsbury, 27. Shudley, 20. Shute, 145. Sidney,
113, 155, 203. Silkworms, 3. Sindercomb, 37. Sion, 31. Skeleton, 194.
Skinners-Hall, 121. Slawell, 150. Slingsby, 37. Smith, 52, 56, 57, 67, 96, 99,
114, 116, 134, 145. Smyrna, 83. Soldiers, 179, 184. Solicitor General, 200,
205. Sommerset, 4. Southampton, 2, 43, 64, 88. Southold Bay, 61. Southwell, 30.
Spain, 2, 4, 7, 10, 41, 69, 84, 96, 124. Spalato, 5, 6. Spaniards, 1, 5, 6.
Speak, 157. Speech, 199, 200, 208. Speak, 181. Spensor, 188. Sports, 5. Sprag,
52, 65, 78, 83, 9^. Stafford, 122, 130. Stamford, 18, 176, 177. Stapleton, 137.
Stately, 101. Statue, 35. Staunton, 165. Stetin, 98. Stevins, 180.
Stillingfleet, 212. Stopford, 25, Stow, 29. Stowell, 30, 45, 117. Strafford,
13, 15, 16, 17, 94. Straights, 74, 78. Stratford, 5. Stratton, 21. Street, 162.
Strickland, 192. Stuart, 19, 25. Sturton, 3. Stutcomb, 25. Suffolk, 198.
Summers, 205. Sunderland, 24, 93, 104, 147, 150, 175, 195. Suns three, 26.
Supremacy, 208. Surrey, 32. Swansie, 98. Sweeden, 7, 10, 60, 63, 69, 87, 104.
Sweepstakes, 56. Sylvius 118. Synod, 5, 6, 14.
T
Tabago, 96. Tadcaster, 19. Talbot, 57. Tamworth, 22, 28. Tangier, 45, 46, 106,
109, 113, 123, 127, 128, 130, 131, 135, 156. Tasborough, 105, 122. Taunton, 21.
Tempest, 118. Temple, 71, 125. Term, 33, 40, 55. Texell, 51. Teys, 206. Thames,
37, 68. Thanksgiving, 205. Theater, 74. Theobalds, 13, 18. Throne, 198, 201.
Thwing, 118. Thynne, 141. Tichbourn, 122. Tiddiman, 52. Tide, 71, 111, 142,
145. Tiltyard, 62. Tinmouth, 32. Tirconnell, 180, 183. Tiroen, 3, 114, 130,
131, 139. Tiveot, 48. Toleration, 205. Tomkins, 23. Tompson, 34, 128. Tongue,
25, 99, 100, 127, 140. Torbay, 65, 195, 207. Torrington, 29, 207. Tower, 38,
106, 114, 200. Tower Hill, 44. Tower-street, 34. Townesend, 149. Trade, 68, 95,
132. Traquare, 13. Treaty, 2. Treason, 122, 138, 139, 146, 152, 153, 170, 174,
175. Treasurer, 64, 88, 134, 182, 201. Treasury, 106, 202. Treby, 131, 200,
205. Trenchard, 205. Trevor, 71, 73, 85, 168. Tripoly, 46, 94. K's Trial, 33.
Tunis, 46. Turbervile, 128, 140. Turkey, 120, 132. Turner, 5, 48, 80, 152.
Tuscany, 74. Tweddell, 74. Twine, 48. Tyburn, 26, 42, 44, 45, 77, 101, 104.
V.
Valentiennes, 96. Vane, 70, 102. Venetians, 5. Venice, 72. Venner, 42. Vere,
77. Vernatti, 176. Vienna, 153, 154. Villiers, 32. Viner, 85, 194. Virginia, 3,
95, 156, 204. Vi^onne, 95. Volunteers, 206. Votes, 32. Vratz, 141, 142. Usher,
37. Utbert, 63. Uxbridge, 27.
W.
Wakefield, 20, 21. Wakeman, 100, 109. Walcot, 153, 155. Wales, 161, 193, 194,
195. Waller, 23, 25, 26, 119, 129. Wallingford, 30. War, 196, 205. Warcup, 163.
Ward, 198. Warder, 25. Warder Castle, 21. Warspight, 59. Warwick, 34.
Wentworth, 9. West, 15^. West India, 37, 88. Westminster, 197, 198. Weston,
116. Weymouth, 23. Whitaker, 102, 136, 148, 181. Whitehall, 13. Whitfield, 117.
Wiche, 141, 203. Wightman, 4. Wildman, 45. K. William, 201, 204, 207, 208, 211,
212. Williams, 7, 111, 132. Williamson, 83, 94. Willoughby, 60, 200. Wilmore,
137, 144. Wilson, 138. Winchelsea, 74. Winchester, 202. Wind, 45. Windebank,
15, 27, 28. Windsor, 17, 33, 34, 193, 194, 196. Windsor Chapel, 23. Wine, 154.
Winton, 33. Wiscomb, 209. Witherley, 162. Witness, 120, 121, 132. Wood, 114.
Woodmongers, 68. Woodstock, 30, 202. Wool, 187. Woolcards, 99. Woollen, 177.
Worchester, 19, 25, 30, 35. Wormleyton, 29. Wright, 159, 162, 206. Writs, 33.
Wymondley, 149.
Y.
Yarmouth, 100, 183. Yarum, 20. York, 2, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 26, 30, 32, 45,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 58, 6^, 66, 71, 72, 73, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 85,
92, 93, 97, 107, 110, 111, 112, 117, 118, 119, 126, 127, 142, 143, 146, 195.
BOOKS lately Printed.
1. BRitain's Glory, and England's Bravery: Wherein is showed the degrees of
Honor, from the Prince to the Peasant, with the Honor of the Nobles, and
Privilege of the Commons; the proper Places, and the Precedence of all Persons
from the Throne to the Bondsman; as also the Honor of Arms, the Power of
Heralds, Significations of Charges and Coat Armor, a Dictionary explaining
the Terms of Heraldry, and an account of the Orders of Knighthood all
Christendom over, etc. price bound, 1s. 6d. 2. A Discourse of Schism, for the
use of humble Christians. By Thomas Wight of Little Henden in Berkshire, in 40.
price 6d. 3. A Discourse of Prayer. By G. Budgell, Rector of Symondbury in
Dorsetshire, in 40. price 6d. 4. Peppa, a new Novell, with the Songs all
exactly set to two Voices, in 120. price bound 1s. 6d. 5. Family Herbal, or the
Treasure of Health; showing how to preserve Health, and long Life, by the rules
to be observed in eating and drinking, in 120. price bound 1s. 6d. 6. A Modern
view of such parts of Europe that have lately been, and now are the places of
great Transactions, viz. Italy, France, Germany, Lorrain, Spain, etc. with
Curious Remarks of Antiquity, in 80. price bound 2s. 6d. 7. Compendium
Geographicum, or a more exact, plain, and easy Introduction to Geography than
any yet extant, after the latest discoveries, and alterations; with an
Alphabetical Table of the Ancient Names of Places, and another of the Modern.
By P. Chamberlain, of the Inner Temple, price 1s. 8. The Buccaniers of America,
in 2 Volumes complete, in 40. price 10s.
FINIS.

