THE HISTORY Of the late WAR with the TURKS, During the Siege of VIENNA, And
the Great Victory obtained against them, at the raising the SIEGE. TOGETHER,
With an Account of the underhand dealings of FRANCE in that affair.

Being the best and fullest Relation that has been yet published.

Printed at Cologn, and Reprinted at London, for H. Bonwicke, at the Red-Lion
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

A RELATION Of the present WAR WITH THE TURKS, Till the raising the Siege of
VIENNA.
THE Emperor expected in making the Peace of Nimeguen, that France would rest
contented with the advantages she had already gained in the War. But he^ happy
successes only increased her courage; for scarce had she signed the Treaty, bu^
thought of breaking it. Thi^ dealing gave no small troubl^ to the Emperor, who
behel^ himself on the other sid^ threatened by the Turks, an^ not trusting so
much to his own strength, as to believe he could at the same tim^ make head
against two suc^ Potent Enemies, he thereupo^ dispatches Count Albert Capr^ra
to the Port, with advantageous offers to obtain a continuation of the Truce,
which was between the two Empires, and now upon expiring* In the mean time the
Partisans of France took hence occasion to blame his Conduct; publishing he was
more willing to comply with the Infidels, than the King, though he might expect
from him sufficient assistance. But they took no notice at the same time, that
France would come to no agreement: But upon conditions which were not only
dishonorable to the Empire, but tended also to the utter ruin of the Emperor.
For the King of France would have approved by a Treaty all the infractions
which he had made of the Peace of Nimeguen, and moreover certain pretensions
satisfied, which I can scarce forbear terming ridiculous, were I not withheld
by the respect which is due to whatsoever comes from Crowned Heads.

Howsoever, the Emperor impatiently expected some news from Caprara, when this
Ambassador (deceived by the artifices of the Grand Vizier, who was wholly set
upon amusing him with hopes of peace, whilst he thought on nothing but War,)
advertized him he doubted not but to accomplish his business; which filled the
Emperor and the whole Court with joy.

In effect, although he willingly would have turned his Arms against this
common Enemy of Christendom, yet knowing the designs of France, which aspired
of late to the Empire, th'interest of his Family made him respect it as an
enemy far more dangerous, than the Turk could be; who at farthest expected but
one place or two, whereas the other would swallow up the whole.

A report being spread in the month of January, that the King of France would
encamp 50 Thousand men on the Saon, and almost as many on the Saar, obliged the
Emperor to secure the Rhyne. And although he had only words as yet from the
Turks, he chose rather to ungarison Hungary, than expose his Country to the
invasion of the French. Count Mansfeld, who was with the King of France from
the Emperor, had in the mean time orders to observe whatsoever past: But that
Court taking pleasure in giving every day new fears, he could send no certainer
news than what were commonly reported, to wit, that the King would carry the
War into Germany the next spring, if the Emporor granted him not whatsoever he
demanded.

Although perhaps what I now mentioned, may appear distant enough from my
subject, which is to relate the success of the War, which the Turks made with
the Emperor, yet will it not appear so to those that shall take the pains, to
consider how necessary it is to show what the Emperor had to fear on the side of
the French, to the end he may not be blamed for not immediately employing all
his forces to repel the Infidels; neither will it be amiss to take notice by
the way, that setting aside Religion, 'twas more the Emperors interest to
oppose this power than that of the Turks: Because the Establishment of the
house of France, is the undoubted ruin of the house of Austria. Howsoever the
Emperor seeing the effect was far from the hope he had conceived from the
promises of Caprara, caused new levies to be raised in all the hereditary
Provinces, and solicited the Christian Princes to enter into a confederacy
with him against this common enemy of Christendom. The King of Poland made an
offensive and defensive League with him: Several other Princes promised to
assist him, some with men, others with money, and in short, great preparations
on all hands were made for War, seeing it could not be avoided. In the mean
time it being known at Rome what passed in France, the Pope sent a Brief to the
King, wherein having given him all the qualities due to a great Prince, as
indeed he is, he exhorted him to assist the Emperor, or at least not hinder
others from doing it.

In the mean time great care was taken to fortify Waag and Raab, the keeping of
which were entrusted to the Hungarians; it being hoped, the seeing, not only
their estates, but likewise the lives of their Wives and Children were
concerned, they could not but stoutly resisit the enemy.

Comorra and Raab, being looked upon as the bulwarks of Christendom, were
carefully fortified: And it being supposed the enemy would not leave two places
of that importance behind them, to come and besiege Vi^nna, there was less care
than ought to be taken in strengthening this last place: so that when the Turks
appeared before it, the ditches were not so much as cleansed, nor the bastions
repaired. Yet both these defects were amended under the favor of the Cannon
and Muskets, which kept the Infidels from disturbing the workmen. But that
which facilitated the performance of this, was, that the enemies not being able
to bring their Cannon over the Danube, by reason of Raab, and Comorra, which
belonged to the Emperor, they needed much time to draw it by land, the ways
being broken in several places, which hindered them from planting them so soon
as their occasion required.

To mention every thing in order, I should first say, that the Emperor seeing
the Turks had set up the Horse-tayle, which is to them a signal of War, and
moreover exercised several hostilities on the frontiers, he held a Council of
War, resolving to prevent their designs. 'Twas determined in this Council, that
the Troops should speedily leave their Garrisons, and make their rendezvous a
league distant from Presburg, to march thence to Newhawsel, which was intended
to be besieged, in hope 'twould be taken before the Turks could succor it.

The Command of the Army was given to the Duke of Lorrain; for besides the
considence which the Emperor put in him, he should by this means take away all
causes of jealousy from several others, who would not have been contented, had
they been obliged to obey any one but the Emperors Brother-in-Law. In the mean
while the Duke of Lorrain, who was sick during the whole Winter, and scarce yet
fully recovered; could not come so soon to the Army, and indeed made it a month
before his arrival, which occasioned much mischief: For whilst he was
recovering from his sickness, the Bassa of Newhausel had time to fortify the
place, and to prepare himself for defense.

The Governor of Gran, who likewise might fear the Emperors Arms, took care
whereinsoever he was concerned, and agreed with the Bassa of Newhausel to send
him assistance, if he should be the first set upon, as also to receive the same
from him, if Gran chanced to be first attackt by the Christians.

Things being in this posture; when the Duke of Lorrain came to the Army, and
made the review of it in the prefence of the Emperor, Duke of Bavaria, and
several other Princes, he caused it to march between Gran and Newhausel, as if
it had been still uncertain which of these places he minded to attack. About
six leagues off both these Cities he seemed to be determined for Gran: For
having made a detachement of 6000 horse, he caused them to march on the side of
Gran, which made the Bassa of Newhausel believe that 'twas not he, whom he
designed. In the mean time to satisfy the agreement made betwixt 'em, as before
mentioned, he sent out about 2000 men of his Garrison, with orders to enter
Gran. But as soon as ever he that Commanded the detachem^nt of the Duke of
Lorrain knew they were entered, he turned short off to Newhausel, which he
invested.

The Duke of Lorrain, ravished at the news of the Garrison of Newhausel's being
thus weak'ned, hast'ned to the Town, and having fixed his Quarters, sent a
summons to the Governor to this effect, That he wondered at his obstinacy in
defending such a place which had not half men enough to keep it; and thereupon
advised him to come to a speedy agreement, otherwise he would deal with him, as
those deserve, who pertinaciously stand upon a fruitless d^fence. The Bassa of
Newhausel made answer to the Duke of Lorrain's messenger, That he wondered what
should hinder him from ^^tting him to death at that inst^nt, that he should
therefore speedily r^turn and tell his General, h^ would show him in a few days
to whom the Grand Signor Entrusted his places. In effect, he on that day made a
sally out on our Guards, who gave place to the first impetuosity of the Turks:
Which gave an allarum to the whole Camp, and caused the cavalry to mount on
Horseback, who beat back the Infidels. Yet did they carry away a great number
of Prisoners, whose heads they caused to be immediately cut off.

And to affright us the more, planted them along the walls of the Town, which
was an object of great grief to several, who continually beheld the loss they
had suffered, of their brother, friend, or near kinsman. This happy success
encouraged afresh the Turks to make another sally the next morning, in which
having likewise taken some Prisoners, they used 'em after the same manner as
the former.

This did not so damp the Courage of the Christians as to hinder 'em from
making use of it as a motive to revenge, and of more care for the future. Our
batteries then were raised in a short time, the trench opened, and there was
never more hopes of a happier success, when there arose a report thro^ghout the
whole Camp, That the Duke of Lorrain openly complained, that Prince H^rman of
Baden, President of the Council of War, which was at Vienna with the Emperor,
kindered necessaries being sent him for the siege, hoping thereby to make him
lose his reputation, and render himself more considerable. In fine, these
reports were so common in the Army, that coming to the Ears of Prince Lewis of
Baden Herman's Nephew, he had some words about it with the Duke of Lorrain. And
indeed 'twas well known of a long time, that Prince Herman had a secret
jealousy of the Duke and 'twas the opinion of several, that he would not have
been much troubled had his undertakings proved successless. But in this
occasion, not only the welfare of the Empire, but moreover of all Christendom
being concerned, 'twas charitably judged this hatred was somewhat abated, if
not wholly extinguished. But 'twas afterward apparent how greatly such as thus
reasoned were deceived, when they came to use the ammunition.

Whilst the Trench was well advanced, and there were great hopes for us, the
Duke of Lorrain receives an order from the Emperor, signed with his own hand,
by which he was enjoined to raise the siege, and put forces into Raab, Comorra,
and Presburg. It Is impossible to relate the vexation which seized the Duke at
this Command, the whole fault of which he cast on the Prince of Baden: But not
able to dispense with his obedience, he retired from the Town, and drew up his
Army in Battalia, showing by his countenance, that obedience was the only cause
of his retreat. In fine, when he was to depart, he lodged some infantry in
several houses, which were about a quarter of a league distant from the Town,
hoping in case he should be followed, not only this infantry would favor his
retreat; but moreover, seeing the enemy must pass near these houses, those whom
he left behind in 'em might attack 'em in the Flank, and whilst they were
surpised with the first Charge, the cavalry which was at the rereguard, should
turn head upon them, and easily defeat 'em.

It cannot be said, but that this order was given according to the rules of
War, there being all the likelihood in the world of a suitable success. But the
raising of the siege had so discouraged the Troops, that when the Infidels
appeared, the rereguard doubled their pace, instead of facing about, leaving
those who were in the houses without any hope of succor. They defended
themselves, as well as they could, for an hour or two, but the place being not
tenable, they were forced to yield to a greater power, so that those who
escaped from the combat, were all made Prisoners.

This did little advantage them, for the Bassa no sooner was entered into
Newhausel, but he caused their heads to be cut off, and planted on the ramparts
of the Town, with those who dyed with their Arms in their hands, as if he meant
his cruelty should add to his glory. The Count de Taxis, who was of one of the
best Families in Spain, and whose Ancestors have possessed time out of mind the
Office of Great Master of the Posts of that Kingdom, was one of those miserable
victims.

The Army, in the mean while held on the way to the Isle of Schut, and as she
retired, news came of a greater misfortune, than the raising the siege of
Newhausel. I mean of the Treason of the Hungarians, that were in the passage of
Vaag, who instead of defending it, as was expected, joined themselves to Count
Teckely, chief of the Malcontents of Hungary, after they had Charged the
other Troops, which were with them, for the defense of the passage. I cannot
express, nor nobody with me, how great was the Armies consternation at the first
news of this mishap. For every one imagining already to see the Turks at his
elbow, thought of nothing but how to escape them; and as if they had neither
Arms nor Hands to oppose them, they had the victory already yielded 'em without
striking a stroke. But that which augmented still each ones fear, was, that of
every party which was sent out from the rest of the Army, there returned at
most not above half, and generally in bad order.

Every body took pleasure in augmenting the Forces of the enemy. Some saying
they were 300000 men, others 400 thousand, and exaggerating beyond all truth
the crueltes which they had exercised along the way. So ingenious are men when
they are set upon it to do themselves mischief.

In fine, the Turks having past the Vaag, and possessed themselves of all
places, which are between that River and the Danube, arrived on the banks of
this latter, where they built a Bridge above the Papas, over which passed their
Infantry. The Cavalry with the Baggages passed over the Papas. But the Army
being numerous, and the multitude generally retarding enterprises, the Grand
Vizier made several detachements, some to plunder the Country, others to pursue
our Army, which had not yet gained the Isle of Schut. Those that were designed
for plunder, gathered an inestimable booty of all things. For nothing being
less suspected than the Treason of the Hungarians, every one was therefore in
his house, far from thinking their misfortune so near.

All the Campain was then entirely pillaged, and after the Infidels had
satisfied their covetousness, they glutted their cruelty in the blood of Aged
persons. In fine, they set all on fire, sparing neither houses of Princes, nor
Peasants; nor those of the Emperor, so that Luxemburg was burnt with several
considerable Castles, and their vastations were sooner known at Vienna, than
the revolt of the Hungarians.

The Tartars who were employed in the ruin of so many men, and stately
Buildings; retired with the same precipitation wherewith they came, fearing to
be cut off in their way home; and left as many marks of cruelty in their
retreat, as they made appear in their coming. This news, which was soon known
by our Army, perfected our dread and consternation. The Duke of Lorrain could
find no body, who would undertake to bring him news of the enemies motion, and
when he sent out any, it seemed as if he sent 'em to their Graves. So greatly
were they possessed with an imagination of their force and cruelty. Yet the
Army still advanced, the Infantry at the head, the Cavalry at the tail with the
Dragoons. The Baggage was on the left, and marched separately with the Regiment
of Dragoons of Savoy, at the head of whom was the Chevalier of Savoy whose
Father was the deceased Count of Soissons, the Infantry of Count Taff was also
for the guard of these Baggages with the Cavalry detached from diverse bodies.
As we were at the bank of a River a party which the Duke o^ Lorrain had sent
out brough^ him word, that the enem^ was not above a league off which obliged
him to remain in the rereguard, to give order that they might be received as
they ought. But the fear was so great, that instead of hearing this Command,
the Cavalry forsook the Infantry, and retired under the Cannon of Vienna. The
Duke of Lorrain followed the Cavalry to make it return to its post, but not
being able to become master of it, he Commanded the Infantry with all speed to
pass ever in^o the Isle of Schut, which was n^ar, and to re(...) themselves
inc^ssantly. W(...) ^he avantguard passed, the (...) appeared, and began to
^^^^ge the Regiment of Montecucali, who h^d the rereguard. The Baggage was
likewise attackt at the same time, and the Turks found so little resistance in
the one and the other, that they promised themselves to obtain an entire
Victory that very day.

In the mean while the Cheval^er of Savoy, who was as I sai^, engaged in the
defense of the Baggage, having rallied some Dragoons, and some others that were
well disposed, set himself to oppose the enemy. But his men having been soon
beat back, he was overrun by the Turks, and his horse falling backwards on him,
the pummel of his Saddle with the weight of his horse crushed him to death. The
Infantry on their side fought under favor of the Wagons, or to speak better,
endeavored to make them a rampart against the strokes of the enemy. But as
soon as ever the Turks had opened a p^ssage, every one began to throw down his
Arms, and take his heels, so that in shanning death, they found it nearer and
more ignominious. For the Turks lighting on 'em thus disarmed, and without
defense, killed them without the least danger.

In fine, after they had killed about 800, they fell on the Baggage, which
saved the rest of the Army. For whilst they were busied on pillaging, they
which had not yet past over into the Isle of Schut made have to get thither. We
lost near 13 or 14 hundred men in this conflict, amongst whom were two Princes,
to wit, the Chevalier of Savoy, and the Prince de Aremberg, three Counts of the
Empire, and several Officers. Moreover the Turks took a great booty, whose
value was esteemed at 3 hundred thousand Crowns: For the Prince of Montecuculi
lost for his share near 20 thousand, the Prince of Baden a more considerable
sum, and several other Officers accordingly.

But though every particular person had enough to lament the loss of, yet this
was the least trouble, for there were other things of greater concernment. The
Infantry saw themselves abandoned by the Cavalry, and knew not well which way
to turn themselves. The Duke of Lorrain was gone after the horse, and the news
of him was expected with the greatest impatiency. But he lost no time, being
resolved to lose his life, or bring off his Infantry. In effect, after some
reproaches to the Cavalry, he tells 'em, the way to repair their fault, was to
return to the enemy: That they need only follow him, for he hoped by Gods
assistance, how difficult soever the enterprise was, to come in a short time to
the end of it.

He was become desperate by what had happened to him, and his affliction made
him scarce known, so greatly was he altered by it. For besides the danger,
wherein all the Empire lay, (he knew that the good and bad success of affairs
were attributed only to the Commanders,) he beheld his reputation in great
danger, had not fortune seconded his Courage. He marched always foremost, and
having given necessary orders to avoid confusion, he sent away two men, by
different ways, to advertise his Infantry, that he was coming to their
assistance.

The Turks knowing his design, made strait up to him, to dispute him the
passage, but the Duke casting himself first amongst the firings of the enemy,
opened a passage with his Sword, having beat down before him all that opposed
him. In fine, having re-joyn'd his Infantry, he was received with testimonies
of esteem, and an extraordinary joy. He showed them on his side the
satisfaction he took in delivering them from that great danger, but amidst
these congratulations he learnt that the main body of the Ottoman Army drew
near, and thereupon puts a great part of the Infantry into Raab, Comorra,
Presburg, and withdrew with the rest of his Cavalry near Vienna.

The Emperor who had received a fierce alarm by the sudden irruption of the
Infidels, and who considered that after the revolt of the Hungarians, he could
no longer remain at Vienna in surety, bethought himself at the same time of
leaving it. But first augmented the privileges of the Scholars, which were
already very great, and considerable, that having received them as a recompense
of their Courage which they showed heretofore against Solomon, when he besieged
the City, this should be a fresh incitement to defend it with the same
resolution. He gave also to the Shoomakers Apprentices their Freedom, who were
to the number of about 1500, in case they took Arms, and did any thing
considerable for the Country.

In fine, having recommended the City to Count Starenberg, whom he left therein
Governor, he departed carrying with him whatsoever he had valuable. He took the
way of Lintz, accompanied with the two Empresses, the Princes his Children, and
other Persons of Quality.

Every one wept at his departure, and this Prince had much ado to forbear
himself. So greatly was he afflicted to be thus constrained to abandon his
people to the mercy of the Infidels. In the mean time each one endeavored to
follow him, to avoid the being exposed to those mischiefs which they
represented. In fine, there being not Coaches enough to carry all those that
offered 'emselves, several Women of Quality got behind like Lacques; so that
one might have seen the first Prince in the World, followed by all the flower
of the German Nobility, to go as an exul amidst the screeches and lamentations
of his people, who presented 'emselves in his passage with showr's of tears.

Several Jesuits, who were very ready to follow the Emperor for several
reasons, were gotten into a Wagon, at the sight of whom the people turned
their compassion into a just rage. And knowing their perfidiousness was the
cause of all these miseries, they fell upon 'em, and few escaped their fury.

The Emperor all this while marched with a countenance sad and dejected like
his fortune. Others kept a mournful silence, and although each had left their
estates behind 'em, 'twas not known whether their own mishap or that of the
Prince was to be most lamented. In fine, this march much resembled a Funeral
Pomp, when another spectacle increased the dolor and compassion. For they
beheld the other side of the Danube all in fire, and the Emperor having caused
his Coach to stop, knowing not at first what it was, soon perceived 'twas the
Turks, who showed there new testimonies of their barbarous cruelty. He could
not withhold his tears at the sight of a thing so much needing his compassion,
and although he did all he could to refrain his grief, he could not effect it.

Being arrived at Lintz, he staid there some days expecting the whole Court,
which could not part at the same time with him. And every one being come near
his person, he traveled thence to Passaw, where he resolved to wait the events
of the War. There came news every day which served to accomplish his misery;
for in effect he was informed from Hungary, that all places revolted from him,
and that he had reason to suspect those about him of that Country, who muttered
unsufferable things against his government.

In the mean time the Turkish Army advanced still on the side of Vienna, which
obliged the Duke of Lorrain, who could not resist them, to put forces into the
place, and thence to retire. He put in effectually 12000, who with the ancient
Garrison, amounted to about 15000 men, besides the Scholars, Handycrafts men,
and several other Inhabitants, who were able to do service.

Count Starenberg seeing the Turks were coming strait to Vienna, assembled all
the people, and made to 'em a short discourse to this effect. That before the
enemy blockt up the way, he was d^sirous of knowing who were for staying in the
Town, and who for leaving it. That they need only freely tell him, for he meant
no hurt thereby to the one nor the other. Moreover as to those who were for
staying with him, he must as freely discover his resolutions to defend the
place to the utmost extremity, so that if they had not Courage enough, to share
with him both the honor and danger, which must accompany all their actions,
they would do better to depart than stay. At which words every one cried out,
he was ready to dye for his Country, and Starenberg seeing their forwardness,
bid them hold up their hands as they would be faithful to God and their
Emperor; at the same time one might have beheld an infinite number of hands
lifted up in the Air in sign of fidelity.

Starenberg having congratulated their forwardness, sent away useless persons
out of the Town. But being about to turn the Women out, they entreated him not
to do it, promising to work as well as the Soldiers, which so satisfied him,
that he caused but few of 'em to depart. In the mean while he made an Inventory
to be brought him of the munitions of War, and provision; and found he had more
corn than he needed, but few cattle for so great a Garrison. He also found he
had less powder, and other necessaries, and no one could tell whom to charge
with this neglect, for time was not wanting whereby to provide all things: All
that could be said, was, that 'twas hoped the place would be succor'd before
they came to want these things. For otherwise, this neglect of the Officers
could not be sufficiently blamed, who believing the Turk dared never begin his
Campain there, thought it sufficient to store Raab, Comorra, and Presburg,
which they imagined lay more exposed to danger. Yet was not this an excuse for
them, whose care ought to have provided against whatsoever might happen.

But not to reprehend any one here, I shall only say that the Turks finding no
body in the field to withstand them, extended their Army in such a manner, that
it contained above 30 miles in front. They burnt thus a great deal of the
Country, and having left every where the marks of their cruelty, the Army
attackt the Isles which are on the Danube about Vienna, and having made
'emselves masters of them, they thereby took away all communication which they
held with the Town.

On the other hand, the Parties which the Grand Vizier had sent out, possessed
themselves of several Castles, of which they burnt those which were us^less to
'em, and put in Garrisons in the others which might secure their Convoys. Yet
had they left a great many Troops about Raab, Comorra and Presburg, to curb
those Garrisons, which without this, had been likely to disturb the forragers,
and hinder those who came every day to their Army, from traveling in surety.
Count Teckely who had excited great troubles in Hungary, where he held
intelligence with all the great ones, the most part of which were his kindred,
had marched in the mean time on the frontiers of Poland, to hinder not only the
effect of the league, which I have already mentioned, which was concluded by
the Emperor and the King of Poland, but likewise to possess himself of some
Castles, which were necessary for this design. He took several of 'em without
any trouble, because the great ones of the Country, who desired only some
pretense to appear compelled to take Arms against the Emperor, were very glad
of this opportunity, and failing not to publish, they could do no otherwise
than declare themselves on the side of the strongest, seeing they were forsaken
by him who ought to protect them, they took part with Teckely, so that his Army
every day considerably increased. There was only one Barron of the Country,
named Johanelli, who made resistance in his Castle of Panowits, and who obliged
Teckly to a formal attacking him.

This Castle being situate on the top of a Mountain whereunto 'twas difficult
to bring up the Cannon, held Teckly a longer time than he could well spare from
his affairs. For whilst he was employed before that place, General Schuts, who
had order to join the Troops of Prince Lubomirski, (then on their march from
Poland in great diligence,) hastened to execute his orders, and effected 'em
before Teckely could hinder him.

Teckely enraged, that such a place as this should make him miss so
considerable an occasion, battered the Castle of Panowits with such fury, that
the Cannon having made a breach wherein might pass 10 men a breast, he resolved
to give a terrible assault. Whereupon the Baron Johannelli, (whose Garrison
consisted of not above 200 men, and they people picked up here and there, and
who fought rather to save their goods, which they had laid up in the Castle,
than for honor) sent a messenger to Teckely, to let him know that he would
surrender upon certain conditions. But this General was so enraged, as I
already mentioned, that he had made him lose so much time, which he might to
good purpose have used elsewhere, that he would not have granted a surrender
upon any Terms, if the Hungarian Lords, who were some of 'em his own kinsmen,
and some Johannelli's, had not interposed their entreaties to give him his life.

Teckly marching from thence encamped at Tokay, where understanding the Grand
Vizier marched on the side of Eseck, he parted from his Camp with 2000 horse,
to meet and conferr with him about what they had to do during this Campain. The
reception which the Grand Vizier gave Teckely, surpised those which
accompanied him, so great was the kindness showed him. But this Turkish
Minister had private ends in doing this, considering it necessary to insinuate
into the minds of the Hungarian Lords there present, that he came rather to
give them assistance, than to enlarge the dominions of his Master, which were
already but too great, and of too vast extent. He received him then not as a
Baron of the Country, but as him for whom his Master reserved the Crown of
Hungary, of which he was very willing to give him assurances, in presence of
the principal Turks and Hungarians: To the end, that the news of it flying
every where, might produce the effect he expected. He, in the mean time, orders
him, to possess himself of the passage of Oralva, through which he expected the
coming of the King of Poland, assuring him that thereon depended the success of
the promises which he made to him in the name of the Grand Signior.

Things were in this posture, when the Grand Vizier sat down before Vienna. He
immediately attackt the Subburb of Leopolstad, which is separated from the Town
only by an Arm of the Danube, and having made himself master of it, after a
fierce dispute on both sides, he raised two Bridges on the River, the easier to
communicate with his own Troops, who were scattered up and down, some in the
Isles, others in the main land. He expected in the mean while his great
Ordnance, which could not arrive so soon, because as I have already said, they
were forced to draw it by land, which was very tedious, especially the ways
being so uneven.

In the interim, to lose no time, the Grand Vizier set 'em to work at the lines
of circumvallation, and contravallation, which were all of 'em very irregular,
by reason of the situation of the Country, bu^ which were yet no less strong*

For the former were Cannon proof, and the latte^ defended by good redoubts
which were raised in an equ^ distance.

'Till the lines of circumva^lation were drawn, the thi^^ part of the Ottoman
Army (...) still at Bivac, and althoug^ the rest kept quiet in their Tents, yet
had they order (...) be ready at the first comman^ so that the horses remain'^
saddled all night. The line^ being finished, they were n^ longer guarded but by
loo^ bodies of men, which affo^ded some rest to the Army which was exceeding
weary by continual standing to their Arms, for they were not only obliged to
frequent watchings, but forced to keep-continually on horseback, either to meet
the Convoys, or for other exigences of War.

On our side there was a great fault committed, for instead of wasting the Corn
and Grass growing in the fields, to incommodate the enemy, they were both left
untoucht, which was the cause that the enemies Army, as numerous as it was in
horse, had no need to go far for forage.

Whilst this past, Count Starenberg had interrupted the work of those that
labored at the lines of contravallation, by frequent sallies. But finding this
proceeding disadvantagious to him (for their fell such a multitude of Turks on
his men, that they were always forced to give way,) he contented himself with
firing the Cannon at 'em, which did good execution, 'till the enemy had made
themselves shelters. These lines being finished, they opened their Trenches,
placing 4000 horse to defend the Workmen.

The fire of the Town was very great all the night, during which Count
Starenberg, caused several Artificial fires to be thrown over the Walls, to
discover on what side the enemies were at work.

The great Ordnance of the Turks being now arrived, 'twas placed on several
Mounts, the better to do Execution. The Grand Vizier set 20 thousand men to
guard it, in case the Christians should attempt to enclose it. For an Italian,
who had fled into his Camp, assured him that Count Starenberg had such a
design, and although the enterprise appeared to him so difficult, that he could
scarce credit it, yet was he resolved to be wanting in no manner of precaution.

He caused 4 batteries to be raised, two of which played against one bastion,
so that one might say they were one and the same battery, were it not that they
ruined it on both sides. As to the two others, they were placed against two
other works, which defended the City on the side of the Scotch and Red Gates,
where the Grand Vizier designed to make his attack.

As soon as ever these batteries were finished, they were so well supplied,
that the Town received a thousand shot the first day, and more than 16000 the
two next: All the City Cannon were in these 3 days dismounted, and great
numbers were wounded, with several Officers killed in their attendance on it.
This furious beginning filled the whole City with terror, which was increased
by the Bombs, that set several parts on fire, and that were with great
difficulty quenched.

The Citizens, who were not used to these kind of disasters, had already lost
above half their Courage, which they showed before the siege began. And Count
Starenberg knowing there were not wanting some who began to talk of a
surrender, caused a Gallows to be set up in the Marketplace; swearing in the
presence of some of the principal Citizens, that he would hang thereon the
first that should mention any such matter.

This severity, which was not unseasonable, retained the most fearful in their
duty and obedience. But lest the Citizens should infect the Soldiers with the
same fears, he hindered, as much as in him lay all communication with 'em. And
although he first thought to distribute some of his Soldiers amongst the City
Trained-bands, to make them the more hardy and expert, yet he changed his
resolution, lest as I now mentioned, the fear of the one, should lessen the
Courage of the other.

The Emperor, who was at Passam, as I already observed, received in the mean
time messengers every day from the Duke of Lorrain, who informed him what he
could of the siege, of which he was but indifferently informed himself. For two
men which Count Starenberg sent him, were taken by the Turks, as they
endeavored to pass over to his Camp, and were at the same time hanged, for
having Letters found about 'em. He could not then know more, than what common
fame brought him, which took pleasure to make things worse than they were,
every one regulating the present, by what had past, which indeed was not very
fortunate.

The Emperor was in a mortal anguish touching what would become of him. For on
one hand the most Christian King, having made his Troops to march toward the
frontiers of Germany came thither in person, and 'twas reported his designs
were against Cologn, or Philipsburg, having Pensioners, as well in one place as
the other. In effect in the latter of these one Nigrelly was suspected, and in
the former the whole Town.

Moreover the King of Spain was so dangerously sick, that he was given over by
his Physicians; whereupon the Emperor considered in case he dyed, the King of
France would have several claims to decide with him, and fall boldly on the
Empire, which perhaps otherwise he durst not attempt, lest he should draw on
him the hatred of the Christian Princes.

Being troubled with these fears, he received two grateful messengers the one
informing him the King of France was returned home, and the other that the King
of Spain was on his recovery. He wanted only to hear the siege of Vienna went
ill on the Visiers side, but was informed on the contrary, that the Turks every
day recruited their Camp, with fresh Troops, and their endeavors grew every
moment more successful against the Town: This news banished the joy from his
heart which he had conceived at the former. And forgetting not to hasten the
succors which he was promised from several parts, he sent expresses into all
Courts to represent the necessity he had of assistance, and to excite his
Allies to a speedy contribution.

In the mean while the Marquess of Seppeville, Envoy from the King of France to
the Emperor, was the person from whom the bad news of the siege was sooner
learnt than from any other. And he made it his business, to retail it out to
every one, although this made him suspected by the Emperor; seeing he dispatched
four messages in one week to the King his Master. He hoped perhaps by this
means to give him a great deal of satisfaction, but he at the same time
inspired the Prince of Conti with a desire to signalize himself against the
Infidels, who was moreover discontented at the Kings giving to his prejudice
the Government of Languedoc to the Duke of Maine, his natural Son; which had
been promised him in espousing Mademoiselle de Blois. He communicated his
design only to Prince Eugenus of Savoy, Brother to the Chevalier of Savoy, who
was killed in the service of the Emperor, as I have already mentioned, lest in
making more acquainted with it, some one should discover it to the King.

He resolved to part from the Court, on Monday the 25th of July, and having
commanded his Coachman to tarry for him at the Palace Royal, where was
Monsieur the Duke of Orleans lately come from Versailles, he mounted on
Horseback with Prince Eugenus, attended only by a Page, but without a Livery,
and took Post for the Road of Senlis. About ten miles from Paris, a Postillion
knew him, so that the Prince of Conti having spoken to him, and the other
giving him his Title, the Prince asked him whether he knew him, and the other
answering he did, he gave him four Pistols, not to discover which way he went,
and changing Hats with him, thought he might thus pass on unknown. But this
fellow had no sooner left him, but carries the Hat to the House of Conde, which
he gave to Gourville intendant of Monsieur the Prince, Uncle to the Prince of
Conti.

They were all till then in great trouble, for his Coachman who had waited for
him at the Palace Royal till eleven at night, had set all the house in Alarm.
And it being known, he had left the Court, this troubled Madam the Princess of
Conte, but yet not so much as the King, who could not imagine what was become
of him. The King had sent word hereof to the Prince of Conde, who was then at
Paris by the Duke of Fuiellade, and this Prince who was ready to return to
Chantilly, came to him, to remain asurety for his Nephews Fidelity. In the mean
time those that believed they knew him, said he was not much troubled at this
disparition, which showed the Prince of Conti had courage, and could not suffer
the Duke of Maine to be preferred before him without Resentment.

Immediately as soon as 'twas certain at Court what Road he had taken, the King
sent several Messengers after him, and gave one of them, whose name was
Saintraillees, and belonged to the Prince of Conde, a Letter for him, written
with his own hand, in which he called him his Son; but which at the same time
told him, that if he returned not speedily, he would never see him. Whilst 'twas
doubted, considering his circumstances, whether he would obey or no, the Prince
of Conde sent him Letters of Exchange for twenty thousand Crowns, knowing he
had carried but 600 Pistols with him; and that his occasions would require them
if he went further. But this being an encouragement to him to continue his
Journey, rather than break it, gave every man occasion to believe, the Prince
of Conde would not be much troubled should he not show himself so obedient.

This Princes departure, to signalize himself against the Turks (for 'twas not
doubted but 'twas his design) gave ample matter of discourse to the people,
some attributing this resolution to the reason which I before related, others
to a domestic grievance, which was muttered soon after his Marriage.

But to return to Saintrailles, he arrived at B^ussels the same day he parted
from Versailles. And being informed the Prince of Conti only past through it,
and had taken the road of Cologn, he got to Namur, whence he came down by the
Meuse, to Liege, where he rested awhile: and taking post thence used such
diligence, that he overtook the Prince of Conti, who seeing in the Kings
Letter, the threatenings he used, he resolved on obeying him, so that having
embraced Prince Eugenus, of whom the King made no mention, and who was resolved
to continue his Journey, and given him a Diamond of great value, he leasurely
returned toward France, sending Saintrailles before him, who longed to give the
King an account of his Journey. But Saintrailles found the King in such a
surprise by the Death of the Queen, who dyed in a manner suddenly, that he had
scarce leisure to think on the Prince of Conti. Yet was he well enough pleased
at his obedience, seeing it much concerned him, that whilst he endeavored at
the ruin of the house of Austria, she should not have a Prince of the Blood in
her hands, for whom she might expect a great Ransom, supposing she could not so
greatly exasperate his discontents, to make him use his Arms against his
Allegiance.

The affairs of the Prince of Conti bearing some Relation to the subject I
handle, I hope will be a sufficient excuse for the digression. I shall now
return to the Siege of Vienna, which the Turks continued with success,
sometimes favorable and sometimes contrary. Staremberg seeing they advanced in
their works, still made some Sallies, in one of which he had so briskly charged
'em, that if all their Horse had not come into their assistance with the
Janisaries, he had made a grievous rout amongst them and their works. But
finding the match to grow unequal, he sounded a retreat, and whatsoever good
order he observed, yet did he lose several Officers of note, and no small
number of common Soldiers.

Soon after this he discovers a dangerous enterprise, begun by two Christians
against the City, one of which was an Albanian by Nation, and the other of
Candia. Their design was to set fire on some parts of the Town, under pretense
of quenching that which often was fired by the Enemies Bombs. But there being
found Straw, instead of water in their hands, they were apprehended, and put on
the Rack, where confessing their crime, they were punished as they deserved.
Their heads were afterward severed from their bodies and set upon the wall,
not only that they without might know their secret practices were discovered,
but also to keep those within from the like Treasons.

In the mean time the Turkish Army receiving no recruits, but what were brought
by Camels and Wagons, did not so abound, but that they were often in want.
Forage moreover became thin near the Army, and therefore they were forced to
go far. In this necessity the Grand Vizier sent part of his Horse on the side
of Raab, and caused a party of Foot to come to the Camp, which lay on that side
the Country, of which he had more need than of the Horse.

With this Foot which were all in breath the designs greatly advaneed. So that
the Grand Vizier seeing himself no further from the Counterscarp than ten
paces, resolved to attack it after he had sprung a mine, in the Ruins of which
he thought he might securely lodge. But the mine instead of damnifying the
besieged, falling on the side of the aggressors, several that had advanced to
be ready for the assault were destroyed in its Ruins. Whose places being filled
up by others, the Counterscarp was attackt with such Vigor, that 'twas wrested
by the Swords point. But Staremberg, who considered that if he gave the Turks
time to lodge themselves there it would be the loss of the Town, sent thither
fresh men, which after a sharp dispute on both sides, drove the Turks thence,
of whom^ they made a great Slaughter.

The Turks believing their honor was concerned to retake the Counterscarp, and
better keep it than before, blew up another Mine, which proving more effectual
than the former, made one part of the work fly up into the Air, together with
some men that were upon it. Which daunting the Christians courage, several
began to faint and give way, whilst the Janisaries assisted by the Workmen,
possessed themselves of the Counterscarp. They began at the same time to entrench
them selves, when Staremberg hastening to his Men's assistance endeavored to
hinder 'em, and with his Sword in his hand vigorously attackt them, mingling
several Granadiers with his Soldiers, in whom he had placed his chief
confidence.

The Janisaries although they had not time to shelter themselves, yet failed
not to receive him bravely, and having likewise advanced their Granadiers, and
being possessed of the higher ground, they scarcely fired any Granado which had
not its effect: the heat of the Christians insensibly abated, and Starenberg
perceiving they gave ground, bethought himself of a retreat, plainly perceiving
all his endeavors would be fruitless.

In effect, Starenberg having made the Counterscarp on the side of the City to
be Counter-min'd, and his Mine being unperceived, he had no sooner retired far
enough, but he blew it up, which caused several Turks to caper in the Air. The
Turks were by this put in great disorder, and Starenberg resolving to make his
advantage of it, returned to the Charge before they could put themselves in
order. But a Battalion advancing to their assistance, the fight began again
with equal heat, but with a success very different.

For the Turks finding themselves refreshed every moment, instead of losing
Courage, felt their forces augmenting, whilst the Christians whose Ranks
appeared thin, as any one might see by half a look, began to waver. In effect
that which they had before their eyes, was a spectacle terrible enough to
astonish the most resolute. For they could not make a step, but they must pass
over the bodies of their Companions, the greatest part of which, lying gasping
for life, were trodden to death by the multitude.

Starenberg seeing that instead of restoring good order amongst his men, the
disorder every moment increased, changed the design which he had of Re-taking
the Counterscarp, into that of preserving what had yet escaped the Enemies
hands. And having made his retreat, and taken great care of the wounded, he
made a review of those Forces he had left him; which he found diminished by a
third part, not so much by Sallies, and in this last occasion, as by the
Dysentery or Flux which began to rage in the Town, as well amongst the Citizens
as Soldiers. In effect the fatigues together with the bad food they eat, had so
heated the blood of most of 'em, that they fell sick every day. And it being
impossible for 'em after this to do service, the rest, whose weariness
increased as fast as the number of the others diminished, were soon in the same
condition, or at least so tired out with labor and watching, that they were
all ready to drop down as they marched. Starenberg found himself struck with
this distemper, which cast 'em all into a general damp, it being obvious to
every one that the Town could not be defended without him. It being feared if
he continued his incessant labors any longer, he would fall at length under a
dangerous malady, he therefore was entreated to give himself rest, and those of
the principal Officers who still enjoyed their perfect health, offered the best
of their assistance to ease him. But Starenberg considering with a great deal
of reason, that the condition wherein things lay, required a greater industry
than his own, would therefore trust to no body, so that although he was very
ill, yet did he order all things, as if he had been in perfect health.

In the mean time the Turks having made themselves masters of the Counterscarp,
and repaired it the best they could, to keep it, brought up their Ordnance to
it, and there planted 'em, which began to make a horrid confusion in the Town.
They beat down above 300 Foot of the Wall, with one part of the Ravelin: And
Starenberg desirous to remedy both these inconveniences, caused a retrenchment
to be drawn in the City, over against the Wall which the Turks had beat down.
As to the Ravelin, he would have repaired it, but the enemies Cannon hindered
him, and he was forced to content himself with half finishing it.

The Duke of Lorrain had in this time pitched his Camp between Vienna and
Crembs, on the other side the Danube, where he had a Bridge of Boats, over
which he made his men pass as often as they had occasion. He had strengthened the
head of his Bridge with two good Forts, where he had lodged his Cannon and Foot
Soldiers; so that the Enemy willing to drive him thence, sent out a Party to
surprise Tulm, which would have made his Bridge useless, because that after
they had rendered themselves masters of the Town, they would have put therein a
Garrison, which would have so straightly pressed our men, that they could not
extend themselves beyond the Danube, as they did before.

The Duke of Lorrain having notice of this design, sent word to the Governor of
Tulm to beware of surprises. In the mean while to prevent the Enemies return
without fighting, he sent out a Party of his men, almost as numerous as that of
the Enemy, and being both met, they so roughly encountered, that there remained
of both sides a great number dead in the field. Yet the advantage lay on the
Christians side, who put the Turks to flight. But they not daring to pursue 'em
too far, for fear of falling into some ambush, were obliged to rest contented
with what they had already performed.

This happy success was seconded by several others. For two or three Parties of
our men, having met with several Troops of the Enemy, killed a great number of
'em, and made the rest Prisoners of War.

But this was not sufficient, for without a speedy succor, Vienna was in great
danger, Envoys were therefore dispatched into all Courts, to know what withheld
'em from sending that assistance they promised, and which the City so much
needed.

The Pope joined not only entreaties to those of the Emperor, but also a great
number of Briefs, of which the Court of Rome was never sparing, and by which he
granted great indulgences to those that succor'd Vienna with Money, and an
assurance of going strait to Paradise, to such as dyed in so just a quarrel.

But he being sensible that all this would not signify much, if he added not
thereunto effective assistance, he therefore sent good sums of Money to the
Emperor, part of which came from his own Coffers, and the rest from the
Cardinals, who did this not so much out of devotion, as to assure their own
Fortunes, which would have been shaken, had Vienna fell under the Ottoman
power. The Pope likewise sent Ranucci into France in quality of his Nuncio, to
move that King to contribute to the succor of Vienna. And to make him the more
welcome, gave him consecrated Agnusses to present from him to the Duke of
Burgundy, Son to Monsieur the Dauphin.

But the King being not over joyful at the news of his coming, sent an express
to Ranucci not to pass beyond Orleans; under pretense that he was setting out
himself for the Frontiers; for what I relate happened about the month of May.

In the mean time the Dysentery instead of abating in the City, every moment
increased, so that near an hundred persons dyed every day, as well Citizens as
Soldiers. As to Starenberg, if the good diet he used, and which others had not,
contributed on one hand to his recovery, on the other, God who would not
chastise the Christians by the loss of Vienna, permitted him by little and
little to recover his health, that he might continue his diligence as he had
begun.

Yet things were still in a very bad case, howsoever we consider 'em. For on
one side the Garrison were ready to drop down with faintness, and on the other
no comfortable news came of succor; besides 'twas reported and that not
without truth, that the King of Poland had about him persons that were
Pensioners of France, who endeavored to insinuate, that there could be no
surety to the Kingdom, in making its Forces march out, whilst there were such
dangerous enemies at the Gate, and such as were glad of, and lay ready for such
an opportunity.

Yet receiving news continually from that King of his readiness to march, these
assurances balanced the contrary reports, which Starenberg took care to conceal
from his Garrison; for 'twas to be feared lest this ill news should quite
emasculate the Soldiers Courage, who appeared already but too faint, by so many
unhappy events, and such a dangerous distemper wherewith they were afflicted.

But that which contributed to render this malady more incurable, was the Airs
being so infected by the stench of the dead Bodies which lay unburied, that it
could not be more dangerous in a time of Plague. The cause of this stench was
that Starenberg would not yield to any terms of a Truce proposed by the Vizier,
to take away those of his party, who had been killed in so many several
skirmishes, hoping that besides the displeasure he would receive thereby, this
would be a spectacle to damp the Courage of the Soldiers, when in marching up
to the Charge, they should see before their Eyes the fortune of their
Companions, which would be a presage to them of the like.

Howsoever whether 'twas this infection or something else, which brought this
grievous sickness into the Town, they were so greatly incommodated by it, that
they would willingly have been delivered from of it at the cost of a greater
danger from the enemy. Yet did this distemper rage as well in the Camp of the
Turks, of which there dyed every day near 300, but which was scarce percevable,
because they continually received fresh supplies, which made up their losses.
But these being people never trained up in War, they seemed to come there only
to fill up a number, and not to increase the forces of their party, and being
not accustomed to undergo the fatigues of War, the greatest part of 'em fell
sick at the end of two days, and rather increased the confusion than confidence
of the Army.

Starenberg who had advice of whatsoever happened in their Camp, took thence
occasion to excite his people to patience, to whom he declared by a kind of
prediction, that the coming of the King of Poland would perfect the ruin of
the Infidels, and prove the deliverance of the City. And indeed 'twas time for
him to come, now or never. For the Turks being advertised that he was upon his
march, used their utmost endeavors to become masters of the Town; they had
gained a Bastion, in taking of which, they surpassed themselves, if one may so
say. For although the Christians had made a mavelous resistance, and such as
might be expected from persons enspired by a noble despair; all this had
hitherto served only to set a greater luster on the valor of the Enemy.

The Bastion being taken, they attackt the Ravelin before mentioned, at the
taking of which continuing to Testify their Courage, they forced all within to
leave it to 'em. But a Mine which the Christians had made, being at the same
time blown up, they found in another kind of death, that death which they
despised under a different figure.

They attempted afterward a descent into the ditch, set up their gabions and
gallery, and thundering at the City more than ever with their Cannon, they
prepared themselves to carry it by a general assault, before the King of Poland
could arrive. The day was set for so great a design, being the 29th of August,
a day sacred amongst them, and which they Solemnized with a great deal of
Superstition.

In the mean time the Vizier caressed the Officers to encourage them the more,
telling 'em the day was come to put an end to their Labors, he exhorted them
not only to do their duty, but every one in particular to encourage his
Soldiers. These Officers in compliance with the command of the Vizier, called
together their Regiments, under pretense of viewing their Arms. And taking
thence occasion to speak of the enterprise, which the Grand Vizier had formed,
told them 'twas their fault the whole War was not ended in one day. That if
they took Vienna, not only all the Christian Towns, which were in Hungary,
would surrender of themselves, without striking a stroke, but a way through all
Germany would be laid open, where there was no strong City, a good and
plentiful Country, and wherein every one would find a recompense of his labor.
As they held with 'em this discourse, the Grand Vizier, who was come out of his
Tent, to Authorize by his presence the words of his Commanders, appeared from
one end of the line to the other, where in passing, he smiled on every one, to
show his approbation of what the Captains had told 'em: then he begins to order
all things necessary for the attack. So that Staremberg fearing greatly that
day, was as careful on his side that every one should prepare himself to do his
best, in such an urgent Occasion. In the mean time he burnt the Gallery which
the Enemies had made in the ditch, and having thrown several Artificial fires
on the Wood which they heaped therein, he so happily set it on fire, that the
Turks who ran thither with all their endeavors, could not put it out. The fire
which they of the Town made was so great in this rencounter, that the like was
never seen, and as the Turks were busied in quenching the fire in the Faggots,
there were several of 'em killed, and many wounded.

This happy success raised up the Christians courage, but did not abate that of
the Infidels, who preparing themselves, as by a prelude for a general assault,
came to make some essays of their forces, pretending sometimes to rebuild their
Gallery, otherwhiles to carry away the Town. And although they did not use all
their strength, yet did they so harrass the Garrison, which every day grew
weaker, that the Soldiers were scarce able to stand on their Legs.

'Twas about this time, that the Grand Signor reckoned himself so sure of the
City, that he suffered Count Caprara, who had been detained by diverse
pretenses, to return to the Emperor. And as this circumstance may serve to
undeceive those, who imagine that Empire has less policy than power, I shall
mention here, under what color he was retained, and what was the real cause of
it.

The Grand Signor apprehending, lest the Christians should join together for
the assistance of the Emperor, had thereupon amused all along this Minister
with some propositions of peace. But Caprara perceiving 'twas a folly to expect
it, seeing he demanded no less than the Crown of Hungary, would have several
times been gone, but they would not let him. The affair of Count Serini, whom
the Emperor had apprehended, by reason of the intelligence which he held with
Teckely, furnished the Grand Signor with a pretense, (who knew not how to
detain any longer this Minister) to tell him he must serve for an hostage, till
he knew in what manner they used Count Serini, to whom he would willingly have
the Emperor know he granted his Protection. Yet all these proceedings were
only to have a person near him, to whom he might make propositions of peace, in
case the King of Poland with the other Christian Princes, should march to the
succor of Vi^nna. But the Grand Vizier sending him word that this Prince was
still a great way off, and that he should take the Town, before he could come
to its assistance, he thereupon dismissed Caprara, who was not a little glad of
this his Resolution, not reckoning himself in safety whilst in the hands of
this barbarous Prince, whose Will stood for Law to all those under his power.

Things were in this posture, when Count Staremberg, who had found out a way
for money, to acquaint th Duke of Lorrain with his condition, which required a
speedy succor, viz. That the Garrison was much weakened, and although it showed
still the same Resolution, yet 'twas to be scared, their strength would sooner
fail than their courage. That his stock of Powder would be soon exhausted, as
well as the Grenades, yet he believed he had enough, if (what he had heard say
were true) to wit, that the King of Poland was at hand. The Duke of Lorrain
answered Staremberg by the same man that brought him the Letter. Who being got
safe into the Town, had no sooner delivered his Letters to Staremberg, but this
Governor finding they confirmed the arrival of the King of Poland, and that
the Town would be soon relieved, imparted this good news to the Citizens and
Garrison.

Which so greatly encouraged both, that it gave new strength to resist the
Turks when they should come to make their grand assault, and the hope of being
soon delivered from danger, made them not only respect that which they had
already been in, as a thing of small consequence, but moreover despise that
wherewith they were now threatened. The Citizens desired to keep guard in the
Soldiers room, whom they would willingly have eased, but although Staremberg
did not doubt of their good will, yet would he not trust them with the Posts of
Consequence, fearing, least the Enemy coming at that time, they would not stand
their ground so firmly as the Soldiers, who being of greater experience, mus^
needs be less fearful.

In short, this terrible day* wherein the Turks were to do such wonders, being
come, they betook themselves to their Arms, at the sound of their Drums,
Hautbois and Trumpets. They made several marches to make the greater show of
their forces, and strike the City with greater fear. Which done, the Cannon
which had played ever since break of day with more noise than Execution,
ceased, till it began by a general discharge, which was the signal of the
assault which they intended.

At the same time one might see those that were to give the first onset, who
were all i^ battle array, at the entrance of the Trench separate themselves one
from another to march where they were ordered; some with Axes, others with
offensive Arms, but all with unusual briskness. The assault lasted six hours,
during which the Christians went through great difficulties. For the Infidels
were relieved continually by fresh men, whereas the Christians had no sooner
got rid of one Enemy, but they had to deal with a second, which was succeeded
by a third, and so on.

The Citizens, whom Staremberg had put all in Arms, some to guard the public
places, others to secure diverse passages, knowing their whole fortune
consisted in the defense of the Soldiers, whom they were informed were very
hard put to it, desired Staremberg they might assist them.

The Count seeing his men ready to faint under the number of the Enemy, was
well enough pleased at this Offer. And seasonably putting 'em in mind of their
Wives and Children, their Liberty and Religion, he so greatly animated them,
that they presented themselves on the Breach with more courage than he
expected. The fight which seemed to abate by the fatigue of the Soldiers,
began there with great bravery. The Turks who now promised themselves an
assured Victory, enraged to see it snatched out of their hands, fought like men
desperate. But the Christians urged by greater motives, to use their whole
strength, so vigorously repulsed them, that assisted by the Soldiers, who had
taken breath, and the advantage, which commonly the besieged have over the
Assailants, they made the Infidels turn their backs, a great number of whom
remained in the breach.

The Grand Vizier, seeing on what side soever he turned his men, things
succeeded ill, soon sounded a retreat, lest matters should grow worse. He
withdrew into his Camp mad with vexation and despair. For after this Trial,
wherein he had lost above 5000 men, besides those that were wounded, who were
near the same number, he feared, and that not without cause, his Troops should
mutiny against him. In effect, the Janisaries who had suffered much in all the
attacks, and especially in this latter, demanded without spending any more time
fruitlesly before this place, to raise the siege, adding that of 12000 which
they were but six weeks past, they now could number themselves but six, and
those so weakened, that they were not in condition to undertake any thing.

This beginning of a sedition was a greater affliction to the Grand Vizier than
the ill success which he came now from having in his enterprise, and it greatly
concerning him to stifle it in its birth, he made use of the Aga, which is the
name of him that commands them, and obtained from them at his intercession, to
keep within bounds of their duty, in consideration of a certain sum of Money
which he promised them: a remedy ordinarily used to appease their discontents,
but which instead of effecting this, commonly, makes it spring up again on the
first occasion.

The Grand Vizier was no sooner freed from this trouble, but he fell into
another. For he (...) ^orm'd that the King of ^oland, having been too hard for
Teckely's vigilance, marched at a great rate to the succor of Vienna, and that
his Avantguard was already arrived on the banks of the Danube, to which he
would join himself in a few days.

At this news he caused the wounded and sick to be carried out of the Camp, and
having added thereunto new fortifications, he bethought of reducing the Town,
before the Poles came to attack him, which could not be yet, their Army being
tired by a long march, and needed rest.

Several other Princes had joined in person with their Troops the Army of the
Emperor, as the Duke of Bavaria, and the Duke of Saxony. Besides there came
from all parts of Christendom, France excepted, a great number of Lords and
Persons of Quality to the Emperors Army. All which was likely to raise the
siege, without any longer expecting the King of Poland, supposing he had
tarried any time. But these two Princes being unwilling to obey the Duke of
Lorrain, and he being as unwilling to yield to them the command, all these
great forces lay useless, till the King of Poland should come to make them
agree. For they began already to look upon one another with an ill Eye, not
considering, that their business was not to contend for pre-eminence, but for
the safety of Christendom.

As for the Marquess of Brandenbeurg, he had for some time flattered the
Emperor with sending him a considerable supply, but being urged to perform
what he had promised, and hindered by the Alliance of France, he sought a
pretense to break his word, which he found in the demand of the Duchy of
Brieg, Lignits, and Wolnaw, over which he pretended a lawful Right. And truly
the Emperor was reduced to such an extremity, that 'twas thought he would grant
him his demands rather than be without his assistance. But what the Marquess of
Brandenburg did, being only for a fair pretense to disengage himself, he
thereupon adds another demand, which he knew the Emperor would never grant him.
To wit, to permit the Protestants of Silesia to have the free exercise of their
Religion, whereupon the Emperor plainly perceiving whence this dealing came,
waited no more on his promises.

Count Waldec, who was declared Prince of the Empire, very lately, and who had
Command of the Circular Troops given him, came likewise into the Emperors Army,
who by reason of his experience in the War, and Zeal to his service, was
willing to confer with him about the manner of saving Vienna. The Emperor
approved of whatsoever he offered him thereupon, but expecting the King of
Poland, who was to decide the whole matter, this advice and that of several
others, on the same subject, served only to content him at that moment, for the
whole order of it was changed as soon as ever that Prince was come.

In fine, he arrived at Holbron, on the second of September, with the bravest
Cavalry the World ever saw, but so tired, that 'twould be to hazard all, to
attempt any thing in the Condition they were in. The Duke of Lorrain, who had
taken care to store up Provision, for the refreshment of this Army against it
came, went to meet him at Holbron, where the King of Poland received him with
great Testimonies of Friendship and Confidence, although they had been both
rivals in the pursuit of the Crown of Poland. The Duke of Bavaria, and the Duke
of Saxony came thither also to salute him, and the King of Poland presented
them his Eldest Son, named Alexander, a Prince of about 17 or 18 years of Age,
who came to make his Apprentiship in the War, under the King his Father, who
knew enough to instruct him. The former Compliments being ended, they held a
Council of War, not to know whether they should succor Vienna, for that matter
was resolved upon long before, but to resolve of the manner of doing it.

The whole affair being determined by 'em, 'twas communicated to the Emperor,
who having approved of what was offered, it only now lay upon 'em to dispose of
things necessary for so great a design, and the Campain being not only wasted,
but not so much as an inhabitant left in any of the houses, from whom might be
expected the least matter, every man was forced to carry provision as well for
his Horse as for himself.

The Grand Vizier not being ignorant of the great preparations which the
Christians made against him, took all possible care on his side to make a good
defense. Yet was he in no small inquietude how to effect this. For he was at
variance with the chiefest Officers of his Army, who were of opinion that
without delaying 'till the Christians came, they should retire to Newhausel,
alleging to justify the soundness of their advice, that their Army was so
tired with this long siege, that the Soldiers had more need of rest than
labor. And moreover that the greatest part of their men had never seen any
thing more of War, than what this siege had showed 'em, how then could they
resist an Army, which consisted of the flower of Christendom, and wherein
moreover there were such a great number of Princes and persons of esteem, who
came there to Conquer or to Dye. That there would be no likelihood of success
in exposing the remainder of an unfortunate Army, against so flourishing a one,
and against a Garrison, whose valor they had sufficiently experienced by the
defeat of their best Troops, and so many assaults in vain. That whilst they had
time, they should save not only the Army, but also the reputation of the Grand
Signior, which was sufficiently lessened, by so fruitless a siege, and wherein
they had lost above 30 thousand men.

The Grand Vizier answered to this, that the reputation of the Sultan would
rather be lost, if after their remaining so long before a Town, where they had
consumed so much Money, they should be so base as to retire before they had
struck a stroke. That their Army was twice as big as that of the Christians,
and that if the Soldiers wanted experience, 'twas enough their Leaders did not,
seeing 'twas necessary to the former only to have Courage, and these to have
skill. That the Turks should keep their ground, which was all that could be
desired of a Soldier. That as to success, that indeed was uncertain, but
howsoever they could not fail of this consolation, of having done their duty,
and not having fled from the Enemy, which would overwhelm them with infamy all
their days.

The Grand Visier's advice was to serve as a Law, wherefore they were forced to
comply. In the mean while apprehending lest the Janisaries should join
themselves to those who were for raising the siege, he took care to keep 'em
within the bounds of their duty, and made 'em great promises, in case they
behaved themselves well in the fight. The next morning he took a review of his
Army, which consisted still of an Hundred and Ten Thousand fighting men, and
resolving to call to his assistance the Troops which he had left about Raab,
and other places of Hungary, he sent others in their places, in whom he put not
such confidence.

On the side which the Christians had resolved to attack his lines, there stood
a Wood, through which they must necessarily pass to come at him. The Christians
at the beginning of the Campagn took care to make a commodious passage. But the
Grand Vizier believed he might annoy 'em, if he possessed himself of it, he
thereupon timely sent five or six Battalions, who had felled several Trees,
with which they retrenched themselves. On the other hand the Grand Vizier,
having left 20 Thousand men for the Guard of his Camp and Trench, marched out of
his Trenches with his Horse and Foot, whereof he formed three lines, without
reckoning the Body he had reserved, and possessing himself of a little hill,
which might be advantageous during the fight, he caused his Cannon to be
brought thither, charging those who were placed there above all things to abide
firm.

In the mean while the Christian Army, the Commanders of which had implored the
divine assistance, by public and private Prayers, marched with great
confidence of Victory, having at its head a Prince of so great reputation, and
who had already beaten the Turks in several other occasions. But as this
Circumstance raised their Courage, so did it abase that of the Turks, who
feared more the Poles than any Nation; so that they had rather it had been the
Emperor at the head of his Forces, than to have there a King, whose Fortune and
Valor they greatly dreaded. But besides that the Emperor would not so greatly
expose himself, the King of Poland came not so far to obey another, and the
Emperor on his side would pretend to Command him, and therefore to avoid all
disputes he remained at Lintz, ordering Prayers to be said in all the Churches,
which were never empty of people, who sought of God with the greatest fervor,
to favor the Christian Army.

The Army being arrived at the Wood, the fight began, and was at first
ob^^inately enough maintained by both Parties. But the Christians who saw that
if they behaved not themselves fiercely in this occasion, the Grand Vizier
might refresh his Troops which would give them far more trouble, leapt over the
retrenchments of the Enemy, and having driven them from the Wood, killed as
many of 'em as were not quick enough to save themselves. The Wood being wholly
cleared, the Avantguard of the Army drew up it self at the head of the Wood, to
save the arrearguard, fearing lest marching farther, without being in a
condition to fight, the Grand Vizier should march up toward them, and make
advantage of the ill condition wherein he might find them. But he was unwilling
to depart so far from Vienna, fearing lest while he was on the other side, the
Christians would let out the Danube over one part of his Army, and attack those
he had left for the keeping the lines, who would be too much put to it to
resist at the same time these new Enemies, and the Garrison likewise, who would
not fail to sally out.

And therefore he every moment sent out Parties, to see what passed on the side
of the Danube, for he was in greater fear of what might be done on that side,
than on the other, although he was advertised every moment that the Christians
marched against him, and should have 'em upon his skirts within an hour or two
at farthest.

And indeed 'twas necessary these succors should be so near. For although the
Turks were not as yet in the Town, yet they were at least under it by means of
their mines, which was the reason why Starenberg caused a Lanthorn to be put on
the high Tower of S. Stephen, which was the sign, agreed upon by the Duke of
Lorrain and he, when he should find himself in a great strait. His Miners also
were so heartless, that he had all the difficulty in the World to make 'em
work, besides the Garrison were so dampt by their incessant labors and toils,
and which is worse reduced to 5 thousand 5 hundred men, of 16 thousand that
they were in the beginning of the Siege. For if they lost six thousand by the
hand of the Enemy, sickness had carried away few less, so that dying as they
did in heaps, they were not burried one by one, but thrown ten or twelve
together in an hole.

Those that had escaped so great danger, and who in expectation of the same
fortune, suffered themselves almost to languish away, being informed that the
succors, with which they had been so often vainly flattered were near, and on
this side the Wood, where they were seen already to appear, took their Arms
with such courage, that a man would have thought 'em other men, than those one
might have seen the other moment. They went all on the Rampart, without
expecting any other command, than that which their courage inspired, and it
much availd Staremberg, that they were inlivened by this new hope, for those
whom the Grand Vizier left to guard the Camp, and ordered to go up to the
assault, as soon as ever they saw him March toward the Enemy, acquitted
themselves with so great Resolution and constancy that they never had before
done the like. In the mean time the besieged, who considered if they repelled
this last effort, they should be delivered from the misery which had so long
afflicted them, fought with no less courage; so that never was an hotter
dispute on both sides.

Whilst this happened, the King of Poland was engaged with the Grand Vizier,
who had marched up to him, with more courage than prudence. For without
considering he left the Post, where he had lodged his Cannon, and whence he
might greatly molest the Christians, he began the charge, whereas he should
have expected the King of Poland to come and charge him. But whether he
believed there was any advantage to him that gave the first onset, or would
thereby animate his men, of whose courage he doubted, he neglected to use these
precautions, of which he presently repented. For his Troops giving back, after
the first charge, the Christians, so boldly pursued them, that those that had
the care of the Cannon durst not fire, lest it should prove as hurtful to their
own men as ours.

Staremberg being advertized by persons whom he had placed in the highest parts
of the Town, that the beginning of the combat was as favorable to the
Christians as could be desired, made at the same time a Sally out of the
Garrison, who had already drove the Turks from off the Rampart. And several
Citizens being mixed with the Soldiers, to share with 'em in the Honor, they
all fiercely attackt the Enemy, who thought already of packing up their
baggage, from the advice which they had of the Grand Vizier, that all things
went ill on his part, and that they ought to think of a retreat. Then every one
without regretting what he had left in the Tent, minded only to save himself,
when Staremberg at the head of his men charged them so vigorously, that they
threw themselves down one upon another for haste, who should first get away.
And the lines of circumvallation hindering 'em from passing so soon as they
desired, they endeavored to fill them up with their Muskets, which at that
moment served for Pickaxes and Shovels, others with their hands; every one
using more diligence to Ruin these lines than they had done to put 'em in the
condition they were in. Staremberg seeing the disorder wherein the Turks were,
was ravished at so happy an occasion. But his prudence, hindering him from going
far from the Town, he contented himself with sending some Horse after the
hindermost, and staid himself in the mean time near the Walls, where he caused
the Enemies works to be demolished, lest things should change its face.

In the mean time these fugitives increased the fear in the Visiers Army, which
was already but two great; for the King of Poland had defeated his left Wing,
whose Horse left the foot at the discretion of the Poles, who had fallen upon
'em and put 'em to the Sword; as to the right Wing, it made a little more
resistance. But the Grand Vizier considering that in the condition wherein the
fight was, it was impossible to restablish it, and that moreover the Trench was
quitted, with all the works which had cost him so much blood, he resolved to
spare that which remained; and to leave rather his Camp, and his Tents which
were still standing, than to be the cause of shedding more by a fruitless
obstinacy. In this design he caused the Retreat to be sounded, but the foot
being not able to follow the Horse, which rather fled than held on an orderly
March, several of 'em were cut in pieces, and there were not a 4th part of 'em
saved.

The King of Poland having made a Detachment, to put into the Town, and given
thanks to God for his Victory, in the very Field where he gained it, gave
strict command, under grievous penalties, that no one should leave his rank to
plunder. The Dukes of Bavaria, Saxony, and Lorrain, who had fought likewise
with a great deal of courage, did as much on their side, and the keeping of the
Turks Camp was consigned to three thousand men, whilst a Council of War was
called to know whether the Enemy, should be pursued, or they rest contented
with the advantage already obtained. The advices were different, thereupon the
King of Poland, and the Duke of Lorrain, with all those that were in the
Emperors interests, were for pursuing their Victory, but the Dukes of Saxony
and Bavaria, who came only to succor Vienna, would not any more hazard their
Troops. Especially the Duke of Saxony, who complained, that by reason of his
Religion, they had been made to suffer enough all ready. In effect the best
quarters were not his, and he had heard that they suspected lest his Troops
having their Winter quarters in Hungary, should hold intelligence with Teckely.
This Prince seeing then, that after he had traverst a great Country, hazarded
his reputation, and even his life, and left his Estates, to succor those of
another, he was so ill recompensed, resolved upon returning home, where he
arrived more laden with glory than spoil; for the confederates seeing he
forsook the common cause notwithstanding their opinion, gave him what part they
pleased; which again doubled his discontent.

The Duke of Bavaria had better usage, because perhaps the Emperor apprehended,
lest he in the differences he had with France, should take part against him
being moreover solicited to it by several advantageous offers, besides his
Aliance with it. Howsoever all these Princes being not agreed, they made, as we
say, a Golden bridge, for the Enemy to pass over, who retired on the I^le of
Newhausel, where they expected 3 days the wracks of their Army. In the mean
while the Grand Vizier was not without inquietude, how the grand Seignor would
receive the news of his defeat, and to cast all the fault on others, he wrote a
Letter against those that had the chief command under him. But we have not
heard what the Grand Seignor has resolved thereupon, no more than what the King
of Poland has done, reports concerning whom are so various, that there is as yet
no certianty of 'em. Yet it is not to be doubted being so great a Captain as he
is, but he will make the best advantage of his Victory, which all Christians
ought to desire.

FINIS.

