top: representation of a female figure, empress or queen kneeling in front of
an emperor or king seated on a throne, with armed guards and female attendants;
bottom: representation of a male figure and seven others standing before an
emperor or king seated on a throne behind a bench or table, surrounded by male
figures, with guards nearby; middle: representation of a female figure, empress
or queen, or Aphrodicia, and a male figure or Erastus THE HISTORY of ERASTVS
and the Seven Wise Masters of ROME
Here (...) is arraignd unjustly you may See.
Here Innocence obtains the Victory.
Aphrodicia:

Erastus:



THE HISTORY OF PRINCE ERASTUS Son to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN And those famous
PHILOSOPHERS CALLED THE Seven Wise Masters OF ROME. Being a full account of all
that was ever written of that Ancient, Famous, Pleasant, and excellent History;
written Originally in Italian, then Translated into French, and now rendered
English by F. K. With the Illustration of Pictures to every Story.

LONDON, Printed by Anne Johnson for Fra. Kirkman, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Fan-Church Street over against the Sign of the Robin Hood near Algate.
1674.

The Preface
Reader.
ABout 18 Months ago I did write and publish. The Famous History of Don
Bellianis of Greece, or The Honor of Chivalry in three Parts; In my Preface to
the Reader I gave an account of most of the Histories that are Printed and
published in our English Tongue, I did recommend them in general to thy
reading, but I was more particular in my recommendations of one entitled, The
Seven Wise Masters, for I placed it in the Front naming it the first of all
others. It being of so great esteem in Ireland, that next to the Horn-book and
knowledge of Letters, Children are in general put to read in it, and I know
that only by that Book several have Learned to read well, so great is the
pleasure that young and old take in reading thereof.

Since my writting that Book, I chanced to meet with an old Book entitled, The
History of Prince Erastus in French, and upon reading some part of it, I found
it to be not only The History of Erastus, but also of The Seven Wise Masters of
Rome; and to contain all those Stories that are in the former Book of the
seven Wise Masters; I compared them one with an other and saw that though the
several Stories were alike, yet my French book was much the better, being
larger and containing more variety of Stories then the English one which was
not only very short in the Substance but also so old in the language that it
was hardly good sense: I therefore thought it might be worth my while to
Translate and print this French book; wherefore I fell to work and have now
perfected it to my great cost and trouble, my cost has been extraordinary in
the Pictures, for I have bestowed more on this book then are in any book of
this bigness in English; so that the Reader may read every particular of all
the Histories in Picture; and indeed Picture is not only convenient, but
necessary in all Histories of this nature there is so great affinity between
them, that Picture is said to be Dumb or silent History and History to be
speaking Picture there being a Poetical Art ^o be used in both, Pictoribus
atque Poetis. This book being thus chargable to me, I hope the Reader will
consider me in the price, if the former were so well accepted, I doubt not but
this will be as well received (...) as it exceed, that in price so I do assure
thee it exceeds that in w^ (...) have now all that was ever written on this
subject in any language whatsoever for I have (...) Translated the French book,
but also compared it with the Original in Italian, and added to that all that
has been written in English.

We have several books of this nature in English, viz Novels, but they are all
trans^^^^^^, and though more neat and modeish, yet come far short in worth and
substance to this; none is in any respect so like this as one of my own
composition, it is called The Unlucky Citizen; and in every respect much like
this, for in this of Erastustis an Unlucky or Unfortunate Prince, (I may well
Term him so, that for several days together expected when he should be led to
the Gallows and executed for a fact which he was Innocent of;) so in that is an
Unlucky or Unfortunate man, as you may at large read in that Story and both
this book and that are Stored with variety of Examples and Histories, and both
alike adorned with Picture. In the conclusion of this book the Malign
influences of the Stars being past, our Unlucky or Unfortunate Prince, is
cleared from the Crime for which he was accused, and is Justified to all the
world; being thereby in a very good and happy condition: and our Unlucky or
Unfortunate Citizen has good hopes that the Malign influence of his Stars are
over, and that his condition will be for the future prosperous and succesful,
or at the least more screen then formerly, however Fiat Dei Voluntas. Although
this book of Prince Erastus is as completely finished as you can expect is; yet
that of the Unlucky Citizen is not, for I intend suddenly to prosecute the
Story not only of my many misfortunes, but to furnish it with more variety of
Novels or Examples; neither shall it be wanting of Precepts as well as
Presidents, and such as shall be Profitable, and of good and general use for
Readers of any quality; so that I question not, but it will be worthy thy
Perusal

Although this present History of Erastus is Stored with variety of Novels, yet
t^^y are most to one purpose, to demonstrate (...) the Wit, Cunning, and
wickedness of Las^^^ (...) you have many examples to prove (...) and (...) I
may g^^e you a relishing taste of what is in the Book, give (...) s^^^^^ to
relate one in the Preface.

An old rich Gentleman being married to a young want^n L^dy, her husband being
somewhat wanting in his Nocturnall duty, she placed that affection due to him
on a Soldier; and although she was careful to conceal her Liscentious passion,
yet the Old man being jealous soon perceived it, but to be more certain of what
he doubted he pretends a journey for some days, and taking money away he goes.

This Lady had acquainted an old Matrona with her Amors who had informed the
Soldier that it was his god fortune to be loved by such a Lady; he being a true
S^n of (...), was ^^ry well pleased with this hopeful (...) of so (...) V^^us:
and nothing was want^^^ (...) to (...) Conjuncti^^ but an opportunity, which
was now come by ^he absence of the Old man, of which the Soldier having noti^e
he according to orders walked before the Gate of the house that Evening,
expecting admittance.

The hu band having st^i^d thereabouts all day, at night returned h me, and
found the Soldier attending which caused him to suspect the occasion, and his
suspicion was confirmed when he came (...) the house and sound a banquet
prepared, and his wife ready to re^^ive her Champion She was so surprised at
her h^^band app^arance, that she could not make him any reasonable answ r to
the many questions he propounded wher^fore his passion being raised against her
he resol^^d to b^ revenged on her, which he thus effects; he stripped her naked
and so ^^d her to a Pond in the middle wh^re ^f he tied her fast to a Post,
thinking by that (...) that heat that had occasioned her malady and h^ ^^^^si^.

The Soldier having worn out his patience with attendance, went to the old
woman's who had been his broaker in this intended Merchandise; and tells her of
his fruitless attendance she wonders at it and presently goes back with him to
the house, where having a Key she enters the Gate, and leaving the Soldier in
an outer Court went toward the house where she saw the young Lady in the Pond
in the manner her husband had left her. After some small Dialogue, whereby they
both understood how the State of their affairs stood; the young Lady having
still a mind to enjoy her Gallant, it was agreed that the old one should
unstrip and stand in her stead, whilst she went to her Lover. The young woman
being dressed in the Old woman's clothes went to the Soldier, who at first took
her to be the Matron, but by her speech finding it to be otherwise, he soon
enjoyed those pleasures they had so long desired.

The old Gentleman who was gone to bed could not sleep for thinking of that
nights adventure, and believing that he was not sufficiently revenged on his
wife he resolves on a further, and leaving his bed goes down to the place where
he left his wife, and utters outrageous speeches against her, which the old
woman who was there, thought was best not to answer but to remain silent; at
which he was so, enraged that having a Knife in one hand he took her by the
nose and cut it off, throwing it at her face, and wishing her to present it to
her Lover, he returns to bed. Soon after the Lady having taken leave of her
young man, returns to the old woman; who although almost dead with her wound
gives her an account of her misfortune she hears this Story with admiration,
esteeming her self doubly happy in having enjoyed her friends love, and escaped
her husbnads fury: and now she comforts the old woman by promiscing her a great
reward. This pacified her, and the young woman believing that the worst was
past and that better was to come, untied the old one, and again took her place
in the water, where having contrived how to manage her matter so as to come
off with honor; she thus played her trick. Believing that her husband was
within hearing as indeed he was, She with a Low voice makes a heavy complaint
against him that had so w^ongd his innocent and chaste wife, and then she
Implores the Assistance of Diana and all the other Goddesses of Chastity and
Marriage to vindicate her and that they would show some example on her, to
demonstrate her Chastity; and if they pleased to be so gracious to her to
restore that former Beauty which her husband had deprived her of, by rash and
unhumane cutting off her nose. This was the sum of her complaint and prayer,
and then continuing for some time silent she at length brake forth into loud
exclaimations of joy and thanksgiving to the heavenly powers for her
restoration, calling to her husband to come and see the token of her innocence:
He being amazed at this discourse was resolved to try the truth, and riseing
out of his bed lighted a candle, went down and comes to his wife, and beholding
her face finds it whole and sound: whereat standing amazed he began to detest
his rashness and fear heavens vengeance and deprecating the wickedness of his
impious fury; he loses his most chaste wife and brings her again to her bed,
she by this means recovering both her nose and the affection of her husband.
And now Reader let this Story suffice as the first Dish of meat you are to have
at this banquet, which I hope will please your pallet; wherefore I pray fall
too and much good may it do you

Yours, Fra. Kirkman. top: representation of a group of robed men standing
before an emperor or king, seated on a throne, and a boy; below: representation
of a group of seven robed men with hats, one holding a book, in a garden near a
building

THE HISTORY OF PRINCE ERASTUS Son to the EMPEROR DIOCLESIAN And those famous
PHILOSOPHERS CALLED THE Seven Wise Masters OF ROME.
CHAP. I. The Emperor Dioclesian delivers his Son Erastus, to seven
Philosophers to be instructed in all the Arts, and Sciences. The Empress the
Mother of Erastus dies.
ONE Thousand and forty years after the foundation of the City of Rome, the
Emperor Dioclesian, a wise and powerful Prince, reigned in that Superb and
Tryumphant City, he being married to a very fair and virtuous Princess: had by
her a Son who was so well proportioned, and of so exquisite beauty, that every
one concluded him to be more Divine than Humain; in such manner that the
affection which all the world had for the singularities and graces of this
young Prince, caused that the name of Erastus was given to him, which is as
much as to say amiable, and although he was but yet in his very infancy, yet in
that tender age, every one concluded that in time this young Prince would
arrive to very great perfection, and would not be in any thing inferior to the
other Emperors his Predecessors; and moreover there was not any Mathematician,
Astrologer, Diviner, Physiognomist nor Chyromancer, who did not every one
respectively find by his Art, that according to the influences of the
Caelestial Planets, this Child should be of an admirable Spirit; very singular
in all Sciences, and accomplished in all manner of virtue, wherein the Emperor
took so great content as the Majesty of his degree, and the grandeur of such a
Father did require; purposing on his part not to frustrate so good a Nature,
but to use his endeavor to render his Son, such as the opinion of the world
had conceived of him. And for as much as neither Illustrious blood, good
Constellations, nor large Estates, are not of themselves sufficient to render a
man great, if Nature be not helped and assisted by Sciences and Virtues;
therefore so soon as this Infant Erastus was of an Age fit for to learn, the
Emperor provided himself of the most knowing men that he could find, whereby
he might be instructed, under whose tuition he so well profited, that at the
age of ten years he began to have a taste of the secrets of Philosophy; and the
good Emperor very well knowing that the Wisdom and Prudence of the Son, does
ordinarily redound to the glory of the Father, and therefore resolving to
render his Son perfect in Philosophy, he (from amongst all the Wise Men of his
Empire) made choice of seven Philosophers, of whose skill and knowledge he had
sufficient experience, that he might confidently commit the charge of such a
Person, who in time might succeed to the Government of the great Roman Empire
The Emperor having thus delivered his Son to their charge, commanded them to
instruct him with the greatest dexterity, as well in Virtue and good Manners,
as in Letters, and all sorts of Sciences, that all the world might know of what
a Father this young Prince was Son: and by what admirable Masters he had been
instructed, promising to these Philosophers very great recompenses, besides the
Honor they would acquire of all the World, by the good doctrine wherein they
would instruct the Prince,

These Philosophers having with merry hearts taken this charge, by reason of
the Divine Spirit which they knew to be in the young Erastus, which gave them
hopes that they should attain to great honor in the execution thereof; and
that they might the better execute it, they made choice of a place without the
City of Rome, which was very well sc^tuated, and enriched with all things
necessary for the entertainment of man; for in the first place, the Air was
there very temperate, there was very pleasant walks, enriched with fair
Fountains, the plain was very considerable, for the great number of Springs and
Rivers, which running through it, at last met in a little lake, which was
furnished withal sorts of fishes: there might you see all sorts of trees, as
well Fruit Trees as others, and all the Fields enameled with Flowers according
to the season; all accompanied with a World of Birds, who by their various
Notes, rendered a continual Harmony both night and day. In this pleasant place
was a Palace built for the Prince Erastus, that he might be at some distance
from the noise of the City of Rome: where he so plied his study, that you could
hardly distinguish whose affection was greatest, ^ither his in Learning, or his
Masters in instructing him: and although he very well knew the greatness of his
quality, yet however he esteemed of no other greatness, but that which virtue
should instruct him in; in such manner, that he not only surpassed the hope
which had been conceived of him: but he also astonished his Masters, because
they could not reach him any thing but what he soon learn with advantage. He
was excellent in all the seven liberal Arts: for, first he was a good
Grammarian, by that means learning to speak properly and correctedly. By Logic
he found out reasons to discern a false proposition from a ^^ne one, he also
profited so well in Rhetoric and Oratory, that by his well speaking, he
persuaded what he pleased, and diswaded what he had a mind should appear ill:
he was also a good Arithmetician, and ready to cast up any account: by
Geometry, he not only understood the dimensions of the Earth, but also many
other pleasant propositions: as for Music he could by his voice, make an
entire and perfect Harmony; In fine he learned by Astrology, not only the
course of the Stars, but also their influences, which foretell things to come:
furthermore he had the knowledge of all things requisite to the perfection of
man, in such manner that in ten years wherein he was under the tuition of the
seven Philosophers, he was not only a good Scholar, but surpassed in knowledge
those Masters that had instructed him. Finally there did shine in him all the
good graces as well of Body, as of mind, for he abhorred all Vices, and on the
contrary, exercised all sorts of Virtue, passing his time in Disputations with
his Masters: in which he took very much delight. About this time it was that
the Empress his Mothe departed this life; and Erastus being advertised of it,
although he had as tender a love for her, as any Child could have for a Mother;
yet nevertheless knowing that Death is a Natural thing, and common to all; and
that all the Lamentations in the World will not restore life to those that are
Dead, he spent but few sighs and tears upon her, but concluded with the Poet in
this manner,

The glories of our blood and state,
Are shaddows not substantial things,
There is no Armor against fate,
Death lays his Icy hands on Kings,
Septer and Crown
Must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal made
With the poor crooked Scyth and Spade.
All heads must come
To the cold ^ombe.
Only the actions of the just,
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust.
CHAP. II. The Emperor Dioclesian being enduced by the Roman Senate, took to
Wife the Princess Aphrodisi^, who having heard speak of Erastus became
enamoured of him, and acquainted him with her affection.
THE death of the Empress was almost insupportable not only to the Emperor,
but also to the People of Rome: by reason of the sweetness and good nature
werewith the Princess was endowed; which caused her to be beloved of all, her
funeral rite, being finished, and the grief of her death being considered not
only at Rome, but in a manner throughout all the World. The Principal Senators
top: representation of an emperor or king, empress or queen, and a male figure
seated at a table, with servants nearby blowing horns; bottom: representation
of a robed figure instructing a male figure from a book in a garden near a
house and Counselors of the Empire considering the great loss the Empire
should sustain if the Prince Erastus should dye before the Emperor his Father'
and thereby leave the Empire without any lawful successor, and that it was
necessary to persuade the Emperor to a second marriage, they therefore humbly
represented the case unto him, and although he at first wholly refused their
proposition: yet in the end: they so prevailed upon him, as to consent thereto;
provided they could find him such a Princess as should equal his lately
deceased Empress; the task was very difficult to be performed, so great were
the beauties and virtues of the disceased, so that it was long first ere they
could in all the world hear of any that was in every thing suitable to the
Emperous desire, but at length they found a Princess who by common report was a
most excellent Creature, and richly endowed, not only with the beauty of body,
but also accomplished in all manner of Virtues, the f^me of her good qualities
was so large, that the Emperor was enduced to be married to her: and she being
named Aphrodicia, arriving at Rome and the Emperor by her outward show and
appearance, believing she was a most accomplished Crerature, caused the
solemnities of marriage to be performed, and they were celebrated in such
solemn and splended manner at the quallity of the Emperor required; and
although people from all Parts resorted to Rome, to be spectators of this
pompious ceremony: yet the young Erastus made not one of the number, being of
this Opinion, that let the pomp be never so great, yet it deserved not the loss
of one hour from hi^ studdy, in which he had so well profited, that the renown
thereof flew through the Universe, and he was not only renowned for these his
virtuous accomplishments, but also for his outward Beauties and Courtesies, in
which he surpassed all the young Princes of his time; this report arieving at
the ears of Aphrodicia, (who was more fair then wise) she began too loosen the
reins to her desires, and so to possess her self with the love of the young
Prince Erastus (whom she had never seen) that she believed it impossible to
live long without giving some case to her disordinate appetite: whereupon
considering with her self of the easiest way to accomplish her desires, and
after several proposals to her self, finding that she could not attain her
ends, without the help of some third Person, who considering the importance of
the affair, should be both secret and faithful; she in conclusion resolved to
serve her self with a certain slave whom she very much loved, and who was used
to serve her in many private affairs: knowing him fit for her purpose, having
caused him to come into her private apartment, after many sighs and tears, she
discovered her whole heart to him, expressly charging him as he tendered his
life, to make no words of it to any person, but to her beloved Erastus; telling
him that she now required his assistance and not advice. The Slave having heard
her discourse, although he was naturally more prone to ill then good, however
considering the danger he should run into, he therefore ^t first endeavored to
divert the Empress, and diswade her from the, unlawful love which she had for
her Son in law. But in the end seeing the obstinate purpose of his Mistress,
and again considering the large promises which she made him, he disposed
himself, (let what would happen) entirely to satisfy the wicked desires of the
Empress, who resolving to put her purpose into practice, began to prepare a
Present of ten shirts, very fair ones, as well in respect of the fineness of
the cloth, as the richness of the embroidery; she also provided several other
sorts of Linen, wrought very curiously with flames of Gold and Silver, wrought
so to the life that it seemed to be true fire, intermixed with certain Letters
which said, thus do I burn, for you and mourn.

She also provided a looking-glass made of a precious stone, which represented
all things as lively as any other looking-glass of Crystal or Steel; and was
enchased with fine Gold, so cunningly wrought, and so artificially, that it
every where represented love stories: these rich things being collected, she
likewise provided perfumes and essences that should, be as agreeable to the
scent, as the others were to the sight, and having locked them all up in a
silver Cabinet, so richly wrought, that the workmanship was of more value, then
the materials, she delivered all to her trusty Slave, charging him to carry
this present to Erastus, as sent from the Emperor and herself, and to
recommend them both to him, expressly commanding him to acquint him that she
herself had wrought most of these works, and above all to show them to him one
after another, presenting her most affectionat commendation, without forg^tting
to declare to him the grievous pain she endured for his love praying him to
have compassion on her, and to find the means to come to Rome that she might
enjoy the the fruit of her so much desired love.

The Slave being dispatched with his rich presents went directly to the Castle
where Prince Erastus with his Masters resided; by fortune he found him alone in
the Garden, contemplating on the secrets of Philosophy: he rejoiced at his good
luck, being of opinion that fortune had favored him very much, in regard he
found the Prince so conveniently without Company, whereby he might have the
convenience to let him see piece by piece, the beauty and richness of his
present, and to have leisure to discharge himself of his whole message; and
although the sage discipline of the Prince, and the great continence wherewith
he was reported to be endowed, might cause him to desist from prosecuting his
design; yet the gayety which he then saw him in, and his Age being so propper
for love affairs, put him in hopes that he should perfect the desires of the
Empress his Mistress; however being cuning and crafty, he purposed to manage
the affair of her affections, as he should find the young Prince affected to
the beauty of the present which he brought him; being thus determined, having
made his reverence, he presented recommendations from the Emperor and Empress,
telling him he was expressly sent to him, to visit him, and to bring him certain
presents as a remembrance, which were for the most part wrought by the
Empresses own hands; who did bear as much affection to him as the Emperor
himself, and although by reason of her youthfulness she was not deserving of
the name of Mother: yet nevertheless she did assure him, that she had as great
an affection for him, or more then if she had bore him of her body; as in time
she would make appear to him: and having opened the Cabinet, he took out the
rich presents which the Empress Aphrodisia had sent him: endeavoring to cause
him to view them severally, but the young Prince not having the patience to
hear the Slave, and less to look on the presents, with an angry Countenance
thus spoke to him, if these presents come from the Emperor my Father, (which I
cannot believe) I am constrained to say, that he is not of such Prudence and
Virtue as he has been esteemed for: for does he not well know, that these
Curiosities and Delica^^es are direct contrary to the study wherein he has
employed me, and which I shall not forsake these Bawbles belong to Women and
not to Men of his degree and quality. I hope his new wise h^^^ n^^ altered the
temper he was of; as I read of so^^ Women, who have overruled wise and vali^^
(...): as for my part I shall not receive these present by no means, therefore
carry them back, and say to the Emperor my Father, that he must ^end me other
presents, if he would have me accept of them; and say as much to the Empress,
whom on my behalf, you may thank for the good will which she bears to me; and
that I may not be ungrateful to her, that I can do no less, but freely tell
her, that it would more redound to her profit and honor, to govern her ^ouse
well, then to loose so much precious time in these vain idle works, from whence
she can reap no honor, but blame. The Slave being ravished with the great
continence of Prince Erastus, and much more with his wise discourse, knew not
what to say, and less what to do, for to carry back the presents he durst not,
fearing he should highly offend the Empress his Mistress, and how to cause the
Prince Erastus to accept of them, he knew not, but on the contrary he found he
had no opportunity to discover the principal point for which he was sent: so
that not being able to speak one word, he remained as in a maze. But the seven
Philosophers came to him in good time, who having understood as well of the
Prince Erastus, as of the Slave, all that had passed between them, having first
commended the Constancy and Magnaminity of their Scholar, for refusing things
so delectable to the eye, as being repugnant to their Phylosophical severity,
yet nevertheless persuaded him to accept the presents which the slave said were
sent as well from the Emperor as the Empress, that he might not anger or
displease either, and this he at last though unwillngly assented to. The Slave
being thus dispatched, entered into new considerations what he should do with
the Empress, for to let her know the business in the very manner as it had
passed, he feared would put her out of her wits, and that he should be
accounted an ignorant fellow, and knew not how to perform the charge that had
been given him, and of which at the beginning he had given so good hopes: and
never the less seeing himself frustrate of all means to accomplish his desires,
he foresaw that instead of great rewards which he hoped for (if the matters
should take effect) there was danger that the Empress might do him some
mischief, and having a great while considered what he had best to do, he in the
end resolved to keep his Mistress in good hopes to get what he could from her,
and keep himself in her favor. And now being come to her presence, he with a
smileing countenance made his obeisance, and told her quite contrary to what
had passed between him and the Prince Erastus, assuring her that the Prince had
received her present with very great affection, and and for a greater
expression of love, had very amorously kissed every particular piece that had
been presented, and had expressly charged him to give the Empress a thousand
thanks, and on his behalf to entreat her not to displace him from her heart
until his return to Rome, which he would hasten as much as possible, and by all
means to accomplish. The poor Princess giving credit to the Slave, and
believing the love of Erastus to be greater toward her, than the Slave had
reported, having a good opinion of her beauty, did so inflame the fire which
was already Kindled in her heart, that out of the abundance of love, without
regarding her degree and quality, she gave great presents to the Slave, to let
him know how great an esteem she had for him, in regard of the pains he had
taken in his late negotiation, making him great and magnificent promises, if he
should manage her affairs so as she might attain to her desired wishes: and
although the Slave had lost all hopes of performing any, thing by reason of the
great continance which he saw in the Prince Erastus; yet nevertheless that he
might gain somewhat on the Empress, he nourished her hopes with a certain issue
of her design: in such a mnnner that this poor and too credulous Princess,
seeing the sweetness of her desires too long d^l^yed, retired into her Cabinet,
not permitting any body to accompany her; w^e^^ casting her self upon her Bed,
with scaldding sight c^lling on her beloved Erastus, and be^^ overcome with
these thoughts she fell into a (...) sleep; wherein she believed that her
beloved Er^stus was come purposely to find her, whereupon ^h^ fi^^e^ly cried
out, A^ my Life you are very welcome wherein all my love, and all my good
depe^ds. A^ which cry all her Ladies and Damsels came running, asking of the
Empress what was the matter, who being awakened, and knowing what had happened,
answered, that having laid her self on the Bed to sleep a little, she had seen
in a Vision; a furious Serpent, who leapt upon her to devour her, and she not
having any way to defend her self had cried out: the Ladies and Damsels, and
other her Attendants replied, that no great heed was to be given to Dreams; and
and to remove this Fancy from her, they began to sing and play on instruments,
in which exercise they employed themselves till it was time to go to Supper.

top: representation of an empress or queen seated at a table in a library with
a package, nearby a figure in livery; bottom: representation of a male figure
with seven robed male figures near a table

CHAP. III. The Empress Aphrodisia writ a Love Letter to Prince Erastus, which
he having read, tore in pieces with anger, threatening the Slave to chastise
him, if ever he again attempted to appear before him about any such affair. The
Slave keeps the Empress in hopes, telling her the contrary to what had passed.
SUpper time being come, and the Empress being seated at the Table with the
Emperor, she was more melancholy then ordinary, and took no pleasure in the
pastime that was presented to her: but sighed so vehemently, that the Emperor
took notice of it, and being troubled, asked her the cause of her sighing, to
which she answered; that the remembrance of a horrible dream which had happened
about break of day, was the cause of her present sadness: and indeed she said
true, for it was Erastus whom she had seen in this Vision, although she had
told it to be a horrible Serpent; the Emperor then being willing to put this
Fancy out of her mind, told her that she must give no credit to Dreams, being
things without substance, that vanish away, whereupon she put on a mercy
countenance, and entertained the Emperor as she was wont, until it was bed
time, which occasioned more pain to this poor Princess, the Emperor for his
part went to sleep, but the Empress could not close her eyes for thinking of
her affection to Erastus being of opinion that her affairs having had so
prosperous a beginning, she should lose noe time or occasion to bring it to
that end so much desired by her: and ruminating all the night on what means she
should use to perfect her desires: sometimes she doubted that the Slave was
insufficient, for an enterprise of so high a consequence; otherwise, she could
not find any way possible to speak with Erastus, because he was at Rome, and
always accompanied with grave Philosophers; whose doctrine she very well knew
was contrary to her appetite. In conclusion she resolved to speak to him by
Letters and Presents, and so soon as the day began to appear, that night in the
opinion of the Empress being longer than usual, she arose, and being retired
alone into her Cabinet, she writ this Letter which follows.

THE Empress Aphrodicia to her Friend Erastas health, I doubt not but these
presents will astonish you, that I without respecting your grandeur, have bin
so bold to write to you, without considering that I present to your fair eyes a
thing so ill dictated as these presents: and to cause your mouth so accustomed
to all good learning, to read this Letter destitute of all eloquence: however,
I have not forborne putting Pen to paper, being assured that your sublime spirit
will measure my writeing according to the affection from whence it proceeds,
and that you will have a greater esteem for it, than if all the Oratory had
been employed to assist me with Eloquence upon this occasion: for according to
the Poet, Love hides many faults, and to tell you truly how it is: this God
has so fettered me that to obey him, I have been forced thus to write to you,
praying you to receive and entertain it with a pleasant countenance, believing
that it is not simply paper, but my self: who with all my affection am
transformed into it, and I wish I were personally present with you, assuring my
self that I should enjoy the fruit of my desires: which I hope are long by word
of mouth to discover to you; for it is impossible that your knowing spirit
should not be acquainted with the secrets of my heart, which is more yours then
my own, for you are Lord of it, so as you will please to love that which with
all her heart loves you. However if your temper corresponds to your name (for
Erastus signifies amiable) I hold my self assured, that my recommendation shall
be received, which nevertheless I present to you with all possible affection;
and because I wondered at your absence at my Wedding with the Emperor. I
therefore pray you to take occasion to come and see me, that you may let the
World know that you are not dissatisfied with my alliance: in doing whereof
which I entreat of you you shall hear openly by word of mouth the rest of my
secret which only tends to your profit, honor, and greatness In the mean time
to testify the perfect love which I bear to you: I send to you the most
precious things which I have, being certain jewels which you shall find to be
singular, not only for their beauty, and richness, but also in regard they are
pieces of antiquity, which my late Father gave particularly to me, being the
preciest things he was Master of: and therefore I send them to you, as better
deserving to enjoy things so rare, desiring you to accept of them with my
heart, And as you have the report to surpass i^ every thing all other men, that
you not only permi^ your self to be overcome by the force of a simple woman but
let her know that your love is more ardent then hers if it were possible. I
wish you good health. This Letter being written and sealed, the Empress wrapped
it up in fine cloth of Gold, with many Jewels, Pearls, Diamonds, Safers and
many other precious stones of inestimable value, and enclosed all in a Cabinet
of fine G^ld, which she delivered to her faithful slave: charging him to carry
it to Erastus, advising him to find him alone, and accompany the present with
speeches, proper to the intent of his message; and the slave might perform this
voyage with the more bravery, she presented him with a horse, and a good some
of money.

The Slave thus dispatched, in short time arrived at the Palace where Prince
Erastus studied: where by good Fortune he found him alone in his studdy, and as
to the matter of the present delivered his mesage as the Empress had commanded
him, without proceeding further, but only to bar^ r^commendations from his
Mistress, forbearing to deliver the rest of the message, until he should
understand how the Prince would accept of the p^e^ent, being of the opinion
that it would be imp^ss^ble for a Prince of his age to sl ght such precious
Jewels as he had brought; but Erastus having considered the richness of the
present, began to consider what might be the cause of the great liberallity of
the Empress, in regard that all women are naturally covetous. But having found
the Letter and read the contents of it, he presently had some suspicion:
although he could not absolutely believe love to be the cause: but however in
great anger he tore the Letter into prices, and sound^y rat^ed the slave,
forbidding him upon his life never to come into his presence, and that he
should carry back the Jewels to his Mistress, and use his endeavor to diswade
her from her disordinate humors. The slave being much troubled returned back
to Rome, and in his way thither, he considered that if he should acquaint his
Mistress of the truth of this affair, his profit would be at an end, and
therefore being come into the presence of the Empress he spoke thus, Madam, I
do assure you that I have full and according to your intention, executed the
charge which you were pleased to give me: and that the Prince Erastus is wholly
at your dispose. True it is, that not thinking himself worthy of the great
present which you sent him, told me that your love was sufficient, without
depriving you of so great rarieties and therefore he has returned them, only
keeping the Letter, which he read over and kissed more than a thousand times in
my presence; and he would willingly have returned an answer; but that he
doubted his Masters would return presently and surpr^ze him, wherefore he in
short told m^ that he would suddenly come to Rome, where by word of mouth he
would give you full satisf^ction: beseeching you in the mean time to continue
your good opinion of him. The Empress was highly contented with the slaves
discourse, however she was somewhat dissatisfied, for that her presents had
been return^d without any litteral answer, but being blinded by her passion,
she absolutely believed the slave, and therefore rested contented her self, and
highly contented him, by great riches, which she gave him earnestly, expecting
the arrival of Erastus, but thinking his stay to be very long and passionately
desiring his company, she devised to hasten him by the Emperors command, and
therefore she solicited him to condescend that Erastus might come to Rome.

CHAP. IV. The Empress Aphrodici^ persuades the Emperor, to cause Erastus to
come to Rome, where by his command great preparation was made for his
entertainment.
SOON after this the Emperor and Emperess being in ^ed together, she began to
speak of the Prince Erastus, highly commending the means which the Emperor had
used, to provide Masters for him, that were so excellent as the seven
Philosophers: to render him perfect in all things, and worthy of the the great
Roman Empire, which Nature had provided for him; being as she said very joyful
of the great g^^d and profit which the Prince had attained by his study, and of
the advantage which all the World would receive by mean^ of his perfections,
but that she had been somewhat troubled why the Prince was not present at the
solemnity of her nuptials. Whereunto the Emperor replied, that the
youthfulness of the Prince, was the cause lest in an age which was inclined to
pleasure, the pomp and delicacies which he might see at the solemnitly more
than at another time, might distract, divert him from the study of Philosophy,
in which he not being sufficiently grounded, all the pleasures which he might
take, should turn more to his disadvantage than true content, if he should
place his affection on the pleasures that would be presented to him at Rome:
and it was to be feared, that instead of the go^d affection he had to his
study, he should be debauched, as it would be difficult to reduce him to that
again, wherein he well profited, that there was great hopes he would in time, be
so great a proficient in all virtues, as to arrive at the highest perfection.
All this discourse of the Emperor only served as fire and flame to consume the
poor Empress, who already sufficiently enflamed with the love of the Prince
Erastus. Whereupon taking the opportunity of this discourse of the Emperors to
obtain her desires, she thus replied to him: wherefore ^ir, do you permit these
great virtues to be hidden? and to what end is it, that your Son (for I love
him as well as you) has so well profited to r^main always in an obscure place
where his virtue is unknown; wherefore do you not cause him to come to Rome,
where there is so many ways to employ his perfections, for in the f^^st place
he will see how affairs are mananaged, he will make himself known as the Senate
and People, and by that means will increase the esteem that every one h^th for
you, not only for the good usage which they have under your government but also
for the great foresight w^h they shall see in you, for having provided for them
a Prince well instructed to keep them in peace after your discease. The good
Emperor hearing his Son thus commended, and being in a manner ravished with
joy of a fatherly love, thus answered the Empress. I assure you Madam, I have
often had it in my thoughts to do what you advise me to, and do now purpose
very suddenly to cause my Son Erastus to come to Rome. The Empress hearing this
and seeing her affairs in so good order, ceased not till she had brought them
to perfection: so that the Emperor promised the next day to send to the
Philosophers, to know if Prince Erastus might come to him without prejudice to
his Studdy; letti^g them know that if what was reported of the Prince were
true, he might come without any danger. The n^xt day then for th s purpose he
dispatched a Gentleman, one of the most considerable persons of his Court who
being arrived at the Palace of Prince Erastus, delivered to the Philosophers
what he had in charge from the Emperor: enjoining them to accompany the Prince
Erastus to Rome, so as they were assured he was Master of those perfections as
was so much desired and reported of him. The Philosophers understanding this,
they conducted the Ambassadors, (who was a wise Gentleman) to the Prince
Erastus, and having in his presence examined him upon several points of
Philosophy, to whom the Prince made very pertinent answers, and moreover
disputing with him the most subtilty that they could in all manner of Science;
the Philosophers thereupon said to the Gentleman whom the Emperor had sen^,
that he might boldly assure his Majesty, that Prince Erastus h^s S^n, was one
of the wisest young men that could be found in all the World; and that they
purposed in order to his Fathers commands to wait on him the next day. The
Gentleman being very joyful of this news, and of what he had seen, being
arrived at the Court, gave the Emperor an account of his Embassy, who could
not contain himself for great joy to hear that the Virtue of his Son was no
less than report had given out: but above all the Empress Aphrodicia
understanding that the coming of her dearly beloved Erastus was so nere, she
knew not how to moderate her present joy. Upon this account, the Emperor
caused the Senate and all the M gistrates and Officers of Rome to assemble
commanding them to be ready the next day to meet his son Erastus. This being
n^ised amongst the people every one began to make preparations, and to provide
for the greatest feast that had for a long (...) b^n in Rome, the horsemen were
ready to accompany the triumphant Chariots which went to meet the Prince with
all sorts of instruments for such a n entertainment; so that there was no
corner of all Rome but what was filled with joy, this young Prince being
desired of every one, but more especialy of the Lad^es, and above all by the
Empress, to whom the night seemed to last a thousand years by reason of the
great desire she had to have a sight of him, of whom she was so much enamoured
withal, having never seen him.

CHAP. V. Erastus foresaw by the course of the Stars, that in his voyage to
Rome, he should dye a shamful death, having no other remedy but to remain seven
days without speaking. The Philosophers his Masters obliged themselves
respectively one by one, to preserve him from all harm, during those seven
days.
THAT very evening whereon these preparations were made at Rome, for the
entertainment of Prince Erastus, he being walking in a Garden, had a mind to
see the cause and influence of the Stars; the good or ill fortune that should
happen to him in his Voyage to Rome, and beholding the Heav^ns, and ^he Aspects
of the Planets, he was perfect in the Science of Astrology, and who p^rfectly
know the course of the Stars, and the significations o^ the Aspects of the
Planets, knew by one Star his going to Rome would in few day^s be the cause of
(...) and ignominious death; whereupon not out of the consideration of death to
which he knew all men were subject, but for the shame which he should suffer,
he began to complain and lament so highly that all the Philosophers (being
amazed at it, as at a thing which they had never seen in him) ran to see what
was the matter with this young Prince, to whom top: representation of a eight
male figures, seven wearing hats, looking up at the stars; bottom:
representation of two armies on horseback facing each other he sighingly thus
said, do you not see the disposition of the Stars, and with what they threaten
me, as for death I value it not, although I am in the prime flower of my age,
being assured that in few years, I must leave this world according to the
course of Nature: but I am troubled at the shameful man^^r of my death, that I
am to suffer, and of the inf^my and ignominy that I must endure, which i^, th^^
which troubles me more then ordinary, I pray c^nsider this malign Star a
little, and with w^^ ^^serable end it threatens me, in this my v^y^g^ to Rome.
The Philosophers being tro^bled a^ w^a^ their young Master had told them, began
to consider the order of the Stars as they were at that instan^^ and to judge
according to their aspects, and confu^^ed about the malevolent Star which their
wise Master had showed to them, and having e^ect^d (...) Scheme, and calculated
the revolutions of the H^^vens, they found that what their Scholar had (...)
was certainly true, and the effects of an eccl^^^^^ which had lately happened,
did demonstrate then by the concurrence of certain malignant Plan^t^ which
appeared to the present sight, that Prince Erastus went to expose himself to a
death, the most ignominious that could be imagined; whereupon looking upon one
another as lost and undone men, not having the power to open their mouths and
speak one word, they were so fully possessed with grief, because there was no
way to^^rd the voyage of the^ young Master, by reason things were so far gone
that the next day he was to make his entry into Rome and that in pursuance of
this voyage, they foresaw an infamous death not only to their scholar, but
also to themselves, being thus at a loss, and not knowing what to say, and less
what to do; the wise Erastus having well examined the revolutions of the
Heavens, and the Aspects of the Stars, thus began to say to them, what do you
think my Masters, there is but one only remedy in this, which depends upon the
influence of this Star, which you see is in opposition to that which threatne^h
me, by which I comprehend that if I can remain these seven next ensuing days
without speaking to any person whatsoever, the malignity of this influence will
pass over, and I may avoid the infamy wherewith I am threatened by these S^ars:
as for my remaining without speaking, I shall take ear in it, but all the
difficulty remains to find the means to resist during these seven days to the
violence that shall be used against me, and the cruel threatenings that a Person
of very great power during these seven days, shall practice against me: the
Philosopher having heard this, and truly knowing that their young Master had
understood the truth thereof better than they: they told him that if he had the
heart, and resolved to keep silent for seven days, (which they thought
impossible in regard of the great violencies and ignominious usage, that he
must suffer, wherein it was impossible for any man to pass by in silence) that
they would undertake to preserve him from death for those seven days, for
there was none of them, who by a divine excellence wherewith they were
respectively endowed, that could not superceed not on^y for one day, but for a
longer time the execution of the most criminal and wicked man in the wo^ld, and
therefore they undertook to defend with much ease the innocence of their
Master: so that each of them took the charge to preserve him from death, and
defend him by turns each of them one day in such manner, that the pleadings of
those seven should not be finished, u^til the malignity of the influence of the
stars should he passed over: and there upon they all promised and swore to the
Prince Erastus, who thus reply^d ^f you think to perform what you have
pro^^sed, let us boldly go to Rome, for the malign infl^^nc^ (...) the Stars
will have their effects as well in any ^^h^r place as at Rome: where upon they
all promi^^^ (...) defend him respectively every one his day (...) the other
side, the young Prince Erastus hav^^^ (...) off all fear, promised to keep
silence f^r th^se (...) days; the day being then come, they b^gan their
journey toward Rome, with a firm resolution to vanquish the malignity and
conjuration of the Heavens by the means aforesaid.

CHAP. VI. Erastur being arrived at Rome, put the Emperor his Father, and all
the People of Rome in great trouble by reason of his silence. The Empress
Aphrodicia caused him to go into her Chamber, undertaking to cause him to speak.
THE Emperor having given good order to all things requisite for the entry of
his Son, accompanied with many Princes, and Barons, that went to meet him: to
set down here the great Nobility that were assembled at this entry, the rich
Habits which were worn on this occasion, and the Arches, and triumphant
Chariots, it would be superfluous; for you may be assured that all was done
that a Roman Emperor could do; to honor the entry of a person so worthy of
respect, as his only Son, and that nothing was wanting on the other side, in
the appearance of the people, who was as well pleased as the Emperor, every
one to his power endeavoring to do honor to him, who was to be their Prince
after the death of the Emperor; and therefore you might see people from all
parts in their richest and best equipage, who all accompanied the Emperor, to
receive the Prince Erastus: the Empress for her part earnestly expected him,
who remained in the Palace, accompanied with a great number of Princesses,
Ladies, and Damsels and you may be sure that she omitted nothing that might
enrich her natural beauty, that she might have the stronger hold on the heart
of Erastus, who then began to enter the City of Rome, whither he being come, he
was met at the Gate by the Emperor, who kindly embraced his Son, asked with a
pleasant countenance of his good health, and what he thought of the Senate; the
Nobility who were come to meet him: The good old man hoping that his Son would
make a pertinent answer according to the great wisdom that was reported of him;
but Erastus remembering what the Heavens threatened him, and of the silence he
was to keep, to avoid the malignity of the caelestial influence^, an^wered not
one word, which occasioned great trouble, not only to the Emperor, but also to
the Senate, and the whole Nobility; for they had all great fancy to hear him
speak, expecting what he should say, would be so much to the purpose, that
every word would be a sentence; the Emperor then being moved with anger and
incredible sorrow, with a troubled and angry countetenance, demanded of the
seven wise Philosophers, if this was the wisdom and great perfection which they
had caused him to believe his Son was endowed with; saying that he was complete
in all things, and what doctrine they had taught him not to answer his Father
being an Emperor, what Philosophy is this quoth the good Emperor? in what
Aristotle or Plato have you found the doctrine? for instead of being wise, and
well instructed as you informed me, every one sees that he is ignorant, a Sot,
and without understanding; but I assure you by the words of a Prince that ye
shall be punished according to your deserts. The Philosophers seeming to be as
much surpised, as the rest to see Erastus thus mute said to the Emperor, know
Sir that we have not informed you Majesty any thing touching your Son, that is
not true, so that here is not any Philosopher modern nor ancient to whom he may
not be compared: Being as well or better taught than any man whatsoever of this
age; to tell you wherefore he is at this present mute we know not, but we can
well assure your Majesty that it is not done without great cause, which
nevertheless is unknown to us, for being Master of so much knowledge he well
enough knows when he ought to speak, and when ^o h^ld his peace. But let the
Philosophers s^y w^^^ ^h^y would the Emperor could not be appe^s^^ but being
transp^r^ed with anger, h^ rep^^^^, (...) Erastus c^uld have no reason to be
(...) in his p^ete^ce: And thus being both angry (...) S^n in this condition he
left him (...) ^ed wi^h the Nobility that accompanied (...) The E^^^ ss hearing
the noise of horses went (...) meet the Emperor, being attended by all her
^^^ye^ and the Roman Princesses, and having under^o^^^ from him the small
satisfaction he had took in seeing his Son and she beholding Prince Erastus: To
whom she was e^slaved, without having seen him and considering with her eyes
that his beauty was beyond compare greater ^hen report had given of him, she
became wholly en^moured of him and therefore with a merry cheerful countenance
she went to him, and having very amorously embraced him, she began to reason
with him of many matters, but the young Prince made her no answer, whereupon
the Empress was astonished, yet however the fire that consumed her did not at
all diminish, but on the the contrary increased, in such manner that not being
able to resist the violence of love which constrained her, she took occasion
upon the Princis silence to increase the flame of her disord^nate appetite; and
thereupon went toward the Emperor to whom she declared, that every one very
well knew that the silence of his Son, was not because he was naturally mute as
might app^are by what the Gentleman related, who came from Eras^us ^u^ the day
before: who affirmed that he had heard him dispute so ingeniously with his
Masters, that he rather judged him to be Master than the Scholar; and
therefore, they might conclude that this silence was caused by some accident,
which she would undertake to discover and remedy, having the young Erastus in
her power, in a place where they might be alone. The Emperor believing what
the Empress said, was out of a good will to his Son, (not in the least
suspecting her loyalty) and being very desirous to discover the cause of his
Sons silence and to give a remedy thereto: He presently c^ma^ded that Prince
Erastus should be led to the Chamber of the Empress, and that they should be
left alone, the Empress seeing all things to fall out according to her
expectations was very joyful: And promised the Emperor that she would use
such means that his Son should speak, ^n the other side, the young Prince
foreseeing the great attempts that should be made upon him, was fearful left
he should be enforced to break his resolution: Nevertheless being resolved to
vanquish the malignity of the stars by a strong and firm constancy, he went
cheerfully to the Empresses Chamber, where in short time we may see by
experience that hatred prevails more than love in the hearts of Ladies.

CHAP. VII. The Empress Aphrodicia being shut up alone with Prince Erastus,
endeavored all she could to induce him to her appetite, but seeing her self
refused and disdained she made an outcry that he would h^ve fo^ced her, by
which means the Prince was m^de Prisoner and condemned to Death.
THis cruel Tygress seeing her prey taken in the toyl^^ (...) thou^^ losi^g
one moment of time, (...) to her Chamber, where being come she look^d her self
(...) and having taken the young Prince by the hand she caused him to sit down
by her and c^lli^g her arm about his neck she embraced and k^ss^d him in a
different fashion then what a mother u^es to her Son, in fine, after many
kisses and embraces, she asked the cause of his silence, which held the
Emperor and all the Roman people in so great trouble; who in honor of him had
caused his entry to be so magnificent. She told him that every body had cause
to think it strange, that having lived a long time without seeing the
Country, his Father, nor friends, being came thither he did so apparently
sl^gh^ them, being a thing unhandsome in any person of understanding and much
more in him, who had bin accounted so discreet. In this time the young top:
representation of an empress or queen seated on a bed pulling the cape of a
male figure as he pulls away; bottom: representation of an empress or queen
with female attendants kneeling before an emperor or king seated on a throne
Prince fixed his eyes on the ground, without one word of answer, knowing that
to be his critical minute of holding his peace. Whereupon the Empress being
astonished; she again threw her self about his neck, giving him an infin te of
kisses; but the more amorously she behaved her self, the less regard he took of
her: The Empress seeing this, spoke to him in these terms. What disdain is
this, or what other accident can have happened to you, to cause you to be mute;
why do you not speak to me, what do you fear, remove all fear, and tell me the
cause of this silence, and let me alone, for I will carry it so, both to the
Emperor; and all the world, that every one shall be satisfied, without
imputing anything to you; and if you have resolved to be silent to all others,
wherefore do you deny to speak to me, to me who am so ravished with your love,
that I can enjoy no rest but when I think on you and now I see you, and have
means to speak to you, I should be to happy, if this unlucky silence did not
at this time hinder me: If you are beautyfull be not therefore cruel; and if
you are wise as report g^ves out of you, wherefore do you grieve your father,
and all the world; if you have any discretion, know who loves you; if you are
young, I for my part am in the fl^wer of my age; if you are fair, I do not
believe that th^re is any woman in Rome, that can equal me for beauty? What
should hinder then from reaping the fruit which is prepared for you; is that
according to what you sent word by my slave, is this the effects which I hoped
from you, where are now the great promises which you made me. Oh! how much
better had it bin for me to have believed my self loved by you, when you were
absent, then to see my self slighted now you are present and that you may know
all, it is I only that have occasioned your voyage to Rome, to have the
opportunity to see you and discourse with you, and now I find that you despise
me, wherefore do you not speak to me, and why do y^u not remove your eyes from
the ground to look on me: Be assured that I will kill my self, for I dye if you
do not help me, alas my dear it is easy for y^u to help me, I beseech you then
do not deny me, and I assure you by the word of a Princess, that none shall
ever know of it: Wherefore are you so cruel toward her, who loves you dearer
than her own life; and if my kisses and embraces, and my ardent prayers will
not move you, at the lest behold my two eyes, which now serve me only as two
fountains, and let my poor heart move you, which for your sake burne^ in a
continual flame: Is there any rock or marble that will not hearken to me? Or
any steel that would not be softened with my speeches? I thought I might have
molified the most savage and the most cruel beasts in the converse; in fine, I
thought I might have overcome all the world, and you alone make no reckoning of
me: Remove, remove this Ice which thus freezeth your heart, I beg of you not
thus to despise me, me who dye for you; I lose my speech, alas my heart fails
me, behold me at your feet beging of you to relieve me, at least with one word,
be it what it will, and that if I can receive no other; shall very much content
me. These were the words of the Empress, but let her discourse be what it
would, Prince Erastus took no notice of it, whereupon she being desperate,
began to sigh and Curse her fortune, which had forced her to love one who would
not regard her: and nevertheless resolving, let what would happen, to have her
will with this young Prince; seeing persuasions would do no good, she thought
to use force, but he knew well enough how to defend himself from that; for
although speech wa^ prohibited him, yet he might guard himself from violence,
whereupon the Empress began to be so outrageous, seeing her self so refused,
that changing the unbridled love which she bore to Prince Erastus, into a
mortal hatred, she thus spoke to him. I am resolved that you shall perform my
pleasure in despite of you, or I will ^ea^ my Clothes, and do violence to my
self, and with loud Clamours I will accuse you to the Emperor, that you would
force me, and then the small esteem that you have for me shall bring you to an
Ignomi^ious death! Therefore choose one or the other, for I am resolved no
longer to be thus abused by you. The young Prince hearing the speech of the
Empress, and not knowing what course to take went to the Chamber door, and
began to fly, but the Empress tearing her Clothes and pulling off all her head
attire, striking her head and breasts, with her fists, and running after young
Prince Erastus, cried out aloud Help, help, seize on him, seize on him, let not
the Traitor escape you. Oh me wretched woman! Oh how is my life accused! Come
quickly, my Lord and Husband, come quickly I beseech you and stay not; behold
the wickedness and Treason of your Son, who would have forced me, behold how
the wretch flies because he could not have his will on me; See, see, the good
doctrine which the Traitors has learned, not to vouchsafe to speak honestly to
you, and without shame to ask that of me, which is not Lawful for to speak or
think of, and indeed he would have forced me; come then and revenge me, and
your self also, of the great outrage which this wicked one (who never was your
Son) would have done to me: For if he had ever in the least belonged to you, he
had never had the heart to think, much less to do an action so wicked. The
Emperor who had run with the greatest part of his Princes and Barrons at the
cry of his wicked wife; having hard what she said, and seeing his Son Erastus
making have all pale and trembling, being moved with great anger, commanded him
to be seized on, and put in a dungeon; absolutely believing the case to be such,
as his disloyal wife had represented it: The poor young Prince, was suddenly
taken bound and manacled, very strictly without speaking one word for defense,
or excuse, but was in a manner confounded, as it happens to those who are
surprised in a wicked action, which being seen of every one, all the world was
of oppinion that he was guilty, of what the Empress had accused him; and
therefore there was none so bold as to open their mouths for poor Erastus; but
they had all great compassion for his fact, for he was secured in the strongest
and obscure Prison in all the Castle. The Empress on her part required speedy
justice against him: In persuance whereof the Emperor resolving to be
revenged, not only for the outrage done to his wife, but also to himself; and
that he might let the people know that he had a heart equal, to the Emperors
his predecessors; not to spare his own blood, in the execution of justice,: he
therefore caused the Counsel presently to assemble, where taking his place, he
passed sentence of death against his Son; comanding that within three hours he
should be executed, with the most cruel and most Ignominous death, that could
be imagined, the which sentence was pronounced, and intimated to young Prince
Erastus: Yet nevertheless, although he plainly saw the injustice done him, and
that it would not be very difficult to have sentence rewarded, and to Justify
himself, by relating all that had passed: Yet however being very well informed
of the threatenings which the Star^ had given him, if for the space of seven
days, he should speak one word; he chose rather to hold his peace, than to
defend himself, depending upon the promise which his seven Masters had made
him; whose knowledge and prudence was so well known and experienced, that
although he saw himself in eminent danger of death: Yet nevertheless he had
this hope, that they would easily stop the execution of this cruel sentence,
until the malignity of the influence of the Stars should be passed over, which
time being come he might freely speak, and defend himself against the guilt,
and Ignominy; whereof he was accused. The sentence of Erastus was no sooner
published in Rome, but in a moment, there was seen a very great alteration: For
instead of their preperations of joy, for the entry of their young Prince;
every one now hang down their heads, so that there was nothing but sadness, and
melancholy throught all Rome; In the first place the poor Emperor, cried and
sighed; and with him all the Lords and Ladies, at the misfortune of Prince
Erastus: In testimony whereof, all persons as well men as women, threw off
their rich habits, which they had put on to honor the entry of their Prince;
and instead of that, every one put on mourning aparrell; in the mean time the
Officers of justice, began to provide in execute the sentence of Erastus, so
that every where, all went with crye^ and ^eare, to see this cruel spectacle:
But the seven Philosophers, who were met together in counsel, to advise about
Erastus, concluded that Euprosigorius should first begin, and order the matter
so with the Emperor, that execution of the sentence should be stoped for that
day, and that one day after another, every one should do the like, so that each
of them, causing the execution, to be delayed for one day; the fatal days of
Erastus, would in that time be passed over, and thereupon the good Philosopher
disposed himself to go find the Emperor.

top: representation of a knight or soldier holding his sword to the neck of a
dog, near a snake, a cradle, and two female figures; bottom: representation of
a male figure holding an axe to a tree

CHAP. VIII. Euprosigorus the Philosopher, puts a stop to the execution of the
sentence of Erastus for one day, by the example of a Roman Gentleman; who had
killed his beloved Dog, who had rescued his only Son from a Serpent that would
have devoured him; giving too much creditto the speeches of his wife, who had
told him that his son was dead.
THe Philosopher Euprosigorus being arived at the Palace, saw that the
Emperor was walking alone in the hall; no person darcing to speak one word to
him, yet nevertheless he entered with much freedom, and great confidence; But he
was no sooner in the presence, when many flocked together after him, to know if
he came upon the account of Erastus, and what would be the issue of it; before
the Philosopher had the convenience of making his reverence to the Emperor, he
looked on him, with an angry and troubled countenance, and with a high tone
demanded of him from whence proceeded that rashness and presumption, to dare to
appear before him, and more especially at a time so improper, and if that were
the doctrine and instruction, which he and his Companions had taught his Son,
to scorn to speak, nor answer to his father, and to solicit his Mother-in-Law
to so dishonest an account, Nay; and to attempt to force her. But continued he,
I promise you by the word of a Prince, that I will provide so sharp, and so
examplary a Chastisement; as well for you as for that Rascal my Son, that
shall leave a perpetual memory, and shall serve as an example to posterity to
cause them to take heed of Committing such felonies, toward their Lords or
Princes: The Emperor having ended, the good Philosopher with a cheerful
countenance, and without the least appearance of trouble, thus answered; know
Sir, that it is very ill done of any person, to Act any thing contrary to right
justice, and more especially for those who are in public employments, and
although your Majesty being endowed with great wisdom, may think that you have
not erred, in your sentence against Prince Erastus; yet nevertheless I can
boldly say, that it is impossible but there should be a fault, in giving so
sudden a sentence; for every wise man ought dilligently and deliberately to
weight the cause, and to understand the fact very well before he proceeds to
Judgment: And those persons who are fit to be Judges, ought principally to
avoid three things; that is malice, disdain, and anger, as for the two first I
shall say nothing at present, being assured that neither malice, nor disdain,
did not induce you to denounce this rash sentence; but I may speak of anger,
for it was that which caused you to pronounce so severe a sentence; and
certainly the Poet said truly

Anger by some termed Ire,
Springs from the heart and fire;
Which, if quenched not in Season,
By the water of sound reason,
Right nor wrong, nor time nor place,
Can prevent its furious race.
All these disorders Sir, have possession of your Spirit, and have moved you to
a certain impetious anger, in this so important a cause, and that merely
through the speech of a simple woman; although your Majesty is not ignorant of
the little reason which an angry woman is Mistress of; who for the most part
suffer themselves, to be transported by their passion without inclining to any
reason; so that I am assured that no good can come of it, and if you do not
change your mind, I doubt it will happen to you, as it did to a Roman
Gentleman, who giving to much credit to his wives persuasions killed his only
Dog which he had loved above all things; of which action at last, he too late,
very much repented. What was this Gentleman said the Emperor, and how was the
matter: I shall tell you Sir, said the Philosopher provided that in the mean
time your Majesty will be pleased to stay the execution of Prince E^astus, so
that having heard me, if your mind shall alter, (as I hope it will) and the
sentence not being executed, you may be at liberty to pronounce one more
favorable, otherwise my desires will be in vain: Therefore Sir if you please
to stay the execution until I have finished my discourse, and then you may do
even what you please, not only with Prince Erastus, but also with me and my
Companions. To this the Emperor agre^d although he did certainly, believe that
nothing that he could ^ay should cause him to change his Opinion; yet in regard
he had oftentimes took great pleasure in his learned discourse, he was content
to hear him; an^ commanded the execution of his Son to be d^l^yed for the
present: The Philosopher therefore taking up the discourse, thus began.

Some time since, there lived a Gentleman in Rome having but one Son, who bring
desirous to have him well bred up as his only dear Child, caused him to be
nursed in the house, and laid in his Chamber; the some Gentleman had a Dog
which he had a very great esteem for, as well for his handsomeness as good
properties, and he took much pleasure in him, as it was possible for any
Gentleman to take in such a creature. It happened that there was a Tournament
or running at Tilt, held in the public Place in Rome; to which the Gentleman
amongst others of his quality resorted: And no sooner was he gone but his wife
also being as unadvised as many other woman, had a mind to go see the pleasures
of this Tournement, and thereupon she went with all her Chamber-maids and
damsells; and to their great misfortune the Nurse went to the Top of the house,
from whence although she could not see, yet she might hear what was done at the
Tilting, having only shut the Dog into the Chamber, where her Masters Son lay:
This Gentleman's house being old and out of repair, there were many breeches in
it even in the very room, where the Child and Dog were and that one of these
holes, there at this time entered a great and horrible Serpent, which the dog
seeing, and that he made toward the Cradle, for the natural love which these
Creatures bear to their Masters, even to hazard their lives in their defense;
he slew upon the Serpent, to keep him from hurting the Child: But the one was
not more furious in assaulting, then the other was in defending, and the Dog
and Serpent struggling together nere the Cradle where the Child lay they over
turned it; so that the Child fell to the ground, but without any harm, for the
clothes that were upon were by the tumbling now underneath, and the Cradle
standing on the four pomells, the Child lay as safe and as well as it had done
before it was overturned: the Dog being enraged as well at the wounds he had
received of the Serpent, as at the wrong which he saw was done to his young
Master, threw himself with great fury upon the Serpent, who knew well enough
how to defend himself; however in the end, the dog remained victorious and tore
the Serpent in the cruelest manner he could imagine, so that he was all smeered
with his blood.

Hereupon the Nurse coming into the Chamber to see how the Child did, she had
no sooner put her foot within the door, but seeing the Cradle topsie turvy, and
the Dog all bloody, with out looking any further, and being very certain that
he who had saved the Child's life, had killed him; she began to tear her
Clothes, and with outrageous cries went to entry this sad news to the Child's
Mother; who understanding of the death of her Child, fell into such a passion
as any one would for do the loss of such a Child, and if the Nurse expressed
her sorrow in tearing her clothes, it is to be supposed that the poor Mother
did not forbear doing the same to her flesh; not only she her self, but all the
women of the house who had accompanied their Mistress, increased the
lamentation, and made an incredible noise with their great cries and
lamentations, not any of them having the wit to go into the Chamber, and see
how it had happened: but there they continued their outcries until the
Gentleman returned from the Tourney, to whom they all with tears related, not
that which they had seen, but that which they had imagined by the Nurses
discourse.

The poor Father hearing these sad tidings, more full of rage than tears, (for
anger and sadness which are great passions had stopped his tears) went directly
into the Chamber, where meeting the Dog and seeing him all bloody, gave
absolute credit to what the woman had told him: and having his sword drawn in
his hand, ^e smote the Dog with such fury, that off went his head, and after he
had spurned him with anger: he began to curse his fortune, and lament his Son,
using great threatenings toward his Wife and the other women of his house, for
the little care they had taken of his Child; and being in despair, he went
toward the Cradle, which he took up to see if there were yet any parts of his
Child whole, but he found him well, and without any hurt, whereupon all the
Family were highly contented, as you may judge: and yet they were all
astonished in that they had seen the Dog so bloody, but as they sought about
the Chamber, they saw the great Serpent which the Dog had tore to pieces,
whereupon they conjectured that the blood that was about the Dog, came by
reason of the combat which he had with the Serpent, in defense of the Child;
which the Gentleman seeing, and being enraged that he had in anger killed his
good Dog, he would have slain his Wife, and all the other Women of the house,
who had been the cause of the Dogs death. Ah poor Dog said he, that thy
friend-ship and loyalty have been so unfortunate to thee, to cause thy death
instead of a recompense which thou did deserve for so well defending my
little Child. In fine, this poor Gentleman could not be appeased for the loss
which he had caused of so faithful an annimal as his Dog was, so that every one
that hard it, had pity and grief for the Child's loss, was now converted into
grief for the loss of the Dog; all which sorrow happened to this Gentleman, for
having given too much credit to his Wife, for if he had been wise, he would
first have examined the matter, and accordingly have judged it, without entering
into such fury, as to act a thing which caused perpetual sorrow to him without
any remedy. I shall conclude that this will be your case, if you give credit to
the words of a simple woman, to put your Son to a Shameful death, whose cause
being heard deserves rather praise than punishment and perpetual infamy; and
therefore as your Majesty's most humble servant, I advise you that laying aside
all anger before you proceed further, you cause this action of your son to be
consulted on, by wise and experienced men, such as will be faithful to you, and
that you will revoke this sentence, which your anger has caused you to
pronounce. The Emperor took such notice of the Philosophers saying, that he
commanded stay of the execution of the sentence, until he should take further
order therein; and thus was Prince Erastus defended the first day.

CHAP. IX. The Emperor Dioclesian, by an example being induced which the
Empress Aphrodicia related of a fair Pine Tree, which being old, is lopped, and
then cut down to nourish a young one, which was ugly and crooked; commanded
that Prince Erastus should be executed.
THE Emperor retireing when it was late, according to custom found the Empress
alone in her Chamber very disconsolate; which much troubled him, for he dearly
loved her, and endeavour^d by all means to comfort her; but the more he
essayed, to please her, so much the more she sobed, so that the Emperor prayed
her to be of good cheer, and that she should be satisfied: to which she
replied, truly I have little cause to be contented, for the shall care you take
to revenge so great an outrage, which has not been committed against me only,
but against your self; for upon this account you are as much injured as I am.
It is true, I resent it more than you laying our honor more to heart than you,
who however ought to show it more exemplarily: as yesterday you made me believe
you did, but I know not who has so suddenly caused you to revoke your
sentence, and I doubt to my great trouble, if you do not take more heed to your
affairs, that it will happen to you, as it did to a very fair Pine Tree, which
instead of being renewed, was cut up and destroyed. What Pine was this said the
Emperor, and what happned about it, to which the Empress answered. A while
ago there was a Gentleman of Italy, who had a very fair Garden, wherein he
took so much pleasure, that he therein planted all sorts of Herbs, and Trees,
and among others he had a very fair Pine, so fair and so strait as any could be
in the World, so that this Gentleman esteemed this Pine more than all the
Trees in the Garden, and thereupon he there made an arbor, taking great
pleasure to remain under the shadow of it for the most part of the day,
whether he had a mind to read, or otherwise to pass the time. It happened as one
often sees among other Trees, that from the root of this Pine, sprung a sucker,
which the Gentleman seeing, being very much pleased at it, he commanded his
Gardner to look carefully after it, hoping by this means to get an other Pine
as fair as the former, and this young sucker finding the fresh Earth that was
put about it, grew very well at the beginning, but being grown up so high that
the branches of the first Pine kept the Sun from it: it did not grow so well as
at the first, but became bent and crooked. The Gentleman being troubled at it,
asked the Gardner the cause, who answered, that the bows of the great one,
gave so great a shadow, that the young one not having the Sun and air to make
it grow strait up according to its Nature, it therefore was crooked and did not
thrive, whereupon the Gentleman commanded to lop the old one, and take away
the branches which hindered the Sun from the young one, so the old one was
lop'd all away on one side. It happened that this Gentleman had a voyage to make
for some months; but before he went, he recommended his young Pine to the
Gardner above all things, in this the Gardner did not fail, so that the Sun
coming to the young one, it grew again as it had formerly done, but however it
still continued crooked; on the contrary, the great one began to wither on the
side it had been lopped. The Gentleman at his return, seeing the great Pine
half dead, and knowing that these two Pines hindered one another, and that there
was little hopes of the great Pine, in regard it was so decayed, caused it to
be cut up, and thus was this Tree (that had formerly been so well beloved)
destroyed for the young Pines sake; which although it grew to be a great one,
yet it still kept it^ ill and crooked shape, which it had from the beginning:
and thus will it happen to you, for having placed your Son, (if he may be
called yours which I cannot believe) to the government of these seven
Philosophers, you see in what case he is, they have already lopt you on one
side, by the shame which they have caused you, and which is worst, being
resolved to maintain and justify it; you will in short time see a rebellion in
Rome, and if you should pardon him for this outrage in hope^ of his amendment,
assure your self that ere long he will a ^empt against your life, as he has
already done against your honor, to arrive to the Government so soon as he
can: and be assured that these Philosophers will put their helpin^ hand to it,
in hopes that they shall have the management of the affair^ of the Empire, and
so for want of forecast, you will see your self ruined by your young sucker; I
shall prevent it replied the Emperor, for I promise you that justice shall
take place, and at once to revenge your honor and my own; and thereupon he
commanded that without delay the sent^nce of Erastus, should be executed on his
Person.

CHAP. X. The Philos^pher Dimurgus caused execution to be stayed for an another
day, by a discourse which he made to the Emperor of the great Hipocrates: who
out of anger did stay without cause a Nephew of his that was an execellent
Physician.
DAY, brake was hardly come, when those to whom the execution of Prince Erastus
was committed, d^d provide for all things necessary thereunto, without loss of
further time, according to the precise command of the Emperor; in the mean
time the Philosopher Dimurgus, who had undertook to defend the Prince for the
second day, lest he should be surprised, had bethought himself of all that he
had to say to the Emperor, and so being ready, in the morning he came to the
Chamber, where by Fortune he found him coming out sooner, than ordinary, by
reason of the great trouble he was in, both in body and mind, for the causes
aforescited: and although the Emperor appeared to be angry, yet he being
satisfied in the innocence of Prince Erastus, after he had made his usual
reverence, he took the boldness to say, Sir, having rece^ved this favor of
your Majesty, to be long since admitted into the service of your house: I ever
knew you both of a rare spirit, and very well advised; whereby you have always
prudently governed the affairs of your Empire, so that I have always admired
the great virtues which did respectively shine in you; and a particular zeal
which you always had to do justice, so that I never knew you guilty of one
unjust action. But considering you, by I know not what extraordinary disaster,
to be about to exceed the bounds of reason, and to be diverted from your good
and ancient custom; I therefore made bold (not out of hopes of reward or
praise) to come before you, not to counsel you, but to advertise your Majesty
of a certain error, into which (as a man, and not as so great an Emperor as
you have always been) are now fallen; you know Sir, what you have purposed to
do with my Lord the Prince your Son, by reason of a wicked perswatition, which
has been imprinted in your mind. But I humbly pray you, and that for the
reputation of your honor, to suspend a while this your purpose, and to take my
counsel, which being good (as in truth you will know it) you will prefer it
before all that has been said to the contrary; and be not angry Sir at my
advice, for as the Proverb says, and you very well know it: He does deserve to
be ruined that will not take advice. The Emperor having heard this preamble,
and considered of what had been spoken by the Philosopher, was contented to
stay the execution of his Son; however, intimateing to him, that if by good
reason, he did not make appear that he was in an error, and that his defense of
the Prince Erastus was just, that both the Advocate and Criminal should be
hanged one after another, to which the Philosopher consenting: he began to say,

Hipocrates the Prince of Physicians, had a Nephew, with whom he took so great
pains to instruct him in the Art of Physic, that in fine, this Nephew was in
his Skill, Experience and Practice equal to his Uncle; it happened that the Son of
the King of Hungary fell sick, and his destemper increasing more and more upon
him: all the Physicians of that Kingdom gave him over for dead; the King being
troubled to lose his Son, was advertised that if his Son might escape by
Physic, Hipocrates only could cure him, for this skilful Physician was
renowned through all the World; by means of his great knowledge, and having
conferred with the Queen about the matter, who was also very sad for the
sickness of the Prince her Son, and very desirous of his recovery, advised with
all diligence to send Ambassadors to Hipocrates with great presents to ind^re
him: besides far greater promises, which the said Ambassadors were charged to
make him to come and cure the young Prince of Hungary, who without his help
would unavoidably perish. The Ambassadors being come to Hipocrates, and having
declared their charge and delivered their presents which the K^ g had sent
which he kindly received, he thus answered, that he was as much troubled as the
King their Master; for the desire he had to do him humble service, in regard
that he could not go and therefore he entreated that his Majes y would excuse
him, by reason of his inability in respect of his great age, he being now
decriped and diseased in his body, but however he would fully satisfy the
desire of their Master, by an only Nephew which he would send, who being very
^k^l^ul, being always br^d up with him, and pr^ctised under him, in such
manner that he knew him ^^ffi^i^nt for this cure: and that therefor that the
K^^g should not diseste^m him for hi^ youthfulness, for he should find him very
able in hi^ u^d^^taking. The Ambassador seeing Hipocrates not to be in a cond
tion to travel and having a very good opinion of his Nephew took him with them
and p^ ceeded so on the r journey, that they arived at the ^^^^rt, where they
were well received o^ the King and Queen, and that they might not loose time,
the K ^g cond^cted the Physician to his S^n; But when he had seen him and heard
him spe^k knew by his ^^ s g^ony and other signs that he was not the K^^g^ S^n;
and therefore before he would do any thing in ^rder to the cure, being desir^
u^ to be resolved of the doubt he had conceived, he desired to speak with the
Queen alone, whereupon being privately with her in her Chamber, he thus began;
Madam if you please to tell me the truth of what I shall ask you, I will in
short time restore your Son to his former h^alth, otherwise I can give you no
ass^rance of it. The Que^n promised him with an Oath (so desirous s^e was to
see he^ Son well) not to conce^l any t^ing that he should d sire of her.

Then the Physician said, I desire only to know if the Father of the sick Child
be here: to this the Queen ^nswered, do you think that any but the King is his
Father; to this the Physician replied, since you are not pleased to tell me the
truth, I^ will be gone and your Son will dye.

The Queen hearing this resolved (so as she might save her Sons life) to tell
the Physiti^n that which she could not upon any account let any Person in the
world know, and having taken on Oath of the Physician to be secret in what she
should tell him, she blushing for shame thus began.

I would excuse my self but you are not ignorant of the sad condition that
married Women are in who are Childless: for in truth that is their only riches
and content: for the Husbands who can h^ve no Children of their Wives do hate
them a^ (...) it were her fault, and for this cause the poor Women are
disdained, slighted, and ill used, and their Husbands seek out other Women that
they may have a Bastard to succeed them after their death.

This being my case having lived long with the King without any Child, and
being therefore accounted barren, and slighted by every one, I purposed to know
whether the defect was in me or my Husband; whereupon I having ^e^n the Miller
come into the Count to bring in C^rn to the Granery, and believing that to be a
good oppertunity to execute my design, because the King was gone a hunting, and
all my Women dispersed, some in one place, and some in an other. I caussed him
to enter into my Cabinet, pretending to speak with him alone, where he had to
do with me, and that several times after, so that I perceived my self to be
with Child, and that I might the better wier the matter, I caused the King to
lie frequently with me, so that at the time o^ my Childbirth it was supposed
to be the Kings Child, and so it is still, and after this I was better
resp^cted of the King, and honored by all: wherefore I pray you to save him
which I got by such art to my great peril. The Physician smileing to himself
answered, Madam, take no further care, I will restore your Son safe and sound:
and thereupon after many remedies which he gave to the sick person, causing him
to be nourished with gross meats, according to his natural constitution he
became well. The Physician then seeing his Patient in good case, and out of
danger, and that it was time to return, he took leave of the King and Queen who
presented him with Gold and Silver, and gave him good and honorable Company to
attend him to his Uncle; to whom he rel^ted every part^cular that had happened,
by which relation Hipocrates knew the great profit which his Nephew had made in
so little time, for which cause, instead of taking pleasure in regard he had
so taught him, he conceived a mortal hatred against him, and doubting that the
skill of his Nephew would deminish his renown, in regard he was to succeed him,
and to possess a great many books, which Hipocrates had composed according to
the great experience of his time which would increase the fame of his Nephew,
and diminish his own if his receipts should come into his possession: he
therefore purposed privately to kill him, and thereupon having caused him to
come into his garden where he had all sorts of herbs, he demanded if he knew
their several virtues, to which his Nephew answered, yes, he desired him to
pluck up one of them which he named, and as the young man stooped to the ground
not doubting any thing, the envious old man struck him between the head and
shoulders with a hatchet, which he had hidden under his gown, and slew him at
the first blow, and to conceal his cruelty, he buried him in the same place;
where he had killed him. It happened (as God is just and leaves nothing
unpunished) that soon after Hipocrates fell sick of the bloody flux, so violent
that no medicine could stop it. But Hipocrates to make trial of his skill,
caused a great, Vessel to be filled with water, whereinto he having cast a
certain powder, he drew out several faucets wherewith the vessel was stoped in
several places, to see if the water would come out, but the virtue of the
powder had so restrained the fludity of the water, that it continued in the
vessel, without one drop coming out, as if it had been frozen, at which all the
company were astonished, yet nevertheless Hipocrates found no good in the flux
of his belly, very well knowing that to stop it at once on a sudden, he should
put his life in great danger, and therefore leting it take its course, he hoped
that nature would be assisting, yet he had great sorrow for the loss of his
Nephew, very well knowing that if he had been with him he needed not fear any
thing and then he repented of hi fault (but to late) he sighed and groaned
always calling out upon his Nephew, but seeing that all was in vain, he took
it so to heart, that he ended his miserable life.

By this Sir you may judge of the rest of my discourse, which is this, that
none o^ght hastily to do any thing in anger, of which they should afterward
make it irrepai^able, with vain repentance, you have purposed to put the Prince
your Son to death, not for any crime that he has committed: (of which you can
be ass^red) but at the report of another, but I say once again to you: that you
ought to think once and twice what you do, and against whom; being ^ss^red that
if you do not suffer your self to be transported with anger; y u will in
conclusi^n find your Son the Prince in^ocent of the fact, for which he has
been accused, and of which you at present think him culpable. The Emperor
taking good notice of what the Philosopher had said, as well by reason of his
speeches, as for the natural l^ve which he bore to his Son, ordered for that
day a stay of the execution of the sentence of Erastus.

top: representation of an empress or queen with a male figure, in the
background a robed male figure standing over this male figure kneeling, and an
indistinct figure in a bed; bottom: representation of a man standing on the
back of a boar at the foot of a tree

CHAP. XI. The Empress Aphrodicia, induces the Emperor to the final execution
of Prince Erastus, by a discou^se which she made of a Wild Boar, which was
(...) by a Herds man, who pretended to flatter him.
THE Empress Aphrodicia certainly believing (...) the next morning her Son in
law would (...) executed according to the Emperors command; and supposing that
this loss would be some trouble to her husband, wherefore to take away the
displeasure he should receive by the death of his Son, if n t wholly, yet in
some Part she provided a magnifcent Feast to entertain the Emperor, and to
po^s away his melancholy: for it was usual for the Emperor and Empress to
feast one another, when they had a mind to pass the time away; so that
sometimes the Emperor would feast the Ladies, the Empress at an other time
treating the Emperor when she had a mind to pass over s me mel^nch^lly; dinner
time being c me, the Emperor went into the Q^eens hall, where the table was
covered, and being sat down, and the Empress by him, en^ring into discourse
with her, he told her that f^r the good cause he had been advised to slay the
exe^^tion of Erastus for that day, which the Empress understanding all the good
cheer was altered, and with her usual disdain, and angry countenance, she said
to the Emperor; I see Sir, you well show the little esteem which you have for
your honor, and if the faith you have promised me, and always broken. But I
hope that Judgment, and justice will show you the great fault you want against
them both; and I doubt it will happen to you as it did to a wild Boar, who was
destroyed by flattery, which is a very good example and which I would relate to
you, if I did not think it loss of time, whereupon the Emperor said; my dear,
I have directly promised, and sworn to stop for this day, the execution of
Erastus, and I may not in point of honor break my word and Oath: But I assure
you that if some more important cause do not happen, I shall to morrow morning
let you know that revenge which I know to be reasonable, is as pleasing to me
as to your self; and therefore I desire you to let me know the story of the
wild boar whereof you have spoken; for on one side, you will much please me,
and on the other side, you will it may be make me more resolved then I was.
Then the Empress began her discourse said.

There was some time since in a great and spacious forest a large Wild boar
who had no other feeding then the wild fruits which grew naturally without the
help of man's art and yet however were very good, as well by reason of the
fertility of the ground, as for the good temperature of the Climate, where they
grew, among other trees there was a great wild pear tree, whose fruit did very
much please this wild boar; and therefore he came ordinarily thither, and
shaking the tree with his shoulders, to make the fruit fall; having filled his
belly, he would be gone to his Den. It happened that a Herds-man, that kept a
herd of cattle at the entrance of the forest, lost one of the best of them and
believing that it was strayed into the forest, as indeed it was, considering
the difficulty in finding it, be was troubled, but hoped to light upon it, he
went to search in the forest, but it was lost labor, and having spent some
days in the forest, and seeing that it was to no purpose; he intended to
return, but in his way he came to this great pear tree which I have spoken of;
and seeing very fair pears, and being somewhat an hungry, he began to beat
them down with his staff; he had no sooner tasted of them, but finding them
better than he expected, he th^ught it would not be a miss, to carry some to
his Master; that he might somewhat appease the anger, which he had against him,
for the loss of the Bullock, that he might carry them without damage, he
thought it best to gather them with his hand, and thereupon he climbed up the
pear tree, but he was no sooner got up; when the great Boar, which I speak of,
came to the foot of the pear tree, and began to shake it as he was used: The
poor Herds-man seeing this furious Animal was afraid, and that he might be rid
of him, he threw many pears to him; hoping that when his belly was full, he
would be gone again as he was used to do, but it fell out otherwise, for the
wild-boar seeing more victuals, than he was used to have; and that with less
pains, he eat so many pears that he was ready to burst, and not being able to
go back, he lay down under the tree: The poor Herds-man seeing this, was more
fearful then before, for on one side, he was in great fear of the wild-boar,
and on the other side, he foresaw the danger, he should be in, of other wild
beasts if he should stay all night in the forest being thus reduced between
these two in evitable extremities, he thought it was best to ch^ose the least;
whereupon thinking of the nature of Swine, he began to come down from the tree,
as softly as he could, and being so near the wild Boar that he could touch him
with his fo^t, he clawed his back with the nails of his foot, the wild Boar
being p^eased with it, turned his belly upwards; and the Herds-man continuing
to claw and scratch him, he fell aslee^: The Herds-man perceiving that, came
down to the ground, and seeing this great Animal was safe, he resolved to make
him more s^cure, and th^reup^n drawing out his knife, stuck it into his heart,
thus killing him as he slept, by this means freeing him^^lf from the fear of
the wild Boar, and the other wild beasts.

The same may come to you: Sir, this lending your ears to these Philosophers,
who being as fearful as this Herds-man they ^p^e and essay all means to
destroy you; the Herds-man had lost a Bullock, but these h^ve had their h^n^ur;
the Herds-man purposed to a^p^ase his Master with these wild pears, and these
h^pe to escape the danger they are in, by fables and co^^t^rfeit speeches; the
He^ds-man killed the wild B a^, under pre^e^ce, of clawing and flattering him,
the Phil^s^phers h^pe to do as much with you, having by ^h^^ sl^t^ries laid
snares for your life, hindering ^ou from d ing justice, and therefore Sir, look
well to you b^si^e^s, for it is not the part of a wi^e man, to say ^f^e w^rds I
did not think it.

The Empress having fi^ished her discourse; the Emperor top left:
representation of a female figure holding an axe to a tree, with a male figure
nearby; top right: representation of a male figure and female figure in
conversation; middle: representation of a female figure carrying a dog to a
fire, with two male figures seated; bottom left: representation of a female
figure having her blood let by two male figures; bottom right: representation
of four male figures seated at a table with a female figure standing thus
replied: My love let me desire you to be merry, for to morrow morning, you
shall be revenged and my self also of the outrages that have bin done to us,
whereupon the Empress was merry, and contented.

CHAP. XII. Thernus, the Philosopher put a stop to the execution of the
sentence of Prince E astu for the third day, by a discourse which he made to
the Emperor, of an old Knight, who knowing that his wife had wild blood; and
therefore could not contain her self within the bounds of reason, but she very
often did him some mischief; he to tame her caused her to be let blood till she
fainted: He persuades the Emperor to take the same course.
THe Philosophers being advert^zed of the promise, which the Emperor had made
to the Empress, that the sentence against Erastus, should the next morning be
put in execution; they advised among themselves to provide for the young Prince
an advocate for the next day, and therefore they empoured and gave the c^ ^e
thereof to the Philosopher Thernus, a man wi^^; ready, and very advised in all
his affairs, so that his name was proper, and correspondant to his actions; by
break of day this Philosopher, went to the Palace, waiting for the time to
speak to the Emperor, and so soon as he heard he was risen, he went to make
him his reverence, and although the Emperor beheld him with troubled
countenance, and was very angry with him in his discourse, yet nevertheless he
did not forget himself, but with much freedom, spoke thus, Sir, you know me,
and withal it is not unknown to you that my profession has always bin to speak
freely my Opinion, in those affairs which I know to be of any importance,
whither it be to my friends or strangers, for in all matters of consequence,
where things ought not to be acted, being not rightly understood, or for any
other reason I should not do well, if I should be silent. And therefore using
this custom to others, I should be guilty of a very great crime; and should be
worthy of as great punishment, if I should not use the same right, to him who
is my Sovereign Lord, and who has raised me to what I am: That I may not have
this remor^e upon my conscience, to permit by my silence so dangerous an evil,
as that which I see prepared, both against you and the Empire; I have not
therefore been afraid to present my self before your Majesty; not regarding the
threatenings, of those who being minded to direct me, told me that if I did on
this act appear, before you, that you would cruelly put me to death: But I
knowing you to be a Prince; who will not slightly destroy any one, without,
first having heard what he can say; and I being very well satisfied in your
goodness: And although it should happen otherwise, and that upon this occasion
I should lose my life, I shall not value it, for I know it is the Duty of a
Philosopher, not to be afraid to die for the truth, but rather therewith to be
very well contented. Sir, I hope you will please to remember the great desires
which you had for a long time, to have issue whereby to perpetrate the
excellency of your blood: Whereupon Nature was so favorable to you, that in
short time you were provided of a Son, the most accomplished that ever lived he
has bin instructed in all things that are convenient for an Emperor; wherein
he has so well profited, that you may truly esteem your self to be the
happiest father, that has for along time lived; which felicity will turn to
your prejudice, and perpetual regret; if you suffer your self, in an affair of
so high importance, to be over ruled by the Counsel of one simple woman; for
although women have the use of reason, as well as we; yet nevertheless by
reason of their imbecility, they suffer themselves to be so transported, by
their affections; that very often they lay a side their reason, and are given
over to their passions; this was not unknown to a certain Old Knight, who like
you, had took a young wife, and if you had followed his example; your affairs
had not been in so bad condition, as now they are. And what was it this Knight
did said the Emperor? I will tell you Sir, answered the Philosopher; but I
would not that during my discourse the Execution of Erastus should proceed,
least if you should be sat^fied with what I shall say; it would then be two
late, and therefore if you please, to put a stop to the execution of your
sentence until I have finished my narative, you may afterward, proceed as you
shall think fit: The Emperor hearing this, although he was unwilling to
defer that which he had promised and assured to the Empress; yet however
knowing that the delay would not be long, he agreed to the Philosophers
request, but withal intimated to him, that if his discourse did not give him
the satisfaction he expected; that he as well as the Prince, should suffer a
shameful death; I shall not value that, said the Philosopher; but with a
pleasant countenance he thus began.

N t long since there lived in Tuskany, a very worthy Knight, who being rich
and puiss^n^, and much a Gentleman; took no other care but to live merrily,
k^^p g^ ^ c^mpany, and to treat his friends; someti^^^ ^^^^ding his time in
mannaging of arms, rid^^ (...) ^reat horse hunting; and sometimes at his
(...). He kept an open house f^r his friends, and was much plea^ed in feasting
them, at his Countrey-h^use; which was as well bu^lt, and as commodiously
Sc^tu^ted, as any in all Tuskany, where he usually soj u ned: This Gentlem n
having lived long, and m^ ^ily without regarding to have any Children, he was
^^ll ^^r ken in years before he thought of marriage. I^ so ^^ll out one day,
that having good merry Company in his house after the table was uncovered; from
one discourse to another (as it is usual for Gentlemen to talk after dinner)
they happened to fall upon this proposition, of the natural affection that men
have, to have Children wher^by man ^enew^ his blood; and in a manner lives,
after his death in his po^terity, upon this discourse, some of this Gentleman's
friends, p^rswaded him to marry, wh^r^by he might have Children, to inherit so
many fair Ca^^le^, and other riches, which he was possessed of. This Gentleman
did not much regard it, but seeing himself importuned, sometimes by one, and
then again by others; after he had sustained many assaults of his friends; he
in conclusion resolved to please them as he had always done: His friends
knowing his mind, took much pains to find him out a wife, fit for his quality,
and by whom he might have Children; and they used such diligence, that in
short time they betroathed him to a very fair young Damsel; who was daughter
to one of the greatest Lords, of all Tuskany.

The wedding was solemnized, as you may suppose, suitable to the quality of
their estates, and al hough there was great difference in the ages, of this
Knight, and his young Bride; yet however he was so Gallant, that his gallantry
was enough to content, a Damsel, better than one that was younger; so that for
a while, he and his wife, lived very contentedly: But after some time, this
Damsel having understood, from other good wives, how their husbands treated
them in the night, she began to wish for a young husband, without regarding the
gallantry of her own; rather wishing for a good strong back, than a gallant^y
accompanied with a feeble breath, and seeing that she could not have her
desires, and that notwithstanding all her endeavors, her husband as he grew
more in ^e^rs; so he was less able to please her: After she had fasted one
year, and knew that there was nothing in the house to satisfy her appetite;
she resolved to purchase her victuals in an other place, but understanding that
she was to make use of a third hand, and that in an affair of so great
importance; there might be danger to discover it to a third person, she propsed
to make use of her own mother, whom she thought had most reason to love her
best, therefore she went to her, where being arrived, after many other
discourses; she fell to the matter in hand, that which most a^gred her; letting
her know, as well as she could; the necessity wherein she was, and the purpose
she had taken to provide otherwise for her self, that she might not dye, in
that necessity, praying and conjuring her, for the natural love, which she had
always born to her; that having pity, and compassion on her, she would make
provision against that evil, which would be her death if she had no remedy, and
also to her honor; governing her self, after such manner in this aff^ir that
she might find her self re-restored, and so as no person should know any thing.
The Poor mother thinking of what her daughter had said to her, for a long time
was amazed, not bring able to beli^ve her own ears; much less, to believe what
she had heard; but in conclusion seeing by her daughters obstinacy, how the
matter was; and that what she had said was true; she first of all tried, to
direct her, from her wicked purpose, showing her what offense she would commit
putting her honor before her eyes; alleging to her, many other examples to this
purpose, but all was to no purpose; for as to the offense, the young woman
answered that the Law could not give her a greater punishment then death, and
that continuing in the condition she was then in; she knew her death was
sudden: As for the shame and infamy of the world said she, I come to take your
advice in that particular; that my honor being saved, you may provide me with
what you know may be necessary, upon this account, and for examples she had
enough that served for her purpose, so that all that her mother cou^^ say, to
change her mind from this wicked purpose, was but to beat the air; whereupon
the mother was so troubled, that she thought she should be distracted. The
young woman seeing this, began to colt's and flatter her, saying, Dear Mother,
have compassion of my youth: You have been young, and therefore know well
enough what are the desires of the flesh, which as I have always heard say, and
now I know by experience, are greater, and more vehement in women, than in men;
and although the fire is not so great in men, as in women; yet however, as
often as they have a mind, and they know where; they give themselves the
satisfaction they desire: But if we miserable women are sruprized but once,
besides the shame we endure, they make no matter of killing us: So that for
this cause, we other women, ought to put the change upon them, to revenge our
selves of the shame, that men upon this account do to us. To this the Mother
made several replies, but all was in vain; for so much the more that the Mother
endeavored to turn her from her purpose; so much the more ardent, and
passionate she appeared to be: Let what would happen to extingu^sh the fire
which consumed her; she did clearly con^^s^ that it would be more for her
honor, to contain, than to abandon her self, but she could not imagine how she
could live long so, and that therefore the fault should not be imputed to her,
but ^o nature who did so constrain her; further entreating her Mother to
consider of some way to give her content, and to save her honor, protesting
unto her, that if she did refuse to assist her; she would hazard her life and
honor, praying her once for all, to put all other oppinions out of (...) mind.
The poor Mother seeing her daughters obstinacy, knew not what to say further;
seeing on the one side, her daughter blinded with love, and so resolved in her
purpose that it was not p^ssible to alter her mind, and on the other side, she
well knew the great wrong, she should do to her honor, in satisfying the
appetite of her daughter: And although she well knew that she lost time;
however she thus made further trial of her daughter, saying, Ah! how strong a
thing is it that I see you purpose to violate the bounds of marriage; and count
so great ill to your husband, who as you know, loves you as well: or better
then any man can love a woman; and therefore I would not have you give such way
to your appetite which I confess is great, but not so, but that you may
overcome it if you will, I have been young and as fair as you: and have
experienced love affairs, and his fires; but however, I have resisted all with
a constancy, and firm res^^ution to love like a woman of honor, so that I
never wronged your father; and never had tho^ghts ^or any other besides him,
much less abandoned my le^f to any other; wherefore then do not you do the some
And Mother replied the d^ughter, your consequence is nothing to the purpose,
for when my father married you, he was a young gentleman, and as handsome as
you, so that he might well enough furnish you, with that which women desire
above all things; and that you had no occasion to look further, and you had not
done well, if you had done him that wrong. But my case is different, for the
husband you have given me, may better serve for my father, then my husband;
that he loves me I cannot deny but what does his love avail me, when he cannot
furnish me with that I have most occasion for; I have endured so long, that I
cannot longer endure; and yet I have not discovered my self to any body but
you, hoping as you are my Mother, you will have compassion on me, which I pray
and conjure you to, assuring you, that if you do not help me, I will yet help
where I can find it; let what will happen, for I had rather dye contented, than
to languish in a life worse than death. The poor Mother seeing the obstinatness
of her daughter, for some time was silent, and then she said; Seeing you in
this wicked purpose to abandon your honor to satisfy a base and disordinate
appetite, rather then to see you fall into infamy which may happen; matters
being not wisely ordered I am content to assist you, in what I may: Yet
however, you ought well to consider one point, for although men keep but little
loyalty for their wives, as you have said already; yet however they will not
suffer them to take the same liberty; but the most part of men, doubting that
they wear the horns, they cut them off; sometimes by poison, sometimes with a
Dagger, and sometimes with a sword: True it is that there are again, some good
men, who have a good stomoch to digest all; and all goes down as sweet as milk
to them, though they find their wives in the very fact; Now I cannot Judge of
what Complexion your husband will be upon this occasion; therefore I think it
absolutely conversant, to try his patience before y^u proceed further doing him
some displeasure of little importance, which will be a trial of him (...) it he
takes it patiently; come and tell me, and I will take such order about you
that, you shall be contented, so as you keep your self to one man, for if yo^
should abandon your self to many; in the end it would be known, and bad would
come of it to you, and to me also, though your husband were never so patient,
so that we should both endanger our lives; fear not that said the young woman,
for if I have had the heart to contain my self, a year with my husband who is
so old as you know without, looking out any further, although he was not able
to content me; I shall be well enough pleased, when I may enjoy him that I have
thought of; who will give me full satisfaction to what I desire, and will be
very secret, being as much concerned as my self, to keep his honor; and
maintain himself in the reputation, which every one has for him. And who is
this, said the Mother: It is our Curate, answered the daughter, who as you know
is a young man, and accounted by every one, for a holy person, so that he may
come often to our Castle, and none will have any bad oppinion of him; but on
the contrary, all will have the more esteem for me, and so will my hu^band; who
I have often heard discourse, of the good conversation of the Curate, with whom
he will be well pleased, to see me converse; to keep me from other Company,
which it may be, do not please him so well: And by what I have several times
observed, it will not b^ very difficult, for me to work my ends, upon thi^
Curate; so as you being a third person, will assi^t me, and I will have no
assist^nce but yours* And therefore if you desire my life, and my honor, I
pray take such order, as to bring us together; if not, I assure you that in
short time, you will see me ^^^ore your eyes dead, or dishonored. Be of good
^^art daughter, said the Mother, and make trial of that I have told you; for if
your husband does not resent the displeasure you shall do him, provided it be
such as as he ought to be angry at, assure your self that I will render you
content: Upon this the young woman being very glad, took leave of her Mother;
longing to be at home, to make trial of her husbands patience, upon some
considerable matter: She being come home, understood that her husband was gone
on hunting, with other Gentlemen, as he was accustomed to do, wherefore she
thought it a convenient time, to perform that which she had in her fancy by the
way. This Gentleman, had in his Garden a Laurel, which he himself had planted
and cultivated, and it was become a great tree, it had a very pleasant shadow
under which, the gentleman did often refresh himself with his friends, and pass
the time away in discourse in the hotest time of the day. The young woman very
well knowing, what esteem her husband had for this laurel; and having a mind by
this, to try her husbands patience, as her mother had commanded, and therefore
taking one of her husbands servants with a hatchet; she went with him into the
ga^den, and being come to the laurel tree, she commanded him to cut it up by
the roots. The poor countryman, well enough knowing the pleasure, which his
Master took in this tree; would not strick a stroke at it, whereupon his
Mistress being angry, gave him many hard speeches threatening him with severe
chastisment; for the little respect, and obedience he gave to her comands: And
taking the hatchet out of his hand, she her self fell to cutting the fair
Laurel, to which she gave so many strokes on every side, that she put the poor
Laurel cut of possibility of growing, and although it were then let alone, the
servant then seeing that, took his hatchet and finished what she had begun:
whose branches by his Mistresses command, being made into faggots, and the body
cleft in pieces, he put it into a Cart, and carried them to his Masters house,
the Cart was hardly unloaden when the Gentleman returned from hunting; who
went presently into his Chamber to refresh and shift himself, when his wife
counterfeiting the good huswife, was not long ere she came with a faggot of the
fair Laurel under her arm, which she put upon the fire, aireing her Husbands
linen at it, that she might the better play her project. The Gentleman being
astonished to see a fire made of Laurel, did suspect that some mischief had bin
done to his beloved tree, but he could not imagine that it was cut down, and
theref^re so soon as he had shifted and refreshed himself, he went into the
Garden direct y, to the place where his Laurel had grown, where he saw that he
which had no mind to see; whereupon he began to cry out and curse, swearing by
all his Gods, that he would so sharply chastise those who had cut down his
Laurel, that they should never forget it: his wife hearing these threatenings,
ran into the Garden, and with a smileing c^untenance said to her Husband; that
if you will be revenged for that fact, that your vengeance must fall on me, for
none but I have cut up your Tree, wherefore did you do it said the Gentleman,
I w^ll tell you said she, bring returned from my Mother, where I had stayed
almost all day, knowing that you were hunting and considering that in regard of
your age, and the coldness of the present season, it was impossible but you
would have a great need of a fire at your return, and not finding any dry wood
to make a present fire, I came into this Garden, and very well knowing that the
branches of a Lawrel-tree will make a good fire although they be green; I
caused them to be made into little faggots, whereof I made your fire as you
have seen, and this is the very truth of the whole matter, which was done for
your service, and therefore you ought to take it in good part, and now Sir if
your anger will not be appeased, and that you resolve upon revenge, you may do
what you please with me; for I shall suffer all with patience, since what I did
was intended to serve you; You have done very ill said the Gentleman, and have
a care therefore, that for the future you do not act any thing that shall so
displease me, for I promise you by the word of a Gentleman, that I shall take
satisfaction for both. If you had not been furnished with dry wood in the
house, was there not other trees besides my Laurel, and assure your self, that
if you had cut down all the Trees in the Garden I should not have been so
troubled as for this one Laurel: but since it is done, and cannot be helped, we
will say no more of it, but for the future you take more care not to displease
me.

Thus was the Gentleman's anger pa^ysi^d, and he passed away his t me with the
Company that expected him; the Gentle woman hearing her husbands ^^s^^^r, and
(...) w^^^^ly she had appeased him, was very joyful^^^ see things succeed
according to the intention of her Mother, so that she hoped in short time, to
enj^y that thing which she most desired in the World: and long^d for the good
hour, when she should return to her M^ther, and she what course she would take
in her affair, considering the good experience she had made of her Husbands
patience. The next day when the Gentleman was gone, as he was wont to pass away
the time, the good Wife made haste to her Mo^her, where with ten thousand
laughters, she related to her how all had passed, praying her theref^re without
any delay to perform her promise with her; since her Husband had showed himself
so good a man, to throw of his anger so easily, notwithstanding the great ill
turn she had done him; it is very well said the Mother, yet however although
the proof is very good, yet it being made upon an insensible thing, and which
men are not so much troubled at, as at an other. I would therefore have you try
your Husbands patience in a thing more certain, as in some beast which he loves
as the Bitch, for which he has so great an esteem, that he can hardly live
without her; kill this B^tch therefore before his eyes, and if he lets that
pass without punishment, or great anger: then I may fully conclude that I may
do what you desire, but have (...) care that he does not use more than words
upon this account, for I never knew any man love any beast better than he does
this Bitch; let me alone for that said the Daughter, for in a very little time
you shall hear that I will acquit my self as d^x^^rio^sly, and well in this
second charge, as I did in the first: and thus being fully resolved with her
self of what she took in hand, she only waited for an opportunity to execute
her design.

It wa not long after this, but this Gentleman walking abroad with several of
his loving friends, he took his bitch along with him, his wife dressd up her
C^amber, and the better to adorn it, she put a very fair and rich covering upon
the bed; and dressing her self in her best apparel, she took a book in her
hand and began to read in it: being sat down to the fire, and expecting her
husbands return, who at his usual time came accompanied with diverse other
Gentlemen, he sat down to the fire being very cold, and the ways being very
dirty, the little bitch being in that dirty pickle, leaped upon the Bed, and
bemired all the fair covering that was on it. The good wife took no notice of
it, when soon after the bitch leaped on the ground, and having fawned on her
Master, ran directly and lay down on her Mistresses garment. which she all
bemired, as she had done the bed covering; the young woman seeming to be very
angry, snatched up a knife which she found there, and having took up her
husbands little bitch, she presently killed him, in the sight of all the
Gentlemen that were present, and it was done on such a sudden, that none had
so much time as to rescue the poor creature out of her hands: the Gentleman was
so very angry at this outrage, that he would have proceeded further than words,
had not the Company hindered him, for all this the young woman continued crying,
look you said she: how this mischeiviou^ bea^t has spoiled my clothes, which
are of more value then all the bitches in the World; and which is worst, behold
what a pickle she has made the bed in: and to say the truth, we could keep
nothing clean in the house for her; yet, however I could wish she were alive
again, and I am very angry with my self, by reason of my Husbands trouble, and
wish I had not done it; had not my passion been so violent. But since it is
done, he ought to appease his anger, the Gentleman seeing that all the sorrow
in the world would not restore his bitch again, was somewhat pecifyed, only
saying to his Wife, that she had done very ill in that manner to kill his bitch
for so small a fault; this being over the Gentleman and his Friends, spent
their time in their ordinary divertisements, and the young Woman was pleased at
her heart, finding that she had so bravely come off from her undertaking,
without any difficulty: and therefore the next morning early she went in all
haste to her mother, to let her know of this last passage, pressing her to put
in execution that which she had promised, seeing she had such certain proof of
her Husbands patience: the Mother understanding how matters went, made as if
she were very glad, and told her Daughter that truly she had reason to keep her
word with her, but that she might have greater assurance, and some clerer proof
of his heart, she desired one trial more of his patience, promising and
swearing to her daughter, that if her Husband then continued in that temper,
she would immediately, and without any delay, give her the content she desired.
And what other proof would you have said the Daughter, I think what we have
already is very sufficient: but for ought I see, all your discourses tend only
to prolong the content, which you have promised to give me; why did you not at
first tell me that you would not meddle in it? and then I had took an other
course. Daughter said the Mother, do not take it ill, for what I do is not to
deny you my assistance, but to accommadate your honor, and my own also; the
first trial that you made was upon a Plant, and therefore you proceeded to a
second, upon a beast: now I would have you make a third proof upon men, what is
it you mean said the Daughter, that I should kill some body, it is somewhat
difficult for a woman to do, but if there be no other way to attain my desires,
I shall not question but to perform it; God forbid answered the Mother, for I
do not intend any such matter, but this is my meaning, that as you have already
offended your Husband, so now in the last trial; the displeasure you shall do
him, shall not only extend to him, but also to the Company; and this must be
done in somewhat of as great importance as was that of the Laurel, or Bitch
which you killed; and I have thought how, and what it shall be. You know your
Husbands birth day is very near, and that he usually makes a great feast on
that day for his Friends; I would have you then when the Table is covered, and
the victuals upon it, and every one is seated, that you arise pretending to
look for somewhat, and that by some means or other, you throw down the Table,
and all that is upon it: and if your Husband lets this pass without being
revenged on you, I promise you, and swear to you, that the very day you shall
do this, I will content you in that thing, which above all things in the world
you most desire; the young woman thought the time long, although it was but
three days, but she resolved to wait in the mean time, considering with her
self the manner of what she was to do, hoping to have a better issue for this
third enterprise, than she had for the other tw^; the desired day being come,
the Gentleman caused great preparations to be made, to entertain those guests
he had invited: so that there was very good company, and of the greatest Lords
of all the Country, the Tables being spread and covered in such manner as is
usual for Persons of his quality, and the hour being come to sit dow^ (which
was the desi^ed time for this young woman, not for the hunger which she had,
but for the great desire which she had to satisfy her self, of somewhat else
besides v^ctuals:) every one took their places according to their degrees, and
among others the young woman was seated at the upper end of the Table, as it is
usual for Ladies, and as the victuals was a serving, she fastened her keys to
the table-cloath, and having thus done, pretending to be in haste to go look
for something, she arose and in her riseing she pulled down the Table and all
that was upon it, whereupon the Gentleman being angry, asked wherefore she had
thus thrown down the Table; I did perceive said she, that some body had put a
strange knife at your trencher, and I very well knowing that you could not
endure to use any knife but your own, I therefore arose up to look it, and I
know not how the Table caught hold of me so that it was thrown down; all the
company endeavored to laugh away the mischance, and pass it for a jest, and
withal every one very much commended the great care the young woman had of her
Husband. The Gentleman being very discreet, took no notice of it at present,
that he might not disturb the Company, but caused the Table to be taken up, and
other service brought, for there was plentiful provision of all sorts of
victuals, and thus was the day passed away without thinking of any thing but
passtime, wherefore the young woman had a world of joy in her heart, beleiving
now that there was no obstacle that could hinder her content, so that she only
waited the good hour when every one would be gone, that she might go to her
Mother, and give her order for that which she so ardently desired; but the
Guests kept company together all the day with the Gentleman, that she being
forced to continue with them, by necessity deferred going to her Mother till
the next morning, not questioning but then all things would fall out to her
expectation. But she sound it otherwise, for although the Gentleman had passed
away all his birth day, that he might not trouble his guests, without taking
notice of the shame which his wife had caused him: yet however he had not
forgotten it, nor the other two outrages which she had done formerly; and
therefore being a wise man, he purposed to chastise his wife, without making
any noise, and therefore the next morning finding her awake, and that she went
to dress her self, to go to her Mother, he commanded that she should not rise,
whereupon the good wife being astonished, replied, that she had a mind to
rise, having slept enough already; but the Gentleman answered her, that the
reason why he would have her lie in bed, was for her good, and that it was
convenient for her to do so: that she might take a medicine that he would give
her, for what cause said she, for I need no medicines, for God be thanked I am
well and lusty, you are to^ lusty said he, and the cause of it is a certain
superfluous blood that boyles in your body, which at every turn causes you to
play the fool, which is to my displeasure, and a shame to you: do you remember
the fair Laurel which you did cut up the other day, which I loved above all the
trees of my Garden: a little while after you killed my B^tch, which was the
pleasantest beast I ever had in my house: yesterday you threw down the Table,
where there was so good company without considering the trouble you put them
all too, to my great shame on my birth day. Now if I should let all this pass,
I know the fourth offense would exceed all the rest, but I have a purpose to
cure you, and thereupon causing a good fire to be made in the Chamber, he sent
for a Barber, who he had provided ready for the purpose: He being entered the
Chamber, he caused his wife to rise, and come to the ^ire, and giving him her
right arm he caused him to rub it and chafe it, to fill the veins the better,
and then commanded he B^^ber to perform his Office; he did as he was commanded,
and opened one of the young woman's veins, who could not guess what would be the
end of this adventure. But seeing her blood she began to be afraid, but she
could not help her self, for the Gentleman caused her to be held so fast that
she could not stir: and he let her continue bleeding thus, till such time as
she could bleed no more, without endangering her life, and then he caused the
vein of her right arm to be closed and bound up, but he did the same to her
left arm, in such manner that the poor young woman was half dead, and having
left all sense was carried to her bed, where having been some time, as in a
sound, and being somewhat come to her self, she sent one of her servants to her
Mother, earnestly praying her to come to her presently, the servant having
delivered the message, the Mother made all possible haste to come to her; but
she understood of the Messenger by the way how all things had passed, how her
Daugher had thrown down the Table, and all the victuals that was upon it; but
she who very well knew all the Mystery presently guessed how every thing had
happened, and for what cause: being arrived at her Son in laws Castle, she went
directly to her Daughters Chamber, saying to her with a pleasant and merry
countenance, look you Daughter I am ready to accomplish all that I have
promised you, would you have me bring your Friend hither to day; to this the
Daughter replied with a feeble voice, and so low, that she could hardly be
heard: Ah Mother I am dead, all my fire is extinguished, it is no time now to
speak of love, but only to think of giving me some Cordial restorative.

From this Sir you may comprehend what I will infer, and conclude by this
example, you are now old and full of years, and yet have taken a young wife and
alth^ugh she wants for nothing, but in that point that young Ladies most
desire, wherein I suppose you can do but little to her satisfaction and
content, and for the cause it is that the Empress your wife is troubled with
conceits and fancyes in her head, so that whether it be for revenge, or any
other end she endeavors to torment and displease you, so long as this mischief
extended but toward a Plant, or upon a Dog, it might be endured, as the good
Knight did, of whom I have spoken, but the cruelty is ^oo great: to deprive you
of on only Son which you have, who is one of the most accomplish^d young men,
that is this day in all the world; wherefore I am verily persuaded that he is
falsely accused, so that your Majesty will consider of this affair as you ought,
without using precipitation to draw out the truth of the fact, you will find
your Son innocent, and those who endeavor to ruin him, and take a way his
life, culpable of the outrage of which they have falsely accused him. The
Emperor continued some time in silent meditation, hearing the discourse of the
Philosopher Thernus, bu^ he resolved that the execution of the sentence of
Erastus should be stoped for that day, and withal ^xp^^sly declared that he
would gravely and deliberately examine the fact of his Son.

top: representation of a male figure seated outside a house, with a group of
male figures on horseback with spears; bottom: representation of a young boy or
Merlin pointing to a steaming cauldron while speaking to a king and two male
figures

CHAP. XIII. The Empress Aphrodicia persuades the Emperor to cause Prince
Erastus to be executed by a discourse which she made to him, of a King of
England; who having by the Council of Merlin, caused seven of his principal
Counselors heads to be cut off, who under the name and titles of Sages or
Doctors, tyrannized over England, and by that means the King recovered his
sight.
THE Empress had so great an affection to hear the news of the death of her Son
in Law, according to the promise which the Emperor had made her, that every
hour seemed to be a hundred ye^r; but she understood the contrary to her
expectations, for a Gentleman of her Chamber acquainted her how that the
Emperor being induced by the discourse of the Philosopher Thernus, had
commanded stay of the execution for that day, whereupon she was so enrag^d,
that she thought she should loose her senses; and retireing into her Chamber,
and sighing and crying, she would not see any person all that day, in the
evening the Emperor having understood that the Empress was gone to bed, and
that she was very ill, he went to see her, endeavoring to comfort her the best
he could, knowing that all her ilness ^roceeded from melancholy, particularly
praying her to be of good cheer, alleging several reasons to her, why she
should not take it ill, that he had stayed the execution of his Son Erastus,
and that he did not intend to stop the course of justice, but to let all the
world know that he had proceeded judiciously in that affair. To this the
Empress going to anser, fetched a deep sigh, saying, it is not possible Sir,
but these delays must be to my great prejudice; since my honor is so
interressed, and the little regard you have for it, although you your self are
principally concerned: however God be my witness that the greatest sorrow that
I have is for your sake, who now seem to me to be reduced to the some condition
as a certain King of England was, who by the just judgment of God became
blind; but I wish that like him you will give ear to the Counsel of the Sage
Merlin, by which means he not only recovered his corporal sight, but also had
the eyes of his understanding cleared, what and wh^ was this King said the
Emperor, and how was this matter, I pray be not angry but tell me, f^r it may
be, I shall thereupon take such advice, that y^u will be as glad that you have
told it me, as I shall be joy^ul that I have heard it, God grant it replied the
Empress, so that by this means the eyes of your understanding may be opened,
and al^hough I expect no more from this discourse than from your former
promises; yet however that nothing may be wanting on my part, I shall not
forbear to endeavor to let you understand your duty, and thereupon she thus
began her discourse. Sometime since there was a King of England who desireing
that the affairs of his Kingdom should be well managed, and being unwilling to
take pains himself, that he might enjoy the more pleasure, he therefore
committed the management thereof to seven great Personages, who belonged to his
Court, and who having the repute of the Sages, pretended to have knowledge in
all things; whereupon in short time it was brought to this pass, that the King
only minding his pleasure, left all dispatches and affairs to these seven Sages
who acted all things as they were minded, and gave the King what account they
best thought for their purpose, but above all thing; they took care not to
displease him, so that in time they were in such high esteem, and they were
taken rather to be Lords of all England then Counselors; true it is, that in
the beginning they took so good order in the execution of justice, that all
things were done in good order: but afterward when they had tasted of the
great gifts and presents that was usually made them; they then were so desirous
to heap up riches, that they minded nothing else, without respecting their
honor, or the zeal they should have to justice; and among other inventions to
raise money, they found out one than would raise them a world of riches, at that
time it was a custom in England, for the Natives to give such credit to
dreams, that the believed the greatest part of their affairs and chiefly those
of importance were divinely revealed to them in visions and dreams which they
little or much understood according to to the goodness and sanctity of the
persons, who thus should dream, so that when any one had dreamed of any thing
that she could not understand, they had recourse to the Sages (whereof in
England there was great plenty) and for their advise carried great presents, as
if Gold and Silver would cause the true interpretation of dreams; these seven
Deputies or Governors of the Kingdom, understanding of this that they might
show themselves the more knowing, and more excellent in all things than any
body else; and more particularly in the interpretations of dre^ms, under
pre^ence of takei^g away the abuse which was done upon that account, and that
the people might not be dec^ived in the interpretation of dre^ms, they
published an E^ict, by which it was prohibited; all persons to go to any to
have interpretation of dreams, but to them ^lves. In persuance of which E^^ct,
a world of people came to them every d^y, with great presents: so that in short
time these Lords were ^iche^ in money then the King himself, who minding nothing
but to take his pleasure, fell into a v^^y strange accident: for having hi^
N^ts to be pi^ched in a very pleasant Forest to please the ^^dies with a co^^^
at hunting; he was no sooner gone out of the ga^es of London, to g^ to this
hunting, but that his eyesight was so troubl^d that he could not see,
wherefore taking adv^ce of his Physicians; who looking on the K^^gs eyes, found
they were fair and without blemish; and understanding that he had no pain in
his head that he was not wounded, that might occasion this blindness, they knew
not what to think of it, but only advised the King to return to his Palace,
and go rest himself, and that in the mean time they would consult among
themselves of this accident to remedy it as well as possibly they could;
according to this advise the King turned his bridle to return back, but he was
no sooner entered the City-gate, but he recovered his sign without using any
remedy; whereupon being not only joyful, but wondering with a merry heart, he
turned his bridle to go follow the company; but he was no sooner out of the
City, but he was again taken with his former blindness, so that he was forced to
turn back toward the Court and yet so soon as he was entered within the
City-gates, he recovered his former sight, yet in regard the time was somewhat
spent, he put off the hunting until a^ other time*

The next day going to pass away some time at a garden, that was without the
City, he was no sooner passed London Gates, but he became blind as he had done
the day before, and no sooner was he returned in the City, but he saw as
clearly as he had formerly done; upon this account the Physicians were amazed,
they had many consultations but without any effect: for in general it was thus,
the Kings sight was good so long as he was within the Cit^, but so soon as he
was out of it he became blind, and al^hough he went out at several Gates, and
had tried them all yet he still continued blind so long as he was out of the
City, and when he returned he could see well enough. In this condition this
poor Prince remained for sometime, and c^^^d not find any remed^ which was a
great ^ffliction to him, to see himself confined to the City of London,
whereupon one day he called the seven Counselors, to whom he had committed the
Government of the Kingdom, remembering that they had given out that they could
give a reason for all things, and therefore he expressly enjoined them that they
should make known to him the cause of his blindness; that he might find a
remedy without being thus confined within the walls of the City of London: but
these great Sages who knew as little of the causes as the King, were so amazed
that they could not speak, answer a word to purpose, yet however dissembling
their ignorance, they told the King that the case required to take some time of
advice to consult well on the matter, and to studdy on it, that they might give
him such an answer as might be to his content; to this the King replied, I give
you all this day to advise upon it, and charge you that tomorrow morning you
give me an answer; but the Sages finding this time to be too precise and too
short, told him, that the case was of that importance, that it required a
month of delay: how a month said the King, is this the great readiness which
you boast to have by your ^kil, presently to resolve all doubts and question^
^g^ and consult together, and in fif^een days resolve me of what I desire, and
find a remedy, or I promise you, I will make an example of you to all such as
for the future shall he so bold as to abuse their Princes. These poor unadvised
Sages hearing this were much troubled, yet since they had a term of fifteen
days, they plucked up their spirits, hoping in that time to supply their
ignorance by the knowledge of some other, so that they assured the King that
within the time prefixed they would give him the satisfaction he desired, and
having took leave of the King, they each of them sever^ly sent away messengers
in Post to all parts, to find out some knowing person, to whom they might
apply themselves in this affair, and their Messengers had good success, they
hea^d of the virtue and miraculous spirit of the child Merlin, and of the
sayings he used, which surpassed all humain understanding. This child was but
young, and was born miraculously, so that it was believed that his Mother had
conceived being a Virgin, being with child by a Spirit; or a Magician: who it
was reported had given her a great belly without touching her: by means of a
familiar Spirit, but let it be so or not, the child was no sooner born, but he
began to let the world know that he had more than humain knowledge, so that in
his very Cradle he speak the most admirable things in the world; whether it was
in resolving questions, or foretelling things to come, or describeing things
past, as authentically as if he had seen them, and he ^pake nothing, but he
gave a good reason for it: that it was not p ssible to imagine that any thing
could be contradictory to his reasons, these Sages then purposed to go find
the young Merlin, to take his advice how they clear themselves from the
Labrin^h wherein they were involved, and they travell^d so long that at last
they come to the place where he resided, who before had foretold their coming
to his Mother, and several others advising his Mother to be ready, for the
arrival of the seven who were called S^ges, should occasion him to go to Court,
where he should continue a long time to his M^thers great advantage: and to the
great di^advan^age of those that came for him. Th^se Phil^sophers then were no
sooner arrived at Merlins lodging, but they had great experience of h^s divine
kn^wledg, which put them in good hopes, nay, gave t^em some assu^ance that they
might know from the ch^ld Merlin, the certain^y of what they e^q^ire^ after:
for jus^ as they came to his house, it h^pn^d that near to the pl^ce where
Merlin was, th^r^ p^ss^d by a m^^ who went in great h^^^, whom Merlin called by
his name, the Tr^vell r ^^^ear ng himself called, turned back, and seeing ^^a^
th^re was no b die that be knew, h^ turn^d ^b^ut to pr ^c^^^on i^ h^^ w^y; but
Merlin called him by his name (...), c^ying out Galgo, (^^r (...) was his n^m^)
look back for he whom y^u go to se^k it London is now here, where you shall
und^rstand m^re t^^n y^u expect, Galgo hearing himself ^amed, and u^derstanding
the reason why (...) went to London, which he had told no body of, w^ a^^z d,
^ut (...) more after he had heard what (...) Merlin ^^id to there t^ him, for
Merlin (...) ^o^k^, (...) not yo^ g^ (...) London to carry half an (...) to the
Kings S^ges, to know the in^erpr^^^tion a la^^ dr^am ^t you^s, y^u have sav^d
y^^r lab^ur^r^ they are all ^even here, and yet yo^ shall ^now n^ more of them
concerning your d^^^^, (...) you have already from me, y^u may under^^^^nd the
truth without pa^^ing from young ^d for I will have nothing from you, but I
will instr ct you in the way to be rich; In the first place, I would not have
you tell me you dream, for I know it better then your self it is true that this
last night, two houers before the sun rising, being l^id in your bed, you
supposed that being si^ting in your Cellar, you become so very dry, so that all
the drink ^n your house could not quench your thirst, whereupon a fountain did
arise in the Middle of your Cell^r; having the fairest water; and the cleerest
that ever eye beheld, to which you suddenly ran and having tasted of the water,
you found it to be the b^st wat^r in the world, so that your thirst was
q^enched, and you caused all your family to drink who like you received the
greatest content they ever had: Now to know the meaning of this dream, you are
going to find the Kings Sages, without acquainting any body with this
adventure, Galgo hearing particular recital, of that which he had seen in his
dream; and knowing that he had no^ spoken a word thereof, to any person; he was
surprised, that he believed this to be a dream as well, as that which he had
dreamed of the fountain, and although he was thus ast^n^shed yet he affirmed
that every thing had ^^ssed p^rticularly in such manner, as the infant Merlin
had rec^^ed, and that for no other cause he was taking a j^urn^y to London. Now
you shall understand the ^^st, ^a^d Merlin, for this is the principal ^f y ur
cause. The alteration which you saw, and which in truth pr^ss^s you, is the
great desire you have to g^t w^a ^h that you be rid of your poverty and
m^^^tain yo^ fami^y, better for the future; the f^^ntain which ^^st s^^ve you
to quench this thirst, is in your h^us^, as your dream has demonstrated, and
therefore ^^t^^n wi h all diligence, and dig where you thought the fountain
was; for I assure you, there you shall find so great a quantity of Silver, that
you shall have sufficient for your self and family, but have a care that you be
not robbed hereafter. The Philosophers hearing what Merlin had said, knew not
what to think; and doubted of the truth, of what he had spoken, or whether this
was not a design, or plot laid to cause the world to believe, that Merlin was a
diviner; but he also understanding their thoughts, thus spoke; I would not have
you give credit to my speeches further then your own eyes shall be witness; and
therefore go along with this good man, and see him find this treasure, and then
return to me, that I may go with you to the King, whose grief is not unknown to
me, without your relation of it; for I know from whence it proceeds, and what
remedy is convenient for his Cure; and I assure you that we shall come to
London the fourteenth day, which is the last but one, of the fifteenth; which
is limited to you, to answer the King, so that you shall be at London time
enough; the Philosophers wondered greatly, to see that Merlin knew already, for
what cause they were come, and the term the King had appointed and would
willingly, have discoursed of their business; but Merlin would not hear them,
but desired them to go see the good man's treasure, and that they sh ^ld have a
care that they did not touch a penny of it, and that afterward they should come
to him, who would then be ready, to go with them, to the King. The Philosophers
hearing this without alighting from their horses, they followed the good man
Galgo, whose house was but a few miles from that place so that they came
thither the next morning Alighting from their horses, they went into the house
with him; when he presently began to dig in the middle of the Cellar, where he
had in his dream seen the fountain to rise: But he had not dug very deep but
he met with a great quantity, of Meddals of Silver; after that he found several
vessels of Silver, the fairest in all the world, under which he yet found so
great a quantity of Ingo^s of Silver, that you could hardly meet with so much
treasure, in one place together: And now the Philosophers believed this to be
no counterfeit matter; for the King himself, could not have stored so much
Silver together, without great thrift, and along time, and being thus
astonished, they returned to Merlins quarters, to whom they related, all that
they had seen; confessing that by experience, they knew more to be in hime then
they thought any man could be endowed withal praying him according to his
promis^, to go to the Court with them, before the time should be elapsed:
Question not that said he, for I shall be there to soon for your benefit, they
understood not what he meant by this answer, but he who understood how all
things would happen; gave them this slight knowledge of it: And now Merlin, and
his Mother began their Journey, in Company of these seven Philosophers; and by
the way discoursing with them of many things, he gave them such reasons for
every thing he said, that they were ravished with his discourse, and so long
they traveled that in the evening of the fourteenth day, they arived at London
according to what Merlin had foretold. The next morning these Philosophers went
to make their r^verence to the King; telling him that they were come within the
perfixed time, to make ^l^er to (...); not only that which he ha^ asked of
them, ^^m all other ma^ters, as well past, present, and to com^: What said the
King have you tasted some divinity, since I saw you, that you can fore^ell
things to come, it will be enough for you to resolve the (...) I have demanded;
without bragging of so much for I purpose, not to endure you; abuses no longer.
Sir, it is no abuse, said the Ph losophers, for we shall tell you nothing but
the truth, as by experience you shall find but to acquain^ you with the truth
of the matter; this is not done by ^ur own knowledge, (...) by a divine and
miracl^ous Child, of whom we having ^^ord we sought him out for your service;
and we h^v^ alreadly found such proof of his divine spirits; ^a i^ ^od ^o^ been
possible for any man to have p^r^v^^d us to it, if we had not seen it, with our
eyes: And thereupon they related to the King how all had happened about Galgo
and the promise he had made them, to acqua^^^ the King, with the cause of his
blindness, and the means for his recovery; whereupon the King was so well
pleased, (as you may very well imagine) that it seemed imp^ssible, to express
the j^y, which he had in his heart; and therefore he presently commanded, that
the Child Merlin should be brought into his presence: But when he saw that he
was so young, he suspected that these Philosophers did only put an abuse upon
him; which Merlin very well knowing, said to the King; Sir, before I shall tell
you the cause of your blindness when you are out of the City of London; and the
means to deliver you, I will show you to your own sight, what has been the
cause o^ ^t, and what ke^p^ you in this C^ndition; so that you seeing by
experience, that I know the cause of your evil which has been hid and unknown
to your self, and all others, of your Kingdom, you will be the more rea^y to
give credit to what I shall further say (...) you: Hereupon having caused the
bed whereon the King usually slept to be removed; he said thus Sir, cause
sombody to dig under it, for there you shall find a great Cauldron, that
without fire, burns continually and which is maintained, by seven great balls
of fire; whereof there is one in the Middle, which is larger than the others,
who are all of an equal bigness, and ere all placed about this great (...) Now
Sir, you may please to understand, that so long as the fire of these balls
shall endure; you shall always find your self blind, when you are out of the
City of London and yet it is imp^ssible, to extinguish it by nature, nor by any
other liquor whatsoever, for the more water shall be cast upon this fire, to
much the more violently will it burn; and further great care must be taken, not
to remove this burn^ng C^ldron from the place where it is, for i^ will not only
burn those that shall attempt to remove it, but you will also suffer more
mischief, if it should be removed; for you would become absolutely blind,
without armedy as well within the City as without, up n these words of Merlin,
the King commanded to dig in the place where his bed was, but they had not
dug very deep, but they who first began, were forced to leave off, by reason
of the great smoke that issued out: It is enough said Merlin, for the force of
the fire, will discover the rest; and so it came to pass, for it was not long
before the earth flew up like sparks of fire, and then first was seen the great
ball of fire, which was it the middle; and soon after, the rest discovered
themselves, one after an other, so that in less then an hours time there was
plainly seen the b^ring Cauldron; and the seven fire balls, which did cast up
their fire a great height: At this sight the King was amazed, and so were all
the Princes of the Court, who were very desirous to understand the mystery of
this miraclous fire; and more especially the King, who earnestly asked of
Merlin; from whence this fire could proceed Sir, answered he, this is a great
secret of God, who will not have i^ revealed but t^ those whom i^ Concerns; and
therefore if you would know the truth, let every one depart; for to your self
only, will I declare this mystery. Hereupon every one, by the Kings Command
left the room, and none remained there, but the King and Merlin, who thus began
his discourse; Sir, your Majesty ought out to think that she things ^f this
world happen by chance, as some Ignorant persons have said; but you are
certainly to believe that nothing happens but by the providence of God who
having distributed his charges, to every one, according to his good will and
pleasure he wills, and expects, that man should perform his endeavor; in
the vocation, to which he has called him; and therefore having committed to
you, the administration and government of this Kingdom, his pleasure was that
taking care of the affairs thereof, and performing the duty of a good Prince;
you should procure the good, and repose of the affairs of your people; as for
some time you did. But after that you did so much give your self to pleasures,
that leaving the charge to others, of those affairs; which according to Gods
will, should pass through your hands; you were kept from the true knowledge
thereof, so that the good justice that had been in this Kingdom, has been
altered, and your good subjects are opressed; and on the con^r ty, they who
should be examplarily punished; not only escape, by means of their money, but
also are proved with estates, and offices; justice is to those that will give
most, and finally, all things go contrary to what they ought: All this evil
proceeds from no other ca^e, but that you being unwilling to be troubled with
state affairs, have left the mannagment of all, to these seven; who under
pretense of the name of Sages, committ the greatest extor^ions and unjustices
in the world; thinking of nothing; but how to Tyranize ^v r the poor people,
and heap to themselves great treasure, by the destruction of your Subj cts;
whose complaint, and cry, having reached up unto heaven, God by his just
Ju^gment, has sent you this blindness, which you have, when you are out of the
City of London; that as you have voluntarily deprived your self of the eyes of
your understanding, so that you will not see, nor take notice of any thing, but
your particular pleasure, instead of having your eyes employed, for the good
and quiet of your people; you should be also deprived of your Corporal sight,
so that you may not see any thing out of your City of London. Thus have I told
you the Cause of your evil, so that now without saying any more it is easy for
you to remedy it, but that you may be without any excuse, I will prescribe to
you the course you are to take; know then that God would have you Chastise your
self, for your fore-passed negligence, and by the same means, that those who
have exercised so much Tyrany over your people, be punished, for their crimes
are beyond all comparison greater then yours: True it is, that you have very
much failed, but it was through Ignorance; having put into the hands of others,
the adminstration and charge which God had committed to your self; indeed you
might think them to be wise men, and fit for such a government, but they have
maliciously ^ff^nded; for they very well knew, that their actions wherein they
Tyraniz^d over this Kingdom; were contrary to God, and nevertheless their
insatiablness and avarice have continued; and therefore you ought to amend your
self, and that they suffer death; and I assure you if you act this justice upon
them, your evil will leave you, and if you will not, I advertise you that the
Judgments of God will increase upon you; so as to darken your heart, and I ^ell
you there is no w^y to extinguish these seven fire balls, but by the heads of
these seven, and that you may ha^^ a proof of what I say, make a trial of the
greatest, for a^ you have seen, the more you endeavor to extinguish it with
water, or other liquor; so much the more violently (...) burns (as you have
already made trial) ca^se the head of the principal, that is the oldest, and
most inveterate of these S^g^s to be cut off; and you will presently see that
this great fire ball will be extinguished. The King having very attentivly
heard, the discourse of Merlin; some times blushed, and then again became pale,
and ^e found himself touched to the life, and yet however acknowledged his
fault, for having continued so long without taking care of the affair^ of his
Kingdom he began to sigh and groan, entreating the good Merlin, that he would
pray to God for him that his Majesty would forgive him his faults, you need not
doubt of that answered Merlin, for in performing what I have told you, your
offenses shall be pardoned, without the intercession of any, and on the
contr^ry if you do not perform it, a greater vengeance of God is prepared for
you, since now you c^nnot pretend the cause of Ignorance: The King did think it
very strange to put those to death, whom he had raised to such greatness, and
of whom he had several times, had experience on many occasions to be very
wise; but considering, and viewing with his eyes, the matter of the Cauldron,
and having a remorse of conscience, for the great fault which he had committed,
which put him in fear, of a more sharp v^ngance according to the threatenings
of Merlin, he therefore resolved to make a trial of the principal of the seven
Philosophers; and thereupon causing him to be called, pretending to conferr
with him about what Merlin had told him; he ordered his head to be presently,
and privately cut off, which being done, the great fire ball in the middle that
did cast out more fire than the rest, was of it self extinguished: This being
seen by the King, without any more delay, he did the same by the rest, causing
them to come one by one, and as one head was cut ^ff, so one fire ball went
out; so that the last was no sooner beheaded, but all the fire was
extinguished, and there was no appearance; neither of balls nor Cauldron, which
was not mater^call as Merlin said, but it was of fire, although it seemed to be
of mettle, as other Cauldrons are, and the earth where it had been before, was
as cool and fresh as in other places. This being done, Merlin ordered the Kings
Chamber to be put to rights, and caused the bed to be placed, where it had
formerly been; and because it was then late, he told the King that he should
rest contented, and take his ease, for that night; and that the next day they
would go out of the City of London, where he should perceive his deliverance
and healing, which should be then seen, and known of all the world: The next
morning the King arose early as joyful as might be, and sent to all the
Pr^nces and Barrons, and Gentlemen of his Court; that they should be ready, to
accompany him; for he would that morning go pass the time, out of the City of
London? Every one mer^a^led at ^he news, because the King had so long continued
without going out of ^he City, for the trouble to find himself blind, being out
of the City, for the matter of the Ca^ldron, was not yet divulged or known; and
although it had been, it would have been acco^nted as a fable, and especially
by those who believe no more than what they see. The King then being mo need on
the fairest horse ^n hi^ stable, did set r^wards having Merlin by his side, wh^
was in homely hab^^, for notwithstanding all his knowledge; he would have no
other Clothes, but went in poor ^ayment, according to the Condition of his
birth; not regarding Clothes nor riches: The King did all the way discourse
with Merlin, which his Princes wondered at; to see him thus taken up with a
poor lad, without speaking one word to all the Nobility that foll^wed him; and
being come to the City Gate, M^rlin going before, said to the King Sir, as I
have served you as a Physician, so I will show you che way to rejoice; and the
great occasion you have for it, in having rec^vered your sight to the great
content of your people. And yet if you will speak the truth, although you had
some hopes of your cure, yet you were not so certain as now at this time you
make experience of it: And going forwards out of the G^te, he tu^ned about to
the King who was also issued (...); and looked about toward all parts,
believing himself entered into a new life, to see himself restored to that which
he had so long lost, witho^t knowing how and which he had so often endeavored
to rec^ver; but in vain. Whereupon Merlin said to him Sir, do you see the truth
of what I told you, and how the providence of God is great, give him thanks
therefore, and for the future, so order you actions that the fury, and vengence
of God may not fall upon you. The King being transported with joy, ran to
embrace Merlin heartily; thanking him for his good aid and assistance, with a
promise never to act contrary to his directions. The Princes Barrons and
Gentlemen; who followed the King, seeing this were surprised with mervaile and
joy, to see their King with his accustomed sight; and every one showed some
sign of rejoicing; which was redoubled in the hearts of all, when they
understood the means the King had taken for his Cure, which was a true and
absolute a-franchising of the realm of England, from the tyran^ of these ^even
Philosophers; who had for so long time oppressed the poor people: This news
being spread a broad. Bonfires were made not only in London, but throughout all
England; and as for Merlin, he continued with the King, until Justice was
reformed; and having given him many good documents, as well for his particular
person, as for the government of his people; he then went to instruct other
Princes and Nations, according to the Charge which God had given him.

Now to apply this discourse to your occasion, I say Sir, that you stand in
want of a Merlin, to show you, the abuse of your seven Philosophers, who studdy
nothing more, but how to take away your sight that you may not be able to
Judge, not only of things passed, but also of those that are in being; and
which you your self have seen with both your eyes: And in order th^reunto, they
do so disturb your brai^ with their fabulous tales; that by degrees they will
persuade you that the vilanous action which the Traitor Erastus has done,
contrary to all right, divine and humane; and to your perpetual shame ought
not only, not to be punished according to the ^entence, which you have given
but that he des^rv^s a reward; to which bl^ndness if yo^ suffer you self to be
sotishly wrought unto; I can think no othe^wise, but that they will in time,
take away your life, as they have already deprived you of your eve^; of your
understanding, (which I hope God will not permit,) by which means wi^^^ this
wicked Erastus; they may exer^ise their Tyrany on the poor Roman Empire. I
shall prevent that, said the Emperor, for to morrow morning without fail,
Justice shall take its course; in the first place, upon that Wretch who has so
highly offended, against your honor and mine; and secondly, against these
Rascals; who in stead of learning him virtue, have showed him how to commit,
such vilanous actions: And of this, assure your self my dear, for it shall be
delayed no longer. The Empress then seemed to be of good cheer; expecting the
day, with an Ardent desire which possessed her, to hear the News, which might
extinguish the Cruelty and Rage, which consumed her.

CHAP. XIIII. The Philosopher, Enoscopus slayed execution of the sentence
against Erastus for the fourth day; by a discourse which he made to the
Emperor of a Gentleman of P^dua, named Cleander; who for the words of his
Chambermaid, killed his Wife and Servant believing that he had found them in
the act of dishonesty together; and yet afterward knowing the Contrary, he
tore out his Chamber maids heart; and being in despair hanged him self.
THE Emperor having s^laced himself that night with the E^pe^^s, at b^eak of
day he c^ll'd one of the G^n^lemen of his Bedchamber to him, (who was one of
his principal favorites) commanding him with out further delay, to put in real
execution: the sentence which he had pronounced against Erastus; and that he
should wholly incline himself to that end, least the Philosopher should come in
the interim, and hinder him of his intention: further comman^ing him, that as
soon as Erastus was executed; he should secretly surprise the Philosophers and
secure them in top left: representation of a male figure or husband standing
beside a bed with a male figure or servant and a female figure or wife; top
right: representation of a male figure or husband with a sword raised chasing a
female figure or wife; bottom: representation of a male figure hanged from the
ceiling with the bodies of a male and two female figures on the floor below him
a strong Prison, each a part, to deter them from consulting each other, about
h^ means of their deliverance It is true, the Empres^ was very desir^e and
therefore much pressed the Emperor that without delay that one time and place
should p^r a period to their and Erastus his life; but the Emperor would not
be induced to a consent, saying, that to please the Senate (among whom these
P^^l^sophers were in great esteem) he would further enquire into their lewd
lives and conversations, and other misdemeanors, which they had perp^^^ed in
the behal of Erastus: and if at length they would not confess, he would compel
them to do it, and in the conclusion inflict such punishments as their
villainies have deserved. The Empress being herewith pacified, her sole
expectation waited for the welcome news of the death of her Son-in-law; but on
the contrary that good Philosopher who res^lved to stand the fourth day in the
defense of Erastus, was much troubled for his young Master. Now this man
(besides his profound knowledge in other Arts and Sciences) was very skilful in
div nation, by the flight and chirping of Birds, for which he was calle^ by the
name of Enoscopus, and in short, having known by ^h^ slight of certa^n B^rds
^ot evening preceding that threatening ^^al m^rn, that Erastus should be in
danger of his l^fe, he went to the Castle before it was day; with an intent to
find him ere the hour that seemed with danger should approach; and finding the
gates shut, he w ^ afraid to knock fearing that the Emperou^ und^rstanding his
errand was to speak with him, would cause him to be thrust out of the Castle,
for he was well informed before of the resolution of the Emperor and Empress
the night foregoing; and therefore res^lv'd to wait a^ the gate till some one
came with whom he might enter, and so speak with the Emperor; and so it fell
out as he had determined, for the Empresses Physicians having understood that
she was indisposed the foregoing night, came very early that morning to the
Castle, to enquire into her health and welfare, and to consult the most proper
medicines for her recovery; by which means the Philosopher Enoscopus had a fair
opportunity to have entrance into the Castle with them, he attended in the hall
all they were returned from the Chamber of the Empress to go to the Emperor,
to inform his Majesty of the present condition of their Mistres. The
Physicians finding the Empress well, and that she stood not in need of their
assistance, took their le^ves, and from thence went to the Chamber of the
Emperor, their to pay their reverence and devoir, and with them went the good
Philosopher Enoscopus, who was no sooner discovered by the Emperor, but he
instantly dar^ed at him a furious deadly look, and upbraided him with many
miscarriages, and was ab^ut to have had him cudgel'd soundly out of the
Palace; but fearing he might thereby procure the disreputation of a passionate
man, and one that is transported with choler (having always been a moderate
Prince and well governed) he bridled his passion; which the Philosopher
perceiving he made this as an argument to his ensuing purpose, and began to
applaud the great moderation of the Emperor, of which he had made large
demonstrations, even till that time in all his actions; making it apparent what
great profit and reputation he had gained by that means through the whole
Universe, remonstra^ing with all in^o what inconveniences they precipitat^ them
^l^^s into, who being led captive by choler, or other ssions, neglecting the
true government of them (...) have done those thing, which are irremid^ess,
(...) seeing repentance we unavoidable, they ^ave b^^n reduced to despair,
especially their (...) ^^^ng irrepairable. But the more demonstra^^^^ (...)
P^^losopher made hereof, the more enrag^^ w^^ ^he Emperor, so that he did not
h^ar him, but wi h great perplexity; so that turning his back upon the
Philosopher, he was just about to leave the room, but the presence of the
Physicians and many other persons of quality, which were then in the Castle
restricted his departure, fearing he might give them occasion to blame him for
not giving them audience. The Philosopher now became earnest, and pressing in
such manner that he demanded of the Emperor by way of admonition, where w^^
his prudence and accustomed patience and what was become of that love he ever
had to justice, and those other excellent faculties which were wont so to shine
in him, that they served for a less ornament to themselves, then wonder to
others. I see says the Emperor what you aim at, and that you came hither to
break the neck of my intention concerning Erastus; but it is in vain, for I
have determined what shall be done in such sort that without demurring or
delay, justice shall take place; whom to satisfy, I had rather see the death
of my Son, and be destitute of a lawful success^ur to the Empire, than to
pardon him in a case so horrible villainous and detestable, leaving him his
life, by a fatherly indulgence, to leave after me to the Empire a man so v^ld
and wicked, to be its Prince and Governor, moreover do not think this b^siness
shall be concluded in his single death: for justice shall no sooner have had
her course on him, but that her rigor shall turn it self upon you, and your
Brethren, for that evil doctrine and instruction to which may be attributed
this miscarriage and disorder which has surroun^ed the blooming years of young
Erastus: notwithstanding he shall not escape punishment, the which shall as in
justice be redoubled on you not long after, seeing that an old man and making
profession ought to be punished with greater severity, than a young man who
has yet arrived to no greater height than the name of a Disciple. Sir, said
the Philosopher I am not aff aid of death, nor will it; threats terrify my
companions; who have lea^n'd in the study of Philosphy, that death is no pain
to the virtuous, but end of their pains and travail, serving to them instead
of a gate or entrance into everlasting happiness; and by this means by how much
the more you cause our advancement, by so much the more are our obligations to
you for it, but as to you it is imp ssible! would it not anger any one to see
you instead of reputation and a good name which you may acquire by the love you
bear to just ce, you fall into disreputation and infamy perpetual, for being a
Prince that is cruel, inhumain, precipi^ate, inconsiderate, credulous and
easy, to be ded^ceiv d, havi^g your ears p^ssest by one who counterfeits a
love, but hates you mortally and seeks by all means to make an end of such, who
to speak truly have no other end but the advancement of your grandeur, and the
utility of the Comm ^-wealth. I cannot be blaimed said the Emperou^ for
opp^sing a fatherly affection to obey justice; since I proceed not by the
instigations of any, or their false persuasions, nor from my self, through
fault of having always my ears patiently employed; for this fact was not
related to me, but I saw it with both my eyes: yet notwithstanding I refused
not to give audience to you and your Companions, who by your tittle tittle, and
tedious discourse, have so enraged me, that nothing could put me into a greater
passi^n: for from them I could never gather any thing on which I might resolve,
but only insisted on sensuality and natural affection which in this respect
agrees in the conquest of what will be found reasonable, and certainly the
malice of your Companions has demonstrated it self greatly in this affair, not
only contenting your selves, to have shown so bad an example and giving such
bad advice to Erastus, but that you peremptorily uphold him in his crime
presuming on your pain^d expressions, (adulterating color d) and subtle
inventions, to make me fall into this reproach, and so work upon my noddle,
that I may take that for a fable or dream, which I saw with both mine eyes: but
the matter is otherwise, than you suppose it, for know I will secure you from
evermore abusing any person, and take this for certain that this is the last
discourse you shall ever make in this world, to which the Philosopher replied
with out the least astonishment, I know not what you may have seen but I know
full well that the judgment of the sight, notwithstanding it is judged more
infallible than hearing yet it has often proved deceitful, esp^cially when the
spirit is busied, and transported with some passion; for whether good or b^d,
it always multiplyes what their eye would sufficiently and faithfully remark;
so that frequently a thing seems greater in appearance, than it is in effect,
and by this means, that which you think you have seen in Erastus may be fal^e,
you cannot have a better instance against him, than what a Gentleman of Padua
had against his own faithful servant, thinking he had discovered him vitiating
his wife, (who notwithstanding was one of the chasest Gentlewomen in all
Pandua) and thereupon without enquiring into the cause of his servants going
into his Ladies chamb^r, and putting too much confidence in his own eyes, slew
them both: but having ^^terwards understand the the truth of the ma^^er, (for
God will not suffer long the innocent to be ^ppr^ss^d with calumny; but by the
same (...) they were wrongfully villifyed and dispar^g^d, by the same shall
their innocence shine as b^ight as the morning S^^) I ^ay this poor Gentleman
^^ll into such despair, that hating both fel^ and life, and fi^ding nothing no
other way to office the fault by him committed, then to execute j^stice on
himself for the injustice and injury which he had offorded his wife, and
faithful servant, deprived himself of life b^ ^is own wretchedness, and
certainly if God (who has always his eye sixth for the c^^versation of the
Roman Empire, preserve you not in ^hi^ great exigency into which I see you
falling, I fear in a very little time, a mischief will befall you, for
precipitating and hastening the death of your Son, for his innocence shineing
out in process of time (but to late for him) you will be constrained in all
right and reason to revoke that sentence you pronounced too rashly, and with g
eater precipitation then the evil matter of fact required a thing discordant to
Emperial dignity, in which you are now established, in which tr^^e nothing ought
to be done, but with maturity and deliberation: It is impossible for me to
dissemble the loved hear f r Prince Erastus your Son, as well for being my
Disciple: as for those virtues which posse^s his Royal breast, and furthermore
as he is the off-sp^ing of your Emperial blood, but these move me not so much
as truth it self, and in its vindication am ready to sacrifice a life; and to
the intent I may not survive my Disciple, I am expressly come before your
Majesty, (having understood the command you have issued out for the execution)
humbly bese^ching this favor not to permit to live after his death: and now
Sir seeing that we are freed from the fear of death, be pleased to lend an ear
to the discourse of the Gentleman of Padua, of whom somewhat I speak before; to
this there wants nothing more but the discharge of my Conscience in all things;
I know may any ways concern your grandeur and service, this done do as you
shall think most fit and expedient with Erastus, my self and companions. It so
happened that there were many Senature in the Chamber where the Emperor was, to
confer with him about matters of State, who hearing the speech of Enoscopus the
Philosopher were much moved and troubled, nay and the Emperor himself;
although as at other times, he made no great appearance thereof, hereupon the
standers by supplycated the Emperor for the prolongation of the life of
Erastus, till the Philosopher had finished his discourse, that he might not seem
to have denied audience in a matter of such great importance as the life of a
man: to which the Emperor consented though much ag^i^st his mind, and
thereupon sent away instantly to defer the execution till further order: for
the innocen^ Erastus was already on the Scaff^ld, and his eye^ covered, yet
lifting up his head to heaven, he showed by signs his innocence, and to avoid
the malignity of ^aelestial influences, he was compelled to be silent. The
execution then being deferred for an hour without more ad^e observing the
command of the Emperor, the Philosopher began his Narrative in this manner
following.

In the ^oble City of Padua, a place highly renowned, as well for its grandeur,
as famous University, and illustrious Personages, its Inhabitants, among whom a
young Gentleman called Cleander, who was reputed among the chief of that City,
as well for his great wealth, as ancient and noble Fami^y. This Gentleman from
his infancy having been well educated in learning, and brought up in all
virtues, and commendable exercises, suitable to his degree, he became so great
a proficient therein, that there was u^ other talk in Padua, but of the
excellen^ education and good nourtriture of the young Gentleman; by which means
his father was partaker of no small honor, besides the inward satisfaction
which p^ssest his heart, it come to pass this young Gentle^ens Father dyed, and
having paid the debt which was due to Nature, he became by this means sole Heir
being his Fathers only Son, and thereupon took upon him the care of all the
affairs of the house which was very great.

Notwithstanding, without secluding himself from those honest exercises in
which he was brought up, he managed so dexterously his affair, that one might
say he was born to rule an govern an Empire: and this rendered him more
admirable to every one.

The Relations and Friends of this young Gentleman, seeing how orderly he
governed his house, and being the sole male of that family which was left,
persuaded him to marry, that so good and ancient family might not be lost by
his faulty neglect of procreation. To which the Gentleman would not condescend
at first, but opposed it with much ob^tinacy. However understanding what his
friends said, proceeded from a sincere affecti^n, he promised to put in
practice what they had counseled him, with this proviso, that the Gentlewoman
they should provide for him, should be of quality, and not inferior to his
fortunes; moreover well educated and of an age agreeable to his own: which
being understood by his friends they undetook the pains to find out such a one
as he demanded: it was not long er^ they had procured such a Gentlewoman, fa^^,
young, and bred like a Gentlewoman of Padua, whose name was Beatrice.

Their marriage done and solemnized he took home with him his new Spouse, whom
he found in all things what he desired, it so fell out that she was very
importunate with her Husband (as other women are) to have the management of the
household affairs which she so notably handled that in a few months the
Gentleman surrendered the whole charge thereof to her guidance, wherein she
behaved her self wonderfully well, discreetly and modestly, seldom acting any
thing without the advice of her Husband, discoursing him always so much to the
purpose, with a deportment so sweet and amiable that her Husband thought
himself in her the happiest man in the world: this amity and concord lasted a
long time, for that these two were held the fairest and happiest couple in all
Padua: but fortune (an Enemy to the repose and tranquillity of the virtuous) was
not long ere she laid a plot to ranverse their happiness, and to turn their
joys topsi ^urvy; making an exchange of the felicity man can imagine, into the
greatest misery that can befall mankind.

Now this Gentlewoman had a Chambermaid among other servants who was an
excellent Governness of a house, to whom her Mistress gave a great deal more
l^berty than to others, for that love and fidelity she experimentally had found
in her, not-with-standing this great governness, doing as many had done before,
who finding themselves pampered by good diet and entertainment, never think of
their honor, began to cast a lustful eye upon one of the servants of the
house, and being over confident of the good opinion her Mistress and others had
for her, consulted with her self, how she should enjoy her sensuality, and
quench the flame of her carnal appetites.

Without any consideration had to her reputation, and upon these thoughts she
ordered the matter, so that she got this servant within her amorous net, or
toil, however the fear and danger counterpoised the pleasure: there two
Amorists had not been long in the Chamber, ere their Mistress (which was
continually busied every where in the affairs of the house,) surprised them as
they lay on the bed in the very act; at which being much enraged, seeing the
hainousness of the fact which they committed, was about to have delivered them
both into the hands of her Husband, for him to inflict a punishment agreeable as
the crime required.

But then thinking with her self (being prudent and discreet) that should she
advertise her Husband hereof, there might be great danger, that the zeal which
he had for the honor of his house, might so transport him, that he might kill
them both, and so justice be offended with him; wherefore she was resolved not
to speak a word, and only with the severity of rebuke turned the man servant
out of doors, and taking her Chambermaid by the arm, lead her into an obscure
place, where any noise could not be heard, and there did beat her beyond
sufferance; thus bruised and beaten she was forced to keep her bed, under the
pretense of being very sick and thus was this fault hush't up; and although
this wise Gentlewoman had great occasion to abhor this wicked wretch for the
faul^s which she had committed: yet was her countenance as friendly to her as
formerly: but this ingreateful wench, ought to have highly prized the goodness
and bounty of her Mistris^ in passing by a fault, so enormous, and so mildly
corrected, entertaining her still, lovingly in her service, notwithstanding she
had forfeited all favor and respect, yet notwithstanding this contemned what
ere her Mist^es^ had done; or then did for her, and being as it were mad, not
only to have lost her stolen pleasures, but to be baisted to boot, consulted
with her self, how she might execute her revenge, in such sort that she thought
of nothing night n^r day, but of the means to be revenged of her Mistri^.

Having discourst her self thoroughly on this point, and concluded how she
should work he^ design, she immagined it would never come to perfection, as
long as her Mistress should be so watchful over her, and therefore seeming to
take all in g^^d part which her Mistress had done to her, became very pliable
and pleasant, although within she carried nothing but poison.

She now behaved her self humbly to he^ Mistress, in such manner that having
acquitted her her ^^d, (which she had kept some days, by reason of her
Mistress severe correction, she betook her self to her former employ of looking
after the house behaving her self more diligent and affectionate toward her
Mistress than formerly, seeming to he very well pleased with her chastisement,
since ^^e had deserved it, by which means her Mrs. could not perceive the least
spark of that malice which she concealed in her bosom; and continued these
subtle practices, till by abusing her with such dissimulations, whom she held
as her mortal Enemy, she had got the good opinion of her Mistress, and was
again returned into favor.

In the mean time it was her common study to make her diligence in household
affairs, to appear so visibly to the eye of her Master, that that she might
gain the opinion of being a good huswife.

Seeing she was arrived to what she desired, she only waited an opportunity to
execute the villainy her wicked heart had con^^ived against her Mistress, who
one day being g^ne for po^s time with some young Ladies and R^l^tions of her
own, to a Garden which she had w^^hout this City, this She-Divel the
Chamber-m^^d (wh^ ^ho^ght on nothing but her reven^^,) (...) alone in his
Close^, besi^e (...) in ^^^self there was no body in the ^^^e, t^^^gh ^^is hour
the most proper for her (...) agreeable to the plot the had formed to effect
her revenge.

In short, not to loose any m re time, she went directly to her M^^ter giving
^^m to (...), that she had ma^^er (...) communicate unto him. And w^^ (...)
matter of imputrate^ (...) all amazed and startled at these novels, it is such
said the Chambermaid, that cannot be greater, for you, now Sir, if you are
willing to understand it, you must do too things.

In the first place, you must promise to keep counsel, and that you will not be
angry with me for what I shall relate; for the reward will be very heard, if in
li^n of being recompensed for that zeal add fidelity, which forces me to this
proffer, I suffer death for the same, which undoubt^dly will come to pass if
this thing shall be known to have been divulged by means.

The other thing that I desire is not to be transported with chollar and fury,
but resolve to hear patiently the truth of what I shall declare unto you. Speak
boldly what thou will answered Cleander, for I will never utter a word thereof
without your approbation; and do not think me guilty of such levity, that for
thy words, or the words of any woman whatsoever, I shall inconsiderately
believe any thing, much less do any thing that may injure my reputation.
Wh^reupon the Chambermaid having made a long Apol^gie expressing her grie^ f^r
b^inging him such news which must needs turn to his great sorrow, spoke thus.
Sir, you have well known in the time that I have lived in your service, with
that love and fidelity I have acted therein, not employing my thoughts upon any
thing, but the finding out such means according to my slender ability, as were
most conducible to the guidance of your Domestical affairs, and bring the
greatest contentment to your self and Madam your Consort; as much esteeming the
good and welfare of my Mistress, as my own life, observing the great love you
have for her; which sole consideration (besides the obligation incumbent to
render you reciprocal duty as a wife) is sufficient to make her love you, and
to be very careful of yours: but especially her own honor, the which she ought
to preserve above all things, and verily I always thought her till now very
lately chaste and loyal.

But you and I Sir, are both egregiously deceived, for I am very well assured
that throwing the fear of the law behind her, and the preservation of her own
honor, she has prostituted her self to one of your servants for her lustful
satisfaction. This I speak unwillingly, and being unable to bear with an act
that brings with it so much misery; I have oftentimes reproved her, being both
alone, to withdraw her from the baseness thereof, remonstrating to her the evil
she acted therein, and the great danger she was like to involve herself; there
by beseeching her to banish all such thoughts, and reconcile her heart to you,
and to be as just and true as you have been to her; but the Harvest of (...)
good counsel I reapt in blows even to D^^^; the which troubled me not, and did
bear it patiently, nay was content to be beaten again and again, so that I
might see that amendment I desired; but I see that things go worse and worse,
and therefore am forced to give you notice hereof, to the end you yet may take
such a course, as your prudence (...) ^^rection ^n the mean time let me pray
y^^, not to stick at my words, but satisfy yourself ^^ther which you may easily
do, for every thing, as often as you please shall be evidently ^^de ^ppear to
your occuler observation.

But herein have a special care of your (...), for if you forbear to speak, and
dissemble the knowledge of your knowing any thing you will easily find out
which of your servants is m^^^ acc^p^^le, to your disloyal wife; for fire will
not suffer a long conce^lment, but make a discovery of it self by its own
luster. The Gentleman hearing his Chamber maid talk after thi^ manner, was
am^zed, to hear such tidings of his wife, whom he always thought chaste and
modest, a^ in truth so it was; now finding the means facile for the knowledge
of the truth, he resolved to wait till he might fi^d out the true ^^ea^oing
^ereof, and having forbidden the Chamber maid, to speak to any person hereof
op^n pa^n of death, bid her go about her accustomed busin^^s; and being al^ne
began to ruminate with himself, often refl^cting on the f^ct of his wife, and
p^rdering with himself who of his servants should be the man, that did him this
injury.

Now among others, this Gentleman had a young servant, whom from his infancy he
brought (...) in his own family; who was handsome, bold and of a graceful
d^portment; also his Mist^ess l v^d him well, not for lust, but for the
goodness she saw him and his readiness to serve his, now this Gentleman thought
within himself, that if any servant belonging to him, had done him this wrong
it must be him, but the great loyalty and fidelity which he had always known in
his wife, and this servant made; the case seem very strange and intricate, how
ever he resolved to be very vigilent to see whither by himself or other means,
he could come to understand the truth, and in short looking narrowly into the
deportment of this his servant, he Judged him the likliest of all his servants.

He saw otherwise his servant had no other propensity, then to serve his
Master; waiting at table, and consequently on his Mistress, in such manner that
upon the least signal given he flew to execute what was commanded him: Also he
began to suspect seeing his wife was more desirous to be served by him, then
the rest and fancied (as commonly it happens to such as are tainted with
jealousy) that all that his wife did she was accustomed to do, and that the
forward, and ready service of Henry (for so this servant was called) at was an
undeniable argument, proving what the Chamber-ma d had related; and as his
jealousy began to increase, he frequently resolved to kill, both w^fe and
servant, and thought he had proof sufficient to confirm him in the fact, but
remembering that the Chambermaid had told him, that at any time and as often as
he would^; she would lead, him by the hand where he might satisfy himself; he
altered his purpose, concluding to see if it were possible, if he could
surprise them in the very fact, to show that with good and just reason, he had
done that which he had before determined; for which purpose, having secretly
got the Chambermaid to come to him in his closet, he asked her whether she was
willing to show him that which she had told him concerning his wife; to which
this wicked Chambermaid answered; is there any thing more easy then this? Do
only this which I shall tell you, and you shall see with both your eyes, that
which shall make you mad to see. This very day if you please; seem to go out of
Town for some few days, and a little while after return that night, and I
giving you the sign, to which come without knocking at the door, and I will
let you in; and then you may go briskly into the Chamber of your wife, for
there you shall find the Cuckoo brooding in a Nest that is none of his own.

This over credulous Gentleman finding the counsel good of this wicked
Chambermaid, presently called for his Boots, and having his horse got ready
said to his wise, I must go out of Town for some days, I recommend to you the
care and mannagment of all; and taking his leave of her, as it was usual for
him to do when he had travailed abroad, but he rode no further than the extreme
parts of the Suburbs; where in a secret place he lay occult, till about
midnight and then perceiving the hour proper, for what he had resolved upon; he
took a poisoned Dagger which he stuck by his side, and in this equipage he
directed himself toward his Palace; where arriving, he made the signal, which
he had told the Chambermaid, who being very watchful as she was, ran
instantly like a fury, to Henry's Chamber door at which she knocked very loudly
crying out to him, Henry do you hear make have, run quickly to your Mistresses
Chamber, who is taken suddenly ill, and commands you in all have to come and
speak with her; that she may send you to a Physician. Honest Henry, who was a
good servant, and allways ready at command, ^^^^wing his Cloak upon his
shoulders, went to the Mistresses Chamber, and at that very instant; the
Chambermaid opened the Gate to her Master, saying go up the stairs, and you
will now find the steel and stone striking fire into the Tinder-box; wherefore
hasten and go up softly, that you may not be discovered and that the whoring
Varlet may not hide himself. Henry being come to his Mistresses Chamber, asked
her; Madam what is your pleasure with me, for the Chambermaid caused me to
come in great have unto you, to which his mistress replied, go and sleep for I
need not your assistance, sure she is drunk as she use to be; poor Henry going
out of the Chamber, encountered his Master upon the stairs, wh^ in rage without
speaking a word, stabbed him with his Dagger to the heart, and there left him
dead; thinking he had then come from defiling his marriage bed: and to
prosecute his fury, ran to his wife, whom he found awake; and did beat and
abuse her, worse than any common Strumpet; on the contrary the poor Gentlewoman
all astonished at the villainous misusage of her husband whom she expected not,
demanded of him half drowned in tears; what was his reason for so doing,
endeavoring also to vindicate her Innocence; but her husband still persisting
in heating and battering her about the mouth with the Silt of his D^gger,
whereby she had not the least permission to utter one syllable, and being more
then half dead, he railed at her in the most reproachful manner imaginable,
and being unwilling to stain his hands with the blood of her he loved once so
dearly; he wished she would dye of her own accord Having now pour^d out the
poison into a glass, which he had brought with him, he took it in one hand and
his Dagger in the other, saying, choose which of these two thou will have,
either this poison which will suddenly dispatch thee or shall I penetrate thy
heart, with this Dagger; in recompense of those villainies, thou have
perpetrated, and acted against me: D^spatch in the choice, of one or the other,
o^ I will dispatch thee instantly. The poor Gentlewoman, seeing her Husband
firmly been upon her destruction, without doing him any wrong; took the Glass
of poison, and lifting her eyes to heaven, said, I call heaven and earth, and
all the creatures therein contained to testify my innocence; and if there be a
Providence above, who ever casts a watchful eye on things below; I humbly
supplicate that after my death, my honor may not remain cont^mi^a^^d or
spotted, either in respect to heaven o^ ^^^^h; and that one time or other, my
innocence may be so p^^picu^us that the death which I am now a^^^ to r^ce ^e
form my own hand, may (...) us pl^^sing to h^aven^^ it is (...) way troublesome
former ^^de g^^^lly lif^ ^in^^g ^rvous for me to lo^k (as G^^ and be my
witness) but all my trouble is for the (...) y^u have c^st upon me, but I hope
in God who is a j^st j^dge, that my inocencie will thine out the dishonor and
confusion of th^se are the cause of this my present woe; I speak not this to
you, knowing that you are troubled in my behalf, for I know it is your
mis-prision, has ^rove you to thi^ sad enterprise, the which when once clearly
known, I doubt not will make you willing to repair your present fault, with the
hazard of your life, to extenuate, which I had rather dye by my own hand,
drinking this poison, than to charge you with this infamy, of having shed the
innocent blood of her, who so ardently loved and loyally served you; having
always kept the tie of wedlock inviolable. Thus saying, and without fear she
took the poison and putting it to her mouth, she withdrew not the glass till
she ^^ed swallowed all, ^aving so done, she addressed her self to her Hu^band,
saying, since by my death app^oaches, which I feel stealing on my eyes, your
wrath and fury ought to be appeased, seeing you have taken as large a revenge
as the greatest fault in the world may require, although I am innocent, I
beseech you do me this last favor, as to tell me the occasion which put you
into this passion, to the ruin of her, whom in times past you loved as your
life, to which. her husband thus replied; how is it posible thou thou can be so
impudent as to make me believe that I am deceived in a thing I saw with both
mine eyes: and touched with both both these hands, which caused this revenge?
but since before you dye, you desire to see what thus enraged me here to see, I
am content to do you that kindness, and so pulling her out of bed, dragged her
to the place where lay the body of poor Henry the innocent, and throwing her
down upon it, saying, solace thy self now in thy disloyalty with this Traitor,
and as you club'd together to the ruin of your honor, and my reputation, so
now agree, to dye miserably together in one place as a due punishment for your
evil deeds, and to serve as an Example to others who dare commit the like. The
poor Gentlewomen who had yet some little strength remaining (for the poison had
not yet seized her heart) raising her self as well as she could, cry out
saying. Oh God! the sin of my husband is greater and more enormous than I
thought it was; for I thought he aimed at my life alone, but I see we are both
Murderers; and have slain wrongfully the Innocent, I pray thee O God be
pleased to enlghten him, and let him know our fidelity; to the end our honor
may endure unwrong'd blamless and immaculate, turning thy eyes with justice, on
that wicked Chambermaid, making appear the treachery she has here committed;
and hereupon she fell dead; being unable to pronounce her last words: for had
she had more strength she had discovered all, remembering her self what Henry
said at the Chamber door, whom the Chambermaid had sent thither, under the
pretense of her Mistress calling for him, and now she seeing them dead;
concluded th^^ the danger of the treachery, was blown over but death stopped her
in her full career. The Gentleman seeing the great resolution, and constancy in
which his wife departed this life, was in a miserable taking; although he had
too confidently believed his eyes, by whom he thought to have found his wife
faulty; yet notwithstanding by the last words proceeding from his wifes mouth,
falling dead, he began to suspect some treachery in this act on the
Chamber-maids side, and resolved to know whether it was so or no, although too
late. Having then called the Chambermaid, who mistrusting some danger for the
evil she had done, came trembling; but he began to ask her with a smileing
countenance (but within most desperately heavy) by what means and in what
manner she to find out the loves of Henry and his wife, came or whether it was
long since that she discovered this amorous intreague; and where was it that
she first surpised them in the fact, asking many such like questions: to which
the Chambermaid answered in terms so intricate and contrary, speaking
sometimes things the Gentleman knew were impossible that he concluded to take
this following course with her looking very pleasantly on the Chambermaid, he
said to her: thou now have of thy Mistress that which thou desired'st for she
evil treated thee, but she will now be never more offensive to thy eyes, for
which cause I am now obliged to thee that thou have given me the means to be
rid of that offensive thing which enraged me so often under pretense of zeal to
my honor, for which I will assure thee, I shall not dye in thy debt: but since
you have done me one kindness, pray do me another, and that is to tell me
freely the truth of this business, and how it stands in every particular, for I
know very well it is otherwise than I was made to believe, to have the color
and occasion to do what I have already done. The Chambermaid assuming courage
from the words of her Master, verily believing she had pleased him to the life,
assured her self any thing, and therefore said to her Master, if you will
promise to pardon, and not turn me out of doors, I will tell you one thing you
never ye^ the (...) of, which put me upon the desire of this rev^^^ (...)
thought it would have (...) ^^^dly said her Master, for I know (...) the cause
goes, and by thi^ me^ (...) you will please me very much; ^f (...) ^^ur self,
instead of a reward, I will inflict upon (...) a punishment so strange, that I
will make thee tell the truth by force.

The poor and unhappy Chambermaid, began to relate the love between her and
the ^ervant, how she was surprised by her Mistress, beaten after a most
grievous manner, and how she purposed a revenge, should it cost her her life,
in short she omitted nothing that was past, saying moreover that it was not the
life of her Mrs. she desired, but to have her as lo^dly basted, as she had been
basted by her, ^he Gentleman hea^ing this, (being all ^age and fury,) he ^an a^
her, and having r^p^ open her breast with that D^gg^r he killed Henry with, be
to^e out her h^^^, and stamped upon it, pouring out all the cur^es, repr^aches,
and execrations he could think of over her wretched carcals, cursing himself
too for believing the treachery of her miscreant, and now ^^vi^g sufficient^
deplored and wept over the corpse of his chaste wife, and faithful servant
Henry, he asked of one and the other a thousand pardons, saying, since it is
inpossible to remedy so great a crime, as I have here committed, so great in
killing you both so wrongfully, that it must not pass unpunisht; and therefore
I will appease it I can, by sacrifising my self to your offended innocence;
begging that you will not deny me your Company in death, since there was so
much love and amity between us in life, till treachery made this final
separation. There is one thing left which aff^ds me some comefort and
contentment, that before I dye, I have had my just revenge, although a thousand
de^ths of such like Traitors, is no fit reparation for the life I have
deprived; having said this, he put a halter about his neck, and having tied it
to a beam, strait over the body of his c^^ste wife, he wrote against the wall,
with his dagge^ these verses under written, which yet to this day are to be
seen in the house of that miserable Gentleman.

By a rash act which had its rise from treason,
Incensed by a maid servant without reason,
I wrongfully have stain my dearest wife
And a male servant have deprived of life:
At length I knew the truth but 'twas too late
To stay the hand of my too rigid fate,
And then I stabbed the heart that was the cause
In making me offend great Natures l^ws
For which I hang my self against this wall,
Cleanders boundless rashn^s^ was his fall,
Having finished this writeing, he threw the dagger under him, and pushing the
stool on which he stood, to tie the rope about the beam with which he intended
to hang himself, he there hung miserably, ending his days for being over
c^edulous, and pu^ting too much confidence in his own eyes.

And now to return to the matter of fact, which is the question I conclude.
Sir, that you ought to take great heed in this matter, and weigh it with
serious consideration without levity believeing in the words of her, who
desires the death of Erastus without any reason, thereunto inducing: Consider
then within your self, that this affair may be otherwise that as it was
represented to your eyes. For there is no greater argument, nor more proper
instance for entering into jealousy, then this Gentleman of Padua, of whom we
spoke before; who without questioning the matter took it for certain, but knew
in the conclusion (but too late, and to his utter ruin) that a matter of such
great importance, should not rely on the believing of an other, nay nor
himself. This oration of the Philosopher, put all the Auditors into admiration;
for he spoke so much to the purpose, and with such vivacity, that all the
standers by could not refrain from bathing their cheeks, in a S^a of tears;
which wrought so eff^ctually, that every one Judged, nothing wa^ more
requisit^, then staying the execution of the sentence o^ Erastus, until the
fact was more narrowly searched into, that in the end, he might receive a
righteous Judgment. Whereupon the Emperor was constrained to condescend, as
well for that excel^^t di^course the Philosopher h^^ delivered, as for the
supplications the Senate ^st^r'd up to his Majesty; according to this
conclusion, Erastus was sent br^^ to his Dungeon, and so had his life prolonged
by the mea^s of hi^ good Master Enoscopus.

top: representation of a male figure looking out from an upstairs window while
a female figure holds a stone over a well, then stands outside the door;
bottom: representation of a female figure at an upstairs window with a group of
armed men at the door, in the background a male figure in the stocks or pillory
surrounded by a crowd This History or Example of Cleander, is according to the
original, in the Italian and French; but in regard there is another History in
another Book to this purpose; I shall thus relate it.
THere dwelt in a certain City, a Kingh^ well stricken in years, who
notwithstanding married a wife; whose youth and beauty both conjoined to make
her the subject of every man's admiration, these two things, so endeared his
affections toward her, that their was nothing to her, by him more p^izable in
the whole universe; now least at any time he might be robbed, of this
inesteemable Jewel, after with his own hands he had locked hi^ doors, he
secured the keys under his beds-head. By the way you are to understand that by
the Low^ of the City, at a certain hour of the night a Bell was usually rung;
after the sound of which, if either man or woman was found gadding in the
streets, they were instantly seized and having been detained in prison (...)
might, the next morning they stood in the Pillory, a^ an object of shame and
laughter to all the beholders.

This ancient Knight, by reason of his age, was impotent, feeble; and
altogether unable, to give that satisfaction as youth required; as well for
procreation as delight, and therefore his young wife, found out away to supply
his defects, by taking the keys every night from under his head, when fast
asleep and opening the doors went to her paramour, who having lustfully enjoyed
her sill, returned and laid the keys in the same place, from whence she took
then.

It so happened (but not expected) that one night fafter she was gone, to
prosecute her accustomed delights, that her husband awaked, and m ssing his
wife felt for the keys, but finding them not, he went down to the door, which
he found open; therefore he bolted it, and returned to his Chamber, and
suspecting his wifes levity, he looked out of the window to observe the
passages, which might happen in the street: When it was very late, or rather
early his wife came from her lustful ^allion, but found the door bolted
against her; however she took the boldness to knock. Hereupon the good old
Knight looking out of the window, and seeing it was his disloyal wife, spoke to
her in this manner; O thou wicked and unchaste woman, have I now found you out;
how often may I not from hence conclude thou have committed adultry, and
defiled thy marriage bed; for which cause stand there till the ringing of the
Bell, that the Watch may take thee, and that punishment may ensue, according to
thy demerit. To which she cunningly and cogingly replied; my Lord, why do you
thus unjustly charge me; I am no ways guilty of your accusation, for if you
will know the truth, I was sent for by my Mother, being taken dangerously ill;
now finding you in so sweet asleep, I was loath to wake you, and therefore
without the least noise I rose, and taking the keys I opened the doors and went
whether my duty commanded me. I found my Mother sick even to death, and though
I believe she cannot live till the morning, yet so great was my affection to
you, that I came away and left a dying Mother to return to a dear and loving
husband wherefore I beseech you let me in; but the Knight utterly refused it:
hereupon she reminded him, what a shame it would be (were she taken) not only
to himself, her self, but to all their relations, using besides all the
persuasions her subtle invention could find out requisite for her purpose, but
all proved unavailable, when she saw nothing would prevail, she bethought her
self of this stratagem: my Lord (said she) you know by this door there is a
well, if you let me not in, I will drown my self therein, to avoid the shame I
see is coming upon me, and my friends in my behalf. As the old Gentleman was
about to reprove her further; the moon went down, and now was the night
obscured with a darkness, more then usual, she being glad of this advantage,
she thus spoke; that I may dye like a Christian, before I drown my self, I will
make my last Will and Testament, and first I bequeath my Soul to Heaven, and my
body to the Earth, but all other things what ever, I solely leave to my dear
husband, for him to dispose of, as he shall think convenient; having finished
her saying she went to the well, and there finding a great stone, she took it
up in her arms and lifting it up cried out, now I drown my self, and to threw
the stone into the well, having thus done she stepped to the side of the door
again, and there absconded her self. At the n^i^e of the stones fall into the
well, the old man verily bel^ev^d that his wife had been as good as her word,
in drowning her self, and having made a miserable out cry ran hastily down to
the Well, to prevent what notwithstanding he thought irrecoverable he was no
sooner out but she got in a do^rs, and having locked them, went up into her
Chamber, and looked out of the window as he had done before, and having heard
along while the sad complaints, the poor old man made for the loss of his wi^^,
condem^^ng much his over ridged humor she regarded less of his sorrow, called
out to him aloud: reproaching him in the vilest manner imaginable, calling him
leacherous Dotard, and upbraiding him for sl^ghti^g her, and going continually
a night walking after H^^l^^; will other base ab^ses which the old Man valued
not being overjoyed to hear that his wife was yet living, and desiring his wife
to have a better opinion of him, b^^'d her to open the door, and p^ssing by all
they would be good friend^; but she was deaf to all his entre^ties, vowing he
should stay there till the w^tch came, that he might suffer deservedly as he
had threatened her before. The Knight insisted upon his impotency for his
vindication; alleging further, that out of pure affection in her we have he
was now in the streets, and therefore desired her not to let him suffer
sh^^^fully for love and tender kindness; but all this would not do, and as he
was studying some new pers^^^ions to (...) him in the watch came, and fin^ing
him in ^he f^^^^^, d^^^^ded his business, and what ^e did (...) uns^^son^ble
time of night, minding him (...) the (...) had broke ^h^ Law and custom of the
City, and that though he was an antien^^^ abi^^^ thereof that could not excuse
h m from: fiering acc^rd^^g to the nature of the off nce: his (...) hearing
their words cried out to the watch, s^ying n^w is the t^me honest men for y^^^
to avenge (...) that ^^ul A^ulterer, who is so insati^ie in (...), he never
s^ils a night to a^^se my bed ^^d (...) his common Strumpets, in hopes of
re^^^ma^i^n I have patiently forborne him a long time, but n^^hing will reduce
him, slighting my youth, and continuing still his whoredoms: wherefore now
punish him as he has deserved, that he may be made an example to all such
doting Lechors; accordingly he was thrown that night into prison, and the next
morning shamefully stood in the Pillory.

Now said the Philosopher to the Emperor have you minded well this story, and
he said right well: then said the Philosopher if you execute your Son, being
thereunto instigated by your wife your condition may prove more unfortunate
than the ancient Knights. Hereupon the Emperor condemned very much the
lew'dness and unworthiness of the woman, and said moreover that for that very
cause Erastus should not dye that day, the Philosopher having applauded his
resolution, and ^^^bly thankt him for it, he departed.

CHAP. XV. The Empress again prompted the Emperor to hasten the execution of
Prince Erastu^, by a Letter which she wrote wherein was contained a discourse
of Treasures belonging to the King of Egypt, of whom one was very covetuous,
and the other liberal, who being over ruled by the evil council of his Son
resolv d to rob the other Treasurer, and possess himself of that treasure the
King had committed to his charge, but being unable to clear himself from the
place wherein he committed this robbery, he ordered his own Son to cut of his
head, this Son living after very rich and being arrived to that pitch he
pro^osed to himself, killed also his own Mother, who was privy to the theft, to
prevent her making any discovery thereof.
THE Emperor with his counsel having ordered acc^^ding to the rule of justice,
the accomplishment of the Proc^ss of Erastus, and having left the ^x^cution
thereof to the Principal of the Senate, ^e r^s lved to leave Rome for a
breathing while, and ^ivert h^mself without troubling his head as he top:
representation of a male figure with a sword or scimitar outside a hole at the
base of a tower, in the background a headless figure being pulled along by
horses; bottom: representation of a female figure with a cut leg and an axe or
hatchet on the ground, with two female figures, a male figure, and two armed
male figures was won^ with the complain^s of the Empress on the one side, and
the orations of the P^ilosophers on the other side: for the great iniur^ he
conceived he had d^ne, and his z^^l for just^ce, to whom he w uld ^^e be
^bservant, ^n the one si^e, and his fatherly ^ff ction ^n the oath would not
^uff^r him to take a m^^u^te of q^iet and ^^p^se: wh^^^^ore without acquainting
^h^ Empr^^s h^ lef Rome wi^h little company, only attended by some of (...)
chief ^avourites, and directed his course to one of h^s Castles without the
City, in a place ob^cure and ^ecluded, from the noise of people, where he
intended to rest himself for some con^evient time. In the mean time the Empress
(minding nothing but the joyful news of the death of Prince Erastus) was
informed that instead of the ex^cu^i^n of the Prince, the Philosophers had so
man^ng'd the matter, that it was generally believed that the Prince would
escape the danger in which he was involved, since the wh^le proceeding was left
to the dispose of the senate, amongst whom there was not a Senator who was not
extremly grived at the death of their y^ung Prince; every one desiring the
continuance of his honor, and well being. This m^ss^^g^ was no sooner deliverd
but she had informati^n by another, of the departure of the Emperor, wh^ had
left Rome without maki^g her acq^a^n^ed ^h rewith, this made her strongly
imagine that thi^ departure was designed for the delivery of her son, and that
he ^ad done this on purpose that the E^press sh ^ld not br^ak the n^ck of his
^^s^gn, and that she should not be reveng^d for the great injury and imfamy her
Son in Law had thrown upon her, w^ndring withal at the rev^cation of that
decree the day b^eore which is contr^ry to right that a Couns^l or Sena^^
sh^^ld bring about the trial an^w and judge of the v^lidity or nullity of a
Sentence which ^^d been b^f^re p^^nounced by the Emperor him^^lf; the (...)
hereof was so contrary to her (...) ^n^ exp^cta^ion, that she f^ll into so
great a r^^^ th^^ every on supposed she would run dist^^ct^d. But th^^ she
^^ght nor make the W^rld a^q^ain^ed ^ith that which with so much difficulty she
^ad conc^al'd in her breast she withdrew herself into her Closet, w^cih was
private and remote from all the o her L^dging^ of the Castle, where being alon^
and desirous (...) ease her (...), she began to curse the Emperor her sel^;
and that barbarous enterpr^z^ she had took in hand: and having argued a w^^^^
with her se^f ^b^ut what she was to do, ^^d havi^g discharged her heart in sa^^
(...) of a l^ad o^ g^ief, by the ^o^^e^^ of her ^^^r^, she took pen in h^n^ and
with much e^gerness wrote this Letter following.

A^^^^^lis^^ to the Emperor D^oclesian her Lord a^^ m^st (...) hu^ba^d ^^^lth,
of health can proceed f^^m ^^r who is reduc^d to a condition worse then death,
s ^ing h^^ fest ^t w^^d o^, not only by others, but by him who would ^^ke m^
believe ^e lo^'d m^ better then his ow^ ^^fe; (...) the case (...) of gr^ater
importance t^^n to b^^ (...) herein does ho^our (...) before life it self for
it is th^^ alone which bears up our reputation and esteem in such manner that
she who (...) d^priv'd thereof ought not to be rankt amongst women, bu^
^^g^^tred in the catalogue of Beasts. Now Sir wonder not ^o see one thus
vehement in a business w^^ch concerns m^ so nearly, assuring you that the grief
I have taken and still retain after this fact pr^ceed princi^ally from this
that your honor is as much interested a^ min^ own: for as to the holy ^ye of
marriage it is imp^^^^^l^ to blemish the honor of one party and the other
(...) i^sensible of the wr^ng; the honor was ^r at w^^^ you acquilled in the
beginning of the sentence w^^^^ y^u pron^unced aga^^st E^^^^^^ that Traitor, an
act becoming so worthy in Emperor as your self: for we find i^ ^^story that
there has been Emperors who rather then dev^^te from right and equity, have
l^id aside all Fatherly ^ff^ction and become the ex cu^^oners of their own
^hildren as ^ight and justice did require: the same you were willing to show at
the beginning; but by so much your reputation increased as you were willing
severely to give place to justice, by so much are you to be blamed by your
womanish indulgence and levity, which ^^^ns by every w^ndy ^able of those seven
Ph^losophers, who by their g^ilded counte^feit expressions toss you ^ee and ^ro
as chaff bef^^e the wind. Did you ever read in Chronicle of a^ Emp ^our, that
the execution of a se^^^nce p ^^ou^ce^ by the Emperor himself or by his
P^^^l^mation w^^ retarded as this is now? Or which is worse the s^ntence it
self repealed. How comes it that your judgment and counsel is so purblind as
to order and es^ab^ ^h one th^^g of which afterward you are convi^^ed to ^h^
contrary. In short, the infamy and reproach^ labor (...) so great, that I am
almost distracted and had rather have not a being in the world, then to be
involved in so much trouble as I am. Amongst the rest of my reproaches I see
one without an end, for put the case that filial affection should move a heart
mild and low as yours seems to be, yet it is a thing dissentaneous to a
courageous and a constant soul, and such a heart befits an Emperor who casting
behind him all affection and passion ought solely to regard what Justice does
require; now for you to leave me without making me acquainted therewith argues
my presence is displeasing, and that you hate me for loving you too well. And
if it be so, (for othe^wise it cannot be) you know you will hate always;
however I love you as a^d^ntly absent or present; and shall ^dvise you by
Letters (since I cannot do it by word of mouth) of any thing I shall know
tending to the prejudice of your welfare and repose: and although I know it is
to little purpose having so little credit for my advertisements, (how true so
ever) yet y^u will l^nd your car to others who propound nothing but what is
dangerous interwoven with painted ^n^ p^rnicious sophistry.

However I shall d^^harge my conscience, being well assu^'d that in the end you
will know all my sayings tend to no other end then the conserv^tion of your
life and honor; and on the contrary what others say only aim at the utter
ruin and destruction of them both: as it happened to a ^reasurer of an Egyptian
King a man ^^veral or rather profuse who might have lived quietly and
peaceably, had he believed the counsel of his wife; but instead thereof dyed
miserably following the disordersd Dictates of his Son, to the great prejudice
of his poor wife, and perpetual infamy; as you will see in this short discourse
here under written, to the end that by informing your judgment with matter
suitable to this purpose, you may from thence gather what is best to be done,
taking a b^tter resolution in this affair, than hitherto I have known.

In former times there was a King in Egypt very rich, both in Silver and Gold,
as were all the Ancient Ptolomies: But this man so abounded in money, that he
was continually making it up in great heaps or piles.

This King had amongst other Officers of his house two Treasurers; one whereof
was very liberal, and such as became a servant to so great a King;
Notwithstanding the other Treasurer was miserable and covetuous and agreeable to
the Nature of his Master.

This Prince the better to secure his Treasury, built a strong Tower, wherein
he laid his Gold and Silver, and gave the key thereof to his covetuous
Treasurer strictly commanding him not to meddle or dispose of any of the money
without his express order under Hand and Seal.

This Treasurer guarded the Treasury with such circumspect care, that he
trusted non^, nay, hardly himself to cast an eye there^n. In short, every day
he constantly united the treasu^y, p^ying into the lo^ks and trying whether any
had been compering to break or op^^ them in his ab^ence.

The other Treasurer who was prodigal, who had spent all that little money the
King had entrusted him, and his own Estate ^^ndes: and not content with this he
c^uncelled his ^^n to the same profuseness, wh^^ (...) of himself prodigal
enough before: headstrong and licentiou^, at length this young m^n ^ecame so
profuse, that he spent all that was left of his Fathers, and hi^ Mothers too,
in making presents, and giving here and there without regarding how or to whom;
in such sort that all was gone, being unable to do as he did before; however he
endeavored what in him lay to follow his former courses; whereupon his Mother
reproved him, often elling him what a great charge she was at in maintaining
two daughters which were si^ for marriage, and to what great poverty his
prodigality had reduced does father and m^ther: yet for all this he g^^w ^^^rie
and w^^^^, and never left till he had (...) all, notwithstanding being more hot
than (...), in ^^e prosecution of expense, and addr^^^ (...) to hi^ Father,
de^^^ing him to supply h^s (...) and tha^ he might brave it amongst his
Aff^c^^^^ ^s former^y, and not to be disgraced by them, (...) which ^is Father
replied, that he had nothing left to supply his excessive charges, adding m^r^
(...) ^hought all the money in the other Tr^^sure (...) not suffice, what
treasury it th^^ said the (...) to which question the Father informed the So^^
of all that pa^^. Certainly said the Son the King has done you great wrong, in
putting less confidence in you, than in the other Treasurer, wherefore if you
will be rull'd by me, serve him as he deserves.

How must this be done said the Father, since I have nothing of his remaining
in my hands no, no, said the Son, the cheat I intend is (...) what you have not
in your hands, and the fault shall lie heavy on the shoulder of another. In
short, he councelled him to rob the treasury, relating the manner, and how
easy it was to effect it so that the cove^^^^ Treasurer should not suspect any
thing, though it was usual for him to go often and view the Treasury, seeing
that the locks were fast, and unviolated, and the doors shut, for there were
many belonging to it, the foolish father knew very well the danger of the
attempt, however he was desirous of revenging himself of that indignity the
King had thrown upon him (as he thought) and to satisfy his own ordinate
desires and his Sons, and to maintain that rank and quality he had invested
himself with (as he thought) by his profuseness: and therefore determined to
follow the evil counsel of his wicked Son, and having prepared instruments for
their purpose, he and his Son one night entered into the Tower, where the
treasury lay, having sprung a mine, and broken the wall of the Tower, and
having loaded themselves with Gold and Silver returned through the Mine they
had dug, and stoping up the hole, made the Earth plain as it was before, so
that their theft might not be perceived, knowing the danger if it was
discovered.

By this means returning home, they were very jolly and feasted abundantly,
resolving to take the same course in a few days, if they heard no noise of
this their robbery, and ^o fill their bags, that thereby poverty being banish^,
they might have for the residue of their lives, where with all to feast it
according to former custom.

N^w the ava^itious Treasurer who was more j^al^u^ in the preservation of this
Trea^ury, than if it had been his own, let not a day slip wherein he did not
visit it: and being entered into that Chamber where the Treasury was, and
looking whish^y about him, saw s^veral things displaced, for every thing lay in
its proper order, whereupon he instantly su^pected what was already done, and
having diligently look^ ab^ut every where, to spy out where an entrance had
been made, found out at a corner of the Tower ear^h newly dug: Hereupon
acq^^^nting no person with his design, he entered the Tower alone, with
instruments to dig and mind so l^ng till he come to the very hole which they
had made at the Basis of the Tower, and knew tha hole to b^ (...) ^lac^ where
it was not usual for any person to be ^^^^^g ^^ s he m^sed a while, considering
what was b^^^ ^o be done, at length concluded to say nothing but studied
whether it was possible to entrap the Thieves by silence. Whereupon having m^de
a great Ch^ldr^n, abought the height of a man filled it full of Pitch,
Bird-lime, and such like st^ff, which mingled together, became so glutinous
that it wou^d forceably ret^in any thing put therein: this being done, he laid
it as secret y as he could in the hole which gave entrance into the Tower, and
having scraped away the earth, he so covered this Cauldron or Kettle, and
cleansed the pavement that it could not be perceived that any had been there
since the prodigal Treasurer and his Son; who hearing no noise about the money
they had stolen, and concluding for certain that the covetuous Treasurer had no
mistrust of any thing, resolved to prosecute their enterprise, and to carry
away more money than they had done before, and to that end, made choice of a
night very dark, without the least glimmering light of the Moon, and so went to
the place where was the mouth of the mine; the Father went first, as best
knowing the way, just as he came to the hole of the wall, where he was to enter
the Tower, he fell into the Cauldron and was so fastened on every side, that he
could not stir, and presently concluded it a plot for his surprise, and
therefore admonisht his Son to withdraw instantly, lest he should be entangled
like himself. Whereepon his Son asked him what was the matter, to which the
Father replied; I am dead take you no care of my life, but of my honor, for
should I be taken in this thieving plight, infamy will attend my name for
ever, the Son would have endeavored to assist his Father, but that the Father
told him it was impossible to take him out of the Cauldron alive, besides
should (...) come to help him, he would be in danger of being caught himself.
What must be done the^ said the Son? for the safeguard of my honor and thine
own said the Father: since there is no remedy, cut of my head, to the end they
may not know my body and that the name of our family may not be defamed, the
Son hearing this, thought it very strange that he should be his Fathers
executioner, but considering with himself that of two evils the least is to be
chosen, resolved to execute the command of his Father, and coming to the brim
of the Cauldron saw him shrunk up to the Arm pits, irrecoverably, than taking
him by the hair of the head with his left hand raised him, and with a Scymeter
in his right severed his head from his body; after this having enter^'d the
head in a secreet place, not to be found, he returned home all bloody to his
house, where with sighs and tears related the whole matter to his Mother,
beseeching her to take all in good part, and to hinder his Sisters from crying,
for that would be a mean^ of discovering what as yet is hidden to the world,
the poor woman hearing this sad news began to weep, tearing her hair, and
cursing her i^ fortune with the prodigality and disobedience of her Son, who
would never hearken to her advice, now blam^ing the extravagancies of her
Husband, then condemning the insufferable profuseness of her Son, and having
thus a long while deplored her condition, the began to consider that the advice
of her Son was not impertinent to avoid the great evil that might follow the
contrary, and therefore threw her self on a bed, tormenting her self, and
lamenting all the ^ight. The day following the Treasurer according to his
Custom, went to see the Chamber of the Treasury, and to see whether any was
taken in the Cau dron; where coming he saw before the Cauldron the earth all
covered with blood, the which amazed him much, considering diligently the
whole, and looking into the Cauldron, he saw a body without a head, at which he
knew he had not lost his labor and de^g^, for he though^ to have taken the
Thief alive, and consequently have recovered the Gold and Silver he had lost,
and i^ may be more to boot. In the mean time he essayed by all means to take
c^gn zance of the body, the which he removed out of the Cauldron by the help of
fire, and notwithstanding could discover nothing because his stature was low,
nor from his garments being all so be daubed with Pitch and Birdlime. Hereupon
the Treasurer resolved to inform the King of all that past; upon which it was
concluded that the body of the Thief should be dragged by two horses through
every street with a Trumpet, before and at every house the Crier should
proclaim, this is the body of that traytrous Thief, that robbed the Kings
treasury, intending thereby to have cognizance of the fact, his relations being
unable to contain their tears at so sad a spectacle; and indeed it was a very
good project for that purpose, if the Son had not prevented it by another
wicked act; for the body being drawn through most of the streets it came at
length against the house of its abode, at sight whereof his Wife and Daughter
could not refrain from weeping and lamenting as soon as they heard the cry,
this is the body of that traitorous Theif who robbed the Kings treasury:
hereupon a Justice ran instantly to the house of this thieving Treasurer,
thinking to find what they fought for; but the villainous Son who was wary took
suddenly a hatchet, and therewith g^sht his Mothers leg, before which he laid
a l^g of wood, and threw, down the hatchet all bloody on the ground; the
Justice being entered the house, enquired of the Mother, and her daughters the
occasion of their weeping and wailing; with sighs and tears they answered, do
you not see Sire how that poor Woman, who is our Mother is cut grievously, her
leg being almost off, by endeavoring to cut that log in pieces, and therefore
it is no wonder, if we who are her Children grieve and take on for her, having
just grounds to fear she will loose her leg; you were better said the Justice
go and help her, than cry and lament her, and so took his leave, without
affecting any thing imagining all true they told him. Some little time after
the poor Mother, who was thus wounded in the leg fell into a fever which
deprived her of life, leaving her Son richer in villainy then he was before,
having with his own hand, killed both Father and Mother. God grant Sir, the
like befall you not, for certainly I am much afraid hereof, and that you will
be reduced to the same danger, that this Treasurer fell into, and as it is an
honest woman that gives you this advice for your benefit, so I shall never
desist to tell you sincerly, and in pure verity whatsoever I shall understand;
and be not angry, that I put you in mind of your duty. The Treasurer followed
the evil counsel of his Son, and so lost his honor, and his life by the hand
of him, who should have given him his best assistance; do you also follow the
counsel of your fine Philosophers, who to have the mannagment of affairs, to
rule and govern the world at their pleasure, thinking of nothing but the
installing of their Disciple in your Imperial seat, to the hazard of your
life, and loss of honor. The Son of the Treasurer remained rich, after the
death of his Father and Mother, whom he slew with his own hand; I fear Erastus
will serve you in like manner, in such sort that we shall be in danger of life
and honor, unles^ you open the eyes of your understandstanding, the which I
beseech and exhort you to; if my supplications move you not, let this danger
wh^^h hang^ over your head, and the Imperial dignity which you now possess,
persuade you to it? Beseeching you to pardon me, if I off^nd you in saying the
tr^ h for the love and sinceer affection which I bear to you, and the faith I
owe you, constrains me thereto, and so I bid you heartily farewell.

This Letter being fin^sht and well desig^'d, she called to her, one of her
Bedchamber in whom she put great tru^t; commanding him to go and find out the
Emperor with all diligence, and deliver that night the Letter to the
Emperor, assuring him there was matter of great importance therein contained,
and that he should instantly read it, and return an answer the same night, and
so bring it her the next morning as soon a^ it was ligh^. The Messenger having
received his dispatch from the Empress, so speedily executed her commands, that
though the day was fa^ spent, and the place where the Emperor was, being
remote from Rome, yet he arrived at his journey end before Sunset, and having
found the Emperor alone, delivered him the Letter, which he h^d received from
the Empress; who reading it over and over again, and weighing well the contents
thereof, all ^m^z d as he was, returned an answer imeadiately ^n the place, to
the Empress, excusing himself for his sudden departure from Rome, assuring her
it was not because he would revoake the sentence pronounced against Erastus,
but only to delay it for a wh^le; and finding that these de ays were taken ^ll
by her, he wo^l^ forthwith proceed to the execution of the sen^^^ be soon as
she pleased: for knowing the sentence to be just, without any other form of
process it should ^e executed; referring all to the disposal of the Empress,
commanding the Messenger to inform the ^fficers of Justice to do with Erastus
as the Empress should command them.

CHAP. XVI. Philantropus the Philosopher deferred the execution of Erastus by a
discourse which he made the Emperor of a young Grecian Damsel, who was given
in mar^iage to a young strange Gentleman whom she loved by the hands of her own
Husband, who was both old and ^ al^^rs.
THE Empress having received the Letter of the E^perour, was the most satisfied
person in the Worcester d; s^eing tha^ the execution of Erastus was remitted to her d
scretion; wherefore not to loose time, fearing ^^me accident might happen which
sh uld in^^^^pt her design as formerly; she encouraged the Officers of justice
to a ^p^edy execution: but F^rtune was so favorable to Prince Erastus, that
the J^dges seeing the Emperor departed, and by that means having time to
consider of their own b^siness, were g^ne some here some there in order to the
settlement of their particular affairs. The Philosophers top: representation of
two knights jousting on horseback outside a tower in front of a seated audience
with a male figure blowing a horn; bottom: representation of a male figure
standing beside a bed in which lies a female figure, beside the bed a dog in
the mean time had the opportunity to consult about what the Emper^ur had
concluded on the day before, hoping that the seven ^a^al days which threatened
the death of E^astrs were as good as past, since there were but three (...)
come, yet notwithstanding they were not well ^ssured here of being in continual
fear, seeing that the Heavens and every thing from whence they might divi^e,
and know things to come, demonstrated their Disciple in danger of death;
moreover that which augmented their fear was the secret threats of the Empress
Aphrodicia, of which they were continually inform d, for inded they had good
spies in her house, some of the principal of her Bed-chambe^, by whom they were
adver^^sed, that the foregoing night she had sent to the Emperor, one of her
Bedchamber in great haste, whereupon imagining what she might effect thereby,
they consulted how to frustrate her designs against Erastus. In short the same
night wherein they understood the menaces of the Empress, they left Rome and
were so speedy that before break of day they arrived, where the Emperor was
about to rise, who being troubled all night about the Let er of the Empress,
arose in great rage as soon a^ he saw them, and being much troubled, said what
come ye here to do, and with what presumption dare ^ou appear before him, whom
you have so much injured; assuring them that if he had no more regard to his
own quality (which nothing should provoke to anger) than their deserts he would
h^ng them all seven but he ass^red them that they should not go^ ^g unpunished,
for as soon ^s Erastus should be disp^^^^ according to order, he told them their
unto must be next, causing the rigor of justice to make them exemplary,
according to their villainy and treason, for m^king him the most miserable and
unfortunate man of the Earth, instead of a happy and triumphant Emperor;
having constrained him to kill ignominiously by the hand of justice, the Son of
his own loins from whom he expected comfort and assistance, whch' had come to
pass, if instead of betters and goodmanner^ (whom they ought to have instructed
therein) they had not perverted his nature, disdaining hitherto to speak to his
father; but on the contrary had incited him to vitiate her, whom he ought to
call Mother; concluding that the matter should not go after this manner. The
Philosoph^rs hearing the saying of the Emperor, and understanding the
conclusion which he had made with the S^^ate was reverst, and that he had made
new provision for the death of Erastus, they were so troubled, that they had no
more to say to the Emperor, then if they had been stabbed to the heart: however
knowing that their business required expe^ition, they with unwilling to l^ose
time in their (...) j^stification; b^t resolved to prosecute the case of
E^astus. Wher^^ ^o^ Philantropus who undertook to speak for Eras^us his day,
and who of all others, was a person most Gentle and complaisant (following in
his actions the crymology of his name (began to speak in this manner Sir, if
you have been so dilligent in the informing your self, concerning the truth of
the fact, alleged against Erastus and as you have been too credulous, so if
you be to rash in Judging, I shall not take the boldness to speak the least
word in his defense: But since I am so well assured of the chastity of the
young Prince, I think it is impossible for him so to let loose the reins to his
disordered desires as to commit a fault so foul as this: however I shall offer
this to your Judgment, which I kn^w by experience and must spe^k for him,
although you condemn not only him, but these Sages, also my comp^ni^ns not
only worthy of that death you have ordained, but a punishment much greater.
But knowing and understanding that in th^s ca^e you are only g^vern'd by the
sole p^rswasion of a S^mple woman, and being informed else where in History; as
w^ll ancient as modern, of the great passions to which women are inclined, and
principally those which l^y a constraint on all, but what their appetites do
dictate to them; hence I conclude, whatever you have heard of Erastus are only
fables, and do not wonder Sir, if you are deceived by a woman, for you are not
the first, and shall not be the last; for women will not only reduce us to
believe what is possible as in this, but things that are altoge^her impossible,
as it happened to a Gentlemen of Greece, Governer of Morocco, who was so
deluded by his wife (whom notwithstanding he loved better then his life) that
with his own hand, he give her in marriage to a strange Gentleman whom she
loved, thinking it was some other. Let me see said the Emp^rour how can that
b^? I will tell you Sir, said the Philosopher, not doubting to have as good
success from my disc^urse, as my companions have had from their; and thereup^n
began to spe^^. Not long si^ce, there was a Gentleman in Greece, whose name I
shall not tell, b c^use I know h^^ w^ll; and the accident which befell him,
cannot be intruth imputed to him any sottery or folly of hi^, but chiefly to
the disasters of fortune, who takes delight to trouble and interrupt the
designs of men, and chiefly of th^se who not only study to g^vern their own
course of life, but that of others, ^ndeavouring to show in that respect a
greater st^ck of prudence th^n other m^n: B^t (...) return to our Gentleman,
who was of a good and ancient family, and every where esteemed a mighty m^n,
not only for the great estate his Father left him* but for the Lands and
Lord-ships, he had purchased by his own industry; at leng^h he purposed to
marry thinking himself a happy man, if he could procure a w^fe b^th fair and
honest too; and certainly it had not happened ami^s, if the thing had fallen
(...) as he desired; but it is very seldom (I will not say never) that beauty
and honesty l^dge together. With a dilligent eye he sought after a beauty that
might be called a None such or a N^n p^rcill, resolving to marry one that was
pleasant and of a good grace; in some few months he found out what he desired,
and cho^se her for his wife, who was very pleasing to his eye, and whom he
loved as his life. In the intervall, the Deputies of Greece having a very good
oppinion of this Gentlem^n, whom by experience they found wife and accomplished,
established him in the g^vernment of Morocco; and thereupon b^ing constrained
to retire to h^^ g^v^^nment he took with him his wife, whom he c n ^ou^d having
so entirely, that he became jealous in such sort, that he abridg^^ himself of
that liberty he took in d^v^r^ sing h^m^elf at Fe^stivalls am^ng his
ass^cia^^s, and the company of G^ntlewomen; and not sat ^fied with that, he ^et
a g^^^d ^ver her of such as ^e most ^^^^usted, watching her himself and
endeavoring to find out what he could, either in what she did or said; knowing
f^r cer ain that it is hard, nay, imp^ssible almost, to guard that which every
one covets; for the more he loved (...), and ^he m^re lovely she appear^d in
his eye, the more he thought she was b^lov^d by every one, an^ that ^he was
^tempting to all, as she (...) to him; ^aving be^n thus tormented for some
time, instead of fin^ing any ^a^e he g ^w worse and w^rse, whether i^ was
because no mistr^sted hi^ g^^rdians he had plac^d over his wife, whom he feared
might be bribed to treachery; or whether he revolved in his thoughts the great
de usion^ women put upon their husbands, pretending to be blind when they have,
or would have as many ^y^^ as Argus, o^ whether he had seen some thing himself,
he did not well aprove of. Hereupon being unwilling to trust any, and being
unable always to obse ve and watch her himself, by reason of business ^e was
continually employed in, he fell into the greatest melancholy th^^ could be,
still considering how he might assure himself, that she might not cast a wanton
eye, or bestow her love ^n any b^^ himself. Now he had a very fair and high
T^w^r ^n a corner of the Castle wherein he lived, which wa^ built rather for
ornament than streng h; herein this Gentleman pi^eh^ upon a Chamber for
himself, the most commodious for h^s design; and having pain^ed and adorned it,
so that there was nothing to be seen but the glittering of Gold, he res lved to
enclose his wife therein and not to let her but, but on some certain days in
the y^a^; in sh r^ he perf ct^d his de^ig^ and ^^s it were, put his wife in
prison. As to the (...) the doors which must give him inlet where his wh^ was
were many in number (for there was ten doors to pass through) he carried them
always abent him, and would not trust them with any body. Hereupon the
Gentlewoman grieved, and lamented sadly, not so much for being enclosed, as for
the little confidence her husband had in her. All her tears availed nothing,
f^r she could not be s^t at liberty, till the arrival of some Feastivals,
which in all were but four in the year, and but two of them neither, properly
belonged to the Damsel; doubtlessly she had a great mind to make an escape,
and therefore employed all the faculties of her mind to that purpose; but her
guards about her, and the little assistance she saw she had, besides her
husbands having a continual watchful eye upon her, frustrated her design. Now
as we said before, this Damsel was a very great beauty, and the same thereof,
which spread it self all there about was much greater: For which cause a young
Gentleman (of whom I shall speak more at large anon) forsook his own house, to
put something on fact, he should think most requisite. In process of time
fortune or love brought it to pass, that it happened that a strange Gentleman
who had a Father very rich arrived at the Matropolis of Morocco where having
lived a while, there happened one of these solemn annual Feastivals which
invited him to go and see their public sports, which were usually performed on
those days, to delight the people, where being come, and and considering every
thing, ^t leng^h he saw the arrival of the Governers wi^e, to whom every one
gave place, and showed their reverance, as well for that rank she held in
Magistracy, as for her excellent deportment, and incomparable beauty, which was
then accompanied with rich accoutrem^n^ and so many gr^ces, wh ch d^zled the
eyes of the spectators. All these were suffici^nt not only to force all to give
place, and ^o give her honor and respect so great was her beauty, and so
lovely and bleiging was her behavior. Oposite to the Chair which was prepared
for her was placed a Scaffold, in which were windows to look out on the place,
where the sports were solemniz^d. Hereupon the strange Gentlemen taking notice
thereof, adv^nced in good time to bargain with the Master of the Scaffold for a
place, which was so dear that very few people were there; so that the Gentleman
had the opportunity to sit uncrowded and and at his case, for the
accomplishment of what ever he designed. In fine, having his eyes continually
fixed on the Governe^s and considering her brave behavior with gestures all
divine was presently captivated by love, so that his internal passions (wh ch
afflicted his mind) constrained him to manifest by outward signs, that which
was contained within his breast if any there had taken notice; but every one
had his eyes so busied, that his passion wa^ not discovered, fortune being than
very favorable, especially in this the that damsel looking now here, now
there, at last cast her eyes upon the young Gent. whom finding in a good ga^b
and gesture, she amorously glanced her eyes upon him, and he on her, so that
the glances which past between these lovers, had in a little time so absolutely
disposed of the heart of this Gentlewoman, that she showed as much satisfaction
in the friend-ship of this Gent. as he showed affection for her service. Now
that which incited her to consent easily, to the friendship of this Gent. was
her hopes by his means, to be freed out of Prison; forgeting all the
difficulties she formerly found for her deliverance. The sports being finished,
the people began to withdraw, so did these new two lovers, fixing their eyes
on each other, as f^r as their eyes could reach. In the mean time the Gent.
f^llowed at a distance, even to the Castle-walls; the Dam^e^ b^^^g en^o^^d, the
poor Gentleman which was lef^ without, than fel^ those pains which are inc^n^^^
^o ^^v^rs, nor was the Gentlewoman insensible there^f, f^r b^th the one and the
other having no other ben^fit than the glance of an eye, nor hav^ng no
assurance of one another friendships, had less hopes of ever conferring
together; for the Gentlewoman was assured of being made close prisoner as soon
as she entered the Castle, and so it happened. N^w the Gentleman who had heard
some^^^ng ^^quired diligently how the matter stond, in the mean time the
Gentlewoman w^pt and bewailed her c ndition in prison, tha^ she had found so
sweet a Gentleman, who on the contrary despised that liberty he enjoyed and w
she himself the happiness to be with her, under the same constraint, and both
of them employed their whole time in contriveing w y^s now i^ succor and rel
eve one another: ab ut this ^ffair they consumed a great deal of time, hav^ng
no other remedy than to d^ssemble, in the mean time that which at present they
could not obtain. Hereup^n the strange Gen leman gave out that h^ was come to
inhabit in this City pretending he had i^ (...) ^is own Count^y upon a very
lawful account, ariseing from a q^arrel in which he had slain a G^ntlema^, and
that he m^g^^ frankly do, because his Father was dead who had left him a
consider h^^ estate, by which means he could frolic and p^^ away the time with
other Gen lemen of the Cit^, who esteemed much and caressed high this strange
Gentleman; for he ob^iged them to expenc^ by paying all the reckoning, hoping
enough to do it; by this manner of feasting one another, in a little time he
came acquainted with the Governor. Now to the intent he might be lodged nearer
the Castle, and to have better access to Court, he bought him a stately house,
very near and just facei^g the Tower, furnishing it with very rich T^p^stry
which he had brought out of his own Country; in which he often essayed to treat
the Governor, and with him to pass away the t^me therein pleasantly; ^n such
^or^ that for the most part he was not looked on as a stranger but a Courtier
or a Citizen. This Gentleman besides his other accomplishments, was much
delighted ^n arms, for he was a great Traveller, and had been in the service of
a King of Greece, who du^^g life had justly for him a very great esteem; after
whose death be returned home, looking on it as an unglorious thing to live the
life of a Soldier, being so rich for that service which he had undertook, he
did not for necessity, but to exercise himself in honorable exploits and
employments. Being accustomed as aforesaid, to the exercise of arms, it hopned
that a solemn day drew near, of which ^e was joyful, and particularly having
understood that ^here would be a Turnament with Lances, for the delight and
satisfaction of the Ladies; whereup^n without delay, or furnished himself with
Lance and Arms, and with every thing requisi^^ for that purpose, with such
secrecy that none knew it but himself, and one confident, and the better to
carry on his enterprise, he re^oved his furniture from his lodging, and had
c^^ningly bought a very brave horse in another name. The day of justing being
come (which seemed the day of re^urrect^on to the poor Prisoner, and to the
young Gentleman) who had counted the hours and minutes, to the time wherein he
should appear before his Mistr^^s, he there made himself known her N^ighbour,
and yet he was nearer to her in hear: than in habitation, now as he past he
bowed, and lid-elongcast an amorou^ glance, receiving the like reciprocal
glance from his Mistress. In short, having eyed her all the way he went to his
place of standing, and thinking she would excuse him, if he was less lavish of
h s amorous glances, since there was so many eyes upon them, he hasted to his
post or place appointed, to be armed, and being armed from head to foot in
white armor, he came to the course with a Lance all silvered over, both
thicker and larger than customary, having his head-price crested with a black
and white Plume of Feathers, answering the the colors of his Horses caparison;
under the Helmet there was a Corsset of Beass, out of which issued a little
smoke, denoting the fire that was hidden within, with a scrole whereon was
written in Letters of Gold these words, It Is hard to hide a flame. This devise
was thus invented by him, to many rest that aff^ct^on which was known to very
few: every one began to reg^rd from head to foot this br^ght Cavaleer, one
saying this, another that, yet every one mistaken, for this Gentleman had his
Viz^^r down to able and himself from knowledge, but ev^ry one might kn^w his
horse by reason of his great Caparison. To a^k his name was a^ great an i^
civility, as m^desty to conceal it; after several Lances broken by the
Gentleman who en^ered the L^sts, a^ this Gentleman stranger was willing to
break his, a Herold at Arms arrived and proclaimed in the behalf of the
defendants, that all Gentlemen assailants having won the victory, of the
defendants, should have for their prize a Chain worth 300 Crowns; but on the
contrary if they had the worse, to give them the like, or be the defendants
Prisoners. On a sudden the white Cavalleer elevated his Gantlet, in token he
accepted the chall^nge with its conditions wherein (to be short) he behaved
himself so well that he won the Chain, having past his Lance against the head
of his antagonist. The second defendant, he so briskly charged, that he made
his head kiss the Pommel of his Saddle. This made every one amazed, for every
one held these two defendants the most valliant and courageous Cavalleers in
all Morocco, as indeed they were and having besides conquered many other
Gentleman and carried off in token of victory many small Chains and perfumed
Gloves, and having sustained many a shock with Gallantry of Spirit, all the
whole assembly remained astonished. Yet every one eagerly desired to know who
was this Cavalleer who had so admirabley behaved himself in the Tournaments: but
above all the Governor had a Great affection who earnestly besought him to
make himself known for the honor of nobility, to the end that the accumulation
of praises which he had merited, might not vanish in the air. Whereupon the
Gentleman turning his face to the Governess, who without saying any thing
showed by a sign that she was desirous to know this Cavalleer (for women are
more affected with curosity than men) hereupon the Cavalleer putting up his
vizier? see here it is Fabio (for so he was called) your friend and servant.

This being observed by all, there was a general amazement seized the whole
Company, and chiefly those who before thought him a man more fit for pleasure
than for Action, The day being far spent, a retreat was sounded to put an end
to the Tournement, and the white Cavaleer was accompanied with Drums and
Trumpets toward his Lodging, still pretending to treat one and another,
staying in the street till the Governess should pass that way, who was attended
with an honorable retinue; to whom he made a profound reverance without as to
the wife of the Governor, but within, as to his dearest friend, and having
received the like from her, with a joyful countenance he reteuned to his own
habitation, where after he had paid those respects due to the honor was done
him, he then began to ruminate on his love concerns, and how he should
accomplsh them, in which considerations he found many and great difficulties:
how ever like a true Lover, finding nothing impossible, after a long
consultation with himself, he dispatched his servant whom (he could confidently
trust) to fetch him a Master Mason, which was a stranger, and very skilful in
his Art, such a one was brought him in a short time, whom this Gentleman
treated so generously well, that he became absolutely his creature, sealing up
his mouth with a world of presents he gave him, adding with all threats if he
discovered the design, so that it was buried between them three, the Master,
Servant, and Mason; the latter of whom began to set his hands to work to every
thing he was commanded, and that was to spring a Mine under the foundations of
the Tower where the Damsel was, with as little noise as might be, to which the
Gentleman lent his assistance very frequently in digging and carrying out the
earth, continuing their labor, in a little time they undermined the Tower
without the least discovery. Hereupon the Gentleman discovered to the Mason his
resolution of mounting into the Chamber of the Damsel; to which the Mason gave
him admission, as well by reason of his long experience in such matters, as by
reason of the advantage of the Winding stairs, which were in the said Tower; by
which means it was very easy to ascend into the Chamber of the Damsel; yet
there were several impediments in the way, however the Mason found out other
ways to ascend, listening to the Walls if any one took notice, at length they
arrived at the floor of the Chamber, or rather prison of the Damsel; not
knowing now what to do but to trust in fortune, and leave the issue of all to
her guidanc^, intending not to pass further as yet for fear of inconveniencie,
resting there and hoping in a little time to have some beetter opportunity
submiting his passion to reason which ought to govern in all such matters and
respects: Upon the approach of a solemn festival, the Gentleman was not
unmindful of putting an end to his enterprise, and having given out that he was
extreem sick and that he could not go to see the publ^ck sports, much less take
pleasure in them, and the D^msel being releast for that day to go and see them;
this Gentleman Fabio said to the Mason; Master this opportunity will not admit
us to loose time, for this is the day whe^ein we ought to esteem our selves no
less happy (every thing favoring us) then Deucalion and Phyrrha after the
Deluge, so that for any one to loose one single minute of this opportunity were
to hate himself, and provoke the Gods. Hereupon the Master and the servant
immeadiately furnished themselves with instruments, and other things requisite
for their purpose, and having past the Mine they had made, they arrived at the
place they desired, where being come they searched round about and at last found
out in a little time a hole big enough for a man to enter, at that very corner
where stood the bed of the Damsel, according as the Master Mason had contrived
with the assistance of the God of love. The Gentleman being entered the Chamber
(whilst the Mason and servant were regarding the hole, how to return again
another time with out discovery) he regardful looked about the Chamber, wherein
he saw a little box lying open (for it had no key, which which was made in the
form of a little Press to contein Clothes, wherein were rich habilliments which
he would not disorder, as well by reason he had no leisure, as that he might
not be discovered; notwithstanding having found a place (at he thought, were
the Damsel was accustomed to lay her hand at her return he resolved there to
leave some signal of his entrance, which however was so obscure, that though
any other should see it by chance, he should not gather any thing from it, and
so left this following Madrigall, which some days before he had composed in
manner of a Riddle.

Madrigal.
Madam there is one has vowed to be
Your Captive whom you know not;
And though you are within a tie,
Has sworn to break the knot:
And this I do to move your heart,
But let not eyes or heart with grief
Be troubled for what is done
Love has consulted your relief,
When I the victory won
And acted then a Lovers part;
And will do still and must do more,
It Is he that come from foreign shore,
Will serve you with his hand and heart
The Gentleman having laid this Madrigal where he purposed, returned to the
Mason, desiring him to dispatch what he had begun; so that all being descended,
and the Gentleman seeing all things as he would have it, had some thoughts of
killing the Mason to assertain the non discovery of his plot, but moved with
compassion, he changed his intention, and giving him many presents he caused
him to embark the same day, and leave Morocco. In the mean time the Damsel
being entered her Hermitage, she tumbled over some things she had, amongst which
she sound the Madrigal, which she read and read again and again, thinking and
rethinking of the interpretation thereof, how it could be laid there, and what
should the issue be thereof, in sine she gathered who it should be that laid
it there, but could not collect by what means it could be left; and at last
concluded it must be done by Nicromancy; for in those days there were many
Witches, and many put confidence in them. Whilst she was in these strange
imaginations supper time, and consequently that of bed time drew near, and so
she went to bed, not with an intent to sleep but to be vigilant to the intent
she might see the issue of this doub^ful matter. At length the night being far
Spent, and having tired her self with thinking, she was constrained to give
repose to her senses, and so fell into a sound sleep. Now according to her
thoughts awake she saw in a dream what afterward hapened; for she thought she
saw him who had so much eyed her before and she him, was on the battlements of
the Castle bewailing himself by reason of those impediments and obstructions,
which were laid for the hindering one another pleasures; and that then the
prison miraclously was opened, and as miraclously shut as soon as he was
entered; and that both afterward fell into great anexity of mind, she fearing
that there was no means left for his going out, and he fear^ng he was surprised
for gathering the fruits which belonged to the Master of the house; but whither
a truth or a dream, it was very true that during the time of her dreaming, the
Gentleman who had tarried some while from coming that he might not affright the
D^msel, entered at last softly through the hole into the chamber of the damsel,
and coming ^e^r the bed perceiv^d that she knew nothing, and s^ s^^d these few
words: Mad^^, I ^m he that am wholly yours, to whom ye^^erday fortune was so
favorable as to h^ve the means to make known to you in wri^^ng, the main end
of all my intentions is only to love you, as you may well g^th^r by signs in
my way and by my eyes in the public pass times; to be brief it is I that am
l^dg'd so near this Tower, for no other purpose, but to employ my life in your
service, if you please to accept of my endeavors, and finally to deliver you
from this thral dom. The damsel at first seemed astonished; however as well for
fear as desire she had to understand the sequel of this business, kept her
mouth shut, but her ears open to the saying of the Gentlemen; whose request
being well understood, and unwilling to show her self harder than a stone, and
being more unwilling to the ruin of the Gentleman, and much more of her self;
thinking it withal an Act of Piety to preserve those who love us, became at
length inclinable to pity, and resolved to entertain him, whereupon without
further loss of time they both addressed themselves for the gathering of loves
fruits; and to make manifest the Riddle, thinking of nothing else but the
perpetuity of their pleasure; advising the best way how they should meet often
together.

This story here inserted, Sir, it tends much to our purpose, and those also
who have endeavored to know women; but principally those many Hypocrites,
which makes profession of being half Saints. This Damsel of whom we speak, Sir,
not enduring to be locked up under the guard of her Husband, (who we may
presume had good reason to be careful of that he valued above every thing;) was
resolved for a long time to be revenged of him, and so seeing occasion offer it
self, she greedily laid hold thereon; not only to save and deliver her self,
but also to conclude the detriment and confusion of the poor innocent; and so
having taken her pleasure many nights with her friend, she resolved to forsake
her Husband, and cleave to this young Gentleman, and that with much subtlety,
so that she was pr^^s'd, and her old man blamed. In the mean time her friend
visited he^ often, and she desirous to come to that end the Gentleman
propounded, without regarding any thing bu^ the present she spoke to him in
these words; my friend I know you are valiant and that you hear me great
affection, wherefore it is requisite that you enterprise something in which I
shall have the greatest charge, to the intent that if any thing happen contrary
to our design which I hope, the whole may be imputed to me, and no other; and
that you may not perplex your brain, I will undertake the particular management.

In the first place tomorrow morning going to Court you shall wear on your
finger one of the rings of my Musty Husband, which I shall give you, and so
order the basiness, that he may see it on your finger, and I doubt not but
imm^diately he will know it to be his own, in such sort that he will ask you,
whence you had it; to which you must answer that you have had it a long time,
say no more, but come straight aw y to me, and give me the ring again,
afterward I shall inform you how things proceed. Day breaking (which
constrained the Gentleman to depart) the Damsel gave him the good morrow,
putting the ring on his singer wi h which the Gentleman derected his course
toward the Governor, and had no soon^^ perf^^med hi^ ^beisance toward him,
bu^ that the G^vern u^ saw that which netled him to see, and although he
dissembled the knowledge o^ what of that which was too true, yet he could not
but fix his eyes a long time thereon, and to show by some strange gestures that
he was not well pleased; in such manner that many of the attendants desired to
know the reason of this sudden change; but ^he presently went to the Tower,
and was so long in opening the several doors, that the Gentleman who was gone
before had the opportunity of delivering the ring to her from whence he had it;
now the old Dotard having found the said ring in the place he desired, rested
himself satisfied, and was resolved to lie with her the following night which
was accordingly done; of which her friend was advertised by a certain signal
given by her, which he finding returned to his lodging.

The day following the Gentleman seeing all things safe returned to his
accustomed rest, where he and the Damsel had time enough to laugh at the poor
oldman. In fine the Damsel said to the Gentleman; my friend the God of Love
has given us a good beginning to satisfy our selves, and certainly I hope no
less of the middle and conclusion, and so for the second trial, you shall do
what I shall tell you, and do but as you did with the ring in which you behaved
your self most gallantly. The Gentleman descended from the Tower (after he had
received a little D^g from her which she kept for her pastime,) and went to the
Court, carrying with him the little Dog, the Governor seeing his little dog,
was about to have called him by his name, but considering the quality of him
who held him, and wondering how it was possible for it to be procured, for he
saw by all the marks of the dog, that it must be the same, he said not a word
but went straight to the Tower, grinding his teeth, and threatening both his
wife and Gentleman that he had worse dog for them both then they had of his.
The young Gentleman turning his back to the Governor disposed of the Dog with
as much celerity as he had done with the ring.

The Governor being entered the Chamber Chamber of his Wife, and there seeing
the little dog, knew not what to say, but believed it might so happen, that two
things might be found alike in two different places; and having seen already
things like his own, he entertained no bad opinion, and le^s jealousy. In the
mean time the Gentleman had his full delight with the Damsel; who was desirous
to put an end to all; resolving with her Friend about the means they should
take to deliver her from this servitude, showing him the way he should take,
and what pretenses he must use, and that he must fit a Galley, as swift of sail
as he could choose, and that he should place her in some Haven near the City,
and pretending that he was in haste to be gone, he should procure some strange
H^b^lliments for her, and having taken leave of the old Dota^d, they should get
aloft with all speed they could, discovering how he had cheated her Husband as
he did. The Gentleman descended the Tower, and went to procure the lightest
Galley in all Morroco, and having victual'd and armed her he put her off a
little to Sea, the better to abscond his design: after this he subtlely
contrived woman's apparel very rich, but made after a strange manner, the which
he laid up in his Chamber, the hour for their design being come, the Damsel
removed from her Prison that night she knew the Dotard would not come to see
her, he conducted her to the Galley which was arrived at the Port that very
nightgiving out that it was a strange Galley then come in, and having embarked
his Lady, he committed her to the care of his trusty servant, and returned a
shore to perfect his design. Now the Govenour was rilen very early to go a
hunting, and seeing Fabio, desired him to make one of the Party, of which he
excuse himself, saying to the Governor that he was constrained to lay all
business aside to return speedily into his own Country. How said the Governor,
shall we be deprived of the company of a man so good and honest as you are:
whereupon the Gentleman replied that he could be content to stay and see their
pa^times, but that he was constrained to depart as suddenly as he could, having
received the good tidings of the peace his Parents had concluded with those of
the Gentleman he had Du^l'd with for which cause his presence was altogether
requisite for the ratifying what had past in his absence, and that he feared
delay in going might endanger him more than any thing else; the Governor
having asked who brought him this news, the Gentleman answered to tell you the
truth it is my dear Female friend who who always has conferred on me her
friendship, who being much troubled at my absence, is very desirous of my
return, being come in all baste for that purpose, in a Pinnace which arrived in
the Port this mo^ning at break of day; wherefore I am come expressly to take my
leave of you, according to that service and duty I ever owed you, and to pray
you also that you will drink a glass of wine with me in that Vessel which is
come on purpose to carry me off; to the intent with better courage I may set
sail. The Governor praising much the Cordiality and Friendship of the Damsel
which was come to find our Fabio, promised him to go and dine with him in the
Galley, and following his hunting, the young Gentleman in the mean time gave
order for dinner after the best manner he could: dinner time being come he went
before the Governor, with several Gentlemen his friends whom he also c^nducted
thither, and being ariv'd near the Port, he began to consider and amongst other
things he declared that for the great love he had found in his friend in times
past which she had sufficiently dem^nstrated then and now in seeking him out,
he resolved forthwith to marry her; beserching the Governor as he had ever
found him affectionate to his service that in acknowledgment thereof it would
please him to solemnize his marriage, and that he might have the happyness to
receive a wise from so good a hand as his. The Governor readily agreed to the
motion, and being on the strand, a Skiff presently carried them aboard the
Gally, where being come, the Gentleman ordered her to cover her self and to sit
next the Governor who was no stranger but his own wife. At it first was
thought by the Governor and all present that she was his w^f^ (as indeed she
was) but by reason of her strange habit and her deportment, knowing well how to
counterfeit as in the case of the Ring and little Dog, as aforesaid she
remained undiscovered. Dinner being ended the young Gentleman spoke briskly to
the Governor desiring him to bestow his Female servant on his Male, to which
the good old man replied that it was very reasonable, and that he would do much
more for his contentment; hereupon taking the Damsel by the hand, he gave her
to the young Gentleman in the presence of all the company; this being done he
returned to the Castle; but the Gentleman with his prey, got as far off as he
could. The Governor having some little jealousy in his breast, and that which
encreast it more was the astonishment of the whole company to see a woman so
proportioned like the Governess; in such manner that to clear all doubts, he
was no sooner arrived at the Castle but that he went straight to his Tower, and
having unlockt all the doors and searched up and down, he could not find his
wife, at which he was ready to run mad; and not seeing any remdy for this
calamity, there being no hopes of overtaking the Gally, which was now a good
way at sea, beside the confusion he was in, either to speak or be spoken to,
and silling his he^d with a thousand things, he at length fell into despair
unimaginable, and inexpressible, at length a disease seized him, which took him
off.

Who think you Sir, was guilty of his death, but his wicked wife: Wherefore all
men ought to consider how to govern their wives rightly; for there is nothing
more difficult than to divert a woman from what she in^ends? It Is true if
their, designs were guided by reason, I should not so much blame their
subtleties by which they accomplish their conseptions, but seeing the
imperfection of the Sex, which is more usually guided by passion than reason, I
can confidently say that the end of those designs they plot tends ordinarily to
mi^chief and danger, as may be seen in the discourse of this our Greccian,
whose ^xample need not go alone for I can instance a thousand more, and I wish
to God that the Empress was not rankt among them as I am certain she is, and
you your self may easily discover it: Wherefore it is necessary for you to take
mature deliberation in this affair without giving more credit to the passions
of any other then reason shall require.

The Emperor having given good attention to the Philosophers discourse,
thought good to meditate thereon: but although he had no bad opinion of his
wife, yet he did abhor to think of the Death of his Son, which could not but be
a great vexation to him: although he much desired that Justice might take
place, and the affection which he always had to acquire the reputation of a
just Prince, and who would not be rash in any affair, and this induced him to
resolve to stay the execution of his Son, until the case should be more fully
and deliberately exam^ned, having understood by so many examples, that all
things ought not to be taken for truth, which at the first seem to be so; yet
that he might somewhat please the Empress he purposed to return to Rome, so
that by his presence he might show her some reason for his present delay; and
thereupon without any further stay, or giving any other answer to the
Philopher, but that he would take care that justice should be done, he
instantly mounted on horseback that he might the sooner perform his journey to
Rome, where being arrived, he found the Empress very much enraged against the
Officers of Justice, who being abroad upon their particular occasions, had been
the cause of prolonging the life of Prince Erastus. This very well pleased the
Emperor, finding it in his power to deliberate in the proceedings about his
Son; and therefore he gave command to the Officers to forbear any further
proceedings until they had further commands from him.

top: representation of a group of figures in a ship or boat; bottom:
representation of a male and female figure in bed, and a bird on a stand with
rain or stones falling on it from a hole in the roof

This Story or example may serve to the same purpose as the Former.
There was a wealthy Burgess living in a certain City, who kept a Pie, the Bird
he loved so well, that he suffered none to feed him but himself, and as he fed
him taught him several Languages; this Pie was so apprehensive and grateful to
his kind Master, that whatsoever he saw done in the house he told his Master.

This Burgess was married to a young wife, who was much more beautiful than
honest, requiting her husbands love and affection with s^ight and disrespect,
because he was not a man of that lustful performance she expected, but that she
might not want means to satisfy her amorous desires, she made choice of a man
fit for her purpose, whom she always sent for when her Husband was abroad
about his business, that they might eat deliciously and wantonly toy one with
another.

Now the Pie as she told her Master every thing, she observed, upon his return
so particularly this junketting wantonness, and was so open mouthed, as the
report hereof did spread it self through the whole City, her Husband hereupon
much troubled and grieved, upbraided her with disloyaly and charged her down
right with adultry, to which she said she was innocent, and that he was to
blame to belive his Pie, and that as long as he continued so doing, there would
be nothing but variance and discord among them; but he replied the Pie could
not lie, for what she saw or heard, that she told him, and therefore would
belive her rather than his Wife.

It so happened not long after that, this Burgess traveled abroad, and was no
sooner gone, but she sent to advise her friend, that to avoid the suspicion of
the People he should come secretly to her that night, to do as he was
accustomed: being come, as he entered into the house, he said Dearest I fear
this Makebait Pie will discover us, but she bid him be bold, for it was dark,
and therefore the Pie could not see them; the Pie hearing this, said it is true,
I see you not, but I can hear you, and know that you Cuckold my Master, which
It shall tell him when he comes home; at which this lusty young fellow was
startled, but she bade him be of good courage, and she would be revenged of the
Pie, so they went and lay together, about midnight the Adultress arose, and
calling her maidservant, commanded her to fetch a Ladder, which they did set
up to the roof of the house, and having got thereto, they made a hole therein,
straight over the Pie, and through it cast at the Pie, sometimes water, then
small stones, sand and the like, in so much that the poor Pie was ready to dye.

Upon the Burgesses return h^ went to visit his Pie, asking her how she fared,
and what had past in his absence, to which the Pie replied, Master I shall
satisfy you in both; first, I have strange new^^ to tell you, and that is you
are Cuckold, for that very night after your departure, your wife entertained a
young man all night in Bed with her, notwithstanding I told them I would
inform you thereof: as to my welfare, that very night I had like to have dyed
it was so tempestuous, either raining, hailing, or snowing upon me all night
long. The wife hearing this said to her husband, you have hitherto belived in
the Pie, I will see whether you will continue so doing. She says she had like
to have lied with rain, hail and snow, that night she accuses me of adultery,
where as there was never any thing clearer but my innocence, there having not
been seen so lovely fair a night as that for many years, and therefore for the
future belive her not. The good man to be satisfied of the truth, inquired of
the Neighbors whether that night was foul or fair, who all affirmed no night
cuold be fairer; then going to his wife he acknowledged the fault of his
credulity, and after that went to his Pie, and having railed at him for sowing
discord between man and wife, notwithstanding he had loved him so well, and
though the Pie protested he had told him nothing but what he either saw or
heard, yet he wrung his neck of, the Wife at the sight hereof was overjoyed,
but the Husband looking up, saw a ladder, and a hole in the roof the house, and
a vessel of water, sand and stones standing by, which made him soon perceive
the treachery of his Wife, at which he grew so troubled to be thus deluded, and
deprive his dearly beloved Pie of life, that he sold all that he had, and went
a Pilgrimage. Now said the Philosopher to the Emperor, was not this a false
and wicked woman, by deceit and craft to cause the faithful Pie to be slain,
and the Emperor answered it was very true, and I much pity the Pie, that she
should dye for her fidelity, this is a good example for me, therefore this day
my Son shall not dye, the Philososopher commending the prudence of the
Emperor, took his leave, having first recommended him to the protection of the
Almighty.

CHAP. XVII. The Empress Aphrodicia again induces the Emperor to proceed to
the execution of Prince Erastus, by a discourse which she made to him of a
great inconvenience which befell a King of Persia, by putting too much confidence
in Philosophers and Wisemen which belonged to his Court: who by means of a
Phantasme which they made in a town, besieged by the Persians, and ready to be
surrendered caused the Seige to be raised, to the great damage of the King, of
Persia, they having taken Bribes and Presents from the Enemies.
THE inconstancy and instability of those who loose themselves in the service
of women, may be clearly demonstrated in this example of the Emperor
Dioclesian: who had no sooner ordained and established any thing in this case
of his Son: but that at the discourse of the adverse Party he soon changed his
mind: for after he had heard the Philosopher Philantropus, he resolved to
examine well the fact of Erastus, and search out the truth, but being come to
Rome, he was so over ruled by the speeches of the Empress, that he gave fresh
orders to proceed without any delay to the execution of Prince Eastus; the top:
representation of an empress or queen and an emperor or king beside a throne,
with two more figures; bottom: representation of a group of figures outside a
castle, fort or tower, over which stands a winged figure with two swords manner
thus, The Emperor went to visit the Empress, to acquaint her that the delay
which he had caused in the case of Erastus, was not to hinder the course of
Justice, nor to defer the revenge for the abuse she had suffered: but to
avoid the blame of being accounted rash and chollerick, as already several had
reported him to be, in regard he had pronounced sentence without using the
forms in those cases accustomed which ought to be freely used to the
satisfaction of every one; wherefore the execution of the sentence must be
deferred for a few days, otherwise he should be very much blamed in not
administering Justice according to the usual manner.

The Empress sighing and groaning thus answered, I deny not Sir, but that in
all ordinary cases it is necessary to observe the customs of the Court; but in
so extraordinry a case wherein the crime exceeds all punishments established by
law: I say there it is ill to delay the punishment, but to hasten and be speedy
in the execution thereof? and Sir, I pray was it ever known or read in any
Chronicle or History, that any one was so audacious as only to think to force
an Empress, much less to attempt it? where do you find a Son so unnatural and
wicked, as to endeavor to quench his disordinate appetite in a vessel
consecrated to his Father, and now this great abuse is committed against one
who is above all Laws and Ordinances: and for him to delay the punishment, I
know not what to say to it, but that you are so blinded by a Fatherly
affection, that you are in a manner contented with the outrage that has been
done to for the laws formerly made by Emperors were to tie up their hands, but
to keep their Subj within compass, and to inflict severe punishment upon those
who should be found so manifest guilty as Erastus, who has committed a crime of
the highest nature that he could possibly be guilty of; wherefore I see that
all this prolongations are to no other end, but that I should dye of grief,
which will soon and easily happen to me, since you have so small esteem for my
honor, and if my life be troublesome to you, wherefore do you trouble me and
your self in this manner, and not kill me outright at once; for assure your
self, I shall be better pleased to dye, so it may please you, then to live in
this torment I now endure.

At these words the Emperor could not forbear weeping, which the Empress
observing, she prosecuted her discourse with greater affection than before,
showing that she was not so much troubled on her one account, as in respect of
him, ading that she very welknow that all these delays about Erastus proceeded
from the malignity of the Philosophers, who under pretense of zeal and religion
endeavored to ruin the honor and life of the Empress; and I wish to God, said
she, that it happens not to you as it did to a King of Persia, who having to do
with the Caldeans, was in bad case, by being advised by his Philosophers as you
are by these here; and although I find my self very much weakened by the
continual trouble which affl^cts my poor heart, yet however I should be willing
to relate the whole affair to you, were it not wholly loss of time, seeing you
resolved to stop the execution of the sentence you have denounced.

Let not that hinder you replied the Emperor, and I pray you (provided it does
not displease you) to relate to me all that happened to this King, and I assure
you that you shall see your self revenged both of Erastus and the Philosophers
sooner than you expect: And thus having comforted the Empress in the best
manner that he could, he so entreated her that she began her Narrative after
this manner.

In times past there was a very puissant King in Persia, (as it is usual for
all the Kings of Persia to be so) who was named Psamentin: this King being
desirous to enlarge his Kingdom, at the first began to war upon his Neighbors,
and so pursued his Victories, that in the end he having reduced all the
adjoining Countries to his command, he came to the Confines of Caldea, hoping
to conquer that Kingdom, as he had done the rest of their Neigbours; and
thereupon having raised a very fair Army, and being provided with all things
necessary for so great an enterprise, he with great fury entered the Country of
the Caldeans, putting all that he met to fire and sword* the King of Caldea who
was named Achias, being informed of the great provision which the King of
Persia made to assault him, caused his Nobility to be assembled, whom he
acquainted with the design of the King of Persia had to subdue the Country of
Caldea, and to reduce it to the obedience of the Persians, for which purpose he
had raised a great Army with which he had taken the field, so that he daily
expected news of his arrival into their Country.

Representing to them that they all very well knew what Forces they c^uld
raise, and yet however he was resolved to maintain the fredom of his Country
choosing rather to dye than to fall under the Government of the Persians, whose
Impieties they were sufficiently acquainted with, and did abhor them for their
Religion; which they could not by any means admit off, wherefore he prayed and
exhorted every one, both particular and general to consider of what expedient
they should u^e in that tim^ of so eminent danger, and that for the
conservation of the Crown, a right to which he would not particularly claim,
but should remit it to the General: and thereupon a Royal Throne being placed
in the middle of the Counsel Chamber, he went thither and placed the Crown
thereon, and then went and sat down among the rest of the Counsel, concluding
his discourse thus. As for me, I shall serve the Crown, and shall not spare my
life to maintain it: being assured that if every one will follow my example,
and do their endeavors, we shall well enough preserve it from tyranny of the
Persians.

This action being accompanied with a Vehemence which the King used in his
speech, did so move the hearts of the Chaldeans, that laying aside the fear
which they had of the Persian forces, conforming themselves to their Kings
example and his virtuous heart, they all unanimously cried out, that they would
live and dye in the service and protection of the Crown, in sign whereof they
took it into their hands; and having replaced it on the head of their King,
they all promised and swore that they would never yield to the Persians, but
that they would rather choose to dye than to fall into the power of their
Enemies, praying the King to be courageous, and to advise of the necessary
provisions for defense of their Country, offering themselves ready, wholly to
obey all that he should enjoin them.

It is high time said the King to take order therein, but however it is first
requisite that the Estates take care of provisions, and since you have restored
me the Crown: I shall not fail to let you know by my Government the love I have
always had for you.

After several propositions on all sides, the Estates resolved to carry into
the City of Hur, all the riches and wealth of the Kingdom, in regard that it
was the Capitol City of the Country; and also by reason of the Fortress, and
that all the Forces of Caldea should there have their general Rendevouze, to
make to make head against the Enemy, for that it was impossible for them to
meet the Persians in the open fields, whose Army was not numbered by hundreds of
men, but by thousands. And thus the King of Caldea having given the best order
he could in his affairs according to his power, he caused the City of Hur to be
victualled and munitioned, wherein he also placed a good number of men to
sustain the Seige: yet he made not so much haste, but the Enemy was entered the
Country, before he had victualled the City of Hur as he had intended, and the
Army of the Persians was so numerous both in Horse and Foot, that it seemed
sufficient to Conquer not only one City, but all the World.

The Persians being entered into the Caldeans country, put all that they met to
the Fire and Sword: so that the Caldeans being forced to forsake their little
Towns, all ^led to the City of Hur, being followed by their Enemies. Those who
were within, seeing so great an Army without their walls, began to fear, yet in
the end every one resolved to keep his Oath, and to defend themselves,
purposing rather to lose their lives then to yield to the Persians, who
frequently assaulted the City, but it was as valiently defended as assaulted.
The City was so straightly beseiged on all sides, that it was impossible to
enter it, and much less to issue out, but without great difficulty, and that by
the way of the Mountain, which was adjoining to the C tty; and thus the seige
endured for several months, the beseigers not being able to take the City,
nor they within to damage the beseigers; and yet they were many times
assaulted, but the Fortress was so strong and so well defended, that the
assaliants could gain nothing thereon, but many times they had epual losses.
The seige then having continued a long time, the Victuals began to fail them
within, the King understanding thereof took the number of the men, and cattle
that were within the City, giving to every one a competent, though slender
allowance, so that the beseiged k^pt themselves for some time in very good
order. But the King seeing that their victuals would endure but f^r ^ few days
longer, he caused the Counsel to assemble, acquainting them with their
condition, concluding that of two evils they must choose ^n^* either to dye by
hunger in the City, or valiantly t^ issue out upon their Enemies; saying that
although the best was bad, yet his opinion was not to dye of hunger, but like
men of courage, to fall upon their Enemies, on whom they must needs make a
co^siderable slaughter, assuring them that if they beh^ved themselves as he
hoped they would, they should lessen the number of their Enemies, and give the
rest occasion not to beast of any victory.

All of them approved of the Kings advice, considering the desperate condition
of their aff^i^s, and it was concluded that at the next new Moon (for the
Caldeans reckon the increase of the Moon to be a good sign, and the decrease to
be a bad sign to them) they would all issue out intending to dye in the Bed of
Honor, fighting against their Enemies, and the Women declared themselves to be
no less valiant, resolving to accompany their husbands. This conclusion being
taken, and every one being resolved, they all began to make merry, and give
signs of joy and gladness. The Persians hearing this, and being acquainted with
the great want and scearcity which they with in had endured, were astonished
thereat, and more particularly their Philosophers and Magitians, whereof there
were three in the Camp, who managed all the affairs of the King of Persia, so
that nothing was done without their advice, for these three Philosophers were
reputed to be very wise and good servants to the King, yet within few days
treason and disloyalty, appear in the ruin of their King, and destruction of
their Army. Now these three Philosophers being very well experi^nced did
pre^ume that all the treasure of the Caldeans would be brought to this City of
Hur, and that t^erefore there would be a great quantity of Gold and Silver, as
indeed there was, and they had designed this seige for no other end, but that
they might gain a good part of the treasures that should be there, but now
understanding that the beseiged had not lost courage, but that the longer they
continued, they appeared the more hardy in defendi^g their City, they
therefore b^lieved they had found some quan^^^y of Corn or other Mu^itio^,
whereby they might yet endure the Seige. And therefore not having patience, but
being very desirous to satisfy their avarice, they reso ved to be Masters of
some of the Caldeans treasure by one means or other, and not attaing their end
by the ruin of the City, which had worn out their patience by their long
holding out, they therefore intended to g^in it by delivering of them within,
whereupon having conferred together, they all three entreated the King to
permit them to depart from the Camp for some certain days, to cel^brate some
sacrifice, where none ought to be present but those of their quality; whereby
they should discover by the communication of Spirits, the ^ccasion of the
feast, which was made by the besieged, and what means they must use to reduce
them to the necessity of yiedling. To this the King consented, and withal
entreated them to be diligent in their sacrifices, to the purposes aforesaid.

These Philosophers then leaving the Camp, prevailed so with the King of
Persia, that he promised to attempt nothing against the City until their
return, only to kee^ it straightly besieged, and to take care of his own Camp.
This being done they traveled to to the Mountain, where they remained until
night, which being come they went toward the City, and being perceived by the
Sentin^l^, who asked who goes there, and having answered that they were there
for the service of the City, and that they should conduct them to the King to
acquaint him with somewhat of importance, the Court of guard seeing that they
were but three, permitted them to enter the City, and having set a guard of
soldiers over them, some went to the King to acquaint him of their arrival, who
caused them to come presently that he might know their business; they being
before the King desired private audience, to this the King consented, retireing
into a Chamber with some Princes his favorites, and there the Philosophers
began to discover and declare what they were, saying, that the great compassi^n
which they had for the poor inhabitants of the City of Hur, had moved them to
come thither, to advertize the King, that if they might be recompensed equal to
the g^eatness of their desert, and as the case required they would cause the
seige to be raised, and constrain their Army to leave the Country of Caldea.
The King hearing this, although he could give no credit to their promises,
taking them for Traitors, yet however seeing his affairs reduced to so great
extremity, that within a few days he should be constrained for want of
victuals to fall upon desperate actions; he therefore would not slight this
occasion, and thereupon knowing that the design of these Philosophers was only
to get money, though he was uncertain of their performance, but the better to
oblidge and engage them, he carried them into the treasury, where there was so
much Gold and Silver, that it is impossible to reckon it, for the whole
treasury of the Country had been brought thither for security. The Philosophers
seeing this, were astonished at the vastness of that treasure; and the King
promised them and solemnly swore to them, to let them have what part of this
treasure they pleased, in case they performed what they promised in causing the
seige to be raised, and the Army to leave his Country.

The Philosophers being contented told the King that he should encourage his
people; for within 4 days the seige should by their means be raised, which they
performed as you shall presently hear.

In the middle of the City of Hur, there was a very high Tow^r, which not only
commanded the Camp of the Persians, but also discovered all the adjoining
Countries. The Philosophers intending to play their project on this Power,
caused a habit to be made of a Giant like proportion, covering the same with
burning glasses, looking-glasses of Crystal and other Glasses of several
colors wrought together in marvalous order; after this they made two golden
wings, which had as much luster as the habit, and painting two swords with
Vermission, that they seemed to be bloody, ^et however they shined very
clearly, they also provided several artificial fire works, which should make a
great noise, and seem to be Thunder and Lightning: all things being thus
provided and ordered, two of the Philosophers went out of the City, and went
to the Mountain the same way that they came, the third remained in the City,
to execute that which they had determined between them.

The next m^rning the Rascal Philosopher who staid behind, did put on the habit
of gl sses, and placed the two golden wings on his shoulders, so that he could
command them, and spread them as artificially as a Bird does naturally; besides
all this he put a great Crown on his head, from whence issued several bright
beams or rays of diverse colors, having in each hand a bloody sword.

This done he fell to work with the wildfire* making so great a noise with
slashing and cracking as if the whole City of Hur had been on fire, and in the
midst of this flameing and thundering the Philosopher appeared on the top of the
Tower, in the habit and equipage which I have described to you, appearing of so
large a stature and size, that it succeeded all humain proportions. The Sun
beams struck so directly upon the Glasses, and their shineing habiliments, that
it dazeled the eyes of the beholders. After the Philosopher had for some space
spread his wings, and sluttered with them, he began to brandish and flourish
with both his vermillion swords, so that the beholders supposed him to be in
fight. The Persians seeing this strange and dismal sights were terrified and
dismayed, not knowing what should occasion it. In the midst of these passages
the two other Philosophers who were in the Mountain came running and crying into
the Camp, and going directly to the Kings Tent, cried out they were all dead
men, wherefore said the King? do you not see Sir, said they, the God of the
Caldeans who is descended from Heaven to defend them, so that if we stay here
any longer we shall be all lost; and therefore it is necessary for us to flee,
lest we enrage this God any further, and thereby loose our lives as our
Companion has done, who having seen the apparition of this God, and being
desirous to appease his fury with certain new Sacrifices which he would offer,
was suddenly slain in the Mountain by a Thunderbolt, which we seeing made all
possible haste down hither, to acquaint you that if you do not this day depart
the place, none of your Camp will escape: and thereupon they began to flee,
which caused several who gave as much credit to these Philosophers, as if they
had been a God to follow them, and fly as well as they The King himself
presently mounted on horseback, so that in one hours time the Seige was raised;
The besieged who were in arms and who were ready to issue out, seeing their
enemies in a Rout, fell on their Rear and charged them so briskly, that they
made as great a slaughter as they pleased, and took so many Prisoners that it
was wonderful, for the poor Persians fled without any order, thinking that the
God of the Caldeans was still behind them, so that a small number escaped, and
they too hastening night and day out of the Caldeans Country. The pursuit being
finished which lasted until night, the Caldeans returned to their City being
all rich and more contented, for all the baggage of the Persians was left in
the Camp, whereby the Caldeans had the Pillage which was of an inesteemable
value. The Philosophers faceing about took the way of the Mountain, and from
thence returned to the City of Hur where they were highly welcomed, and the
King of the Caldeans kept his promise with them, having by their cunning device
and tricks defeated the King of Persia who was their Master, and had turned the
victory to the Caldeans side, and that for covetousness of the Treasure which
was delivered to them.

And thus Sir, (continued the Empress) will it happen to you if you prevent if
not: For I foresee that you lending your ears to these Phi osoph^rs, and not
taking heed to their device, and following their wicked and pernicious counsel
as you d^, they will occasion your death and will enstall their Erastus with
the Imperial Crown* that they may divide among themselves the Treasure of
Rome; but I beseech God to be so meciful to me to take me out of this miserable
life before that happens, so that I may not with my Corporal eyes behold
that which with my Spiritual eyes I foresee with much regret.

And thus having finished her discourse, she began to sigh groan and weep, so
that the Emperor himself could not refrain from weeping; and after he had
comforted her as much as he could, he said take no care for this Madan, for I
am too well in Instructed to be overreached with all their cunning; and to
give you the more satisfacton I have purposed that to morrow morning Erastus
shall be executed without any further delay, and he being dispatch justice
shall soon after proceed to the punishment of these who have brought him to so
pitiful an end by their bad Instructions: At which speeches the Empress being
somewhat app^ased they went to bed together, but the Empress found this nighr
to be as long as the precedent wherein she the next morning expected news of
her son-in-laws death.

CHAP. XVIII The Philosopher Agathus, put a stop to the execution of Erastus by
his oppinion upon a Letter which a Queen of Germany had written to the
Emperor, to cause her husband to be put to death; alleging in confirmation of
his oppinion the Story of a Gentleman of Modena, whose wife did cut his ^hroat
that she might have a young man whom she loved, she having before endeavored
to kill him by several ways, and means wherein she had failed.
THE Emperor being willing to lie with the Empress, in some manner to appease
her, did perceive soon after midnight (he being so continually troubled in mind
that he could not take his natural rest) several people who talked very loud in
the withdrawing Room of the Empr^ss; and having asked of the women of the
Empresses Bedchamber wha^ was the ma^ter, one of them entered the Chamber, and
presented a Letter to the Emperor, saying that one of the Gentleman of his
Chamber had brought it, and had charged her to deliver it suddenly, according
to the desire of a Messenger who was come from Germany in Post, who said he was
commanded by those that sent him, to cause it to be instantly read to the
Emperor in regard it was of importance for the Conservation of the Empire,
further saying that top: representation of a male figure seated at a dining
table, with two female figures standing nearby; middle: representation of a
male figure lying in bed, with a male figure and a female figure holding a
knife or dagger standing nearby; bottom left: representation of two female
figures being burnt at the stake; bottom right: representation of a dog digging
or pawing at the ground, with three male figures nearby the loud talking the
Emperor had heard was in arguing the case with the Messenger, whether it was
absolutely necessary to deliver the Letter presently; doubting there might be
danger in staying till the Emperor did rise, and for fear they should
presently awake him.

The Emperor having seen the contents of the Letter, which required sudden
consideration and yet mature deliberati^n, commanded that the chief of the
Senators should be assembled, in the mean time he arose, (for it was not long
to day) and went only habited in his night gown to meet the Senators, in the
Empresses Hall, among others the Philosophers were al^o called to this counsel,
whose presence although it some what displeased the Emperor by reason of
Erastus, yet however he was very well contented that they should be present at
this Counsel; to see h^w much they would surpass the others in readiness of
advice. The Counsel being then ^ssembled and all others being turned out, but
such as belonged to the Counsel, the Emperor acqu^inted them with the c^use
why he had caused them to meet, and after he had spent some time in discoursing
ab^ut the present affair, be commanded one of his S^cretaries to read the
Letter from the Q^^en of Germany, the contents whereof follows.

HEliodora Queen of Germany, to Dioclesia^ Emperor of the Romans greeting; the
horror which I naturally have against any thing contrary to my duty joined to
the faith I owe to the R^man Empire, not only in respect of the general
obligation which this kingdom has as being a dependant on the said Empire, but
also by a particular affection of my Family which is anciently descended from
the illustrious blood of the Romans has constrained me to send you this
Letter, without respecting and having little regard to the great danger and
hazard of my life, in case of discovery that the advertisement which I send you
should come from me, preferring this advice which only tends to the
preservation of the great Roman Empire, before my own life.

Know then that the King Erastus my husband, who at first showed himself very
affectionate to the service of the Roman Empire, from whom he holds his Crown,
is so altered in his latter age, that he endeavors nothing more than your
ruin, and the destruction of Rome, and yet I am ignorant of the occasion. To
compass which ends, he daily endeavors to draw to his opinion, the most
dexterously that he can the chief, and Governors of the Countries adjoining to
this Kingdom. Nay has many intelligences and secret practices in Italy* by
which means he may on a sudden raise a great and strong army to surprise you
unprovided; and by this means to abuse the granduer of the Roman Empire. And
this he may easily perform (if you prevent him not) by the great number of men
which he can raise in these Countries, who are very strong and brave warriors
as every one knows. And therefore you are not only to advise how to defend
your self, but to think of Chastiseing his rashness; so that he may serve as an
Example to other Princes, who shall be so hold as to rebel against the Roman
Empire, and to maintain Rome in its greatness.

Now to think of chasting him by force of Arms, as the case requires, it will
be very difficult* and in a manner impossible, for as you very we^^ know our
Germans are so valiant, that all the Forces of your Empire, which I confess are
very great, yet they would be to weak to subdue and conquer this Nation.
Wherefore that which cannot be done by force, may more easily be performed by
cunning which if you leave the management to me? I will deliver this disloyal
King to you either alive or dead: provided that you warrant me in the action,
and will take me into your protection, and that of your Empire, to which I
account my self so much obliged, that I rather choose to keep faith with you,
than with him, to whom my person is obleiged some years since: wherefore
expecting Letters of assurance on your part, you may be confident of the
sincerity of my heart toward you and your Empire, which I will manifest to you
in short time, more by effect than words, Fare you well.

This Letter being read in full Counsel, and the importance of the affair being
well considered, they were divided in their opinions, some advised that Rome
ought presently to be fortyfied, so that the Enemies might have little mind to
come and beseige a place so well provided; others on the contrary said that
this was not correspondent to the grandeur of the Roman Empire* and that this
would demonstrate their fear, which would be a thing contrary to the honor and
reputation of the Roman People, who having been Conquerers of the World, would
not seem to fear the barbarous Germans, without great prejudice to their
honor; and therefore concluded that a potent army should be raised, and led
withal expedition to chastise the rashness of those who had not only presumed
to rebel, but also had sworn the ruin of the Empire.

O her^ wh^ were disp^^ased with the war, disapproved of the German exp^dition,
alleging that it was not only ^^fficult, but in a manner imp^ssible by force
of Arms to over run a Nation so populous and Warlike as the Germans were; and
to this purpose they related the many losses which the Ancient R^mans had at
diverse times sustained, and therefore they advised under some pretense to send
an Ambssadour to the King, who might by fair means remonstrate the duty which
he owed to the Roman Empire, from which his Crown depended; endeavoring to
persuade him to desist from making war upon the Empire, intimating that if he
did prosecute his design, it would be his certain ruin.

Others were of opinion to acccept the Queen Heliodora into the protecti^n of
the Empi^e n t ^^^cept of her offer, considering the great affection which she
showed, by advertiz^ng them of that which might be of dangerous conseq^ence to
her. This opinion was contradicted by others, in respect that the Romans had
always maintained their greatness by a millitary virtue, and not by any
indirect courses, such as those were; wherein the Queen proposed and offered
her assistance, in this variety of opinions, the greatest part of the morning
was spent without taking any resolution, when the Philosopher Agathus (whose
turn it was on this sixth day to defend Erastus) arose, it being his turn to
give his opinion, and because all the Assembly believed him to be a wise man,
of good counsel and ready judgment, every one kept silence, so that he being
obs^rved by all, he began to remonstrate by a very elegant discourse, the
little appearance for any sudden motion, and less to m^ke any w^^l ke
preparati^ns upon the simple Letter of this Queen, since that by the Letter it
self which she h^d sent th^re a^peared falsi^y and deceit in the
^d^^rtisements, which pr^ceeded rather from the P^ssi^ns and d^ rd^nate aff
ct^ons of that Prince^s, th^n f^o^ any z ^l which she had for the co^se^va ion
of the Roman Empire, and opening all the p^rticulars of ^he Letter, he made out
the little credit that was to be given to it* for as for her Orig^nal which she
said she was derived from the illustrio^s blood of the Roman Senators, he
proved from the Annuals and Ch^onicles that this was false, for he could not
find that any Roman Gentleman had left Rome to marry in Germany, or that any
Roman Lady man married thither; further adding that if it had been so (which
was not to be believed) yet h^wever that it was imp^ssible that any Roman Lady
should so long remain in a barbarous Nation without being basterd^z^d: her
Letter expressing that her Family was descended from the Ancient Roman blood,
and therefore he concluded that this Letter could not be impa^^d to proceed
from any good z^al, alleadg ng further that there was very l^t^le prob^^ility
that this K ng had solicited the Neig^bou^ing N^^ions to reb^l with him, since
that if it were so, it wo^ld be impossible but that the French, Sweedes,
Hungarians, and those of the adj^yning Co^ntries who are always most faithful
to the Empire, should have some knowledge of it. And as for the Practices and
intell^g^nces which ^he said her husband had in Italy, this might easily be
discovered to be untrue, in regard the affairs of Italy were as well settled as
they had been for a long time: and that Italy had not ever been more at the
command of the Empire than it was at that present. And therefore knowing that
the said Letter was composed of falsities and impossible things, he concluded
that no regard should be had thereto; for although the King of Germany should
bear such intentions against the Empire, (which he could not believe, esteeming
all that the Queen had written to be false,) yet he could not on a sudden
raise such an Army, but that their Allies, nay the Governors of the Roman
Provinces would have knowledge ^f it, who would give such timely notice thereof
at Rome, that they might be well enough provided to stop their pass^ge, more
especially at the Alps. And now said he, these things being thought to be
probably false, it will be necessary to resolve a doubt, which is this, what
should be the cause, and what should move the Queen to write this Letter, and
thereby to caluminate her Husband. As to this, the contents of the Letter being
considered, the resolution is very plain, and in short is her Husbands age, for
there is nothing more displeasant to a young woman than to lie by an old man's
side; so that if Nature do not take them away as soon as they have a mind to
it, they never leave then to study some way how to dispateh them, and I wish to
God that their case would always prove as it did with a Damsel of Modena,
whose story I shall willingly relate, which may serve as well to this purpose
as another, if I did not doubt to displease the Counsel with my tediousness,
no, no replied the Emperor, proceed and you shall very much please me, for
time cannot be better employed than in hearing those things, from whence we may
learn some good and profitable doctrine; whereupon the Philosopher prosecuting
his discourse thus began.

In times past at Modena one of the famousest Cities in Italy, there was a
Gentleman one of the Principal of his Country, who having spent his youthful
days in the study of learning, and in several other exercises fitting his
degree and quality, without subj ct^ng himself to the yoke of wedlock, being
arrived to a declension in years, purposed to marry, as well out of compliance
to the desiers of his friends, as out of an effection to leave some issue
behind him: and thereupon he took a woman his equal in riches, and the
greatness of his Family, but much different in age, he being well stricken in
years, and she entering into the flower of her age, who having lived with him
for some time, and having had some experience of the World, she understood that
although she had plenty of all manner of worldly goods, yet she wanted a full
enjoyment of that one thing which women most principally covet; and
understanding that her Husband could not give her a full satisfaction, she
purposed to look out for it else where, so that by the assistance of her
Chambermaid, she contracted love with a young man, and having had trial of his
youth, she so entirely placed her affection on him, that she not only enjoyed
him in private, but was not ashamed to own him before all the World. But
knowing that this could not be done without great scandal so long as her
husband live^ she therefore endeavored to dispatch her old Husband out of the
way that she might be Married to this young one, who for his part loved her
with an equal affection, hoping that it would not be long ere they had both
their wishes accompl^shed, in regard that the old man could not by the course
of Nature live much l^nger.

These two Lovers having sevaral times discoursed upon this subject, with a
recip^ocal promise of a c^nstancy in affection, the young woman at length
resolved to hasten that which Nature had so long deferred, which the young man
understanding, he told her that although he should be pleased with her husbands
death, yet it was necessary to consider that this hastening might wholly hinder
that which they so earnestly desired, for in c^using the old man to dye of a
vio^ent death, Justice would take such an account of it, that he should be
forced to forsake his Country to save his life, or to suffer a shameful death;
by that means losing the pleasure which they had already tasted, and of which
they hoped in time to have a full inj^yment. Upon this discourse the young
woman did in part moderate her rage, yet however she endeavored to attain her
ends, but yet so as it might be thought he dyed of a natur^l death. And
thereupon being acquainted with an old woman, who like many others commit much
wickedness under the veil of devotion, she learned of her the receipt of a
certain powder made of the roots of Herbs, and many other ingredients, which
being taken either in Bolus, or Licquor, would cause a burning Fever, and
having provided this powder, she administered it to her Husband, hoping that the
Physicians judging this Fever did proceed from bad humors, would cause her
husband to be purged by means of which purgation and his weakness the Physic
would bereave him of his life. The powde^ performing its operation, put the
poor Gentleman into a Fever, which he being sensible of, sent for an ^ld well
experienced Physician who having examined his Patient, and found by his answers
that he had not at all disordered himself; he attributed the cause of his
distemper to his age; and in regard he had a young woman to his wife, whereupon
he was of opinion that in straining himself more than his age would admit, to
pleasure his young wife, he had caused this Fever to seize on him, and
therefore he concluded not to purge him either with Medicines r G^ysters,
believing that a restorative would be more pr^per for the conservation of his
Radical moisture, than to weaken him further by evacuation, seeing him already
feeble enough, as well in respect of hi^ age, as in regard of his straining
himself with his wife.

The poor Gentleman having remained several days in this condition, his wicked
wife failed not to let him taste often of her powder, sometimes she gave it him
in Broth, and other times after some other manner, that she might continue him
in his Fever, but finding that this caused him only to languish and not
dispatch him as she intended (for the restaurative which the Physician
administrd to him was of such virtue, that it exceeded the malignity of the
Fever, and maintained his radical temper) wherefore she determined to make use
of absolute poison, to effect that which neither Age nor his distemper could
perform, and so as it might be supposed that his Fever only did occasion his
death; and thereupon having purchased some strong Poison, She mixed it with
some Broth which she gave gave him as a restaurative. But fortune was at that
instant so favorable to the old man, that taking the Porringer with trembling
hands, he chanced to let it fall, and it became a Medecin to the Cat, which
soon licked it up; the woman was very angry at this accident (pretending her
displeasure to be at the loss of so precious a restaurative) and having thus
spent all her Poison, for resolving to make fair work she had given him as much
poison as would have killed a dozen: Wherefore that being lost, she was
necessitated to give him of the true restaurative, by virtue of which the good
Gentleman recovered his former health, the powder which the old she Devil had
provided being likewise all spent. Whereupon the wicked woman was mad with
anger, and therefore resolved whatever might happen to di^patch him out of the
way; she therefore procured a sleepy potion and gave it him one night at
Supper, so that the poor man began to sleep as he sat at the Table. His wife
perceiving that, to express her kindness to her husband, she undressed him for
bed where she purposed he should take his last sleep, and having pulled off his
Clothes she very gently laid him on his Bed: In the mean time her Paramour
being sent for, he attended her in an adjoining Chamber, where they were used
to meet together. She soon left her husband asleep to go to her waking friend,
in whose company she took her pleasure, and having enflamed him to a height,
she fell upon the discourse of the long life of her husband, and understanding
that her young Lover was as much troubled as her self, she told him that if he
had courage enough to do one thing which she would d^rect, he might be assured
to have a full and free enjoyment of that which they had so long and so
earnestly desired, and expect^d, and therefore she pressed him to execute her
desires. The young man who little thought of the wicked purposes of his
Mistress, being willing to content her as it is usual for young men, told her
that there was nothing so difficult but he wound enterprise for her se^vice. He
making this protestation to his Mistress, she made him swear to perform it;
after which she took him by the hand and led him into the Chamber, where the
good man was in a found sleep, and being approached near the Bed, she put a
naked Dagger into his hand saying: Behold him who has so long hindered the
accomplishment of our desires, he is fast asleep, and will be so for these four
hours, for so eff^ctual is the sleepy potion I have given him, you have
therefore the means of dispatching him from troubling us both and therefore I
pray keep promise with me, and let this Dagger be instrumental in conveying him
thither where long since he ought to have been. The young man was startled and
troubled at these words of his Mistress, and although he loved her very well
and above all things desired the death of the Gentleman, that he might be
married to her; yet however he was seized with horror and compassion to see
this ancient Gentleman who was in great esteem throughout Modena, to be thus
cruelly dealt with by his wife; sometimes in one manner, and then after in an
other, so that the consideration hereof having seized on his Spirits, being in
amaze he let fall the Dagger; which this wicked and obstinate woman took up
saying since your weakness and Coward^ze hinders you from executing what you
ought, you shall see that I am Mistress of m^re resolu^ion and courage than
you; and lifting up the Dagger she cut the poor man's throat, who was so fast
asl ep by virtue of the p ^tion, that without waking he went to sl^ep in the
other World. And not contented h^rewith, she gave him diverse blows with the
D^gg^r into his heart, uttering so many outrageous speeches against him, tha
the young man begin to be ang y with her. H^v ng thus dispatched her hu^b^nd
and being covered with blood thus am^z^d her l^ver she sa^d to him; n^w that is
finish d which c^used all our m^^chief, we ought not to loose ^im b^t p^r^^e
the rest, and now we have ^^ne and oppo^tunity, and it will be long before it
be day and any compa^y w^lk the streets, let us wr^p up th^^ body in the^e
bloody Clothes, and ca^ry them into one obscure place witho^t the City, wh ^e
w^ will b^^y h m o ^ha^ n^ knowle^ge shall ever b (...) ^im; w^ ch being d^ne I
will early in the (...) our ^^untry hou^e attended by my Ch^^^^ and w^o is
acq^ain^ed with all my love pr^c^^d^^g^ in ^^^^ere we w ll rep^rt, that may
husband ^^^^^vi^g into ^he C^u^try for change of Air, an ^cc^dent ^here
happened to him which soon killed him; (...) will ^e easily credi^ed, for it is
pr^bable enoug^ that an old man after a lingering long distemper may dye. This
being d^ne I will cause a C^ffi^ to be filled (...) with a dead C^rps, which I
will re^use to see lest I should dye with grief, and making an honorable
Funeral according to his quality we will then at leisure consult how to finish
our affairs.

The young man approved of the Counsel of this Murdress, and thereupon they
wraped the body in the bloody Clothes, and carried it unto an unfrequented
place without the City where weary few persons passed; and having dug a hole
and buried him, they concluded that for the future nothing could hinder them in
their Loves, but the young man was still somewhat doubtful, and according to
their agreement they went to the Country to prosecute their intentions which
would certainly have taken the effect; the lewd woman intended had it not been
for an extraordinary accident which was not thought of, and did discover all
the treason.

This ancient Gentleman had bred up a Dog which always attended him: This dog
followed the Litter wherein the woman was carried to the Country House,
supposing that his Master was also with her. But being come to the Village and
not finding his Master there, he returned to the City and having hunted and
sought over all the house, not leaving the least Corner untrodden; he according
to the nature of Dogs began to smell and sent out his Master, and to find the
place where they had conveyed his Masters body, and in conclusion he hunted so
long over all the fields, that he came to the place where he was buried; and
three he stayed putting his nose to the ground he scented his Masters body:
whereupon this poor C^rr began to howl for his Master, and that in such
pitiful manner that many who passed that ways stopped at this howling,
although this was the Common lestal for the whole city: and the dog did so
scratch and claw with his feet that having removed some earth he discovered one
corner of the bloody cloth which he endeavored to pull out with his teeth
forbearing to tear it as if he feared to hurt his Masters body, and thus did he
continue and increase his howling. This the P^ssengers seeing and observing the
pains which the Dog took with the bloody Cloth, which be endeavored to draw
out, they therefore resolved to see what it was; the poor Dog looking sometimes
upon one, and then upon another, as if he asked their assistance, fawing on
those that helped him to dig, and flying on those who would hunt him away, as
if he had resolved to defend this Pit even to the death; so that in conclusion
people came with spades and shovels, and digging found the body wrapped up in
bloody clothes. The good Dog seeing his Masters body, began to lick it so that
he cleansed it from the blood wherewith it was besmeared, and yet for all that
none knew the body; the news hereof being carried through Modena, caused that
many and some of the Chief of the City went to see it, among the rest several
of the Murdered Gen^lemans Relations, who first knew the body by the Dog,
before they knew the Dog by his Master, whose body was very much disfigured.
The Governor of the place having notice hereof, being a wise and understanding
Person, examined the particulars of all; and being told that the Wife of the
deceased was young, and the man old; he thereupon conject^red the truth of the
matter, whereupon he sent Officers to the Place where the Woman had reported
her Husband was gone for change of Air. The wretched Woman who was returned to
Modena, hearing the noise about the Dogs and the body that was found, was about
to flee, but the Officers came timely enough to seize on her and secure her and
her wicked Chambermaid; she seeing her self taken and bound, and knowing in
whose custody she was, freely confessed the fact, saying she very well knew the
cause why she was taken, and particularly related how she had used her deceased
Husband that she might be rid of him, and how she had killed him with her own
hands, whereupon she was led to the Governor, where she reiterated and
confirmed her disposition, further adding that she repented she had endured so
much, and that she had delayed his death so long, and that if it were to do
again she would do it.

The Governor hearing this, being much troubled to see so fair a young woman
so obstinate in her wickedness, which she did not endeavor to excuse, but
rather to justify, he therefore condemned her to be burnt alive, at the common
place of Execution in Modena, and that her Chambermaid who had not only kept
her counsel, but bin her assistant and companion should also suffer with and
accompany her in death, and this sentence was the next day executed, this
wretched woman not showing the least repentance for so wicked a crime.

And this may be the very case of the Queen of Germany, for I am very
confident, that no cause has induced her thus miserably to calumniate the King
her Husband, but only an earnest desire to have him dispatched out of her
sight. True it is this woman is more cunning, and endeavors to have more
assurance then she of Modena, for she would be assured of the protection and
safeguard of the Empire* that she may with more safety execute her wicked
design* wherefore my opinion is that she ought not to be protected in so wicked
an action, but that in short an answer should be returned her, that the Roman
Empire is puissant enough, not only to defend it self from those who shall dare
to assault it, but also for to punish those that shall attempt any unjust action
whereby this perverse Princess may know that we well enough understand the
reason of her writing this Letter, and that therefore she should forbear acting
of those things that deserve punishment, lest she serve as an example to others
who shall attempt the like.

And it is my earnest wish that there were none like her at Rome, and then I
should not have occasion to continue my discourse, and then Sir you and w^ that
are your servants should not be put to the trouble we this day are at, on the
^ccasion of Prince Erastus; for certainly if the c^use were searched to the
bottom, it would be found to be quite different, than his mother in (...) h^th
i^sly imputed it, to cause him to do so, that she may with the more ease
contrive the same against you and b^ out of fear and danger of your S^ns he^ g
rev^^^^d on her; this Sir, or some such curse is the only r^^son, which at
present is to me unknown, but I can affi^^, as you will in conclusion s^^d,
that Erastus ^ ^^noc^nt, not only of this fact, but of ^ll other v^i
^^^actions, if the hasty execution of a rash sentence giv^n against him d^^h
not hinder the knowledge of the truth; to pr^cure which I shall follow the
Nature of the Gentleman of Modena's D^g, and the example of my Companion^, who
have no^ ceased not do not yet cease to cry that order may be, observed, and
if you are not pleased to open your ears to the advertisements which we give
you, have a care that our clamours be thought hereafter to be to as little
purpose as the Howlings of the good dog were to his Master, to discover the
truth of the fact when there was no remedy. Open your eyes and your ears Sir,
while it is yet time, without precipitating on an action that may cause a too
late and vain repentance; if you believe that Erastus is guilty of the crime
wherewith he is accused, we are of a contrary opinion, and yet none of us are
upon certainties; and therefore if you put him to death, you will be accounted
throughout all the world to be a wicked unjust and cruel Prince; wherefore let
me prevail with you to do that which you have so often intended, to remit the
cause to the trial of the Senate, to proceed according to right reason and
justice; if it proves to be so as the Empress has falsely alleged, and that
Erastus be ^o d^^^^ed th^n you may execute him and us also who (...) been his
^^^tors without incurring any infamy. And on the contrary if his Innocence does
appear as I believe it will, you will not be deprived of a Son and the Empire
of a Successor.

The Oration of good ^ Igathus was pronounced with such earnestness th^^ all
the Senate stood up entreating the Emperor to (...) the advice of the
Philosopher, and (...) counsel could be given in a case so difficult: (...) and
also by reason of the learned speeches which the Philosopher Agathus had made,
the Emperor, was constrained to put a stop to the execution of the sentence of
Erastus for that day, but he was troubled to hear the Empress so openly blamed
before the Senate. And as for the Queen of Germany, it was concluded to give
her such an answer as the Philosopher had directed, who gained very great
honor in this Counsel for that he had discovered the intention of this Queen
of Germany which could be no other but what he had described in regard there was
no other advise if any rebellion in Germany whereupon the Counsel arose, and
every one retired to their houses, expecting to hear the cause of Prince
Erastus which had been left to the trial of the Senate, and it was the wishes
and desires of all, that the cause should prove as the Philosophers had
averred, and not according to the accusation and imputation of the Empress,
whose Tyranny was hated by many, on the contrary every one admired the good
carriage which they had only once seen in Prince Erastus, who was esteemed and
loved by all the world.

This History or example of the Philosopher Agathus is according to the
original in the Italian and French; but there being an other story to this
purpose, I shall thus relate it.

A Gentleman of Rome (whose Ancestors had left him a plentiful estate, becoming
Master of it by the death of his Relations before he had descretion to manage
it;) was so expensive and prodigal, that in few years it was much impared and
lessned; he not perceiving it or at leastwise not taking care to improve what
he had left, still spent in superfl uous manner, keeping the highest though not
the best company; but the most chargeable was his converse with women, whom he
had treated in a splended manner, hoping, to make up his own fortune by
matching himself to a rich Lady; but those who were so understanding his
profuseness, had almost reduced him to b^^gery, refused his Court-ship and
Importunity, and at length his Company, so that he being disappointed in his
intentions of recovering his Estate became desperate, and having long courted a
rich Roman Lady, and missing of her, he was at last contented to top left:
representation of a male figure kneeling by a river tipping a body or corpse
out of a sack; top right: representation of a male and female figure standing
with a body or corpse of a male figure in a sack; middle left: representation
of a male figure standing beside a body or corpse outside a bathroom or
outhouse; middle right: representation of a male figure driving an armoured
knight on a horse into a fire; bottom left: representation of a male figure
standing with a body or corpse of a male figure in a sack beside two other
sacks; bottom right: representation of a female figure standing in a doorway,
with a body or corpse of a male figure falling against her be married with her
Chambermaid, who was as fair though not so rich as her Mistress, and who had
tasted of his bounty as a servant, that she might speak a good word for him to
her Mistres, but she who was deceitful and ambitious, and indeed amorous of
him, instead of furthering and assisting him in his Courtship to her Lady,
spoke and acted all she could to hinder the progress of their loves; which was
soon broken off, so soon as her Lady who was covetous, understood that he had
made shipwreck of his fortune, and had no other way to keep himself from
sinking but the hopes of her Estate which she had resolved he should never be
master off.

Our Gentleman understanding the resolution of the Mistress, was as I told you
married to the Maid, by which action he thought to vex the Lady which slighted
him, and marry her who loved him, and that he might make the Lady and all the
World believe they were mistaken in him, and that his Estate was as good as
ever, he lanched out all that he could to make a sumptuous wedding, so that by
such time as h^s and his Brides clothes were paid for, and the other expenses
defrayed, not only his own Estate was consumed, but all his new wives ready
money which she had picked up in her service was spent, and besides one City
house and some movables, all else was sold, and the money wasted, all the
Treasure he could boast of was his wives beauty which was indeed admirable, and
so attractive that it brought her many servants and adorers, but she who was
vicious enough in other matters as you shall understand ere long was virtuous
in preserving her chastity for him alone who who had paid so dear for it, and
refused the embraces of all her Lovers for her husband.

They who courted her, finding that amorous language and handsome treats would
not work upon her, and partly understanding her husbands condition to be
necessitous, resolved to take an other course, and presented her with rings,
plate, and some trifling jewels, which she accepted of, and than gave them the
hearing, but yet stood out as to the main, and wou^d not admit of any near
approaches, resolving since they had begun with presents that they should
proceed in the same manner, and that if they had enjoyment, it should be a
costly one, as indeed in the end it proved to be. Many of these suitors she
had, (all which she held in hand so long as they brought grift to her Mill) but
the principal were three Roman Knights, who having large revenues, not only
spent largely, but presented her very roundly that they might have a lick at
her honey p^^.

Her husband was no such Novice in these affairs, but that he understood what
was meant by this courtship, but being confident of his wiv^s chastity, (who
indeed acquainted him with all her proceedings, and permitted him to share in
her profits) he therefore was contented, and advised with her how to manage her
affairs to the best advantage; so that the 3 Knights becoming imp^rtuna^^
^^uiters, and besides the presents off^ring her fair in moneys, she at length
made a bargain with them she managed each of them severally, not one knowing
the design of the other, though they were all very well known to each other,
yet this was a secret they discovered not (...) any, she having engaged them so
to do for preservation of her honor.

The some she agreed upon was 200 Crowns of each of them they were to pay, and
fare all alike, and to be entertained all at one and the same time and place.
The appointed time being come, and one of the Knights having entered her house,
and delivered the money ready told, her husband was ready to receive him, but in
a fatal manner with a naked sword running him through so often, that he sunk
down dead on the ground, the first being thus di^patched, it was not long after
before the second came, who fared no better than the first, and the third also
was forced to bear his friends company in death.

Thus did these three Knights fall inglorlously, and instead of pleasure they
intended, they purchased a sudden death, and these two murderers were proud of
their prize and conquest, believing that they had done well in preserving their
honor, and supposing that if the world were acquainted with the whole matter
they might well enough justify the fact, yet however they were willing and
desirous to conceal it, and to that purpose they contrived a way how to be rid
of the dead bodies.

The murdress had a Brother who was Commander of the watch of the whole City,
and with some attendants, such as he thought fit to choose from among the rest,
he went the Rounds, and visited the several watches, he being in his Circuit
was called in by his Sister, who gave him and his crew a sufficiant quantity of
strong liquor, and keeping them in k^n house so long that it was too late to
pro^a^^ in his walk she desired him to send away hi^ Attendants; and that she
had a private h^^ private business to impart to him. He consented to what his
loveing Sister desired, and they being gone, she tells him that she has
somewhat to impart that he must be very secret in, and withal assist her in or
else she was undone; he not questioning the matter what, makes her an absolute
general promise to do all things she would desire, she having thus assured him,
she tells him a Knight of the Emperors Court came that day into her house, and
intended an abuse to her but was hindered by her husband, who by chance arrived
and being Choleric and the other desperate, they so far engaged together that
her husband having the Juster cause overcame and slew his enemy whose body
remained there in the house unburied, and that without his assistance they knew
not how to convey it away. Well Sister replied he I will rid you of that
trouble; help me to a Sack and I will put the body into it and carry it on my
back and throw it into the River Tiber, whose streams will quickly convey it
into the Sea, so that you shall hear no more of it.

His Sister did as he required, and desired him by all means to return thither
again, so soon as he had done what he promised: He accordingly did as he had
said and soon returned, bidding her take no more care for by that time the body
was carried far enough by the violence of the stream, she hearing him say so
fetched him a cup of the best liquor her house afforded, but pretending some
business in the next Room to that where they were drinking, she went thither?
but hastily and as it were in amaze returned crying out, Oh Lord! Brother I am
undone; for the Knight which you so lately carried to the River is returned and
lies here: How said he, it is impossible; but going thither he there found the
body of a dead Knight, whom he supposed was as she told him the former
returned. Well said he give him me again, and I will try what can be done and
now make sure work, for I will throw him in again Sack and all and a great
stone tied to it; having aid thus he takes the body puts it into his Suc^ lays
it on his shoulders, and carries it where he had said; and returned saying, now
Sister assure your self I have secured all well enough, for I saw the body sink
to the very bo^^om: therefore fill the other dish of liquor and let us be
merry. She did as he desired and they drank on, but not long before she made
the same excuse as formerly, and came running and frighted, crying out that the
Knights body was again returned.

Her Brother hearing her speeches and seeing a dead body (which indeed was of
the third Knight though she said it was the first) was much am^z^d concluding
that this Knight was borne under some Planet whose influence was such that the
water should not prejuduce him, wherefore he resolved to take another course,
and try what the fire would do: therefore he puts it into a Sack and carries it
to a place without the City where there was much Wood, this he put together in
such manner about the dead body that it might be consumed He having placed all
things in order, and set fire to the Wood, retired a little out of the way to
do the deed of Nature.

In the mean time, it growing toward morning a Knight who was Journeying to
the Emperor Court, chanched to ride that way, and seeing a fire the weather
being cold and raw, he drew near to it to warm himself, and in this posture did
our Over-seer of the watch find him when he returned, whereupon he asked what
he was, a Knight replied the Traveller, you are a Devil and no Knight said the
Over-seer, for I first carried you into the River and threw you in, but you
returned, I then again threw you in sack and all with a stone, but you still
returned, and then I finding that the water had no power over you, tried what
the fire could do and intended here to burn you, but I think to no purpose, for
I see you are come out again, yet I will once again try what I can do, and
thereupon he seized on the traveling Knight, and threw him horse and all into
the fire, and their stayed tell they were burned.

By this time it was day, and he having done his work thoroughly as he believed,
returned to his Sisters house, telling her what he had done, and how that at
last he threw him and horse too into the fire, she seemed to admire at it, and
was very well contented with the story, and having treated her Brother with
good drink and victual, and many thanks she permitted him (...),

Thus did the (...) woman perform this enterprise, coming off with flying
colors, and the baggage of the field, ^hree considerable baggs of money which
was very welcome to her and her husband, to price up their broken fortunes, and
thus did she often times g^t many of her several woers, till at last she came
off with loss, and thus it was.

Among her many lusty woers, she had one a little dapper fellow for her
servantt by profession a Lawyer, he having a months mind to be dabling with
her, made his addresses to that purpose, he was rich and prodigal, she
covetuous and a niggard of her favors which must be purchased at a dear rate;
he had tried the virtue of his tongue, but it had no virtue at her bar without
that which caused it to speak at the Judges, ready m^n^ was used to oil his
tongue, and that must be produced before she would give the comfortable word
you shall have your desire; but in the end he agreeing to give her what she
desired she consented, but she intended it not, for of all men she liked not
this Handy-prat Lawyer; and therefore intended to serve him as she had done the
three Knights.

She acquainted her Husband with her design, who was willing enough to assist
and take part in the pain, because he was to take part in the gain.

It was a tall sum she agreed upon, 300 crowns which she pretended she would
only borrow for some time, but designed never to pay; the time being come the
poor Lawyer came to the place her own house, and delivered the money, but so
soon as he attempted to take his pleasure with her, he had it with a vengeance,
with a lusty blow laid on between his neck and shoulders, with a large cudgel
that set him a sprawling, as it used to do Conies, there needed not many blows,
nor no sword to dispatch him, that one with the staff was sufficient; so that
he soon kicked up his heel, and went to plead causes in the other world.

They being certain of his death, consulted what to do with his body, which not
being wounded, they resolved on this case, the murdering Husband took him on
his back and carried him to the back side of the Lawyers own house, which was
not far distant, and there being a house of office in the yard, he set him down
on the fear, as if he had been there easeing his body, and thus having placed
him; he there left him, and went home,

The Lawyer had a companion and bedfellow who was acquainted with his love
story, and knew of that nights appointment and therefore did sit up for him, he
having occasion to visit the house of Office, opening the door saw one sitting
there, although he could not imagine who it should be, yet out of modesty he
retired for some time, but attending somewhat longer than ordinary, and seeing
the Party did not come out he again opened the door, and making a nearer
approach perceived that it was his friend the Lawyer: he wondered at his being
there, supposing he was in an another place, wherefore he called him by his
Name* but received no answer; he then believing him to be asl^ep, and resolving
to awake him, pulled him by the C^^t, first s^ftly, and then so rudely that he
fell on the flo r, he seeing that, upon a little further search found that he
was dead.

Our Lawyers Chamberfellow being ready witted, was not long in considering the
matter, but g^^ssed how all had happened, and therefore, resolved to carry the
dead body back to the place from whence he was brought, and thereupon taking
him up in his arms, he went to the house where he had been murdered, and
setting him upright against the door, he there left him and returned to his
lodge ng.

Our Murdress had some occasi^^ ab^ut midnight to go to the door, opening it,
d^wn ^ll (...) b die into the house, to her great amazement and ^^^ble; but when
she broug^^ a Candle, and saw that it was the body of the dear Lawyer, she was
ex^reamly terrified, calling out to ^er Husband, and acquain^^^g him with the
business, he was (...) ^^en troubled as she had bin, but knowing the^ (...) a
^^^^ssi y of doing somewhat, he resolved to c^rry the b^dy and throw i^ into to
the River, he was to pass through diverse streets, but in the midst of his
Journey he heard a noise of People walking and talking; he having a guilty
conscience, and fearing all things stood up at a convenient corner to hear and
see what these People were, it was not long ere they came so near him, that he
could discover by their words and actions that they were night walkers,
shop-lifts, or house-breakers, and that they having met with some pr^ze or
booty, which they had in a sack, were resolved to leave it on a stall, and
retire to a Tavern to make merry.

Our Murderer understanding this, perceaving that they were gone, came from the
place where he had stood up, and examining the Sack, found there was in it two
flitches of Bacon, he was not long in resolving what to do, but taking the
Bacon out of the Sack, put the dead man into it, and placing it on the stall
went home laden with the Bacon. His wife expected his return, but seeing him
laden was ^ff^ighted, thinking he had broug^^ back the body, but he getting in
a doors undeceived her, shevving her the Bacon, and acquain^^ng her how all had
happened, she understanding that they were enriched by an other Priz^ went to
bed, being very well pleased with her evenings work.

The night walkers who had the Bacon, went to the Tavern and drank so long
there that all their money would not pay their reckoning; wherefore they
bethought themselves of selling their Bacon, and having drank their Landlord
to a handsome Pitch, they told him that they had a bargain for him, he asked
what? and they replied Bacon, this is good chaffer said he, if I could see it,
whereupon one of them went to the place where they had left their Bacon, and
soon after returned, and setting down his load they opened the Sack, but
instead of Bacon the Lawyers head appeared. This amazed them all, but the
Vintner more especially, who cried out they had murdered his Neighbor; who
was well known to him, and indeed to all the City: they were as much surprised
as he, and knew not at first what to say, but although he threatened to secure
them as murderers, yet in conclusion they overruled and persuaded him to be
patient, and told him all they knew of the story, and that they took it for
Bacon, and had it in such a place* a Chandlers back house, which indeed they
had plan^red, and that thither they would carry it again. The Vintner
understanding by their discourse that there was a mistake in the case, and
believing that he should only purchase trouble by his meddling in it, and it may
be, be accounted a party, he therefore was contented to be ruled by them and
thereupon they went to the Chandlers house from whence they had the Bacon, and
carried the body and laid it there and so departed. The Chandler at whose house
they had left the body did that morning call up his servant early to carry Corn
to the Mill, to be ground, the servant ariseing and having fitted his horse and
his corn for his journey, had a mind to a breakfast before he went, and a rasher
of Bacon was that which he desired wherefore up he went to the Bacon loft, but
instead of Bacon, he met with the Sack and dead Lawer which tumbling on him,
threw him down, he crying out up went his Master to see what was the matter,
where he found his man tumbling and rolling with a man in a Sack, he wondered to
find a dead man there; but missing his Bacon he supposed they who had took the
one had brought the other, but now it was there he studdied how to be rid of
it; wherefore having brought his man to his little wits, they resolved that he
should carry the dead body with him toward the Mill, and by the way either
drop him or bury him. The servant agreeing to what his Master said, intending
to do so, but falling into company who went the same way, he had not the
opportunity to do it all the way he rode to the Mill, so that being come
thither, and having delivered his Sack of Corn to the Miller, he then hunted
about to find a place where to put the dead body. It was winter time the
nights long and it was not yet day, however the Miller was up and had provided
a Cart load of meal to carry to the City, to sell, the Chandlers man seeing
this took one of the Sacks of meal and taking some of it out, and stuffing out
the sack wherein the Lawyers body was, with it made an exchange and laid the
sack with the Lawyer and meal on the car^, taking the other sack and laying it
on his horse and having his own sack of corn ground, he took that also and
returned homewards.

This wandering body of our dead Lawyer was now on the Millers Cart, who soon
after set forwards to market, and exposing all to sale; but mark how pr^vide^er
ordered the matter to discover this Murder, and the true Act^r^ of it. Our
murderer and his Wife being p^ssessed of a round sum of mon^y, and two
flitches of Bacon, did resolve to have m^re store of prove sion, and lay in
Meal as well as Bacon; and therefore went the next day to market to purch^^e
some; although they came lightly by their money, yet knowing the want of it
they resolved not to part from it easily but buy a good pennyw^rth, and
therefore they examined all the market where to buy ch^^pest, and at last they
pitched upon the Miller who had the little Lawyer in a Sack, that was set down
in the open market, but tied up as a Sack of meal; the woman having cheapned
and tried tha^ the Miller would use her well, agreed upon price for two S^cks
full, one which he opened and another w^^ he warranted to be of the same
goodness but seeing being believing; She caused him to open the Sack, and she
her self thrusting in her hand intending to d^^w (...) handful of Meal; caught
hold of the Lawyers ha^^, she therefore tells the Miller he intended to cheat
her with some worse commodity than Meal, wherefore to be sure, some of the
Meal being taken out the Lawyers head appearing, she cried out; Oh Lord!
hu^band the Lawyer you killed is come again: Although she spoke this in an
affrighted, distracted manner, yet she was observed and notice was taken by
some persons there present and the Lawyers head being seen by the multitude
tha^ gathered together upon this account, caused a great amazment; all
concluded that Murder had been committed, but how strangely none could guess.
The Miller was secured as owning the Sack and Meal, and our murdress and her
husband, although they would have slunk their necks out of the Collar and
denied what she had said, yet they also were seized on and carried before the
Justice.

The noise of this accident was soon spread through all the City, and came to
the ears of our Lawyers Chamberfellow, who knowing somewhat of the truth of
the matter, went to the Justices to hear what would be said of the Whole; but
there was little proof of any thing, till he declared that he knew his
Companion the dead Lawyer, went the foregoing evening to the house of the
murdress whom I may now truly call so; she being supposed to be guilty
therefore she and her husband were both committed to Jayle, and being separated
and put into several Prisons and strictly examined; it was not long before she
confessed the whole fact, and also accused her husband for murdering the before
mentioned three Knights, so that just^ce taking place, they were both sentenced
to dye and accordingly executed.

Thus although this woman pretended to a great height of virtue in preserving
her Chastity, yet was she guilty of a greater crime murher; which was the loss
of all who had any converse with her. Therefore we ought not to give credit to
every seeming virtue, for some Vice may exceed it.

This story or example may be and has been applied to the same purpose as the
former of the Lady of Modena; to show the cruelty and little credit that is to
be given to women, and this or the former preserved the life of Prince Erastus
for one day longer.

CHAP. XIX. The Empress moves the Emperor to proceed to the execution or
Erastus, and to put the seven Philosophers into Prison by a discourse which she
made him of two marvails at Rhodes one of a fire not to be put out, which
however was extinguished by a Scholar. The other of a Colunine wherein might
be seen all passages and actions that were contrived against the Isle of
Rhodes, which wa destroyed by the knavery of three Philo ophers, under p^etence
of finding great Treasures under it, which occasioned the ruin of Rhodes.
ALL matters being ordered according to the agreement made in Counsel, the
Emperor purposed to leave the City and not return to the Empress, (whom he
highly effected) that he might not hear the exclamations she would make in
regard of the from top to bottom: representation of a male figure and female
figure standing next to a sack with a head emerging from the top, nearby four
male figures seated at a table; representation of a male figure standing on a
cart next to a windmill, nearby a saddled horse grazing; representation of a
marketplace, with male and female figures standing around baskets and sacks,
with a head emerging from the top of one; representation of a male figure
lowering a pike on a statue of a male figure holding a drawn bow and arrow,
near them a fire beneath an arch; representation of a pillar supported by
statues of an eagle and a lion, nearby an emperor or king and three other male
figures delaying the execution of Erastus, so that the miserable Princess who
thought of nothing but the death of her Son in law, doubted of that which had
happened; wherefore that she might be informed of the truth, she sent for one of
the Secretaries, whom she had preferred to the Emperors service, of whom she
enquired a particular account of what had passed that morning. The Secretary
gave her a full answer, freely relating all that had been said and concluded
on, so that by this means the Empress was advertized not only how it was
endeavored to bring the cause to the hearing of the Senate, but also all that
the Philosopher Agathus had so freely spoken against her; whereupon she was
very much enraged, and conceived as much anger against the Philosophers, as she
had against Erastus, purposing not to desist until she caused them all to
suffer death, that she might be fully revenged on them, wherefore contriving in
her brain a thousand m^chinations and treasons as mischievous as she could
imagine, she expected all that day when the Emperor should come to visit her.

And having understood that he arrived late, and had not (according to Custom)
come to see her, and discourse with her, she became desperately angry, and
having for some time continued so, but knowing that she lost time, in
expectation of the Emperor, she therefore resolved to go to him,

Having staid till every one was retired, she being accompanied by two of her
Damsels, went to the Emperors Chamber just as he was going to bed.

There she began to sigh and cry, and make the greatest complaints in the
world; she having (as she said) performed all dutiful love to her Husband, as
to her sovereign Lord, yet she was so unfortunate, that (although a reciprocal
love was pretended) she was mocked, and she believed hated, as might be easily
conjectured by the effects: for instead of revenging the injury had been done
to her, he had not only favored him that had deserved the punishment, but also
hearkened to the Counsels of those who had occasioned all this evil; by pretense
of defending their Disciple by false inventions, and fraudulent speeches had
not forborne to speak unworthily of her, and accuse her of that which she never
so much a^ dreamt of, and had been so confident as to persuade the Emperor
that she had caused and procured that against him, which he with his own eyes
had seen acted against her; much wondering that he should so much debase
himself, as before his Counselors to appear so friendly to these traitorous
Philosophers, who made no difficulty; so much to work on his easiness, as to
persuade him that black was white; further adding that she valued not how much
she suffered in the opinion of all the world, so long as she enjoyed his love
and good opinion; which she sound would be difficult to continue, by means of
these men's venomous tongues, who endeavored to possess him with an evil
opinion of her. But she still hoped he would do her justice, in punishing those
who had so highly prejudiced her honor; telling him that if he should refuse
that justice, she could easily have it by other means; for her Relations being
advertized of the great outrages that these Philosophers had spoken against
her, would not let them pass unpunished, but would execute such vengeance as
the persumption and rashness of these Calumniators, and the greatness of her
house did require; nay, she did not question but their revenge would reach
against Erastus himself, in regard he had been so backward in executing justice
for the great wrong which more entrenched upon his honor than hers. But
especially if he should hinder the course of justice, as he had done in only
condemning, and rather giving him the means of escaping by this delay, and
permitting him to live, to the great scandal of the Empire; and truly
(continued she) I foresee to my great grief, that in the conclusion these
wicked men will execute their mal^gnity against your person, to the ruin and
destruction of the C^mmon-wealth, and it will happen to you as it did to
Philarchus King of Rhodes, whose story I would relate to you, if I thought that
my true discourse would b^ as effectual with you, as those false ones of the
Philosophers.

The Emp^r^ur having considered of the complaints of the Empress, made many
excuses, assuring her that the delaying the execution of Erastus was not in any
respect of any desire he had to hinder the course of justice wch-she intended
should proceed not only against his son, but also against those who having the
charge of instructing him in g^od learning and good manners, had it couraged
him by their wicked instructions, to commit that lewdness which they had seen,
and who under pretense of defending him, had spoken so ignominiously against
her virtue: but that the Senate had so pressed him, that he had not power to
deny that which the Laws grant to all Criminals, that is to give them time to
justify and defend themselves, and although Erastus had already had six days
time to defend himself, during which time he had heard nothing absolute to
signify that what he was accused of was not true, as indeed it was, he
therefore purposed not to delay it any longer, desiring the Empress ^o depend
upon his word, that in a very short time she should be revenged of all the
wrongs she had received either of Erastus or the Philosophers; and therefore he
prayed her to relate the story of the King Philarchus, which was a great
Novelty to him, who had never heard any thing thereof; neither had he read any
thing thereof in any History, assuring her that as to his great trouble, he had
been constrained in full Senate to hear the calumnious discourses of the
Philosopher Agathus, so on the other side he should take as great pleasure in
hearing the Narrative of Philarchus.

Although the Empress would not at first consent to give the Emperor this
satisfaction, making excuses that she might cause the Emperor to be the more
earnest, yet in conclusion after much importunity she began as follows.

All people do very well know the great renown which in times past was had of
the City of Rhodes, as well by reason of the Antiquity thereof, as for the
famous University that was there: where all manner of learning did flourish,
and out of this furth^r respect and consideration that the Inhabitants of that
City had by force of arms subdued not on^y all the Island, but also the
greatest part of the adjoy^ing Countries.

There were many rare things in the Island, but principally two that were
admirable and profitab^e, ^^e was of great use and service to the poor, and the
other was for the preservation of the Country. These two mervails were in the
public place, under two great triumphant Arches made of Marble, in one of
which there was a fire, that without any Wood or Goals, or any other fuel did
continually burn, yiedling so great a heat, that the poor Inhabitants who
wanted fire at home, came commonly to this, so that many of the Rhodians spared
making fire in their own houses, having the convenience of warming them selves
at this public fire, just opposite to this fire there was a great statur of
brass, holding in his left hand a Turkish bow, which he had so drawn with his
right, that the very point of the arrow which was drawn to the head, and ready
to discharge, touched the wood of the bow whereon was written.

Strike me not, for if you do,
I have more power to offend than you.
Under the other Arch there was a Column which did shine very bright, and none
knew of what materials it was composed, some supposed it to be of one unknown
stone; others were of opinion that it was composed of diverse metals, but what
ever it was made of, the brightness was so great that it sh^ned clearly under
all the Arch, thi^ Column wa^ supported by four other stutues of brass, made
in the figures of animals, the one was of an Eagle, the other of a Lion, the
third of a Griffin, and the fouth of a Horse. And although this Column was
thus bright and shineing as any looking glass, yet a man could not see himself
therein, neither could one see any thing that was adjoining, as is usual to do
in any other Looking-glasses, or other things that are polished, yet it had
this admirable property ^ that when a^y thing was enterprized against the City
of Rhodes, or when any Prince did raise forces to assault the Rhodians, all
might be seen in the Column, so plainly that you might behold those that made
these enterprises, and by the same means see from what Parts the Enemies came,
for the Rhodians could not in any manner be surprised, for no soo^er was any
thing intended, and contrived against the City, but the Column pres^ntly
discovered it, and therefore the Rhodians were by means of this Column always
provided for their Enemies, it is imp^ssible to tell wh^ was the Inven^or and
Archit^ct of these two Co^umnes, it being altog^ther uncertain, yet it is
supposed that some g^e^t Magiti^n, (for at all times that City has bred men
of kn^wledg, and well experienced in all Arts) made them both; and the Rhodians
were as pr^ud of these two Columens, as of any thing that was in then whole
Country; and yet so great (...) them certainty of all things in the world,
(where nothing is p^rpe^uall) that b^th these marvalous things (...) ^e
de^t^^y^d (...) ^han was convenien^ for the g^^^ of the (...).

Th s Univ^^^^ (...) all the world, wa^ (...) of all N^tions, among oth^^^
the^^ was one who after long stu^y of the cau^^ ^^ the un^^^ti^gu^shable fire
tha^ without wo^d or other materials burned continu^^^y, and having search^d
dilligently, but not fi di^g the natural cause, turning his face he perceived
the ^^r^ing which was in the Bow of the Brazen Arche^^ (...) which I have
spoken, and thinking with (...) h^w it should be possible that an innanimate
and senseless thing, should give a greater blow, than he that should strik
that, wherefore he purposed to make trial, and having taken a halbert, he
struck it as hard as he could against the breast of the Archer; but he had no
sooner given the blow, when the Archer discharged his Arrow directly into the
inextinguishable fire which presently vanished; so that the place became as
cold as if there had never been any fire there; at which the yo^ng Scholar was
amazed, and doubting what would become of him if it were known, that through
his folly the unextinguishable fire was put out, h^ ran away as fast as he
could, having deprived the City of Rhodes of one of the greatest commodities;
and indeed the disturbance occasioned by the loss of this fire was very great,
for all the Inhabitants but principally the poor ones were very much interested
and troubled at the loss; and it was not long after that they lost the other
marvail.

This happened in the reign of Philarchus King of Rhodes, who had a difference
with Nichomachus King of Cyprus, for certain ships which the King of Rhodes had
taken from the Cypriots, refusing to restore them; although the King
Nichomachus had often prayed and solicited the King Philarchus both by
Letters, and Ambassadors; wherefore the King of Cyprus being angry, resolved
to be revenged for the abuse the Rhodians had done him, but he could not raise
any forces, and surprise the Rhodians by reason of the admirable virtue of the
Column, which discovered all to King Philarchus, so that by this means he had
time to prepare for his Enemies; this enmity being between these two Princes,
the one no^ b^ing willing to be at the charge of a War, doubting h^ should lose
his labor, and the other not valuing his Enemies, knowing that they could not
surprise him; three of these under pretense of dispiseing riches, and the
greatness of the world, but had no other end but to make themselves both great
and rich, (such as these Philosophers are, in whom you put so much confidence)
seeing the great gain they might get by the difference between these two
Princes; after they had a long time consulted the matter among themselves, they
went to King Nichomachus, to whom making themselves known to be wise men, (as
they were esteemed) they told him that if he would give them conveniences, they
would undertake to ruin and destroy the miraculous Column of Rhodes, so that
nothing should after that be seen in it, which being done, he might easily
attain his ends of Philarchus; by taking him unprovided; the King of Cyprus who
desired nothing more earnestly, than to have the means to be revenged for the
wrong which Philarchus had done him; assured these Philosophers that he would
not spare for any thing to accomplish this design, though it cost him his
Crown; further promising to give them all that they should ask, if they would
p^rform what they had said, nay, he promised to make them partakers with him in
his Kingdom if they would live in Cyprus; praying and entreating them to
perform it with all speed.

You shall see it in short time answered the Philosophers, but to attain your
desires, you must provide us three Ancient Vessels, which must be filled with
Gold, wherewith we shall in such manner blind Philarchus, and those who have
the keeping of this miraculous Column, that they shall as well be deprived of
that, as they were of the unextinguishable fire, which they had in their City.

The King of Cyprus who was very rich, seeing their demands were so small, said
to the Philosophers, if Gold will finish the enchantment of the Column of
Rhodes, we will easily attain our ends, as your selves shall see; and thereupon
he showed them his great treasure, telling them they might take as much as they
pleased; and that they should fill certain Ancient Vessels which he had
furnished them withal.

The Philosophers having made choice of three Vessels, one made of Earth, and
the other of Brass, and the third of Silver, they filled them with Gold, as
much as a man could carry, and having taken their leaves of the King, they
departed for Rhodes in a Friggat which they had provided, were being landed,
they each of them took one of these vessels under their Arms, going strait to
the City of Rhodes, and being near it they buried one of their Vessels in a
place which they took special notice of; then going into the City, they did
the same with the other two, burying them near to the principal Church of the
City, so ordering the Earth that it could not be discerned, that the place had
been lately diged.

This being done and they having remained some time in Rhodes, and agreed among
themselves how they should accomplish what they had promised the King of
Cyprus; they went, early one morning to King Philarchus, of whom having
demanded private audience, and obtained it, they told him they three were
Brethren, and that they had spent all their time in the study of Sciences, and
obersly in the Art of Magic; wherein they had so well profited, that by the
means of their knowledge, and of certain Sacrifices and Invocations which they
made always; observing the di position of the Moon, each of them saw in the
night time, certain treasure that was buried in any place near unto th^se parts
where they at present did reside; and having known by their Art, that the City
of Rhodes did abound in hidden treasures more than any other place in the
world; they were theref^re come thither to practice their knowledge, which they
had no intenti^n to d^, without first having the License and permission of his
Majesty, entreating him to permit them to make discovery of those hidden
treasur^, which rem^ining under ground were unp ofitabl^ ^o any, p^omiseing to
give him all that should be found, and tha^ he might bestow on them what part
of it h^ should p^^ase.

Philarchus hearing this discourse of the Philosopher, could not at first
believ^ that they were so skilful as they professed themselves to be but having
examined them about other pert^cular affairs, in which he found them knowing,
he changed his mind, and esteemed them to be wise men, as indeed they were so
that he resolved to make trial of their knowledge, in regard that he himself had
heard, that in the Isse of Rhodes (which had always been accounted very rich)
several measure^ had been found out, which had been formerly b^ried in the ^ime
of the wars, and therefore having cour^eously ^^ceaved them, he with cheerful
countenance told them that they were very welcome, offering them lodging in his
Castle, so long as they should please to stay at Rhodes, and that he would take
order for all such necessary provision as they should please to have; they
having very humbly thanked the King, l^dged in the Castle, concluding thus with
him, that so soon as they should understand by their Art that the M^on was in a
condition for them to make their S^crifices and invocations, they would
acquaint the King therewith, so that he with his own ey^s might see the truth
which they had told him. This Philarchus very well approved of, who having took
leave of the Philosophers, caused them to be honorably entertained in the
Castle, commanding the Masters of his house, and all his other Officers and
Treasurers to give them all they they should desire, and to provide all
necessaries for them.

Some days af^^r this the Philosophers told the King Philarchus, th^^ the M^on
was very well disposed for them to make their Sac^^fice^, so that the following
night the youngest of the three would have a Vision and Rev^la^i n.

The King being very gl^d of this advertisement, prayed them to put their
off^irs in so good order, that they might not loose that opportunity, whereupon
these knavish Philosopher^ put on their Priestly habits, and having sanctified
and purifyed him who was to see the vision by persume and holy waters and
h^v^ng made their invocations and Sacrifices, with a world of Ceremonies which
they said were necessary, they wraped him who was to divine, in the skins of
those beasts that they had Sacrificed, and having left him there alone (for
they told the King that it was convenient so to do) they went to rest
themselves, having first assured the King, that the n^xt morning he should
have Intelligence of some hidden Treasure; the King being so near seeing the
experience of the Philosophers promises, was so impatient that, that night
seemed to be a whole year, thinking the day never come soon enough, to make
proof of the truth or falsehood of these three Brothers. So that as soon as day
break he went to the Philosophers lodgings, who making him believe that they
were in contemplation and prayer, did not stir un^ill such time as the King
entering their Chamber, asked how the matter went; whe^eupon these Rascals
feigning to be awaked from a deep sleep, made their obeisance to him, saying
that it would not be long before the D^eamer would come out, whom they must
attend so that they nor no other persons might en^er into the place where he
was. And thereup^n so ^n after the Dreamer came forth from his Chamber,
clothed in his Priestly hab^liments requisite for the visions he was to see.
On a sudden the Philosophers prostrated themselves on their knees before him;
a^vising the King to do the same, saying that this honor appertained to those
who had been all the night in the counsel of the Gods so that they were made
participators of the divinity of those G^ds with whom they had comunicated, and
then after that the Dreamer had caused himself to be adored for some certain
time, he made a sign with his hand that his Priestly habits should be taken
off, and his own put on; then being dressed in his usual Clothes he said to
the King Sir, I bring you good news by the Revelation of the God Pluto, who
has power over all the Treasures that are out of the power and mannagement of
men. I therefore tell you that this night I have seen a Vessel of earth full of
Gold, in a place without the City and yet very near the same, which was hidden
there many a hundred year since; the place is without the Eastern Gate, 333.
paces from the City walls, in a direct line against the Sunrising, so that with
the help of an Astraloble I can easily show you the place where the Treasure
lies: And because according to the Revelation which I have had, this Treasure
is to be discovered at six of the Clock in the morning let us readily pray to
God Pluto for to find us upon the place at the hour he has appointed Assuring
you Sir, that since we find Treasure without the City, that we may very well
expect to find greater abundance within it. The King being joyful to hear what
this Dreamer had said, desired the company to return thanks to God Pluto,
according to the usual Ceremonies, and that he would not fail at the hour
appointed, to be at the place where the Gold was hidden, saying that he would
be there himself, to see the issue of the business, this the Philosophers
approved of that the King finding what they had said was true, should put the
more confidence in them, to believe what else they should acquaint him with, so
that by this means they might execute what they had intended. Having returned
thanks according to their ceremonies they mounted on horseback to follow the
King and principal Courtiers, and they went toward that gate without which the
Philosopher had said the treasure was hidden acording to his relation when they
were come thither, the dreaming Philosopher took an Astrolabe and a Q^adrant
to find out the full ^ast, where he was to pr^ce^d and to measure Geom^tric^lly
the Pac^s between the Walls and the plac^ where the Treasure was to be. And
having dilligently mea^ured it, he assured the King and the Company that in
that very place the Treasure was; and then having inv^^ked the G^d Pluto, he
caused them to dig with fresh assurance that it was the right place. The King
^^^ging to ^ee the truth of this assa^^^, commanded to dig wi^^al diligence,
carefully ob^erving what the Pion^e^^ did do: But it was not long before the
Pione^r^ did discover the Vessel which the King ^eeing, he himself wou^d take
it up to see what was in i^; and finding it to be just as the Philosopher had
said, he r^tu^ned toward the Castle very well satisfied, honoring and
treating the Philosophers with all kindness; hoping by their means to be Master
of a world of Gold. And after he had given them great presents, he e^quired
when they might have another Revelation? to t^is they answered that they must
be governed by the Moon, and that they must wait until another change o^ the
Moon, because the aspect^ of the Moon and Sun, which was requisi^e on this
occasion; happened b^^ once in a month, assuri^g the King that they would
advertise him when the time should come, wh^ in expectation thereof endeavored
to ho^^ur and pleasu^e them in all that he could. In fine, the enc^easing of
the Moon comeing ^h^y acquainted the King that the following night the e would
be a vision, which the midlemost of the three was to be concerned in, and
therefore having per^^^med their o^dinary sacrifice, and observed the same
order that I have before related to you. The next day the King coming to them,
the Dreamer said to him Sir, I have good news, for this day we shall find in
the City twice as much Gold as we found the other day, and having remarked the
place where the Treasure was to be, and found it out by means of the Astralobe
and the Q^adrant, and having used the usual Ceremonies, they began to dig near
the Temple in that place where the Philosophers had buried the two other
Vessels, having placed one much deeper than the other; also the Dreamer had
told that the Treasure which he had seen was contained in two Vessels of Me^tle
whereof the one was richer than the other, and that the richest would be the
deepest in the ground; wherefore after they had for some time dug they began
to discover the br zen Vessel, and following their work as the Philosopher
directed they also found the Vessel of Silver, both which were filled with
Gold. This did so increase the affection of King Philarchus toward these
Rascally Philosophers, that he did nothing without their advice and counsel,
and had them always in his Company commanding that they should be honored as
he himself was.

And now was be in great expectation to see the effects of the third
Philosophers vision, which was to be at the third Moon, and on the other side
the Philosophers thought of nothing more but the means how they should perform
their promise, which they had made to King Nichomachus; acording to which
design they went one morning early to the King, to whom they with cheerful
Countenances told that the Moon was disposed for the vision, so that the
following night they should have the third Revelation which would concern the
most ancient of the three Philarchus being very joyful at this news commanded
that all things requisite for their Sacrifice, should be provided: And now
using greater Ceremonies then ordinary, as the age of the person required, at
their desire every one departed expecting what the Dreaming Philosopher would
say the next morning; after the Sun was up the three Philosophers went to the
Kings lodgings, the Dreamer being in the middle whither being come, he with
smiling countenance said. Sir* g ve me your hand, for I bring you the best news
you have had this long time; know then that in the City, not far from hence
there is a Treasure three times as large as that which we have already found,
and the Vessels that contain it are much more rich than the others: true it is
that there will be some difficulty to come at it, for Pluto seeing the
greatness of the Treasure, has placed it very deep in the earth yet that shall
be but little hindrance, for since it is discovered it will be free.

The place ^here the Treasure it posited, it six hundred paces from the
Palace, (you may take notice that these Rascals had taken the pains privately
to measure the distance which was between the Column and the Palace) di^ectly
toward the South, which was the very place where the Column stood. The King
hearing this news was very well pleased, and pressed the Philosophers to make
have and find out the place; whereupon he went accompanied with diverse Princes
and Lords* where being come the Dreaming Philosopher began to Calculate the
distance of the place by the Astralobe and having marked by the Quadrant the
exact place of the last pace, it happened to be exact^y in the midst of the
Pedestal, and of the Base of the Column, and having measured and calculated
very exactly, he affi^med that the treasure was placed directly under the
Column.

Philarchus seeing this began to be suspicious, so that he looked as white as a
Clout, appearing to be more like a Ghost than a living man, but spoke clearly,
that he would not by no means suffer any digging under the Column choosing
rather to be without the gold and lose all that he already had rather than
hazard the miraculon Column, which might truly be said to be the Column and
prop to the Kingdom of Rhodes; to this the Ancient Philosopher answered, that
truly it would be great imprudence to hazard so rich and so excellent a
treasure as the Column was, which surpassed and exceeded all the treasures in
the world; and that only to gain another lesser treasure which was hidden in
the earth, but if so great a treasure might be attained as that which was
hidden without damageing the m^raculous Column, that then it would be
indiscretion to let it alone there. I dare undertake said he, and so may others
to keep this Column with Timber which I will place round about it, which shall
support it as formerly, that it shall be impossible to damage it, and these
Engines shall be so strong, and so orderly placed, that you may dig under the
foundation as much as you will, without the least prejudice in the world, and
when the treasure is taken from underneath it, a new and better foundation may
be laid, then that which is there now, whereby the miraculous Column may
perpetually perform its office.

King Philarchus hearing this, began to consider, yet being still fearful of
hazarding his rich Column, but withal very desirous to have the treasure which
he certainly believed was underneath; wherefore he desired the Philosopher to
make a case for the Column, as soon as possibly he could, and to provide the
other Engines to support it according to his best skill saying that as he found
the Engines to be strong, he would consider whether he would have any digging
under the Column or not. The Philosopher who desired no more, being very glad
that they had brought the King to this point, in very cheerful manner told him,
so Sir be confident of this, that the Engine which we shall make, shall be so
strong that they shall be not only capable of sustaining the miraculous
Column, but sufficient to support a Tower, so that all the digging that shall
be used under it, shall not move it, but it shall remain as firm as if fixed on
a sure foundation; and thereupon they made an Engine of wood to be as a case to
the Column, so that nothing could harm or touch it, this being done as the
Pyoneers wrought, these Philosophers were very curious that the Column should
suffer no prejudice by dust, and the better to preserve it, they covered that
and the four Animals which served as supporters with clothes, and they filled
all the void places between the Case and the Column with Wool; but these
Traitors privately mixed Pitch and Tar, not permitting any to h^ve a hard in
this p^etended preservation of the Column, and that for fear that their
treason should be discov^red; after this was done they desired the King and
several Engineers to take a view of the Engines they had made to support the
Column; and this view being made, it was agreed on all hands that they might
with safety dig under the Column; whereupon the King was well pleased and
contented, and commanded that without any delay they should proceed to digging;
then the Pyoneers began, but although they d gged all day, yet they found
nothing, nay, they cont^nued their work for part of the night, which the
Philosopher seeing, he pretended to measure and c^lculate with his Astralobe,
and having been dilligent in his calculation, he told the King that the
treasure was yet as deep again in the ground as they had dug; and therefore
it would be convenient to defer the digging until the next morning, assuring
him, that he should then see great matters.

Upon his promise the King retired, very desirous to see this great treasure
discovered, certainly believeing that i^ would be very great; considering that
which had been already found out, and which in conclusion was too great for
him, for instead of a treasure which he thought to find, he lost that which was
of more vain than all the treasures in the World.

The Philosophers having made provision of all things necessary for the
finishing their treason, and being assured of a Friggat, they went about
midnight, when all the world were asleep, to the place where the Column stood,
and having anointed and bedaubed the case and wooden Engine, and all the
Materials about the Column with Oil, Grease, and other ingredients fit to take
fire, they put a barrel of Pitch, Sulpher and other Materials just underneath
the Column, and having set fire to it, on a sudden it made a terrible
execution,

The Philosophers seeing this, and finding all things to be as they desired*
and that the Column could not possibly escape being destroyed, and knowing
they had no more to do at Rhodes, they embarked themselves in their Friggat,
where they had privately conveyed not only their Gold and Silver, but also
several rich things which they had of the Kings; which they easily procured, as
having liberty to take any thing they had a mind to without any contradiction,
for so the King had commanded, and the Mariners plied their Oars so lustily,
that by the next morning they had lost the sight of Rhodes, in which there was
a great uproar; for these Traitors had placed so much wood about the Column,
under pretense of securing it, that it caused so great a fire, that it not only
consumed the Column which was their principal design; but also the Arch of
Marble under which the Column was placed, at the fall of which there was so
great a noise as if the whole Palace of King Philarchus had fallen into ruin;
at the noise of which all the People did run to see what was the matter, and so
did the King too: who now too late saw his Covetuousness, but however he
commanded several things to be done: to see if the Colum might be preserved,
but all his endeavors were ineffectual, for not only the Arch but the Colum
were both wholly ruined.

The people perceiving this, many of them ran with violence to the lodging of
the Philosophers, and there they understood that they were gone, and had
carried much of the Kings treasure with them; and then their suspicion was
cleared that all this ruin came by the only treason of the Philosophers; who
being arrived at Cyprus were welcomed by King Nichomachus, who gave them much
treasure in recompense of their good service, whereby they had empoured him to
be revenged on King Philarchus.

In the mean time the poor Rhodians were very much troubled, that they were
deprived of that which served for a defense, not only to the City of Rhodes,
but to all the Island; and it was not long before their sorrow was increased,
by means of King Nichomachus, who having privately raised great Forces, and
obtained the alliance and friendship of diverse Princes of Natolia, who were
troubled at the power of the Rhodians their Neighbors; fell upon the Isle of
Rhodes being unprovided, and so well prosecuted their intentions, that they
took the City, and King Philarchus had hardly the liberty to avoid the fury of
the war, who from being a powerful Prince, was reduced to the necessity to turn
Schoolmaster, and teach publicly in the Isle of Metolin.

And thus as the unextinguishable fire which was of so great commodity t the
poor Rhodians, was put out by the sottishness of a Scholar, so the City of
Rhodes was taken and pillaged by the cunning machinations of the Philosophers,
and the King of that Island forced to confine himself as a banished man, into
an Island, there to spend the remainder of his miserable life.

To apply this History to the present occasion, I am fearful that the same
calamnities may befall you, since the experience is already begun at Rome;
where I may truly say these 2 marvails were. For I dare boast my self to have
been that fire and burning lamp of honor, which the Ladies and Damsels of Rome
owe unto their husbands, so that from me they might take example of their duty;
but I may say this immortal fire of honor is extinct, not only by the
sottishness, but by the disordinate appetite of a Scholar* who under pretense
of being your Son, i^ your Capital Enemy: and although the integrity of my
faith did make him such resistance, that he did not obtain his will upon me,
yet however the infamy still remains imprinted in the minds of all men,
considering the great delays which from day to day you make to avoid the
execution of that just sentence which you have given against him. The
consideration of which does much trouble me, more out of respect to you than my
self, but my heart is ready to burst to see the cunning contrivances that are
used to ruin and destroy this most firm and strong Column which has served as
a safegua^d both to Rome and all the Empire; being so clee^ that by its
brightness it has frustrated all the designs and enterprises of those who
design to raise arms against the Empire. This Sir is your prudence wherein
formerly every one might see as in a looking glass, that which concerned the
repose of all in general, so that being in its luster, and standing on its
foundation, there is nothing that can prejudice the estate of the Empire;
against which I see several treasons designed, not by three, but by seven, who
have the title of Philosophers, having abandoned themselves to all vices, only
tending to the deliverance of Erastus, that he may take possession of the
Empire before his time; by means of their cursed and pernicious Coun^e^s* to
deprive you of your Estate, that they may at their wills manage the affairs of
the Empire; and because nothing can resist their design, but the Column of
^our prudence they endeavor to undermine it by the various subtle ways which
they use to set all on fire as the other three did; and truly they are not far
from accomplishing their ends; for they have already caused you to doubt of
that truth which has appeared before your eyes: wherefore Sir while you have
yet time open the eyes of your understanding, and do not permit the false and
indirect inventions and machinations of these Traitors, to bereave us with our
honor (which already it much shaken) both of our Estates and lives.

These complaints of the Empress were spoken with so much earnestness, that the
Emperor conceited that all the good advertisements which tho Philosophers gave
him, were to no other purpose but to deceive him, so that he presently
commanded that they should be committed to prison, promising the Empress that
the next day should not pass, but she should see her self revenged both of
Erastus and the Philosophers, and that he did not doubt but that the
Philosophers were Traitors as she had wisely discovered. The Empress being very
well contented appeared more pleasant than usual, and lay that night with the
Emperor, only waiting for the hour, wherein her wicked and perverse desires
should be accomplished by the death of her Son in law, and the innocent
Philosophers.

CHAP. XX. The Philosopher Lencus persuades the Emperor to leave the cause of
Prince Erastus to the Senate, by a Letter which he writ to him, demonstrating
the danger of being guided in any Importunate case by the counsel of a Woman;
and this he made out by the discourse of a Physician of Milain. Who having lost
his only Son by the inducement of his Wife; who hindered him from giving to the
Child in a violent distemper something which the Child demanded, and which the
Physicians had not forbidden, and after finding by experience that the Child by
a certain natural instinct asked for that which would have cured him, out of
despair, he first killed his wife, and then himself.
IN pursuance of the Emperors command, the Guard immediately se zed on the
seven Philosophers, who were chained and fettered, and put every one in a
several Prison, that they might not confer wi^h one another, and they were
told that they must suffer death the n^xt day after the execution of the Prince
Erastus, which was to be performed in the morning, according to the former
sentence. Those w^o had ^he custody of the Prince did likewise discourse after
this manner; so that he heard of it, which did not so much trouble him as the
Detension of his seven Masters who were his faithful Advocates, so that he
could not forbear manifesting by evident signs the great trouble top:
representation of a male figure lying in bed, with a two male figures and a
female figure standing nearby; bottom: representation of three male figures and
a female figure seated at a dining table that he was in; and being reduced to a
kind of despair, he was upon the point of breaking silence, not valuing his own
life, so as thereby hi^ Masters might ^^ape and be discharged; yet con^^^^ing
the necessity of the Caelestial influences, against which it was impossible for
man to resist, and be^ieving that according to the dispositions of the Heavens,
that not only his own life but his Masters consisted in his seven days
silence, six whereof were already passed, he therefore resolved not to speak,
assuring himse^^ upon the great wisdom of his Masters, who would not fail to
find some means to stay the execution of the sentence; although they were
imprisoned. In hopes of this although there was but little probability; he
endeavored to comfort himself. The Philosophers on their parts were as much
troubled, being out of hope of life, which did not so much trouble them, is
that they had no way to d^fend the poor innocent Erastus.

But above all the Philosopher Lencus, whose turn it was to defend the Prince
Erastus the seventh day, he was much troubled, for he had prepared so
patheticall an Oration, that although the Emperor should be never so
obstinate, yet he assured himself by his Oration to move the Senate and People
to take the young Prince out of Prison and secure him for some time, till the
Emperors anger should be over. But now he being secured in a Prison where his
Oration would be to little purpose he was so dejected that he was alm^st out of
his wits; yet however he did intend to do his utmost for his young Master, and
in regard he had not the convenience of speaking, he resolved to write to the
Emperor, and having Pen, Ink and Paper, he thus began.

TO the Emperor Dioclesian, one of his faithful Counselors sends greeting.
The duty which oblieges all men to serve each other, and the truth of which I
have always made profession, together with the fidelity which I owe to my
sovereign Lord and Prince, has constrained me Sir, to declare to you by
Writing, that which with a good will I should have spoken by word of mouth: The
matter being of such importance, that your honor and reputation and quiet of
the Empire depends thereon; you being established in the Government thereof,
ought not only to give audience to those who demand it, but it is also
convenient for you to change your mind, when it contradicted by reason; for
that man who has the mannagement of public affairs, ought not to be stiff
in his opinion but to alter his mind as often, as to the public good it shall
appear to be necessary; and if he ought to be thus observant in affairs of
small importance, how much more is an Emperor engaged in great affairs, nay in
those wherein consist the safety or ^uin of the Empire; and I question not but
you will do so, provided you will lay aside your passion which every M^gistrate
ought to do; and have patience to read what I now write unto you, not for my
particular interest but out of respect to your self who are my Sovereign
Prince, and for the consequen^^ which may happen to the Empire, the repose and
good whereof entirely depends upon that which is now in question; for as
justice causes Common wealth and Empires to increase, so on the contrary where
iniquity and inordinate affections reign and where justice is wanting, all
things go from bad to worse. And of this we every day see a world of
experiences which are manifest enough to us all; and we are sure that there is
no Monarchy nor Empire so firmly fixed, but injustice in short time destroys it
which entering the breast of a great Estate produces most dangerous fruits and
ffects: Now no person is more remarkable than an Emperor; and if histories
which have made so great matter of the severity of Br^tus and ^orquatu^, who are
so m^morable for their cruelty although when they put their Children to death
it was for violating the Laws. With what ^nfamy then will the Emperor
Dioclesian be noted for putting to death his only Son without hearing any thing
in his defense, which is a thing contrary to all Laws and ordinances, humane
anal divine; for there is no Nation so Barbarous, to execute a Criminal
without giving him a competent time to Justify himself.

Is it then possible that the Emperor Dioclesian who has always been esteemed
a just Prince, and an observer of right shall now introduce a custom so
inhumane and cruel as this. If the authority of the Senate does not at all move
you, or if you doubt that Prince Erastus shall escape while you proceed
orderly, are not your Prisons strong enough, and well guarded with Soldiers, is
there any ^enato^s Prince or Barron, to whom you have been pleased (...) sp^^k
of this affair, who has not endeavored to divert you from t^ is hasly
execution, and none hastens you therein but the venomous rage of a woman by
whose counsel a Roman Emperono can get nothing but blame, let the Counsel be
never so good; and therefore what infancy will you procure to your self to use
contrary to all reason so great cruelty at the only persuasions of a woman.
Know Sir, that women are made to serve men, and not to counsel them and he who
is ablutely governed by their counsel shall in the end to bis damage repent
thereof; for although a woman is desireous to give good counsel, yet the
imbecility of the sex causes their counsel always to happen to the worst as
not long since it happened to a Physician; which story be pleased to read.

It is not long since that at Millain there was a Physician named Polictetus in
very great esteem of all, as well by reason of his wealth, as for the opinion
which every one had of his knowledge; so that he was esteemed the principal and
most famous Physician of Millain, and indeed he deserved this title, having
performed many almost incredible Cures.

This Physician had for wife a Damsel of Millain named Flaminia who was one of
the principal families of that City, by whom he had one only Son, and no other
Children. But although nature had been niggardly in giving him but one, yet in
recompense she was very liberal, having formed this Child so fair and of so
gentle a spirit that it was pleasant to behold him, for being but seven years
of age, he gave hopes not only to his Father and Mother, but also to all that
beh^ld him, that in time he would be a great personage and of reputation; for
which cruse his Father l^ved him more then his own life and caused him to
beinstructed and exercised in all exercises, as well of the body as the mind,
proper and convenient for that age; finding him very well disposed to Sciences,
well formed in his body, strong in his members as having never been sick.

It happened when he was nine years old, he fell into a distemper which in the
beginning seemed to be small; which his father seeing would take the advice of
other Physicians, although he himself was esteemed the first; for fe^r his
affection in his own case should deceive him. Having therefore brought two of
the most experienced Physicians of Millain to his house he recomended his Son
to them; however he himself took notice of what they ordered. This disease of
the Child which at the first was small and slight, did daily increase so that
instead of diminishing, by means of the remedies, which were given yet he every
day grew worse and worse, and thus it continued for a months time; all which
time the Physicians did all that was possible according to Art, for the health
of the Child, without perceiving any amendment but or the contrary he was the
worse for every thing they give him: The poor father was almost desperate and
so were the Physicians, who now resolved to g^ve him no more Medecines, but
only to comfort and fortify nature by restoratives, that he might live as long
as he could, being out of hopes of restoring him to his former health; the
Child finding himself as sick as his heart could hold, desired them to give him
a white Onion to eat; to this the Physicians would not consent, in regard an
Onion is contrary to a feavour, and yet all the while the disease increased so
much the more did the Child cry out for an Onion, saying if they would not give
him a white Onion he should dye.

The Physicians seeing there was no other remedy for him agreed that he should
have an Onion, more to content him then any thing else, saying that, that could
not do him much prejudice considering the violence of his distemper; and having
sent for a white Onion to give him, the Child's Mother another came into the the
Chamber, who seeing them about to give him an Onion, fell into the greatest
passion in the world; saying that this was to kill her Child, and that she
could not endure it to be a Murdress of her own blood, and she made such a
noise to her husband, and the other Phisicians, that the Onion was not given to
the Child, whereupon the Child took it so to heart, that he did not languish
long before he dyed, still even to death crying out after his Onion.

The Father and Mother were as much grieved a^ can be imagined, having no other
Child but his wherein was all their comfort, and being out of hopes of having
any more, after the death of the Child, the Phsitians were desirous to op^n the
body, at this the Father was was well contented, being desirous to know the
cause of that distemper, which no Physic had power to cure, he being then
opened, there was found on the b^^tom of his stomach, near to his heart, a
piece (...) Ice hard as Crystal, at which they were all astonished, to see
water thus congealed in a humain body, and they all agreed that there was no
c^^^^g of him, but by things proper to desolve the (...) ^ol; and that the
Child dyed for want of such Remedies, the poor Father who always had his Son
before his eyes, in respect of the great love he had for him, that he might
have some mark and token caused this Crystal to be enchased in the haft of a
knife, which he usually carried about him upon all occasions, and when he drew
it, he always kissed the Crystal in memory of his Son; and thus it passed for
a whole year, but on that very day twelve month that his son dyed (whether by
chance or that Nature was willing to show the greatness of its secrets) this
Physician being at the Table, had a mind to eat a white Onion, one being
brought him hercut it in to pieces with his knife, and having tasted a slice or
too, he asked for drink, and let his knife fall on part of the Onion that was
on the Table, but he had no sooner drank, when going to take his knife, he
found it without a haft, for the Crystal that wa^ fixed thereon was dissolved,
and diligently searching the cause, he knew that the virtue of the Onion had
desolved the Crystal into water; wherefore being a wise man, he conjectured
that his Son by a secret instinct of Nature, was so importunate before he dyed
to have a white Onion, as being the sole remedy, and only expedient for his
disease, so that understanding that he had caused the death of his only Son, by
denying him an Onion, only at the persuasions of a woman, contrary to the
directions of him, and the other Physicians, he took his knife in one hand, and
the piece of the Onion in the other, saying with sighs and tears, Ah poor and
unfortunate Father, you now see the great evil, which you have caused; this day
it is just twelve months, that by my own fault I lost my only Son, and that I
might know my misfortune, the Heavens have this day made me see it; who will
not blame my sottishness, knowing that I have caused the death of my only Son,
by following the directions of a foolish and distracted woman. Now I know it
but too late, that Nature showed her self as bountiful in preserving my Son, as
she was liberal in bestowing him upon me; behold the sign, behold the Crystal
dissolved, by virtue of the white Onion which my poor Child so often desired to
have, but in vain, whereat Nature being angry, has made me understand and know
to take such vengeance of me as I deserve; and to serve for a perpetual example
to all men, not to give credit to this sotteri^s and malignities of their
wives; my Son being dead, who otherwise by the course of Nature might have
lived long, shall I live? I who have caused his death? It shall not be so, I
cannot endure my self, such a mischief shall not go unpunished, and on a sud^in
when he had spoken thus, he thrust the kni^e which he held into his wives
b^ea^, and ^hen did as much to himself; and that with such quickness, that
those who were present, and who melted in tears, thus to hear the poor Father
complain, did not mind him, and much less had the means to hinder what he did.

This was the end of poor Polectetus, who to his great prejud^ce found the
danger of being governed by the counsel of a woman; for if the counsel of a
woman be bad, when she thinks to do well, as it was with the poor Flaminia,
what is it then when she is moved with rage and fury.

The means which the Empress uses upon this account I shall let pass, because
Sir your Majesty is best acquainted therewith: but I dare say and affirm, that
if you suffer your self to be over ruled by her, and cause your Son to dye,
without well considering of the matter, I doubt nor but it will happen to you,
as it did to Polictetus, and it may be worse; and yet I do not conclude that
Prince Erastus ought not to suffer death, if what he is accused of be found to
be true, and that the Philosophers escape death who instead of instructing him
in virtuous courses and good learning; have rendered him so unnatural, and given
to sensuallity. Yet however I once again urge, that in this point you do not
depend upon the sole words of a woman, nor to those who on this occasion are
transported with passion, as you your self are, for the wrong you think you
have received; which if it should be true there should be no torment nor pain
how great soever, which should not be thought li^^l^, in comparison to such an
excess; But all those who know and are acquainted with the virtues, and great
continence of young Prince Erastus, are of another mind. And therefore not only
to content your mind, as belongs to so great a Prince as you are; I pray,
Exhort, and Counsel you to leave this affair to the Senate. And in case Prince
Erastus be found guilty of the fact, that he dye miserably by the hand of
justice, and with him the seven Philosophers, who have instructed him so
wickedly; and on the contrary if he be found Innocent, that his Innocence he
not oppressed. And do not think Sir, that I say this to prolong this cause, and
by this means escape death, for I only desire three days time for the
Philosophers; in which time if they do not clearly make appear the Innocence of
your Son, and if he himself do not Justify himself wi hin that time, that he
be put to death, and with him the seven Philosophers, beginning with me Lencus,
who have writ this present Letter; not having at the beginning put the name of
him who sent it, lest (considering the great hatred you bear to us) you should
refuse to read it, seeing it directed by one of us; and therefore wonder not
Sir, at what I send you word, that your son shall Justify himself; for the
cause of his not speaking hitherto comes not by any natural default which he
has, neither is it occasioned by the accident for which we are deteyned, but it
is caused by a certain great Mystery and secret, which you shall understand
from him within two days if you have the patience to let him live so long:
Praying the Gods that your life be long and happy.

This is the Story or example which Lencus the Philosopher did write, and send
in a Letter to the Emperor, and as I find it in the Originals Italian and
French; but others say it was an other Story, which I thus relate to you.
A woman having buried her husband is resolved to dye in his Vault and will
therefore stay with his body. A Soldier (who is appointed to Watch a Rogues
body, that was hanged on a Gibbet) comes to the Vault to the woman, persuades
her to drink and eat, and enjoyes her; in the mean time the Rogues body is
stolen from the Gibbet. The Soldier is distracted being to dye for his
neglect; he therefore attempts to kill himself but the woman hinders him, and
helps to hang her husbands body where the Rogues was.

A Gentleman of Rome who was blessed with a large estate, had for his sole
heir, or Daughter of an incomparable beauty and Ingenious Soul, and having been
careful to give her virtuous education, she by that Addition had so honorable
a fame, that all the young men of quality in those parts became her Suitors;
but it being impossible for her to be the lawful prize for them all, she at
length was so importunatly courted by one, that she was espoused to him. He who
was thus happy in her love and enjoment was a Gentleman, in whom nothing was
wanting that could be req^ired to make him accomplished and amiable, especially
in her eye, who loved him with equal ardours, and thought of no felicity, but
in his mutual affections and Society, so that all men (his envous. Rivals only
excepted) expected from so fare an Union, would proceed all mortal happiness in
perfection. But observe the unconstancy of humane felicity, these two Lovers
had not long enjoyed each other when fate (seldom long favorable to Lovers)
steps in and divides them, by the Eternal divorce of death; translating the
husband into an other life, and leaving the Widow almost liveless, for so had
her grief made her, and nothing kept her from using violence on her self, that
she might enjoy him in the Elysium shader but the desire of seeing him laid
into his Tomb, with such Funeral Pomp and solemn obsequies, as were agreeable
both to her sorrow and his quality; and that affair being once over, she
resolved that it should not be long ere her Spirit were remitted to his, to
regain that content in the other World, which had been ravished from her in
this; and to perfect this resolution she made a rigorous vow that she would
receive no nurishment to continue her in this world, but by her abstinence
hasten her to the other; and thus she continued for some days and nights,
notwithstanding the importunities of her relations, and the necessities of
nature urged her to comiserate and relieve her self: And as if this had not
been sufficient to exalt her sorrows, she goe^ privately into the Vault where
her husbands body remained, and siting down on the damp earth, fixed her eyes
upon his Coffin as the proper object of her distracted fancy. At the same time
that this her husbands Corpse was deposited in a Tomb in the earth a notorious
Malefactor was condemned to the Gibbet and his body to remain hanging in the
air that it might serve for terror and example to all oath criminals and that
all spectators might abhor his crimes and lest any of the vilains relations or
confederators, should take down the carcass by night; Proclamation was made to
forbid it, and a guard of Soldiers ordered to watch it, with no less penalty
than death, to those that should neglect their duty; and the night being come,
the Soldiers thinking one would be enough to watch the Gibbet: they cast lots
who should perform that duty, while the others went to a Tavern hard by to
secure themselves from the cold; they being gone, our Sentinal applied himself
to perform his duty, but he finding it to be cold, and believing none would
hazard their lives to steal away the carcass of a Rogue: he bethinks himself of
shelter and rest, and remembering that there was aspacious arched Vault, he
retired thither and being entered he saw a weak light, that was at some
distance, wondering thereat but being confident and bold he went thitherwards
and perceiving a woman in a mournful dress, but with a countenance far more
mournful, siting on the ground and casting her eyes upon a Coffin. He admires
the object, which indeed deserved admiration (being as I told you our desolate
Matron) who notwithstanding all her sorrow, did discover a certain charming
luster such as is wont to strike respect and adoration into the hearts of the
beholders; and cannot be concealed by the most altering disguise of the
greatest passion. At this sight he was so amazed that he wanted not much of
becoming a Statue: But he resuming his courage, and being about to speak to
her, she lifting up her eyes saw a man or Ghost standing before her; and
although at first she was startled, yet her grief and melancholy had not so
deprived of her courage, but that she soon spoke to him after this manner.
Friend said she (and certainly you can be no other to me who have no enemy but
life) have you any thing to say, if you have speak freely, for I am not afraid
of the worst news you can bring fate has shot the cruelest of all its arrows
already, all that are to follow will be but favors, my misery is already so
great, that it cannot admit of any addition. Lo here (pointing to the coffin)
nere lies my heart dead and cold as marble; and I am only here to prepare my,
self to attend that shade, who by this time expects me; if your coming hither
was by chance, I pray be gone and leave me the peace of this solitray place fit
for mourners, therefore lest you be guilty of a Profanation; leave me to
accomplish the sacrifice my fidelity and vow oblige me to offer in this place;
she having uttered her mind the Soldier soberly replys: That no design but
chance had brought him thither, that the sight of a woman at that time, and in
that place and posture had, caused his admiration and raised a curiosity to
satisfy, which he had approached her, that if he had disturbed her in any
thing, he begged her pardon; that he conceav'd himself innocent of any offense
to those dead bodies, he not in the least purposing to violate their
Sepulchers; and lastly, if his presence were troublsome to her, he was ready to
depart, but withal he offered all the succor he was able to afford, which though
mean; yet he desired her to accept of, and if his life might be serv^cable to
her she might freely command it. The Matron observing the habit and arms of
her visitant, and perceiving him to be a Soldier, had spoken somewhat roughly
to him and expected as rude an answer, but seeing him so courteous in his
speech and intending to give him thanks and dismiss him in order thereto arose,
but her tongue and legs both failed her, and she suddenly sank down in a
swound, falling on her husbands Coffin; which the Soldier seeing took her in
his arms and bending her body poured a little wine into her mouth which he had
in a bottle to comfort his own Spirits, and now proved very comfortable to her,
for in short time she gave some signs of a recovery; he seeing the effects of
a little Wine, and being unproivded of any better Restauratives, again made use
of his bottle; and forcing some more of the Liquor down her throat it wrought
so well and had such good effects on her weak body, that she opened her eyes,
had the use of her legs; but being still weak she to rest them, sat down upon
her husbands Coffin.

The Soldier seeing the success of his endeavors, was glad that he had been so
well accomodated with Liquor; and believing that V ctuals would also be very
necessary for strengthening of his patient, and he being provided of some which
he had in his Knapsack about him, he therefore takes it out, and in an humble
manner and in as decent a posture he offers it to her, entreating her to be so
Charitable to her self, as to refresh her weak body with such as he was t^ere
furnished withal; he seeing her somewhat attentive to what he said, used more
arguments to persuade her and although he was no Philosopher or Orator, nor
his head so well furn^sh'd wi h p^rsw^s^ve arguments as his Kn^psack and bottle
had been of p^ovisi^n; yet the effects of the win^ and i^ s m^de^t though
homely discourse, did in the (...) prevail with her to taste of his homely v
ctuals, and having eaten moderately thereof, the air of her countenance was
changed and her face which had been so cloudy was now clear, pleasant, and
cheerful: ^he man observing this alteration and believng it was n^c^ss^^y to
use some arguments to bring her to a true u^der^^anding of her condition he
therefore tel^ her that (...) sorrow was to be used for the decease of our
rel^tio^ and ^^^^ds, yet it was to be bounded and moderated by reason which if
we once laid aside or exceeded we became like the brute B^asts and indeed worse
being unnatural to our selves, without doing any good, or availing any thing to
the benefit of the dead; as to recalling them to life again, and hazarding and
endangering our own, contrary to the laws of Nature whereby every one is
obleidged to endeavor their preservation as much as in them lies, and if she
had designed any thing against her own life (as he doubted she had) she ought
instantly to retract it, for as murder was the greatest crime humain nature
could be guilty of, so much the more criminal were they that should be
murderers of themselves, and that it was so detestable a crime that it was
dangerous to presume that heaven would be so merciful as to satisfy it; and
that it was most certain the Ghost of her Husband could receive no satisfaction
thereby, but be rather displeased, since if he loved her when living he could
not allow of any violence she should offer to her self, but rather ab^or the
society of so great a Criminal.

The woman hearing that her visitant had done, replied, that indeed his
discourses Were true, but she had such a subject of sorrow, as was not (...) be
parralled her loss had been so great th^^ ^lthough her grief were so too, yet
she rather deserv^d pity and excuse, than to be reprehended or condemned, and
this short speech was accompanied, not only with a deludge of tears, but
another fit of fainting; the man of War and Physic, for at this time he had
acted the the Physician, seeing his Patient so far from being cured, that he
feared a relapse; had immediate recourse to his only Medicine the Antidote of
the bottle, and holding up her head with one h^nd, with the other he drencheth
her with a conside^ a ^e dose o^ the remaining licquor which was ^o sooner in
her stomach, but she finding the warmth and vigor of it, was at it were
reannimated, the fountains of her tears stopped, her forehead smoothed, and her
face reduc^d to her Native sweetness, and this last draught did not only effect
thus strangely on her body, but her mind also seemed to be perfectly restored
to its ancient mildness and tranquillity, for as if a new soul had been infused
into her; she became the most affable, complaisant and cheerful Creature in the
world, and indeed there was not only a change of humor, but also a perfect
metamorphosis of her Person, that she seems not to be the same woman; for
instead of a sorrowful widow which she lately was, she now appears to be a
most pleased and contented Bride. Her forehead seems to be smoothed, d lated to
a graceful largeness, and spread with a sanguine dye. Her eyes though little
more than half open, yet sparkling with luster, and their amiable whites turned
upward, and yet by stealth casting glances on her Visitant (such as dying
persons and lovers in the ecstasy of delight are observed to us^.) Her lips
were swelled with a delicious vermillion ^^ncture, her cheeks overflowed with
pleasing blushes, her head a little d^clining as when modesty and desire have a
secret confl^ct, and she is wholly poss^ssed with an impatient, though gentle
dispute, and her spirits being highly agitated within so there was an effusion
of them upon the outward parts, a temperate and balmy sweat, extilling from the
Pores of her snow white skin; so that there was reason to suspect that this
Matron (although still in the Cha^nel house, and sitting upon the coffin of her
dearest all, whom she so lately lamented with so much violenc^) she I say we
may suspect to be in Love, and that she now burns as extremely in the flames of
amorous desires of the Sold^er, as she was lately frozen in the Ice of sorrow
for her husband: her looks and gestures betray her and all the airs of high
content and pleasure appear in her face: and that she may taste of those joys
^he so much desires, she throws her self into the Soldiers arms she emb^ac^th
him, she k sses him and wi^h that violence as if she were unsati^fied with the
bare touches of his lip^; and l nged to leave the impression of hers upon them
and when she had feasted her lips with touching, (...) feasted her eyes with
beholding their bel^ved obj^ct; in a word there is nothing of liberty,
dalliance, caresses and indearments, which this sportful woman does not use to
make herself grateful and charming to her new Gallant, and to kindle fresh
desires in him, so that we may conclude one of the Daughters of the beautiful
Venus, is now sporting with one of her beloved Mars's his Sons, and that in
the height of Solace; neither was the Soldier wanting for being sensible of the
Magic, of her wanton enticements, he is soon armed for an encounter, which
being to be done in the dark, let us seasonably avert our eyes and leave these
Votaries quietly to finish their Cytherian Rites they are going about;
especially since their Zeal is so Fervent, as not to scruple the Nicietie of
making the dead H^sbands Coffin the Altar; whereon to kindle and exhale the
Incense they have brought. Thus you see here was a great and sudden change in
our Matron, who is no longer Mourner or Widow.

I shall not trouble you with a large discourse of what should be the cause of
this sudden and prodigious Metamorphosis; some attribute it to the Mutability
and Levity of women's nature in general, considering the softness and tenderness
of their constitution, is such as renders them like wax, capable of any
impressions; but we have daily examples of the constancy in affection of some
women; who will loose their lives in defense of their honor, so that I will not
attribute this Mutability and Levity of women to be general to all women, nor
that this was the only cause of our Matrons Metamorphosis, for some impute it
to the force of the wine the Soldier gave her, but I suppose this can at the
most be reckoned to be but an Accessory, and not the principal Agent; for the
quantity she drank, though it was sufficient to renew her spirits, cherish her
vitals, warmeth and quicken the motion of her blood, yet was it too little to
intoxicate her brain* and inflame her to the height of desires; so
inconsistent and contrary to the fridgid temper and low condition it found her
in, and as to the quallity, though good wine be the milk of Venus, yet does it
s^ld me work effect^ally that way, but where it meets with boys pr^disposed to
admit, and concur with its sprightly and heightning influence, wherefore it
cannot consist with reason to aggravate the facility of this woman, and
transfer it wholly upon the innocent means of her refreshment, and recovery:
so that the Mutability and Levity of women in general, and the eff^cts of wine
not being the cause; I know not what else to attribute it unto, or charge it
upon a^ Love in general, which we know is the Author of many wonderful
Advetnures, and is a kind of Magic; against which Nature has given us no
power of resistance, and which mastereth the greatest and wisest men in the
world, as may be proved by a world of examples, which I shall omit, and return
to the Matron, and her beloved Soldier, who by this time had satisfied hers
and his own desires, and now after his pleasure in the Vault, was desirous to
know how his business at the Gibbet stood, which although he found standing in
the place he left it, yet the body was removed, this was a sight as unpleasing
as that of his Mistress had been pleasant; and he now becomes more despairing
than she had been, and he strives more to destroy himself, than he had hefore
to preserve her. Being distracted with horror at the Gibbet, he returns in a
horrible posture to the Vault, and there without speaking he falls to acting:
one while he casts up his eyes that flame with fury, beats his breast, tears
his hair, stampeth upon the ground, and uses all the gestures of a man
transported to perfect madness, which sudden and violent passion; another
while he stands unmoved and silent, fixing his exe^ upon the earth, as if ^e
were consulting the infernal spirits what to do with himself; he exclaims
against heaven, despises fate to make him more miserable, reproaches Fortune
for her giddiness, Curses his Malevolent Stars, renounceth Providence;
sometimes he condemns his own negligence, and then he reflects upon the
innocent woman, a the unhappy occasion of his wretchedness, and thinki^g he had
met with the true cause of his mischief, he interpretates all the plagues in
Nature upon the heads of the whole Sex, and vomits out these blasphemies
against them.

Ah Women, women (says he) why did Nature make you, unless, repenting the
perfection she had given to man, she found out you to lessen it? For, Man who
otherwise would be more than half Divine; only by being obnoxious to the
corrupt temptations of Woman, is made less than half Human. What misery ever
befell him, in which Woman had not a hand? What crime did He ever commit; to
which she did not incite him? What Tragedy has at any time been acted in the
theater of the world, in which a woman had not her part? what war, what
desol^tion, what ruin has not found its beginning in that mischeivous s^x? How
many mighty Nations, flourishing K ngdomes, prosperous Commonwealths, populous
Cities, and noble Families, have owed their destruction, to either the Malice
or Pride, or Lust of Woman? What are you Women, but the poison of Man's
Innocence and Peace, which Nature has guilded-over with a splended outside,
that we might swallow it down with the less suspicion? all your beauties, all
your ch^rms are but like the Apples of Sodom, which have fair and inviting
rinds, and yet within are nothing but stinking d^^^; you are the true Sirens,
that enchant us with the melody of your voice, and then hold us captives in the
chains of beastial slavery. You are the true Hiena's, that assure us with the
fairness of your skins; and when folly has brought us within your reach, you
leap upon us, and devour us. You are the traiters to Wisdom; the impediments to
industry; the obstacles to honor; the softners of top: representation of the
corpse or body of a male figure hanged from a gibbet or gallows with a soldier
holding a pike standing nearby, and a female figure in a vault; middle:
representation of two male figures lowering the corpse or body of a male figure
from a gibbet or gallows, and a female figure and a soldier in a vault; bottom:
representation of an empty gibbet or gallows with a female figure and a soldier
in a vault courage; the perturbers of Tranquillity; the cleg; to virtue, and
goads that drive us all to vice, impiety and ruin. You are the Fool's Paradise,
the wisemans plague, and the grand Error of Nature. What, What shall I say? I
want words to express your pravity; as I did my reason when I set my foot into
this unlucky, this fatal place. Having thus belched out this virulent invective
against poor innocent women (who deserved much better language at his hands)
his wild imagination, (which catches at any thing) wheels about, and he thus
vomits the remainder of his choler upon himself.

What damned spirit was it that conducted me into this Charnel-house, and made
me quit my duty? where was the care and vigilance of my good Angel, when he
left me to be seduced into this dismal vault? would I had fallen into a den of
Lions and Tygres, when I lighted upon this woman here: then had dyed innocent,
and without dishonor; whereas now I have contracted a guilt, whose punishment
is an infamous death, and that inevitable, unless I prevent the stroke of
justice, and become my own Executioner. Which being the only refuge my disaster
has left me, why am I thus slow in addressing my self unto it? why do I waste
that time in weak and fruitless complaints, which I ought to employ in
delivering my self from the extremity of misfortunes, that is yet to come? dye
I must, by sentence of the magistrate; why then should I defer to fall by my
own hand? to vindicate ones self from extreme, and otherwise inevitable
Calamity, by Sui-cide is not certainly) a crime: but an act of Heroique
Fortitude.

I am resolved therefore, my sword shall prevent the ignominy of the Gallows,
and by forcing open the Gates of death, I will stop up the way to public shame.

Here, he puts a period to his desperate Harangue, and hasting to put one to
his life also, he suddenly draws his sword; and beginning to set the hilt of
it upon the ground, that he may cast himself upon the point, he is most
seasonably prevented by the pious Matron. Who being all this while ignorant of
the cause of his fury, has been wholly possessed with amazement at the
extravagant effects of it; so that she minded not a word of all those bit^er
reproaches he had cast forth against her whole Sex: but quickly roused out of
the stupifying fit of wonder, wherewith she had been invaded, by seeing him
draw his sword; she throws herself into his arms; and partly by grasping his
hands, p^^tly by the charms of her kisses tears, and entrea^ies, she so far
becalm's his rage, as that he seems not unwilling to p^^rouge at least the
execution of that self-assasination, he intended, until he had convinced her of
the necessity of it.

He tells her therefore in short, that the body of a certain notorious villain,
which he had been appointed to guard, was taken from the G^bbet, and conveyed
away; that the penalty of the like death 'denounced by the Governor against
him and his fellows (who had transferred the whole charge upon his care and
vigilance) was certain and inevitable, unless he hilled himself, by way of
prevention; that if she could have any sentiments of kindness for so
unfortunate a wretch, as this sad accident had made him, there was now no way
left for her, to express them, but by permitting him q^ietly to pervert the
infamy of a public execution, by a private withdrawing himself into the other
world; and that it was some content to him, in this his Agony, that he should
leave his body to be dissolved into the same dust with that of her former
Lover, of whose singular worth fame has defused so honorable a report. And
having thus hastily delivered to her the cause of his desperate resolution, he
begins again to free his hands of the encumbrance of hers, that he may speedily
effect it.

But good and tender hearted Creature! her affection was too great, to suffer
her to yield to any thing conducing to his death; and the more he strives to
dis-engage her breast from his, the closer she clings to him; vowing withal,
tha^ if he wounded himself, it should b^ by forcing the sword first through her
body, to which she added, that she would not live to be so miserable, as to
loose so dear a person so soon and in the same place, where she had been so
happy to find him unexpectedly; that very gratitude forb^de her to consent to
the taing away his life, who had lately and miraculously preserved hers, and as
(she had some reason to believe) infused a new life into her; that it would be
less affliction to her, to die before him, than to survive and behold at once
the dead bodies of two persons, each of which she had loved infinitely above
her own life; and that the death he so much dreaded from the Hangman, was not
so unavoidable, as his fears had made him imagine, but there were other ways
of evasion, besides self murder, and would he but follow her advice, she
doubted not to put him upon such a course as should procure both his own
security and her content. The Soldier more effectually w^ought upon by this
last clause, than by all else she had said; and remembering the old saying, that
Women are always more subtle and ingenious at Evasions, in sudden Exigences
than Men: he easily promise h (as who would not in his case?) to listen to her
C^unsel, and pursue it also, if it appeared reasonable.

Well then, says this Good woman; since the body of the best and greatest of
Mortals, is but a lump of clay, after the departure of the Soul, which gave it
life sense, and motion; that all Relations are extinguished in death, all Piety
is determined in the grav^: and that it is but Charity to use the Relics of
the Dead, in case of necessity, to preserve the Living: why should not I
dispense with the formality of post hume-respects to the putrefying Corpse of my
deceased Hu^band, and make use of it for the preservation of my living friend,
with whose life my own is insep^rably bound up, and whose danger therefore is
equally mine? come therefore my Dear and let us take my Husbands body out of
his Coffin and place it upon the Gibbet, in the room of the Malefactors, which
you say has been stolen away. Death (you know) does so change and disfigure
the Countenance, as to disguise it from the knowledge of even the most familiar
acquaintance. Who then can distinguish his naked body from the other? besides,
we will besmear his face with blood and dirt, and rather than fail in any part
of resemblance, break his arms and legs, and make the same wounds in him, the
Executioner did in the Rogue's: so that his nearest Relations shall not be able
to find a difference, much less shall strangers, who come to gaz-upon such
horrid spectacles, out of a ^avage Curt^sity, and commonly stand a loof off.
The Soldier quickly approves the woman's project how to excuse him; and having
no time (for, now day was approaching) to insist upon acknowledgment either of
her great love, or of the felicity of her wit: he joins his strength with hers,
and removes the Husband's Corpse out of the vault to the Gibbet, whereon he
places it, in the same posture he had left the villains, omitting no part of
those resemblances she had suggested, as requisite to delude the spectators.
Which cone, He and his incomparable Mistress secretly retire to consu^t further
not only of their present safety, but also how they might continue that mutual
hapine^s which Fortune had so unexpectly begun betwixt them. And thus did they
put an end to this nights Adventures, which had been admirable to them both;
and we may from hence learn the instability of all sublunary things, but more
particularly the Mutability and Levity of women, so that there is no great heed
to be taken of them; especially when they are in their passions, as I may
conclude the Empress is now possessed of, which rages so extreemly that nothing
but the death of your Son, the Prince Erastus will quallisy; whether her
passion be Love or Hate I know not, but believe in the conclusion you will
find that it is both, and that Hate at present is the product of former Love,
but let it be which, or how it will, I am sure it is not commendable in her to
let it proceed so far as to take away the life and honor of a Prince so
virtuous as is Prince Erastus, and who I hope if you please to spare from
executing at present, will very suddenly make it appear to you and all the
world, that he is not in the least guilty of the crimes whereof he has been
accused.

I have already told you, that some others say this was the story or example
which Lencus the Philosopher did write in a Letter, and send to the Emperor,
but some again say that it was the former of the Physician of Millain, they are
both to one purpose and efect, to show the weakness, instabillity and passions
of women, and may be, and are well applied to the Emperor in this occasion
about his Son Erastus; for the satisfaction of the Reader, and that nothing may
be wanting to make this book as complete as possibly as I can, I have given the
Reader an account of them both, he may give credit to which he pleases, and
therefore I shall thus proceed.

After the Philosopher Lencus had sealed and subscribed this Letter, he
delivered it to one of the Soldiers that was set to guard him, charging him
above all things to deliver it that morning early to the Emperor, and to tell
him that it was an advertisement of very great importance. This the Soldier
promised faithfully to do, and thereupon he went directly to the Castle to
execute his charge; the Emperor seeing the day break and that the Sun did
already gild the tops of the mountains, that he might be distant from a
spectacle so miserable, as that of the death of his Son, and of seven Persons
esteemed and reputed to be the wisest of that Age, he therefore purposed to
ride out into the fields, to divert his melancholy as well as he could, and as
he was about to mount on horseback the Soldier which the Philosopher had sent,
making his reverence, delivered the Letter to him. He instantly opening it read
it, but not without great alteration, which was taken notice of by those that
were about him, seeing that he often changed color, from thence beleiving that
it was something concerning the Prince Erastus. The Emperor having then read
this Letter, remained for some time very pensive, without speaking one word,
yet withal concluding that he could do no less than to communicate this
advertisement to the counsel, he returned in some p^ssion to the Castle. The
Senate being assembled he declared that as he could do no less than punish by
the way of justice the detestable felony which his own Son had c^mmitted
against him; and the treason of those who having the charge to instruct him as
well in good manners as in learning; instead of rend^ing him eloquent, and of
good speech, they had brought him dumb and distracted; and instead of
instruct^ng him in good manners, they had instructed him in the wickedness that
was in question, and yet these Philosophers had presumed to justify him in an
act so wicked and so apparent; however he would not proceed of himself, but had
caused this counsel to be assembled, to make them acquainted with the sentence
which he had given on this occasion, so that he did believe there was no reason
to revoke it; nor no occasion for further proof, the matter of fact being so
clear and manifest unto all; yet nevertheless to let all the world know, that
he would not, nor did not intend to stop the mouths of any Criminals from
justifying themselves (al^hough in this case he could not see any way of
justification) he was content to wash his hands of this business, and to remit
the whole cause to the consideration of the Senate, with this proviso,
nevertheless that Erastus and the Philosophers should only have two days time
to say and allege before the Senate, all that they could think off, or speak
for their justification and defense; and that if in the same two days it did
not appear to the Senate by evident proofs, and manifest arguments that Erastus
was innocent of that whereof he was accused to have acted against his honor,
that then without delay He and his Masters should be all publicly executed by
the hand of justice the morning of the third day following; and having finished
his discourse, he commanded that his Son and the Philosophers should be brought
before the Senate fettered, and with a strong guard. Prince Erastus hearing the
door of his Dungeon opened, supposed they came to fetch him to execution: but
when he perceived that they led him before the Senate he took heart, and more
especially when he saw his Masters there, in whose wisdom he had so much
assurance that he hoped to escape that day which being ^^ce pass d, he feared
nothing.

Now it ^as that he was in most care and fear to to keep silence, as well in
consideration of the many questions that were asked him, as also in regard of
the op^nion that had poss^ssed many of the Senators that he was gu^lty of the
fact wherewith he was charged; not using any manner of justification in a
matter that concerned his life; and therefore the most part of the Senators,
seeing him thus dumb held him guilty of the fact, but on the other side, the
Philosophers did so readily defend the cause of Erastus and their own, and
alleged so many examples to the Senate, that they were divided in their
Opinions, and all that day was spent without taking any resolution to the great
satisfaction and content of Prince Erastus; and by order of the Senate the
Prisoners were sent back to Prison, and kept assunder with express intimation,
that if on the next day they made not better proof of their innocence than
hitherto they had done, they should proceed against them in real execution of
that sentence which the Emperor had pronounced against them.

CHAP. XXI. The Empress Aphrodicia found means to induce the Emperor to
command that execution should be done immediately upon Erastus, and the seven
Philosophers, by a discourse which she made of one Philemon, that being adopted
by a french Gentleman named Archelaus, contrived how to kill his Mother in law,
conceiveing a hatred against her. And being desirous to be Lord and Master of
all; by the assistance of seven of his Accomplices, he caused his father in law
to be secretly murdered.
THE Empress ^ Aphrodicia impatiently expected the ^ew^ so much desi^ed by her;
which was that the sentence which the Emperor had in great anger pronounced
against the Prince Eraslus, and against the seven Philosophers, should be
really executed, which had been so many times delayed. But now she thought
herself assured that none could hinder her designs; for that by the
Impri^onment of the Philosophers, she had stopped all ways of inducing the
Emperor to have a knowledge of his error, and thereupon to spare his Sons life.
The consideration hereof did very much please her, to see her design take the
effect she top left: representation of a male figure and female figure standing
in a room; top right: representation of two male figures and a female figure
seated at a table, with two female figures standing nearby; middle left:
representation of two male figures standing, with two male figures kneeling
nearby; middle right: representation of four male figures standing in a room;
bottom left: representation of two male figures taking hold of a male figure,
nearby a fire; bottom right: representation of two male figures, one with a
sword cutting the head off another male figure had desired, but on a sudden
there arrived to her one of her Spies (whom she had sent to acquaint her with
the certainty of all that should happen) who related to her how Prince Erastus
had been brought before the Senate, guarded and settered, and with him the
seven Philosophers, in regard the Emperor had remitted the trial of the cause
to the Senate, with this proviso, that if within two days the fact of Erastus
was not so clearly justified that every one might plainly find him to be
innocent of what he was accused, the sentence pronounced against him by the
Emperor, should be then immediately and without further delay executed so that
Erastus should dye by the hands of justice and with him the seven Philosophers:
further adding that she might reckon the business done, in regard of the
shortness of the time which had been given the Prince for his justifycation, in
which it would be improbable for him to clear himself, from so manifest a guilt
as he had committed in any time, and much less in so short a term as two
days, whereof the first was already expired, so that it was impossible for
Prince Erastus to avoid the sentence: and therefore the news which he brought
were little different from what the Empress so much desired, which wa^ the real
execution of Erastus, which in short time would be accomplished.

The Empress hearing this n^wes was so troubled, that if her Damsels had not
taken great care of her, she had fallen down in a swound, but they seeing her
faint away, laid her on the bed, w^ere having remained some time in a trance,
and being again come to her self, she retired into her Cabinet, where after
after she had groaned and cried, she tore her clothes, and beating her self,
cursed her foolish mad love which had induced her to enterprise so rash an
action, and in conclusion seeing that tears and and complaints availed little
in her designs, and considering that if the Philosophers, and Prince Erastus
had so long time of respite, the truth of the matter might come to light; she
therefore purposed upon new matter, to take new counsel, wherefore recoll^cting
her spirits the best that she could, she sent for her Father and Mother and all
her Relations, who were many, and all g^^at Lords, she bring descended from the
most illustrious and principal Family in Rome; they being all come t^ her, did
every one persuade her to condescend to the Emperors pleasure, and attend till
the term of two days ordered for the Prisoners to justify themselves should
be expired; telling her that they could no more clear themselves the second
time, than they had done the first, and that the more ^he cause was examin^d,
so much more would ner virtue and contin^nce be manifested, and that would fu^
her (...) ^he world against the wicked Erastus, and against those who had
undertaken to defend his wickedness. But the Empress would not hearken t^ this
counsel, but answered her Relations in gen r^l, that if they had any resp^ct
for her honor, they would not thus sl^ght her; and thereup^n she sent to the
Emperor to desire him to come to her chamber for she had matter of great
importance to relate t^ him in ^he p^^sence of her Father and Mother and ^^hers
her Relations. The Emperoor underst^nding hereof, went to the chamber of the
Emp^es, wh^ imm^diately ^egan to complain of the lit^ este^m the Emperor had
for her, in that she had suffered the greatest outrage in the world from
Erastus, which he himself and others had seen, having been publicly surpriz^d
in his flight, and having promised to inflict such pu^ishment as the enormity
of the case required; instead thereof he had admitted of justifications and
against all reason had called her honor and fidelity in question, remitted the
matter to the judgment of the Senate; where without public blaming and
calumniating of her, it would be imp^ssible to defend the care of Prince
Erastu^: yet for her own part she did not much care being ass^red in her
conscience that nothing could be proved against her. But she was most concerned
in the honor of the family from whence she was descended, that injury would be
done thereto in having a bad opinion of a woman descended therefrom, and that
any dishonest actions should be mentioned of her, as there needs must be, in
that case, her honor being remitted to an ordinary Process as the Emperor had
determined, and being resolved to maintain the honor of her house which she
esteemed above her li e, she was constrained to acquaint her father and mother,
and other relations with the cause of her grief, to the end that they on their
parts might advise how to maintain their honor, in revenging the wrong that had
been done to her, by the best means that they could advise, since that the
Emperor had given liberty of speaking to her prejudice; and as for her part she
had rather live as a private woman in honor, than to be Empress of Rome, and to
command all the world and be tainted with disgrace; as for the honor of an
Empress, she had it not only as being wife to the Emperor, but being descended
from the race of Emperors, more mighty than the E. Dioclesian was and that she
nor none of her relations had procured the marriage between them, but that he
himself had endeavored it, and took all p^ssible pains to procure her to be
his wife, and therefore he ought better to esteem of her; and if it were a
trouble to him to put his Son to death, and that he was desirous to have him
live (which would be great injustice) he might pardon him out of his absolute
power, whereby it is Lawful for an Emperor to pardon the greatest Criminals,
without persuading and imprinting this opinion in his mind, that the wicked and
Traytorous Erastus was Innocent; of a crime so enormous and manifest as that
which he had committed, and to give credit to the fantastical inventions of
those Rascally Philosophers who defended him, which means will serve for no
other purpose, bu^ to open away for the Roman youths, t^ under^ake all sorts of
wicked and infamou^ actions; in hopes to prove by the eloquence and well
speaking of Orators and Advocates, whereof Rome is well stored; that white is
black, and that Vice is virtue, and that instead of punishment and shame, they
des^rve praise and recomp^nce: Of which matter she thought good to advertise
him, considering the b^d counsel which he followed, which proceeded from those
that g^ve it, who did not acquaint him with the truth of m^tters, as indeed
they were; whereas she on her part had never hidden the truth, and had never
endeavored to hide it from him since she had lived with him. And ^lthough his
disdain of her or his passion, which choked his understanding, had caused him
to do those things which he ought not, and to abhor and disdain, th^se who
advertised him of his honor and quiet, yet however she would not be wanting to
let him kn^w those things which should be for his Comodity, although by
experience she knew that he had not so much regard ^f her speeches, as the
importance of the cas^ requi^ed, nor the sincerity wherewith she proceeded in
her advertisements; because she knew not how to disguise things as those
Traytorous Philosophers did, who ordinarily hid the truth of things; although
she were now despised and disdained of the Emperor, who at first had so great
a respect for her: and to conclude and put an end to her complaints, she said
thus, Sir, I much doubt that it will happen to you as it did to a French
Gentleman, whose Story was told me when I was young, which is so proper to your
purpose, that if you do not provide while you have the power in your hands, I
fear and that to my great trouble, that it will happen to you as it did to this
Gentleman; wherein I shall n^vertheless have a clear conscience, in regard I
have not only advertised you whom it principally conc^r^^, but also my
Relations who are here present, who also have great interest therein. And
although it may happen that there are s me h^re present, who have heard this
Story of the French Gentl^man, yet however I shall relate it, as being not
improper to allege known examples, especially when they may serve to the
matter whereof we treat.

In France, there was some time since a Gentleman named Archelaus; esteemed to
be one of the richest and greatest Lords of all the C^^ntry, he being Lord of
much Lands; and having in his power diverse fair and strong places, and
especially o^e which was so pleasantly Situated, and so strongly bu^l^ ^h^t he
had the command of all the adj^yning Country. This Gentleman took to wife a
Damsel his neighbor, whom he kept long without having any Children; yet he
lived with her in the greatest love and friendship that could be immagined to
be, between man and wife, yet in the end seeing that his wife was barren and
being out of hopes of having any Children, he purposed to adopt some Child to
bear his name and Arms, and to succeed in those Lands and Lordships which he
held; since the bounty of heaven did not extend so far, as to give him natural
and Law^^l issue, so that having conferred with his wife about this design who
on her part was also very well contented; he a dopted and took for his Son a
young Child named Philemon, who was one of his nearest relations, whom h^
ca^sed to be bred and instruct^d as belonged to the Son of a great Lord, and as
if he had been his own Child. The child had so good natural parts that he
learned all that was taught him; so that his adopted F^ther was very well
pleas^d, and so was the Mother and all the family and in regard of the great
hopes which all the Subj ct did c^nceave of the good breeding of the young
Gentleman; there was none of them which did not love him and who did not honor
him being assured that for a long time there had not been any more wise and
prudent than their young Lord was likely to be. And his ad^pted Father seeing
his good genius, notwith^tanding his youth did not omit to acquaint him wi h
his aff^irs, and to entrust him with ^^me charge and mannagment, wherein he
acquitted himself with great d^xterity. It happened that this Philemon being
dilligent in all the affairs of his adopted F^^her his ad^pted Mother fell
sick, and in short time died; wherefore Archelaus was extremely sorry, so that
the better to pass away his melancholy and grief, he retired to a Country
house, there to live solitary and pass away his time in reading and studdy, in
the mean time leaving the mannagement of all his great affairs to the young
Philemon who also appeared to be much grieved for the death of his Adopted
mother at the first appearance showing that it was impossible for him to live
in the absence of his adopt^d father, and that whether-tsoever he went he would
follow him, to do him all service as in duty bound. But this adopted father
would not permit him; C^mmandi^g him not to stir and that above all thing he
should adimnister good justice to his Subject. This Philemon performed; that he
might not appear disob^diant, ^o that his chief design was ^o govern well, the
Subjects of his Father Nay, he demeaned himself, so vertuo^sly in the
Government of his Subj^ct^, that they were very well contented; and thus he
continued for some time. But in short time, whither it was that his wickedness
being hidden was so great that it could be no longer dissembled, or whither it
proceeded from the Imperuosity of youth, which cau^ed him t^ make a bad use of
his freedom, and power, he began to loosen the Reins to his f^lly as it is
usual for young men who know themselves to be free and out danger of
punishment. True it is that being very wary, he so ordered his affairs that no
complaint came to the ears of his adopted Father; who having past away his
time of mourning, and being weary of a Solitary life, he purposed to return to
his house where he was highly welcomed by his Subjects but chiefly young
Philemon appeared to be the most contented person in the world and gave so good
an account to Archelaus, of all matter^ of import^nce that had p^ss^^ in his
absence; and thereby caused him to und^rstand hi^ g^^^^^^ spirit, that his
Father al^h^ugh present remitt^d all aff^irs to his mannagement, who acted all
his busine s being held in his fathers pres^n^s, in greater reput^tion and a
more abs^lute Lord than in his f^thers abs^nce; in which mannagement he
continued a cer^ain time, with a very great in^de^^y in appearance, y^^ in
private abandoning himself to the sa^^^^ct^on of his disordinate appetite.

Archelaus then seeing young Philemon to be grown to man's ^state, purposed to
seek ^ut a wife for him which Philemon under^ta^ding, and fearing to be tied to
a wife by the bands of ^^^ri^age when he could not so freely enjoy ^is
accustom^d pleasures as he had done, being to give an account in the night,
whereas now he ^cted what he luted, and let loose the Reins to his v^l^pte
usness of which liberty he should be deprived when ^e was ^ur ed, he therefore
went to his Father, (...) him to let him continue in the condition h^ w^^, in
(...) brid^ing him by marriage, alledg ng that a Wife would disturb him from
his study, and the ^^^^gement of his affairs, and ^old him several other
rea^on^ (...) ^olour of ze^l which he had for (...) good of hi^ Subjects, so
well using his tongue, that Archilaus (who yet above all things desired t^ see
of the race of his beloved Philemon) having first us^d all p^ssib e
persuasions, was in the end constrained to comply with him, as well in respect
of the z^al which Philemon showed to his business, as not to contradict him in
that where he excused himself with some appearance of reason, so that he
intended not to urge it any further yet however purposing to cause him to
condescend in time by other mean^.

Whereupon having considered the manner how he discovered his intent to his
favorites, telling them that since his Son would not consent to be married,
than he himself should be constrained to take a wife, whereby so noble a family
as his might not be lost; having none to bear his Name and Arms but the young
Philemon, and this he gave out, not out of any thoughts of being married, but
to invite Philemon to take a wife; certainly believing that when Philemon
should hear this news, if nothing else should move him to be married; yet at
last the fear of being deprived of so great a succession, as that of Archelaus
by the Children which he might have of a wife, if he should take one, would
induce him to consent to the will of his Father. But all this did not divert
Philemon from his oppinion knowing on the one side that Archelaus was already
out of hopes of having Children, and on the other side, if he should have any
he could not live to see them great by the course of nature, so that by
necessity he should always have the government of those Children, and of the
Lands and Lordships of Archelaus, remaining by this means as absolute Lord of
the said Lands, as if Archelaus had no Children. In conclusion Archelaus seeing
that young Philemon regarded not the same that was spread abroad, thought that
by the greatness and vivacity of his spirit he had disovered his intention; and
therefore to make the matter seem more probable and real he began to seek out
for a marriage for himself, enquiring among all the Damsels that were
marriageable, to find one prop^r and convenient for him, not that he intended
to be ma^r ed, but to induce Philemon thereunto, seeing tha^ there was no
diss^mbling in the Case, and that he might think his father would in good
esrnest marry, as it was the general discourse of all people. But for all this
Philemon still continued absolute ag^^nst marriage, so that what was first
intended for jest proved in earnest, for a Damsel was found out for Archelaus
her name was Eufrosena she was fair virtuous, of a C^^p^ten^ age, and of as
good a family as he desired.

Archelaus seeing this, and that this Damsel came freely to him, and that
Philemon would not marry; he therefore purposed to p^^ceed in this marriage.
This was approved of by all, and o^ Philemon himself without whose advice he
would not conclude thereon And so this Wedding was solemnized, with all fit
magnificence to the great content of every one.

Archelaus being very well pleased with his marriage, having d^^ly experience
of the mild Spirit, great prudence and virtue of his wife, began to introduce
her into the Rule and Government of all his Lands and houses; yet without
taking the mannagement of his affairs from Philemon, but with this charge that
in all eases of importance, and which required counsel, he should act nothing
without Communicating thereof to his Mother-in-law. This woman behaved her self
so virtuously in her mannagement, that in short time by degrees all affairs
passed through her hands; for on the one side Archelaus being stricken in years,
would not trouble himself with business having more need of rest, and on the
other side Philemon minded nothing but his pastime, and to enjoy all the
pleasure that came into his fantasy sometimes to the prejudice of others,
remitting all dispatches to his Mother in Law, who did expedite all the most
dextruously that might be, and with great equity. The subjects seeing their
Lady behave her self so virtuously in the Government of the Country, took heart
to complain to her of the great disorders and violence which Philemon
committed; so that from all parts complaints came to her ears; yet she being
mild and good natured endeavored at first to excase and cover the faults of
Philemon; and then in private to c^^de him, admon^shing, exhorting and praying
him so to de^^an himself, that he should use no violence toward the Subjects,
and to mind his business as formerly he had done, showing himself worthy of
that quality whereto he had been called by the bounty of Fo^tune; and by the
love which Archelaus had born him, hereupon young Philemon very humbly thanked
her, with a promise from thence forwards to follow the good advertisements,
which by her b u^ty she had given him; yet nevertheless he acted quite
contrary, not omitting to do any thing that his wicked inclinations led him to,
and al^hough he endeavored to act his lewd tricks at privately as he could,
that his Mother in law might not discover him; yet now it was not so as it had
formerly been with his Father, for he was acquainted with all his actions,
because the Subjects went more freely to make their complaints to Eufrosena,
than to Archelaus, seeing the ready and quick dispatches which she gave to all
affairs; and now they did not fear that she should be transported with natural
affection at the discovery of the dis^rdinate life of Philemon, as it may be
Archelaus himself would have been, who being near of Kin to Philemon, had taken
so great a love for him; that he had adopted him when a young child, and had
always bred and entertained him as his own Son.

The wise Eufrosena seeing the advertisements which she had given to Philemon,
had not at all p^^fited him she began to be more free with him; threatening that
in case he did not change his manners, to acquaint her husband therewith that
he might take course with him: yet withal mildly telling him the great blame he
would have when his lewd life should be discovered. Whereupon Philemon promised
that for the future he would so behave himself that she should hear no
Complaints of him; an^ ^^t^e was every day worse and worse, so that the
ve^^uous Eafrosena was constrained to acquaint her hu^b^^^ th^^ewith, earnestly
entreating him, to advise hi^ S^n to leave those wicked courses, and to bring
him back to his former v^rtuou^ manner of living. Archelaus hearing this new^
of his Son thought (...) very ^^range to hear of ^uch dishonest ^ct^^^s, so
c^ntrary to the good opinion which he had of his C^ntin^^c^ and virtue;
wherefore ^e c^id him ^ve^ely and threatened him highly, st^^^^ly c^mm^nding him
from thence forwards, not t^ c^mmit any ex^^^s or violence; Intimating to h^^
that for the first ^ault he should be guilty of, he wo^ld so Chastise him, that
his former c^lmes and th^se which he should commit, should not escape
unpunished, and that he should ^erve as an example to others, who seeing that
he had not spared his adopted Son, should forbear offending for fear of
punishment. Young Philemon counterfeiting a Repentance, and that he was very
sorrowful, that he had committed crimes to the displeasure of his Father,
begged his pardon promising to live so strictly from thence forward^, that he
should never hear any just complaint against him.

Yet it was not long after this that he had a mind to a fair young Damsel,
daughter to a Gentleman of the most considerable quality of his fathers
Subjects* and not knowing how by fair means to get possession of her, ^e one
day made a forceible entry into the house of this Gentlem^n, and carried away
the Damsel. This rude action coming to the knowledge of Archelaus, he Commanded
that Philemon should be suddenly seiz^d on, and being strictly guarded should
be carried Prisoner to a strong Castle, giving express commands to the Captain
of the Castle, that upon pain of his high displeasure, he should put Philemon
in the strong; Prison of the Castle, that he might at all times render a good
account of him.

Philemon being thus put into Prison, conceived mortal hatred against his
Mother-in-law, believing all the anger of Archelaus did proceed from her, and
by her Instigation; and from thencef^rth purposed to employ all his power and
wicked Spirit, to ruin the good and innocent Lady: And that he might
accomplish his design, he endeavored all that in him lay to get the friendship
of the Captain of the Castle which he easily performed; the Capt^in being a
good fellow, one who desired to please all and particularly Philemon, whom he
one day hoped to see Lord of all the Lands of Archelaus. And therefore he often
visited Philemon eating and drinking with him, endeavoring to divert him by
Playing, singing, and other recreation; so that his liberty only excepted, he
knew nothing that would please Philemon, but he suffered him to enjoy it. This
Captain had one only Daughter competently fair and mar^iagable, which he loved
above all things. Philemon having seen her, resolved to make use of this means,
to accomplish what he most desired. He seeing his keeper to be so much his
friend, that he might without any danger discover any secret to him; he one day
took him apart, and having made a long preamble of the many traverses which his
Mother-in-law had practiced to his prejudice, and that without cause, so that
she had by these means brought him t^ a Prison him who was by right the true
and Lawful Lord of the Country; there to cause him to Languish in a condition
worse than death, had it not been for his kin^ness to him, for which he
reckoned himself v^ry much oblig^d, so that he should never forget it, and
being willing to begin to acknowledge the great ^^iendship and service which he
had received of him, and gave him assurance of what he might hereafter expect;
when by the death of his Father he should be Master of his (...); he therefore
purposed to take his only daugh ^ to wife, ^on this condition that the said
C^ptain would Aid and assist him in what he purposed to do And then he began to
discourse of the probable coo^^^ he would take to be revenged on h^ Innocen^
^ufrosena, and told him particularly how the design should be managed.

The affection which the Captain had to see his daughter so highly preferred
and the Ambition to be Father-in-law to his Lord and Prince, and by consequence
Governor of the Country, caused him to open his ears; so that although he
knew this to be an unjust undertaking, yet however he resolved to be an Actor,
and therefore they having plighted their trothes to each other, the marri^ge of
his daughter and Philemon was secretly c^^^^nated. The Captain of the Castle
resolving to keep promise, choosed out seven S^ldiers Reformadoes, in whom he
could confide, and after he had c^njured them, and received an oath from them
for their fidelity and secrecy, he discovered his and Philemons enterprise to
facillitate which, he showed them the proper means, giving them great presents
and greater promises, to serve as false witnesses, to testifi^ and affirm that
which should be requited of them. This being done he dispatched one of these
Reformadoe^ to Archelaus, to entreat him to come to the Galile, about a
business of very great Consequence, and wherein consisted the quiet of his
estate which was of so great importance, that he durst not write least the
Letter should miscarry and much less could be trust a third person to acquaint
him by w^rd of m^uth.

While the Soldier was on hi^ way ^o deliv^r his Message, the Traitor Philemon
pur^^sing to act his wickedness, cunningly laid his found^tion on a Letter
which he found, which the S^ge Eufrosena had with her own hand wri^ten to the
C^ptain of the Castle; whereby ^h^ g^v^ him some particul^r orders about
governing the Country, which Letter he found among the Captains (...); and
b^^ng well acquainted with his Mother-in-l^w, ha^^ h^ pr^ctised ^^^^ nterfeit
it and did it so artificially that it was not to be distinguished from her own
proper writing. This Letter being perfected, he sealed it up at Eufrosena was
used to do; counterfeiting a Superscription (which was addressed to the Captain
of the Castle) as he had done to the Letter it self; and this he gave to the
Captain, concluding with him how to use it.

But to return to Archelaus, as soon as he heard the Message from the Cap^ain
of the Castle, he mounted on hors-back, and rode with a small train to the
Castle; where being come the Captain retired with him into a private Chamber,
entering into a large discourse of the great obligation which he had for him and
his service, who from so low a degree as a private Ge^tleman and Soldier, had
raised him to be a Captain of s^ remarkable a place, that indeed might be very
well accounted to be the strongest of the Kingdom of France; f^r which cause
and also in regard he was his natural Leige-Lord, his duty Commanded him, to
think of nothing more than the peace and conservation of his estate and person,
which he ^^s b^und to defend, and ma^ntain by hi^ blood ^^d w^^^ his L^fe. And
therefore he having the m^^^^ t^ deliver him from a very great danger, he had
been so bold as to entreat him to come thither, to give him p^iva^e
advertisement of that wh^c^ was al^^ady ^^ forwa^d, that were it not for his
great fidelity and others that belonged to him, it m ght be concluded that hi^
life was at an and, so forwards was the d^^ign against him; And it wo^ld be
difficult to prevent it, in regard it was contrived by a person in whom he put
the greatest c^nfidence, and of whom he always had a good opinion. And to make
it more plain to you said the Captain, it was your wife; whom you and I and all
men else, have esteemed for the best and Loyalest Lady in the world. But I very
well know that this Sex is frail and Subject to Ch^nge, which has at all times
been seen, and now more then ever, but I never heard of so wicked a design as
this: F^r some days since whither it is out of hatred to you, or love to some
other person, or any other occasion has induced her (for I cann^t ^mm^gin the
reason) she has endeavored to engage me to her by presents, and great
promises being more liberal than ordinary. I was at first ^^rpr^zed, yet in
conclusion resolved that this was only the effects of her good nature of which
she always gave sufficient proof. And therefore without immagining any evil, I
endeavored to do her all possible service and to insinuate further into her
favor, acknowledging her for my Lady and Mistress, as indeed she is being your
wife; and I many times told her that the greatest desire I had in this world,
was effect^all^ to d^^ ^^a^e the great affection which I had for her serv^ce,
according to my duty; praying her freely to command me, and to employ me as she
should think fit as Lady and Mistress, both of my goods and life, putting all
into her power, t^ disp^se of at her pleasure, holding my life and goods very
well employed, when they should be used in her service. She hearing these off
r* wh^c^ were in general did believe she had (...) much power over me, that I
would perform wh^^soev^r her bru^^ish cruelty had possessed her mind, which till
then she had covered with a cloak of mildness and courtesy, without
considering what my honor and duty oblidges me to: being confident hereof, not
long since she wrote this letter to me, which is of her own writing, as he that
brought it told me, by which (as you may see if you please to read) she
sollicites me to commit the treason therein contained, to kill you privately
one day when you should come to this place, and give out a report that you dyed
of age, or some accident, whereby she might have full possession of your land;
in recompense whereof as you may see, she promises me the best of your houses,
this only excepted at my choice, but God forbid that any such treason should
enter into my breast, for proof of what I say said the Captain, behold the
letter, and thereupon after a due reverence he gave it him into his hand.

Archelaus hearing this news of his wife, was during the Captains discourse in
great torment, considering the great experience he had of his wives virtue; he
could not im^gine that she would have thought, and much less have endeavored
so treasonable an action, yet understanding tha^ by the letter, he might know
the truth, he p^rmitt^d the Captain to finish his discourse, which being ended
he took the letter, and having well v^ewed and considered it, he did certainly
bel^ive it to be her own hand writeing.

And H^ having ^f^e^ read this Letter, was very much ^^v shed with admiration,
and even as a man who d^^ames of something, and not being able to discern
whether it be true or false so this poor Gentleman knew not what to think on
the one side, knowing it to be his wives hand, and on the other side believing
her to be so fa^^hful* that he thought it unpossible any such treasonable
action should enter into her heart, this perpl^xity of spirit being perceived
by the Traitor who spoke to him that he might the better compas^ his design, he
thus continued his discourse to Archelaus.

Sir, I doubt that this Letter is not the true hand of my Lady, it is, it is
sighing said the poor Archelaus, I know it too well suppose it to be so said
the Captain, it was only to make trial of my fidelity, for I cannot imagine for
what reason she should attempt to murder one to whom she has without the
least distaste always showed all manner of dutiful love; but I have discovered
something else, which cleers the truth of all, for she has sub^rned with money
some my Soldiers, and took an oath of them that they would kill me at her
arrival here, which should be soon after your death, that she might be rid of
us both; and these very Soldiers have discovered this conspiracy, after I had
assured them of pardon, and this they themselves will relate to you.

Having said thus, he caused the seven Accomplices to come into the Chamber, who
when they come thither fell down on their knees before Archelaus, begging
pardon for the great fault which they had committed in harkning to so great a
Treason as that wherein they had b^^^ engaged, and for which ^hey had received
reward; and (...) a par^^c^l ^^^^on how Eufrosena had hy^^^ (...) the^ C^ptain,
as the Captain had told Archelaus, but after that being sensible of the
greatness of the crime which they had undertaken; they resolved of two evils to
choose the least, and submit to their Captain who had been graciously pleased
to pardon them.

Archelaus comparing this relation with the contents of the Letter, no longer
doubted but that the case was just as the traiterous Captain had told him, yet
he knew not what to resolve upon, for on the one h^nd the great treason which
he believed his wife to be guilty of, drove him on to revenge; and on the other
hand the love he bore to the innocent Lady, staid and hindered him. The
traiterous Captain perceiving this, said Sir, when a man is interested in any
case, and passionate his best course is to take advise of others, and therefore
I will give you my best counsel, which if you please you may follow, otherwise
you may d^cline it, and take your own course.

If it were my case, I would have you send for your wife; pretending to
confer with her about some case of importance, and so soon as she comes
h^th^r, cause her head to be cut off, as a reward for her treason, which I
think is plain enough proved unto you; Archelau, approving of the counsel of
this tr^yterous and cursed Captain, sent to his wife that without any delay,
she should come to the Castle to acquaint her with some weighty matters; the
good and virtuous Lady having received her husbands l^t^er, suddenly mounted
on horseback and came thither; but she was no sooner passed the two first
gates of the Castle, when she was se^zed on by the seven Soldiers, who cut of
her head, not p^rmitting her to speak one w^ d; Archelaus would not be present
at this miserable execution, but remitted all to the Captains discretion, who
having performed what he had intended, and resolving to add one treason to
another returned to Archelaus, to whom he said that Eufrosena se^ing her life
to be at the latest account, and that her treasons were discovered, for which
she had deserved death: she therefore charged him to tell her Husband that she
prayed him to pardon those crimes she would have committed, therefore
confessing her self worthy of a more cruel death than she was to suffer; also
acknowledging that she knew not wherefore such a Treason had entered into her
mind, but that God by his just judgment had bereaved her of her sense and
understanding, for the great wrong; which she had done to the innocent
Philemon, having so calumniated and accused him, having hired a Gentleman who
complained against him, pretending that he had forced his daughter, which was a
thing counterfeited, that she might remove her Son in Law from the management
of affairs, and be her self the sole Governness.

This the poor old man easily believed, so that he caused the traitorous
Philemon to be immediately taken out of Prison, making excuses to him, for the
hard usage which he had received, and he instantly out him into the same
capacity he had bin in: giving him greater authority than before; so that all
dispatches depended absolutely upon him and passed through his hands.

Philemon then seeing himself in the condition he desired, for some time
managed the affairs with such dexterity that he in short time obtained the good
will of the People; yet considering that Archelaus was not so old but that he
might be married again, and that then there would be an alteration in his
condition, he purposed to assure himself and be peaceable; Lord of all the
Lands of Archelaus, whilst it was in his power, and not to delay his design,
lest some new trouble should arise; wherefore being experienced in the
dexterity of his Father in law, in wicked actions he declared his intention to
him, desireing his assistance. This Traitor had often thought of this matter as
well as Philemon, and was so ambitious of seeing himself great, that every day
seemed a year to him* till his Son in law should be absolute Lord and Master of
th^se Lands; and therefore he told Philemon that he should leave the management
of that affair to him, for at Archelaus his next coming to the Castle, such
order should be taken, that for the future he should not be hindered of being
absolute Lord; and having conferred his intention with those Soldiers that had
murdered Eufrosena, that the next day he should leave the Castle, and go ^
days journey from thence to manage his aff^irs, that his abse^ce should not
cause him to be in the least suspected, and that he should be r^ady to return
thither as to the chief place of residence, and to s^ize on all his other
houses before any trouble should happen.

Philemon taking his Father in laws advice, departed from the Castle, and not
long after Archelaus came thither, who one day walking with the Captain in a
private place of the Castle, two of those murderours Soldiers threw a girdle
about his neck, and there immediately strangled him.

The poor Archelaus being dead, the rascal Captain made an outcry, so that all
the Soldiers did run to see what was the matter* and he holding the dead body
in his arms, with feigned tears told them, that while he was talking a Gatarhe
had seized on him, so that he f^ll down dead in the place: and then he caused
him to be laid in his bed, applying perfumes and other remedies to see if he
would come to himself, but all was to no purpose, which he seeing without any
delay sent in Post to Philemon, and after he had counterfeited lamentations for
the death of his Lord, he caused him to be interred in the most sumptuous
manner that he could.

Philemon understanding of the death of Archelaus was very well pleased, but in
appearance showed much discontent and sorrow, but soon returned to the Castle,
where with tears he was received of the Captain, and all others of the Town for
their lawful Lord; and having taken order for mourning, he took possession of
the Lordships thus wickedly usurped before the time, beginning at the chief
City, and from thence going from place to place without any contradiction.

The time of mourning being over, Philemon was solemnly married to the Captains
daughter, and he gave large rewards to the Soldiers who had served him in his
designs, but in conclusion he caused them all to be privately murdered.

He himself did not long enjoy his estate, for the justice of Heaven which
leaves no evil action unpunished, raised an English Lord against him to be his
Enemy; who having intelligence with certain o^^er French Lords, who although
they were Philemons Neighbors, yet they hated him for his tyranny)
necessitated him to retire to an inconsiderable City, where being taken by
the English, he was burnt alive, and as they led him to execution, he confessed
that he had deserved not only to be burnt, but a far w^rse punishment, not for
the wrong which he had done to the English, but for the great treason which he
had committed against Archelaus, and the innocent Eufrosena; declaring
particularly how all things had been contrived and executed, and then being
fastened to the stake, he there finished his wicked life,

This history my Lord, said the Empress, I had a mind to relate to you, to see
if it might be possible to open your eyes that you may see that this your Son
endeavors nothing else, with his seven traiterous Accomplices (and not
Philosophers) to dispatch me out of this world, being assured that if I were
removed: I who am your loyal wife and companion, they would more easily attain
their ends; which is to make themselves peaceable Lords of the Empire, without
waiting for the nat^ral course of your life, against which they have had many
designs, and it would not be long ere they were effected, if I were once taken
away from you, and this all persons of j^dgment may easily perceive; and
although Heaven in the end will not leave this unpunished, but ^et we must
first suffer a miserable death, if according to your duty, you do not make
timely provision against it, and my Parents and Relations here present ought to
give their ready assistance.

These speeches of the Empress were uttered with so much livelyness and
earnestness, that not only the Emperor, but her Relations resolved that Erastus
should dye without delay, so that if it had been day time, as indeed it was
not, part of the night being passed away and spent, the Emperor would have
caused the innocent Erastus, and the seven Philosophers to be dispatched; and
therefore he gave absolute command, that without attending any other order of
the Senate, the next morning without any delay, Prince Erastus should be
publicly executed by the common Executioner, and after him the seven
Philosophers; after he had given this order, he endeavored to appease the
Empress, and for her better satisfaction he committed the execution of the
sentence to four Persons, who were her particular favorites; causing his father
in Law, and other Lords who were the Relations of the Empress to stay and sup
with him, and he that night lay with the wicked and perverse Aphrodicia.

CHAP. XXII. The Emperor Dioclesian saw a Vision in his sleep, of several
sorts of Animals whereby was demonstrated all passages about Prince ^^^stus,
and what part he should take, by reason of which Vision he became very
melancholy.
THE Emperor being in bed with the Empress was was so trouble^ in mind, that he
could not possibly sleep until ^ little before break of day; and then his e^^^
(...) ^o sooner closed, but he saw in a Dream ^ss^^ from his Reins a Pidgeon
white as snow ^he ^^ h^^t^st and ^^^^est that ever he had seen; whereupon ^^e
being joyful, purposed to have it well and c^^efully nourish^d, it being
already so fair that all the World admired it, and he himself was so much in
love with it, that all his pleasure and qui^t consisted in considering ^f the
whiteness and f^irness of the Bir^; which g^ow^ng larger, and daily increasing
^n be^^^y, he perceived that a Serp^n^ came to his P^lla^e which was so
beautiful, tha^ although this An mal is naturally horrible, yet he was so in
love with it, that sometimes he put it in hi bosom, and at other times lay
with it; he also perceived that so soon as this Serpent saw his young Pidgeon
to be so fair, he took great pleasure in it, and by all means ^ndeavoured to
have its company. The Pidgeon at fir^^ was well enough contented, and not only
showed love to, but also respected the Serpent; but seeing that the Serpent
kissed it, and endeavored by all means to couple with it, the Pidgeon with
h^^ror and anger which it had against this villainous and venomous beast began
to fly; the Serpent on the other side seeing it self disdained, seemed to have
changed into mortal hatred, all the love which he had to this Pidgeon,
endeavoring by all means to kill the poor Bird, in such manner pursuing it,
that the Emperor himself hated it* out of respect to the great Serpent, so
that he also assisted to kill it, and yet he thought that the poor Pidgeon made
no defense, only looked to heaven, without speaking, as if from thence it exp
cted assistance and favor, he also saw that as the cruel Serpent was about to
kill the fair Pidge^n, seven several Animals appeared in order, who were all of
different shapes, so that he could not distinguish what they were, yet they
were so fair, that all that beheld them took pleasure therein; these Animals
being arrived, one by one placed themselves to defend the young Pidgeon from
the great Serpent, fighting for the Pidgeon one after another; so that in the
beginning it seemed that the Serpent yielded, and yet afterward he returned to
assault the poor Pidgeon more fiercely than before; so that it was necessary
that another of the seven Animals should come to combat no defend it, and so
there was seven assaults, during which the Emperor seemed to favor the Pidgeon
against the Serpent, when the Serpent had the worst, and on the contrary when
the Serpent had the better, he altered his mind, and was pleased to help to
kill the Pidgeon, for love of the Serpent.

In conclusion, he perceived that the Serpent raised himself higher than
before, and casting forth all its poison with the rage and fury that possessed
him, he had so disordered the seven Animals, and the Pidgeon which all that
time had made no defense, that they seemed to be at the last gasp of their
lives, and that yet nevertheless the Pidgeon appeared then with so good a
grace, and so great a virtue, that without fighting he overthrew and abased the
Serpent, so that it remained upon the place not daring to stir, which the
cursed and perverse Beast seeing it, employed all its rage and venom against
it self, so that it killed it self; whereupon the Emperor seemed to have then
as much hatred as formerly he had love for it, very much repenting that he had
so persecuted so pleasant a Bird as this Pidgeon was, at the desire of so
horrible a beast as was the Serpent; he also thought that all the City of Rome
made Bone-fires for the deliverance and victory of the Pidgeon, so that nothing
was heard throughout the whole City, but Drums, Trumpets, and other musical
Instruments.

In conclusion the great noise which the people of Rome made at these
Bone-fires, seemed to be so great that it awaked the Emperor just at break of
day; then when the Sunbeams chased away the obscurity of the night, and being
awake, he began to consider of the great dream he had in that hours time
wherein he had slept; the apprehension of which, was so imprinted in his mind,
that he thought it rather a truth than a Dream; and yet he could not comprehend
one single point of it, although he could not remove from his fancy a thing
that he had seen so perfectly, believing that it must necessarily have some
great signification considering the impressi^n it had left in his mind, being
thus very melancholy he arose, and soon after him the Empress; to whom a
minute of an hour seemed to be a year, so desirous she was to be satisfied in
the death of the innocent Erastus, and the seven Philosophers, who took part
with him to maintain the just quarrel of their Disciple; and she was no sooner
up, but she sent in great haste for those who had Commission to execute the
sentence of the Emperor against Erastus and the Philosophers.

CHAP. XXIII. Prince Erastus declares in full Senate, the necessity which had
constrained him to be silent until then; and by an example of Hermogenes,
afterward named Entichus, whose Father had caused him to be cast into the Sea,
that he might not see him to be greater than himself: Ye^ however the same
Entichus at length obtained the Crown, of the Kingdom of Candia, although he
was but the Son of an ordinary Merchant, according to the fatal destinies, who
had foretold that he should Arive at this dignity; showing that there is no
prudence nor humane counsel, that can hinder that which once has been
determined in Heaven, and by the Caelestiall Influence. And having declared the
truth of the fact, as it had passed between him and the Empress; he and the
Philosophers are acquitted, and the Empress is cast into Prison.
PRINCE Erastus knowing the Term was past, of (...) fatal silence which the
St^^s had demonstrated to him, and enjoined him to, under great penalties; and
knowing that for the future he might employ his tongue, which in so long time
and in so great dangers, wherein he had been encompassed, had neglected to
perform its duty, rendering thanks within top: representation of a griffin
rampant facing seven birds, nearby two figures in a bed; middle: representation
of an emperor or king throwing a figure from a ship or boat, nearby two other
male figures; bottom: representation of an emperor or king and four other male
figures standing near a loggia, with three birds overhead himself to the bounty
and goodness of heaven; and to the virtue of his Masters, who on so signal an
^ccasion had found out the way to preserve his life, against the Malignity of
the Stars, seven days together; So soon as he saw the dawning of the Eighth
day, by him so much longed for, he called the Jailer in whose custody he was,
saying to him, my friend go from hence to the Emperor my Father, and tell him
from me that his Son Erastus is no longer Dumb, and that he can now as freely
speak, as formerly it was necessary for him to be silent; and entreat him in my
name, that although he may have purposed to bereave me of that life which he
formerly gave me: Yet nevertheless at the end of my day^ he will not deny me
this favor, to give me audience in a full Senate before I dye, and assure him
that I have such matters to relate, as will give him much satisfaction to hear,
and if after that he will put me to death I shall rest very well contented.

The Jailer having heard the Message of Prince Erastus; went with all
diligence to the Emperors Lodgings, yet he doubted that he should be derided,
for delivering a Message from one that was Damb; but however he delivered what
he had in charge to the Emperor, who understanding this new Embassy, remained
very much perplexed and astonished, by means of what had newly happened. And
although he believed that his Son had given that in charge to the Jailer which
he had delivered, yet he thought it very strange that he now speaking, he
should all that time keep silent even, in those great dangers wherein he had
been and was still envolved, So that he sometimes resolved not to make any
reckoning of him, considering the small esteem Erastus had for him, not
vouchsafeing to speak and justify himself, when he had been charged with so
great a crime; for which cause he believed he had just occasion to be angry
with his Son, who had so little respected him, as not to pay him one civil
salutation as in duty he was bound to, and for that he had not answered one
single question, there having been so many propounded to him, when efore he had
concluded that this his silence was sufficient proof of his guiltiness, in so
abominable a case as he had been charged withal: And then again natural
affection and instinct, which induces Tigers to bear affection to their young
ones (although they disdain and hate all others) induced and inclined the
Emperor to give him audience; And thereupon he gave command to the Jailer that
Erastus, and the seven Philosophers should be brought bound before the Senate,
being however resolved that so soon as he had finished his discourse, (which in
his opinion could be nothing but to ask mercy and pardon) he should be
publicly executed and with him the seven Philosophers, according to the
Sentence formerly given, and the evening before confirmed, the news was already
spread throughout all Rome, how that the Empress had the evening before
obtained of the Emperor, that without any process or delay the young Prince
Erastus and his seven Masters, should the next morning be publicly executed;
so that before day break, the place of execution was full of Spectators to see
the end and issue of this spectacle, every one believing it impossible that so
virtuous persons as the Philosophers, should be miserably and publicly
executed, with the only Son and heir of a Roman Emperor, and that their
wisdom and virtue which was known to all, could not save them, not that none
would engage in their rescue. The people being thus gathered together, some of
them perceived the Jailer when he went to the Emperor, and therefore followed
him (being inquisitive after news) but were hindered by the Guard from entering
the Palace, only some Noble men and persons of quality were admitted, and were
present when the Emperor commanded the Jailer to bring forth the Prince; these
relating this news abroad to others it was matter of novelty to all, as being
of so great importance that it could not be hid in obscurity, so that at length
it became so public, that not only all in the Palace was acquainted
therewith, but also the whole City of Rome, and principally the Senators who
had upon this occasion been already sent for, so that throughout the whole City
there was a world of people of all sorts and qualities, men and women, great
and small, who being every where met together made it their whole business, all
expecting the issue and conclusion of the speech that Erastus would make before
the Senate, where every one strived to get a place that they might hear what
would be said. Only the Empress hearing of this news, began to suspect her
affair, as well in respect of certain remorse of conscience which pressed her,
as for the novelty of the case, so that being retired into her Chamber, she
ruminated in her thoughts the event of this discourse; and she already repented
of the rashness of her pursuit: and then on a sudden she would take courage by
a certain presumption that had possessed her, and further enflamed her with
malice and ang^^, setting good spies upon the place, to know when Erastus
should be brought before the Emperor, and to give her an account of all
passages that should happen. All the world being in this expectation, the young
Prince Erastus arived, who went before his Masters, all their hands being
fettered and as strictly guarded as if they had been going to execution, as the
Emperor had commanded; which ^pectacle moved ^ll to compassion. But on the
contrary, the young Prince marched with so much magnaminity and confidence,
that he appeared as if he had made a Triumphant entry, rather then to go to
execution: And there did he see his Father sitting in the Senate, purposing not
to be overcome by fatherly love, although his Son should beg pardon or favor
but to leave him to the Justice of the Law. Erastus being come to a convenient
place, with a voice high enough to be heard of all, began as follows.

I deny not my Lord and Father, that the Creatures of this world every one in
its kind do sometimes produce eff cts degenerating from their essence, so that
there is noth^ng here below that arives to an absolute perfection; but when
this mi^fort^n^ happens to man to see wicked Children issue from good Parents,
who however have taken pains to have them well bred up, and instructed such as
these may be reckoned not to be men but brute Beasts. And therefore so much the
more should I confess my self to be such, if I should commit, or think of
committing so great a crime as that wherewith I am charged, and should be more
Criminal then all men, both against Nature and the breeding that I have had,
being naturally issued from your Royal Loins being educated and instructed
with such knowledge and integrity as hith^rto has been ^^own and will for the
future be acknowledged to b^ in these my seven Masters, who are here p ^^ent;
who for good cause you made choice of to ^ ^mit the Government of my tender
Age, to whom a^^ to the goodness of Nature, and by their dilig ^^^ and
industry, I am sure I am so well profited, a^^ have given such an opinion of me
in Rome, (for always with my Age I have so pursued the steps of virtue, that I
can speak it without being taxed of arrogance) that being come to the Age of
discretion, it is a thing almost incredible to believe that I should so much
forget my self, as to fall into a crime which should defame your blood, and the
reputation of our house, which by this means should be contaminated with so
villainous a crime, as this whereof I am accused; I wonder how it can enter into
the thoughts of any, that I should have so small respect to the honor of our
house which wholly concerns me being your Son, and only successor, considering
my Age, and my study of Philosophy to which I have wholly applied my self, ever
since the hour of my Nativity, I must needs be a competent Judge of good and
evil, that which is profitable and hurtful, honest or dishonest; and therefore
I have wondered hen I thought with my self how it should be possible to
believe, and that so easily that I should commit an act so villainous, and how
you should be possessed with a thought to condemn me to death so suddenly for
the speeches of a single woman, without any proof of the fact, true I am more
to blame than you, who have given sentence against me because I have not spoken
one word that might serve for my Justification, neither at the beginning when I
was accused, nor during these days wherein my Masters here present have saved
my life; so that this my silence has had the power to induce those who
consider things no further than their eyes demonstrate to them, to believe that
I had committed this Villainous act wherewith I was charged, and that being
surprised in the very manner, and knowing the Crime to be so hanious that there
was no expectation of pardon; I was thereupon so confounded, that I was
bereaved of my speech. But my silence was occasioned by a higher cause,
wherewith if you had been so well acquainted as were these my Masters, you
would have known that it was impossible for me to do otherwise, without falling
into an extreme evil, which I could not avoid, it having been already allotted
to me, and my only remedy consisted in being silent for these seven days, I
very well knowing that my life was in great danger if it were not prolonged for
that time, as well by the learned discourse of my Masters, as by the necessary
silence which I have used. For these virtuous persons as well as I, did foresee
on that day we received your commands to come to Rome, the great danger I
should be in of a shameful death, in coming hither, for they are endowed with
so great knowledge, that there are very few disasters which they do not
foresee, and provide a remedy if there be any; it is very true that we could
not possibly find out the means which should cause this disaster although we
were very well assured of the great danger I should be in for seven days; to
avoid which, there was no other remedy but for that time for me to keep an
absolute silence. This we concluded to do rather than disobey your commands in
not coming to Rome, doubting also lest I should fall into some other
inconvenience which should procure pour displeasure, and render me infamous to
all posterity; and therefore hazarding all that might befall me, I resolved to
continue seven days without speaking, assuring my self that my just cause
would not fail me, being confident of the great virtue of these my seven
Masters; who like vigilant and virtuous Advocates have always oppoposed
themselves against the fury of those who endeavored the ruin of my life and
honor.

And thereupon he gave a particular account of what they had seen in the
Heavens and the Aspects of the Stars, that evening before they took their
journey to Rome; and the resolution which he and his Masters had thereupon
taken, in pursuance whereof he had suffered very much, considering the great
inconvenience caused by his silence, which gave occasion to all people to
believe that in regard he made no defense, he was guilty of the great felony
whereof he was accused; yet however his heart had not failed him, being assured
that what was once established and confirmed by the Caelestial influences;
(that is if he continued silent) he should avoid that disaster; so that in
conclusion he did not doubt but by this means all things would be well,
notwithstanding the impetuosity of the words, and storms which had so
overwhelmed him; wherein the will of the Gods appeared to be different from
that of men, for all mortal things are easily changed, whereas the will of God
being immortal, remains eternally immutable; so that what has bin once
determined above follows by necessity, although it be by ordinary means,
notwihstanding all oppositions and contradictions whatsoever, And that it is
thus said the young Prince, I will prove it to you by the example of a very
virtuous young man, and to whom Fortune was so contrary, that he who should
have advanced him, endeavored his death; and yet however he arrived to be a
King from being a mean personage, as the influences of the Stars had predicted,
and that which was intended to hinder his greatness, was the means whereby he
arrived to royal dignity.

And I now make it my humble request to you all here present to excuse the
length of my discourse, in regard I have been silent so long, and now being at
liberty to speak; I think it not to be inconvenient nor unreasonable, that I
give my self this satisfaction, and that I use my utmost endeavors to please
my Auditors, the matter in question being of so great impor^^ance to me.

Long time since in the Levant Countries, and particularly in the most
illustrious and famous City of Alexandria, there lived a Merchant named
Europus, who contrary to the custom and fortune of many others, having a long
time traffiqued with Merchandise without any los^, had so increased his riche^
and arrived to so much wealth, that he had no mind to have any more; and
contrary to the humor of most men, was content with what he had. This Merchant
being thus wealthy left of his tradeing, taking no other thoughts but of
advancing an only Son which he had, who was called Hermogenes to attain to
which he sent him to study, that he might fashion him to those things that were
gentile and honorable; and Fortune was so favorable to him in this enterprise,
that in short time he saw his son very well instructed in Learning and Arms,
and in all other virtuous actions becoming a Gentleman; yet however seeing
that he was morose and melancholy, by reason he had no company in the house to
converse with at home, neither had he traveled abroad; for there is no better
way to know the World than to travel in it, which gives a greater reputation to
men, and is more profitable than to live always at home in their Nests;
wherefore that he might please him, he resolved to travel into several places,
and having made provision of moneys necessary for such an undertaking, and
chosen out those that should accompany or attend him, he provided and furnished
a Ship, wherein he and all his company embarked, and having taken order about
his Domestic affairs, with the first good wind they set sail, and having
sailed several days, and meeting with a storm, they made toward an Island
where they landed; in this Island he had a mind to remain some days, as being
a pleasant place; well manured, and the Inhabitants very civil and courteous,
but being desirous to pursue his Voyage, he embarkqued, when he and his son had
no sooner left the shore but they saw two Birds as white as Swans, who hovered
about their Vessel, and in the end perched on the Ancient of the main M^st,
where they had not long rested, but they descended as if they would have settled
on the head of the young Hermogenes, but soon returned from whence they came,
where they began to warble and sing so sweetly and harmoniously that one would
have imagined them to have bin Musitian^ that endeavored to show their utmost
skill and cunning; so that all the Ships company, who were pleased with their
harmony, durst not stir for fear of disturbing them; Europus who had formerly
learned several words of the auguries of Birds, and their significations,
bethought himself what this might mean, being ignorant whither it foretold good
or evil; and seeing his son very pensive, and yet nevertheless very pleasant in
countenance, he said to him, is it possible that what I have formerly heard
has been true, that there are brute Beasts, who by extraordinary gestures will
foretell things to come; and that there are men so wise as to understand them?
there is nothing more certain replied young Hermogenes, for often times by
these and such like means, some men have foretold several accidents to come, a
long time before they have happened, and that their hearts might be enlightened,
and be upon the greater certainty, they offered sacrifices proper thereunto;
making use of many things that I shall not at present mention. If this be true
said the Father, I would gladly know the meaning of the singing of these two
Birds, if you are very desirous said young Hermogenes, for the Obligation which
I have to obey you, I will give you that satisfaction let what will befall me;
and therefore you are to take notice that all which you have seen, and all the
warbling of the Birds was made only in respect of me, and of my future
greatness, for these Birds have signified no other thing but as they perched
themselves so much higher than you are, so much hereafter shall I surpass you
in greatness, in sign whereof they have begun to sing praises to me.

The Merchant Europus hearing this was surprised tither with Choler or Envy,
or rather with both together, and in a great fury said, I will take order that
this angury shall not take effect, and saying so, he took his son by the
shoulders and threw him overboard into the Sea; saying to those in the Ship,
that although he desired his Sons advancement; yet however he intended not to
make him greater than himself; and that he had rather choose to dye without an
Heir, than to give the least respect in the world to his Son, and therefore he
commanded instantly to hoyst up the sails, and steer their course for
Alexandria, certainly believing that his Son was devoured by the wave^, but it
happened quite otherwise, for he thinking to abase his Son, and to hinder the
greatness that was prepared for him, he shortened his way thereunto; young
Hermogenes than endeavoring to gain the shore by swiming so well as he could,
a strong wind so assisted him, that in less than an hour he found himself
ashore, on the same Island from whence they set out and from whence his cruel
father had cast him into the Sea being much weary and spent; yet the Islanders
releived him so well (having compassion for the cruelty that had been showed to
him) that he in short time recovered, and having continued two days in that
Island, he saw a very large Merchants Ship w^^ endeavored to take harbor there
to refresh themselves, and take in fresh water, and considering with himself
that to continue longer in that Island, his condition would not be better, he
made his case known to the Master of the Ship, who was a rich Merchant of
Candy, named Sterifo, who having discoursed with young Hermogines, and
understanding from him particularly how every thing had happened, he asked him
what course he intended to take; to this the young man answered that he was
content to what he should please to command him, if he would be pleased to
accept of his service; whereupon Sterifo being very willing, accepted of him,
and from that time Hermogenes disposed himself to serve him truly and
faithfully, which he performed so well, that Sterifo being childless and being
out of hopes of having any Children, purposed to adopt the young Hermogenes,
^eeing his good and honest carriage, which was every way such as Sterifo
desired in a Son, if he had had any; Being arrived at his house, and having
acquainted his wife with his design, he found her very willing and free to it,
and f^on after they both declared him for their proper Child, and because of
the bounty of Fortune which had been manifested toward him, they changed his
Nam^ and called him Entichus; that is to say Bonadventure, or good Adventure,
which being done you may understand that if at the beginning, a young man so
well bred, had carried himself respectively toward Stirefo and his Wife when
he was adopted, he then made it his Study to do much better, and with all
fidelity, diligence and readiness to apply himself to their service.

It was about this time that the King of Candy, who was named Critorneus, that
is to say a Judge of Birds, (whether that were his proper name or only imposed
on him) by a certain accident, was then in great trouble, and not knowing which
way or how to deliver himself out of it, he counted himself to be unhappy and
unfortunate, and being ignorant of the cause of this trouble; he Judged that
some great misfortune would befall him, and the Candiots his Subjects had a bad
opinion of him, supposing that this had happened in respect of some enormous
Sin which he had Committed. And this was his affliction, so often as he went
out of his Chamber three Crows would present themselves before him, as if they
had waited on purpose, which flew round about him fluttering and Croaking in
such manner, that the poor Prince had his brains almost broken, so that he was
forced to return into his Chamber from this mischief, being very desirous to be
released, as his last refuge, he caused it to be proclaimed through all his
Countries by Sound of Trumpets, and through all the Isle of Candy that if there
were any one who could remedy this Croaking of the Crows, and deliver him from
the trouble which they gave him; he would give them the one half of his
Kingdom for their reward and if it were a man, he would furthermore give his
only Daughter in marriage to them.

This being Proclaimed, many went to try their skill, thinking to deliver the
King from the trouble of the Crows, some by Negromancy and the Invocation of
Spirits, and others by certain Medecinal compotsi^ons and Ten thousand other
experiments, and yet there was none that could effect what they intended. The
young Entichus understanding this news of the Proclamation of the King of Candy
bethought himself that it might happen to be he that should receive this great
reward which the King had promised, since all consisted in the Interpretation
of the Gestures and Song of the Crows, in which knowledge he was very well
skilled; and therefore he humbly entreated Sterifo (without whose commands he
would undertake nothing) that he would please to give him leave to deliver King
Gritorneus from the trouble of the Crows, assuring him that he could easily
perform it; to this the Old man consented, and he himself presented him to the
King, who likewise promised him, that so soon as Entichus should have delivered
him from the trouble wherein he was, he would perform the promise he had made,
and confirmed it with an oath; whereupon young Entichus having made his
Reverence to the King, he humbly entreated that it would please his Majesty to
take the Air out of his Palace, assuring him that he would immeadiately
acquaint him, with the occasion of the Croaking of the birds, and by that means
free him from the trouble he was in. The King very readily performed this, but
he was no sooner come out of his doors, but the Crows came fluttering and
Croaking more then ever they had done. The young Entichus said to the King,
know Sir, that this Croaking and fluttering of the birds, comes not by any evil
that is in you nor any other in your house, but these birds come to you to
decide a difference which is between them: This Crow which is known by his
feathers to be older than the other, took to wife this other which appears to
be a Male but is a Female, but when a scarcity of provision happened, he hunted
her away and would not keep her company, so that she joined her self to this
young Crow, which is that in the middle; when there was victuals enough to eat
then the old Crow would again have his Female, but she seemed to be
discontented, and furtherfore the young Crow hoped to have some pleasure with
the Female in that good season, since he had provided for her in the time of
scarcity, and this being in debate, and they not agreeing there upon are com to
you that by your royal authority whereby you make Laws and ordinances, that you
would be pleased to put an end to their difference, by your definitive
sentence; assuring you Sir, that so soon as you shall pronounce sentence they
will be gone, and trouble you no further. The King hearing what Entichus had
said, adjudged by his absolute sentence the Female to the young Crow, and he
had no sooner made an end of pronouncing his sentence but the Crows flew away
without ever returning again, to the wonder of all the Spectators, who much
marvailed thereat, but above all the King was astonished, and being transported
ran to embrace young Entichus; telling him that from thenceforth he should take
him and no other for his natural Father, for said he I will perform my promise
in giving you my Daughter and the half of my Kingdom, Entichus making his due
reverence to the King, humbly thanked him, and so they returned to the Palace,
the good old Sterifo being joyful of his Adopted Sons advancement after he had
given him his best instructions and blessing, departed goeing home to his wife
and leaving his Son Entichus at Court, both beloved and admired at by the King
and all his Nobility, as well in respect of his Gallant deportment, as of his
kill and cunning, for he frequented Jousts and Tournaments in short time became
so Complete a Practitioner, that he excelled all others still bearing away the
Prize.

At this time there was an Emperor of Germany, whose name was Frederick, who
was so accomplished a Prince in all endowments both of body and mind, that he
excelled all the Princes, Kings, and Emperors in the whole world. The same of
this Emperors virtues flying abroad into all parts, it came to the hearing of
Prince Entichus (for so I may now call him, his virtue having procured him that
Title) who being desireous of procuring fame abroad, as well as it home; and
therefore purposing to t^avell, and no place being so fit as he thought as the
Court of the Emperor Fredrick he asked leave of the King to go thither. His
request was not denied, only the King adv^sed him to stay some time till
honorable provision were made for him, that he might appear at the Emperors
Court, in an equipage befitting the Son of the King of Candy, and that before
he went he would perform what was at first intended, and was indeed necessary
in marrying his Daughter. To this Prince Entichus replied, Most renowned King
and honored Father, I most humbly thank you for your great respect toward me,
in condesending to give me attendance, and other equipage befitting your Son,
but I desire you to spare that charge and trouble, for if my own virtues are
not sufficient to to bespeak and make known my quallity, it will be in vain to
have any other Ornaments; therefore I desire to go, although not altogether
unaccompanied and as a private person, yet to have as few as may be, and as
little charge only your Letters Credentials, that I may be received as your Son
if I shall deserve that Title; and as to your other desire of my present
marriage, I humbly and heartily thank you for your offer, and above all things
accept of your Majesty's Alliance, but desire the consumation thereof may be
deferred till my return, hoping then to bring so good a fame with me, as may in
part merit the Illustrious Title of your Son-in-law, and thereby render me to
your Daughter more acceptable for her husband.

Prince Entichus having finished his speech, which was dilligently observed by
the King who knew it was modest and reasonable, he therefore consented thereto
and gave him leave to depart accordingly first furnishing him with a sufficient
quantity of Money and Jewels; and now in short time he arrived at the Court of
the Emperor, who received him with ^ll Immaginable kindness: And there he
behaved himself so well, that the Emperor made him his Carver. And soon after
Prince Arthur Son to the King of England, arriving there was kind^y received of
the Emperor, and him he made his Cupbearer; And these two Princes Entichus and
Arthur were so like one another in face Proportion, and voice, that they could
hardly be distinguished, and as they were alike in bodies, so they Loved each
other with an entire and f^ithful affection.

The Emperor had only one Child and that was a Daughter who although she kept
a Court by her self and had servants of her own yet every day did the Emperor
send her a dish from his own table by Entichus his Carver, who by that means
had the opportunity of seeing her and the advantage to be esteemed by her; but
he being one day absent from the Emperors Table, and the Emperor according to
Custom intending to send to his Daughter; Prince Arthur performed that Office
on his behalf, by this means he had the sight of the Princess Angelica (for so
was she named) who perceiving that it was not Entichus, enquired his name and
quality, and he having answered her departed, but although he was well in body,
yet he was so sorely troubled in mind that not being able to hold up his head,
he retired and went to Bed.

His friend Prince Entichus missing him, and doubting the matter to be as
indeed it it was (for he understood that he had supplied his place, in carrying
a Dish from the Emperor to the Princess,) and he supposing that the sight of
her, had wounded his heart with love; he therefore w^nt to his friend Arthurs
Chamber, and demanded the cause of his sickness, which Prince Arthur being
unwilling to discover, made excuses, but Entichus being confirmed in his
opinion, declared it to his friend Arthur, who then could not deny, but that
the Love of the Princess Angelica was the cause of his distemper; thereupon
Entichus desired Arthur to be comforted, and he would assist him in all that he
might, neither did he fail in his promise, for the next day he having the
opportunity of waiting on the Princess, he presented her with a Rich Jewel of
his own, but delivered it as sent to her by his friend Arthur, whose Love he
recommended to her and ^me an humble Suitor to her in his behalf.

The Princess seemed to be offended with him for his boldness and charged him
not to proceed in that manner, but however he took all opportunities of
presenting her with Jewels from the Prince Arthur, and used all possible
Arguments to induce her to pity and love his friend; whereupon she who had
borne some affection to himself, asked him why he had not spoken on his own
behalf, to this he replied that he did not esteem himself so worthy as the
Prince his friend, either in birth or otherwise, and besides that his heart had
not as yet been wounded with love, as his friends was; wherefore there being so
great a friendship between him and Prince Arthur, he thought himself obliged
to try all means to procure his satisfaction and therefore he was an humble
Supplyant to her in his friends behalf.

The Princess understanding thus much, and being inclined to love Prince
Arthur, accepted of those presents that Entichus had offered, and at his
entreaty was won to admit them both into her Chamber, at a time appointed that
evening. This was good news to Entichus, who soon carried tidings hereof to his
friend Arthur; who was in a manner ravished with joy at the recital, so that
he left his Bed and was immeadiately so well, that at the time appointed he
went to visit his fair Princess; who received him kindly at present and soon
after was conquered with his Importunity and his friends courtship, so that he
had freedom to be with her, when and as often as he pleased; but this affair
was managed very privately in regard the Empero^ ^s very cautious and vigilant
over his Daughter, and many Courtiers who perceived Arthers too much
familiarity with the Princess; were envious thereat, and sought how to entrap
him, but they were frustrated and disappointed in their contrivances, by the
vigilance and valor of his friend Entichus; who oftentimes put his person in
great hazard on his friends behalf.

The case stood thus with these Princes, when Letters came to Entichus of the
death of the King of Candy, and that he should return and take possession of
his kingdom, this news he declared to them who were right sorrowful for his
departure, and so was the Emperor himself when he came to take leave of him;
but however knowing that it was necessary for his advancement, he gave leave
for his departure, most of the Court attended him part of his way, but
particularly his friend Arthur and the Princess, who were grieved for the loss
of his Company, he advised them to be very private in their meeting, telling
Arthur that some one in time would discover his love to the Princess, if he
were not very wary and circumspect, and that would be his ruin; to this be
promised to take good heed, and Prince Arthur taking a precious ring from his
finger, and giving it to Prince Entichus after strict embraces, and a solemn
but sorrowful f^rewell, these friends and Lovers separated, he pursuing his
journey, and they returning to Court; where not long after Pharamond Son to the
King of France, arrived and was admitted into the place of Prince Entichus,
which was much to the sorrow and trouble of the two Lovers, for they were
suspected and watched by Prince Pharamond, who was so curious in his search
after the truth of their love, that he found it and discove^ed them, and having
some designs upon the Princess himself, and now finding all his hopes
frustrated, he through rage and anger resolved to be revenged on them both; and
therefore he publicly accused them both before the Emperor, who so soon as he
heard of it was very angry, and sending for Arthur, told him of what he was
accused, telling him that if it were proved, he should dye a shameful death;
Arthur pleaded that he was innocent, and that he would prove it in Battle
against his Accuser, to this the other consented, and the Emperor assigned them
the day of Combat.

This was very unpleasant to Prince Arthur, but much more to the Princess, when
he acquainted her therewith; but they seeing how their affairs stood, advised
how to prevent the ensuing danger, for dangerous it would be for him to fight
with Pharamond, who was not only a very valiant Knight, but had a just and true
cause, which commonly is the occasion of the victory; whereas if he should
fight in defense of an untruth and for that of which he was guilty, he might
justly expect to ^ail, and be vanquished; this they both believed would happen,
and therefore consulted what to do, and thus it was, that they wanted the
presence of their dear friend Entichus. This consideration brought it into the
mind of the Princess, how that they should accomplish their business, and
therefore she having thus advised her Lover; to take his opportunity very
suddenly, to speak with the Emperor, and tell him that he had received Letters
from the King his Father, that he must needs go home suddenly, because he was
sick; and therefore to desire his leave to dpart, and to give longer time for
the Combat, which having obtained, to go then immediately to King Entichus, and
desire his advice and assistance; Prince Arthur followed the directions of the
Princess in all these particulars, and obtaining leave of the Emperor, he
traveled so long that he arrived at the Court of King Entichus, and there
privately be acquainted him with his affairs, and the occasion of his journey;
King Entichus was very glad to see him, and desirous to all things to advise
and assist him but knew not how; there is no way but this replied Arthur, that
you return in my behalf, and not being known to be other than my self, on my
befalf to perform the Battle and return; King Entichus approved of what his
friend Arthur had propounded, but they were very much straightened for time in
regard it was but eight days time to the day prefixed for the combat, and if
it were delayed for one day he could not possibly arrive there time enough, and
he had invited all his Nobility on the next day to come to his Wedd^ng. This
was such an ob^tacle as could not be removed or remedyed, and put them to their
wits ends; but King Entichus being resolved to give an absolute proof of his
friendship, and hazard Kingdom, Wife and Life, and all rather than his friends
should suffer in their honor, he therefore thus contrived the business; that
Prince Arthur in all things resembling King Entichus should stay there, and as
if it were he be married to his Queen, and hold all the solemnity of the
Nuptials, only when he was in bed with her to forbear proceeding with her: and
that he would immediately return to the Emperors Court, and undertake the
Combat, and if he obtained the Victory suddenly return, and so might he do so
too to his best beloved, this being concluded upon they separated accordingly.

On the next day was solemnized the Wedding of Prince Arthur and the Queen, as
if he had been King Entichus, and after much feasting, at night he went to bed
with his Bride, but that he might perform with King Entichus, he laid a naked
sword between them, and which she much wondered at, however he continued to do
so all the time of the absence of his friend; King Entichus arrived at the
Emperors Court, applied himself to the Emperor, telling him that although his
Father the King of England was very sick, yet as a true Knight he had left him,
and was come at the time prefixed, to perform the appointed Combat, the
Emperor received him kindly, and wished him good success, and so he went to his
Lodgings as if he had been Prince Arthur, only the Princess entertained him
privately, and understood from him in what condition he had left his friend,
much wondering that there should be so much friendship between them. The next
day being the day of Battle, both the Champions being ready before the Combat
began, King Entichus before the Emperor declared that if Pharamond did accuse
him with incontinence, or too much familiarity with the Princess Angelica, that
the accusation was false and untrue, and that he therein lied to the great
dishonor of himself, the Princess, and of the Emperor, and that he was a false
Knight. and that he was then ready to make good upon him in single combat.
Pharamond hearing this protestation, answered, that what he had said was true,
and that he was ready to prove, and thereupon being both ready arth'd, they
mounted their horses and began the combat which lasted not long, for K.
Entichus being the better Warrior, soon vanquished his enemy, and cutting off
his head, presented it to the Princess to her great joy; and to the
satisfaction of the Emperor, and all the Court, who applauded King Entichus,
supposing him to be Prince Arthur; but he having leave of the Emperor to go to
his sick Father, as he pretended, and having taken his farewell of the Emperor
and Princess, he departed not toward England as he pretended, but to his own
kingdom; where he was privately but joyfully received of Prince Arthur, to whom
he gave a true account of the success of his journey, to his great
satisfaction, who told him that he had saved his life and the Princesses; and
therefore he was Debtor to him for both, not being able to requite such a piece
of friendship but with his own life, which he would gladly at any time off^r up
for his service; this was the kindness between these two unparralled frinds,
whose friendships exceeded all that was ever written, as in the s^quel of my
discourse you will understand, but at present after many kindnesses offered to
one another, these two friends Entichus and Arthur separated; Arthur returned
to the E. Court, and Entichus remained in his own kingdom, neither was it known
of any that he had bin absent for when night came he went to bed to his Q. and
as soon at he was laid began to kiss and embrace her in loving manner, she
hereupon told him that this was a sudden alteration, as how said he, because
replied she, you hitherto have been very cautious of coming near me, and have
put a naked sword in bed between us, not so much as turning top: representation
of a knight in armor presenting a head to a seated audience, behind him the
headless body or corpse of a knight, with two male figures holding two horses
by their bridles; middle: an emperor or king and empress or queen seated at a
table with two male figures, attended by a male figure and two female figures,
at another table a female figure seated and a male figure standing; bottom:
representation of an empress or queen standing and a seated male figure, nearby
two figures in a bed toward me; Oh my dear Lady said he, that was intended for
no harm, only the performance of a vow, which time being expired, I shall for
the future make you amends, she seemed to be contented with his excuse, but was
so enraged with his former coldness, that she was resolved to be revenged on
him, and therefore consulting with a Knight of the Court, who had formerly
loved and courted her, they conspired his ruin; and to that end they gave him
poison, which he taking had almost bereaved him of his life, but although he
escaped with life, yet the poison had such effects as it made him like a
Leaper, and that in a monstrous manner; so that he was abominable to behold,
and being abhorred by his Queen and Subjects, they turned him out of his
kingdom, his wife being married to the Knight I lately spoke of, who reigned
as King in his stead.

This was the sad condition of the poor unfortunate Entichus, but on the other
side, Prince Arthur was as highly advanced, for his father the King of England
dying, he became King, and the Emperor of Germany dying, and he marrying with
the Princess Angelica he was crowned Emp. King Entichus understanding the
fortune of his friend to be thus prosperous was joyful, and resolved to go to
him for releif in time of adversity, and therefore putting on Hermits apparel,
he traveled to the E. court, where when he was arrived and would have entered,
he was turned out by the courtiers, who could not endure the sight of so
deformed a monster, wherefore he spak with one of the Emperor servants,
desiring him for the love of God to do a message for him. The servant being a
sober person bid him speak on on and say what he would have? I desire said the
Leaper that you go to the Emperor and tell him that here is a Leaper, that
desires for the love of God and King Entichus his sake, that he may be admited
to eat in some place this day, in the Emperors presence. The Servant told the
Leaper that certainly his request would be refused, but however he would
perform his desire; and thereupon went and told the Emperor, who hearing the
name of his dear friend King Entichus, was so charmed therewith that he
presently consented to the Leapers request, commanding that he should eat in
the Hall at a Table by himself, and be respected as a person of honor; Dinner
time being come, and the Emperor and his Courtiers being sat at Table the
Leaper was also placed and served, and when he had eaten he desired one of the
Servitors to go to the Emperor, and desire him for King Entichus his sake to
send him his best Bowl full of Wine; This is an unreasonable request said the
Servitor, for my Lord the Emperor will never drink in it again, if you should
once touch it but however he went and delivered his Message to the Emperor who
wondered at the request, but performed what was desired, and the Leaper
receiving the Bowl drank off the Wine, and taking the Ring which formerly the
Emperor had given him, put it into the Bowl and desired the Servitor to carry
it to the Emperor, who seeing the Ring and knowing it, was amazed believing he
should hear something of his dear friend Entichus; wherefore he commanded that
the Leaper should be looked after and conducted to his private Chamber that he
might speak with him, this his commands was obeyed, and he arising from Dinner
went to the Leaper, and being alone with him, he asked how he came by that
ring, very honestly replied the Leaper, I had it of the right owner, who said
the Emperor King Entichus? no said the Leaper, of Arthur Prince of England,
that cannot be replied the Emperor, for I am that Arthur, and I gave it to none
but my dear friend King Entichus, that is confessed said the Leaper, and since
you still call Entichus your dear friend, know that I am that unfortunate King;
Oh what impossibilities do you tell me said the Emperor! nothing but what is
too true replied the King with tears in his eyes, which by this time flowed too
from the Emperors eyes, down his cheeks in great abundance, but his grief and
passion having had this vent for a time, he then ran to the Leap^rous King, and
kissed and embraced him, crying out on my dear friend, how is this great
mi^f^rtune befallen you; you replied the King are the occasion of it, though I
must confess you to be innocent, how said the Emperor could I your friend be
the cause of this misfortune and yet be innocent: it is most certain replied
the King, for your friendship to me in lyi^g with my wife, and being innocent
in not knowing her, she supposeing you to be me, has so enrag^d her, that she
revenged her^elf on me by poison, which has wrought this dismal effect upon
me, so that your innocence occasioned my ruin; and thereupon the King related
the whole manner how it had befallen him, and how he was turned out of his
Kingdom, Oh me unfortunate said the Emperor! that I should occasion so much
evil, that my dear friend who has so often hazarded his life for me should be
thus evilly recompensed through my occasion: I cannot (said the King) complain
of you, but of fortune, to whom we must all submit, well said the Emperor,
since you are still Master of so much virtue continue it and hope the best; and
I will endeavor your remedy if it may be done by the skill of any man, I will
give any reward, nothing in my Dominions shall be wanting or spared that may do
you good: the good King thanked him, and resolved to continue there unknown to
all, to see if there might be any remedy for his infirmity.

In order to his cure the Emperor employed all Physicians that he could here
of, setting out Proclamations, that if any could cure this distemper, they
should have a large reward; but when all was done they could do nothing, and so
they told him, that it was not within the cure of Physic, and that if he were
ever healed it must be by miracle. The Emperor hearing this was very much
afflicted, and being resolved to try always for the restoration of his
friend, he applied himself to all religious Persons and their prayers, neither
was he wanting in his own, for he did not only make frequent and daily prayers
for his friend, but he set apart several days whereon he fasted and prayed
upon this occasion; the good King Entichus was patient in this adversity, and
yet prayed also to be dedelivered from this evil if it might stand with the
good pleasure of the Almighty, who in the end was entreated of him, and in a
Vision told King Entichus how he might be cured: but it was by so strange means
that he resolved rather to continue as he was than attempt it; for the Vision
told him that there was other way for his recovery, but to be bathed in blood
of two Children of the Emperors which the Emperor must with his own hands
kill, and after bath him with their blood; This was the only remedy prescribed
for his malady, wherefore he purposed to be silent accounting it unreasonable
to kill two Innocents to preserve one Sinner; but let him resolve what he
pleases, it was the pleasure of heaven to resolve otherwise and as he had given
an Unparalleld proof of his friendship to the Emperor, so the Emperor must
retalliate and indeed exceed it in this great trial of his natural affection
in preferring his friend before himself, for his Children may be termed himself
being the best part of him; wherefore that I may proceed you are to know that
the Emperor still continued his prayers to heaven, neither was heaven silent,
but in a vision told him that his friend Entichus knew how to be cured, he
thereupon goes to him and desires him to tell him and that truly if he did not
know of a remedy for his disease, to this after much importunity, Entichus not
only told him that he did but also the manner now, but withal disswades him
from executing it; to this the Emperor replied, that since heaven prescribed
the remedy he would dispute no further but obey what was commanded; and
thereupon went and Cut the throats of the two Innocents, and saving the blood
and bathing his friends body therewith, he became as clear and fair as ever, to
the great joy of them both, the Emperor rejoicing that he had so good an
opportunity as to give proof of his friendship.

The King being thus healed, it was thus agreed that he should leave the Court
and go some few miles out of the Town, wherein he should have attendants
suitable to his quality, and then he should send word of his approach, and so
should be met and entertained as to his dignity appertained; accordinly there
came a Messenger the next day into the Emperors Hall, who gave the Emperor an
account of the arrival of his friend King Entichus. The Empress hearing of this
news was joyful, and told the Emperor that by all means they must entertain
their good friend very splendedly, and to that end said she, you with your
Nobles, and I with my Ladies will go meet him; to this the Emperor agreed, and
they rode together till they met him and received him with great reverence; and
attending him till they came to the Palace, where they gave him royal
entertainment.

Although the Emperor was joyful at his dear friends company, yet the Empress
exceeded him in demonstration of her joye; which the Emperor observing, he told
her that he was well pleased therewith: wherefore said the Empress should I not
express my joy to the height, for his company is more precious than all the
Treasure in the World; for by his means you attained to this hono^ and dignity,
and he has often hazarded his life to save yours.

The Emperor hearing this, desired her to take good notice of what he should
presently say; it is not long since (continued he) that a deformed Leaper was
in my Court, I well remember him said the Empress, a most horrible creature he
was indeed; suppose (said the Emperor) this Leaper were our friend King
Entichus, and that there was no way to cure him of his loathsome Leaprosie, but
by the death of both your children, in whose blood he must be washed, could you
for his sake suffer it. It is a very strange question replied the Empress, but
I thus resolve it, that had I ten Children, I would kill them all with my own
hands, rather than our dear friend King Entichus should continue so loathsome a
Leaper, for we might have more Children, but never such a friend as he. The
Emperor hearing her constant speech, was resolved to make full trial of her
constancy, and told her how all had happened, and that her two Children were
dead, she bearing this, notwithstanding all her eouragious speeches, yet Nature
so wrought with her that she sunk down in a swoun, but remedies being used she
recovered; at the news of the Emperors Childrens death, the Nurses went to
see after them, when they came where they were, and expected to find them
dead, they saw the contrary; for they were alive and singing, and about their
Necks where they were cut, were Circles of Gold; this joyful news was brought
to the Emperor and Empress, who were exceeding joyful thereat, give-thanks to
Heaven for this Miracle.

Soon after the Emperor raiseing an Army, went along with King Entichus to
Candy, and overcoming an Army which the Queen and her Husband had raised, King
Entichus was ag^in put in possession of his Kingdom, and the Queen and her
Husband slain,

And now the King being a single man, that these two friends might be allied by
marriage as well as affection, the Emperor having one only Sister, gave her in
Marriage to his Friend King Entichus and then these two great friends were
again separated.

The Emperor returning to his Empire, and the King remaining in peaceable and
quiet possession of his Kingdom; and now he began to think of his old friends
especially his Foster father Sterifo whom he ennobled with Titles of honor,
and giving him an honorable and profitable employment at Court, had him near
him as a Counselor in all his affairs; and carrying himself courteously and
justly to his Subjects, he was beloved of all them and feared of his enemies.
Thus affairs growing every day better and better, it happened that in the City
of Alexandria, which was his natural Country, the great wars, unfruitful
seasons, and other bad influences had caused such a Scarcity of Victuals, that
the g eate^t part of the inhabitants dyed with famine; so that the inhabitants
of Alexandria were necessitated to travel into several Countries to get Corn
for the poor, and therefore they made choice of the most expert and the most
knowing men that they could find amongst them (who willingly accepted of the
Employment, because they were well provided with every thing) that from other
parts they might relieve their Citizens, passing their time at the charge of
others. Among the rest they made Choice of Europus the natural Father of
Entichus, and who had thrown him into the Sea; who having taken Povt in the
Isle of Candy where the Stars had so long before prepared a Crown for him, he
desired leave to buy up in that Island a great quantity of Corn, King Entichus
being acquainted herewith caused enquitey to be made, who they were that were
in the Ship, and from whence they came, and being informed of the truth, and
knowing the necessity of his Country, and the name of the Commander, and of the
Ship, he did suspect that it was his Father; and therefore he purposed before
he departed to make himself known to him, and to put him in mind of the great
fault which he had committed. Whereupon having sent for him, to come to his
Palace pretending to discourse with him about other affairs, he caused him to
stay and Dine with him: which invitation he knowing not how to refuse,
accepeted of with such honor and reverence, as has been accustomed to be used
by those who speak with Kings, Princes, and other great Lords.

Being at the Table, after that the King had sufficiently informed himself of
the estate of the City of Alexandria in general, he questioned with his Father
of his particular affairs, of his name, and how many Children he had? Whereupon
the Merchant having told his name, answered sighing that he had no Children,
and that he never had but one, who perished in the Sea by a miserable
misfortune.

It may be said the King your Son is not dead, for there is one here present
who has escaped from such a like misfortune as you speak of and as he says he
is the Son of a Merchant of the City of Alexandria, and therefore advised him
to look about him, upon all the Company there present for it may happen that he
may know his Son, before his Son did know him. The Merchant observing what the
King had said, began to take notice of all those that were in the Hall; and on
the other side every one looked upon him, believing that they should understand
somewhat that was as yet unknown, and after he had well looked upon and taken
notice of every one, he said to the K ng that he could not find that his Son
was there present, whereupon the King said, if you had well considered the
Spectacle which you had of the two white Birds, and the interpretation that was
made to you, you would of your self have known that which I shall now tell you;
for it was I my felf, whose way to greatness you would hinder instead of
advanceing it as you ought. The good man hearing him speak of two white Birds,
suddenly changed his Color, being confounded within himself with shame; But
when he heard this spoken to his face and in the presence of so many great
Lords, the occasion that had moved him to such an excess, he g^ew pale and red
both at once; and knowing no other way to make amends for his faults, he arose
from the Table and cast himself at his Sons feet asking him p^rdon. But the
King who was no less generous then great and puissant took hold of him and
raised him, praying him that forgetting what was passed he would make use of
that power which God had given him and that he would rest contented that he had
made him know by effects that it is impossible to interrupt or hinder that
which the pleasure of God has once ordained; and so having sent by others a
sufficient quantity of Corn for his Country, he caused his Father to remain
with him, taking order to bring the rest of his family to Candy, to participate
of that good fortune which had befallen him, contrary to all humane thoughts
and which he had well and wisely persued.

By this Example (said Erastus) and many others as admirable as this, which I
could relate; we may assuredly conclude that whatsoever has been once ordained
and established above, does usually come to pass, so that nothing here below
can obstruct or hinder it; being assured of this, I and my Masters did expose
our selves to very great hazard and danger, in our coming to Rome, and the only
remedy that we had was for me to be silent for the space of seven days, in
doing whereof the heavens promised me a good issue and deliverance, provided
that some would defend my cause, for that Term; the which my seven Masters like
prudent and valliant Champions have done: I therefore resolved to follow the
right remedy which had been prescribed me, for the conservation of my life and
honor, the which otherwise I should have dishonourably lost (as the heavens
had let me know) soon after my arrival at Rome, the shame whereof would have
been much more grievious to me, than the death wherewith I was threatened.
Behold then what has induced me and indeed enforced me to be Dumb these seven
days, which I suppose has been as much to your astonishment, as my trouble to
see my self constrained by a fatal silence to confirm the opinion that every
one might have, that I would commit an action so wicked and wretched, as that
which has been falsely charged on me by the Empress; who being a woman and
naturally inclined to be fickle and angry, and having been lately in love with
me, it is no wonder if she has converted that love which she first showed me
into a mortal hatred, endeavoring to make me dye who am her Son in Law, as it
has frequently befallen others who without any reason have prosecuted their
Sons in law, either through hatred or anger. As for hatred we may find
examples enough in ancient Histories; as that which Jur conceived against
Phrisso and Hell, and of the Modern Histories there are enough; and of hatred
we may read how the cruel Phedra treated the innocent Hipolitus, whose
companion I had certainly bin, both in cause and miserable death; if the
evident danger wherein I was, had not been manifested to me by Heaven, and the
means to escape it, the which I have hitherto done by the good assistance of my
Masters here present, to whom I am indebted, not only for the good instructions
I have received of them but also for my life; as for the crime wherewith
Aphrodicia has endeavored to change me which is that I attempted to force
her, and confirmed the truth of this outrage by my flight, it had been very
easy for me to manifest my innocence, and her incontinence, if I had
permission to speak, but knowing very well by the course of the Stars that my
speech would not have delivered me from danger but rather have plunged ^s into
a bottomless pit of misfortune, I have been constrained to endure these days
past all the Calumnies that have been charged upon me, that I might now
discharge my self, and mak^ my Innocence appear to all the World, I being
unwilling to advance before my time, lest I should at once loose both life and
honor.

And now before I proceed any further, may it please you Sir, to grant me this
favor, to cause the Empress to appear before you and the Senate, that the
truth of what I shall speak may be cleared, and that you may not think I have
contrived what I have spoken, as she has falsely contrived the Imputation
wherewith she has charged me, miserably to ruin both my life and renown: yet
however I do not desire the same manner of proceeding against her as has been
used against me; that is to begin with execution before the matter of fact in
deliberatly debated, but I desire that the truth may be known by the
confronting of the Parties, and that what term she pleases may be given for her
justification, entreating you Sir to believe that what I shall propose to the
Empress when she is present, to be for the discharge of my innocence, and the
clearing of the truth, and not to imagine that I shall speak or propose any
thing whatsoever for revenge, for it will never enter in^o the heart of any man
of honor to revenge himself upon a woman. This Oration of Prince Erastus was
spoken with so much confidence, that not only the Emperor, but also all the
Senators, and generally all those who had heard him speak were astonished, and
thereupon without any contradicton it was concluded and ordered that the
Empress should be immediately sent for, who understood by her spies with what
courage the Prince Erastus had spoken before the Senate, and doubting what
would become of her, she purposed to have fled, and by that means to escape the
danger, but it was too late, for she had no sooner taken this resolution, but
those whom the Emperor had sent, came and surprised her; at whose arrival she
lost courage, and was so out of countenance, that understanding the charge
which they had from the Emperor, she could not give one word of answer, being
pale and trembling not knowing what to do or say; whereupon those who were sent
for her did easily conjecture that the case of Erastus was otherwise than she
had represented it, seeing that she was so confounded at her being carried
before him. In this distracted condition they conducted her from the Palace,
into the Hall of the Senate, at whose arrival all the Senators arose, making
reverence to her, who took no notice of them; whereas formerly she was used to
be so complaisant that she returned all salutations, not only to the Senators,
but also to the meanest person in Rome, this fi^^ceness was observed by all,
being sat down by the Emperors side in a different posture from what she was
used to, Prince Erastus pursuing his discourse, did particularly declare from
the beginning to the end, all that had passed between him and her, beginning
with the letters and rich presents which she had sent him before his coming to
Rome, which might be attributed to a loving and Motherly affection, if she had
not proceeded further; but no sooner was he come thither, when she made clearly
evident the dishonest intentions that she designed by those presents,
endeavoring at the beginning by smooth and amorous speeches, and after that by
disordinate and luxurious gestures, to induce him to violate the holy and
sacred marriage of his father; and in conclusion endeavoring to have her
pleasure with him by force: whereupon he had rather chosen to fly from her,
than to stain his hands in her motherly blood, in revenging the great outrage
she intended against his Father; according to the enormity of the case,
considering the violence she used to him, but she seeing that the case was
otherwise than she expected, measuring the continence and chastity of others,
according to her own disordinate appetite; through rage and anger to see her
self so slighted, (as it is usual for women in her condition to do) or else
doubting that he would discover this villainy to the Emperor his Father, who
might punish her as she justly deserved, took her advantage seeing him take his
flight out of her Chamber, to cry out a Rape, and say that he would have forced
her, confirming her report by his sudden flight, assuting her self that this
would be sufficient to move the Emperor and every body else, the truth being so
apparent, to kill him immediately, being surprised in such an action, without
giving him leisure to justify himself; and by this means failing in the
satisfaction of her disordinate appetite, she might have the content to be
revenged. To which design of hers at the beginning Fortune had been as
favorable to her, as contrary to him, in winding him into this Labrinth; at
such a time as the Heavens would not permit him to speak, whereby all men might
believe that he was guilty of the crime whereof he had been accused; true it
is, that according to the instability and ordinary inconstance of Fortune, she
had turned her wheel, giving opportunity to his Masters to stay the execution
of the sentence against him, until he had the liberty of speaking, to manifest
the matter as it had passed.

And here did Prince Erastus apply every thing to his purpose, which might be
material to the conservation of his life and honor; sometimes he would address
himself to the Empress, rehearsing to her the very speeches she had used to him
in her Chamber, with her luxurious and disorinate gestures whereby she
endeavored to induce him to let loose the Reins of his continence, oftentimes
asking her wherefore and for what cause she would thus ^aint an Imperial family
with so villainous an action; to this the miserable woman knew not what to
answer, seeing her folly and treason so apparent in the presence of the
Emperor, and so many persons of honor which were there present, but her eyes
were continually fixed on the ground, often changing her color, shrinking up
her shoulders and sighing continually; which things served as an absolute index
to prove the speeches of P^: Erastus to be true, who was so eloquent and lively
in his defense, that he not only drew to his side the Senate, and others who
loved and reverenced him, but also the friends and relations of the Empress,
(who the evening before being seduced by the fraudulent speeches of Aphrodicia,
had procured that without any delay Prince Erastus should be dispatched and
with him the seven Philosophers) who were the first that declared the Prince to
be innocent, casting themselves at his feet, and asking him pardon and mercy,
most humbly entreating him that he would forget the prosecution which they had
made against him, for that they as well as the Emperor had bin cunningly
seduced; and for satisfaction if no others should, they themselves would take a
revenge according to the quality of the crime against her, who by so great
treason had abused them; hereupon Prince Erastus received them very
courteously, with a free and clear countenance, and he and his seven Masters
being unbound, he went directly toward the Emperor, who having retained all
that his Son had said, how every thing had passed, he bethought him of his
dream, understanding the truth of the Vision that had the night before appeared
to him; and therefore ariseing from his Imperial seat, he went to his Some
imbraceing him so loveingly that the tears flowed from his eyes, to see him in
a manner raised from death to life, as well in body as in honor, which he
esteemed more highly than life; and being about to excuse himself for those
rigorous courses which had bin used against him, the young Prince interrupted
his discourse, saying that his fatal silence was the cause of all, whereof
having said enough before the Senate he should forbear to speak further, only
he entreated him to declare plainly if he yet had any scruple of his being
guilty, which was not cleared to him, so that he might fully justify himself;
whereupon all the Senate unanimously answered him, that they esteemed him
sufficiently justified and innocent of that wherewith he had bin accused, and
after some further discourse the Emperor caused him to sit down by him, to
consult what should be done with the Empress; whereupon the Emperor (having
learned by the pains and trouble he had lately suffered) speak aloud that by
experience found it to be an unjust thing for a man to be a judge in the matter
wherein he himself was concerned and therefore he would not meddle with the
proceedings about the Empress; but remit all to the judgment of the Senate to
proceed as they should find cause, without respect to any person; and
accordingly by order of the Senate, the Empress was delivered into the Custody
of some of the principal Senators until the next day, when they would consider
what way to proceed against her; and if she should not at all justify her self,
(as every one believed it to be impossible) that sentence should be justly
executed on her, that she would have unjustly caused to be executed on the
Prince; and that in the mean time all things should be taken from her,
wherewith she might offend or kill her self through despair.

CHAP. XXIV. The Empress Aphrodicia understanding the desperateness of her
condition, being in Prison desperately killed her self.
SO soon as Prince Erastus was restored and confirmed according to his place
and quality, the fame thereof was presently spread through all the City, by
means of the great multitude who were assembled at the Palace, to understand
how the Case would be with Prince Erastus, which having had an honorable issue,
all the Romans both general and particular, made the greatest feast in the
World; in such manner that there was no Man or Woman, young nor old, great nor
small, but laid aside all business, though never so importunate; and hastening
to the Palace endeavored to see the face of the Victorious and Triumphant
Erastus; so that no triumphant entry that was ever made in Rome, had caused so
great a crowd of people in all the streets, nor no joy more general nor more
common; every one speaking so highly and advantageously as possibly could be of
Prince Erastus; who for his part received all the people and saluted them with
an incredible modesty; letting them understand that he knew how to keep a
medium without being elevated in prosperity, as his spirits had never failed
him when he was in adversity; but it was far otherwise with the unhappy
Aphrodicia, who finding her self in the night time locked up in her Chamber,
which those who had the charge of her had provided (they having offered her two
Damsels to keep her company, which she resolving to be alone had refused) she
began to curse herself, the Heavens and Nature, and being enraged wished that
before her death, that it were in her power to ruinate not only her Son in law,
but also the Emperor himself, the Senate, the City of Rome, the Empire, and all
the world together; and having a long time continued in these wicked
meditations, and finding that this would be much more difficult than her former
enterprise against the life of her Son in Law, she converted all her rage
toward her self; and considering her self to be culpable not of the crime,
which she intended to commit against her Husband, but that she enterprized a
matter which she could not effect, she attempted to be, revenged on her self,
and to dye by her own hands. And not finding any thing to make a cord to
strangle her self and much less any thing to stab her self withal, she then
found her self truly miserable, in that she was necessitated to dye of a
violent death, and yet had not the means to execute her desires; this
consideration brought her into so great an Agony that she fell upon the floor
in a swoon, in which she continued a long time without any knowledge, but in
time she recovered, wherefore out of despite that she was come to her self, she
afresh cursed ner self and her life, through rage and anger tearing her
garment^, in doing whereof she saw she had fetched blood on one of her fingers,
whereupon she searched dilligently for that which had caused it, to see if
therewith she might make a larger wound, wh^reby her Soul might make its issue
out of her miserable body: Upon this curious search she found a bodkin,
wherewith she was used to prick out figures in parchment to divert her self,
and this she had stuck into her Clothes as women are used to do, without being
taken notice of by her Attendants; they having been commanded to take from her
every thing that might hurt her, but this bodkin was so Cunningly hidden that
it was impossible to be found. Having found this bodkin she took it in her
hand, and casting her self on her bed she said see what I am enforced to, Ah
bodkin! thou have ere now when I used thee, diverted me from melancholy
thoughts, but now thou must be isntrumental to deliver me from the sadest
melancholy that ever any was possessed with. This bring uttered with a firm
resolution she fixed this bodkin under her left breast, and with her finger
thrust it so strongly that it entered up to the top, so that having pierced her
heart it was not long before death seized her; yet she lay rather like a
sleeping than a dead woman.

At the break of day those Lords who had the charge and keeping of her, sent
several Damsels to see how it was with the Empress, who opening the Chamber
door very softly and seeing her lie on the bed thought that she had slept, not
immagining that it was her last long sleep as indeed it was and therefore that
they might not awak her they returned to those that had ^ent them, telling them
that the Empress was fast asleep; whereupon those Senators that had the charge
of her were amazed, wondering that one in her condition could sleep so soundly.
The Sun being risen they went to the Senate, which on that occasion was so
early assembled; where being come, they advised how they should proceed in this
affair, and they concluded that all manner of advantage allowed to Criminals,
should be permitted to the Empress, that she might Justify her self, that she
should have leave to choose one or more Advocates to plead her cause, either in
her presence or in her absence, as she should think fit. This being determined
by the Senate, those who had the Empress in Custody were sent to fetch her,
that she her self might see the fair means they would use in her cause,
notwithstanding the great rigor and precipitateness which she had used against
Prince Erastus. The Gentlemen being arrived at the lodging where the Empress
was deteyned, sent the same Damsels that had been there in the morning to see
what she did; who finding that she had not stirred, carried back word to the
Gentlemen that she was not yet awake: Whereupon the Gentlemen wondering resolved
to awake her, and thereupon entering into the Chamber with the Damsels they
opened the Windows, and seeing that for all that she stirred not, one of the
Damsels called softly, Madam, Madam; To which she not answering all who were in
the Chamber seeing her so pale did believe that some accident had happened,
which was very likely in regard of her great trouble: yet nevertheless seeing
that for ought they could do by throwing water on her face, she came not to her
self, they therefore sent for the Emperors Physicians, who being come and
having felt her pulse concluded that she was dead. The Senate was advertised
hereof, but none could Imagine that any trouble of mind though never so sudden
could have the power to kill, for that griefs though never so great, have not
the porwer to oppress and suffocate the vital spirits as an excess of joy. And
therefore searching very dilligently over all the body of the Empress to see if
they could find how she came by her death, they found nothing but a scratch
which the bodkin had made on her finger, which gave little light to the
Physicians, they Judging it to be impossible that so little a scratch should
cause her death, in regard they could not find that it was envenomed: In fine
one of the Physicians observing a little blood to be under the Empresses left
breast, he put his finger there and feeling something hard, he pressed his
finger so that he felt the bodkin, which being plucked out did plainly show how
it had happened. Which being reported to the Emperor, he was at first much
moved; Yet however being unwilling to hinder the course of justice, he referred
to the Senate to do what they thought fit to the body of the Empress;
considering the great Felony which she endeavored to commit to the Emperor,
and the Treason which she had contrived against the life of the Innocent
Erastus: But the young Prince who above all things abhorred cruelty and
vengance, seeing his innocence fully and entirely justified to all the world,
which was the only thing he desired, would in no wise permit that any shame
should be done to the body of the Empress, this he easily obtained both of the
Emperor and Senate to the content of all; so that her Funeral was c^lebrated,
as belonged to an Empress as may be seen by the sumptuous Tomb that was made
for her, which remains to this day, where the Emperor caused an Epitaph to be
ingraved which in few lines contains the whole matter, which is more amply
specified in the Histories and Chronicles of the Romans. The Emperor Dioclesian
whether out of grief or otherwise, did not long out live his wife, having first
elected his Son for his Copartner and successor, who being come to the Empire
changed his name, governing his estates for a time with much prudence,
according to the great wisdom wherewith he was endowed, and yet notwitstanding
all his judgment he could not keep himself from giving too much credit to the
speeches of his malignant wife; although the Plots and contrivances which women
had contrived against him, should have forewarned him; but it is very
difficult to avoid that which the Heavens have determined, and since both the
one and the other History have seemed to me worthy of memory, I have committed
them to writing for the profit of posterity.

This i^ the conclusion of the History of the Prince Erastus, and his seven
wise Masters, as I have translated it from the Originals, Italian and french:
but in an old English book it is very different, as well in several places as I
have already recited, as also in the conclusion, being the manner of the
Empresses death, which is thus related.

The eighth day being come wherein the Prince resolved to be no longer silent,
but speak in his own defense, and acq^ainting his Keepers with his intention,
he was carried before the Emperor and Senate, after due reverence to his
Father, and excuses he gives his reasons for his silence, and for a proof of
his innocence of what the Empress had charged him with, he charge her with
incontinence and adultery, and the Empress and her Damsels being sent for at
the Princes request, one of the supposed Damsels being stripped naked before
the Court, proves to be a man so disguised, with whom the Empress was used to
accompany and often lie, this being a certain proof of the Empresses guilt. The
Emperor commanded that both she and the Ribauld her companion should be
immeadiately burnt: but the Son desired him to forbear judgment till she were
reproved for her fact. The Emp^ror then committed the full judgment to his
Son, who particularly related how things had passed between him and the
Empress, she seeing her wickedness discovered, fell at the Emperors Feet, and
crying for mercy, but he wholly refused her, relating the haniousness of the
crimes which she was not able to deny; wherefore the Son demanding justice of
the Judges and Justices, they pronounced this Sentence against her, that she
should be bound to a horses tail, and drawn through all the streets of the
City, to the place of Execution and there burnt; And that the Ribauld should be
quartered and his flesh cast to the Hounds, and Birds of the Air to devour
him, and this was executed upon them.

This is the Conclusion of the Empress as it is related in that former Book,
now the Reader having read what both conclude, are left at liberty to believe
which they please; and thus have I given you a full and particular account of
all that I can find Written in any Language, of this Prince Erastus and those
Famous Philosophers the Seven Wise Masters of Rome.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Francis Kirkman:
The Famous and Delectable History of Don Bellionis of Greece, or The Honor of
Chivalry; the first, second, and third parts bound together, in Quarto; price 2
s. 6 d.

The English Rogue, described in the Life of Meriton Latroon, a Witty
Extravagant; being a complete Discovery of the most eminent Cheats of both
Sexes, the first part with the Illustration of Pictures, in Octavo; price bound
3 s.

The English Rogue, continued in the Life of Meritin Latroon, and other
Extravagants; comprehending the most eminent Cheats of most Trades and
professions, the Second Part, with the Illustration of Pictures in Octavo;
price bound 3 s.

The English Rogue, continued in the Life of Meriton Latroon, and other
Extravagants; comprehending the most eminent Cheats of both Sexes, the third
part, with the Illustration of Pictures to every Chapter, in Octavo; price
bound 3 s

The English Rogue, continued in the Life of Meriton Latroon, and other
Extravagants; comprehending the most eminent Cheats of both Sexes, the fourth
part, with the Illustration of Pictures to every Chapter, in Octavo; price
bound 3 s.

The Unlucky Citizen Experimentially Described in the various misfortunes of an
Unlucky Londoner; Calculated for the Meridian of this City, but may serve by
way of Advice to all the Comonality of England; but more particularly to
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Husbands and Wives intermixed with
several choice Novels, stored with variety of Examples, and advice president
and precept, and Illustrated with several Pictures, fitted to the several
Stories, in Octavo; price bound 3 s.

The History of Prince Erastus Son to the Emperor Dioclesian, and those Famous
Philosophers called the Seven Wife Masters of Rome. Being a full account of all
that was ever written of that Ancient, Famous, Pleasant, and excellent History;
written Originally in Italian, then Translated into French, and now rendered
English by F. K. in Octavo; price bound 3 s.

Poor Robin's Jests, or The Complete Jester; being a Collection of several
Jests, not heretofore published, now newly Composed and Written by Poor Robin,
Knight of the Burnt Island, and well willer to the Mathematics; the first,
second, and third parts, in Octavo; price bound 2 s.

A Course of Catchising; being the Marrow of all Orthodox and practical
Expositions upon the Church Catechism; and of all controversies upon the Church
Customs and observances. Digested into LII Heads, for the LII Sundays in the
Year. Useful for Ministers, and their People, Schoolmasters and their
Scholars, Parents and their Children, Masters and their Servants. The Second
impression, with large Additions, and 48 several Pictures fitted to the several
occasions, in Twelves; price bound 4. s.

The Counterfeit Lady Unvailed; being a full account of the Birth, Life, most
remarkable Actions, and untimely death of Mary Carleton, or the German
Princess, in Twelves; price bound 1 s.

The Wits, or Sport upon Sport; being a Curious Collection of several Drolls
and Farces, presented and shown for the Merriment and Delight of Wise Men and
the ignorant; as they have been sundry times Acted in Public and Private; in
London at Bartholomew, and in the Country at other Fairs, in Halls and Taverns,
on several Mountebancks Stages at Charing Cross, Lincoln's Inn, Fields, and
other places, By several stroling Players, Fools, and Fiddlers, and the
Mountebanks Zanies, with loud laughter, and great applause, now newly Collected
by your old Friend to please you Fra. Kirkman, in Quarto; price sticht 1 s. Or
more atlarge, in Octavo; price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Poems of diverse sorts, and three new Plays Viz.

The Obstinate Lady, A Comedy.

Trappolin supposed a Prince. A Tragi-Comedy.

The Tregedy of Ovid in Oct. price bound 3 s.

Mony's an Ass, in Quarto; price sticht 1 s.

Nicomede, A Tragi-Comedy, Translated out of the French of Mr. Corneille by
John Dancer, as it was Acted at the Theater Royal in Dublin, together with an
exact Catalogue of all the English Stage Plays Printed till the Year 1671. in
Quarto; p. sticht 1 s.

Although this present History of Erastus is in this Catalogue mentioned to be
price 3 s yet in regard there are 24 several Pictures cut in copper, I must
alter the price to be 4 s.

FINIS

