THE HISTORY OF THE Venetian Conquests, From the Year 1684. to this present
Year 1688.

Translated out of French by J. M.

Licensed, October. 2. 1688.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton at the three Pigeons over against the Inner
Temple-Gate in Fleet Street. 1689.

The Author's PREFACE.
THE War maintained by the Confederate Princes against the Turks being the
Subject of the Hopes as well as inquisitive Discourses of all Europe, I thought
I might do good Service to the Public, by communicating to the World these
Memoires of the Venetian Conquests, having received them from an Eyewitness of
those Exploits. It may be said of the Turks in their present Consternation,
that they are half vanquished before they are assaulted. The Christian Armies
have by their late Victories, made themselves so formidable, that they strike
Terror and Amazement among the Infidels: We have Examples of it in the Morea;
where, upon the first approach of the Venetiens, the Turks quitted Patras, the
Dardanelles, the Cities of Lepant, Corinth, and Misitra, and whatever was under
their Command in that Country. But that which makes most for the Venetians
Glory, is, That those Places which the Turks never durst attempt with less than
an hundred or an hundred and fifty thousand men, were by them subdued with a
far inferior number: So that if we consider the swiftness of their Conquests,
we may easily believe that Republique to be in a good Capacity of recovering
its ancient Grandeur, and that it will have a great share in the Glory of
overthrowing that vast Colossus which has so long been the Terror of all
Christendom. The Losses it has suffered since the Establishment of the Turks in
Europe, are well known. Salonica the richest City of Macedon, was taken from it
by Amurat II. who destroyed that famous Wall that stopped his passage, and
secured that Seigneurie from his Invasions. In the year 14^0. Mahomet II.
seized himself of Negropont, and part of the Morea and Albania, having a second
time ruined the Corinthian Wall which the Venetians had rebuilt. In the year
1500. Bajazet II. took from them Lepante, Coron, Modon, and Duras. Selimus II.
possessed himself of the Kingdom of Cyprus in the year 1570. Canea and Retimo
in Candia were taken by Ibrahim, and lastly the Capital City of the Island fell
into the hands of Mahomet IV. who was since dethroned. But by the following
Relation of what has passed from 1684. to this present year, it will appear,
that the Venetians wisely taking advantage of a happy juncture of times, have
recovered a great part of what the Turks, during the course of so many years,
had taken from them. In a word, here are particularly set forth the most
important Circumstances of so great an Action.

The Order of Precedence.
Venetian Galley Captain of the Gulf. Galley of Malta General. His Holiness's
Gal. the Patron. Gal. of Malta, the Patron. His Holiness's Gall. His
Holiness's Gall. His Holiness's Gall. His Holiness's Gall. Gall. of Malta.
Gall. of Malta. Gall. of Malta. Gall. of Malta. Gall. of Malta.
The Proveditor of the Fleet his Squadron.
His own Galley. Gall. Zaune Pizamano. Gall. Marco Barbarigo. Gall. Alessandro
Beregan. Ven. Gall. Andrea Pasqualigo. Ven. Gall. Anzolo Corner.
The Captain of the Gulf his Squadron.
His own Galley. Ven. Gall. Isepo Bolani. Ven. Gall. Camillo Trevisan. Ven.
Gall. Francesco Pona. Ven. Gall. Teodoro Corner. Ven. Gall. Gerolamo Priuli.
Ven. Gall. Daniel Venier.
The Governor of the Galley-slaves his Squadron.
His own Galley. Ven. Gall. Zuane Contarini. Ven. Gall. Zuane Quirini. Ven.
Gall. Francesco Moro. Ven. Gall. Gasporo Bragadin. Ven. Gall. Anzolo Michiel.
Ven. Gall. Michiel Magno.
Galley of Tuscany. Galley of Tuscany. The Vanguard. Galley of Tuscany. Galley
of Tuscany. Galeass Capt. Ordinary. Galeass Morosini. Galeass of Bassadona.
Galeass Bono. Galeass Pizani. Galeass Cap. Extraordinary. The Vanguard was to
make discovery till all the Army were come up. The same Vanguard upon occasion
of Battle, was to place it self amongst the Galeasses, yet without falling in
the Stern of them, or hindering the use of the Side-Guns. The Left Wing. Ven.
Gall. Governor of the Galley-slaves. Ven. Gall. Zuane Quirini. Ven. Gal.
Francesco Moro. Ven Gall. Gasporo Bragadin. Ven. Gall. Anzolo Michiel. Ven.
Gall. Michiel Magno. Ven. Gall. Zuane Contarini. Ven. Gall. Daniel Venier. Ven.
Gall. Isepo Polani. Ven. Gall. Marco Barbarigo. Ven. Gall. Anzolo Corner. Ven.
Gall. Andrea Pasqualigo. Ven. Gall. Otavian Vekier. Ven. Gall. Alessandro
Beregan. Ven. Gall. Zuane Pizamano. Ven. Gall. Proveditor of the Fleet. Ven.
Gall. of the Captain of the Gulf. Gall. of Malta the General. His Holiness's
Gall. the Patron. Gall. of Malta, the Patron. His Holiness's Gall. His
Holiness's Gall. His Holiness's Gall. His Holiness's Gall. Galley of Malta.
Galley of Malta. Galley of Malta. Galley of Malta. Galley of Malta. Gall.
Tadero Corner. Gall. Francesco Pona. Gall. Camillo Trevisan. Gall. Captain of
the Gulf. The Right Wing. Galley Vincenzo Priuli. The Rear-Guard

THE HISTORY OF THE Venetian Conquest, etc.
The First Book.
Venice being deceased the 26th. of April, 1684. and his place supplied by
Signior Marco Antonio Giustiniani, the Council sent Orders to Sr. Capello,
their Secretary at the Ottoman Port, to declare War against the Turks,
immediately upon the Conclusion of their Alliance with the Emperor and Poland,
and to make his Escape the best he could; which he accordingly did: for he had
no sooner declared, but he retired from Constantinople in the habit of a
Seaman, and embarked himself, together with some principal Venetians, in a
Frenchman of War called the Faithful, commanded by Monsieur Bidaut, who came as
a Convoy to some other Ships. But the day following two of his Household, with
six other Servants had the misfortune to be taken; the Merchants in the mean
time taking refuge at the French Embassador's, where the Caimacam of
Constantinople would have made search after Sieur Capello, but the Ambassador
told him, if he attempted any search there without express Orders from the
Grand Signior, he should have cause to repent it; at which he was so surpised,
that instead of proceeding in that Enterprise, he made many Excuses full of
submission.

The Council also chose many Commanders in chief, and first Signior Morosini
for Captain General, Dominico Mocenigo Proveditor General of Dalmatia, the
Prince of Parma General of the Infantry; Signior Alessandro Molino, and Signior
Antonio Bembo Captains extraordinary of the Ships the Sieurs Pauli Michieli,
Matthew Pisani, and John Morosini Commanders extraordinary of the Galeasses,
etc. General Strazoldo quitted the Imperial Service for that of the Republique.

The Morlaques also for the greater part sided with the Venetians, and gave the
Turks continual Alarms during the Summer, and frequently carried off
considerable Booties. The Morlaques will so often be mentioned in this History,
that I think my self obliged to give my Reader a more particular account of
them, which here follows in the words of Monsieur Amelot de la Houssaye. They
voluntarily put themselves under the Protection of the Republique in the year
1647. being induced to it by the Persuasions of a Priest named Stephen Sorich,
a man who knew as well to manage a Sword, as to carry the Crucifix. They
harassed the Turks by continual Incursions, carrying away what they could, and
wasting what they could not carry away; and then retiring into the Mountains,
where it was more difficult to find than overcome them, so well they knew the
Bye-ways and narrow Passages of them. Besides their deep resentment of the
Massacre made upon some of theirs, in the Year 1647. at Knin, a Place of the
Bossina, by Tekieli Governor of that Province, and the barbarous Cruelty used
toward Sorich, who was tortured to death in the Year 1648. the Interest of a
Sequin, granted them by the Senate for every Head of a Turk, has so far engaged
them against those Infidels, that they have lost all hopes of ever making Peace
with the Port. By these means is this brave Militia tied to the Service of the
Republique, being otherwise esteemed a sort of men as unconstant in their
humor, as their abode. They have no certain places of retreat, but build
themselves Cottages in the open Plains, shunning the Licentiousness and
Concourse of Cities, which corrupt Military Discipline. In the Year 1648.
Clissa being surrendered to the Venetians, the Morlaques, who know not what
belongs to Capitulation, or military Faith, could not abstain from assaulting
the Ottomon Garrison as they marched out, putting two hundred of them to the
Sword; nor had one escaped, had not the Venetian Officers come in to hinder the
Slaughter. It will appear by what follows, that the Conquests made in Dalmatia
are for the most part to be attributed to the Morlaques, who were always
employed in the most difficult Enterprises.

After most of the Commanders were gone with their Squadrons to the Levant,
Generalissimo Morosini put to Sea from the Coasts of Italy on the 10th. of
June, with five Galeasses, two Galleys, and sixteen other Ships, and set sail
for Corfu.

The Campaigne was begun with the taking of the Isle and Fortress of Santa
Maura: This Isle was formerly joined to the Continent of Greece, and reckoned
among the Western Islands, as those of the Archipelago among the Eastern: In
effect, the whole breadth of Greece taken from East to West, divides the
Archipelago from Santa Maura; it was known to the Ancients by the name of
Leucas, and was part of the Kingdom of Ulysses, and is very near Ithaca, where
that Prince and his Wife Penelope did reside. One of the Rocks of this Island
served formerly as the last Refuge for the unfortunate Lovers of Greece, who by
leaping from the top of it, found a sad, but sure Remedy of their tormenting
Passion. It Is said that Sapho the famous Poetess, upon the news of her Lovers
Falsehood, gave the first Example of that kind. Others attribute to Cephalus,
the first Essay of so uncommon a Cure for Love. But to return to Santa Maura,
it is certain it has always been esteemed a place of great importance; it is
adjoining to Epirus, and is near the Morea, at the entrance of the Gulf of
Lepante, where was fought that famous Battle in 1571. which won so much Glory
to the Christian Army, and Don John of Austria who commanded it.

The City of Santa Maura was reduced under the obedience of the Venetians by
Benedetto Pesaro in the year 1502. This General, with a succor of some Vessels
from the Pope, King Lewis the XII. of France, and the Rhodians, landed part of
his Army, and having, after an obstinate Fight in which many Turks were slain,
made himself Master of the Bridge, forced the City to submit; but matters being
soon after brought to an accommodation between Bajazet II. and the Republic,
by the mediation of Bassa Achmet, it was agreed, that the Isle of Santa Maura
should be restored to the Turks, which the Venetians the more willingly
consented to, on the account that that of Cephalone should remain to them. The
League which they made with the Emperor and King of Poland against the common
Enemy of Christendom, in the Year 1684. having obliged them to declare War,
they resolved to attack Santa Maura after their General Morosini had held a
Council of War at Corsu the 15th. of July with the chief Commanders of the
Squadrons, and principal Officers of the auxiliary Forces. But before we
entertain the Reader with any further account of this Expedition, it will not
be amiss to show him the state and condition of the Ships of War belonging to
the several Potentates who had joined their Interest with the Venetians, their
number; and the order of Battle agreed on in case they had been forced to
engage the Grand Signior's Sea-forces, which is here laid down as it was
prepared at Corfu, and confirmed at Venice.

The attack of Santa Maura being resolved on in the Council held at Corfu,
where were present Proveditor General Cornaro, the chief Commanders of the
several Squadrons sent by the Pope, the great Duke of Tuscany, and the Order of
Malta, General Strazoldo, and other Officers: Signior Morosini mustred all his
Forces designed to be landed. Two Battalions, each consisting of six thousand
men, one being of the Pope's Forces, the other of Malta, mustred together with
eight thousand out of other Companies. The first Line of this latter Battalion
appeared with such splendor as was surprising, being composed of a hundred
Knights clad in their Coat-armours of red Satin with the white Cross of their
Order. The Army set sail the 19th. of July, and the day following arrived at
little more than Cannon-shot distance from Santa Maura, and there cast Anchor.
This City extends it self Eastward upon an Isthmus, or neck of Land, and is
joined to the Continent Northward, by an Aqueduct of three hundred and sixty
Arches in manner of a Bridge, not above three or four Foot in breadth: A
wooden Bridge of three Partitions affords a Passage to the Continent both on
the East and West side. It is a Peninsula of a considerable length; the head of
it bears the name of St. John's Point. The Fortress in an irregular Pentagon,
each corner is flanck'd with great Towers, and there are several small ones
along the Curtain.

The Fleet being entered the Port of Demata, which is Eastward of the place, and
is capable of receiving a great number of Vessels, they landed some men.
Signior Morosini also went on shore, and visited all the Posts which they had
taken view of, and a lodgment made by Captain Manetta, in a place called
Chiebe, of which he had made himself Master, being a House of Pleasure
belonging to the Aga's Son: in the mean time he would not fire upon them till
he had sent to summon the Governor of the place; he set forth to him by
writing the just causes the Republique had to raise a powerful Army, the Turks
having violated the peace, by harboring the Corsairs of Barbary, and using
hostilities against the Subjects of that State. The Governor making no other
answer, but that God would punish the Republique for taking that pretense of
making War with the Grand Signior: The Admiral Flag was set up, and the Galleys
and Galeasses began to batter the Fortress with their Cannon, and with above
twelve hundred Bullets that were shot did much damage to the Houses and
Fortifications, and entirely ruined a Mosque. There was continual fi^ing from
the Turks. Artillery, yet did it not hinder the Pope's Forces, and those of
Malta and Tuscany from advancing to the place, and lodging themselves in the
Suburbs, which they did without much interruption, the Enemy not daring to
sally: Their chief endeavor was to hinder the Besiegers from raising their
Batteries, but in vain; for they being soon put in a readiness, played upon the
Town with so good success, under the directions of Signior Lorenzo Venier, that
they very much shattered the Walls, and the Bombs that were thrown in great
numbers caused much disorder in the place.

The first day of August the Batteries razed the Bulwark to the ground, and
widened the Breach, which before was considerable; they dismounted four pieces
of the Enemies Cannon, and the Bombs set fire to several parts of the Town. The
Works being advanced by the help of continual firing from the Cannon and
Mortar-pieces, the Besiegers began to fill up the Ditch with Fagots and Sacks
of Earth. At last, on Sunday the 6th. of August, the Turks hung out the white
Flag to give notice they would capitulate; and about one in the Night, they
sent three Deputies to Signior Morosini to let him know they were ready to
surrender the place upon honorable Conditions; they demanded leave to march
out with all their Goods, but no more was allowed them than their Families, and
what they could carry away on their Backs. The Hostages were sent the day
following, and all the Slaves set at liberty on condition to serve on the Ships
or Galleys of the Republique, in the quality of Seamen and Soldiers. The
Garrison being seven hundred men, marched out toward the Evening with Sword
and Musket; they were shipped and carried on the further Shore of an Arm of the
Sea. At the same time the Venetians entered the Town at the Breach. The Booty
given to the Soldiers was considerable; there was found great store of
Provision in the place, and Eighty pieces of Cannon. The Venetians lost but 200
men in the siege. Monsieur Jouy a Frenchman, Serjeant-Major of the Army, and
Colonel of a German Regiment, received a wound on his Thigh, and was shot
through the Arm with a Musquet-bullet. Signior Morosini immediately caused the
principal Mosque to be blessed, and Te Deum sung in it; it was dedicated under
the name St. Savior, it being on the 6th. of August, the Feast Day of the
Transfiguration of our Lord, that the Turks hung out the white Flag. Another
Mosque was likewise blessed and dedicated to St. Cajetan, upon whose Feast Day
the Christian Forces entered the place; the Government of it was conferred upon
Signior Lorenzo Venier, a noble Venetian, and related to the Venetian
Ambassador then in the Court of France: All of that name were eminent for their
Services to the Republique. Sebastian Venier was Commander in chief of the
Venetian Army, when Selimus was entirely defeated at the Battle of Lepante.

General Morosini after having repaired the Fortifications of Santa Maura,
caused the Mortars and Bombs to be brought thither, and all Provisions and
Ammunition that the place might stand in need of, in case of a Siege, and chose
out two thousand men, being all that were fit to march, many having been made
useless by Diseases and Fatigue, and some left for a Garrison in Santa Maura.
Colonel Angelo della Decima was sent to the neighboring Country to draw
together all the Grecians he could to strengthen his Army. Signior Morosini
having set sail, made for the Port of Petala, there to wait for advice from the
Colonel who was advanced about twenty six Miles from Santa Maura, from thence
to the Port of Dragomette, where he cast Anchor and landed his Army, which
consisted of two thousand Venetians, about one thousand of the Pope's
Auxiliaries, and fifteen or sixteen hundred Greeks. This Army advanced on the
Plains; and some Turkish Squadrons that were posted in several places, and
charged with the defense of the Passages, retired without making much
resistance. Saban Bacha, Governor of Preveza, had sent out these Squadrons to
observe the motions of the Christian Army, and finding from their observations,
no reason to believe they had any design on the place, he marched out to put
himself at the head of them, with a design to draw the Christians to fight and
surprise them; but they having set fire to four or five Villages, returned to
Port Petala to reimbarque themselves after having wasted the Country during the
space of five days. At the same time Signior Morosini with his Galleys got
within view of Patras and Lepante, his design being to draw the Turks from that
side, who, while the Venetians were dispersed on the flat Country, had reason
to hope it would be easy to charge them. Next he came to the Port of Demata,
where he called a Council of War, in which the Attack of Preveza was resolved
on. The Conquest of that place was the only means to secure Santa Maura so
lately taken by the Republique, which otherwise lay much exposed to the
Infidels, and might easily be besieged.

The Fortress of Santa Maura is about ^welve Leagues from the Gulf of Ambracia,
by the Moderns called the Gulf of Larta or Preveza. Larta or Ambracia is a City
of Epirus, which had formerly a Bi^hop; it is situated on the utmost Borders ^f
the Gulf, which is twenty five Leagues ^n compass, and can contain a great
number of Ships. It was the Royal Seat of Pyrrhus, as Plutarch says. Alexander
the Great confirmed to the Ambracians the liberty they had got by driving a
Mace^onian Garrison out of their City. The Gulf of Ambracia is famous for the
Vi^tory obtained over Anthony by Augustus ^ear the Actian Promontory, in memory
of which he caused a City to be built in that place, and called it Nicopolis.
There are four Cities mentioned in History that ^ore this name. The first in
Masia, built by the command of Trajan the Empe^our after he had vanquished
Decebalus, King of the Dacians; it is called by some Negeboli, by the Turks,
Sciltaro. The second is in Bulgaria toward Walachia, where the Christians were
defeated by the Turks in the Year 1396. in the time of Sigismond, King of
Hungary. The third is a City in Armenia, by Castaldu^ named Gianich, by others
Chiorme; here the Arians caused great Troubles in the Year 370, by substituting
Phoranus, one of their Party, into the place of the deceased Bishop Theodore;
but they were constrained by the Inhabitants to allow them an Orthodox Bishop.
The fourth is an Episcopal City in Judea, and the same with Emmaus. The name of
Nicopolis is Greek, and signifies the City of Victory.

The Fortress of Preveza, which now stands in the place of the ancient
Nicopolis of Epirus, though it be less than Santa Maura, its situation,
nevertheless, is as commodious, for it commands the entrance into the Gulf, and
the Commerce of Larta, which is considerable. The resolution of attacking it
being fixed, Signior Morosini sent out five Galleys, and six Galeasses, with
orders to approach the Castles that were called by the name of the Gomenizze,
which being within view of Preveza, the design was to oblige the Infidels to
divide their Forces, and send back the Soldiers they had drawn out of those
Castles to strengthen their body that lay under the Cannon of that place; which
Saban Bacha accordingly did: for being persuaded the Venetians would attack the
Castles, he sent back the greatest part of those Forces that lay about Preveza,
who were received by the Turks with great demonstrations of Joy, and a Salvo of
all their Cannon. The Army in the mean time having left Demata, came to Anchor
on the 20th. of September about Nine in the Evening, at the entrance of the
Gulf. The day following Captain Manetta having likewise entered the Gulf with
twenty four Barks, and some armed Brigantines, landed there with part of his
Forces, the Turks endeavoring to hinder it by the discharge of Eighteen Pieces
of Cannon, and about two hundred Musket Shot, which did no execution. About
break of day the Galleys which had lain at Anchor over against an ascent of
land called the Hill of Mehemet Effendi, appeared within Musket Shot of the
place. These Galleys by giving diversion to the Enemy, facilitated the landing
of part of the Forces which marched on by land, and crossed over a Branch of
the Sea, about half a Mile broad, in Galeots. In the mean time the continual
firing from the Galleys, hindered the Turks from coming near the shore. And this
it was that deceived them: They were persuaded the Venetians designed to land
their Force on that side, which caused them to give continual fire that way
from their Cannon and Muskets, but without much annoying the Christians. And
the Forces on the other side landed without any opposition and began to
approach the place under the Conduct of General Strazoldo. The Turks commanded
to hinder their landing, began to find their mistake, and (...) order to mend
it, sent a Detachment of five hundred Spahi's, wi^^ command to ride full speed,
and char^^ the Christians before all were landed* But they found them already
drawn (...) in Battalia, and several of the Infidels we killed and wounded by
their shot; (...) rest being seized with fear, retreated such disorder, that it
was impossible (...) many of them to get into the pla^^ The Christians having
advanced without difficulty, made themselves Masters of t^^ out-Town, and
posted themselves on the Hill of Mehemet Effendi, which commands the City. The
same day Signior Morosini caused the Galleys and Galeots to approach yet nearer
Preveza, and sent to summon the place, threatening the Turks, that he would give
no quarter, if they deferred the surrender of it till they were reduced to
extremity. The Officer who commanded there in the absence of Saban Aga, (who
was gone to put himself at the head of four thousand men, to observe the
motions of the Christian Army, as is already said) refused to read the
General's Letter, and caused the Bearer of it to be shot, not doubting but the
Governor would return in few days with Forces to raise the Siege. This
haughtiness obliged Signior Morosi^i to put on shore his Cannon and Mor^ars to
be mounted on Battery the day ^ollowing. He viewed the Posts, and ^rdered the
Attacks; and on the 23d. ^any Houses were ruined by the Bombs which had fired
several parts of the Town, and dismounted some of the Enemies Cannon. Their
Artillery was so ill ma^aged, that it did little or no Execution. The Besiegers
fired upon their Batteries, with so good success, that there remained that
Evening but one piece of Cannon on the place, fit for service. There was
amongst the Christians but one Soldier killed and five wounded. The General,
after having viewed the Works and Batteries, on the 24th. gave orders for
descending the Ditch, where a Lodgment was made, and the next Night a Min^ was
fixed to the great Tower of the plac^ on the side next the Land. The breach
being found considerable, the Works were continued from the 26th. with success
and on the 28th. they made a Lodgment in the Ditch, and on the same day gav^
order for the Assault, the Mine being ready to be sprung: The Turks would not
wait the effect, but on the 29th. hung out the white Flag in token they would
capitulate. They demanded the same Conditions were granted to San^^ Maura; but
Signior Morosini declared that all he could allow them, was, The thirty of the
most considerable might march out with their Arms and Baggag^ the rest with
what they could carry abo^^ them, but without any Arms; and the all the
Christian Slaves should be set at liberty. The Turks having accepted these
Conditions, marched out the day following at the Gate toward the Sea, to the
number of two hundred men: They had a Convoy of Grecian Barks, till they came
within four Miles of Larta. Signior Morosini at the same time gave orders to
seize the Gates, and place a Guard on them, and in other parts of the City, to
preserve the Magazine, and prevent Pillage. This charge was given to thirty
Venetians, twenty Malteses, ten of the Pope's Soldiers, and ten of the
Florentines. The Standard of St. Mark was planted, and all the Turkish Banners
taken down and carried to the Admiral-Galley. About two hundred of the
Inhabitants remained in the place: There were found forty six pieces of Cannon,
of which eighteen were of Brass, and carried fifty pound Ball: All manner of
Provisions were there in abundance, with great store of Muskets and Bullet,
and six hundred Quintals of Powder. The Turks made every year a thousand Crowns
of the fishing Trade there, but the Conquest of Preveza has put the Republique
in possession of the Gulf, and all the places of that Coast. Monsieur Bachili,
who commanded a Party of Malta, was killed by a Musket Shot at the Works, when
they were making the Lodgment in the Ditch.

This done, the Auxiliary Galleys returned home; those of Malta arrived thither
on the 2d. of December. It appeared they had lost but two men of Quality, and
six private Soldiers at the taking of Santa Maura, but by reason of i^^
Weather, and the Fatigue of making Incursions thirty Leagues into the Enemie^
Country, they had contracted such Diseases, that within a Month five men o^
note, and two hundred of the common Rank were missing; of the first amongst the
dead and sick were reckoned these that follow; Chevalier de Chasteuil, de Poix,
de Sailant, Merargues, Bargerie, Gaillard, Audifredi, Grecourt, Cluy, Quinsard,
Moricane, Courtebonne, Escots, Argenteuil, l^ Coupiere, Cinogli, Ruffo,
Petroni, Magailoni, Don Girard Curtol, and Don Lewis d^ Gongora: many others
were sick, bu^ Chevalier de la Bar recovered of hi^ Wound: The Venetians took
their Winter Quarters in the Isles belonging to the (...) Signior Molino
Captain (...) of the Ships, after having (...) those Isles he had reduced to
(...) of the Venetians, and giv^ (...) ^^essary orders for their security,
(...) back his Squadron to Corfu to winter there: General Morosini remained at
Preveza with design, during the Winter, to make that place impregnable, and
keep the Grecians in their Duty, and oblige them to embrace the interests of
the Republique. Although the Advantages the Venetians obtained in Dalmatia,
were not very extraordinary, yet will it be requisite to give some account of
them, what they did there, being but a Prelude to their great designs upon the
Infidels.

The War began to kindle in Dalmatia by the frequent Incursions of both
Parties; in one made by the Infidels to the very Cannon of Clissa, they carried
away seven Prisoners, having ransacked some Villages, but the Morlaques hearing
of it, put themselves immediately on the pursuit; and having overtaken them,
obliged them not only to quit their Booty and Prisoners, but to seek their own
safety by flight; fifty of them were taken, and several killed or wounded.

In the mean time Signior Antonio Zen, Proveditor extraordinary of Cattaro,
came to Perasto, his design being to forage round about Castel-Novo, and hinder
the Garrison from gathering in their Harvest, and having for this purpose drawn
together a thousand fighting men, he began his march toward the place the 22d.
of July, and executed his design with so god success, that he not only set fire
to all the Villages on the East side of it, but even to the Suburbs and lower
Town of Castel-Novo, consisting of above three hundred Houses: He found there
great store of Wheat and other Corn which he seized. The Fire lasted from
Morning till Noon, though the Turks made several Sallies to quench it, and beat
off the Venetians, who still repulsed them with such vigor, as forced them
back into the place. There were twenty Turks killed on the spot, and fifty
wounded in these Sallies in which they charged seven times. The disorder which
is unavoidable on such occasions, was the cause that fifty Turks were involved
in the Flames, and seven others fell into the hands of the Morlaques, who took
them away Prisoners, with good store of Cattle, part of which was taken in the
Suburbs, the Garrison not having time, in so great a Surprise, to secure them.
To complete the happiness to this day, the Proveditor General commanded one
Galley and four other light Vessels to pursue three Fuists of Castel-Novo,
which by the report of the Prisoners, were set to Sea as Pirates: that Evening
they met a Galeot of Dulcigno, commanded by Solomon Aga, the famous Corsair of
that place, who having kend the Venetian Vessels, endeavored to gain the
shore, which he could not do with that speed, but two and twenty men were
killed, and himself in the number. There were found in the Galeot two and
twenty Christians whom this Corsair was carrying into Slavery.

Sieur Valier, General of Dalmatia, made himself Master of the Castles of Sym
and Narenta about the end of this year. He gave many Largesses to those who had
shared in the danger of this Enterprise; he gave new Clothes to his Soldiers,
and particularly rewarded the Banditi of the Kingdom of Naples, who exposed
themselves most in this action: He gave leave also to the Soldiers to carry
away the Cattle that were in the neighboring Meadows, being persuaded that by
this means he should encourage them to their Duty, and gain success in his
greater Designs.

THE HISTORY OF THE Venetian Conquests, etc. The Second Book.
Morlaques, addicted to the Service of the Republique, made frequent Incursions
into the Enemies Territories in Dalmatia, the Mainottes animated each other to
shake off the Ottoman Yoke in the Morea, and preserve their ancient Liberty, of
which shall speak in the following Book. These Greeks took courage from the
fame of the Venetian Conquests, they drew together in a body, and began to
exercise their Hostilities with doubtful successes. The Turks sent some Forces
from Braccio di Maina to bring them to their Duty, who soon overtook, attacked
and routed them, and continued the pursuit of them, being seconded by other
Forces led on by a certain Bacha: But the Greeks backed by unexpected Succors,
and the presence of Signior Delfino, rallied and charged with so much vigor,
that of 3500. Infidels, there escaped but 140. and of 130. men out of a Company
of Athenians, all but two suffered the same fate.

The deep resentment the Greeks had of the Massacre of Abbot Giona, whom the
Infidels took in a Monastery situate near the Gulf of Preveza, and afterward
publicly empal'd, fomented their Revolt, and engaged them so far, that they
breathed nothing but Revenge, and declared themselves open Enemies of the Port.

About this time the Heydukes, and the Inhabitants of Montenegro came to blows
with the Turks, and several were killed and wounded on both sides; after that
the Morlaques made an Incursion, and advanced toward Sing, and carried off
store of Cattle, and some Prisoners, amongst whom one called Papursinovich Aga,
offered upon the Field Five thousand Crowns, and seven Horses of great value
for his Ransom. The Turks after this Rencounter retired to Clin. The Bacha that
commanded them, sent the noble Venetian, Gabriel Lombardo, who was there made
Prisoner, to the Port, as a Mark of the advantage he pretended to have had over
the Venetians.

In the mean time General Paulo Michiel having drawn up a thousand Horse and
some Foot, put himself at the head of three thousand Morlaques that were joined
in a Body under their Leader: These Forces made Incursions into the Country to
curb the Turks. In effect, the Bacha of Bossine, who was marched toward
Hungary, was obliged to turn back toward Clin with seven thousand men under
his command. Signior Michiel encamped his men in such order upon the Frontiers
of Dalmatia, that he was still in a posture of defense; which Precaution gave
the People of those parts a favorable opportunity of gathering in their
Harvest with safety, and encouraged the Morlaques to make Incursions in
Parties, and ransack the Turkish Territories. In the mean time the Fuists of
Dulcigno took Sixty Fishermen near Curzole; and four Galleys of Malta sailing
toward the Naval Army commanded by Generalissimo Morosini, met on their way a
man of War of Tripoli, which after an obstinate Fight they took, and made three
hundred Turks Prisoners, and released many Christians from Slavery.

Though the Venetians and Morlaques thwarted all the attempts of the Infidels
in Dalmatia, yet they drew up in the beginning of June to the number of eight
thousand men, and laid siege to the Fortress of Duare. The Courage and
Resolution of the besieged gave opportunity to General Valier, and Sieur
Michiel, General of the Cavalry of this Province to come to their relief. These
two Generals made it their endeavor, each on their side to break through the
lines of the Besiegers, and took their measures so exactly for drawing together
the Venetian Forces under their Command, that marching with great expedition
toward the Infidels, they attacked them in three several places, and soon put
them into disorder. In less than an hour's time the Turks found themselves
obliged to raise the Siege with the loss of two hundred and fifty men that were
cut in pieces, and seventy made Prisoners, of which number were forty Officers
and one Lieutenant General Aga. The Booty that day was very considerable, they
took one great piece of Cannon and two small ones, three Mortar-pieces, one
Petard, fourteen Colors, and a Convoy of Provision newly brought to their
Camp, together with the greatest part of their Baggage. In this action there
were but six Christian Soldiers killed, and thirty wounded: The Enemy in his
flight was pursued by the Morlaques, and notwithstanding the Basha of Bossina,
who was but four Leagues distant, had upon the first noise of the Fight,
marched to their relief with four thousand Horse, they were defeated before he
could come up, and the Venetians encouraged with success, charged him so
vigorously, that they forced him to fly as the others had done. The Booty and
Prisoners were given to the Soldiers for a reward of their Service. Nine
hundred persons toward Lica, to free themselves from their Subjection under
Mahmut Aga Haradanovich, submitted themselves to the Republic; and General
Michiel assigned them Quarters for their safe retreat. Yet the Basha of Bossina
would have made an attempt to repair his misfortune, had he not been informed
that Chevalier Janco covered the Fortress before mentioned with four thousand
Morlaques: He also soon after advanced into the Country of the Turks with three
thousand and five hundred Morlaques, and meeting five hundred Infidels, put
them to flight, having killed one hundred and fifty, besides those that were
drowned in the River Narenta, thinking to save themselves at Gabella. In this
action he made an hundred Prisoners, took a great Booty, and sent some Colors
to Venice, as a Mark of his Victory.

The Naval Army under the Conduct of Generalissimo Morosini, came near the
Coast of the Morea, where they began the Campaigne with the Siege of Coron, the
particulars of which are to be seen in the following Relation, which as it is
very exact, so is it full of Actions and Circumstances not generally known,
though for the rarity of them, nothing can better deserve to be committed to
Posterity than these gallant Performances of the Knights of Malta, who so
bravely signalized themselves, and shed their Blood in defense of the Christian
Faith against the greatest Enemies of it. This Relation was given from Malta;
therefore when you meet with such words as Ours, our Lines, or the like,
remember it is a Maltese that speaks.

The Squadron of Malta consisting of eight Galleys, and commanded by Signior
Brancaccio, joined it self in the beginning of June, with the Pope's Squadron
of five Galleys, which bearing no Flag, put it self under the command of the
General of Malta. About the middle of June they arrived together at Port
Dragomet, where the Venetian Fleet was, to which some days before, were joined
four of the Great Duke's Galleys; and after they had so regulated matters, that
according to custom the Captain General of Malta was placed on the right hand
of the Reale of Venice; and the first Post agreed in the Councils of War, to
General Brancaccio. On the 20th. the whole Army set sail to the number of
seventeen Ships, five Gale^^^^, two and twenty Venetian Galleys, five of the
Pope's, eight of Malta, and four of the Great Duke's, fifteen Galeots, and
fifteen or twenty Barques or Brigantines. The intelligence which Captain
General Morosini had held for some Months with the Mainotts to encourage them
to shake off the Turkish Yoke, made him believe, that he might by their means
make good Progress in the Morea; but having heard as he came near their Coasts,
that they had met with ill success in the Attempt they had made to procure
their liberty, and that they had been forced to give Hostages to the Turks for
assurance of their Fidelity, he found himself obliged to take other measures
before he could attempt any considerable Enterprise. His first design was to
attack Modon, the capital City of the Morea; but having viewed the situation
the 23d. of June, there appeared so many difficulties as to the landing his men
and Cannon, as made him alter his design, and resolve on the Siege of Coron.
This place called by the Ancients Corona, is by Land about twelve Miles distant
from Modon, and situate beyond the Cape Gallo toward the Country of the
Mainotts. It is a Town of good Trade by reason of its situation; it has a Haven
fit to receive a considerable number of Vessels; it has the Sea on one side,
and on the side toward the Land, it has a Wall fortified with six Towers of an
Antic Fashion. The Greeks and Jews inhabit the lower Town, and the Turks dwell
in the Castle, which makes the upper Town. The Venetians were Masters of it in
the fifteenth Age: Bajazet the Turkish Emperor took it from them, as also the
Town of Modon, in 1499. Prince Doria of Genoa, who commanded the Spanish Fleet,
retook it from the Turks in 1533* and lest in it as Governor Mendoz^, with
some Spaniards, who quitted it to the Turks some few years after; they knowing
the importance of the place, seized themselves of it, and it has ever since
been in their hands.

The 25th, in the Morning the Forces were landed almost within Cannon-shot of
the City without any opposition from the Turks; they consisted of three
thousand Venetians, a thousand Sclavonians, two thousand and four hundred of
those that were sent by the Prince of Brunswick Duke of Hanover, with the young
Prince his Son, according to the Agreement made with the Republique; the
Battalion of Malta consisting of eight or nine hundred Soldiers and twenty six
Knights, one Battalion of the Pope's of four hundred men, and another of the
Great Duke's, of three hundred, which made up in all about eight thousand Foot
without the Cavalry. This Army was commanded by the Count St. Paul, a General
of great ability and experience, who had long time served the King of Denmark,
and Duke of Neubourg. The first Post in order of Battle, was taken by the
Battalion of Malta, the Commander of which, Monsieur de la Tour Maubourg, had
the general Command, with as universal an Approbation, as he had on the like
occasion at the Siege of Candia: He had also under his Command the Batalion of
the Pope's Galleys. All this nevertheless passed as well in the Camp as the
Fleet, under the Orders and Direction of Captain General Morosini, and Signior
Brancaccio General of the Galleys of Malta, which lay at Anchor near the Coast.

The approached the City under the shelter of Olive Trees, and nothing passed
but some light Skirmishes: On the 26th. they opened the Trenches, the Battalion
of Malta, those of Brunswick, and the Pope's on the right hand toward the Sea,
the Venetians and the Sclavonians on the left toward a Suburb or out-Town, of
which they made themselves Masters without opposition. The same day we lost
Chevalier San Vitali of Parma, who was killed in the Trenches by a
Musket Shot. The Works went forward without much interruption, and they raised
two Batteries each of three great pieces of Cannon, with four Mortars for
Bombs, to which they added afterward two pieces of Cannon. The Enemy made but
light Sallies in which they were vigorously repulsed; their firing was
moderate, and gave us cause to believe, that they were not in a posture to hold
out long. But it appeared by the consequence, that their Intention was to
nourish in the minds of their men, the hopes of a speedy assistance from the
Basha of the Morea, who had drawn together a flying Army of three or four
thousand men, both Horse and Foot, which obliged ours to labor hard at their
Works, for their shelter and defense, and to fortify a certain eminence of
Ground which on one side commanded our Lines, and on the other, laid open the
Country about. Here we raised a Battery of four pieces of Cannon, and one
Mortar-piece.

The Basha of the Morea appeared in effect, on the 3d. of July, and encamped
within Cannon-shot of the Christian Army; where having retrenched himself, he
mounted on a Battery four pieces of Cannon, which playing cross-wise with the
Artillery of the place, did much incommode our Works. This Basha gave us an
Alarm every day by some warm Skirmishes, in which, nevertheless, the Turks were
always repulsed with loss. The besieged on their part redoubled their fire, and
answered haughtily to the Summons we sent them, threatening them to set fire to
the Mines at which ours did work continually, but with less success than might
have been wished, being forced to bring them through a Rock, which sort of
Works took up no less than three Weeks time.

The Fortifications of the place were much ruined by our Batteries, and the
Bombs had made great Destruction; but besides that, it had an advantageous
situation, having but one Front to guard, which was flanked with great Towers
built on the Rock; it was further defended with eighty piece of Cannon, and
store of Ammunition, and Provisions of all sort, and seven or eight hundred men
in Garrison, besides others fit to bear Arms in so great a number as four or
five thousand Souls; so that we could have no entrance into the Town, but by
means of the Ovens of our Mines, and vigorous Assaults, during which we were
sure to be attacked by the flying Army of the Turks.

This posture of Affairs caused us some trouble, but at last the Mines being
ready to be sprung, on the 24th. of July it was resolved to make an Attempt,
and all preparations were made for it. Chevalier Segres was to begin the
Assault at the head of Sixty Granadiers backed by a Detachment of Fuseliers and
Sclavonians. Chevalier de la Bar, Lieutenant General of the Battalion of
Malta, followed Chevalier de Refuge, the first Captain, at the head of a Party
of our Forces, and some of the Pope's and Venetians; he was backed by the
Prince of Brunswick with an hundred and thirty of his men, and Monsieur de la
Tour Maubourg followed with a Body of the Knights, in the midst of whom was the
Standard of the Order; he had also with him some of our Companies, and some of
the Pope's; but when every one had taken his Post, it happened that the Mine
was not strong enough to blow up the Rock, so that it had not the Effect that
was requisite to make way for the Assault intended.

At the same time that fire was set to the Mine, the Basha of the Morea
attacked the Redout and Battery we had raised on the Eminence that secured our
Lines, with so much vigor, that the Venetians and Sclavonians who had the
defense of it, though always accustomed to behave themselves bravely, could not
resist him, so that the Turks soon made themselves Masters of the Redout, and
had already planted on it more than twenty of their Standards, when the News of
this Confusion was brought to Monsieur de la Tour.

It appears by the Posture of the Forces commanded to the Assault, that he with
his Knights was nearest to this Post of so great importance for the safety of
the whole Army: He saw the Loss was not to be retrieved but by some
extraordinary Action, and therefore he undertook it without delay. He called
upon his men to follow him, and having kissed the Cross of our Standard, with
that sense of Devotion which gave life to all his Actions, he advanced with
eager haste toward the Enemy, was the first man that leaped into the Redout,
and there with his own hand slew two Turks that opposed him, a t^ird coming
behind his Back, at the first blow with his Cutlace struck off a light Helmet
he wore, and at the second cleav'd his Head, and cast him to the Ground, where
a Barrel of Powder taking fire, made an end of his Life. He was followed close
by several Knights, amongst whom Chevalier de Terms having with his Sword run
a Turk through the Body, received at the same time so great a Wound in the
Head, that he f^ll down dead to the ground with his Enemy, and in that posture
he was found after the Fight. Brother-Servant at Arms Michon coming up
courageously to the defense of the Commander de la Tour was killed by a
Musket Shot. The Chevalier de Grandmont received two Wounds with a Sable and
one Musket Shot. The Chevaliers de Bourgon and de Gaillard, and
Brother-Servant at Arms de la Motte, were mortally wounded, the Chevaliers
Piosasque and Doria Brasseuze but slightly; and Chevalier de Pont, who carried
the Standard, having been assaulted by two Turks, killed one with his Pistol,
the other with his Sword, being himself but lightly wounded. The Chevalier de
Beaupre Choiseul was one of the first that cast themselves into the Redout,
Chevalier Mechatin, Major of the Battalion, signalized himself in the same
manner; and in fine, all of them showed such courage, that they drove the Enemy
from that Post, took eleven of their Banners, and planted there the Standard of
the Order; at the sight of which, the whole Army crying out, Vive Malta, the
Venetians and Sclavonians resumed their wonted Courage, and killed three
hundred Turks, so that none escaped that had lodged themselves in the Redout.
This days Work cost the Christians an hundred and fifty men.

The whole Camp acknowledged the Knights for their Deliverers, and extolled
them to the Skies. The General Officers sent a Complement to the General of the
Galleys of Malta; and indeed nothing would have been wanting to have made it
the greatest, and most glorious Action that has been heard of, had it not cost
the lives of so many brave men, and in particular of Commandant de la Tour, who
was lamented by the whole Army, and whose Death Captain General Morosini could
not hear of without weeping. He was interred with all the Ceremonies that might
serve to give testimony of the esteem they had for his merit; his Heart was
preserved to be carried to Malta, with his Bones. It may be said of him, That
his mind was composed of so many noble Qualities as scarce ever met in any
other. His Piety was so exemplar, that the good Effects it produced on those
that served under him, can hardly be expressed: The sweetness of his temper,
his modest and engaging Carriage, his Wit, his Courage, and all his other
Virtues, made him so agreeable to all, that the loss of him could not but be
generally lamented. But since, according to his commendable custom, he
communicated before he went to the Battle, we doubt not but the Sacrifice of
his Life joined with so Christian-like a Preparation, raised him to the state
of everlasting Glory and Happiness in the other World. The Chevalier de la
Bar, who always observed the same Footsteps, was preferred to the general
Command of the Battalion, and the esteem which all the World has for his merit,
gives us no small satisfaction after so great a loss.

The 30th. of July the Enemy made a fresh attempt upon our Lines, and some of
them with their Swords in their hands, cast themselves into the Redout, situate
on the Eminence to which the Venetians had now given the name of St. John's
Fort, as having been preserved by the the Valor of those Knights; but the
Infidels were beat back to their very Trenches by the Pope's Forces, and those
of the Republique; and they met with the like resistance in diverse other
Assaults, in which those of Malta had frequently the good Fortune to see them
fly as soon as the Standard of St. John appeared; the Barbarians exclaiming
with loud Outcries according to their custom in Battle, That were it not for
this Battalion of Malta, they should soon bring their purposes to effect.

The besieged in the mean time defended themselves with great obstinacy, though
the Breach were very considerable on the side of the Attack where those of
Malta were placed, and toward the Venetian Attack there was prepared a Mine of
two hundred Barrels of Powder, the effect of which was expected to be very
great. Our men waited with impatience the day of assault; but it being certain
that the Turks of the Country who were grown to the number of six thousand men,
would not fail to attack our Lines at the same time we mounted the Breach, it
was resolved to prevent them by attacking them in their own Works, which was
put in execution with all the Success imaginable on the seventh day of August.
Our Forces having marched out of their Lines in good order, the Turks, who were
possessed with fear, fell into such Confusion, that they suffered themselves to
be cut to pieces without much resistance; we gained their Retrenchments, and
made our selves Masters of their Battery of four pieces of Cannon; we took
from them a considerable number of Horses, and drove them far into the Country,
with the loss of no more than two or three Soldiers of all our Forces, and not
one of the Battalion of Malta: we killed a thousand of their men. An Action so
extraordinary was with reason looked upon as a stroke of God's Providence, and
the Veneration the whole Army had for the Piety and Devotion of their deceased
Commander de la Tour Maubourg, made it be believed and said amongst them, That
without doubt it ought to be attributed to his Prayers. A Bark that arrived
here since from Patras in the Morea, reported that some Turks that escaped from
the Fight, represented the Defeat much greater than we knew, and that they
affirmed the Basha of the Morea was there killed, and his Army wholly dispersed.

Immediately after this Victory General Morosini sent Summons to the besieged,
but they made answer haughtily, That they knew their Friends had been beaten,
yet that they nevertheless were resolved to die rather than surrender, which
made us think of preparing the Mine for a general Assault.

The 11th. of August was the day appointed for it, and the Forces having taken
their Posts in the Night, about break of day the great Mine of the Venetians
Attack was sprung, and had the Effect that was expected, and had given them an
opportunity to enter the City at that time, had they not, instead of improving
it, contented themselves with making a Lodgment on the Breach. In the mean
while as soon as the noise of the Mine was heard, they Forces of Malta who were
at the head of the other Attack, seconded by the Pope's, and those of
Brunswick, with great vigor gained the top of the Breach which had been some
days open, though it was of very difficult access; but the Enemies having had
time to fortify themselves there, there grew a furious Combat, during which
the Knights did all that could be expected from their valor, to force the
Retrenchment; but it being well flanked and furnished with Cannon and
Artillery, they fired so terribly upon them, that four of them were killed in
the place, together with Compte de Fenelon, who served with them in quality of
a Volunteer, and more than thirty wounded. Chevalier de la Bar Commandant
General of the Battalion, showed all the Courage imaginable on this last
occasion; he was well seconded by the Pope's Officers, and those of Brunswick,
of whom several were killed or wounded; but at last seeing it impossible to
surmount those vast difficulties, they were constrained to retire.

Nevertheless this was so far from disheartning the Knights, that, having
understood how great a Breach the Venetians Mine had made, they resolved to
give a fresh assault in the Afternoon at two places, but more furiously at the
last Breach than the other. Every thing was prepared for it, when the Turks
perceiving the design, on a sudden hung out a white Flag, and desired to
capitulate. Four of them advanced to the Breach, and proposed to render
themselves, provided they might have their lives and liberty: But Captain
General Morosini not willing to consent to any thing unless the Tower that made
sure the entrance into the City, were first put into our hands; it happened
unluckily while this was in treaty, that two Christian Soldiers quarrelling
near the place, a Pistol was shot off, and the Bandelier of another took fire
at the same time. The Turks of the City upon that believing the Truce was
broke, and that they were not sincerely dealt with, fired a Cannon which killed
several of ours: This was enough to make us resume our Arms. The Christians
having cried out Treason, so briskly forced that little of a Retrenchment the
Enemies had on the Breach, that nothing could hinder them from rushing into the
City, where all were put to the Sword, except some few happy Men, and many
Women and Children; Chevalier de la Bar having had much difficulty to secure
from the rage of the Soldiers, those four Turks which came to parley with him.
The Mine had buried under its Ruins the Governor of the place, a man of
undaunted Resolution, which happened well for the Christians, who otherwise
would not so easily have made themselves Masters of it.

Thus ended the Siege of Coron seven and forty days after the Trenches were
opened, during which time the Christian Army had two powerful Enemies to
encounter, over whom they gained a double Victory with all the Glory
imaginable. The Venetians, with Count St. Paul, got much Honor. The young
Count of Brunswick with his Forces, signalized himself in a particular manner.
Those of Florence gave good Proofs of their Valor to the time of their
reimbarking, which was some days before the end of the Siege. It is easy to
judge how great a share of Honor is due to the Battalion of Malta, and the
Pope's Forces who were always joined with them. Chevalier de la Bar by many
brave Actions maintained the honor Sieur de la Tour had got. All the Knights
generously sacrificed themselves to the support of the Faith, having undergon
incredible Fatigues, and many of them shed their Blood, as may be seen in the
List at the end of the Book, in which I have set down their respective Nations.

Let us now pass to Dalmatia, where though nothing happened of such importance
as in the Morea, yet it will be necessary to inform the Reader of what passed
worthy of remark in the Rencounters the Venetian Forces had with the Turks in
that Country and elsewhere. It was resolved to besiege the Fortress of Sing;
and in prosecution of this design, the Generals marched at the head of their
Forces, and immediately invested it. The Trenches were opened, a Battery
raised, and some Cannon mounted in spite of the Infidels who continually fired
upon them: They summoned the besieged, who being well stored with Men and
Provisions, scorned the Conditions of Surrender which were offered, and by
their vigorous resistance obliged us to quit the Attempt, some days after the
opening our Trenches.

On the other side, the Hayducs of Ca^aro advanced toward Goza, where they
^ade great Havoc, wasting all that Country with Fire; and Chevalier Janco
marched as far as Bilai, four days Journey beyond Sebenico, and burnt to Ashes
Eighteen Villages, and two Castles that were Garrisons, and returned at last to
Zara laden with Honor, and a rich Booty as well of Cattle as other things, and
attended by five hundred men well armed, who had forsaken the Turks to join
with the Venetians.

A considerable number of the Infidels having come out of Castel-Novo to
prepare an Ambuscade for the Christians, the Morlaques who were always ready to
disappoint the Turks Designs, followed the^ so close at the Heels, that they
mad^ them retreat to the Town in great disorder, after having killed and
wounde^ several of them, and taken away a considerable Booty with many
Prisoners.

The Vayvode Janco took the Field again to join the Croats that were subje^^ to
the Emperor, and go with them t^ destroy the Turks Iron Mines. Captain General
Morosini, who was yet at Coro^ caused the repairs of those Fortificatio^ to be
dispatched with great diligence and having put it in a posture of defen^^ set
sail toward the Coast of Zarnata, attended by the Forces of Saxony, his Design
being to seize that Town and two neighboring Towers, by the means of which the
Turks still kept the Mainotts in awe.

Zarnata is a Fortress almost round, and situate on a high place; he sent a
Detachment to summon the Garrison, to which the Aga who commanded the place,
submitted the 11th. of September, though the Army was five Miles distant, and
had not yet set foot on land. The Garrison which was numerous, consisting of
six hundred men, was embarked and guarded by a Convoy within a small distance
from Calamata: But the Aga fearing the Punishment which the Grand Signior
inflicts on the unfortunate, remained among the Venetians: The Captain General
gave him a Pension of thirty Royals a Month after he had received Baptism with
twenty other Turks. There were found in this place fifty one pieces of Cannon,
two hundred Quintals of Powder, great store of Bullet, with other Ammunition
and Provision. Signior Morosini having thus gained the Town, put in a Garrison
of two hundred and fifty Foot Soldiers, under the command of the noble
Venetians, Bartholomeo Contareni, and Angelo Emo; and upon the advice he had,
that the Captain Basha was advanced with ten thousand men to lie before
Calamata, he ordered the Saxons to be set on shore to join the Army, which
having advanced on the 12th. of September in Battel-array, to certain places
where the Enemies were advantageously posted, to dispute the Passage, there
happened some light Skirmishes betwixt the Advance-guards: But whilst all
things were preparing overnight to come to a set-Battel the next day, the
Infidels decamped before day to retire under the Cannon of Calamata, which is
situate upon the declining of a Hill on the side of the River Spinazza, in the
Province of Belvedere, and has no other defense but a Castle built after the
modern way, that can secure it from the Assaults of an Enemy. The Venetians
surpised this Fortress in the Year 1659. and quitted it after they had carried
away the Provision which they found there in abundance.

The Turks not thinking themselves secure under the Walls of this place,
continued their retreat, having first set fire to the Magazine. Thus the
Christian Army entered Calamata without the least opposition, on the Feast day
of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and immediately seven thousand Mainotts
repaired to the Venetian Camp, a Party of which presently went in pursuit of
the Infidels. There were found in the Castle nine Cannons nailed, and but
little Ammunition: The Fortress was dismantel'd, Signior Morosini judging it
unfit for a Garrison.

The Squadron of Signior Molino, Captain extraordinary, during the whole
Summer, gave chase to the Naval Army of the Captain Basha, who whenever he had
sight of the Venetian Vessels, made away; and his Cowardice was such, that
meeting with Signior Molino's Fleet under Capo-Crio, consisting of seventeen
Sail, he fled into the Port of Rhodes with six and twenty Men of War, and six
and forty Galleys: The fear of a Sea Fight made him also lock up the Port with
a great Chain, and he himself durst not come out, though the Venetians came
often to dare him at the very mouth of the Haven, and coasted thereabout
fifteen days to entice him out.

Chevalier Janco who was in the Field, having notice that the Turks had a
design of marching to the number of three thousand men, to fire the Suburbs of
Sebenico, left there some men, and with another Reinforcement of twelve hundred
Morlaques advanced within four Miles of the place, where having laid an Ambush
for them in an advantageous Post, the Enemies were surpised when they least
thought of it; and being put into Disorder at the first charge, betook
themselves to flight with great loss of their men.

After the taking of Calamata, the Forces of the Republique seized Porto
Vitulo, where were found fifty piece of Cannon, and ten of smaller Artillery,
with store of Ammunition: Signior Lorenzo was there made Proveditor
extraordinary. General Morosini after that appeared before Chielifa, the
Garrison not believing it self in condition to resist, accepted the Articles of
surrender which were offered them, and the Standard of St. Mark was there
planted; they reconsecrated the Church of St. Spindion for divine Worship, and
Signior Lorenzo Venier was made Governor of the place. This Fortress is
situate on the top of a sharp Rock, about a Mile and a half from the Sea; it is
a Mile in compass, of a square form, and is flanked with five Towers for its
defense. The taking of Chielifa was followed by that of Passana, where the
Standard of the Republique was planted the 24th. of September, and the Sieur
Angelo Lazari, with the superintendent Georgio Foscarini, were chosen
Proveditors extraordinary. This place is situate on a Hill in the Province of
Maina, in the neighborhood of the Gulf of Colochina, upon the Cape of Matapan
opposite to Chielifa.

The Campaign ended with several Rencounters, which the Morlaques and the
Mainotts had with the Infidels in Dalmatia, and in the Morea. The Turks also
received some Losses at Sea, four of their Galleys being separated by a violent
Storm; that which belonged to the Basha of Negropont, was met by the famous
Corsair Manetta, and taken by two of his Galeots, with two hundred Turks that
were on board, and eighty Christian Slaves, who were all set at liberty.

Signior Morosini having set sail for Corf^ to take his Winter Quarters there,
passed by Preveza within view of Santa Maura, and sailed on to Trapano to view
the Works they were making at that place, with four Galleys of the Isles: From
thence he went to the Gulf of Larta, upon advice that the Governor of that
Town, called Javanos, was on his march with fifteen hundred men to oblige the
Villages of Xeromero to the contribution of Carazzo, which they had refused to
pay. The Turks seeing the Fleet, betook themselves to flight with their
Governor, which gave occasion to the General to pass to Gomenizze, and
endeavor to draw them on thither; in his passage he was saluted by the
Infidels who were there in Garrison with a single Volley of their Cannon; and
having given a signal to the Galley Garzoni to answer them, she did it so
dexterously, that the Bullet carried off the Head of one of the Barbarians,
which struck such a terror into the rest, that they resolved upon the spot, to
leave the place and save their lives by flying to a neighboring Mountain,
which they did. This advantage obliged the Venetians to go on shore, and seize
the Fortress which Signior Morosini caused to be demolished, having first
ordered a Mass of Thanksgiving to be celebrated in the place: The Ammunition
and Provision that were found there, he caused to be carried on board his
Vessels, with six piece of double Brass Cannon, ninety six pound of Bullet, and
four quarter Culverins, with two other small Fieldpieces, to convey to Corfu,
which was but four and twenty Miles distant.

THE HISTORY OF THE Venetian Conquests, etc. The Third Book.
Venetians continued, with great Success, the Conquests they had begun the year
before in the Morea, which is a Peninsula called by the Ancients Peloponnesus;
the number of its Commonwealths, famous in History, rendered it very
considerable amongst the Grecians. It was formerly divided into Achaia properly
so called, Arcadia, the Country of Argos, Corinth, Elis, Sicionia, Laconia, and
Messenia. It is at present called Morea, because in sigure it resembles a
Mulberry-leaf; it is divided into the Dukedom of Clarence, which comprehends
Achaia, Sicionia, and Corinth; Belveder formerly Elis and Messenia; Saccania
anciently the Country of Argos and Tzaconia, where was Laconia and Arcadia: It
is joined to the Continent Northward by a neck of Land called the Isthmus of
Corinth; on the West and South it has the Adriatic Sea, and on the East the
Sea of Candia; its length from Corinth to Modon, is a hundred and seventy
Italian Miles; the breadth is almost of the same extent, and it is six hundred
Miles in compass. The City of Sparta, or Lacedemon, which amongst the ancient,
was the most celebrated of all Peloponnesus, falling under the Turkish
Dominion, has lost much of its ancient Splendor; they call Lacedemon, Misitra,
and Corinth, Coranto. At present the most known are Coron, Modon, Clarence,
Argos, Navarin, Patras, Napoli di Romania, and Maina; that which is now called
Braccio di Maina, is the Country of the Mainotts; they inhabit part of the
Country of the ancient Lacedaemonians, along the Seacoast of the Gulf of Coron,
and they are the only Greeks that have preserved themselves in form of a
Republic against the Ottomans. The ruggedness of their Mountains, and the
nearness of the Sea, has given them this advantage: But the City of Candia
being taken, which happen^d in the Year 1669. they feared they should lose
their liberty, and that fear was the occasion that many of them sought new
Habitations to live in quiet. The Genouese received five or six hundred
Families of them into the Isle of Corsica, and the Great Duke of Florence gave
land within his Territories to a thousand more, who have settled themselves
there within these few years. There are many considerable Mountains in the
Morea, viz. Pholoe, Cyllene, Sepia, Poglizzi, Cronia, or Grevenos, Mintia or
Mente, Neris, Nonaene, Artimisio, and Taygetus now called Borta. The Rivers are
Carbon and Eurotas, now called Vasili-Potamos, Inachus, Linceus, and Spinarzza.
The extent of the Isthmus of Corinth, which joins the Morea to Greece, between
the Gulf of Lepant and that of Engia, is six Miles. Many Princes have made it
their endeavor to divide all this Land from the Con^inent; Nero the Emperor
made a Voyage into Achaia expressly on that design; ^e made a Speech to his men,
and then ^pened the Ground himself, and carried a Basket of Earth on his
Shoulders, but could not succeed in his Design. The Morea being by the Greek
Emperors divided amongst the Despots or Lords whom they named, became a Prey to
the Turks, who easily possessed themselves of it under Mahomet II. surnamed
Boiuc, that is to say, the Great: He was the terror of all Europe, and the
most fortu^ate Prince of all the Infidels that ever ^ate on that Throne. The
Venetians a^one, who were Masters of Corinth and Argos, resisted for the space
of some years, under the Conduct of their General Bertold d' Est, a most
courageous Prince of the illustrious Family that now rules at Modena. This
unwearied General undertook with three thousand and six hundred Workmen to
raise a Wall of six Miles in length on the whole extent of that neck of Land
called the Isthmus of Corinth, with six and thirty Towers to hinder the
Incursions of the Infidels; but being unhappily wounded on the Head with a
Stone at the Siege of Corinth, h^ died in the defense of that place, which the
Turks soon after gained without much difficulty in the Year 1463. which obliged
the Venetians to retire into the neighboring Islands. I thought it proper to
make this Description of the Morea, which may give the Reader an Idea of i^
that may be of use in the following History. It is now time to return to the
matter in hand.

Signior Morosini Generalissimo of the Venetian Army, being desirous to secure
the Conquest of Coron and other place^ taken from the Turks the last year,
resolved to employ his utmost force in the Morea, and judged it proper to begin
with the Siege of Navarin. In Dalmatia the Camp was opened with some successes;
Signior Paolo Fosiorani drew together six hundred Morlaques, and advanced
toward a Fort called Caraman, with design to surprise it, having understood by
his Spies the weakness of the Garrison, and the absence of the Ag^ that
commanded it. The night favored his design, for having seized all the
Outworks, he took the main Tower of the Fort by scaling, and surprised the
Infidels with a brisk and vigorous charge; part of the Garrison that made
resistance, were put to the Sword, the rest yielded on discretion, and the
Morlaques that were in the place came over to those of their own Nation. The
Aga that was gone out of the Fort, was beheaded by the Command of the Basha of
Bossine, for leaving his Post, and exposing it to the Assaults of their
Enemies. After this the Morlaques of Clissa and Sebenico took the Fort of
Ottoch, and got the better in several Rancounters they had with the Sangiac of
Ertzegonine, who having drawn some Forces together to surprise the Tower of
Narino and the Fort of Opusch, saw all his Designs dashed by the vigilance of
the Morlaques, who kept the Field to observe his motions.

In the mean time General Morosini on the 2d. of June arrived before Navarin
with the Galleys, Galeasses, and other Vessels to the number of two hundred
Sail. The Forces of the Republique, the Pope, the Great Duke of Tuscany, and of
Malta, were all joined.

Navarin is a Seaport Town of the Morea, in the little Country of Belveder; it
is near Modon which lies Eastward of it and Arcadia; it is believed to be that
which is called by the Ancients Pilus Messeniaca. Bajazet II. having taken it
from the Venetians in the Year 1500. Don John of Austria, with other
Confederates, attempted to retake it in the Year 1572. They landed a thousand
men, Spaniards and Italians, under the Command of Alexander Farnese, Prince of
Parma, who with ten pieces of Cannon attacked it on the South side by land in
the beginning of October. They battered the Walls for the space of three days,
but the ground which was rocky, not suffering the Christians to entrench
themselves, and the Turks on the other hand having put store of Provision and
Ammunition into the place, and considerable Succors of men, they were forced
to quit their Enterprise.

After the forces were landed, and Count Coningsmark their General had assigned
them their Posts, Signior Morosini Generalissimo, sent to the Governor of old
Navarin (an inconsiderable Town notwithstanding its advantageous situation) to
summon him, advising him not to delay till it should be formally attacked,
threatening to give no quarter if the Garrison resisted. The Governor desired
the rest of that day and the day following to consider; but news being brought,
that the Ottoman General in the Morea, was marching to the relief of the place,
Count Coningsmark had Orders to advance under the Cannon of Navarin. The
entrance of the Port is sheltered by a neck of land on which one Regiment was
posted; and at the same time some pieces of Artillery were brought on shore in
great Barks. The besieged being dismayed at these Preparations, hung out a
white Flag, and sent Deputies to the General's Galley: The Articles of
Capitulation were regulated, according to which they marched out with their
Arms and Baggage, to the number of four hundred men; there were but a hundred
Soldiers among them, the place being defended by its situation, without need
of a greater Garrison. They demanded to be sent to Alexandria, which was
granted them. There were found in this place three and forty Cannons, with
store of other Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions. After having left there a
Governor with a Garrison of an hundred and sixty men, the Generalissimo gave
Orders to the Galleys to make into the mouth of the Haven, in order to attack
the City of New Navarin; they could not do it without bearing the fire of a
Battery that was on a Ravelin close by the Water, but they suffered no damage
by it, only One Galley of the Isles, which Signior Cornaro caused to enter the
Port on the 6th. of June at Night, received a Cannon-shot which put the Oars in
disorder. The Cannons and Mortars were immediately brought to land with the
Ammunition. Count Coningsmark caused a Battery to be raised of twenty pieces of
Cannon of fifty pound Ball, and another of eighteen Mortar-pieces to throw the
Bombs. The Grecians of Coron, and some other conquered places, being come to
the Camp, they fell to take their Posts, and distribute the Attacks. The
Garrison consisting but of a thousand men, was commanded by Zefer Aga, an
Officer of great Repute, as it was known from a Greek that came out of the
place; and at the same time they surprised a Renegade that carried Letters from
the Serasquier of the Morea to Zefer, by which he assured him that he was
coming to his Relief. Upon this news Count Coningsmark was detached to march up
to him with a body of choice men. The Scouts having discovered the Enemy some
Leagues off, the Count made a halt, and set his men in Battel-array, but there
was no fight by reason the Serasquier made a Countermarch and retired. The
Count not thinking it proper to pursue them, marched back to the Camp in very
good order.

Signior Morosini having in vain summoned the Governor, before he began the
Attacks, put in readiness a Battery of Mortar-pieces, which was so well managed
by the directions of Count San Felice Muttoni, that the Bombs which were of
five hundred pound weight, set fire on the Town in diverse places, which struck
a great terror into the besieged. The Battery of Cannon was in readiness on
the 13th. and on the same day there was intelligence that the Serasquier
advanced apace, intending to surprise the Besiegers in their Camp, and that he
was within six Miles of them. Count Coningsmark was again detached with seven
thousand Foot, five hundred Horse, and the Dragoons of the Marquis de Courbon,
and Count Bernabo Visconti: He marched in good order in the beginning of the
Night, and the next day found the Infidels to the number of eight thousand
Foot, and two thousand Horse, entrenched in a Valley, where it was impossible
to come at them, but by a very narrow passage. The Dragoons commanded by the
Marquis de Courbon, and those of Count Bernabo Visconti who immediately
advanced, having posted themselves in an advantageous place to bear the first
Onset of the Enemies, gave time to the Forces that followed them to pass the
narrow way. The Turks who might have taken advantage of this motion, made no
Attack; and Count Coningsmark set his Forces in order of Battle, and placed two
small pieces of Artillery on an eminence of ground from whence they fired
continually on the Turks, who seeing the Dragoons march proudly toward them,
thought to hem them in with a Detachment of several Squadrons. But the Dragoons
not only bore the Onset with great courage, but alighting from their Horses,
made the Infidels give way, and pursued them so successfully, that they
dispersed them; after which they bore so hard upon the Infantry, that they put
them into disorder, which was increased by the Forces that marched after the
Dragoons. The Fight lasted two hours, and ended with the flight of the Turks,
who lost above five hundred men in this action, and had many wounded. There had
been several that had rallied upon the occasion of two or three thousand Turks
that were got together from several parts of the Morea, to reinforce the
Serasquier's Army, and were come near the field of Battle; but it was in vain
they renewed the Charge, they were again put to flight, and forced to leave
their Baggage and Tents. There were but very few Soldiers either killed or
wounded on the Christian side. Prince Maximilian of Brunswick encouraged his
Forces by his Example, and showed at the head of them all the Courage a man
could be capable of. Many other Volunteers of great quality signalized
themselves in the like manner on this occasion. This Defeat of which the
besieged could not doubt, when they saw the Heads of the Turks killed in the
Battle, and the Colors the Venetians brought away, made so general a
Consternation in the City, that they lost all hope of being relieved; and after
some Contests, came to a Capitulation. It was permitted them to march out of
Navarin with Arms and Baggage to be transported to Alexandria. Count
Coningsmark regulated the Articles of Capitulation in the Name of the
Generalissimo: While they were regulating that Article that concerned the
embarking the Garrison, there happened a disaster that was like to have caused
great Confusion: A Magazine of Powder took fire, and was blown up in a moment,
an hundred and fifty Turks were either burnt or buried in the ruins, together
with six Christians; the Governor was of the number; fifteen more were blown
up and thrown from the place. It was presently said the Turks had prepared this
Oven on purpose to destroy all the Christians they could draw that way. This
was enough to make them put all to the Sword, had not the Generalissimo
appeased the Soldiers. He received the excuses of the principal men of the
place, who, when they brought him the Keys of the Town, and their Standards,
asked permission to justify themselves upon this Accident. It was found, in
effect, that the Fire which was set to several Houses by the Bombs, being kept
alive under the Ruins, had made its way to this Magazine only by the
negligence of the Officers, whom the unhappy state of their Affairs had hindered
to provide against such Accidents. The Garrison consisted of a thousand
Soldiers who embarked with two thousand other Turks, to pass for Alexandria.
On the 18th. of June Signior Morosini entered the Town with Count Coningsmark
and the chief Officers of the Army, and the principal Mosque was made choice of
to give God thanks in for this Conquest.

In the mean time the Christian Privateers met with the Turkish Caravan coming
from Alexandria to Constantinople. The number of the Enemies Ships did not
dismay them; they charged very vigorously, and after they had either taken, or
disabled the Men of War which were their Convoy, they took the Caravan. The
Ship called Alexander the Great, surprised also a Turkish Vessel of Eighty
pieces of Cannon; for having discovered it afar off, they hung out Turkish
Colors, and made up close to her, with a design to board her, and quickly made
themselves Masters of her before the Infidels could come to themselves, or
prepare for Fight. Two Turkish Galleots had the same chance meeting the famous
Corsair Manetta.

The Morlaques made many Incursions into the Enemies Territories, and amongst
others, those of Sebenico and Traci being sent for that purpose, to the number
of twelve hundred, foraging in the open Country, surpised a Town called
Dapana, and returned with store of Slaves and Cattle, having ransacked, and
after set fire to the Houses. In the mean time the Turks attempted no great
matters in Dalmatia, their greatest Efforts being limited to the pillaging and
burning some Villages between Clissa and Spalatro, for which purpose they had
detached four thousand Horse: But an accident happened, which frustrated their
hopes of enjoying the Prey; for as they returned with a great Booty, they fell
into an Ambuscade which four hundred Morlaques had laid for them in a narrow
way, which terminates at a steep unpassable Mountain, from whence sixty
Peasants, who had quitted their Houses at the approach of the Turks, rolled
down Stones of a prodigious bigness upon them who were straightened in their
passage. Thus the Morlaques having robbed the Enemy of his Booty, and delivered
the Slaves, returned victorious with about two hundred Prisoners. Let us now
turn our Discourse to the Venetian Camp in the Morea.

The Conquest of the two Navarins was followed by the taking of Modon, a Town
situate in the Province of Belveder, at one end of the Morea; it was formerly
called Methona. The Venetians having assisted at the taking of Constantinaple,
in the year 1204. Baldwin the Earl of Flanders, afterward chosen Emperor of
the East, gave them as a Recompense for the share they had in the dangers of
the Siege. the Isle of Candia, the Cities of Modon, and Coron in the Morea, and
that of Durazzo in Albania, with the Isle of Corfu; this Isle was then in the
Possession of the Genouese, who had for their Captain the famous Corsair
Veterano. The Venetians set sail the year following toward Corfu with thirty
Galleys, and having met Veterano coming out of the Gulf, they attacked him so
successfully, that having taken seven of his Galleys, they gave an entire
Defeat to the rest; after which, without any difficulty, they made themselves
Masters of Corfu, and soon after of Modon and Coron. Modon remained under their
Dominion till the year 1500. when Bajazet the second, Emperor of the Turks,
attacked it by Sea and Land with an Army of 140000. men, and above 220. Sail of
Ships. They made a vigorous defense, but the Proveditor Contarini fearing lest
the besieged should yield the place for fear of not being relieved, chose five
of his best Galleys, and having laden them with Ammunition and Provisions,
which he knew they wanted, sent them to Modon: Four of them got happily into
the Port, but that which was intended for the safety of the Town, proved the
occasion of its loss. The besieged were so overjoyed at this relief, that to
see it come in, they quitted the defense of their Walls. The Turks took
advantage of their Imprudence, and there being already some Breaches made, they
mounted them, and found but a small number of Soldiers to guard them, whom
they soon cut to pieces. The Forces that arrived in the Galleys, would have
made head against them, but they beat down all before them, and almost the
whole City was filled with destruction by Fire and Sword; they neither spared
the Governor, nor the other Officers, and struck off the Head of Andrea
Falconi Bishop of the place, who came in his Pontifical Habit to encourage the
Inhabitants to their own defense.

Signior Morosini being come before this place with part of his Forces on the
21st. of June in the Evening, the next day he viewed the Haven, and observed
the places proper for landing the rest of his Army. This Debarkment was made in
very good order, the Infidels not using any great endeavors to oppose them.
The other Forces had made one day's March by Land, since the taking of Navarin,
and arrived on the 22d. before Modon: This Town is situate upon a neck of Land
that shoots it self into the Sea; it is fortified with a Wall of Freestone
filled on the inside with Earth; on the side toward the Land, it is sheltered
by a Bastion not joined to the Walls, and another raised Work all surrounded by
a good Ditch Palisado'd. Count Coningsmark immediately gave order for the
Circumvallation, which was easy by reason of the deep Waters that are round
the place. The 23d. they wrought on the Trenches, and on the 24th. they got
Fagots in the Camp it self, which lay cross a Grove of Orange Trees, of which
Wood they made 100000. The 25th. they began with eight Mortar-pieces to cast
their Bombs; they threw five hundred, of which eighty missed the Town, and
thirty broke in the Air. The 26th. Count Coningsmark attacked the Suburbs, and
having made himself Master of them, secured the Avenues of the Streets, and put
four Battalions of Sclavonians in the Gardens of the Suburbs, the 27th they
summoned the Town; the Disdar or Governor made answer, That he expected no
Succor but from God; That he was born to die, and that he would defend the
place as long as there was a man alive in it, and that the last man should set
fire ^o all the store of Powder, that so the Town (if it must be cut off from
the Turkish Empire) should not fall into the Power of the Christians. The 28th.
they began to work at the Battery of ten pieces of Cannon; the 29th. they
continued to throw their Bombs, and to work ^t their Fagots, and at their
Battery; the ^0th. the Battery began to play with wonderful success, and in
three hours dismounted five of the Enemies Cannon; the Cannoniers then at the
Camp were very expert, and shot as exactly with their Cannon, as a man could
with a Musket. The first of July the Forces of Malta opened their Trenches,
and carried on their Works two hundred paces; on the 2d. the Spaniards relieved
the Trenches, and Generalissimo Morosini summoned the Town again; the Turks
came to capitulate; the Governor proposed, That if they would give him two
thousand Sequins he would persuade the Garrison to surrender, and urged that a
Truce would be requisite to summon the Council; the Truce was granted on
condition that the Works might continue on both sides. Count Coningsmark,
besides the Workmen, had under his command five hundred Germans, by whose help
they carried on their Works within thirty paces of the Counterscarp, with a
Line of Communication of fifty paces, and a place of Parade on each side. On
the 3d. the Disdar broke the Truce, alleging that he could not persuade the
Garrison to surrender: The 4th. the Saxons relieved the Trenches, four
Mortar-pieces with two Carcasses, were employed all night in casting Stones,
the rest threw Bombs, a^ usual; one Lieutenant Colonel, and thirty Soldiers
were killed. On the 5th. the Forces of Brunswick mounted the Trenches, the
Battery of Bombs was advanced and one of Cannon begun, and the Trenches carried
on to the Ditch. A^ Deserter confirmed what others had said That the Houses of
the Town were almost all ruined by four thousand Bomb^ that had fallen amongst
them, and tha^ the Stones incommoded them most of all The 6th. the Florentines
mounted the Trenches; there was great firing on each side, and the Enemies did
all they could to hinder the Works to go forward* all the Engeniers that were
in the Trenches being hurt, Count Charles Koningsmark, Nephew to the General,
and Colonel in the Most Christian King's Service, ordered the Works, and marked
out a place of Parade; and the Lodgment of the Counterscarps was made without
much loss. On the 7th those of Malta mounted the Trenches again: twenty Knights
and some Volunteers, of which number were Viscount Turene, and Count Charles
Koningsmark, with fifty Grenadiers, lay open on the right Angle of the
Counterscarp: the several Posts being not yet joined, they were forced to work.
That night a Battery of six Guns was made on an Eminence, which battered the
back part of the Town. The clear Moonlight was the occasion that we lost some
men; and two of the Knights were wounded. On the 8th, the Spaniards came again
on the Trenches; they made three descents into the Ditch, and the Gallery was
begun. The Turks fired a great number of Grenado's and Bags of Powder: In the
mean time about Noon, the Christians were got to the Foot of the Bastion; which
so dismayed the Turks, that they hung out the White Flag, and gave Hostages.
Two Principal Men of the Garrison waited on the Generalissimo, who deferred
regulating the Capitulation till the next day. He sent them no Hostages, tho
they had sent six on board the Captain Galley. It was said by them, that the
Serasquier, who had put five hundred Soldiers, and one hundred Cannoniers into
the place before the Siege, gave orders to Cidi Achmet who was Governor, that
he should defend it during the space of fifteen days, and then surrender it, if
he were not relieved. The Capitulation was regulated on Conditions, That the
Keys of the Magazines of Ammunition were to be sent the same day into the hands
of Signior Morosini, That the Turks should bring their Standards on board the
Captain Galley, That they should all march out within four days, the Soldiers
with their Arms, and what Baggage each of them could carry; and the Inhabitants
with part of their Movables; That Vessels should be allowed to transport them
to some Port in the Coast of Barbary; That they should leave behind them all
the Christian Slaves, and the Negro's Men and Women that should be found in
Modon, should become Slaves to the Republique. These Articles being signed, one
hundred men were put into the Castle where the Standard of St. Mark was
planted; and two days after the Turks marched out to the number of a thousand
Men able to bear Arms, and three thousand other persons. There were ^n the
place about an hundred piece of Cannon, of which many were Brass, with great
store of Ammunition in the Maga^ines. Fourteen hundred men were put ^n Garrison
for the defense of the City, and Signior Pavita was chosen Proveditor
extraordinary.

Fortune declared her self on all sides for ^he Republique; and this was not
the only check the Affairs of the Ottoman Empire met with on this side. General
Cornaro who commanded in Dalmatia, having joined to his Forces those of the
Morlaques: they marched from the Province of Zaro, under the Conduct of
Cheva^ier Janco and Sieur Smilianich, with the Captains Possidona and
Patolazzi; they ^irected their march toward Conscho, and being arrived on the
13th to the Banks of the River Cattina, made a halt toward the Evening to
refresh themselves; and having laid their bridge, past the River in the night,
and by break of day arrived to Climno; where having understood, that seven
hundred Spahi's, and fifteen hundred Janisaries, with some other Forces were
encamped: they attacked them with so much courage, that they soon made them
give way. The Cavalry endeavored to gain the open Country, and the Foot to
escape to the Mountains; but they were so close pursued that before they could
compass their design, above seven hundred of them were killed, and five hundred
made Prisoners. The Inhabitants of Climn^ who were witnesses to this defeat
retir'^ themselves into the Castle, with desig^ to defend themselves there, but
in vain for the confusion they were in, havin^ made them forget to shut the
Gat^ of the Town, the Forces of the Repub^lique and the Morlaques seized it
imm^diately, and the Castle also, by the negligence of the Inhabitants, whom
the approach of an Enemy should have man more wary. Whatever was found in the
City they carried away, and put to the Sword those that made any resistance;
they set fire to the Houses, which spreading it self on all sides, burnt the
Town and Castle to Ashes, blew up the Magazine with five hundred Turks,
consumed many stately Buildings and magnificent Mosques, with great store of
Riches; the Women and Children were carried away Prisoners. It was a Town of
good Trade; the Basha of Bossina made choice of it for his ordinary residence,
by reason of its pleasant Situation, good Air, and fruitfulness of the adjacent
Fields, which in this War were wholly wasted. In this Expedition one hundred
and thirty Christian Slaves were set at liberty, and more than sixty Families
put themselves under the protection of the Republique. Signior Cornaro marched
no farther on, but returned with his Force, and the Morlaques, laden with rich
Spoils, having had but nine men killed and three and twenty wounded in this
successful Enterprise.

The Proveditor Extraordinary of Spinalonga in the Kingdom of Candie, gave an
account to the Senate, that, besides many Incursions that had been made by his
Garrison, from time to time, to the very Gates of the Enemies Towns, he had
lately made a Detachment of part of his Forces, with design to fight the
Infidels; that his Scouts having informed him where they lay encamped, he
marched toward them, and gained an entire Victory; and that having possessed
himself of an advantageous Post, which before had much incommoded him: the
confusion the Infidels were in was redoubled, and most part of them killed on
the place; some were drowned, and others dispersed in the Mountains. There was
also intelligence that the Christian Privateers, had taken in the Sea of Candia
eight Saics laden with Corn and other Merchandise bound for Constantinople.

After Signior Morosini had viewed the Fortifications of Modon, and given
necessary orders for its defense, he began to think of new Conquests, and
called a Council of War for that purpose, where all the Principal Officers
being present, it was resolved to attack the City of Napoli di Romania, so
called by the Inhabitants of the Morea. Before he put his design in execution,
he thought it proper to clear the Country of some Garrisons that were in the
small places about Modon: he possessed himself of the Town called Achaia; which
tho it be not in it self very considerable, yet it serves to secure the other
Conquests which the Venetians have made, and are still making in that Kingdom.
Whilst we leave the Army under sail toward Napoli di Romania, let us see what
passes in Dalmatia.

The Forces of the Republique which are in these parts, have had many
advantages over the common Enemy, being seconded by the Morlaques. Solomon
Basha of Scutari and Albania, who took the Field in the Month of July, in order
to besiege some place in the Territories of the Republique, took much pains to
little purpose. It Is true he advanced toward the City of Budoa and the Castle
of St. Stephens, with design to seize them, and having forag'd thereabouts, to
lay siege to Cattaro: In effect he used so much diligence that he quickly got
within view of the place with his Army, which consisted of twelve thousand men,
and eight piece of Cannon, which gave some alarm to the Governor; but General
Cornaro and the Count St. Paul having been informed of his design, had already
prevented him with a number equal to his. The Basha, who believed his design
would not come to light till after the execution of it, and imagined the
Christians could take no measures to traverse it, encamped himself within four
miles of the place, near the Town of Briach, and stayed for the Artillery and
the rest of his Forces designed for this Enterpise. In the mean time General
Cornaro furnished the City with all things necessary for its defense, in case
the Enemies should be so rash as to lay siege to it; and having taken a view of
their Camp, he set his men in Battel-array: The Basha did the same, and himself
in person viewed the Venetian Army from a small Hill on the South side. The
first day past in diverse light Skirmishes and frequent Alarms without coming to
a just Battle. But at the dawn of the next day, the Turks came upon the
Christians with great fury and loud cries, as is customary with them: The first
Squadrons of the Morlaques perceiving their design, stayed for them without
stirring a foot, and with the help of their Artillery bore the first onset. In
this Rancounter, a Cannon Bullet having carried off a Bough of a Tree, forced
it so violently upon the Basha, that his Face was grievously hurt by it: This
Accident caused some disorder amongst the Infidels, and was no small
disadvantage to them; for Signior Cornaro, having observed the Basha retire out
of the Field to dress his Wound, drew his Army out of the Camp against the
Enemies. During the space of four hours the Victory was in suspense, but the
Christians being reinforced by some fresh Battalions from the Galleys, the
Turks gave ground on a sudden, and not being able to make head, retired in
confusion toward their Camp; they lost six hundred men in their flight, and
many were taken Prisoners. Notwithstanding this disgrace, a thousand Janisaries
made a fresh attack on the Castle of St. Stephen, but being briskly repulsed by
the Garrison, they lost all hopes of taking the place, having lost an hundred
men in the attempt. This ill success so enraged the Basha, that he had caused
several of the Captains to be strangled, had they not begged their lives with a
promise of clearing themselves from the reproach of cowardice on the first
occasion; and in effect the fear of this reproach had so much influence on
them, that two days after, having rallied their Forces, they returned in order
of Battle to charge the Christians; but they fell short of their expectations,
and were soon discomfited by those Forces that backed the Christian Army, with
the help of the Cannon from the Galleys. There were four hundred killed on the
place, and the rest forced to retire the third time in confusion; the Venetians
closely pursuing them, being desirous to complete a Victory they had so happily
begun.

The Forces of the Republic advanced their Conquests already made in the Morea
by the taking of Napoli di Romania: This place, which is three parts surrounded
by the Sea, is situate in the Gulf that bears its name on a crooked neck of
Land: its Harbor is safe, and may contain a great number of Vessels; but the
mouth of it is so narrow and difficult that two Galleys cannot enter a breast:
A Castle seated on a Rock within three hundred paces of it, serves for its
defense, and is so much the surer Guard to it, by reason that the Galleys and
other Ships, not having a depth of water sufficient to bring them within Cannon
shot, the Castle cannot easily be attacked. Bajazet II. Emperor of the Turks,
having in the year 1500. attempted to make himself Master of the Morea, drew
together a powerful Army at Santa Maura; he thought to secure himself of Napoli
di Romania, and as he was on his march thither, a party of his Cavalry being
advanced before the rest, those of the Town made a brisk Sally and cut them to
pieces; which struck a great terror into the Enemies, and made them quit that
attempt, and go to besiege Modon; the taking of which place being succeeded by
that of Coron, they were so puffed up with success, that they thought themselves
sure of Napoli di Romania: they came before it again, and employed all their
Force to make a Conquest of it; but the besieged showed no less resolution to
defend it, in which they were not a little encouraged by Paul Contarini, a man
of great Honor: He had been in Coron at the siege of that place, and had
fallen into the hands of the Turks. Bajazet knowing his Authority to be great,
would make use of him to move the besieged to surrender; he advanced to the
Walls, and seeing one of the Gates open, he spurred on with that speed, that
having disengaged himself from the Turks that were about him, he got into the
place, and encouraged the Inhabitants to make a good defense, and Bajazet some
few days after raised the Siege and returned to Constantinople. Solomon the II.
having in vain attacked Corf^ in the year 1537. gave orders to Cassin Ba^^a to
carry on the War toward Napoli di Romania and the adjacent places. The
Venetians who were entered into a League against him with the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, opposed all the designs of the Turks, who having again besieged
Napoli di Romania, were again constrained to make a shameful retreat with great
loss. But at last the Venetians finding it for the interest of their affairs,
to make peace with Solomon, sent Lewis Badoaro to Constantinople with full
power to treat. All his endeavors to preserve Napoli di Romania, and Napoli di
Malvasia in the hands of the Republique (the only places they were possessed of
in the Morea) were fruitless. For Solomon having been advertised by private
intelligence, that the Republique had given him order to conclude a Treaty
whatever it cost, obliged him to give up those two places with two Castles in
Dalmatia, viz. Nadin and Laurane. This was transacted in the year 1540. and
since that time Napoli di Romania has continued under the Turkish Dominion.

Signior Morosini having resolved on the Siege of this place, set sail on the
27th of July: The Army consisted of eight thousand Foot and six hundred Horse,
being the Forces of the Republique, which he embarked on the Galleys and
Galiots, with those of the Pope, the Duke of Florence, and the Battalion of
Malta: There were other Auxiliary Forces, who were embarkt on the other Ships
and Galeasses. A few days after, the Galleys and Galiots which set out first,
arrived at the Port of Tolon, where on the 30th in the evening they landed
without any opposition; this Port is not above four or five miles from Napoli
di Romania, which they invested on the 31st; and it was reported by a Christian
Slave, that Hassan Basha, Mustapha Basha, and three Beys his Brothers, that
were in the place, were the more resolved to defend it stoutly, for that there
was a numerous Garrison, and great store of Ammunition and Provisions. On the
first of August, having begun the Lines of Circumvallation, they possessed
themselves of Mount Palamida, on which they raised a Battery: this Mount lies
on the side toward the Continent, and is not accessible but by a narrow way,
which is between the steepest part of the Hill and the Sea. Three of the
Soldiers that were commanded to cut of the passage of the water to the Castle,
were killed, and four wounded; yet they executed their orders in spite of the
Fire and Bombs of the Besieged. On the same day news was brought, that the
Serasquier was encamped under the Cannon of Argos, but those that brought it
could not discover their number. On the 2d of the Month, they were informed by
a Rascian Deserter, that the fire which was seen the day before in the City,
had taken hold of above an hundred Quintals of Powder; that the ruins of the
Magazine had chok'd up a great Cistern of water, and spoiled another, and that
the Inhabitants had but one Well left that was of use. The same day the
besieged made a Sally with two hundred Foot and twenty Horse, but all they
could do was to charge the advance Guards, and kill or wound six or seven
Soldiers: The Germans came in, and being seconded by an hundred Milaneses,
presently forced them to retire. In this Sally Major Lauro d' Andria received a
Musket shot in his foot. The Vessels and Galeasses that arrived the next day
with the rest of the Forces, reported that the Captain Basha would have come to
the place with seven of his Galleys, in which there were above three thousand
men, but that upon the advice they had, that the Fleet of the Republique was at
the Mouth of the Haven they steered off toward Negropont.

The Generalissimo forgot nothing that might advance the good success of the
Siege: He took a view of the place on the side toward the Sea, from on Board
the Galley commanded by the Governor of the Galley-slaves; after which he took
a turn on the side toward the Land, viewed the Posts of Mount Palamida, and
judging it would be difficult to compass his design as long as the Sea was open
^o the besieged, he resolved to go and attack the Turks in their Camp; knowing
that the Serasquier was encamped four or five Miles from his Lines under the
Cannon of the Castle of Argos. On the 5th they wrought at a Battery of eight
Mortars, and as many Cannon of fifty pound Ball. On the 6th, Count Koningsmark
left but fifteen hundred men to guard the Lines and marched with the rest
against the Serasquier. The Generalissimo advanced on his side with his
Galleys, and having found a place fit for landing, near to Argos, he set a
shore fifteen hundred Soldiers and armed Seamen, to march under the command of
Colonel Magnanini. This Conduct obliged the Turks to divide their Forces, they
left a party to defend their Camp, and their Cavalry to the number of three
thousand went out to meet the Venetians, who received their first fire with
great courage and stedfastness. Count Koningsmark marched toward them in very
good order, and finding his opportunity, broke their Ranks and forced them to
fly; but he not thinking it proper to pursue the Victory farther, the Enemy had
time to carry off their Tents, and some part of their Baggage; the Galleys had
orders to make near the Coast to serve as a safe retreat to those Soldiers
that might be straggling for plunder. On the same day the Batteries of Mortars
were finished, and began to bombard the Town where fire appeared in several
places: Two other Works were likewise carried on to batter it on the side
toward the Sea. On the 7th. fourteen Christian Slaves who had made their
escape the Night before, reported that five hundred Soldiers and an Engineer
had found means to get into the Town by Sea; that the Serasquier that had sent
this relief, drew his Forces together near Corinth to join with those the
Captain-Basha had landed. Signior Morosini summoned the Governor, and upon his
refusing to surrender, it was resolved to burn all the adjacent Villages, and
by that means hinder the Turks to lodge themselves there. Count Coningsmark
took upon himself the execution of this design, and soon made himself Master of
Argos; those that defended it, quitted the place without striking a stroke.
There were found in it some Provisions, with about twelve thousand pound of
Powder. On the 8th. the battering was continued; five Grecians who escaped to
the Camp, confirmed what was reported by other Deserters concerning the
Destruction the Bombs had made there; they added, that there was so general a
dismay amongst them, that if Mustapha Basha had not opposed it, they would
already have accepted the offer of Capitulation. On the 9th, four hundred men
of those Ships that had transported the Garrison of Modon into Barbary, were
landed, and took their Posts. Advice was brought, that the Serasquier was on
his march with his Forces, and a Reinforcement of two thousand men to make some
new attempt, and it appeared to be for the relief of Napoli di Romania. On the
10th. about an hundred of his Horse came within Pistol-shot of the Trenches.
Signior Morosini with his Galleys went on the other side the Gulf for fresh
Water and Forage to refresh his Soldiers, whom the Turks in parties did much
infest, and surprised some as they were straggling, which retarded their Works,
and weakened the Guard of their Trenches. Signior Pisani Captain ordinary of the
Ships, arrived in the Evening with eight of his Men of War, one Saique and a
Pinnace taken from the Turks. The fire that had been seen in the place, was put
out by the rain that fell the same day. The Battery of eight piece of Cannon
was put in a readiness on the 11th. and began to play upon the Town: The
Brigadier of the Brunswick Forces was wounded on the Mount Palamida, at Count
Coningsmarks's quarter, while he was viewing the Posts and the Battery of
Mor^ars. On the 12th. seven Greeks who made their escape from the Town,
reported that the Bombs had killed above twelve hundred Persons, That the
Inha^itants being terrified, desired to capitu^ate; but the Governor persisted
in ^is resolution to defend the place till ^he Besiegers had made a breach.
Signi^r Duodo was sent with three Men of War ^o take the Castle of Thermis,
which being at his first approach surrendered to him by the Disdar, he placed a
Garrison in it. On the same day the Battery was advanced by reason it had not
suc effect as was expected in the place where it was raised: toward the
Evening they opened the Trenches without the loss of one Man.

The 14th. 15th. and 16th. they continued battering the Town, the Cannons and
Mortars playing upon it without intermission. Advice was brought, that the
Garrison of Thermis, after they had surrendered the place, was conducted to
Athens, to the number of an hundred and fifty men. On the 17th. two Morta^ were
placed at the head of the trenches (...) they made no more use of he Battery o^
the Mount Palamida, there being no nee^ of Bombs now the greatest part of the
Houses were ruined. On the 18th. the Galleys were sent for fresh Water an^
Forage. While they were advancing their Works on the 19th. they perceived a
great number of Tents which the Turks ha^ pitched in the same place where Count
C^ningsmark had defeated them some day before, which obliged Signior Morosini
(...) reinforce the Guard of the Lines with the Forces of the eight Men of War
brought by Signior Pisani. He thought it also a matter of importance to the
good success of the Siege, to guard that Arm of the Sea by which the Serasquier
might have communication with the City; and for that design he ordered Monsieur
Bragadin to advance with three Galleys besides four Feluques well armed,
commanded by Chevalier Morel. On the 20th. the besieged made a salley, but
retired at the besiegers first firing, three of their men being killed, and
others wounded: They would have seconded this salled by a large Detachment of
Horse, but they also retired without fighting. The Works having been advanced
to the foot of the Counterscarp, on the 21st. all necessary Preparations were
made for a descent into the Ditch. On the 22d. the Turks detached a thousand
Horse and Foot, buy they retired on the first motion the Saxon and Brunswick
Forces made toward them. On the same day arrived an English Vessel with Men
and Ammunition. The 23d. the Enemy made a Salley from their Camp, but after
some light Skirmishes, presently retired. The Besiegers endured great Fatigues,
being necessitated to be at their Arms Night and Day by reason of these
continual Skirmishes. On the 24th. they fell to undermine one side of the
Counterscarp. The 25th. the Galleys were sent to get Forage for the Cavalry
about ten miles from the place. The 26th. after they had made their descent to
the Ditch, they began to work at the Galleries; it was a piece of Work that
proved fatal to the Major of the Battalion of Malta, who was killed on this
occasion by a Musket Shot, as Chevalier Alcenago, Major General, had been some
days before, viewing the Ditch. The Sersquier advanced nearer the Besiegers,
which hindered the besieged from desiring a Capitulation, notwithstanding the
great consternation the whole Town was in; they were animated by his presence,
and making no doubt of being relieved, they wrought at their Retrenchments that
they might defend themselves in case the Besiegers should make so considerable
a Breach as to venture on an Assault. On the 27th. Monsieur Venier returned
with the rest of his Squadron.

The Generalissimo saw his Army very much impaired, several Officers being dead
of their Distempers, many others were disabled, and therefore, since a longer
Siege could not but be very disadvantageous to him, he resolved to go and
attack the Serasquier afresh; and for that purpose, on the 28th. he made a
great Detachment of Soldiers from his Vessels, Seamen, and Volunteers, to make
his Forces seem the more numerous. But on the 29th. at break of day the
Serasquier prevented him, coming in person at the head of ten thousand men to
attack the Lines; he presently made himself Master of an Eminence which
commanded part of the Camp; and there being but one Squadron to guard that
side, he made them give ground, and fell most furiously on the Battalion of
Malta, which not only stood firm, but repulsed the Turks with such vigor, that
they were forced to turn back, and regain their Hill: Two Battalions of the
Saxons, and those of Brunswick, commanded by Count Coningsmark, marched against
them, and charged them with the greatest Courage and Bravery imaginable. The
Generalissimo caused his grand Detachment from the Ships and Galleys, to
advance, having first given all necessary orders for the safety of the Camp,
and having placed himself at the head of some select Forces, he charged the
Enemies, whom this fresh supply and the other Forces that came from the
Seaside, had so terrified, that whatever their Officers could do, though they
threatened them with their Swords in their Hands, and in effect killed some,
could not stop the others from flying. The Battle lasted seven hours, and was
very obstinate on both sides. The Infidels left fourteen hundred of their men
dead on the Field, and there were but three hundred killed or wounded on the
Christians side. The Defeat of the Serasquier being made known to the Besieged,
by the joyful shouts of the Army in their return to the Camp, and the Standards
they had taken from the Infidels, on the tops of which they had fixed the Heads
of those they had slain in the Battle, it was now no time to consider what was
to be done. The Governor sent three Deputies to the General's Galley, who
granted them, that the Garrison should go out with their Arms and Baggage; That
ten days should be allowed them to embark, and that they should have a Convoy
to Tenedos. The next day the Capitulation was adjusted, the Turks put the
Castle into the hands of the Generalissimo, and sent Hostages without receiving
any from him. The 31. Signior Morosini, attended by the Pope's Galleys, with
those of Florence and Malta, went into the Town, and there gave necessary
orders. On the first of September it was under derliberation, whether or no
they should pursue the Serasquier, but he himself took away the ground of that
Consult, by retiring to Argos on the first tidings he had of the Surrender of
the place. There were found in the Castle seventeen Brass Cannon, seven of
Iron, and one Mortar; in the City, an hundred piece of Cannon, with great store
of Ammunition and Provisions. There was great and solemn rejoicing at Venice
for the taking of this important place; the Doge attended by all the Noblemen
assisted at the Te Deum, which was sung in the Ducal Church of St. Mark, where
(as a token of extraordinary Joy) the Standard of the Morea was exposed, which
till now had not been unfolded in the space of these last hundred years. The
great Services Signior Morosini had for some years performed for the
Republique, deserving a signal Recompense, the Senate intending to confer upon
him a perpetual mark of Honor, made a Decree, that himself, his Brother, and
all the eldest Sons of the Family, should for ever be Knights, and should enjoy
all the Honors that attend that Dignity. The Senate being also desirous to pay
some marks of their acknowledgments to Count Coningsmark, who, during the whole
Siege, had done all that might be expected from his known Courage and Conduct,
it was ordered, that he should be presented with a Gold Basin to the value of
six thousand Ducats.

After the Capitulation, according to which the Garrison and Inhabitants of the
place were to be conveyed to Tenedos, the richest of the Turks asked leave of
the Basha to put their best Effects on board the Vessel where he with all his
Family was to embark, believing that there they would be best secured. The
Basha consented to their requests, without permitting them to come on board
themselves. When they had set sail, he caused the Pilot to steer his Course
toward Venice, with design to ask the Protection of the Republique, being
accompanied by his Brothers and the Governor of Chielifa, they were
accordingly taken into Protection; and while they kept their Quarantane in the
Hospital, Lodgings were provided for them in the Seminary of Noblemen. It was
thought that the secret Correspondence Signior Morosini held with this Basha,
did more contribute to the surrender of Napoli di Romania, than all the Bombs
and Carcasses that had been employed against it. But this is most certain, that
by this Conquest more than sixty Villages were brought under the Dominion of
the Republique; Athens and many other places redeemed themselves from plunder
by submitting to an annual Tribute, and offering a considerable Sum in hand.

Signior Proveditor of Dalmatia having disappointed the Designs of the Bassa of
Scutari, was resolved himself to make some attempt on the Turks; the 19th. of
September he marched toward the Fortress of Singe with the Pince of Parma,
General of the Infantry, and the Count St. Paul. They led up two thousand Foot
which they had drawn out of the Garrisons, six hundred of the regulated Forces,
with a great number of Morlaques, both Horse and Foot, and brought with them
four Mortars, and three Fieldpieces: they were to pass through narrow and
rugged ways; but they overcame that difficulty, and in three days march arrived
before the place where they distributed the Posts. The Batteries being made
ready, they began to fire, and General Cornaro sent to summon the besieged: the
answer was; The Christians should remember they had ineffectually attacked that
place the year before, and had be forced to raise the Siege with shame and
loss; and as for themselves, they were furnished with great store of all
necessaries to make a good defense; That they had now good reason to believe
they should have the same success; the Basha of Ertzegovine was but one days
march from the place, who would certainly relieve them if occasion were. The
haughtiness of their Answer was accompanied by an action of the like nature,
for they shot the man that had been sent to summon them (who was a relation of
Chevalier Janco) and by his Death confirmed their intentions. General Cornaro
used all diligence to advance the Works, and continued firing on the place
without intermission. On the 28th. the Breach being wide enough, they made an
assault, and notwithstanding the stout resistance they made, put the Besieged
into disorder, and forced them to quit the Town, and retire into the Castle;
the Besiegers attacked them there with incredible vigor, and after a Fight of
above an hour they took it, and cut in pieces the Garrison which consisted of
three hundred Turks: Most of their Heads were presented to General Cornaro, who
ordered two Sequins a Head to be given to those that brought them. There was in
the place a great Magazine of Ammunition, with eleven piece of Cannon. The
Besiegers had forty men killed, and an hundred wounded in this Expedition. The
General gave the Government of the place to Signior Boloni, and left there two
hundred and fifty Foot, and a hundred Horse in Garrison; after which he
returned to Spalatro, laden with Honor and Booty. The Conquest of Singe was of
great Importance to the Venetians, for by it the Possession of a very rich
Territory of above thirty Miles extent, was made sure to them. The season of
the year being already much advanced, and the Snow beginning to fall in
Dalmatia, the Pope's auxiliary Galleys, with those of Malta, having taken leave
of the Generals, set sail toward Sicily; those of Tuscany arrived at Gallipoli
the 22d. of September.

The Turks sustained also many losses at Sea; some time before the Galleys of
Malta and Captain Venier had given chase to several Turkish Vessels, had taken
some, and so blocked up the Caravan in the Port of Scio, that it durst not
venture out; but the Fight that happened at Sea betwixt seven Turkish Vessels,
assisted by twenty Galleys of the Beis, and Signior Venier, Captain
extraordinary of the Venetian Vessels, was very much beyond these small
advantages: The particulars of it are very remarkable, as well for the
inequality of their Forces, as for the event of the Fight, which proved very
successful to the Venetians, who in this action delivered many Christians, whom
the Turks were carrying into Slavery. And thus it happened: Signior Venier, who
was ordered to convey the Garrison of Napoli di Romania, having understood in
his return, that some Turkish Vessels were cruising about Rhodes, he desired to
be informed exactly where they were, and what was their number; it was told him
there were but four, and no mention was made of the Galleys, either for that
they had not been discovered, or that there was some Treachery in him that made
the report. In the mean time the number that was told him, being in a manner,
equal to his, which was of three Vessels, he resolved to fall on them, and
advanced before the Wind. But having sent to view their number, he was
surpised to hear it was so much greater than he had been told: He understood
there were seven Vessels and twenty Galleys; and seeing so vast a disadvantage,
he resolved to make back again, and endeavored it; but the Wind that favored
his going forward, was against his retreat; the Infidels soon appeared, giving
great shouts, as if they had been sure of the Victory Signior Venier, whom
Discretion, no^ Fear, had counseled to retreat, seeing i^ too late to put that
Design in execution prepared himself for the Fight. The Turks in the mean time
advanced wit^ great resolution; but Signior Venier fire^ so briskly upon them,
that he held the^ in awe, and they would not venture al^ that day to come
closer up to him. The Night being come, the Fight ceased without any great
advantage on either side; both employed this time to repair the damage they had
received: The Day no^ sooner appeared, but the Turks ashamed o^ having no
better succeeded with so great a^ number, began the Fight afresh; Signio^
Venier not only bore their Onset, but attacked them himself as he saw occasion,
especialy after some of the Enemies Canoniers were killed, which debarred them
the use of their Cannon, and gave such advantage to Signior Venier, that he
sunk some of their Vessels, and gave chase to the rest. The Infidels, who,
during the Fight, had a particular care to keep the Slaves before mentioned,
who were all in the same Vessel, were now forced to leave them to the
Conqueror, who content with his victory, left off the pursuit, which, however,
he could not well continue, his Vessel having lost this Mast. The Infidels were
made happy in their misfortune, by a circumstance, without which not one of
them had escaped, which was that some days before the Fight Signior Venier's
Squadron had been dispersed by contrary Winds; had he had all his Vessels, it is
easy to imagine how entire his Victory would have been; however it is to his
great Honor that he came off so successfully in so dangerous a business.

The Infidels did all they could in Dalmatia (especially since General Cornaro
had taken Singe) to make some successful attempt upon the Christians. The Basha
of Ertzegovine drew together twelve thousand men, and marched into the Field at
the head of them, but attempted no farther than to make some Incursions about
Zara, and burn some Villages; it is true, he advanced under the Cannon of Singe,
and gave some Allarm to the Governor, who had been advertised some days
before, that the Basha had intelligence with some of his Officers, so that it
behoved him to be vigilant whilst he was in his Neighborhood; but the true
reason that this Basha had taken the Field, was to put Ammunition in Clin,
which he effected, though opposed by a Party.

This Basha, who is a daring man, gave some trouble to the Proveditor-General,
who feared lest by the favor of the Ice, he would make some attempt upon the
new Conquests; for which cause he promised great Rewards to the Morlaques, if
they would continue firm to the Service of the Republique. But whatever he
could do, some were found amongst them who had undertaken to kill Chevalier
Janco their Commander, a man very much addicted to the Venetians, for which
reason he was become odious to the Basha, who had promised those Traitors a
good Sum of Money, provided they brought him his Head; but he had notice of
the Design time enough to prevent it. He caused one of the Villains to be
seized, the other made his escape, well knowing no mercy was to be hoped after
such a Crime. In the mean time the Proveditor General was uneasy under these
Circumstances, and sent an Account to Venice of the Trouble he was in, and how
necessary it was to send him some assistance. Thus ended the Campaigne in
Dalmatia.

In the mean time Signior Morosini, before he took his Winter Quarters,
possessed himself of the Isle of Maxos in the Archipelago, a Conquest not very
considerable in it self, (but the place being well fortified both by Situation
and Art) it may be of ill Consequence to the Turks, which obliges the
Christians to work there with great diligence; and there are already eight
thousand Workmen sent thither, the Republique sparing no Cost either for that,
or any other Expenses of the War. General Morosini, after he had been in the
Archipelago, where the Turks trembled for fear, not thinking themselves safe in
any Fortress, returned to Napoli di Romania, where the Deputies of Athens
waited for him to know upon what terms they might be admitted into the
Protection of the Republique, desiring to do it by a voluntary Contribution,
notwithstanding that the Infidels threatened to complain at Constantinople of
their proceeding, as contrary to the obedience they owed the Grand Signior, and
to destroy all by Fire and Sword, rather than consent.

Since we cannot too well know the brave, especially those who have taken upon
them to fight, during their lives, for the Christian Faith, I suppose the
Reader will not be offended that I present him with a List sent from Malta,
containing the Names of all the Knights that made their Campaign this year
1686. in the Venetian Army, and of whom the formidable Battalion of Malta is
composed. The Lis^ of the Officers follows at the end of the Book.

THE HISTORY OF THE Venetian Conquests, etc. The Fourth Book.
Dalmatia were not idle even in the Winter, but made continual Incursions into
the Enemies Country, the severity of the Season not being enough to make them
observe any kind of Truce or Cessation. The Inhabitants and Garrison of Santo
Stephano surpised the Town of Antivari, all that opposed them were put to the
Sword; and having brought together all the Booty which consisted of Money,
Movables, and Plate, and of nine hundred head of Cattle, they retired with it
to their Quarters. The Ships of the Republique which were cruising in the
Archipelago, took six more of the Turkish Vessels which were laden with
Provision from Egypt, and bound for Constantinople, where both the Plague and
Famine did rage.

Signior Perastino, Captain of a Vessel named, Our Lady of Mountaigne, arriving
at the Port of Suda to take in Provisions and fresh Water, Signior Alvise
Marcello, Proveditor Extraordinary, desired him to take in Water at Seignet
near Canea, himself having no more than was necessary for the subsistence of
his Garrison. He advanced on the side of Porto Nuovo, with eighteen Seamen,
having a Convoy of fifty eight men to attend him by the order of the
Proveditor. Ali Cubi, Governor of Canea, having notice of it from the
Inhabitants of Cisterna, sent immediately Ali Bey with eighteen Horse to view
the Christians; the Ali having discovered them, retired to Cisterna; the
Inhabitants dispatched a second Courier to the Basha of Canea, who made a
second Detachment of threescore men. These two Detachments being joined, yet
durst not attack the Venetians, who had entrenched themselves at Citro, and
were all armed with Muskets to receive the Infidels. The Basha having been
informed of it by a third Courier, resolved to go himself at the head of a
Detachment of four hundred Horse and Foot, scorning that a handful of Men
should thus brave him. But his Son having dissuaded him from that Enterprise,
took it upon himself, and marched toward them with a design to break through
them. They were received by the Venetians with Musket Shot: The Fight was long
and bloody, both sides encountering with equal vigor. The Basha's Son attacked
the Christians several times with all the fury of a Commander, resolved to
conquer in despite of Fortune; yet the Turks were at last forced to retreat by
the favor of the Night, with the loss of many men: There were an hundred
wounded, of which number was the Basha's Son, who died in a few hours; his
Horse and Sword were taken and sent to General Morosini. This Basha's Son was
Nephew to the Sultan lately deposed, about five and twenty years of Age; he
showed in this Action a Courage and Conduct above his years: His Father was so
enraged at this ill success, that he imprisoned the second Ali Bey, threatening
to be revenged on him for the Death of his Son.

In the mean time the Turks, to keep their Forces in heart, resolved to besiege
Singe in Dalmatia, endeavoring to persuade them, that on the event of this
Siege depended the Success of the whole Campaigne. In effect they invested the
place with twenty thousand men commanded by the Basha's of Bossine and
Ertzegovine, and twenty six piece of Cannon, with some Mortars, which they
divided in three Batteries. They thought themselves so sure of carrying the
Town, that the next day after they came before it, they sent away eight
thousand men to attempt to enter into the Province of Zoga. The Marquis Borri,
General of the Battalia, and Governor of the place, writ to General Cornaro as
soon as he found himself besieged, that he wanted neither Men nor Provisions,
and that he was the more resolute to defend it, in that he hoped he should in a
short time be relieved. Signior Cornaro was overjoyed to hear this resolution,
yet did not in the mean time neglect to send a Reinforcement of men who got
into the place, notwithstanding the vigilance of the Enemy. In the mean time
the Turks with twelve thousand men that remained, attacked a Rondel, and made
three assaults one after another, in all which they were repulsed. The Garrison
made several Sallies with so good success, that they cut off the Heads of above
an hundred Turks, and placed them on the Walls to give terror to the rest. The
Turks seeing themselves so mistaken in their measures, having remanded their
Detachment, sent to summon the Governor, and to terrify him, they let him
know that no quarter should be given, unless he surrendered; that the relief he
might pretend to expect, was at so great a distance, that the place would be
taken before it could come: They bid him consider of it; but the best advice
they could give him, was to provide for his affairs in good time. The Governor
having received this Complement, gave them for answer, That if either Party had
reason to fear, it must certainly be themselves; That they were deluded by
false hopes; That they might have inferred from the resistance he had already
made, that it would not be easy for them to succeed in their design; That if
instead of giving him advice, they would receive any from him, he advised them
in good earnest not to persist in so vain an attempt; That he would have them
know, that General Cornaro was on his march to relieve him; and that to avoid a
greater disgrace, they would do well to retire, and make no longer stay there.
This Answer making them understand they had no fearful man to deal with, they
continued the Siege, but with so little success, that at the end of three Weeks
they were no farther advanced than on the first day. In the mean time the brave
resistance of the besieged having given time to General Cornaro to draw
together his Forces, who were yet in their Quarters, he marched to their
relief. The Proveditor Zen, General of the Horse, joined him with eighteen
hundred men, and Chevalier Janco brought him a thousand Morlaques, which
altogether made up fourteen thousand men. General Zen commanded the Cavalry,
General San Paolo the Foot, and General Cornaro the whole Body of the Army.
They arrived on the 22d. of April to a place called Lism, not far from the
Enemies Camp, where they made a halt; two hundred men were sent to a Hill to
give notice to the Besieged of the approach of Relief, by a Volley; at the
noise of which the Infidels came to view the Christians, and found the whole
Army was on its march to make them raise the Siege. The Turks would not stay
their coming up, though they were the greater number. They prepared for their
retreat on the 23. of April in the Evening, by sending away their Cannon and
Baggage, which was followed by the Foot and Horse. The Besieged at the same
time made a Salley, charged those that stayed last in the Trenches, and filled
up their Works. The Enemies during the Siege, and in their retreat, lost above
three and twenty hundred men, and some Officers of several stations. In the
mean time Chevalier Janco, who was gone before with his Morlaques, was
surpised to see that the Turks had raised the Siege in such haste, and that
their Horse had already gained the Bridge of Cettina. He entered their Camp,
where he found some Barrels of Powder, some Swords, and one piece of Cannon,
which the Enemies had left, having first nailed it. The 24th. General Cornaro
entered into the Town, being extremely well satisfied with the vigorous
resistance the Garrison had made, and gave a thousand Commendations to Marquis
Borri, and the other Officers who had signalliz'd themselves on this occasion.
The Senate being advertised of it, caused considerable Presents to be made
them, and the Soldiers had each of them a piece of money. On the 25th. Te Deum
was sung. On the 26th. the General retired to Spalatro, having first given
necessary Orders for the reparation of the place, and the Forces returned to
their Quarters.

The Basha of Ertzegovine being next, that he could not succeed in his
Enterprise, took his revenge for that disgrace by wasting the Territory of
Trau, reaped the Harvest, and carried away all the Corn. This Basha gathered
together three thousand men more, and marched toward the Fort of Opusch, a
little place situate on the River Narenta, with design to attack it. He
flattered himself with the thought, that he need no more than show himself to
gain the place; but the Governor of the place had very different Sentiments,
instead of opening the Gates to him, as he expected, he represented to his
little Garrison, that a glorious Death was better than a shameful Servitude,
which was all could be expected, if they surrendered on discretion, and that
they would not die without sacrificing a great number of the Infidels. Signior
Cornaro having notice of this, thought himself obliged without delay to second
the good resolution of the Besieged; for this purpose he commanded some Forces
of that side to march, and sent orders to Chevalier Janco to be there with the
Morlaques, three Galleys, and some other Vessels to transport the Forces. This
march, and the resolution of the Besieged, obliged the Basha to retire, not
being willing to engage himself farther in an attempt which was like to prove
as vain as that of Singe had been. But the Morlaques not content to have
disappointed their Enemies Designs, surpised the Suburbs of Dumno, and several
Villages of that Country, which they pillaged and burnt: The Booty they carried
away, consisted of many Prisoners, with a great number of Sheep and Cattle.

During this time the Pirates of Dulcigno went on shore in the Territories of
the Republique, and carried many away into Slavery, and amongst others, the
Governor of Citta-Nova, with all his Family. Some Vessels were commanded out
to cut them off in their return, but could not light on these Pirates.

Count Coningsmark had showed much Experience, Courage and Conduct in the
Service of the Republique. The King of Suedes, who had a value for him, having
remanded him, the Doge writ the following Letter to his Majesty, which here you
have in the same terms as it came from Stockholm.

To the most Illustrious and most Potent Prince, Charles, by the Grace of God,
King of the Suedes, Goths, and Vandals, etc. Marco Antonio Giustiniani, by the
same Grace, Duke of Venice,
sends greeting, and wishes all Happiness.
GEneral Coningsmark, has shown so particular good Conduct, and given such
Proofs of his Experience in the Campaigns which have been made in the Levant,
with Success happy and advantageous to the Service of all Christendom, that, in
the Design which is now on foot, for the common good of Christianity, a great
share of the Glory, that may be expected from it, is due to to him. His
singular merit shines forth with so much brightness, that its Rays are
reflected on your Majesty, who so generously condescend to yield us a Subject
adorned with such excellent Qualities. We receive great Services from him, of
which your Majesty is pleased to deprive your self, to let us have the benefit
of them in this juncture of time so favorable for the pulling down, and
bringing to nothing the insupportable Pride of the barbarous Ottomans. Since
then we have stood in need of his support, since we have demanded and obtained
it, and more than once felt the good effects of it, we confide in your Majesty,
that to complete our happiness, you will be pleased of your wonted goodness, to
permit the said Count (as we earnestly entreat him) to continue in the
employment he discharges with so much Glory and Applause: Your Majesty's ardent
Zeal joined to your Heroic Courage, will show it self with so much the greater
luster, since by this means you will make it appear, that you have so great a
consideration for the Glory of God, and Interest of our holy Faith, that you
take them more to heart than all other Affairs of the World; you will put an
Obligation upon us, which shall always be preserved in memory, and acknowledged
by us upon all occasions with the deepest resentments of Gratitude and Respect.
To conclude, we wish your Majesty long life, perfect Health and Success to all
your desires.

Given at our Ducal Palace the 17th. of March 1687. Signed Giovanni Baptista
Nicolosi, Secretary.


The Plague, with which many Cantons of the Morea were infected, was the cause
that the Venetians entered late into action. The Turks who were resolved to keep
on the defensive part, might have made great progress on that side by opposing
their Enemies with equal numbers, since the Pope's Galleys, those of Malta, and
of Tuscany came not to the assistance of the Venetians, by reason of the
apprehension they had of the Plague; but all proved quite contrary, and there
was something so surprising and wonderful in the good success the Christians
met with in the Morea, that upon due reflection, it seems almost incredible;
the good understanding that was between the Generals, did not a little
contribute to it, who, though sometimes of different Sentiments, yet were
always united in the same methods by the consideration of the public good, as
may appear by what follows.

A little before the Naval Army went from Climno, a Turkish Aga put himself
under the Protection of the Republique, who reported that the Infidels had an
Army consisting of twelve thousand choice men, who were encamped near Patras,
and another of six thousand near Misitra. The Venetians on the other side, had
but seven thousand Foot, twelve hundred Dragoons, and about the same number of
Sclavonians. The Pope's Forces, and those of Malta and Tuscany, not having
joined them for fear of the Plague, made a diminution of three thousand men.

The Commanders of the Venetian Army, were Generalissimo Morosini, Count
Coningsmark, who was happily recovered of a hurt he received by the kicking of
a Horse, and a Fever that was caused by it; Prince Maximilian William of
Brunswick and Lunenburg, General, who was newly arrived with a Reinforcement of
some fresh Regiments; and Lieutenant General D' Avila, who notwithstanding his
great Age, was very vigorous.

Under the Conduct of these Commanders, the Army left Climno the 20th. of July
toward the Evening, and by the favor of the Wind, were the next day in the
Morning near Patras; some were sent immediately to view the Dardanels that
guard the mouth of the Gulf of Lepante, and observe whether they might land
their Forces there; but they perceived that the Enemies had made Retrenchments
all along the Coast. The same day in the Evening they went to the other side of
the Gulf, but found that the Enemy expected to be attacked on that side, and
that they had divided their Army into four Camps; one being above Patras,
another on the midway between Patras and the Dardanels, the third on the
farther side of the Castle of Romelia, and the fourth on the nearer side of the
Castle of Morea. The Gulf of Lepante has four Rocks. The Ionian Sea runs into
it by a mouth formed by two Promontories which shoot themselves on each side
into the Sea; that which is in the Morea is called Capo Antirio; it is guarded
by a Castle which is called indifferently the Castle of Patras, or of Morea.
The other which is in Achaia, is called Capo Rione; it has also a Fortress
called the Castle of Romelia. These Castles are commonly called the Dardanels
of Lepant. They are of a Square form, and have good Walls, with Batteries near
the surface of the Water.

On the 22d. at break of Day they landed on the right hand of Patras, about the
distance of two French Leagues from the Fortress, and a quarter of a League
from the Turks Retrenchments. This landing was made without any opposition, and
it was said afterward by the Prisoners, that the Serasquier suffered it on
purpose, being resolved upon this occasion to conquer or die. The Christians
being posted along the Seacoast, about an hundred Turkish Horse came up and
charged the Hanover Forces, but were vigorously repulsed with the loss of
twenty men, there being but two of the Christians killed, and seven wounded.
The next day a Council of War was held to debate what way was to be taken to
attack the Enemies in their Camp, or force them to Battle. The way by land was
very bad, and there was a Wood to pass of near a League and a half, so that
that was judged impossible; it was found equally dangerous to go by Sea, the
Passage being very narrow, and the Enemy expecting to be attacked on that side,
had placed there a Battery of some Cannon; this made them resolve to go round
the Wood, and attack the Enemy behind; which resolution the Generalissimo could
hardly be induced to approve, thinking their march would be at too great a
distance from the Sea; but when Count Coningsmark had sent him an Approbation
of it, signed by all the Generals and Colonels, he agreed to it.

They marched in the Evening, having made Provision for some days, they left
the Mountains on their right hand, and the Wood and the Sea on their left. They
met with some very rugged ways in their march, and so narrow that they could
not pass two a breast; from whence it may be judged with how much difficulty
they brought on the Artillery, which was done by those of the Galleys. Signior
Sanudo, Captain of the Gulf, had passed the Dardanels on the 23d. in the
Evening to cut off the Communication between the Turkish Camps; and on the
24th. about Noon the Christian Army appeared before the Enemy in very good
order, the forces of Hanover being for the greatest part on the right Wing, and
the whole Army drawn up in a square Body.

The Enemy presently marched out of the Trenches with ten thousand Foot, and
four thousand Horse, and gave the first Volley, though at some distance; the
Cavalry with their Swords in their hands, charged the Venetians on the left
Wing, but Count Coningsmark advanced with his Squadrons, and all the Cavalry
commanded by the Marquis of Courbon, who was very well seconded by Viscount de
Turenne, so that the Turks meeting there with so strong resistance, turned all
their Forces on the right Wing; there were amongst them two thousand
Janissaries, each of whom had been regaled by the Serasquier with five and
twenty Reals, and a promise of as much more after the Victory. The three old
Regiments of Hanover made the Front and Flank of the right Wing, and those
newly come, the main Body. They let their Enemies advance within ten paces
distance, which made them attempt to hew down with their Swords the Chevaux de
Frisei, but were repulsed by such thick Volleys of Musket Shot, that all their
Efforts were in vain, though they several times renewed the Charge; so that
after they had lost a great number of their men, the Serasquier himself being
wounded, and the Basha of Vallona killed on the place, the rest were forced to
fly, and were hotly pursued by the Dragoons and Sclavonians. Count Coningsmark
observing that the Forces of Hanover so well performed their Duty, and that
they appeared as void of fear as in their usual Exercises, could not but
declare aloud, that he doubted not of Victory, since he saw those Forces in the
place of greatest danger. He commended in public before the Generalissimo,
the undaunted Courage the Prince of Hanover had shown both in this Action and
past Campaigns, his Forces having been very much encouraged by his brave
Example. There were found in the Field above an hundred Turks killed, most of
them on the side of the right Wing: About a thousand paces within the Wood,
there had been above five hundred Turks slain, and a like number of wounded in
the Camp; on the rest of the way through which they fled, there were found near
an hundred more of these Infidels killed or wounded, without reckoning those
that stragled, and were destroyed elsewhere, which in all might make near two
thousand men, the ^rest having escaped and passed the Mountains in disorder. Of
the Hanover Forces there were but thirty lost. Amongst the Officers, Lieutenant
Butler of the Regiment of Rangrafe, was killed, and Captain Rabe, who was there
as a Voluntier, received three dangerous Wounds in the Arm. A Colonel of the
Sclavonians was killed and his loss very much resented, he being a man of
singular merit. The Serasquier's great Standard was taken with ten others. The
Tents had most of them been raised and carried away from the Camp, but there
were found six pieces of Artillery, some Wagons laden with Ammunition and
Baggage, and a great number of Horses and Arms: They took also fourteen Galleys
which the Turks had left in the Gulf.

The Garrison of Patras having seen this defeat, and that Captain Negro was
advancing toward them with some Volunteers, quitted the place with all the
Artillery and Ammunition that was in it. Patras is a very ancient City, and the
Seat of an Archbishop; its situation is convenient for Traffic and Navigation.
It takes up seven hundred paces of the Gulf of Patras, where the Port of
Panormo is. In the time of Augustus the Inhabitants were Citizens of Rome:
There are at this time many Jews, who make it a place of Trade, and it is the
only place of these Coasts, where the Greeks of the neighboring Islands, the
English and the French are wont to traffic. It was a Duchy in time of the
Despots, but those Princes finding themselves too weak to defend it, sold it to
the Venetians in the year 1408. the Turks took it from them in 1463. In 1533.
Doria besieged it and took it; a little time after he made sure his Conquest by
the reduction of the Fortress that commands it, which surrendered it self,
though it had formerly held out against a powerful Army of the Emperor
Constantinus Palaeologus. The next year the Turks returned and expelled the
Venetians.

In the mean time Basha Mehemet, who was with six thousand men near the Castle
of Romelia, fled also with the Garrison of the place, having first blown up
part of it. Guisulderem Mahemet, who was near the Castle of Morea, did the
same, having discovered the Venetian Galleys early in the Morning making
toward the place from the Dardanels; but what is most surprising is, that the
City of Lepante, which is very strong, surrendered it self without resistance at
the first discovery they made from far of the Venetians Naval Army. The
Garrison went away with as much as every Soldier could carry on his back. The
Generalissimo entered the place, and set up the Standard of the Republique.
Lepant is an Archbishop's See; it is built all round a Hill, on the top of
which is the Fortress, surrounded with four thick Walls divided from each other
by the Valleys where the Houses of the Inhabitants stand. The Haven is of five
hundred paces, the mouth of it fifty, and the Channel is not deep. However the
famous Pirate Darach Bey harbored there formerly with his Galleys. There have
been four Temples consecrated, to Neptune, Venus, AEsculapius, and Diana: There
are at present seven Mosques, two Churches for the Greeks, and three Synagogues
for the Jews. There are on the East Side near the Sea abundance of fine Springs
which afford Water to the Mills for Powder used by those that dress Spanish
Leather, the Trade of the Inhabitants being in that Powder. These Springs
afterward gliding on at the Foot of twelve great Plane trees, form a place of
much delight, and then supply a great many curious Gardens with their Waters;
their Banks are beautified with Citron, Limmon and Orange trees; the Territory
produces excellent Wine. In the year 1408. Lepant was under the Imperial Seat
of Constantinople, but Emanuel, who then ruled, not finding himself strong
enough to defend the place, put it into the hands of the Republique, the
Venetians put it into a Condition of making a good defense. In 1475. it was
besieged by thirty thousand Turks, who having battered it during the space of
four months, in vain, were forced to raise the Siege. But in the year 1498.
Bajazet the second attacked it at the head of 150000. men, and took it.

It seems almost incredible that the Venetians should gain all these Advantages
in the space of four and twenty hours, but it is certain they won the Battle,
and gained these four important Fortresses in less than a day and a half, viz.
from the Morning of the 23d. of July, to ten of the Clock the next day. They
found in the Camp, and the places the Turks had quitted, one hundred forty five
piece of Artillery, and in the Gulf of Lepant, several Galleys, Galeasses, and
other Vessels charged with Provisions, and some Christians whom they
immediately set at liberty.

It happened some days before the action last mentioned, that Polani the
Proveditor of Zarnata, detached two thousand men, who were joined by a thousand
more from the Proveditor of Coron; they encamped within two leagues of the Town
of Larithene, their aim being to surprise it, which the Serasquier
understanding, he sent out an hundred and fifty Horse to view the Christians
Camp. The Mainotts intercepted their passage, and advanced up to the Town; the
Garrison sallied out, to attack this handful of Mainotts; the other three
thousand being come up, those of Larithene, endeavored to save themselves in
the Town, but the others entered Pell-mell with them, and pillaged the Town,
giving quarter to none but four hundred persons whom they made Slaves.

After Signior Morosini had sent an account of these Progresses to the
Republique, it was ordered by them in full Senate, That the Arms of this most
illustrious General should be set up in the great Council Hall, and that Count
Coningsmark's annual Pension should be increased six thousand Ducats. At the
same time a Present of four thousand Ducats was assigned to the Prince of
Hanover, and a Sword of two thousand to Viscount Turene; the Marquis of
Courbon's pay was increased two thousand Ducats by giving him the place of
Serjeant-General of the Battalia; and proportionable acknowledgments were made
to all those who had had the Honor to signalize themselves.

The first care the Generalissimo took after his new Conquests, was, not only
to give solemn thanks to God, but to cause all the Churches to be
re-consecrated, which had been used by the Infidels for Mosques. These Churches
were dedicated under the Name of several Saints, and given to several religious
Orders; at Patras one was consecrated to the Immaculate Conception, and given
to the Coventual Friars; another situate in the Suburbs, was dedicated to Saint
Andrew, who (by the Report of several Authors) had there suffered Martyrdom
under the Proconsul AEgeus; it was given to the discalc'd Carmelites. The
Mosque of Lepant was consecrated anew under the name of Saint James, that City
being reduced under the obedience of the Venetians on the Feast day of that
Saint. Signior Morosini after he had provided for the Government of the Church,
took into his consideration the Government of the Places he had taken, and
named all necessary Officers, to the end that the People being furnished with
all things, might enjoy that peace and rest which had long been unknown to
them. Signior Girolamo Priuli was made Governor of Patras, and Signior Pietro
Grioni, Lieutenant; Signior Tadeo Gradenigo, Governor of Lepant; and Marquess
Messulipa, Lieutenant; Signior Marco Barbarigo, Governor of the Castle of
Morea; and Signior Girolamo Tepolo, Lieutenant: that of Romelia had for
Governor, Signior Alvise Sagredo till further orders. Signior Morosini sent to
summon the Castle Tornese, which is a Fortress near the Province of Belvedere,
between the Gulf of Chiarenza and that of Arcadia; it is built upon an eminence
about three miles distant from the Sea. The Aga who was there, made no
resistance, but desired to capitulate, and after the first Summons quitted the
place; it was the sole defense of two hundred Villages and Forts in that most
fruitful part of the Morea; all which submitted themselves; an hundred and
fifty Turks that desired it, received Baptism, the rest retired toward Achaia.
There were found in Castle-Tornese nine piece of Brass Cannon, and twenty of
Iron.

The Serasquier, after the loss of Patras, retired to Corinth with the remnant
of his Army, and Signior Morosini being desirous to complete his Victory, and
at the same time let the Serasquier see he had both Courage and Strength enough
to take that place whither he had retired with all his Forces, made toward the
Gulf of Corinth with his Fleet, augmented now with fourteen Galeots which had
been taken under the Castles of Lepant; in the mean time Count Coningsmark on
his part advanced thither by land.

The Serasquier having heard of this march, and not finding among the four
thousand men he had, resolution enough to defend themselves, fell into such a
despair, that he caused fire to be set to the Magazines of Powder and Victuals,
and to some Houses in the City and Out-town, and blew up some part of the
Fortifications, and then took his flight toward Thebes, and so quitted the
Morea. He sent Orders before to the Governors of some Fortresses to set fire
to them, and join him with their Garrisons and Baggage in the craggy Mountains
of Thebes, there to wait for relief from Constantinople. He burned, destroyed,
and killed all the Greeks he found in his way, because they seemed not disposed
to make such opposition to the Venetians as he expected; to which he added,
That they were the cause of all the ill success of the War; but those of that
Nation being provoked by such barbarous usage, killed two thousand of his men,
and made four hundred Prisoners.

As they drew nearer to Corinth, they perceived afar off the rest of the
Turkish Cavalry on their flight, and the City appeared on fire; but it was
quenched before it consumed all the Magazines, and there was found great store
of Victuals and Ammunition, besides six and forty Brass Cannon, and four of
Iron. The chief of the Grecians who were come out of the City to meet the
Venetians, fell at the feet of the Generalissimo in the name of the rest of the
Inhabitants, and told him there were no Turks in the place, but that they
believed some of them were at Misitra. A great Detachment was placed in
Garrison at Corinth; two Companies in the Citadel, from whence a like number of
the Turks were fled, and there the Standard of St. Mark was set up: Signior
Morosini viewed the place, and provided all things they might stand in need of;
he received the submission of the Metropolitan, and many other Bishops and
Priests. They showed to the Venetians the Mount Parnassus, the Fountain of
Helicon, and that of Pirene so celebrated by Homer; a Statue of Janus found in
the Suburbs of Corinth, the Tomb of Diogenes, the Ruins of the Temple of
Minerva, and several other pieces of Antiquity, as also the marks of the Wall
built by the Venetians in the year 1463. to enclose the Isthmus of Corinth.
Lewis Loredan General at Sea, having landed his Forces to join them with those
of Bertold d' Este, and employ them jointly on this Work; thirty thousand
Workmen were set to it, who in the space of fifteen days finished it, adding to
it double Ditches, and an hundred thirty six Towers. This Work was called
Examilion by reason of its length, which was six miles; in the middle of it, as
soon as it was finished, an Altar was prepared, and the whole Army heard Mass
there. This Country was famous for the Isthmian Games, the Temple of Neptune,
and the Forest of Pines, of whose Branches Crowns were made for the Champions.

There are few places mentioned in Antiquty that has suffered more remarkable
changes of Fortune, or been oftener ruined than Corinth. It is near the middle
of the Isthmus where the AEgean and Ionian Sea meet; its situation is so
commodious, that it has been called the Eye of Greece, and Bulwark of
Peloponnesus. It was, according to Plutarch, the chief City of all Greece; and
Cicero said it was the Beauty and Glory of it. It was destroyed by the Romans
under the Consul Memnius, and rebuilt by Augustus; it has been ruined by
Amurath the second, and by his Son Mahomet; it has furnished the Church with a
great number of Saints. St. Paul remained there eighteen Months, and we read in
the Holy Scripture two Epistles writ by him to the Inhabitants of this place,
whom he had converted: They separated themselves from the Communion of the
Church under the Greek Emperors. Corinth was besieged in the time of the
Emperor Emanuel, by Roger the Normand, King of Naples, and relieved by the
Venetians. About two hundred years after it fell under the Dominion of the
Despots of Greece, who returned it into the hands of the Venetians. Mahomet II.
next made himself Master of it; it has had thirteen Kings in the time of the
first Dynastie, which began by Lelex, first King of the Lacedaemonians, and
ended with Tisamenes, Son of Orestes, their thirteenth King, whom Procles and
Euristhenes, Sons of Aristodemus and Argia, drove out; they were Twins, and
reigning together in Lacedaemon, made the second Dynastie: Their Posterity
reigned in the same manner divided into two Families Royal, the (...) of the
Agides, or Euristhenides, who were the most famous and had One and thirty
Kings; the other of the Proclides or Euripontides, who had but Twenty four.

The Citadel of Corinth, of which we have spoken, is called Acro-Corinth; it is
a Castle built on the top of a high Hill, and was formerly thought impregnable,
Art and Nature seeming to have contended to make it strong.

The Generalissimo knowing there was yet remaining a great Body of Turks in
Misitra, made a great Detachment of his regulated Forces and the Mainots, and
sent them thither under the Command of Signior Polani. At their first appearing
before the Place, the white Flag was hung out, and the Governor sent four
Deputies to the Generalissimo, to desire the Garrison might have free Passage,
but they were answered, That unless the Town would pay Two hundred thousand
Piastres he would put all the Inhabitants from the age of Eighteen to Fifty
into the Galleys, and that he would let none go but Women and those that were
aged.

Misitra is a City so considerable that it deserves a particular Description:
Nothing was more celebrated amongst the Ancients than the Names of Lacedaemon
and Sparta. This City that now bears the name of Misitra was once called by
both those names; the first upon the account of Lacedaemon who succeeded Lelex,
the other from Queen Sparta, Daughter of the same Lacedaemon and Europa; though
some Authors are of opinion, that his last name was given by Spartus Son of
Phoroneus King of Argos, who was its first Founder. Its Circumference has
anciently been Forty eight Stades; the ground it stands on is part plain and
part rising: The Mount Taygetus Commands it; but what is most to be admired,
is, that this City preserved it self Eight hundred years, without
Fortifications, against the frequent Attempts of all its Enemies, and that it
no sooner had Walls but it grew less Prosperous, and oftener changed its Master.
Its Latitude is 35 Degrees 26 Minute: This City is divided into four Parts, the
Castle, the new Town, the middle Suburbss and the out Suburbs; this last is
separated from the other Parts by the Vasili Potamos, over which there is a
Bridge for Communication; the Castle is situate on an Eminence which bears the
form of a Sugar Loaf: there are several Cisterns of Water, and in the middle of
it a Mosque, which was formerly a Church of the Christians; the Situation of it
is so advantageous, that all Historians agree it was never taken by force,
though it has been briskly assaulted by the Venetians, and by Mahomet the
Second. The Despots caused it to be built about the time when the Grecian
Empire began to decay: Authors are not agreed concerning the Foundation of
Lacedaemon; but according to the Calculation of Father Petau, it might be 3422.
years since this City was built; and so it will be more ancient than Carthage,
Siracuse, Alexandria, Lions, or Marseilles, which are reputed the most ancient
Cities of the World. The Despot Theodore in the Year 1405. sold Sparta and
Corinth to Phillibert de Naillac, Prior of Aquitain, and Great Master of
Rhodes, but the Treaty was without effect: Theodore left this City to his
Nephew of his own Name, Son to the Emperor Emanuel. This Theodore the Second
married an Italian Lady, of the House of Malatesta, by which means the Title of
Duke of Sparta fell to that Family; he succeeded his Brother John in the Empire
of Constantinople, and placed his youngest Son Constantine on the Throne of
Sparta, which fell at last to the share of Prince Demetrius, from whom it was
taken by Mahomet the Second in 1460. and 3200. years after its Foundation.
Benedetto Colleone took this City in 1473. but by his death was prevented from
taking the Castle. This City was under the Republque from the time of the Doge
Henrico Dandolo; and Writers agree not about the time that it was taken from
the Venetians.

In the mean time the Albanians and Morlaques of the Morea pursued the Turks in
their retreat toward Thebes, and killed and took Prisoners a great number of
them. Many Grecian Families left Achaia to come into the Morea, and above
Twelve thousand Inhabitants (of which Three thousand were able to bear Arms)
did the same. Many also of Romelia demanded the Protection of the Republic,
and the Generalissimo ordered them some Ships for their Passage into the Morea.
But let us now take a view of Dalmatia, where the Republic extends its Limits
by new Conquests.

Many of the People of Dalmatia came daily to place themselves under the
Protection of the Venetians, and at the approach of General Cornaro's Army, ten
Villages, with the Basha that commanded them, did the same. Count Noncovich,
who Commanded the Militia of the Streights of Zagabria, joined Two thousand of
his Men to the Venetian Forces, and being entered into the Ertzegovine, took
the Castle of seven Towers, where One hundred and fifty Turks were made
Prisoners, besides those that were killed in the defense of it, and having
pillaged the Place set fire to it. In his retreat he laid an Ambuscade for the
Governor of Smocco, and having taken him caused his head to be cut off,
without giving any ear to the Propositions he made of Twenty thousand Crowns
for his Ransom.

Signior Cornaro Proveditor general of Dalmatia, resolved to lay Siege to
Castel-Novo, the Auxiliary Galleys having set out toward that Place, in order
to join the Venetian Forces, but they would not obey him, because he was but in
the quality of Proveditor general; but the Senate took away this difficulty by
sending him the Fanal, and the Gonfalon or Standard, with the Title of Captain
General for that Campaign only.

Some time before the Forces set out for the Siege of Castel-Novo, they made an
irruption into the Territory of Narenza, and setting Fire to thirty Villages,
favored the design which Two thousand Morlaques had of joining themselves to
the Venetians. Six hundred that were thought fit to bear Arms were commanded
to join themselves to the other Forces, and dispute the Passage with the
Infidels that were going to succor Castel-Novo. The Basha of Ertzegovine would
also have hindered the Venetians from entering into the Territory of Narenza,
but was vigorously repulsed and forced to fly.

Chevalier Janco having put himself at the Head of a detachment of Morlaques,
defeated a Party of Three hundred Turks, but it cost him his Life, for as he
was going to cut off the head of a Turk whom he had overthrown, the Barbarian
shot off a Pistol and killed him; his loss was much resented both by the
Morlaques and Venetians, especially the latter; for since he had embraced their
Interests he had done them very great Services, and by his Courage and Conduct
contributed very much to their Conquests in Dalmatia.

The following Relation of the Siege of Castel-Novo was sent from Malta; we may
well believe it exact, since it comes from a Knight of the Order, who was an
Eye witness of what passed in the Siege, and was himself in the greatest
occasions of Danger.

Count Herbesteim Grand Prior of Hungary, and General of the Galleys of Malta,
who besides his Squadron of eight Galleys, had also under his command seven of
those belonging to the Pope, having received express Orders both from his
Holiness and the Grand Master, not to join the Venetian Army in the Morea,
Commanded by Generalissimo Morosini, for fear of the Plague, having daily
confirmations of their suspicion that it was amongst them, found himself out of
capacity to employ him forces for the Service of Christendom, and after having
been cruising on the Sea for the space of three Months, he did but wait the
Orders of the Grand Master to return to Malta, when he received, in Calabria on
the 2d. of August, a Packet from Rome, by which he understood that his Holiness
had resolved to make an Attempt on some of those Places the Turks held in
Dalmatia along the Gulf of Venice.

This news having made him hasten toward that side, he arrived there on the
seventh of August, and having advertised General Geronimo Cornaro of it, went
to Anchor toward the Isle of Lezina to attend him there, who in the mean time
was employed in gathering his Forces together: After they had had some mutual
Correspondence by Letters, they argreed on the Siege of Castel-Novo, but
notwithstanding all his diligence General Cornaro could not be in readiness to
act till the latter end of the Month.

Castel-Novo is a Place of great importance to the Turks, Situate toward the
Mouth of the Gulf of Castaro, which takes its name from another Place belonging
to the Republique, lying at the lower end of the Gulf, the Garrison of which
Place, as well as the Inhabitants of those that are adjacent being subject to
the Venetians, are always at blows with the Militia of Castel-Novo, by reason
of which these Infidels are inured to War, and are esteemed the most courageous
and resolute of all the Country. This Place is Situate on the Sea side, and
extends it self on two Lines, the one looking toward Albania, the other
toward the City of Ragusa; and where it reaches furthest into the Land, there
is a Castle that Commands the whole Town: Besides this Castle there is another,
or if you please an old fashioned Fort apart from the Castle, which covers it
and guards its avenues. The Place is encompassed with old fashioned Walls of
thick and solid Stone-work, and flanked with great Towers, between which there
are some lesser, and though it has no outworks, the Ground about it is so
advantageous by reason of its unevenness, which forms certain Curtains where
they may easily retrench, that it is incredible how difficult and dangerous the
approaches are.

The Christian Army, composed of above One hundred Sail came within view of
the Place, the 2d. of September toward the Evening, stronger in appearance
than effect, since all the rest, but four Galleys, and two Men of War of the
Venetians, and five Galleys of Malta, were Ships of Burden, and
inconsiderable. The day following they were busy in landing their Forces.
Those of the Republique to the number of Six or seven thousand Men, chose for
that purpose a place some Miles distant from the Town; those belonging to the
Pope, and those of Malta, who made but one Body of about Fifteen hundred
Soldiers and twenty six Knights, Commanded by Chevalier Mechatin, General of
the Forces of Malta, landed on a flat, much nearer, where a little open Plain
gave means to keep the Infidels at a distance from the Coast by the Cannon of
the Galleys, having according to Custom taken the Post of Honor to go first
against the Enemies.

Our Men delayed not to make trial whether the Reputation of Courage, which the
Inhabitants and Garrison of Castel-Novo had gained, were well grounded or no;
for these Infidels having posted themselves upon two Hills, the one commanding
the other, and separated by a great Valley, which was to be crossed, as well as
the Hills, by difficult and rugged ways to come to the Town, began to fire upon
our Men on all sides to hinder their advance: But Chevalier Mechatin having
made two strong Detachments, one Commanded by Chevalier de Mareuil, accompanied
by a Body of the Knights, with whom was the Standard of the Republique, born by
the Commander de la Tour Maubourg, the other by Chevalier de Lusignan Lezay,
first Major of the Battalion of Malta, with whom was a Party of his Holiness's
Forces conducted under him, by the Count Montevecchi, they fell upon the Enemy
on both sides with so much vigor, that after an obstinate resistance, they
were forced, in great disorder, to quit the Posts they had taken, and make a
hasty retreat under their Walls with great loss of their Men: Ours made
themselves Masters of some Houses and other Posts of advantage within a large
Musket Shot of the City, where they made a halt in the beginning of might,
which gave an occasion to the Enemies to return in the dark, and retrench
themselves on the Hills, and some from which they were driven with great
difficulty. In the mean time Count St. Paul and Chevalier Mechatin advanced in
good Order with the Body of the Forces, who were ranged in Battalia as soon as
they came from the Coast. The resolution with which the Chevaliers de Mareuil
and Lusignan marched toward the Enemy, was such, that it may be said, that the
terror which it then struck into them, was afterward the cause of the happy
success of this Enterprise; but the Enemies firing very thick, and continuing
it the whole day, they could not but lose some of their Men, amongst whom were
the Chevaliers de Richebourg, de Barin, and de Guira, who dyed a few days after
of their Wounds: The Chevaliers de Pernac, de Loumiers, Ventura, Caraffa, and
Ballaceuill were there also hurt.

From the 3d. day to the 8th. they were busied in forming the Camp and Lines,
and putting ashore the Artillery and Mortars for the Bombs, the continual Rains
having much incommoded them, and by order of General St. Paul they began to
raise a Battery of two Piece of Cannon to beat down a House in which the Turks
had fortified themselves within fifty Paces of our retrenchments; but these
Infidels remaining undaunted notwithstanding the Fire of our great Guns, and
giving us no small vexation by their Musket Shot, it was resolved on the eighth
in the Morning to make a Detachment of the Popes Forces and those of Malta,
under the command of Chevalier Mareuil, and employ them to drive the Turks from
that Post, The Grenadiers commanded by Chevalier de Seire, and the Fueliers by
Chevalier de Paulmy, advanced first and charged so furiously, that the Enemy
not being able to bear the shock, fled away shamefully after some smart
discharges, and quitted the Post, which ours immediately seized. Then the Body
of the Battalion of Malts advanced with the Standard of the Order, at the sight
of which great shouts of joy in token of Victory being heard, many of the
Chevaliers and Soldiers took occasion from thence to advance farther, and with
incredible vigor drove their Enemies to another great House but five and
twenty paces distant from their Walls, and being become Masters of it,
retrenched themselves there. This advantage cost us dear; for though the Turks
had not the Courage to maintain the place, yet the Avenues of it being
commanded by an higher ground of a continued ascent, in form of an
Amphitheatre, from whence the Turks gave terrible fire, as well as from the
Walls of the City, and Castles, several of ours lost their lives; four
Chevaliers being killed on the spot, and three and twenty dangerously wounded.
Chevalier Mechatin perceiving that the Courage of his men carried them on too
far, advanced on purpose to moderate them, and bring them back to the main
body; but the Turks firing continually on all sides, wounded Chevalier de
Lusignan first Major, Chevalier de Seire Captain of Grenadiers, and Chevalier
de Senicourt de Sessival, who died a few days after, regretted by the whole
Army for his admirable qualities.

In the mean time, on the same day, to give a diversion to the Enemy, and
hinder them from keeping all their Forces united toward the principal Attack,
which was on that side of the place that looks toward Albania, the Galleys
approaching near the Walls, gave great fire from their Cannon on the side
toward the Sea, while on the other side that looks toward Ragusa, they landed
a Body of their men under the command of the Count of Monstier, Son to the
General St. Paul, who made their Retrenchments toward the outward Fort which
joins not to the place, and continued their Works, as if they had meant to
attack it.

For several days following they very much incommoded the Besieged by a Battery
of eleven great piece of Cannon which was raised for the principal Attack, and
a vast number of Bombs which they cast into the place without intermission,
whilst ours being lodged and fortified in the Posts they had gained, were
busied in advancing their Works in order to fix the Mine to the principal Tower
of the Castle, by that time the Cannon should make a considerable breach in the
Walls, the design being at the same time to assault both the one and the other.

In the mean time General Cornaro received news, that six thousand men were
coming to the relief of the Besieged, under the Command of the Basha of Bossina
and Ertzegovine, for which cause he possessed himself of all the Hills and
advantageous Posts to stop his further passage; all which Precautions
notwithstanding, the Enemy having forced the Passages, which were guarded only
by Morlaques, appeared on the 15th. about two in the Afternoon ^t the head of
our first Retrenchments with their usual cries. Our Forces on that side were
shaken with the fierceness ^f the Turks pouring in upon them, but ^he Count of
Mostier, who was not far ^ff, having opportunely backed them with fresh men,
they renewed the charge in (...) vigorous a manner, that the Turks turned their
backs, and run headlong one upon the other; and there being no way or retreat,
but through the narrow Passages, ours taking advantage of their fear and
disorder, made a great slaughter amongst them; eight or nine hundred ^ere slain
on the place, of which number, the Morlaques being recovered of their first
fright, brought according to their custom, five hundred heads to General
Cornaro in token of a signal Victory, with a great number of Slaves, whose
lives they had spared. There were taken also eight Turkish Colors, and in this
action we lost but thirty men, of whom none were of note.

The day following all the Heads that had been cut off, were exposed upon Pikes
to terrify the Besieged, and let them know the Succors they expected were
routed. The place was summoned but the Answer was made by the mouth^ of Cannon
and Musket, so that ours began to fire afresh, and continued their Works with
more industry than before.

The 19th. we saw, to our great joy twenty Ships which brought eighteen hundred
men to our assistance, we mounted the Trenches the same Evening, where
Chevalier Zindodari, a man of singula^ merit, was killed.

The Cistern was already finished, an^ the Gallery was brought even to the foo^
of the Wall, with a fair Prospect of a goo^ effect, when, to our surprise, we
foun^ the Stone-work so prodigiously har^ that it was impossible to strike off
the lea^ piece without very great labor, which no way suiting with the
impatient desire of our men to come to blows with the Enemy, the rather for
that the Season began to be severe by continual Rain and daily Storms, all
their designs turned to making the Breach wide enough for an Assault by the
help of their Cannon; and while they were busied in the execution of this
project, two extraordinary things happened to our advantage.

The first was, that two Turks who had fled from the place, came to General
Cornaro, and assured him, that if he would give them good usage, they would so
bring matters about, that several of the Town should yield themselves to him.
This Proposal having moved the General to use them well, one of them
voluntarily remained in his power, as an Hostage, the other attended by a
Morlaque of known trust, returned into the City, and there managed his Affairs
with so much success, that he came back two or three hours after with two
hundred and forty other Turks well armed and equipped. This odd Adventure gave
occasion to another accident which would have quite tired the constancy of any
Garrison less obstinately resolved to endure the last extremities: For General
Cornaro seeing their Forces so considerably diminished, and taking from thence
a fresh occasion to summon them to surrender, threatening, that if they delayed
till the Assault, he would put them all to the Sword: They answered with their
accustomed haughtiness, that they were resolved to defend the place to the last.

Upon which we began to fire upon them, and one of our Bombs lighting by chance
into a little Fort near the Seaside where the Besieged kept their Powder, and
where the Women and Childten were put, as into a place of least danger, the
fire catching hold of this Powder, blew up the Fort, and all that was in it,
making a dismal spectacle, as may well be imagined.

On the same 28th. day the breach at last appearing reasonable wide, resolution
was taken to make advantage of the Consternation into which so strange an
Adventure, in all probability, had cast the Enemies, and give the Assault in
two places; for which purpose a body was framed of twelve hundred men. The
Detachments of the Battalion of Malta, and the Pope's Forces, which made up one
part of them, commanded by Chevalier de Paulmy, were to charge first on the
right, on the side of the Castle, where the strongest Assault was to be made,
while the Florentines, with other Venetian Forces commanded by the Marquess
Borry, were to charge on the left, more toward the Sea, where there was a
great Tower much battered by the Cannon.

But notwithstanding all their Efforts, the Attempt had no success, the Breach
not being in that state as was imagined. In fine, when Chevalier de Paulmy,
with several Knights, and the Detachments commanded by him, had with great
vigor mounted the Breach, he plainly perceived, notwithstanding the Enemies
fire, that that place sunk into a Precipice on the side of the besieged, and
that there was a strong Palisade behind, which the Turks were retrenched, which
with less difficulty, was found true after the taking of the Town. This imposed
upon him a necessity of contenting himself with the Proofs he had given of his
Courage, and finding it impossible to make a Lodgment on that part of the Wall,
which was ruined by the Castle, and lay open in several other places, he was
forced to retire with loss of Men. Dom Emanuel Bru, Captain, was killed on the
spot, and the Chevaliers d' Estaing, du Terail, de Clospac, de Chenau, de
Glandenez, and de la Varene were grievously wounded.

Ours in the mean time endeavored to shake the Resolution of the besieged, and
draw them to the side toward the Sea, by continual firing from the Galleys;
the Saiques belonging to them, advanced under the Walls with Ladders, as if
they intended to scale them; but then it appeared these Infidels were not men
that easily took the Alarm; so far were they from being caught in the Snare
that was laid for them, that on the contrary they seemed more enraged, and
defended the Breach like men in despair.

But on the other side, the Marquis de Borry's Attack, of which they had less
hope succeeded much better, for the ruins of the great Tower proved such, that
he found means to mount them, and lodge himself there, the Turks not being able
to make any great resistance, the two Flanks of the same Tower (of which the
Front only was ruined) serving him for a shelter from the fire of the Castle
and other places near; so that now it began to appear that this was the only
part they should have attacked. The Forces of Malta who had crept along the
Breach, being advanced to take their Post there, it might now easily be seen
the Victory would not be long delayed.

In effect, the day following many of the Soldiers having posted themselves on
several parts of the Wall from whence they had beaten the Besieged; and several
also having found means to get into the place, the Turks stood their ground,
and knocked down a great number of them; but seeing ours did not slacken their
Courage, but entered apace notwithstanding their smart firing upon us, they
resolved at last to retire into the Castle, and leave the Town in our hands.

There were some Turks who had taken refuge in the great Towers of the Town,
and had their Lives and Liberty granted them. The day following, being the
30th. of September, those of the Castle having desired leave to Capitulate,
surrendered themselves on condition that they might go out with their Arms; that
it should be permitted them to carry away whatever they could on their backs,
and that they should be allowed Ships to carry them into Albania, which was
punctually executed on the first of October. There went out above Nine hundred
Men well armed who embarkt with about One thousand Women and Children: They
having, as it is said, before the Siege sent away the greatest part of useless
Souls: After this, thanks were given to God, and two Mosques that were in the
Town, Consecrated, the one being Dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, the other to
St. Jerome.

We parted from Castel-Novo the Fourth of October, and the Wind being
favorable, after we had divided our selves from the Popes Galleys near the
Pharos of Messina, on the Ninth we arrived happily in the Port of Malta.

At the end of the Book follows a List of the Knights of Malta killed or
wounded at the Siege of Castel-Novo since their landing.

The Campaign ended with the taking of Castel-Novo, which is the most
considerable Conquest that has been made in that Country during the present
War. General Cornaro presently gave order for repairing the Breaches to secure
it against any Assault. The Turks were so distracted with this loss, that they
quitted several little Places about Castel-Novo. On the other side diverse
People of Dalmatia came over in throngs to side with the Republique: Amongst
others those of Ertzegovine sent Twenty four Deputies to General Cornaro, with
Twelve Colors they had formerly taken from the Infidels, to beg of him to be
secured. The General having received them in a very obliging manner, gave them
Twelve Standards to preserve themselves under the Protection of the Republique;
and they, in token of their acknowledgements, immediately put themselves into
the Field, with the Inhabitants of Bagnani, to the number of Four thousand,
with design to fight a Basha who was there at the head of a thousand Turks
Horse and Foot; he having notice of their march, retired to Cottone, where he
thought to entrench himself; but understanding afterward that the Morlaques
marched directly to him, he left the defense of it to Mustai Begh, and Three
hundred Men he bestowed on him, and fled away with the rest. In the mean time
those of Ertzegovine having appeared before the Place, the Turk desired to
Capitulate, and accordingly marched out with his Garrison and retired toward
Fossa. They seized themselves of this Post, with six Colors, and the Territory
of Casanza, which depends on it, and they found there good store of Provisions.
Athens, which also submitted to the power of the Venetians, was the last of the
Successes obtained this year by the Republique on the side of Greece.

After the taking of Corinth, the Venetian Army set sail toward Athens, and
arrived on the Twenty first of September at Porto-Lione, which takes its name
from a Lion of Marble, ten Foot high, which stands at the lower end of the
Port. The Modern Graecians call it the Dragons Port, Cicero and Strabo, Portus
Piraeus; it has also been called the Port of Athens, it being but six Miles
from that City. I had forgot to tell you, that, as this Naval Army past by
Napoli di Malvasia, the only Place the Turks had now left in the Morea, Captain
Venier was commanded with his Squadron to Bombard it. In effect, the Bombs
being cast into the Place with good success, made a dreadful destruction, and
the Bridge by which the City had Communication with the Continent was ruined:
But all this not shaking the Resolution the Garrison had taken of defending
themselves, the Army passed forward, hoping they should easily reduce it the
next Campaign, especially since the Generalissimo had detached three Men of War
and four Galliots, to block up the Place during the Winter, and hinder them
from being relieved either with Men, Provisions or Ammunition. Some Forces also
on the Land kept it blockt up, to the end that the want of Provisions might
reduce this City under the Obedience of the Republique, which could not be
easily carried by force. Let us now return to the Siege of Athens.

As soon as the Fleet had cast Anchor at Porto Lione, the Principal Graecians
of that Country came to signify their Joy, for the arrival of the Christians,
and the prospect they now had of being in a short time freed from the Turkish
Tyranny; the Infidels had quitted the Town and retired into the Castle, where
they seemed resolved to defend themselves, and began to fire at a great rate.

Which obliged Count Coningsmark to raise two Batteries, one of six Cannon, the
other of four Mortars, which were ready in a very short time, and the Cannons
played the same Evening. In the mean time the Generalissimo sent Fifteen
hundred Men into the City, as well to seize it, as to preserve the Houses of
those Grecian Inhabitants who had voluntarily submitted themselves; after
which they summoned the Besieged, who Proudly answered they were resolved to
defend themselves, upon which the Venetians saw themselves obliged to work at
their approaches, where a Sergeant Major and some Soldiers were killed: the
works were continued eight days together, and a great number of Bombs were
thrown into the Castle, which blew up their Magazine of Powder. The Serasquier
having had notice that this Place was besieged, and that it was also hard
pressed, gathered together in haste some Cavalry and four hundred Foot, who
being mounted behind the Horsemen, they marched with all possible secrecy,
knowing the success of their Attempt depended on that. But Count Coningsmark
having had intelligence of their march from those of the Country, he marched
against the, and put them to flight; and being returned to his Men he had left
about the City, he again summoned the Besieged, telling them they had now no
relief to hope for. Fear had already seized them, so that being of themselves
disposed to desire some Composition, they offered to surrender if they might go
out with their Arms and Baggage. But the Generalissimo reduced their Demands to
these conditions.

1. That the Garrison should go out without Arms, and retire themselves to what
place they pleased, that each of them should carry on his back only what he
thought most useful, and that they should have five days given them to embark.

2. That they should be convoyed to Smirna, and that they might take Vessels at
their own charge, if they defir'd to be transported elsewhere.

3. That they should not force any one to follow them.

By virtue of this Article, all the Slaves that were then in the Castle were to
remain there, and none to be carried away by the Infidels.

4. Lastly, if the Castle were found without Water or Victurals, the precedent
Articles should be void, because the Garrison had surrendered upon necessity.

These Articles being signed on both sides, the Venetians entered the Castle,
and five days after the Infidels went out to the number of Three thousand,
amongst whom were Six hundred Soldiers who embarked for Smyrna; but there
ramin^d above 600. who desired to be made Christians. There were found in the
Castle 50 Piece of Brass Cannon, and some of Iron. Signior Daniel Delfino was
made Governor, and Count Tomio Pompei Proveditor.

The Naval Army was to winter at Porto-Lione, and the Land Forces were
quartered about Athens; they wrought at the building of some Forts, to hinder
the Communication which Negropont might have with the Continent, and also to
curb the Garrison of Thebes, which made frequent incursions about Athens. The
Conquest of this Place is so important, that it deserves a particular
Description.

Athens is not far from the Gulf of Enghia, which makes part of the Ionian Sea;
it is the Metropolitan of Attica, and the most ancient City of all Greece. King
Cecrops was its Founder, Theseus enlarged it, and obliged those of the Country
to settle themselves there. The Citadel is built on a sollid Rock, inaccessible
on all sides but the West, on which is the entrance; toward the East and
South, the Walls make two sides of a Square; those on the other sides are not
so regular by reason of the irregularity of the Rock which serves for their
Foundation. It is Twelve hundred Paces in compass; at the bottom of the Hill
may be seen some marks of a very high Wall, which formerly surrounded the foot
of it, and made the access more difficult; this Citadel is in an equal distance
between two Eminences, one toward the South-(...) and the Musaeum, which is as
high as the Citadel, and within Cannon reach; the other is the Mount Achenius,
whether they could not bring their Artillery, by reason the way was too steep
and rugged, and at the top no plain but only a descent; it was there the Statue
of Jupiter was formerly adored. The City is on the North of the Citadel, which
entirely shelters it on the side toward the Sea, so that those that sail by
imagine there are no other Houses but those of the Citadel, which is the reason
that some who have not had the Curiosity to go ashore, have believed that all
Athens was comprehended within this Castle. The Situation of the City is very
commodious for the Inhabitants, for the Climate there being very hot, it lies
happily exposed to the North. There are yet to be seen a great number of
Antiquities amongst which are,

The Temple of Victory of the Ionique Order, of which the Turks made a Magazine
of Powder. The Arsenal of Lycurgus of the Dorique Order, which served for a
Magazine of Arms. The Temple of Minerva of the Do^^^ue Order of which the
Infidels made a Mosque. The Lanthern of Demosthenes, which is at this day the
Hospital of Capucins. The Octogonal Tower of the Winds, designed by Andronico
Cireste, and mentioned by Vitruvius in his Book of Architecture The Temple of
Theseus. The Foundations of the Areopagus.
There are four Mosques in the City and one in the Castle; the City is divided
into eight Quarters; it had formerly depending on it One hundred seventy four
Villages, each of which were as large as the City it self. Athens has been the
School of War, and of all Virtues, and Mother of Sciences; and as this City is
very ancient, it may be noted in general (without examining the time of its
Foundation, or of those that built it) that the Kingdom of Athens began in the
year of the World 2496. and lasted Four hundred eighty seven years under
seventeen Kings, of which the first was Cecrops, and the last Codrus. To these
succeeded the Archontes or Pretors, who exercised their Magistracy during their
Life; and of those there have bee^ Thirteen, the first was Medon Son o^ Codrus,
and the thirteenth Alcmeon, afte^ whom the Archontes exercised their Power for
ten years only, who succeede^ each other to the number of seven; afte^ which
these Archontes were made annua^ Magistrates. Dracon, who was one o^ them, made
so severe Laws for his Citizens, that their excessive rigor gave o^casion to
the Orator Demades, to sa^ they were writ in Blood. Solon, wh^ had that Dignity
after him, made su^ as were milder, and established Popula^ Government.
Pisistratus having usur^ the Sovereignty of Athens, Hippias an^ Hipparchus his
Sons succeeded him d^ring the space of fourteen years; the latter was killed by
an opposite Faction and Hippias being droven out of Athe^^ calls the Persians
to his assistance. The lost the Battle of Marathon, and te^ years after were
again defeated in (...) Sea Fight near the Island of Salamin^ These advantages
made the Athenians (...) flourishing Republic. Lysander, G^neral of the
Lacedaemonians, took Athens in the Peloponnesian War, and there set up thirty
Tyrants, who were droven out by Thrasybulus and some others. Athens suffered
under Alexander the Great and some of his Successors. Demetrius restored it to
liberty, and afterward being netled at the affront the Athenians put upon him,
by refusing to receive him, after he had lost the Battle of Ipsus in Phrygia,
he besieged their City, and a year after took it from Lachares, who had made
himself Tyrant there. After this it shook off the Macedonian Yoke, and
subsisted some time with glory under the Protection of the Romans. Sylla took
it from one of the Citizens, named Aristion, who had also made himself Tyrant
there.

In spite of its misfortunes, the Reputation it had for Sciences, still drew
thither the Learned, by the Concourse of whom it was reestablished. It
declared for Pompey and Caesar, who after the Battle of Pharsalia, had it in
his power to punish them, gave them his Pardon in these words so Celebrated in
History, That the Athenians had deserved to feel the effects of his
indignation, but that in consideration of the Merits of the dead, he would show
favor to the living. Augustus and his Successors had great regard for Athens;
it was taken by the Scythians under the Reign of Galienus. Cleodemus of Athens,
and Athenaeus of Bisance drove them out. The Emperor Justin in the sixth Age
endeavored to restore it, and since that time History makes little or no
mention of it for the space of Seven hundred years. Balduin the Ninth of that
name, Earl of Flanders, having been Crowned Emperor of Constantinople in the
year 1204. those of the Croisade, who had had share in the taking of this City,
divided the Estates of the Graecians amongst themselves; Geoffrey of Ville
hardouin had Athens and the Achaia; ^alduin in those days Besieged Athens
without success, and Boniface soon after took it. Since that, the Duchy of
Athens fell to the House of de la Roche. William de la Roche, Duke of Athens,
and Lord of Thebes, being deceased about the year 1300. his Daughter or Sister
brought this Duchy to Hugh de Brienne, Earl of Brienne and Liches. From this
Match came Gualter the Fifth, Father of Gualter the Sixth, Earl of Brienne and
Liches, Duke of Athens, and Constable of France, killed in the Battle of
Poicti^rs in the Year 1356. without ^leaving Issue. In the mean time the
Arragonians usurpt the Duchy of Athens; and after diverse Revolutions, Rainier
Accioli of Florence made himself Master of it, and granted it to the Venetians.
Antonio, Bastard Son of Rainier reestablished himself in it, and from his
Successor it was taken by Mahomet the Second, Emperor of the Turks in the Year
1455. and it is one of the Two hundred Cities he took from the Christians,
since which time it has always been under the Infidels. Vector Capella
surprised it in the Year 1464. but being not able to take the Castle, he was
forced to abandon his Conquest.

If the Generalissimo after the taking of Athens, had had Forces sufficient to
Attack Negropont, he might easily have made himself Master of it; but the
Garrisons he was forced to put in the Places that had been taken this Campaign,
having reduced his Army to a small number, he was obliged to put off the
Execution of his designs to the next year; to which also we shall remit our
dicourse, if what has been said shall appear agreeable to the Reader, of which
the Bookseller will give the best account.

The Names of the Knights killed and wounded at the Siege of Coron.
FRENCH.
SIeur de la Tour Maubourg, General of the Battalion of Malta, killed in the
Redout. De Creus, a Voluntier, died of a Distemper caused by the great
Fatigues. De Montchalin, Guard to the Standard, wounded. Junius, a Voluntier,
wounded. Du Breuil wounded in the Throat by a Musket Shot in the last Assault.
Goudras, second Lieutenant of the Grenadiers, wounded. De Saillans d'Estans,
second Lieutenant of Grenadiers, wounded in his Thigh with two Musquet-bullets.
De Corein Mongon, Guard to the Standard, wounded in the Hand by a Musket Shot.
De St. Pierre the same. Du Pont wounded in the Redout. De Tresmes-Gesures,
Voluntier, died of his wounds received in the Redout. De Bourgon, a Voluntier,
dead of his Wounds received on the same occasion. De Lire de la Bourdonnaye, a
Voluntier, killed at the Assault. Du Plessis Get, De la Brunetiere, two
Brothers, both dead of the Distempers caused by the Fatigues. Michon, Aid
Major, killed in the Redout. De la Mothe, Voluntier, dead of his Wounds
received on the same occasion. De Beaupre, Guard to the Standard; Boindin a
Voluntier, and Doria Brasseuse, all three dangerously wounded in the last
Assault. De Bernieres, second Lieutenant of the Brigadiers, wounded in his hand
by a Musket Shot. De Refuge a Captain, De Sesseval a Lieutenant, De Braigny
and De Brosias, Volunteers, all four wounded. Des Aunois, Voluntier, wounded in
his Thigh by a Musket Shot. De Gaillard, Captain, dead of his Wounds, received
on the Redout. De la Minoye, Voluntier, killed at the last Assault. De Galien
Captain, Tondu Voluntier, dangerously wounded on the same occasion. Roigne,
Voluntier, wounded in his Leg by a Musket Shot. Lescaillon, Descoulette, De
Fanesin, Volunteers; Caulet, De Sade, De Guiers, Lieutenants, wounded. De Cais,
Baron, Volunteers, wounded.
ITALIANS.
The Count Vital, Voluntier, killed in the Trenches. Citadelli the elder, a
Lieutenant, killed at the last Assault. Vicaris, Guard to the Standard,
Beccaria, Voluntier, dangerously wounded at the same. Caraccioli, a Voluntier,
wounded. Pieuzaque, a Voluntier, wounded on the Redout. Perussi, Pensinghi,
Spinola the elder, all three wounded.
SPANIARDS.
Don Felix Verra Terra, Lieutenant, killed at the last Assault. Don Juan Melos,
dead of the Distemper caused by the Fatigues. Don Juan de Barros dangerously
wounded. Don Juan Emanuel wounded. Don Emanuel de Cordoua, Captain, dangerously
wounded in the Thigh by a Musket Shot at the last Assault. Don Ignacio Ourias
had his Elbow so shattered by a Musket Shot at the last Assault, that he was
in danger. Schesbelle, or Chassebet, a German, Guard to the Standard, wounded.
A List of the Knights and Officers of the Venetian Army, and of the Battalion
of Malta.
MOnsieur de Mechetin, General; Chevalier de la Bar, Lieutenant General; Du
Refuge, Major; De Pernac, De la Varene, De Leszeval, Adjutants; De Fagues,
Standardbearer; De St. Fortunat, Cardouche, Ventura, Schonau, De Brilliac, De
Manterie, Standard-Guards; De Grace l'Espinasse, Aid-Major; De la Ferte,
Proveditor of the Forces; Br. Francis Baron, French Almoner; Br. Dominico
Gambigallo, Ignatio di Bono, Almoners of Malta; De Ceres, Captain of
Grenadiers; De Saillans, De Mongon-Corin, second Lieutenants of Grenadiers; De
Paulms-Voyer, Captain of the Fuseliers; De Beaupre, Lieutenant of Fuseliers; De
Champron, De Roquepine, second Lieutenants of Fuseliers.

The Names of those that commanded the Galleys.
The Captain. The Chevaliers de St. Germain and Galder, Captains. De Chemezin,
Gleispach, Lieutenants.
The Patron. The Chevalier di san Lazaro, Don Arnando Jogeres, Captains.
Claricini, Don Thomaso Escarlin, Lieutenants.
The Saint Mary. The Chevaliers du Gaust, and de Chastelet, Captains. De la
Touch, De St. Auban, Lieutenants.
The Saint Paul. The Chevaliers de la Board, and de Beauquemarde, Captains. De
Paris-Fontain, De Gallien, Lieutenants.
The Saint Peter. Where also are the Fuseliers. The Chevaliers de Choisy,
Captain. De Barmon, Lieutenant.
The Magistrale. The Chevaliers Don Juan Emanuel, Don Bernardin de Nierca,
Captains. Don Labo D'almeide, Don Andrea Padila, Lieutenants.
The Saint Gregory. The Chevaliers d'Arene, Don Augustine Vertis, Captains. De
Rousset, Don Thomas Eslava, Lieutenants.
The Volunteers. The Chevaliers de la Son; de la Mothe; de la Brillane; de
Varadier; de l'Espine; Sprely; de Montchalain; de Barbesy; de Boyer; de
Champinelle; de Martel; de Brany; de Molins; de Brany-Thiar; de Gorges; de
Fesin; de Seillans; de Marueil; Perussi; de Gaspari; de Gabriac; de S.
Christofle; de Pudion; Brother-Servant Baron.

The Chevaliers of the Caravan, who were landed out of the Galleys with the
Battalion of Malta.
The Chevaliers de Valavoire; Arcimbordy; Don Carlo Caraffa; Don Juan Sesse;
Gallucy; Zamzedary; de Glandeves; d' Urre; de Gramont Chastillon; de Beveren;
des Ayques; de la Brillane; du Heron; des Ainoix; Don Augustino Ximenes; de
Chastelet; de Brilliac; de Colombieres; de Donedeau; des Tourettes; de
Pezanston; de Perier Clement; de S.Pierre; de Sannes; Brother-Servant at Arms
Charetier.

Four Gentlemen of Marseille put themselves into the same Battalion as
Volunteers, viz. Messeurs de Gilles, de Fouquie, de Bricard, de Saumati.

There are moreover nine hundred Soldiers of Malta, who with the Knights we
have mentioned, compose this Battalion, so terrible to the Turks, that they
dread no Enemies so much as them.

A List of the Knights of Malta killed or wounded at the Siege of Castel-Novo
since their landing.
The third of September. MOnsieur de Brillane dead of his Wounds. Provence.
Monsieur Richebourg killed. France. Monsieur Barin killed. France. Monsieur
Loumieres wounded in the Arm with a Musket Shot. Provence. Monsieur Belaceuil
wounded in his shoulder by a Musket Shot. Auvergne. Signior Caraffa wounded in
his Leg. Italy.
The fourth of September. Signior Ventury wounded in his Heel by a Cannon-shot.
Italy.
The eighth of September, at the taking the Post near the Castle. Don
Bernardino Noira, killed. Spain. Signior Castellano, killed. Italy. Signior
Bourgery, killed Italy. Don Joseph Dolx, killed. Spain. Monsieur Sesseval,
killed. France. Don Tibursio Dolx, wounded in the Thigh. Spain. Monsieur Javon,
hurt in the Eye. Provence. Monsieur Roque spine, wounded in the Leg. France.
Sig. Carneralia, wounded in the head. Italy. Sig. Saraciny, wounded in the
Face. Italy. Sig. Marcellane, wounded in the Shoulder. Italy. Monsieur Gramont,
wounded on the Head. Auvergne. Monsieur Duche, his Arm broke. Auvergne. Signior
Medecy, wounded in the Hand. Italy. Signior Vicary, wounded in the Arm. Italy.
Sig. Falconcery, wounded in the Thigh. Italy.
On the nineteenth at the Trenches. Signior Zindodari, died of his wounds.
Italy.
The 28th. at the Assault. Dom Emanuel Bru, killed. Spain. Monsieur Clospac,
wounded by two Musquet-shots. Germany. Monsieur Chenau received two Wounds.
Germany. Monsieur du Terail, wounded in his Body. Auvergne. Monsieur Glandenez,
in his Shoulder. Provence. Monsiur de la Verene, in his Head. Auvergne.
Monsieur d' Ocquincourt, wounded slightly in his Belly. France.

FINIS.

