THE HISTORY OF Nicerotis, A Pleasant NOVEL.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, at the Post House in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1685.

TO THE DUCHESS OF (...)
Madam,
I Have often observed the Inconvenience of too obstinately maintaining an
Opinion contrary to that which has generally obtained, and in serious or
weighty Matters have carefully avoided that Rock upon which I have known some
to have been lost; but in our last Converse, the Subject whereof was the Finess
with which the Ladies and Gallants of this present Age manage their Amors,
which the Company then present unanimously agreed was advanced to a perfection,
no former Age could parallel; having uncontrouledly asserted the contrary; and
perhaps too positively, and having given an Instance in some Passages of above
five hundred years ago, which you all would positively conclude to be a
Fiction, till I satisfied you, that I met with the History in an ancient Greek
Manuscript, which by the Injury of time, and the Ignorance of the Persons,
through whose hands it had passed, was very imperfect, as having neither
beginning nor ending; and in some places not legible, and with many
interruptions of some excellent Passages, yet contained enough to justify my
Assertion, and to convince the Hearers, that in that Age and Country, there
were Persons who lived much after our Mode, and that there is nothing new under
the Sun. I thought I should have had the general applause of that illustrious
Company, for having so well justified my self; but instead thereof, am punished
with their and your indispensible Commands, to put what remains of that Piece;
the short account whereof was agreeably received by you, into a Language
intelligible to persons more concerned in affairs of that nature, than
acquainted with the Tongue in which before now it was only extant. My Style, I
know, is very unfit for the Subject, and my time designed for a far different
Employment; but rather than disoblige so many, and so fair Friends, I have put
a Force upon my self, and sequestered some few hours for this her View, but
freely profess to you, it is a Piece very imperfect in the Matter, by the
Misfortune and Injury of many Ages, but more by the rudeness of the Translators
Style, who in the Judgment of the Learned, will be censured for having done the
elegant Author much wrong; but in regard his Name is not known, and so none can
be concerned for him, I cannot be condemned to reparation, and therefore with
more confidence present it to you, as it is with all its Defects.

A Catalogue of some Novels and Plays Printed for R. Bentley, and S. Magnes.
NOVELS.
1 ZElinda, a famed Romance. 2 Happy Slave, in three Parts. 3 Count Brion. 4
Count Gabales. 5 Hatige, or the Amors of the King of Tamaran. 6 Mad. Lavalier
and the King of France. 7 Madam and the Duke of Guise. 8 Mad. Colonna's
Memoirs. 9 Queen of Majork, two Parts. 10 Don Sebastian King of Portugal. 13
Heroine Musquetier. 12 Princess of Cleves. 13 Obliging Mistress. 14 Fatal
Prudence. 15 Princess of Fez. 16 Disorders of Love. 17 Triumph of Love. 18
Victorious Lovers. 19 Almanzor and Almanzaida. 20 Nicostratis. 21 Earl of Essex
and Qu. Elizabeth. 22 Neapolitan, or, the Defender of his Mistress. 23 Amorous
Abbess. 24 Homais Queen of Tunis. 25 Pilgrim, in two Parts. 26 Merovius, Prince
of the Blood Royal of France. 27 Life of the Duke of Guise. 28 Extravagant
Poet. 29 Memoires Gallant. 30 Instruction for a young Nobleman. 31 Grand
Alconder. 32 Chaste Seraglion.
In the Press.
33 Adellaid, a famed Romance. 34 The Amors of Catulus. 35 The Illustrious
Genouese.
THE FRAGMENT OF THE HISTORY OF Nicerotis.
AH unfortunate Nicerotis! To what infelicities art thou destined? No sooner
does the world take notice of thy blooming Beauties, but thou art hurried away
into a Desert; no ^ooner become the Adoration of the greatest Court upon Earth,
but thou art ravished from it, and banished to an obscure ^sland, as if Youth
and Beauty were a Crime: Thou must suffer the punishment of Tray^ors, for
pleasing the sweetest and most ob^iging Monarch that sits upon a Throne. Too
late I perceive the difference between a Lover and a Husband. Where are the
Vows, my dear Nicias, so often made, before he could prevail with me, to give
him my heart? How often did he, with the most solemn Oaths protest, his whole
Life should be employed to please me: That he never would entertain so much as
a Thought, that should be disagreeable to mine? That my Inclinations should
govern his with a Sympathy? But he is now on a sudden grown positive and
imperious, as the Guardian Eunuch of the Palace, and inflexible as a peevish
aged Father. While Nicerotis thus passionately bewailed her condition,
Phylaenis who was employed in her Cabinet, and overheard some part of her
Lamentation, coming from thence, and making use of the Confidence that was
between them, thus interrupted her: Madam, What means this weakness in a Person
of your Quality? It ill becomes one of your Understanding and Spirit, to grieve
at the Traverses of Fortune: Persons like you, either foresee their Adversities
at a distance, and then consult how to avoid or oppose them, or when they are
surpised, bear them with courage. Before you submitted your self to the
Dominion of a Husband, you should have believed those that told you they are
all Tyrants, whose Will is their Law, and Interest their only affection; when
their first Heats are cooled, their Passion becomes in the best of them
Kindness, in some indifferency, but in the most, an Aversion. If a poor Soul
fall into the hands of one of them, if he be a Fool, she is presently
persecuted with a thousand Impertinencies, groundless Quarrels, Suspicions, and
Jealousies without cause, cross Humors, peevish, and always unseasonable Wars:
But of the two, a wise man is the greater Evil; so many Precepts and Cautions,
such Pretensions and Circumspection, a Woman had better forswear the World, and
be cloistered up, then be bound to the Rules of his Order. Your Satyr against
Marriage is altogether as unseasonable, replied Nicerotis, as my Complaints
against Fortune; but I must confess, you have a little raised my Spirits, and
made me sensible, it is fitter to think of some way to prevent, if it be
possible, this sudden Retreat, than vainly to bewail it; the time is very
short, and if your Invention be as happy in this Instant, as I have sometime
found it, you shall ever be my Tutelar Angel. Phylaenis, who was a Person of
Experience, as well as great presence of mind in such Affairs, had formed in
her thoughts an Expedient, which so pleased her own Fancy, that with great
assurance, and Gaity in her Countenance, she cried out, Madam, be no more
afflicted; if you can resolve not to be wanting, to your self, I dare promise
to stop your Journey for some months, if you will consent to -- At this word,
Niceas entered the Room, and Phylaenis in some confusion, for fear she had been
overheard by her Lord, withdrew, to leave it to her Lady, to receive the first
Eruption of his Resentments; but he coming in great have, as being intent upon
the Execution of a Design, which he knew admitted no delay, where the least
omission might prove an unavoidable ruin, was so taken up with it, that if he
overheard any of their Words, he yet knew not that he did: Madam, says he, I
have been to perform those necessary Civilities for you, to those of your
Friends and Relations, who are most concerned in you, and I have satisfied
them, that it is indispensibly requisite for preserving my Life and Honor,
that we proceed immediately on our Journey: The Galley lies ready upon her Oars
in a week without the Harbor, and I am come to conduct you thither; there is
no time to be lost, call your Woman, and let us be going, we shall have better
leisure to discourse the motives of this so sudden resolution in our Voyage,
and taking her by the hand, he called out to Phylaenis to follow her Lady, and
said he had given order to the Steward, to send all their Necessaries by
another way, to meet them at the Ship side. The Surprise was most astonishing
to Nicerotis; but giving her hand to her Lord, Nicias, says she, you are all
the World to me, and wherever I go with you, that place will be more pleasing
to me, than all the Delights and Glories of (...) I cannot only be content but
happy with you in a Desert: Let us go then; where you please, and though I have
been instructed, the great Respects that ought to be paid to Relations,
Familiars, and Superiors upon such occasions, and that the neglect of them,
does always, if not destroy, at least diminish the esteem that persons of
Quality ought to desire to live in, in the World; I have now learnt, that an
absolute conformity to the Government of a Husband is the greatest Duty, as
well as Felicity of a Wife. Madam, replied Nicias, as we go, I will satisfy
all your Scruples; and to convince you of the necessity of this abrupt
departure, that you will confess, I only wanted time to let you know the
Reasons of it beforehand, to have made it your Resolution before it was mine.
By this time they were at the Chariot, and being entered, were soon at the
Waterside, having only to pass a Back-way by the Walls of the Palace-Gardens;
so that unobserved they went aboard the Gally that attended them, and
immediately setting forward with a gentle stroke of their Oars, they made no
great have, that a small Sloop, which was to bring their Servants and
Necessaries, just with the fall of Night, might overtake them. Nicerotis
followed by her Woman, was conducted into the State-room of the Gally by the
Captain, who leaving her there, went out to wait on Nicias, who was got upon
the Poop, to observe the pleasant Shores on both sides the Hellespont; and to
take notice of Landmarks, by which the Pilots govern their Course in passing
those Straits. The Day being calm, and the motion of the Vessel steady and
slow, the Lady and her Woman did not yet perceive that Discomposure creeping on
them, which being at Sea, brings upon most Constitutions not accustomed to it,
so that they were not interrupted by it, to entertain themselves with the
Discourse of their present Condition; and Phylaenis first breaking silence,
Madam, said she, it is no time to show your Ladyship, the means I had found out
to have retarded this Voyage, which I had just then modeled, and was going to
propose to you when my Lord came upon us, and I fear, overheard some part of a
Conversation, which may hereafter breed troublesome apprehensions in a Head so
capricious as his. You may be secure from any fear of that kind, says
Nicerotis; for his mind was so intent upon the Design he was to execute, of
removing me from Court, that I believe there must have been some great violence
offered him, to have made him take notice of any thing else. There is no
remedy, now we are wholly in his power, and there is nothing to be done, but to
put on a good Countenance, and to appear pleased with what cannot be avoided;
though I would venture a thousand Lives in the attempt of returning to the
Palace, and to appear there but one hour, so it could be effected without
blemish to my Honor. You know it is but two days since the Prince Athemistius
made me a Visit at my Lodgings; and after he had a while entertained the
Company there with me, with the most diverting Conversation in the World, and
charmed us all into an Admiration of his Wit, he took me aside to a Window, and
with a voice lower then to be heard by any present but my self; Madam, says he,
I ought to be very welcome to you, on this Visit, for I come to tell you, that
your Beauty, (which in the short time you have appeared at Court, has inspired
all the Men with Love, and the Ladies with Envy) is ready to advance you above
all their Passions, and above their Qualities too; for I come from our Imperial
Master, to tell you, that he observes nothing in his Royal Palace so glorious
as you, and that he begs (who commands us all) that you will make your Court to
the Empress, and be constant at her side at the usual hour, when he will take
the first opportunity to tell you himself the Value he has for you. I heard
this with several inward Commotions, and not without a guilty Blush, which
discovered, I well enough understood what was the meaning of this Complement,
and was going to make an Answer, that would have better suited a virtuous
Prudence, then the Princes Design; when he stopped me, saying, Madam, I must beg
your Pardon, if I do not permit you to charge me with an Answer: I have
executed my Commission fully, and his Majesty will better understand how you
receive his Commands, by your obeying them, then by any words I can deliver
from you. And thus breaking off with me, he addressed his Discourse to a
Kinswoman of mine, who had possessed the Emperors Favor in the highest degree
for some years, and rallying her at his usual rates, upon some Intrigues that
were not understood by the rest of the Company, some piquant Repartees past
between them; and at last the Prince said to her, Madam, let us not be angry,
we shall shortly be upon more equal terms, and then we may agree or fall out,
as the humor takes us. This put an end to his Visit, and put the Duchess into
such a Fret, that the rest of the Company taking notice of it, one after
another took their Leaves and departed, and she and I being left alone, she
passionately breaks out into these Expressions: I must no longer endure the
Insolences of Athemistius; his Buffoonery pleases, it is true, the Emperor; but
when I let him know how often it is uneasy to me, and with how little respect
he treats me in all Companies, he will be made sensible of his Folly, in using
his Wit against me, that has more powerful ways of securing her Interest, than
prattling. I could not but smile at these Threats, when I reflected on the
Message I had just then received, and saw that what the Prince said to her,
might be grounded upon the Prospect he had of the Affair he was then engaged
in; which she perceiving, Cousin, says she, I hope the ill Usage I have had
from Athemistius, or the Disorder it has put me in, is no occasion of your
appearing so well pleased. Madam, said I, I have too much Interest in you, to
be pleased at any thing that displeases you; but I could not without some
disdain, think of the Carriage of the Prince, who, though he be a man of
extraordinary Wit, I take to be one not of ordinary Discretion, who after
having entertained me with Expressions of the highest respect, should so soon
forget himself before my face, at that rate to use a Person of your Grandeur,
to whom I had the honor to be related, I shall frame this Action, take my
Measures how to value him: beware of him, says she, he makes Love to every new
Face, and whatever his Success be, he makes it the subject of his Rallery in
the next Company. Keep your self upon your Guard, take my Advice, and have no
Converse with the most uncertain Person in the World. She took leave, and
waited on her to her Chariot, and returning, fell into consideration of the
Commands Athemistius had brought me: I became very pensive, and retired into my
Cabinet, and locking my self up there, that I might without interruption
examine my Heart, which I found began to be interessed what it would have me
do, I balanced a thousand things, before I could observe the Scales to turn;
the Precepts of Religion, and the Rules of Modesty, in which I had been
carefully instructed in my Childhood; the faith I had given to Nicias; the Love
I really have for him, and his great Merits; his lovely Person, and graceful
Mien; his Gallantry, and obliging Demeanor toward me, were irresistible
Arguments to confirm me in my Virtue: but on the other hand, the Glories of the
most splendid Court in the World, the Charms of Wealth and Power, and the
Ambition of Precedence, which is a most vehement Passion in our Sex: the glory
of being concerned in the Intrigues of Court and State; and the Pride to see
the Grecian Monarch at my Feet, began to incline the Scale, and seem more
weighty; and I was about to have called for you, to take your Judgment in a
Case of this importance, when my own heart told me, if thou would be happy,
preserve thy Innocence, it is that will make all things pleasant, and without it
there is no Enjoyment, but has more of Gall than Sweetness. This divine Thought
so ravished and possessed my Soul, that I immediately resolved to despise all
those Allurements, to desire to be nothing, but what was most grateful to my
dear Nicias; to look upon Athemistius, as the most unworthy Person in the
World, who being of the greatest Quality, would take upon him the basest of
Employments. I determined to take no notice of what had passed between him and
I, no not to you, in whom I have an entire Confidence, to avoid the Court, and
divert my self in our Family, and among my Relations, which are numerous and
honorable enough to afford all the Delights of virtuous Conversation; and thus
having composed my self, and passed the rest of that and the next day, after my
usual manner, as you very well know; for if you could have observed any change,
I am sure you would have enquired into the cause of it. Yesternight Nicias came
home somewhat earlier then was his Custom, and with a Countenance that
discovered more of concern, than I had ever observed in him, finding me alone;
Madam, says he, read this Paper, giving me a Billet, directed to the Lord
Nicias, which contained these words; This is a Design, Nicias, against your
Honor, which nothing can prevent, but the sudden Removal of the Fair Nicerotis
from the Court, your Sword nor your Friends, must not serve you in this
occasion, or else I should not be the Man that could advise you to fly from the
Danger. By this I perceive the Secret had taken vent at Court, but resolved not
to seem to understand the meaning of it: I cried out, what Riddle is this, my
Lord? What Words? What Dangers are these? What Design, that nothing can
prevent, but my Removal? Tell me presently the Truth, or my Fear will act upon
me, what the cruellest Murderer could design. There is no Danger to either of
us, said he; if we take this Advice, it is from so good a Hand, that I am
certain of the Importance of it without further enquiry: All you have to do, is
to prepare for your Voyage to Crete with me to morrow, of which you must take
notice to no creature alive: I have already provided a Gally with all
Conveniences, and in the Morning, while you are dressing, I will make those
Visits that are necessary for you, and satisfy your Friends of the manner of
our Departure. He then gave order to his Servants, if any Friends came to sup
with him, they should tell them, he was gone indisposed to Bed, and that their
Lady was so concerned for him, she could not be Company for any one that Night.
Having thus placed Centries and Guards upon me, he sat ruminating a while and
silent; but when a Sigh or extravagant Oath gave a sudden and short vent to his
Passion, I flattered and begged, he would tell me the whole matter that
troubled him; I wept when he refused me, and at last, fell into some Fits,
which frighted him, and were really incommodious to me; the Servants were
called, and after the help of some Cordials you brought me, he directed I
should go to Bed, and was not long behind me himself. I must confess, this was
the first unpleasant night I had with Nicias. She was here inturrepted with a
sudden Shout of all the Slaves and Mariners of the Gally, who saluted the
Castles of Sestos and Abydos, as they passed by them; and running to the Door
of the Cabin, to know what the Matter was, when she understood it, she walked
out upon the Deck, to take the view of those Places, so famous for the
unfortunate Loves of Hero and Leander; the History whereof, being so well
known, only Nicias mentioned to his Lady; but from thence, the Captain of the
Gally took occasion to tell them the Story of a very Tragical Love-Adventure,
which had lately happened in that Place, which was thus: Callippus, a Country
Gentleman, lived not far from Cestos, and was Lord of part of the Village, who
by coming sometimes among his Tenants there, for the management and improving
his Concerns, took notice of a young Woman, who had not long been married to
Dictyon a Fisherman, who held a Tenement under him; to have the better pretense
to frequent her, under color of encouraging a young Man, whose industry and
carefulness he would often applaud, offered to advance him some Money, to fit
him with the best Utensils for carrying on his Trade; which being gladly
accepted of by him, and his Lords kindness much magnified to his Wife.
Callippus was the most welcome man in the World, when ever he would do them the
Honor to look into his House, which as often as he came to the Town, he failed
not to do; and upon pretense of erecting some new Building next to the
Fishermans Habitation, which he took in hand, to countenance his frequenting
that place more than usual, rather than for any other advantage he could
propose to himself by it, he had opportunity to let young Phaedra know he had
observed so much Beauty in her, that he could not but judge her worthy of a
much better condition of Living, and that Compassion had grown at last, into so
great an Affection, that he could not live, unless she would make him a just
return; and if she would, he would provide that she should live in much better
Fashion than any of her Neighbors, and take such care of her Credit, by
finding Employment for her Husband, that all should be attributed to his
thriving. The young Woman, who had been bred in a rich Family, where she had
learnt to value good Clothes, and had begun to understand somewhat of Love, but
by her careful poor Parents, was married to one of their own Quality and
Neighborhood, to prevent the Miscarriages, that Girls, who have any appearance
of Beauty, are apt to be seduced to in such Places, was soon convinced by
Callippus his Arguments, that it was better to love a Gentleman, whose Person
was capable enough, without any other consideration, to prevail upon the
greatest Beauties of his own Quality, then to grow old and poor in the Embraces
of her Fisherman, soon consented to his Desires, and with so good a Grace, that
he, who before probably had no further Design, then to gratify an Appetite
which young Gallants are not very desirous to restrain, and to add to the
Trophies of his amorous Victories, upon which men of his Age and Humor use to
value themselves, became enamored of her to that degree, that he could not
live without her, and his assiduity began to give suspicion to the
Neighberhood, who always are maliciously disposed to suspect and defame the
frequent Converses of Persons of different Sexes. To remedy this Inconvenience,
which he saw would inevitably cause the interruption of a Satisfaction he
prized more than all other Enjoyments, he pretended to leave the care of his
Buildings to his Servant, and that he had a mind to try the Hunting on the
Asian side of the Straight; and to that end, he agreed with Dictyon to fit up
his Boat, for the more accommodate transporting him three days in the Week, and
attending him on the other side, where he might as beneficially use his Fishing
as any other place, whilst he himself followed another Task in the Plains near
Abydos: And having conserted the Intrigue with Phoedra, that when her Husband
attended him, so soon as the good Man was gone off from the Shore, she should
dress her self in those Habits he had furnished her with, and close Veiled, as
the Custom is for Persons of Quality, take a Gondala, and pass over to Abydos,
where he had provided a place for her Reception, and would meet her, to
entertain their Delights in more security, and with more freedom than they
could at home. This was put in execution, and the Practice was continued for
some time. The Gentleman, when he had landed in the bottom of a Bay, about half
a Mile above the Town, and always giving order that the Boat should lie within
sight of that Place, when he came again to the Shore, that upon a Sign made,
might immediately come to take him in; and in the mean time, the Master of the
Boat and his Servant might attend their Fishing; so well he thought he had
projected this Contrivance, that it was impossible he should be disturbed in
the Execution of it; and for a while, it succeeded to his Wish, till some of
those evil Eyes, that had observed them at first, now perceiving the Scene was
changed, so narrowly watched Phaedra, that they traced her to the Rendezvous
appointed her by Callippus; where finding that true Love in effect, which they
presumed so before, they did not spare to make themselves merry with the
Discourse of it at their usual Meetings; till at last, some who were concerned
for poor Dictyon, could not digest the Ralleries, that were on all occasions
placed upon him, advertised him of the Game he so often carried his Patron to
hunt: The man was naturally, as the Natives of Thrace are, of a dark and
revengeful Disposition, soon resolved to do himself right, both against his too
kind Master and lascivious Wife: And having for some time debated in his
thoughts the manner of it, he took upon him a more than ordinary Kindness for
her, and a greater Respect for him: And one day, as he passed him over, he told
him, that he was resolved to make his Boat more convenient for him, and to
contrive a Cabin, that he and his Servants might sit in security from the Wash
of the Sea in windy Weather, and from the dashing of the Oars in Calms, which
he might take down, and set up at his pleasure, whenever he found it
inconvenient to his Fishing, or dangerous in too high Winds. Callippus was well
pleased with the Fishermans seeming care of him, and promised him to defray the
Charge of it. He set his Carpenter the next day to work, and framed such a Box,
which locked the two sides together, it parted of it self, and fell the one half
on one side, and the other of the other, over the Boat sides; if the Boatmen
were not ready, as soon the Bolt was drawn, to set their hands to it, and take
it down: This being finished, the Ingenuity and Neatness of it very well
pleased the amorous Gallant, who had not the least suspicion of any Trap laid
for him. Thus continued he his usual recreation twice or thrice; after this,
when Dictyon having ripened his Project, the Morning he resolved to take a full
Revenge of all that were Parties in the Injury done him, he takes a Bottle of
Wine, and as his Custom was, before he went out, took a lusty Draught of it,
and then conveying a violent Poison into it, pretended so much kindness to his
Wife, and so much commended the goodness of the Wine, that he obliged her to
pledge him, without much difficulty, and so hastened to fit out his Boat, and
attend his Master, who at his hour, was at the Waterside; he received him into
the Boat very jocundly, and set him on Shore on the other side. Callippus
hasted to his Rendezvous, having given his Servants order where to hunt, and
where they should expect him, at the usual hour of his Return; but he had not
been long with his Mistress, but she began to be sick, her Color to come and
go, and to be griped in her Stomach, which put the two Lovers into great
disorder; for if she were sick unto Death, she was no less afflicted; in a
while, the Poison began to work on her Vitals, she fell into fainting Fits; the
Neighbors were called into the Assistance, the Physician sent for to the next
City, but she lived not till he came, for in six or seven hours she expired in
great Tortures and Convulsions; at the time of her being ill, she complained
only of a Draught of Wine she drank in the Morning; but having no inkling of
her Husbands Jealousy, did not at all suspect him of any Malice to her. Her
Lover was in great perplexity, not only the loss of a Person so dear to him,
oppressed him with grief, but the Solicitude how to avoid the Scandal that must
arise, by her dying in that Place; from whence, he knew not how to convey her
to her own House, privately set his Invention upon the Rack; at last, he
directed the Confidents of his Amors, that she should be buried as a Stranger,
who had come to their House the night before, from a Place infected with the
Plague, and so should keep their House shut up for some time, till they had
satisfied the Magistrate, the Infection had not touched any one of the Family.
And by that time, he would think of some way, to pacify Dictyons Sorrow, and
give out, that she, walking on the Shoar-side, to take the Air, in the Evening,
was taken by a Sarazen Pirat, who happened at that time to have pursued a small
light Vessel, bound for Constantinople, to the very Streights mouth, but
missing his Prey, and upon his Return, tacking near the Shore, when he espied
her alone, sent off his Boat and took her away. Having settled his Thoughts as
well as he could, and adjusted all this Affair with his Host, whom he entirely
trusted, having largely obliged him, he went very melancholy out of Town,
toward his Servants, and who had attended him after their Sport was over, near
an hour longer than it was usual, and with them went on to the Shore, where
they found the Boat in readiness: For Dictyon had long left off his Fishing,
being impatient with the Desire of executing his Design, and with fear, that
something might disappoint it, or the sudden Death of his Wife, might make his
Master apprehend some foul play. But when he perceived he came, he was very
busy and officious in helping him on Board; and when he was seated, perceiving
his deep sadness (though he too well understood the true cause of it) he
pretended to wonder at, and became more inquisitive into it, then his Masters
humor could well dispense with; who, therefore gave him a Reprimand, which not
being accustomed to receive, spurred up his Revenge, though that needed no
provocation, yet dissembling his Rage, when the Servants were settled, he puts
off from the Shore, and gets into the Steerage of the Boat, to guide her,
whilst his two Men plied the Oars; they were no sooner come into the middle of
the Channel, but he slips out the Bolt, which held the frame of the Cabin
together, and immediately the Gentleman and his two Servants fell over the
Boat, and it being a dark night, were all three drowned. Dictyon would make his
Servants believe it was an accident; but they should all suffer Death for it,
if they were taken, and therefore told them, if they would fly with them, they
might preserve themselves. That they would go to Shore, and he would fetch what
Money, and what valuable things he had, and immediately go to Sea, and recover
some of the Islands possessed by the Sarazens, who were Enemies to the Greeks,
and very powerful at Sea, by whom they would be gladly received. This seeming
the best thing they could do, in the Condition they were, it was consented to;
and bringing the Boat to Shore, the Master and one of his Men went to his
House, and finding not his Wife, seemed to be angry, and to want the Keys of
some Boxes, and broke open what ever was locked in the House, and seizing on a
Purse of Gold, and some other good things, wherewith his Masters Liberality had
enriched his Wife, and loading his Servant with such Provisions as were
necessary, he goes out of doors toward the Boat. When he came to it, he found
not the Servant he left there; but having not leisure to wait for him (being
under apprehension of a Discovery) he hastily bestows his Carriage aboard, and
with the help of him that was with him, he put off to Sea. The vigor wherewith
they applied themselves to their Oars, carried them many Leagues, before the
Night fell; at which time the Moon being risen, had sufficiently favored their
purpose; but that diverse Symptoms of rough weather approaching, obliged them to
put in at the next convenient Creek; where bestowing themselves under shelter
of a hanging Rock, after they had struck a Light, they fell to the Provisions
they had brought from home, little suspecting the consequence of that Banquet.
For in the hurry of their Dispatch, the Servant (as by the just Judgment of
Heaven) had taken that Bottle, whereof his Masters Wife had drank so fatal a
Draught, which filling up and bringing aboard, proved share of their
Entertainment; the dire effects of which, after short repose, awakt them, to
sleep for ever: the Bodies, together with the Treasure in the Boat, proved an
Object of no less wonder than joy, to some neighboring Cottagers, who
descending to their usual Employments to the Seaside, soon after discovered
them. -- This Relation of the Captains, though listened unto with equal
Attention, was with various Sentiments reflected on by Nicias and Nicerotis; he
justifying the Proceedings of Dictyon, and applauding so nice a sense of
Honor, in a Person of such mean Degree, whilst she silently commiserated the
Misfortune of the Lovers. Her Indisposition, by reason of being unaccustomed to
Sea, was now so much increased, that for the rest of that day, and part of the
next, she kept within her Cabin. The Vessel was all the while followed by so
brisk a Gale, that in less time than could be proposed, they arrived where they
intended. Nicerotis consulting Prudence, and applying her self to her wonted
Subtlety, joins with Nicias, in Acknowledgments to the Captain of the Gally,
for his Conduct and Care, and dissembling a Joy, which she knew would please
her Lord, was beforehand with him, in giving the Welcome to Cydon. The Lord
Emathius being informed of their Arrival, immediately descends to the Port to
receive them, with such Attendance of Chariots and Company, as was suitable to
their Quality and Relation to him; so discharging the Captain well presented,
he conducts them to the City. The Place appointed for their Residence, was an
extraordinary Fabric, which in the original Design of it, contained not only
an Oratory and Court of Sacrifice for the Deity there in former times adored,
but also spacious Mansions for such Priests as were employed in those Rites.
Which ancient Seat of Idolatry and Superstition, together with the rest of the
same sort, had, since days of better Knowledge, been demolisht or altered, and
their rich appendant Possessions, and were given as Rewards to such Persons as
had merited of the Empire. This Temple, with the Revenues belonging to it, had
been conferred on the Ancestors of Amathius, for eminent Services by them
performed, who, according to their several Fancies, built it up in several
Ages; so that that though it wanted that regular neatness, which the modern
Builder so much affect; yet the stateliness of the Rooms, showing the large
Souls of the Lords of that Family, and the convenient disposition of the
Apartments, largely supplied that Defect. The Apartment appointed for
Nicerotis, was one of the last built parts of the Palace, and faced a large
Garden, of three hundred Cubits square, encompassed with a very high Wall; out
of her Antichamber, opened a folding Door, into the midst of a Terrace Walk,
of the length of one side of the Garden, paved with Black and White Marble;
from which was a Descent of six large Steps, of the same Materials into the
Walks below, which were laid with a gross sort of Gravel of various Colors, so
fast, so binding and so smooth, that it seems at first view, to resemble that
curious Mosaic Work that adorns the Pavement of the Quire, in the great
Cathedral of Sancta Sophia in Constantinople; between the Walks were
Grass-Plots. ^ [These Marks shows a great Breach in the Original, by the
Defacements of the Writing of more than a Page.] In the midst was a large Basin
of black Marble, about thirty Cubits in Compass, exquisitely polished,
supported by the Effigies at large, of eleven of the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac, all made of white Marble; the Twelfth, being the Fishes, was placed
within the little Sea, as in their proper Elements. In the middle was placed a
large Pedestal, which to the surface of the Water was a ragged piece of Marble,
as it was dug out of the Quarry, topp'd with a greenish colored Stone, cut
after the form of the Island of Crete, with all the Creeks, Harbors and
Rivers, and all the Hills and Mountains of it; with the little Figures of the
hundred Cities, for which that Island was once famous, cut in several colored
Stones, and inchased into it, in the several Distances and Positions, in which
the real ones were placed. In the midst was the Mountain Ida, out of which rose
several small Streams that filled those Channels, made to represent the Rivers,
and ran according to their proper Courses into the Sea; on the top of the
Mountain was placed the Statue of a Woman, of the purest Alabaster, holding in
her Arms the Figure of a Child, sucking at one Breast, whilst the other spouted
a Stream of Water into the Basin; about her Head, was a Chaplet of Ivy, very
natural, the Stone being artificially stained to the Color of the Leaf; she
was naked to the Waste, but from thence to the middle of her Thighs hung a
Goatskin, being the Dress of the Bacchanal, to whom the Poets feign Jupiter was
sent to be nursed; this was a piece of that admired Statuary Praxite^es, who
lived a thousand years before, and being found by Amathius his Father, in the
Ruins of the Temple, when he was clearing a Foundation, was for the Excellency
of the Workmanship, repaired and set up to view, though it had been formerly
the Idol of that Place, as may well be judged, being the Image of Jupiters
Nurse, giving suck to the young God, the Honor of whose fostering Antiquity,
has attributed to this Country. The Walls of the Garden were ^ In the midst of
the Wall, opposite to the Terrace, a large pair of Gates opened into a Garden
twice as spacious, wherein were planted all the choicest Fruits of Europe and
Asia; it was divided into four Squares by a cross close Walk, the South-end of
which opened into a delicate Grotto, designed for a Retreat from the raging
Heats of Summer; it was a Room of eight Sides, each side being six Cubits in
breadth, the Diameter of the whole ^ The North-end opened into a Banqueting
Room, at one side whereof, was a Door that gave passage into a private Street
of the Suburbs; the East and the cross Walk led to a Door that opened into a
fair Vineyard, in which were ^ Nicerotis was at first well pleased with these
pretty Accommodations; but that Satisfaction did not last long: her temper
inclined her more to the Delights of Conversation than to Melancholy, though
curious and artificial Solitudes, yet did she not forget to reflect upon the
Conveniences that these Places might upon occasion afford her. She had received
the Visits of the Relations of the Family, and of such other Persons of Quality
in that City, who were any way obliged to make them, and it was time she should
repay that Debt, and make Acquaintances in a Place, where she was no longer to
be a Stranger. Her first Visit was the Court of Basilucius, then Exurch or
Chief Governor of the Island, under the Emperor Isiaacius. He was a Person of
great Magnificence, and besides the Favor of his Master, which he enjoyed in a
great Proportion, he was Lord of a vast Patrimonial Estate, which enabled him
to keep one of the best Provincial Courts in the whole Empire: His own Family
was numerous; his Daughters were arrived to that Age, in which their Sex begins
to be sensible of their Privileges, and their Beauties gave them no
unreasonable Pretenses, to think they had the Prerogative of all others of the
Country, as well in right of their Perfections as Quality; his three Sons were
now all well accomplished, but the Eldest, Leontius, was a Person who had given
those Proofs of his Courage and Abilities to the World, that he was deservedly
reputed one of the bravest Gentlemen alive; his Successes in the Wars, and in
his Amors, were always glorious, and in both his Merits and his Fortune still
made it disputable which of them most promoted his Conquests. The Authority of
the Father, the Virtue and Prudence of the Mother, the Gallantry and Beauty of
the Children, drew together such a Concourse of the Nobility and Gentry, that
Lycias his Court had no small resemblance of the Emperors, and yet when
Nicerotis first appeared there, she presently became the Idol of one Sex, but
the Envy of the other: The Ladies, who could spy no fault in her Face, in her
Stature, or Mien, in her Wit, or Deportment, in a short time began to blame her
Conduct, the Gallants of the Court and Town made their Resort where she
frequented, she was desired of every one that had Quality enough, to pretend to
her Favor; Comedies and Balls were more frequently appointed then it was usual
in Cydon; and some of the Court-Wits, who would not allow themselves thought
enough to write Plays, made Prologues, to give

At every public Meeting, some one or other took the opportunity to pay her
some extraordinary of his Respect. Leontius had so many Advantages over all the
rest, that it is not to be wondered at, if his Addresses met the best Reception.
He visited her often; he omitted no occasion of seeing her, either in public
or private, and gave her such Evidences of his Passion, as could not but
convince her of it; he made Presents to Philenis, and by that means had her
whole Council in Pension; so that she could take no Resolutions, but what were
in his Favor, nor discover her Sentiments, but immediately he had notice of
them: For Philenis was the only Person she had entire confidence in, and for
whom she had nothing of reserve. One Morning, says Nicerotis to her, How
impossible is it to resist the Courtship of Leontius? Nicias, since his coming
to his own Country, having tempted me from mine, either despites me as a
Stranger, or has received some former commerce, or has abandoned himself to the
Debauch; I have little of his Company, and his Kindnesses are both rarer and
less agreeable than formerly. What reason is there I should reserve my self for
him only, that never gives himself to me, but when he knows not what else to do
with himself? None in the World, Madam, replied Philenis, no more then that you
should fast, when he does not come home to Dinner; if he neglects, you must
therefore neglect your self: If he has found out other ways of passing his time
to his Content, does it oblige you to spend your days in misery and Complaints?
Alas, Madam! Life is an uncertain thing, and at the best, those Minutes of it
that are designed by Fate for Happiness, are so few, that to let any of them
pass unimployed, is an incorrigible Error, and a loss that is but meanly
recompensed, by the Opinion one gains among those only that are past the
relishing of Pleasures. I did not think, says Nicerotis, so much reason could
be given for Sinning; I thought the most could be said for it, was that passion
might excuse Women in Love, as it does Men in Murder: But be it as it will, my
heart has betrayed me to Leontius, and I blush to think what his success will
be at the next assault. It was not long before the diligent Intelligencer sent
advice of this to Leontius. The hour of his Visit was assigned, and all things
so contrived, that he must needs be infinitely happy, if there were as much
felicity in fruition as Men fancy to themselves beforehand. However these two
Lovers were so well satisfied with one another, that they lived in an exact
Correspondence; no Jealousies, no Capricious, no little Peeks disturbed good
Humor, no unhappy Accidents put them out of their Measures; till Nicerotis,
weary of so easy delights, took a Freak in her head, and would needs appoint
her Gallant a Rendezvous abroad; she told him, she had by accident been at one
of the Gardens near the Town, where they sell their Fruit, and the choicest of
all sorts, and where was the prettiest Labyrinth for Lovers to lose themselves
in that could be imagined; she desired he would meet her there the next day, an
hour before Sun, without any Retinue, that they might not be known; he easily
agreed to any thing she proposed, and being a Frollick of her own, she was the
earliest up, she and her Woman put on the Dress of the sprucest of those sort
of Girls, that carry Fruit among Persons of Quality, at the Theaters and
public Pazades, and with their Baskets on their Arms, went privately out of
her Lodgings to the Place appointed; they knocked up the Gardiners, and demanded
to have entrance, and have such and such Fruits gathered; the Fellows went
about what they were directed, and one of them a lusty young Springle, casting
his Eye upon these new Customers, and observing a more than ordinary Beauty in
them, when he had gathered what he was bid, presented them their Baskets, and
Philenis looking for Money to pay them, pulled out a piece of Gold and offered
him; but the Youth laying hold of Nicerotis, said, he had rather be paid in
another Coin, and began rudely to kiss her; whilst they were struggling,
Leontius came in, but not thinking himself concerned, was walking in, when the
Lady called him to her Assistance; he knew the Voice, and turning about with
some disorder, advanced in have toward the Scuffle, which the Fellow
perceiving, left off his Rudeness and stepped aside, and she addressing her self
to him, said, Sir, I had like to have paid too dear for this Fruit, and it is
but just I should present it to my Rescuer. He thought he knew the Sound, but
the Disguise had so altered the Person, that looking on her as one of the
Condition she appeared in, he said, he had no mind to eat any so early, and was
turning away from her, when she laid hold of his Arm, and said; Sir, here is
somewhat you will have a mind to if you look upon it; this little Importunity,
with the Tone in which she spoke, and the Glance of her Eye opened his;
Nicerotis, says he, I did not think I should have had so dangerous a Rival, I
must chastise the Insolence of this Fellow; says she; I believe his fear of you
has already done that, and his Ignorance may excuse him from any other
Punishment; and besides, it is best for us he should be indempnified by that,
for we have no desire to be known here; she took him by the hand, and they
walked into the Labyrinth, Philenis following them at a distance, and after
some entertainment there, they returned, and went out of the Garden; he waited
on her to the Vineyard behind her Gardens, where, when she was entered, he went
of to the Place he appointed his Servants and Chariot to attend him; after he
parted from her, he began to reflect upon his Mornings Adventure, he could not
conceive her Design, to give her self and him that trouble to no end, but the
hazard of giving Scandal; he judged she had not been long enough in the
Country, to have used this way of Assignation to other Persons, that had not
his Opportunities: he was not at all satisfied with her, and concluded it a
lightness of mind, which he could not approve of. The young Gardener Cornelius,
who after his Fright was a little over, found the relish of the ravished Kisses
on his Lips, set himself to watch the two Women and this Gentleman; he followed
them at a distance, till he observed where the Women entered, and then returned,
with a thousand imaginations in his Noddle, that a long time after disquieted
him. Leontius continued his ordinary Visits, and the Ladies Charms quickly put
away the Disgust he had taken, and he was more in Love then ever; yet a while
after it happened, that being engaged in some Affair, that he could not free
himself from, he missed an appointment given him; Nicerotis spent that time
very unquietly, she began to be jealous, that Leontius his Passion might be
growing cool, or that he had some new Intrigue; she impeached Philenis, for so
often magnifying his Riches and good Qualities, she accused him of Infidelity,
and said, that a Man in his Circumstances, that was guilty of the least
neglect, was never to be pardoned, or at least, not till he had suffered
ten-fold in the same kind; she threatened him severely, and was going to pass
the dreadful Sentence of Indifferency against him; when she checked her self;
well, says she, it is folly to determine any thing of him, till I am truly
informed of all the Aggravations of his Crime; if the Expressions of my
Resentment be not proportioned to his Offense, he will think me easy to be
imposed on, and he will take a Liberty in a short time, to use me as a Wife,
which none must ever have a Privilege to do* But Nicias; I must know the
secret of this Absence, and I will be the Discoverer my self, for you are too
much his Friend, to be entirely relied on in the Inquiry. This Evening a new
Habit was brought home for the Page, which was ordered against the next
approaching Solemnity; do you send for it into your Chamber, on pretense, that
I have directed somewhat to be altered about it, and let that, with the other
Accoutrements of such an Officer, be provided ready in the Garden-house, in the
Morning, by the dawn of day; I will carry him a Visit, as from my self, and by
that Pretense, will learn among his Servants, how he spent this Night. The next
day very early, this was put in execution; the Lady was dressed in her Pages
Habit, left Philenis in the Garden-house to attend her Return, and goes to the
Palace of the Exarch, and coming to Leontius his Apartment, she went up into
his Antichamber very briskly, where two of the Officers of his Chamber were
attending half asleep; but being rouzed by the busling the young Gentleman
made, they beckned him to make less noise, which he taking no notice of,
advanced in the same manner to them, and desired to be admitted to their Lord,
with a Message he had to deliver from the Lady Nicerotis. The Officers seeing
this Rudeness, told him, they believed he had not been long in the Service of
any Person of Quality, or he would have understood better, how he ought to make
his Approaches toward them. They said, their Lord went late to Bed, and that
none should come in till he called; she was incensed at this Answer, so little
satisfactory to her, to the Point she had given her self so much trouble to be
resolved in. She pressed between them to the Door, and knocked hard, which made
the Gentlemen lay hold of her, to take her away by force, and turn her out of
the Palace; But she struggling with them, made such a stir, that the Lord
called to know what was the matter? and one going in, he angerly asked what
meant that noise, who was told the whole Rudeness of the Page; he ordered his
Admittance, and being willing to receive the Message privately, commanded his
Servant to stay without and shut the Door. The Struggling had raised a most
lovely Red in her Face, and so disordered her Hair, that was trust up under a
Peruke, that the long Trails of it falling down as she made her Bows, in
advancing to the Bedside; he needed no other Discovery, but raising himself in
his Bed, he reached out his Arm and pulled her to him, and embracing her, after
a thousand Kisses, told her, Madam, I confess the Crime you come to reproach me
with, and declare the commiting it, was it self a cruel Punishment, since it
prevented the happiness of seeing you last night. Those are no Punishments, my
Lord, says she, which we choose, and since you have chosen other Employments
for that little time you promised to set apart for me, I come to ease you of
the trouble of making any Excuses, and to resign back into your hands, all your
Obligations and Vows of Perseverance; it is better to bestow Liberty upon the
Prisoner that has broke his Chains, than to leave him the Glory of having been
his own Deliverer; you shall never have it to boast of, that you have forsaken
Nicerotis; she was proceeding to more bitterness, when he interrupted her with
a Sigh: Ah Madam! says he, you are too sudden, in passing your Judgment on me,
before you hear me. It was an unforeseen and unresistible Accident that kept me
from you, and when you hear it, you will confess that you ought not to be angry
with me, unless you will impute Misfortune as a Crime, and believe Punishments
were devised for the Unhappy, not for the Guilty. I was last night invited to a
Treat, by some of the Officers of my Army, I do not often engage in those
Entertainments, but to endear those brave men, who are ready to venture their
Lives at my Command, I sometimes spend an hour or two at the most, cheerfully
with them; the time appointed for this Meeting, and the ordinary measure of my
Stay with them, agreed so well with my Appointment with you, that I could not
refuse them; but as we were ready to break up, your Lord came in upon us,
either wanting other Company, or being in quest of some of ours. We were all
very forward to pay him those Respects that are due to his Quality, and to the
Reputation he justly holds among Soldiers, and a Glass or two going round, had
so improved the Humor, he had put himself into some other place, that he would
take upon him to give Law to us all, which I would not have allowed to any
body, not so nearly related to you; he pressed so upon us, that without being
rude to him, we could not break up, till we all were become as unruly as he,
and I believe it is not two hours since we parted. This says she (kissing him,
rather to try if his Zeal justified his Words, than out of kindness at that
time) shall serve for once; but for the future, when any thing is preferrible
by you to my Company, I shall believe you begin not to value it. Madam, says
he, I refer my self to my future Services, which shall sufficiently clear me of
all Suspicion; upon those terms, I leave you to your Rest, says she, which I
perceive is now more necessary for you, than any further Justifications, which
I refer to our Meeting this Evening: he would have kept her, but she sprang
from the Bedside, and he called his Servants, and commanded the discreetest of
them, to wait on that young Gentleman out of the Palace, but first, that they
should beg her Pardon for their Incivility to her, and that from thenceforth
they should not at any time refuse admittance to any that came from Nicerotis,
whatever Orders they had given them in the general. She departed pretty well
satisfied, and returned to the Garden-house where Philaenis attended her, and
the Lord composed himself to rest as soon as he could, for the Reflections he
could not avoid to make upon this Adventure; about three hours after, when he
was rising, Polyphon, one of those Commanders who had been with him over night,
came to visit him, and to enquire how he did, after that unusual Skirmish he
had been engaged in. He told him, he suffered deeply for that Excess, and was
resolved not to allow himself the like Liberty again for any Respect; Polyphon
told him, it was for want of use, and he would find it to agree with him after
a little Practice; I had rather, said Leontius, you and the rest of my Friends
would find it as inconvenient as I do, for I look upon Drinking, to be a Vice
as unbecoming Soldiers as any Profession whatsoever. My Lord, says he,
merrily, that is a Doctrine will hardly obtain among us, whilst we are out of
Action; in time of War it is enough to be Sober; in Peace, we have nothing else
to do but drink and make Love. Does your Lordship hear nothing of the Emperors
Designs this Spring? I heard, said Leontius, some Galleys of the Sarazens, have
contrary to the late Peace, made a Descent on the Coast of Cilici^, and that
they are preparing to set out a great Fleet to Sea; but how the Emperor resents
it, we do not yet understand. Within a few days after, Leontius received Orders
to repair to Court, to take the Command of a Squadron of the Fleet, that was
preparing to punish the Insolences of those Barbarians, and some days
afterward, he told Polyphon, in the Discourse of his Preparations for his
Voyage, that he had been engaged in an Affair of Love, that would have been
troublesome to him upon this occasion, if his Passion had not been a little
rebated, by some indiscretions of the Person he was engaged with. But, says he,
I leave amongst you, one of the most beautiful Persons in the World, and if she
were not somewhat so importune, the most agreeable. My Lord, says Polyphon, you
need not name her, for your Amor has not been as great a Secrecy as you
imagined, and if you abandon your Interests in her, every one may, without
disobliging you, pretend to his own Advantages. -- I am not so ill natured,
says Leontius, to envy my Friends their good Fortune, nor so great a Fool, to
expect to confine a Humor, that I know hates all Constraint. And since I can
make her no Assurances of my Return, it is just I should leave her to her own
Liberty. This was a sufficient Evidence of an Indifferency, that not long
before, all the World could not have convinced him, he should ever be guilty
of. The News of the Town, carried the Intimation of his being commanded to
Court, before he himself brought it to Nicerotis; it put her into a thousand
Troubles, which she did not long defer to let him know, for his Affairs having
kept him one day from waiting on her, the next Morning he received this Billet
from her. You need not join Unkindness with the necessity of your leaving me,
the one or the other has Force enough to kill Nicerotis. This passionate
Reprehension of his Neglect, made him hasten to wait on her, to make the best
Excuses ^

Says Nicias to Glaneus, I have been told of the Liberty Polyphon has taken, in
a certain Company, to speak of some Designs he has upon my Wife, and with some
dark Reflections upon the Departure of Leontius; I am not of a Spirit so weak,
as to be subject to Jealousies; or if I were, could so mean a Person be a
reasonable Cause of it? yet I think his Impertinence ought not to go
unchastised, and I am resolved to take the first occasion that I can, to fix a
Quarrel upon him; but to avoid the being talked of, as a jealous Coxcomb, I
must have you to begin it, and I will come in as a Second. Glaneus was a Person
the forwardest in the World, in Actions of that kind; he had passed over many
Encounters and Duels, with such success, as made him very haughty, and desirous
of getting Honor that way, and on the other side, had warned those that kept
him Company, to be wary in their Conversation, not to give him a Pretense, so
that he had lived a long time quiet, and began to obtain the name of a sociable
and well conditioned Gentleman; but being put in mind by his Friend, of the way
he had formerly so prided himself, he presently took Fire, and was all of a
Flame, and leaving Nicias, told him, he would give him an Account of his Man,
before the next Morning; the rest of the day, he spent in finding out Polyphon,
who at last he found engaged in Company of Ladies; he could hardly refrain from
making the Quarrel there, but he judged that fitter to be done by one that had
not a mind to fight, then such a one whose greatest concern it was not to be
prevented; yet hardly dissembling his Design, in a huffing away, he asked him
where they might meet in the Evening? and being told he would be in such a
Company at a Tavern, he named to him (where they had appointed to play off some
pieces of Gold) after some high flown Complements, passed upon the Ladies,
Glaneus took his leave, and carried his Intelligence to Nicias, at the Time and
Place named, they found the Company met together, and pretty well advanced in
Play; Polyphon had lost, and began to be uneasy (as Gamesters for the most
part are, when they have had an ill Run, and accusing Fortune on the Dice, and
Glaneus took the Occasion that he found favorable enough for his Design, and
in a rough way of Rallery, excused Fortune, and cast the blame of his Losses
upon his Folly, and want of Judgment, and pulling out a handful of Gold, set it
him to throw at, which, as he prepared to do, Glaneus took up his Gold, and put
it in his Pocket, and accompanied this Action with some disrepective Gestures;
at which, Polyphon being justly provokt, told him, he was not a Person to be so
used, and that he must lay down his Money, and after he had tried his Fortune
at that, he must give him satisfaction for the Affront: Glaneus scornfully told
him, he was not disposed to Play^ at that time, but for what other Satisfaction
he expected, he might demand and have it; the other was laying hand on his
Sword, when Aristander stepped to him and held him; whilst Gephyrius did the like
to Glaneus, intending to pacify them; But Nicias, whose Design was to blow the
Coal, said, things could not arrive to that height among men of Honor, but
they must go further; when Satirius, a Person not inferior to him in Quality,
a Friend to Polyphon, and as prompt as any of them in the like Adventures,
said, he was of his mind, and taking him by the Hand, told him, he should be
concerned if he pleased, which the others hearing, quitted one another, and
presently made a Parley to meet the next Morning on Horseback, in a Valley,
about a Mile distant from the City; having agreed this, to the end they might
appear pacified, and take off the Suspicions of the Servants of the House, they
drank a Glass or two of Wine to each other, and so parted every one to his own
Lodgings, to give Order for their preparation against the next day; by the Dawn
they were all mounted, pretending severally, that they were to meet some
Country Gentlemen, who had given them notice over night, they had harbored (^)
a wild Boar in a Wood, about four mile off the Town (another way then that
which they had appointed) and that they would be there with their Dogs, and
Nets by break of day; they took each of them a Footman with his Hunting Spear,
and going out several ways, when they came to the foot of a Hill, beyond which
was the Place they were to meet at, they placed their Servants, with charge,
they should not stir ground till they were called; then they advanced over the
Hill, without other Arms then a Horse-mans Sword and a Javelin (the Weapons in
that time, only in use in single Combats, fought on Horseback) they were all
Persons of great Courage, and every one striving to be the earliest, they did
not stay long one for another. When they were all come, after a few words
importing their desire, that they might lose no time in the Dispatch of the
Business they were met about, they every one turned their Horses, and galloping
a little distance, wheeled about, and then drawing their Swords, and poising
their Javelins, they almost at one instance delivered them; Aristander, to his
share it fell to fight; Gephyrius received his Enemies Javelin in his
Bridle-Arm, which piercing the fleshy part of it, and passing between the Skin
of his Side, and the Ribs, seemed to have gone through his Body, whilst his
Javelin lighted on the Thigh of Gephyrius, and piercing it and the Skirts of
the Saddle, entered into the Horses side, which so gald him, that he began to
plunge; when Aristander coming up in his Career, with his Sword elevated, he
had had a great advantage over his Adversary, had not the unruliness of the
Horse broke all his Girts, and thrown the Rider with the Saddle to the Ground.
Aristander, at this success, was about to have alighted, either to have
succored his Adversary, if he were dangerously wounded, or to have made an end
of the Fight on Foot; when looking about, to see what was the Success of the
rest of the Parties, he saw Nicias and Satirius engaged very close with their
Swords, dealing their Strokes with great fury and nimbleness; when Satirius by
the agility of a well dressed Numidian, on which he was mounted, had gained the
Crooper of Nicias: Aristander spying his Friends danger, flew like lightning to
his Succor, and presenting his Point to Satirius, who stepping short, put
himself in his defense against this New-comer, gave Nicias the opportunity to
turn again upon his Enemy; they were then two to one, but were too generous to
take the Advantage, yet Satirius pressed them hard, they only defending
themselves, told him, it was fit the Combat should cease, there was enough done
to vindicate their Honors, and they did not meet there to butcher one another,
but to try their Courage; in this while Gephirius, who had drawn the Javelin
out of his Thigh, yet not sensible of the loss of Blood, nor wholly disabled by
his Wound, came to take part with Satirius, and began to attack his first man,
who starting a little off, alighted from his Horse, to put himself in equal
condition with his Adversary, and as he advanced toward him, Glaneus came
galloping between them, and calling aloud to Nicias, and Satirius, desired them
to stop their Fury, for Polyphon was fallen dead from his Horse, and they were
now the greater number, and perhaps there was Blood enough spilt already. At
the news of Polyphons Fall, they all made a little pause, and Satirius looking
about, spyed a Party of about twenty Horse, galloping over the Hill. It is not
your being three to two, says he, should have prevailed with me, to have
quitted you so easily, but that I see more Company coming in to take part with
us, than you or I wish. See where a Party comes, pointing that way no doubt, by
the Command of the Exarch, to seize us; let us mount Gephirius on Polyphons
Horse, and ride away to the Town, to have our Wounds dressed, and send the
Servants to bring off the Body of Polyphon. This being necessary Counsel, and
no time of Debate left them, how more ceremoniously they should treat the dead
Body they put in execution, and away they gallopt a full Carreer, to the Place
where the Servants were placed, and sent Gephirius and Polyphons two Men, to
bring off the Horse and Body of the Slain; every one hasted to his own
Lodgings, and the Condition they were in, required it, they had all of them
lost a great deal of blood, and some were dangerously wounded; Nicias had
several Wounds, but one especially, between two of the Ribs of his left side,
that though it did not seem at first to be the most considerable, yet in
effect, afterward it proved of very ill consequence to him. Aristander, by the
great effusion of Bl^od, and the festering of his Wound, was cast into a
Fever, which kept him a long time fixed to his Bed, and put him in a
Condition, that made his Friends fear he would hardly rise out of it. Nicias
was no sooner dressed, but he began to think of the seasonable assistance
Aristander had brought him, when Satirius was at the point to have dispatched
him, and considering he had been the cause of this Quarrel, in which Aristander
had no concern, but from his accidental being in the Company, when it was
begun, and considering their old Friendship, which had grown up from their
Childhood, and his Quality, which was very eminent, he immediately sent a
Gentleman to visit him, and to enquire of his Condition: Aristanders Wounds
were dressed, but his loss of Blood had so weakened him, that it was directed by
his Physicians, that none should be suffered to come at him, that might give
him occasion of spending any of those few Spirits that were left him, so that
the Gentleman was fain to return with such Errand as the Chyrurgions would give
him. The next morning Nicias was very inquisitive of his Friends Condition, and
not being satisfied with the Account that was given him, he called for his
Lady, and told her how much she was obliged to his Valor, that had seconded
him with so much Gallantry, when his Enemy had the advantage of him, and
enjoined her that day to make him a Visit, and to have the same concern for
Aristanders Recovery, that she had of his: she discharged herself of this
Commission very obligingly, and the first time she went to see him, said so
many endearing things to him, and so wittily expressed her Resentment, and the
Opinion she had of his Courage, that he began to think that Blood was not ill
spent, that had purchased him the Acknowledgments of one of the greatest
Beauties of the Age. His Wounds were long in healing, and he was longer before
he recovered strength enough to go abroad, and perhaps he kept his Chamber
longer then he needed, because he would not lose the satisfaction of
entertaining her every day for an hour while he did so, and when he was well,
he found himself wounded in a more sensible part than his Enemies Sword had
reached unto. But Nicerotis after a while, thought she lost too much time in
this desolate State she was in: during the weakness of her Lord, she was
obliged by the Decencies and Rules of a Conjugal State, to pass the whole days
in his Chamber, to receive all her Visits there, and could have no
Conversation, but what he or the old Lady Sophonia his Mother, or some of his
Relations were privy to, and the only Visits she was permitted to make, being
to Aristander, who was not in a Condition to make those warm Addresses that
were necessary to engage a Person of her humor. She resolved to take her
satisfaction in any manner she could; she had entertained a little before the
Combat, a sprightly young Fellow, in quality of a Footman, who from the time of
being entertained in her Service, had expressed all the diligence and
observance that was possible; he was of a middle Stature, well set, active of
Body, and of a ruddy Complexion, and when she began to observe him, she soon
perceived that he used to look on her often, with more concern, than Servants
of that sort have audacity to do, on Persons of her Rank; she began to think
she had seen his Face somewhere before he came into her Family, and this
inflamed her Desires, and she began to fancy he might be some Person of better
Condition then he appeared, who, overcome by his Passion for her, had in that
Disguise, sought to be near her Person. Whilst she flattered herself with this
Imagination, she began to find an Inclination for him, and judging the
Opportunity favorable, to show Pity, as well as to gratify her own Appetite;
One night, as he was called to take the Lights, to carry them before her to her
own Apartment, from her Lords, she took occasion to send away her other
Attendants, in some Employments she found for them; when he had set down the
Candles, says she with a pleasant Countenance, and with a Look that might
encourage the most timorous Lover; Cornelius, I cannot put it out of my
thoughts, that I have seen you somewhere, before you came into my service; pray
tell me, if I did, on what occasion it was? the young man surprised, between
Joy and Fear, at that unexpected Question, immediately falling on his Knees,
said; Madam, you have seen me, but if I tell you the occasion, perhaps you will
turn me out of your Service, and then I am undone for ever; I am sure it will
cost me my little Wits, if not my Life; for in the Condition I am now, I know
not what I do, when I am out of your sight, and am once a day, in the mind to
hang my self, but when I think I shall never see you afterward, I cannot find
in my heart to do it. This foolish way of expressing himself, made her lose the
Opinion she had conceived of his Quality but increased her Curiosity, to know
what he was, and what he meant, and then looking sternly on him, she said, I
must know what and from whence you are, or else I shall certainly turn you away
to morrow; she heard her Women coming, and therefore commanded him to rise, and
resolve to satisfy her the next Morning, when she should send for him, and so
dismissed him, to hasten Philaenis to her, who met her coming into the Chamber as
he went out. The next Morning, Nicerotis, who, though she had sometime after
she went to bed, ruminated on the Answer Cornelius mader her, and the manner of
his expressing himself, could not unriddle the meaning of it; as soon as she
was up, sent for him, and dismissing her ^ttendants, till she should send for
them, said to him, you must now give me a true ^ccount of what I demanded of
you last ^^ght, or I shall immediately cause you to b^ dismissed, with
Directions, that if afterw^rds you are seen about my House, you shall be driven
away with Cudgels. Madam, ^ays he, falling on his Knees, if you will pa^don me
the Fault you make me confess, I will tell you all the Truth. I do pardon y^^,
says she, whatever it be, on condition y^u hide nothing from me, and if any
^ther be concerned with you, you discove^ them likewise. Madam, says he, the
Off^ce is all my own, nor does any one in the World, but your Ladyship and
Philaenis know any thing of it. About two months since I was a Servant to
Melon, that keeps the great Gardens near the old Labyrinth, where attending one
morning early, to deliver out Fruits to the Hucksters, who came to buy, there
came into the Garden two young Women, dressed in the Habits of those
Fruit-sellers, that go about among Persons of Quality, but who were much better
dressed, and a thousand times handsomer, than any that ever I saw there before on
that business; it was my Fortu^e to attend them, and to gather what they called
for; whilst I was at work, they asked m^ so many pretty Questions, and then
talked to one another about something I did not understand, but which I
perceived made them very merry, that I could not but take ^otice of them,
especially of one who seeme^ to be the better Woman, on whom I had no sooner
fixed my Eye, but I found someth^ng stick to my heart; when I had delivered t^em
the Fruit, I could not forbear to venture to kiss the Person I liked so well,
though she refu^d me with a great deal of anger. Whilst we ^ere struggling, a
Gentleman came toward us, ^hreatning me (...) for my Rudeness; I withdr^w
hastily, to decline hi^ fury, and getting b^^ind a Hedge, I observed him to join
the t^o Women, and then separating her that I had engaged with, they walked
into a Wilderness, I durst not go too near, to discover what they did, and to
overhear what they said; for besides that, I was really afraid of the
Gentleman, the other Woman kept that distance from them, that no body could
come near enough to observe them, without being first discried. I watched
notwithstanding till they went out of the Garden, and at a distance followed
till I saw the Gentleman put the two Women into your Ladyships Vineyard. All
the day-after, and for several others, I could do nothing but think of those
two Women, and cast about, how I might know who they were; I concluded they
were some of the Maids of your Family, who appointed to meet this Gentleman,
yet I could not rest, till I saw them again; I took all occasions to be about
your house, to observe all that went in and out, to seek pretenses to come to
the Laundry and other Offices of your Family, but could not set eye on the
Person I looked for, till one day thus, as I was standing in the Court, your
Ladyship came out to take Coach, talking pleasantly with Madam Philaenis, by
the sound of your Voice and the air of your Face, I was instantly convinced
that you were the Lady I had been so rude to, which struck such a Terror into
me, that as soon as your Chariot was gone, and I could not see it any longer, I
came home to my Master, fearing that if you had taken notice of me, I should
have been punished for my sawciness, as I deserved; but I found it was in vain
to keep from you, my mind was so employed in the thoughts of what I had done,
and to whom, that I could not follow my work as I was used to do, many Rebukes
and some Blows I received from my Master, and in five days, was turned out of
my Service, as being become Fool or Madman. It was then much worse with me, and
I had not wherewithal to maintain my self, and found no inclination to go to
labor, but hanging about this House, not being able to be from it, nor knowing
why I staid here, I happened among your Ladyships Footmen, who were making a
Running Match between two of them that disputed which had the best heel; when
they ran, I started with them, and being used to constant labor, and so better
winded, I beat them both, by which I gained credit amongst them, that in few
days I was offered your Ladyships Livery; since then, your Ladyship knows the
diligence I have used in my Waiting. Well, says Nicerotis, I have promised you
my Pardon, and I must keep my Word; but take care you carry your self so, that
no one in the World may perceive by your Carriage or Language that you Love, or
at least who it is you Love; with that she bid him call her Women, and that
Evening told Philaenis, she heard the Night before, a Noise at the Door of the
Antichamber toward the Terrace; she did not know what it meant, and therefore
would have her order Cornelius to bring his Bed into that Room after she was
abed, and lie there. She made her at that time no further Privy to her Design,
nor did Philaenis make any Reflection upon it, but pursued her Direction that
night, after all were gone to their rest, and Nicerotis observed by the silence
of the Night, that her Man was settled in his Bed; she called with a loud Voice,
Cornelius, Cornelius, at which he rising, opened the Door of his Ladies
Chamber, and going to the Bedside, Madam, said he, did you call? I says she,
in some disorder; did you hear no Noise? none says he, but your call. I called
you, says she, because I heard some noise at the Terrace Door; I Will go and see,
says he, if any one be there, no, says she, perhaps it be some Spirits that are
about, then I Will hide my self in my Bed, says he, for I am afraid of Spirits of
all things in the World; than you will leave me to be frighted; you must hide your
self here, says she: with that, in a great Fright, and not knowing what he did,
he got ^ Two or three days after, Cornelius being overjoyed, could not hold, he
must needs give vent to his thoughts, which were too full of his undeserved
happiness, to be contemned in the breast of a wiser Man he took one of his
Fellows aside, with whom he had most familiarity, and told him how good an
Office he was preferred to, in being placed to keep the Spirits from his Lady
in the night, now she lay alone. I do not envy you that Imployme^t, says
Pardelis, I had rather sleep at night, and not dream of the Devil; besides, are
you not afraid of Spirits? I was extremely, when she told me first what I was
to do, and was running away to hide my self under my Bed-Cloaths, says
Cornelius, but she called me Fool, and told me, she would keep the Spirits from
me then, and bid me hide my self in her Bed-Cloaths; Pardelis, who designed a
further Explication, was called away, and could discover no further at that
time; but he had learnt enough, and being one that was placed in the Family by
Zenisces, a malicious Lord, who having something of Confidence with Leontius,
and thereby a Knowledge of Nicerotis her temper, had made some unsuccesful
Addresses, and therefore was resolved to discover her Intrigues, which he was
assured she could not live without. His Spy, soon gave him an Account of this
Passage, and his Curiosity pressed him to pry farther into the Affair. He
ordered Pardelis to get his Lord or Ladies Master-Key, that opened all the
Locks of the House and Gardens, and to bring it to him as soon as possibly he
could, and it was not difficult for him to do so: For during Nicias his
Sickness, his Key had lain on his twilight, unminded of any, which he conveyed
the next day to Zenisces; the next night he entered the Garden, and came to the
Terrace, where he observed Cornelius bringing in his Bed and laying down, and
soon after, rising in his Shirt, and going into his Ladies Chamber; after a
very little pause, he softly opens the Terrace Door, and comes softly into the
Chamber to the Bedside, and opening a Dark-Lanthorn which he had in one hand,
with the other opens the Curtains, and views the kind Couple in their Embraces;
he made a terrible roaring Noise, the Lady shriekt, and the Footman frighted at
the Noise and flash of the Light, as if the Devil were come to take him in the
Fact, swounded away; Zenisces retired immediately, and locking the Door after
him, went off, maliciously laughing to himself at the prank he had played, and
studying how to improve it, to be revenged for the Neglects and Slights he had
received. The noise wakned Philenis, whose Chamber was next her Ladies; she ran
in to see what was the Matter, and there found her in her Smock, risen out of
her Bed, and pulling the Footman by the Nose, to bring him to Life. O Madam!
says she, what is the Matter? Ask me no Questions, says she, but help to pull
this Fellow away, and carry him to his Bed, the House will be all up presently,
and I shall be undone; they pulled him out by the Hair and the Nose, the
violence and falling on the Ground, brought him to himself, and they thrust him
out into his own Bed, and bid him lie still, as if he were yet in a Swound,
what ever happened. By this time several of the Family were raised, and some
running where the Noise was heard (for the Lady and Philenis both called out as
loud as they could) found them in great disorder, complaining of a strange
Apparition, which had put them into a terrible Fright; they went to pull up
Cornelius, but he holding the Clothes fast about him, cried, good Devil let me
alone, do not take me, take my Lady. Which she hearing, and fearing the Fool
might make some Confession, bid the Company withdraw, and that Philaenis should
come to Bed to her; she bid them see if the Terrace Doors were locked, and make
no more noise in the House. Cornelius hearing these Orders, got up, dressed
himself, and went away to his Fellows Lodgings, and Pardelis set up the rest of
the night to secure the frighted Lady, who knew the supposed Devil too well, to
be afraid of him; the next morning, the House was all in an Uproar; the old
Lady Sophonia was much scandalized, at her Daughters appointing the Footman to
lie in her Antichamber and suspected there was some unhandsome Prank played,
that would be discovered, to the Dishonor of her Family. She spoke to
Nicerotis, with some severe Reflections upon her Conduct, which coming from a
Mother-in-Law, galled so cruelly, that afterward she could not endure the
gentlest Advice from her. All that were of any Discretion, endeavou^ed to
conceal this from Nicias; but in (...) ^ew days there wanted not some
impertine^^ Visiter, that would needs be satisfied by him, of the truth of this
Apparition, that was so much talked of about the Town, to have frighted his
Lady: this bred a new Disturbance, and upon his enquiry, the Story being told
him, as it seemed to them who knew well the whole truth (which few did) he fell
into an extravagant passion, being a man of a Choleric temper, and one that
had known the World enough, and he had broken out into some Outrages, but that
his Ladies Quality, and the Consideration of her Relations, cooled him into
thoughts more becoming his Condition; he immediately directed that Cornelius
should be discharged the Family, and commanded privately to withdraw himself
out of the City, with Threats, that if he appeared there, he would give order
to have him sold for a Slave to the Sarazens; this quieted the Family; but
Zenisces had made so many Confidents of this Adventure of his, in the Disguise
of a Spirit, though to most of them, he related it under feigned Names, that
some Poetaster among them, made a Ballad of it, which was sung up and down the
Streets, by all the Boys of the Town.

Though Phillis be Coy, she is not ^ last,
She Is demure all day, yet a^ ^ight,
If she has not a Man by the W^st,
She Is in a pitiful Fright.
Her Footman she called to her Bed,
To keep the foul Devil away;
But he swore it should not be said,
He tempted her to such foul Play.
He appeared with terrible Look,
And told her she was to blame,
Thus to slight all the Care he took,
To breed her for Nobler Game.
By this time Aristander was so recovered, that he went abroad; his first
Visits were to his Friend Nicias.

This Adventure of Nicerotis (as we before hinted) was only a Fiction, invented
by the witty Malice of a certain Person, that had proved unsuccessful in
attempting that Kindness from her, whereof he thought some others were possessed.
And indeed the Story was contrived with so much Art and Humor, that it was
presently taken up by the Poetaster of the Times; but by reason that the first
inventer of the Tale, reported it under borrowed Names, there was none of them
that knew upon what Person to fasten, so that her own Friends and Relations
never suspected her to be concerned in it. One of these Essays being of a
particular Humor from all the rest, and in Vindication of the Lady, as if the
Passages had been really true, we have thought fit to insert it. The Lines were
these.

In vain you little Scriblers of the Times,
Conspire to blast the Fair with envious Rhimes;
In vain your feeble Satyr is applied,
For Wit is always found on Beauties side.
Let (Phillis) none thy Conduct disapprove,
What Is Birth or Title in Affairs of Love:
Where-ere this Monarch lets his Favor fall,
It straight gives Honor and ennobles all.
When Sovereign Beauty pleases to be kind,
It makes the Merit which it does not find:
Without distinction, fragrant Showers distill,
The Sun salutes the Valley with the Hill.
Bestows on all his Light and genial Flame;
Why should not brighter Beauty do the same?
Then Phillis, take your just Prerogative,
To Slaves and Princes, equal Favors give;
While none shall dare to call your Conduct light,
Such Wit and Beauty must be in the Right.
This Apology was looked upon as tolerable enough, and the severest Critics
could not but allow some, to so generous an Undertaker.

In the mean while Nicias was so well recovered of his Wounds, that he had been
abroad, and more than once made Visits to his Friend Aristander. The Intimacy
between them was so great, that their being together, though never so
frequently, could seem no wonder; yet Nicias, in his latter Conferences,
expressed more Importunacy of Affection, than had been observed by Aristander in
his former Friendship. Some weighty Concern seemed to be working in his
thoughts, which he appeared desirous to have communicated to his Friend, and
thought fitting to usher in that Trust he meant to repose in him, with new and
more than common Endearments. Aristander however was yet in the dark, as to the
particular, and Nicias concluded within himself, that the properest Advance,
would be by first breaking his Design to Nicerotis; to whom, in private, with
an unusual Zeal, he continually extolls the Merits of his Friend Aristander.
She was for some time at a loss, concerning his Intention herein, not thinking
it possible that a Person of his Disposition, so nice in his Honor, and
sensible of his Ladies extraordinary Beauty, could ever in the least solicit
her, to confer the enjoyment of such Sweets on any but himself. She wanted not
various Reflections hereupon, and that he hereby made but an Essay of her
Virtue, yet the Importunity with which he pressed her, convinced her at last that
he was in earnest. Aristander was not wanting in Accomplishments, that might
charm a Lady of more reservedness than Nicerotis. Yet this Sollici^ation coming
from her Husband, provokt her to extreme Rage, whatever her own Inclination
might have been; yet this Entreaty seeming to express in him less esteem of the
Beauty he enjoyed, than it deserved, made his demand most displeasing to her;
insomuch that out of Revenge of his Contempt (as she judged it) and the
easieness of his Temper, as Love was no hard Task to her, she really admits a
Passion for Aristander. In order to this Affair, she contracts an intimate
Acquaintance with his Wife Eubea, a Lady of such Sincerity and Innocence in her
self, and so free from Censure of others, with many more such good
Dispositions, as every way qualified her for a Friend.

One Afternoon, in the freedom of Discourse, amongst other Arguments, they
spent some Talk on the Nature and Effects of Love; which of all Passions, had
this Quality particular to it self, that it was of no less difficulty to create
it where it was not, than to extinguish it where it had once taken fire.
Several Tragical Instances of the former were repeated by Eubea; in the
Conclusion whereof, Nicerotis bursting forth into Tears, cries out, Let the
Misfortunes of Antiquity sleep in silence; our own Age abounds too much with
sad Examples of this nature, and amongst them all none more wretched than
Nicerotis. I know not (said she) whether the Privation of Happiness, ought
really to be accounted misery, but what shall we say, when the Disappointment
of that is attended with the most insufferable and incurable Evils? such, my
Eubea, is the state of disappointed Love; where the Unhappy are not only
deprived of that Paradise which was presented to their Imagination, and left to
their primitive freedom, but with the utmost severity of fortune, condemned to
loathed Embraces. It is not enough for the rendering of a Conjugal State happy,
that the Person to whom we give our Vows, has all the Endowments of Art and
Nature to make him amiable, unless our Breasts are disengaged from any other
Passion, for that will be sure to maintain the Fort against the bravest
Assailants, and in spite of all Attempts that our Prudence can make, to
suppress the Remembrance of it, will often return upon us, to the Disturbance
of our Quiet.

It cannot be denied, that the Birth and Education, the many natural and
acquired Excellencies of the Lord Nicias, were such, as would have blessed any
Breast but mine, and that I perhaps was the only person, whom so accomplished a
Man could have made unhappy. Take my Eubea, this Confession, for the greatest
Instance of Friendship to your self, as it is the Argument of greatest sorrow
to me. Nicias, though destined for my Husband, came yet too late for a Lover.
My Heart had been before, without the least reserve, disposed off to young
Philanthus, nor was my Conquest over his, less entire. It was the first time
that either of us had been sensible of Love; and as first Desires are generally
most violent, I am confident that no Transports ever equaled ours. Besides the
Advantages of his Education, and the singular Charms of his Person, which sat
upon him without the least Affectation, such was the agreeableness of his
Conversation, and every way so suited to my Inclination, that I could not
persuade my self, but that we were born for each others happiness. It is
impossible to express the Satisfaction we took in each others Company; and
though our Opportunities of meeting were frequent, yet every parting was with
such regret, that we even envied our selves those delightful Minutes, we were
before so impatient to be possessed of. Nothing was now wanting to complete our
Joy, but the Consent of our Friends, which we had no reason to despair of; for
beside the Equality of our Fortune, it had been an eternal Tie of the Amity
that had long been between the two Families. And indeed the Prudence, as well
as the Kindness of our Parents was herein exerted, in that they concealed as
much as they could, their designing a Match between us, to make it seem as much
as could be, the effect of our own Choice and free Inclination, which was
likely to have made it much more easy to us, than if it had seemed of their
imposing. Philanthus was now taking resolution to acquaint his Parents with his
Passion, when the safety of the Public was threatened, by a most sudden and
unexpected Disturbance from the Sarazens, who came with all their Naval Force
to surprise us in our Security, as depending upon the late Peace that was
solemnly concluded on between us. Philanthus was now of those years, in which
several of his Ancestors had signalized their Courage; amongst whom, none was
ever absent from the Service of his Country in any public Action; nor could he
be prevailed with, to degenerate from their Example on this occasion. To which,
notwithstanding all the Cautions that a tender Mistress could repeat to a
Lover, whom Youth and Ambition might betray to utmost danger, I parted from him
with all the Violence of a Prophetic Sorrow, while he was possessed with no less
confidence of Success. Our Residence was on the Borders of the Sea, and the
Engagement of the Fleets not many Leagues from the Coast. The Dispute continued
for almost three days, two whereof were consumed by me, in watching from the
Clifts, where he and I had been wont to view the Sea, and enjoy the Calmness of
the Ev'nings. On the third Morning, I could perceive the Fleets make further
and further off to Sea, by which I knew our Ships had the Sarazens upon the
Chase. This was the first time I could endure to withdraw my Eyes from them,
when casting them down to the Foot of the Rock, I was saluted with the most
lamentable Object that ever wretched Maid beheld; the Body of my Lover brought
in a Boat to the Shore. Think my Eubea, if possible, what Agonies that
Spectacle must have struck me with, and what Effects it was likely to produce.
Spare, spare me the Remembrance of those sorrowful Hours that ensued, and the
mournful Reflections of my Despair, upon the happy Minutes we had passed
together; the thousand endearing Words with which he used to charm my Soul into
his Breast; which now, all forsaken and disconsolate, I in vain repeated to the
Rocks and Shades, where we were wont to converse. It was no wonder, if now I
grew indifferent, which way I was disposed on for the future, and unconcerned,
to whose share this little Beauty fell, when Philanthus was cut off from
possessing it. It was at this time, that Nicias made his Application, and pressed
for Marriage with me, which I submitted to, being tired with the Importunity of
my Parents, who presumed it the best expedient that could be, to bring
forgetfulness of what had happened. I am confident, that Nicias, his Passion
for me, was for a long time what he pretended, and accordingly I applied my
self to make him all possible Returns of Duty, which even the Eyes of Jealousy
and Envy could never distinguish from the sincerity of Affection, which in time
became indeed advanced to that degree of Kindness, that few Wives are possessed
with, for the Husbands of their own choosing. It was at this unseasonable time
that Nicias began to take a Surfeit of his Happiness, when indeed, I ought to
have been more dear to him than ever; but such is the Choice or Fate of
Mankind, to pursue with eagerness those Blessings that shun them, and to fly
from them that pursue. I could perceive by many Instances, the coldness and
indifferency of his Carriage toward me, nor was it long, before I understood
that Thalassa's Charms had occasioned this Change; and if any thing could have
been an excuse for broken Faith, her extraordinary Beauty would even have
justified the Falsehood. He took all possible occasions of making her acquainted
with his Passion, and at last became so importunate with her, that in her own
Defense (being a Lady of strict Virtue) she was forced to acquaint me Nicias
his Addresses to her, and asked my Directions, what course to take for my
Interest, and her own Quiet. Notwithstanding my Indignation at the hearing of
this, I returned her my thanks, and told her, that to complete the Obligation,
she must feign a Compliance with Nicias, when he next came to solicit her,
and to make him an Appointment at such time and Place, that I might, unknown to
him, supply her Room. This was several times performed by the disguising of my
Voice, and the Darkness of the Apartments. With what Transport did he meet
those Embraces, for which he showed so much Indifference at home? Divine
Thalassa, said he, I was never acquainted with Bliss till this Minute; dull
mistaken Nicias, that could ever imagine that he tasted Delight in the Arms of
Nicerotis. I was before scarce able to contain with Rage, and now with
Laughter. At our parting he immediately went toward home, yet not so soon but
that I made a shift to reach the House, and bestow my self on a Couch, before
he arrived at his entering of the Chamber. You must imagine (continued she) what
Sentiments this Discovery possessed me with, and my uneasiness was the greater,
because I had as yet reserved the Trouble within my own Thoughts, nor so much
as once in express Words, let Nicias understand, that I was sensible of his
Falsehood; it is therefore no wonder, if at this time, my Friends observed in me
an unusual Reservedness and Melancholy. All this Relation was delivered by
Nicerotis with so much tenderness, that Eubea was extremely touched, having a
Heart and Temper apt for all those Impressions that are felt in a Passionate
Friendship, which she possessed in the highest degree for Nicerotis. However, she
thought that condoling with her on this Argument, might only give her a greater
sense of her Misfortune; she therefore judged it more prudent to pacify her
what she could, and above all things counseled her, to suffer nothing to be
occasion of breach between her Husband and her. And indeed, such was the
singular goodness of her Temper, that she w^^ a constant Reconciler, when any
Diff^rence happened between them. Being therefore possessed with so great a
Kindness for Nicerotis, and so high an Opinion of her Virtue, it is not to be
wondered at, that she had not the least Jealousy of the Inclination she had
entertained for Aristander, and of which he was now sensible by several
Instances. It was impossible for the strictest Virtue to be insensible of
Nicerotis Charms; yet there were so many complicated Reasons against his
indulging any such Thought (and chiefly, his Friendship with Nicias) that he
was resolved to pursue no Advantage that might offer it self, but to shun all
Occasions that might lead thereunto. Nicias (as was before hinted) had in later
Conferences with him, expressed more importunate Friendship than formerly, as
it were, to prepare for considerable Trust that he intended to repose in him,
though as yet he had not expressly communicated it to him. However, he was so
far proceeded in it, that he had already engaged Aristander in the whole care
of his Affairs, which he at first scrupled, not as being an act of Friendship,
and for several specious Reasons which Nicias gave him for so doing: Yet
finding after a little Experience, that it might minister opportunities of any
Amor with Nicerotis, or occasion any Difference between himself and Eubea, he
wholly declined the Management of Nicias his Concerns, on Pretenses plausible
enough, without informing him of the true Cause. This Cessation notwithstanding
was but of short continuance; for Nicias his ill Adventures in the Duel,
together with private Discontents, and other Misfortunes, reduced him to such
Indisposition of Body, that to recover his Health, it was absolutely necessary
for him to leave that Country, and remove to a more agreeable Climate. So that
now in the height of Aristanders satisfaction, which he took in having so
handsomely disengaged himself from the Management of his Friends Concerns,
without disobliging him in the refusal, whereby he thought himself free from
all occasion and temptation toward any Intrigue with Nicerotis, which for the
Reasons we have expressed, he was resolved to decline; at the very time (I say)
that he was most pleasing himself with these Reflections, he was unexpectedly
acquainted with the News of Nicias's sudden departure from that Place, and
could by no means believe it, till he was confirmed of it by this Letter,
directed to himself.

MY Departure to another Country, without any Leave taken of so dear a Friend
as Aristander, must possess him with no little Surprise; But by all the
sincerity of our Friendship, I conjure you not to impute that to Unkindness,
which is the Result of Discontent: I leave your self to judge how afflicting
that trouble must be, which I would make any scruple of communicating to
Aristander. The Griefs with which I labor, would extort Pity from an Enemy;
what influence then would they have upon you? no, my Friend, I will be more
tender of your Quiet, then to wound you with the Knowledge of them; and thus
far acquaint you with them, only to engage you to the performance of what I
have to request. My Wife and my whole Concerns I leave to your care; I am
sensible of the Burden I lay upon you, but to accept of trouble, is the Office
of a Friend, such I have found you in the highest Degree, and know, that beside
the Consideration of Friendship, you undetake herein a Kindness to the
Miserable.


Aristander read over these Lines several times, and still found himself more
and more astonished with the Contents. The Disorder in the Expression, and the
matter they contained, sufficiently confirmed him, how great Trouble and
Difficulty his Friend labored under, at the writing of them, and was not a
little afflicted, that he was in no possibility (by reason of his Absence) of
administering such Counsel or Relief, as his Kindness might inspire him with, on
such an Occasion. But having sufficiently condoled within himself the Miseries
with which Nicias was oppressed, he perceived himself again inevitably involved
in the Management of his Concerns, and consequently the same Inconveniences
and Apprehensions returned upon him, for which he so industriously declined
that Office before. His doubts and perplexity hereupon were so great, that his
Uneasiness was presently observed by Eubea, who extremely pressed him to discover
the Cause. All the Account that he gave her, was his Sorrow for his Friends so
sudden Removal, and the Unsettled Posture in which he had left his Affairs. I
condole (replied Eubea) as much as possibly you can do, any Misfortune of the
Lord Nicias, otherwise I should very ill deserve that Degree of Friendship,
which I am favored with by Nicerotis. The smallest Concern of his, whilst out
of his own Power ought to be of great importance to you, but especially his
dearest part, the destitute Nicerotis, must be your principal Care. Let me
therefore conjure you, as I have any share in your Affection, to contribute all
that possibly you can to the diverting of her Grief, and making her Trouble sit
easy upon her. These Arguments, and whatever else could possibly be insisted
on by Eubea, in behalf of her Friend Nicerotis, were urged by her with all the
earnestness that could be. Aristander notwithstanding made her no sudden
Answer, being wholly taken up with contemplation on this Adventure, and yet
could not but smile secretly at Eubea's pressing Solicitation, being conscious
to himself, that his Aversion to engage in Nicerotis Affairs, was not out of
any want of kindness to her, but merely a Principle of justice, and most
especially toward Eubea. He was now sensible by many instances, that an
Address from him to Nicerotis, was likely to meet with small Opposition; nor
was he willing to venture on such Opportunities of making Advances that way, as
the whole Management of her Concerns must needs offer to him.

And though an Attempt of that kind might seem inconsistent with a generous
Nature in any Circumstances, yet the present Distress which his Friend lay
under, and the Confidence he had reposed in him at this time, made every
thought that might have a tendency that way, with the utmost Resolution
rejected by him. However, Eubea was so restless in her Entreaties, and the
disconsolate Condition of his Friend were so prevailing, that he could not but
comply with his Desire, in espousing entirely the Care of his Wife and
Fortunes, and by this means, to be under necessity of frequent Conversation
with Nicerotis. She was not displeased herewith, nor was it less to the
satisfaction of Eubea, who was never better contented, than when Nicerotis and
Aristander were in Company with each other.

Some considerable time passed over in this manner, while Aristander, with all
the sincerity of a faithful Friend, and with much industry, performed the
Charge that was left upon him. Eubea continuing still without the least
Jealousy, and infinitely pleased, to find the Trust reposed in her Husband,
discharged with so much advantage to Nicerotis. Nicias, in the mean time, after
much weakness, and increase of his Indisposition, was at last recovered to that
seeming degree of health, as to think of adventuring back again to his own
Country, where he found, upon all Accounts, the good effects of his Friends
careful Management; nor was Aristander less pleased at having had opportunity
of being serviceable to him at a time of distress: but withal, for the
Considerations we have expressed, was well enough contented to be disengaged from
his Employment, and to resign his Office into Nicias his own Hands. Nicias
could not but accept of the Surrender, being ^^ing now in a Condition to excuse
his F^^^nd from the trouble; yet Aristander perceived a secret reluctance in
him, on the removal of his Affairs out of his hands, and seemed inclinable,
that not only his Fortunes but his Wife should still be under Aristanders Care.
However, not being very express therein at that time, Aristander once more,
thought himself totally exempted from that Office, and from danger or
inconvenience that might occur thereby. This Respite again was but of short
Continuance, for Nicias relapsing into a worse Condition than ever, once more
entreats his Friends Government and Conduct in his Business, which was accepted
as formerly by Aristander. After this re-engagement, Nicias seemed every day
increase in his Endearments and Amity toward his Friend; but still laboring
with some secret, which he was restless to communicate unto him. One Evening,
being something more than ordinary refresht in his Spirits, when none were
present besides his Wife and Aristander, after silence for some minutes, with a
Smile, he uttered these Words. The Love (said he) of Parents to their own
Offspring is the practice of all the World, and has been so in all Ages; yet I
cannot but reflect with some wonder, how a Custom should prevail so upon all
mankind, without any one rational Cause to enforce it. The oddness of this
Assertion, and the abrupt manner of his introducing it, put Nicerotis and
Aristander into a pause, till Aristander made this Reply. It should (said he)
rather be a Wonder (as the greatest Crime against nature and deviation from
common sense) to find that Parent, that were void of Love toward his own
Issue. I grant you (proceeded Nicias) that a Descent of kindness to posterity
is most natural; but from whence that Distinction should proceed, the great
difference of Affection between the Offspring of our own Bodies, and other
men's, especially of Kindred and Friends, is to me, altogether unaccountable;
for it is plain (continued he) that it is not the personal Merit, the
intrinsic Virtues and Qualifications which our Children may happen to be
endowed with, that engages our Love toward them; for we often find them far
excelled upon these accounts, by the Offspring of others, for whom, yet we are
possessed with no such fondness, and what other Consideration should lead a
reasonable man to such partiality, is past my understanding. You will not
certainly (said Nicerotis) dispute the Prudence of a Practice which nature
(that is the supreme eternal Reason) inspires; besides, if it were not the
Effect of an Instinct that reigns through the whole Creation, yet what can be
more agreeable to common Equity, than for Parents to have particular care and
indulgence for those Persons, of whose Beings (next to Providence) they were
the immediate Authors* To say nothing of these dutiful Retu^^ which ought, and
for the most p^rt are paid by Children to them again, there is yet methinks
(replies Nicias) a poorness of Spirit, and something of a s^^^id selfishness,
in fondness of our own Products, more than those of a Friend. It is evidently
the nature of friendship, in perfection, to hold our friend in equal value with
our selves, nay, even to submit our own Interest and Desires to his; if
therefore my Friend appear to me of such merit, as to claim Affection from me,
equal to what I have for my self, I know not why I should not be as fond of his
Likeness as my own. Why should not the same reasoning hold in the Copy, as in
the Original? And why the Son of that Person whom I hold dearer than my self,
should not be dearer to me, than one that sprung from my self, I cannot
comprehend? and that my Friendship for Aristander, is elevated to that Degree I
must needs acknowledge. These last Expressions of Nicias, put Aristander and
Nicerotis to the Blush, who knew not how to reply on this occasion; for they
could not take notice of the Consequence that must necessarily follow, from
what Nicias had said. He plainly expressed it his judgment, that the Child of a
Friend, should be dearer to him than his own, and that Aristander was that
Friend, and they were also sensible, that toward such a Birth, he included his
own Wife. The Right of a Husband (proceeded he) in his own Wife, is
indisputable, and certainly, it is the foulest Violation of Justice, to invade
any man in that Tenure; but Consent removes all notion of Injury, and to say
that a Man has not disposal of that Possession, as he shall think fit, is to
say, he has less Right in his Wife, than in his meanest Chattels; if therefore
a Husband, by any Misfortune or Irregularity, should think himself incapable of
Offspring in his own Person, I know not why the Wife should therefore be
defrauded from the comfort of Children. Therefore in such Circumstances
(especially where the having an Heir is requisite) if by Consent, the Friend
supplies the Office of the Husband, it is so far from being an Injury, that it
must be esteemed an Obligation. These Arguments were delivered by Nicias, with
so firm a Countenance, and such an earnestness in his Eyes, as plainly
discovered his Intention by this Discourse, and that he desired his Wife and
Aristander to take it, with particular application to themselves; and that the
breaking this Design to them, was the Difficulty that had so long made him
uneasy, and toward which, he had so often made imperfect Attempts. Having
therefore after this manner expressed himself (fixing his Looks most eagerly upon
them) he sat expecting their Reply. But still, the more plainly that his Drift
was understood, the greater the Confusion appeared in them.

Nicerotis was far from an Aversion to Aristander, and she was by her
Constitution, no Enemy to Variety (besides her being desirous enough of
Children, and in no probability of having any by Nicias) yet, whether she
thought that this Proposal of her Husbands, savoured something of Neglect
toward her, though under pretense of Justice to her, or whether she thought
her self ^bliged in Modesty to resent (at least in appearance) so unexpected a
Charge, there was thereupon, a great Change of Color, and Combat of Passions
in her Face. Aristander labored with no less difficulty; for all the plausible
Reasons that Nicias alleged, could not convince him, but that there was too
much injustice in such a Practice.

The Conference was here broken off, by the approach of a Visitant, who was not
to be denied. It was the Lady Doriska, one that scorned to suffer time to have
his usual triumph over Persons of her years, notwithstanding which, she still
retained all the Mirth and Gaity of her youthful Humor. Her Inclination had
always been for Company and Treats, and never so well satisfied as when she saw
the Affairs of Love going forward; if she could therein make her Endeavors
serviceable to a Friend, it was so much the more to her Content; but rather
than see a fair Opportunity lost, and stand out, when Action offered it self,
she would not refuse obliging a Stranger. In the mean time, Aristander is
wholly at a loss, how to behave himself in this Adventure. And after through
consideration, once more resolves upon wholly leaving Nicerotis Company, but is
again prevented by the Solicitations of his Wife. Nicerotis, however was
resolved not utterly to lose the Advantage that offered it self by this
freedom. She therefore perceiving this Method so satisfactory to her Husband,
contrives all Opportunities she can of meeting with Aristander. Therefore as a
fit Expedient herein, she betakes her to Doriska for her assistance and
direction, as it were to an Oracle, and the more, as knowing her to have some
intimacy with Aristander. The Matron returned her many Complements, for the
Opinion she expressed of her Judgment, and the Confidence she was pleased to
repose in her readiness to serve her; and I hope (said she) I can give a more
reasonable account of my time and experience, than not to be able to direct any
Friend that shall apply themselves to me for Counsel in the Province of Love.
Nicerotis smiled to her self, and proceeded to say, it would be the most
injurious thing in the World, not to allow her Ladyship an extrordinary Talent
in the Conduct of Amor. After this, she freely imparted to her the substance
of the late Discourse that past between Nicias, and Aristander and her self.
The Matron again appeared extremely satisfied with the Matter, with many
politic Remarks upon it, but above all, applauded the Sentiments and Resolves
of Nicias; and amongst other things (said she) the wisest Records of Antiquity
will be found to be of his side. Let us go no farther for Instance, than the
Confines of our own Country of Greece; what Commonwealth can boast of a
Continuance like that of Lacedaemon? and what could produce such duration, but
the prudence and policy of those sanctions that were instituted by the wise
Lycurgus? Plutarch in Vita Lycurgi.
amongst which, I will be bold to affirm the great Latitude permitted to Wives
in extraordinary Cases, to have been of most important Advantage, where the
Person substituted to him that was incapacitated, was not only reputed to
perform a Kindness to his Friend, but likewise a most laudable Service to the
State.

This learned Discourse of the old Laddies, and the Zeal with which she expressed
her self, gave no small Diversion to Nicerotis. Nor she think bare Counsel
sufficient, for one that pretended friendship, without showing her self active
too in her Service. She therefore so contrived Matters, that Aristander was by
her means, often brought into her Company; but being at length sensible that it
was all to no effect, she reflected with some indignation, to have her Labors
defeated, and however took resolution within her self, not to see so fair an
opportunity utterly lost. She knew there wanted not Lovers that would think
themselves happy in such Advantages, and therefore cast about to bestow her
Endeavors, where the Benefit might be received with gratitude. In the mean
time, the Visits that she made and received from Nicerotis, were very frequent.
She was so far from being past the Relish of youthful Diversions and
Entertainments of Mirth, that she was frequently the Life of the Company; and
wherever she was present, triumphed over Melancholy, both in her self and
others. Nicerotis and Aristander, had always found a great agreeableness in
each others Company, and the perplexity of her Affairs, had often made it
necessary. Yet as much as they delighted in retired Conversation together,
Doriska still brought so much easiness and good humor along with her, that her
coming was seldom unwelcome; and if the Nicety of his Friendship could have
dispensed with what was proposed, it would have been extremely to her Content;
but finding still that a harmless Correspondence was the utmost of his Design,
she thought such poor Advances unworthy a Patroness of her Politics, and so
giving him wholly over, looks out for a new Adventurer.

And it so fell out at this time, that a young Spark that was her Kinsman, had
entertained no small Passion for Nicerotis, and (having observed the intimacy
between them) was encouraged to apply himself to his Kinswoman for her
Assistance. The Proposal was readily enough embraced by her, who engaged in a
short time to bring his Desires to effect, or forfeit her Conduct in Affairs of
Love for ever. The young Gentleman was extremely transported with her Answer,
and whatever Difficulties he might apprehend, he had good confidence in so
skilful a Guide. She therefore immediately bestirs her in his behalf, with so
much Craft and good Management, that (as Circumstances stood) she would not
have failed of success with a Lady of more reservedness than Nicerotis. The
Business in short was so well agreed amongst them, that he is kindly received,
and almost continually in private with her, Aristander in the mean time,
appearing in public, both as her Friend to her Husband, and her Protector. It
must be imagined, that he soon found it very uneasy for him, to be Patron to
these Practices, yet was uncertain what course to take, being cordially a
Friend to Nicerotis, and unwilling to do any thing that might prove prejudicial
to her Reputation. But there appearing no likelihood of Discountenance of this
Intrigue, he could not longer bear to have his Protection made a Property, and
thereupon discovers the whole truth of the Matter to his Wife Eubea, informing
her withal, that it was requisite for her to break off her Acquaintance with
Nicerotis. Eubea was very difficult at first, to believe any thing to the
Prejudice of her Friends Reputation, yet being at length convinced thereof, she
judged it altogether necessary to cease from conversing with her. She made
choice by way of Letter to acquaint her with her Resolution, and that in the
mildest Terms she could express her self. Nicerotis however fell into all the
Violence of Passion at the Perusal, yet as she wanted not tenderness of Temper
and Art of Expression, she sent her this Reply.

I Am sorry that our Conversation is reduced to Letters, and that this is
likely to be the last of that kind too. The Thoughts of losing your Friendship
for ever, strikes me with unspeakable surprise, yet my happiness in possessing
it, was so great, that I might without Prophecy, long since have concluded it
was not always to be enjoyed; but this is not the only ill Treatment I have
received at Fortunes hands, and Eubea well knows, that it is not the first,
though the greatest Affliction of

Nicerotis.


Eubea read over these Lines with Tears, and summoned all her good Nature in
her Excuse, and particularly reflected on the Relation she had formerly given,
of her unhappy Disappointment in her first Love, and imputed altogether to that
Misfortune, any frailty that she might afterward fall into. Aristander in the
mean time was no less afflicted, his Kindness for Nicerotis was so great, that
it was as much as he could do to contain it within the Bounds of Friendship; he
was not insensible of her Beauty, and he always thought the pleasure he possessed
in her Conversation, a sufficient Recompense for any Toil or Difficulty in the
Management of her Affairs. So that his Uneasiness and Melancholy for being
deprived of her Company, was altogether as great, as if he had indulged himself
in all the freedom of a Lover, and perhaps the innocent manner of their
conversing together (as it was more refined and generous) so it gave something
of delight and endearment beyond the grosser sense. He seemed wholly at a loss
within himself, and with many a Sigh visited the Walks, that had so often been
the pleasant Scenes of their Discourse. On the other side, the Discontent and
Grief wherewith Nicerotis was possessed, proved of longer continuance than could
be expected from a Person of her airy humor, and it was as much as all
Doriska's Art and Gaity could do, to bring her to any tolerable Quiet.

FINIS.

