AN ANSWER TO A BOOK Published by Dr. BRAMHALL, late Bishop of Derry; CALLED
The Catching of the Leviathan.

Together With an Historical Narration Concerning HERESY, And the Punishment
thereof.

By THOMAS HOBBES of Malmesbury.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr, 1682.

TO THE READER.
AS in all things which I have written, so also in this Piece, I have
endeavored all I can to be perspicuous; but yet your own attention is always
necessary. The late Lord Bishop of Derry published a Book called The Catching
of Leviathan, in which he has put together diverse Sentences picked out of my
Leviathan, which stand there plainly and firmly proved, and sets them down
without their Proofs, and without the order of their dependence one upon
another; and calls them Atheism, Blasphemy, Impiety, Subversion of Religion,
and by other names of that kind. My request unto you is, That when he cites my
words for Erroneous, you will be pleased to turn to the place it self, and see
whether they be well proved, and how to be understood. Which labor his
Lordship might have saved you, if he would have vouchsafed, as well to have
weighed my Arguments before you, as to have showed you my Conclusions. His Book
contains two Chapters, the one concerning Religion, the other concerning
Politics. Because he does not so much as offer any refutation of any thing in
my Leviathan concluded, I needed not to have answered either of them. Yet to
the first I here answer, because the words Atheism, Impiety and the like, are
words of the greatest defamation possible. And this I had done sooner, if I had
sooner known that such a Book was extant. He wrote it ten years since, and yet
I never heard of it till about three Months since; so little talk there was of
his Lordship's Writings. If you want leisure or care of the questions between
us, I pray you condemn me not upon report. To judge and not examine is not
just. Farewell.

T. Hobbes.

CHAP. I. That the Hobbian Principles are destructive to Christianity and all
Religion.
J.D. THe Image of God is not altogether defaced by the fall of Man, but that
there will remain some practical notions of God and Goodness; which, when the
mind is free from vagrant desires, and violent passions, do shine as clearly in
the heart, as other speculative notions do in the head. Hence it is, That there
was never any Nation so barbarous or savage throughout the whole world, which
had not their God. They who did never wear clothes upon their backs, who did
never know Magistrate but their Father, yet have their God, and their Religious
Rites and Devotions to him. Hence it is, That the greatest Atheists in any
sudden danger do unwittingly cast their eyes up to Heaven, as craving aid from
thence, and in a thunder creep into some hole to hide themselves. And they who
are conscious to themselves of any secret Crimes, though they be secure enough
from the justice of men, do yet feel the blind blows of a Guilty Conscience,
and fear Divine Vengeance. This is acknowledged by T. H. himself in his lucid
Intervals. That we may know what worship of God natural reason does assign, let
us begin with his attributes, where it is manifest in the first place, That
existency is to be attributed to him. To which he adds Infiniteness,
Incomprehensibility, Unity, Vbiquity. Thus for Attributes, next for Actions.
Concerning external Actions, wherewith God is to be worshipped, the most
general precept of reason is, that they be signs of honor, under which are
contained Prayers, Thanksgivings, Oblations and Sacrifices.


T. H. Hitherto his Lordship discharges me of Atheism. What need he to say
that All Nations, how barbarous soever, yet have their Gods and Religious
Rites, and Atheists are frighted with thunder, and feel the blind blows of
Conscience? It might have been as apt a Preface to any other of his Discourses
as this. I expect therefore in the next place to be told that I deny again my
before recited Doctrine.


J. D. Yet to let us see how inconsistent and irreconcilable he is with
himself, elsewhere reckoning up all the Laws of Nature at large, even twenty in
number, he has not one word that concerns Religion, or that has the least
relation in the world to God. As if a man were like the Colt of a wild Ass in
the wilderness, without any owner or obligation. Thus in describing the Laws of
Nature, this great Clerk forgeteth the God of Nature, and the main and
principle Laws of Nature, which contains a man's duty to his God, and the
principal end of his Creation.


T. H. After I had ended the discourse he mentions of the Laws of Nature, I
thought it fittest in the last place once for all, to say they were the Laws of
God, then when they were delivered in the Word of God; but before being not
known by men for any thing but their own natural reason, they were but
Theorems, tending to peace, and those uncertain, as being but conclusions of
particular men, and therefore not properly Laws. Besides, I had formerly in my
Book De Cive, cap. 4. proved them severally one by one out of the Scriptures;
which his Lordship had ^ead and knew. 'Twas therefore an unjust charge of his
to say, I had not one word ^n them that concerns Religion, or that has the
least relation in the world to God; and this upon no other ground then that I
added not to every article, This Law (...) in the Scripture. But why he should
call me (ironically) a great Clerk, I cannot tell. I suppose he would make men
believe I arrogated to my self all the learning of a great Clerk, Bishop, or
other inferior Minister. A Learned Bishop, is that Bishop that can interpret
all parts of Scripture truly, and congruently to the harmony of the whole; that
has learnt the History and Laws of the Church, down from the Apostles time to
his own; and knows what is the nature of a Law Civil, Divine, Natural, and
Positive; and how to govern well the Parochial Ministers of his Diocese, so
that they may both by Doctrine and Example keep the people in the belief of all
Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation, and in obedience to the Laws of their
Country. This is a Learned Bishop. A Learned Minister is he that has learned
the way by which men may be drawn from Avarice, Pride, Sensuality, Profaneness,
Rebellious Principles, and all other vices by eloquent and powerful disgracing
them, both from Scripture and from Reason; and can terrify men from vice by
discreet uttering of the punishments denounced against wicked men, and by
deducing rationally the damage they receive by it in the end. In one word, he
is a Learned Minister that can preach such Sermons as St. Chrisostom preached
to the Antiochians when he was Presbyter in that City. Could his Lordship, find
in my Book that I arrogated to my self the eloquence or wisdom of St.
Chrisostom, or the ability of governing the Church? It Is one thing to know what
is to be done, another thing to know how to do it. But his Lordship was pleased
to use any artifice to disgrace me in any kind whatsoever.


J. D. Perhaps he will say that he handles the Laws of Nature there, only so
far as may serve to the constitution or settlement of a Commonwealth. In good
time, let it be so. He has devised us a trim Commonwealth, which is founded
neither upon Religion toward God, nor Justice toward Man; but merely upon
self-interest, and self-preservation. Those rays of heavenly Light, those
natural seeds of Religion, which God himself has imprinted in the heart of
man, are more efficatious toward preservation of a Society; whether we regard
the nature of the thing, or the blessing of God, then all his Pacts, and
Surrenders, and Translations of power. He who unteacheth men their duty to God,
may make them Eye-servants, so long as their interest does oblige them to obey;
but is no fit Master to teach men conscience and fidelity.


T. H. He has not yet found the place where I contradict either the Existence,
or Infiniteness, or Incomprehensibility, or Unity, or Ubiquity of God. I am
therefore yet absolved of Atheism. But I am, he says, inconsistent and
irreconcilable with my self, that is, I am, (though he says not so, he thinks)
a forgetful blockhead. I cannot help that: But my forgetfulness appears not
here. Even his Lordship where he says, Those rays of heavenly Light, those
seeds of Religion, which God himself has imprinted in the heart of man
(meaning natural reason) are more efficacious to the preservation of Society,
than all the Pacts, Surrenders, and Translating of Power, had forgotten to
except the Old Pact of the Jews, and the New Pact of Christians. But pardoning
that, did he hope to make any wise man believe, that when this Nation very
lately was an Anarchy, and dissolute multitude of men, doing every one what his
own reason or imprinted Light suggested, did again out of that same Light call
in the King, and piece again, and ask pardon for the faults, which that their
illumination had brought them into, rather than out of fear of perpetual
danger, and hope of preservation.


J. D. Without Religion, Societies are like but soapy bubbles, quickly
dissolved. It was the judgment of as wise a man as T. H. himself (though
perhaps he will hardly be persuaded to it) that Rome ought more of its grandeur
to Religion, than either to strength or stratagems. We have not exceeded the
Spaniards in number, nor the Galls in strength, nor the Carthaginians in craft,
nor the Grecians in art, etc. but we have overcome all Nations by our Piety and
Religion.


T. H. Did not his Lordship forget himself here again, in approving this
sentence of Tully, which makes the Idolatry of the Romans, not only better than
the Idolatry of other Nations; but also better than the Religion of the Jews,
whose Law Christ himself says, he came not to destroy but to fulfill? And that
the Romans overcame both them and other Nations, by their Piety, when it is
manifest that the Romans overran the world by injustice and cruelty, and that
their Victories ought not to be ascribed to the Piety of the Romans, but to the
impiety as well of the Jews as of other Nations? But what meant he by saying
Tully was as wise a man as T. H. himself, though perhaps he will hardly be
persuaded to it? Was that any part of the controversy? No: Then it was out of
his way. God promises to assist good men in their way, but not out of their
way. It Is therefore the less wonder that his Lordship was in this place
deserted of the Light which God imprints in the hearts of rudest Savages.


J. D. Among his Laws he incerteth gratitude to men as the third precept of the
Law of Nature; but of the gratitude of mankind to their Creator, there is a
deep silence. If men had sprung up from the earth in a night like Mushroms or
Excresences, without all sense of Honor, Justice, Conscience, or Gratitude, he
could not have vilified the humane nature more then he does.


T. H. My Lord discovers here an ignorance of such method as is necessary for
lawful and strict reasoning and explication of the truth in controversy. And
not only that, but also how little able he is to fix his mind upon what he
reads in other men's Writings. When I had defined Ingratitude universally, he
finds fault that I do not mention Ingratitude toward God, as if his Lordship
knew not that an universal comprehends all the particulars. When I had defined
Equity universally, why did he not as well blame me for not telling what that
Equity is in God? He is grateful to the man of whom he receives a good turn,
that confesses or makes appear he is pleased with the benefit he receives.
So also Gratitude toward God is to confess his benefits. There is also in
Gratitude toward men a desire to requite their Benefits, so there is in our
Gratitude toward God, so far to requite them, as to be kind to Gods Ministers,
which I acknowledged in making Sacrifices a part of natural Divine Worship;
and the benefit of those Sacrifices is the nourishment of Gods Ministers. It
appears therefore that the Bishops attention in reading my Writings was either
weak in it self, or weakened by prejudice.


J. D. From this shameful omission or preterition of the main duty of mankind,
a man might easily take the height of T. H. his Religion. But he himself
puts it past all conjectures. His principles are brim full of prodigious
impiety. In these four things, Opinions of Ghosts, Ignorance of second Causes,
devotion to what men fear, and taking of things casual, for Prognostics,
consists the natural seed of Religion; the culture and improvement whereof,
he refers only to Policy. Humane and Divine Politics, are but Politics.
And again, Mankind has this from the conscience of their own weakness, and the
admiration of natural events, that the most part of men believe that there is
an invisible God, the maker of all visible things. And a little after he
tells us, That Superstition proceeds from fear without right reason, and
Atheism from an opinion of reason without fear; making Atheism to be more
reasonable than Superstition. What is now become of that Divine Worship which
natural reason did assign unto God, the honor of Existence, Infiniteness,
Incomprehensibility, Unity, Ubiquity? What is now become of that Dictate or
Precept of reason, concerning Prayers, Thanksgivings, Oblations, Sacrifices, if
uncertain Opinions, Ignorance, Fear, Mistakes, the conscience of our own
weakness, and the admiration of natural Events, be the only seeds of Religion?

He proceeds further, That Atheism it self, though it be an erroneous
opinion, and therefore a sin, yet it ought to be numbered among the sins of
imprudence or ignorance. He adds, that an Atheist is punished not as a
Subject is punished by his King, because he did not observe Laws: but as an
Enemy, by an Enemy, because he would not accept Laws. His reason is, because
the Atheist never submitted his will to the Will of God, whom he never thought
to be. And he concludes that man's obligation to obey God, proceeds from his
weakness. Manifestum est obligationem ad prestandum ipsi (Deo) obedientiam,
incumbere hominibus propter imbecilitatem. First it is impossible that should
be a sin of mere ignorance or imprudence, which is directly contrary to the
light of natural reason. The Laws of nature need no new promulgation, being
imprinted naturally by God in the heart of Man. The Law of nature was written
in our hearts by the finger of God, without our assent; or rather the Law of
Nature is the assent it self. Then if Nature dictate to us that there is a God,
and that this God is to be worshipped in such and such manner, it is not
possible that Atheism should be a sin of mere ignorance.

Secondly, a Rebellious Subject is still a Subject, De Jure, though not, De
Facto, by right, though not by deed: and so the most cursed Atheist that is,
ought by right to be the Subject of God, and ought to be punished not as a just
Enemy, but as a disloyal Traitor. Which is confessed by himself, This fourth
Sin, (that is, of those who do not by word and deed confess one God the Supreme
King of Kings) in the natural Kingdom of God is the Crime of High Treason, for
it is a denial of Divine Power, or Atheism. Then an Atheist is a Traitor to
God, and punishable as a disloyal Subject, not as an Enemy.

Lastly, it is an absurd and dishonorable assertion, to make our obedience to
God to depend upon our weakness, because we cannot help it, and not upon our
gratitude, because we owe our being and preservation to him. Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? And who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the Milk of the Flock? And again, Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were created. But it were much better or at least not
so ill, to be a down right Atheist, than to make God to be such a thing as he
does, and at last thrust him into the Devils Office, to be the cause of all Sin.


T. H. Though this Bishop, as I said, had but a weak attention in reading, and
little skill in examining the force of an Argument, yet he knew men, and the
art, without troubling their judgments to win their assents by exciting their
Passions. One Rule of his art was to give his Reader what he would have him
swallow, a part by it self, and in the nature of News, whether true or not.
Knowing that the unlearned, that is most men, are content to believe, rather
than be troubled with examining, Therefore (a little before) he put these words
T. H. no friend to Religion, in the Margent. And in this place, before he offer
at any confutation, he says my Principles are brim full of Prodigious
Impieties. And at the next Paragraph, in the Margent, he puts that I excuse
Atheism. This behavior becomes neither a Bishop, nor a Christian, nor any man
that pretends to good education. Fear of invisible powers, what is it else in
savage people, but the fear of somewhat they think a God? What invisible power
does the reason of a savage man suggest unto him, but those Phantasms of his
sleep, or his distemper, which we frequently call Ghosts, and the Savages
thought Gods; so that the fear of a God (though not of the true one) to them
was the beginning of Religion, as the fear of the true God was the beginning of
wisdom to the Jews and Christians? Ignorance of second causes made men fly to
some first cause, the fear of which bred Devotion and Worship. The ignorance of
what that power might do, made them observe the order of what he had done; that
they might guess by the like order, what he was to do another time. This was
their Prognostication. What Prodigious impiety is here? How confutes he it?
Must it be taken for Impiety upon his bare calumny? I said Superstition was
fear without reason. Is not the fear of a false God, or fancied Demon contrary
to right reason? And is not Atheism Boldness grounded on false reasoning, such
as is this, the wicked prosper, therefore there is no God? He offers no proof
against any of this; but says only I make Atheism to be more reasonable than
Superstition; which is not true: For I deny that there is any reason either in
the Atheist or in the Superstitious. And because the Atheist thinks he has
reason, where he has none, I think him the more irrational of the two. But all
this while he argues not against any of this; but enquires only, what is become
of my natural Worship of God, and of his Existency, Infiniteness,
Incomprehensibility, Unity, and Ubiquity. As if whatsoever reason can suggest,
must be suggested all at once. First, all men by nature had an opinion of Gods
Existency, but of his other Attributes not so soon, but by reasoning, and by
degrees. And for the Attributes of the true God, they were never suggested but
by the Word of God written. In that I say Atheism is a sin of ignorance, he
says I excuse it. The Prophet David says, The fool has said in his heart,
There is no God. Is it not then a sin of folly? It Is agreed between us, that
right reason dictates, There is a God. Does it not follow, that denying of God
is a sin proceeding from misreasoning. If it be not a sin of ignorance, it must
be a sin of malice. Can a man malice that which he thinks has no being? But may
not one think there is a God, and yet maliciously deny him? If he think there
is a God, he is no Atheist; and so the question is changed into this, whether
any man that thinks there is a God, dares deliberately deny it? For my part I
think not. For upon what confidence dares any man (deliberately I say) oppose
the Omnipotent? David says of himself, My feet were ready to slip when I saw
the prosperity of the wicked. Therefore it is likely the feet of men less holy
slip oftener. But I think no man living is so daring, being out of passion, as
to hold it as his opinion. Those wicked men that for a long time proceeded so
succesfully in the late horrid Rebellion, may perhaps make some think they were
constant and resolved Atheists, but I think rather that they forgot God, than
believed there was none. He that believes there is such an Atheist, comes a
little too near that opinion himself, Nevertheless, if words spoken in passion
signify a denial of a God, no punishment praeordained by Law, can be too great
for such an insolence; because there is no living in a Commonwealth with men,
to whose oaths we cannot reasonably give credit. As to that I say, An Atheist
is punished by God not as a Subject by his King, but as an Enemy, and to my
argument for it, namely, because he never acknowledged himself Gods Subject, He
opposes, That if nature dictate that there is a God, and to be worshipped in
such and such manner, then Atheism is not a sin of mere ignorance; as if either
I or he did hold that Nature dictates the manner of Gods Worship, or any
article of our Creed, or whether to worship with or without a Surplice.
Secondly, he answers that a Rebel is still a Subject de Jure, though not de
Facto: And it is granted. But though the King lose none of his right by the
Traitors act, yet the Traitor loses the privilege of being punished by a
praecedent Law; and therefore may be punished at the Kings will, as Ravillac
was for murdering Henry the 4th. of France. An open Enemy and a perfidious
Traitor are both enemies. Had not his Lordship read in the Roman story how
Perseus and other just enemies of that State were wont to be punished? But what
is this trifling question to my excusing of Atheism? In the seventh Paragraph
of my Book de Cive he found the words (in Latin) which he here cites. And to
the same sense I have said in my Leviathan, That the right of nature whereby
God reigns over men, is to be derived not from his creating them, as if he
required obedience, as of Gratitude; but from his irresistible Power. This he
says is absurd and dishonorable. Whereas first all power is honorable, and
greatest power is most honorable. It is not a more noble tenure for a King to
hold his Kingdom, and the right to punish those that transgress his Laws from
his Power, than from the gratitude or gift of the Transgressor. There is
nothing therefore here of dishonor to God Almighty. But see the subtility of
his disputing. He saw he could not catch Leviathan in this place, he looks for
him in my Book de Cive, which is Latin, to try what he could fish out of that.
And says I make our obedience to God, depend upon our weakness, as if these
words signified the Dependence, and not the necessity of our submission, or
that incumbere and dependere were all one.


J. D. For T. H. his God is not the God of Christians, nor of any rational men.
Our God is every where, and seeing he has no parts, he must be wholly here,
and wholly there, and wholly every where. So Nature it self dictateth. It
cannot be said honorably of God that he is in a place; for nothing is in a
place, but that which has proper bounds of its greatness. But T. H. his God is
not wholly every where. No man can conceive that any thing is all in this
place, and all in another place at the same time, for none of these things ever
have or can be incident to sense. So far well, if by conceiving he mean
comprehending; but then follows, That these are absurd Speeches taken upon
credit, without any signification at all, from deceived Philosophers, and
deceived or deceiving Schoolmen. Thus he denies the Ubiquity of God. A
Circumscriptive, a Definitive, and a Repletive being in a place, is some
heathen language to him.


T. H. Though I believe the Omnipotence of God, and that he can do what he
will, yet I dare not say how every thing is done, because I cannot conceive nor
comprehend either the Divine substance, or the way of its operation. And I
think it Impiety to speak concerning God any thing of my own head, or upon the
Authority of Philosophers or Schoolmen, which I understand not, without
warrant in the Scripture: And what I say of Omnipotence, I say also of
Ubiquity. But his Lordship is more valiant in this place, telling us that God
is wholly here, and wholly there, and wholly every where; because he has no
parts. I cannot comprehend nor conceive this. For methinks it implies also that
the whole World is also in the whole God, and in every part of God, nor can I
conceive how any thing can be called Whole, which has no parts, nor can I find
any thing of this in the Scripture. If I could find it there, I could believe
it; and if I could find it in the public Doctrine of the Church, I could
easily abstain from contradicting it. The Schoolmen say also that the Soul of
Man (meaning his upper Soul, which they call the rational Soul) is also wholly
in the whole man, and wholly in every part of the man. What is this but to make
the humane Soul the same thing in respect of man's Body, that God is in respect
of the World? These his Lordship calls here rational men, and some of them
which applaud this Doctrine, would have the High Court of Parliament
corroborate such Doctrines with a Law. I said in my Leviathan, that it is no
honorable attribute to God, to say he is in a place, because, infinite is not
confined within a place. To which he replies, T. H. his God is not wholly every
where. I confess, the consequence. For I understand in English, he that says
any thing to be all here, means that neither all nor any of the same thing is
else where. He says further, I ^ake a Circumscriptive, a Definitive, and a
Repletive being in a place to be Heathen Language. Truly, if this Dispute were
at ^he Bar, I should go near to crave the asistance of the Court, lest some
trick might be put upon me in such obscurity. ^or though I know what these
Latin words singly signify, yet I understand not ^ow any thing is in a Place
Definitively and not Circumscriptively. For Definitively comes from definio
which is to set bounds. And therefore to be in a Place Definitively, is when
the bounds of the place are every way marked out. But to be in a place
Circumscriptively, is when the bounds of the place are described round about.
To be in a Place Repletive, is to fill a place. Who does not see that this
dictinction is Canting and Fraud? If any man will call it Pious Fraud, he is to
prove the Piety as clearly as I have here explained the Fraud. Besides, no
Fraud can be Pious in any man, but him that has a lawful Right to govern him
whom he beguileth; whom the Bishop pretends to govern, I cannot tell. Besides
his Lordship ought to have considered that every Bishop is one of the Great
Council, trusted by the King to give their advice with the Lords Temporal, for
the making of good Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and not to offer them such
obscure Doctrines, as if, because they are not versed in School Divinity,
therefore they had no Learning at all, nor understood the English Tongue. Why
did the Divines of England contend so much heretofore to have the Bible
translated into English, if they never meant any but themselves should read it?
If a Layman be publicly encouraged to search the Scriptures for his own
Salvation, what has a Divine to do to impose upon him any strange
interpretation, unless if he make him err to Damnation, he will be damned in
his stead?


J. D. Our God is immutable without any shadow of turning by change, to whom
all things are present, nothing past, nothing to come. But T. H. his God is
measured by time, losing something that is past, and acquiring something that
does come every minute. That is as much as to say, That our God is infinite,
and his God is finite, for unto that which is actually infinite, nothing can be
added neither time nor parts. Hear himself, Nor do I understand what derogation
it can be to the divine perfection, to attribute to it Potentiality, that is in
English, Power (so little does he understand what Potentiality is) and
successive duration. And he charge it upon us as a fault; that will not have
eternity to be an endless succession of time. How, successive duration, and an
endless succession of time in God? Then God is infinite, then God is elder to
day than he was yesterday. Away with Blasphemies. Before he destroyed the
Ubiquity of God, and now he destroys his Eternity.


T. H. I shall omit both here and henceforth his preambulatory, impertinent,
and uncivil calumnies. The thing he pretends to prove is this. That it is a
derogation to the Divine Power to attribute to it Potentiality (that is in
English Power) and Successive Duration. One of his reasons is, God is infinite,
and nothing can be added to infinite, neither of time nor of parts: It is true.
And therefore I said, God is infinite and eternal, without beginning or end,
either of Time or Place; which he has not here confuted, but confirmed. He
denies Potentiality and Power to be all one, and says I little understand what
Potentiality is. He ought therefore in this place to have defined what
Potenality is: For I understand it to be the same with Potentia, which is in
English Power. There is no such word as Potentiality in the Scriptures, nor in
any Author of the Latin Tongue. It is found only in School Divinity, as a word
of Art, or rather as a word of Craft, to amaze and puzzle the Laity. And
therefore I no sooner read than intepreted it. In the next place he says, as
wondering, How an endless succession of time in God! Why not? Gods mercy
endures for ever, and surely God endures as long as his mercy, therefore
there is duration in God, and consequently endless succession of time. God who
in sundry times and diverse manners spoke in time past, etc. But in a former
dispute with me about Free Will, he has defined Eternity to be Nuno stans,
that is an ever standing now, or everlasting instant. This he thinks himself
bound in honor to defend. What reasonable soul can digest this? We read in
Scripture, that a thousand years with God, is but as yesterday. And why? but
because he sees as clearly to the end of a thousand years, as to the end of a
day. But his Lordship affirms, That both a thousand years and a day are but one
instant, the same standing Now, or Eternity. If he had showed an holy Text for
this Doctrine, or any Text of the Book of Common Prayer (in the Scripture and
Book of Common Prayer is contained all our Religion) I had yielded to him, but
School Divinity I value little or nothing at all. Though in this he contradict
also the Schoolmen, who say the Soul is eternal only a part post, but God is
eternal both a part post, and a part ante. Thus there are parts in eternity,
and eternity being, as his Lordship says, the divine substance, the divine
substance has parts, and Nunc stans has parts. Is not this darkness? I take it
to be the Kingdom of Darkness, and the teachers of it, especially of this
Doctrine. That God who is not only Optimus, but also Maximus is no greater than
to be wholly contained in the least Atome of earth, or other body, and that his
whole duration is but an instant of time, to be either grossly ignorant or
ungodly Deceivers.


J. D. Our God is a perfect, pure, simple indivisible, infinite Essence; free
from all composition of matter and form, of substance and accidents. All matter
is finite, and he who acts by his infinite Essence, needs neither Organs,
nor Faculties (id est, no power, note that) nor accidents, to render him more
complete. But T. H. his God is a divisible God, a compounded God, that has
matter, or qualities, or accidents. Hear himself. I argue thus, The divine
substance is indivisible, but eternity is the divine substance. The Major is
evident, because God is Actus simplicissimus; the Minor is confessed by all
men, that whatsoever is attributed to God, is God. Now listen to his answer,
The Major is so far from being evident, that Actus simplicissimus signifies
nothing. The Minor is said by some men, thought by no man, whatsoever is
thought is understood. The Major was this, The divine substance is indivisible.
Is this far from being evident? Either it is indivisible or divisible. If it be
not indivisible, then it is divisible, then it is materiate, then it is
corporeal, then it has parts, then it is finite by his own confession. Habere
parts, aut esse totum aliquid, sunt attributa finitorum. Upon this silly
conceit he charge me for saying, That God is not just, but justice it self;
not eternal, but eternity it self; which he calls unseemly words to be said
of God. And he thinks he does me a great courtesy in not adding Blasphemous
and Atheistical. But his Bolts are so soon shot, and his Reasons are such vain
Imaginations, and such drowsy Fantasies, that no sad man does much regard
them. Thus he has already destroyed the Ubiquity, the Eternity, and the
Simplicity of God. I wish he had considered better with himself, before he had
desperately cast himself upon these Rocks.

But paulo majora canamus, my next charge is, That he destroys the very being
of God, and leaves nothing in his place, but an empty name. For by taking away
all incorporeal substances, he takes away God himself. The very name (says
he) of an incorporeal substance, is a Contradiction. And to say that an Angel
or Spirit, is an incorporeal substance, is to say in effect, that there is no
Angel or Spirit at all. By the same reason to say, That God is an incorporeal
substance, is to say there is no God at all. Either God is incorporeal, or he
is finite, and consists of parts, and consequently is no God. This, That there
is no incorporeal spirit, is that main root of Atheism, from which so many
lesser branches are daily sprouting up.


T. H. God is indeed a Perfect, Pure, Simple, Infinite Substance; and his Name
incommunicable, that is to say, not divisible into this and that individual
God, in such manner as the name of Man is divisible into Peter and John. And
therefore God is individual; which word amongst the Greeks is expressed by the
word Indivisible. Certain Heretics in the primitive Church, because special
and individual are called Particulars, maintained that Christ was a particular
God, differing in number from God the Father. And this was the Doctrine that
was condemned for Heresy in the first Council of Nice, by these words, God has
no parts. And yet many of the Latin Fathers in their explications of the Nicene
Creed, have expounded the word Consubstantial, by the community of nature,
which different Species have in their Genus, and different individuals in the
Species, as if Peter and John were Consubstantial, because they agree in one
humane nature; which is contrary (I confess) to the meaning of the Nice
Fathers. But that in a substance infinitely great, it should be impossible to
consider any thing as not infinite. I do not see it there condemned. For
certainly he that thinks God is in every part of the Church, does not exclude
him out of the Churchyard. And is not this a considering of him by parts? For
dividing a thing which we cannot reach nor separate one part thereof from
another, is nothing else but considering of the same by parts. So much
concerning Indivisibility from Natural Reason; for I will wade no farther, but
rely upon the Scriptures. God is no where said in the Scriptures to be
indivisible, unless his Lordship meant division, to consist only in separation
of parts, which I think he did not. St. Paul indeed says, 1 Cor. 1.13. Is
Christ divided? Not that the followers of Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, followed
some one part, some another of Christ; but that thinking differently of his
nature, they made as it were different kinds of him. Secondly, his Lordship
expounds Simplicity, by not being compounded of Matter and Form, or of
Substance and Accidents, Unlearnedly. For nothing can be so compounded. The
matter of a Chair is Wood, the form is the figure it has apt for the intended
use. Does his Lordship think the Chair compounded of the Wood and the Figure? A
man is Rational, does it therefore follow that Reason is a part of the man? It
was Aristotle deceived him, who had told him that a Rational living Creature,
is the definition of a man, and that the definition of a man was his Essence;
and therefore the Bishop and other Schoolmen, from this that the word Rational
is a part of these words Man is a Rational living Creature, concluded that the
Essence of man, was a part of the man, and a Rational man, the same thing with
a Rational Soul. I should wonder how any man, much more a Doctor of Divinity,
should be so grossly deceived, but that I know naturally the generality of men
speak the words of their Masters by rote, without having any Idea of the
things, which the words signify. Lastly, he calls God an Essence. If he mean
by Essence the same with Ens, (...)I approve it. Otherwise, what is Essence?
There is no such word in the Old Testament. The Hebrew Language, which has no
word answerable to the copulative est, will not bear it. The New Testament has
(...), but never for Essence, nor for Substance, but only for Riches. I come
now to his Argument in Mood and Figure, which is this, The Divine Substance is
indivisible. That Is the Major. Eternity is the Divine Substance. That Is the
Minor. Ergo, the Divine Substance is indivisible. The Major, he says, is
evident, because God is Actus simplicissimus. The Minor is confessed, he
thinks, by all men, because whatsoever is attributed to God, is God. To this I
answered, that the Major was so far from being evident, that Actus
Simplicissimus signifies nothing, and that the Minor was understood by no man.
First, what is Actus in the Major? does any man understand Actus for a
Substance, that is, for a thing subsisting by it self? Is not Actus in English,
either an Act, or an Action, or nothing? or is any of these Substances? If it
be evident, why did he not explain Actus by a definition? And as to the Minor,
though all men in the world understand that the Eternal is God, yet no man can
understand that the Eternity is God. Perhaps he and the Schoolmen mean by
Actus, the same that they do by Essentia. What is the Essence of a man, but his
Humanity? or of God, but his Deity; of Great, but Greatness; and so of all
other denominating Attributes? And the words God and Deity, are of different
signification. Damascene a Father of the Church expounding the Nicene Creed
denies plainly that the Deity was incarnate, but all true Christians hold that
God was incarnate. Therefore God and the Deity, signify diverse things; and
therefore Eternal and Eternity are not the same, no more than a wise man and
his wisdom are the same. Nor God and his justice the same thing, and
universally it is false, that the Attribute in the Abstract is the same with the
Substance, to which it is attributed. Also it is universally true of God, that
the Attribute in the Concrete, and the substance to which it is attributed, is
not the same thing. I come now to his next Period or Paragraph, wherein he
would fain prove, that by denying Incorporeal Substance, I take away Gods
Existence. The words he cites here are mine; To say an Angel or Spirit is an
Incorporeal Substance, is to say in effect there is no Angel nor Spirit at all.
It is true also, that to say that God is an Incorporeal Substance, is to say in
effect there is no God at all. What alleges he against it, but the
School Divinity which I have already answered? Scripture he can bring none,
because the word Incorporeal is not found in Scripture. But the Bishop trusting
to his Aristotelean and Scholastic Learning has hitherto made no use of
Scripture, save only of these Texts, Who has planted a Vineyard, and eats
not of the fruit thereof; or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of
the flock, and Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor,
and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they were
created; thereby to prove that the right of God to govern and punish mankind is
not derived from his Omnipotence. Let us now see how he proves Incorporeity by
his own Reason without Scripture. Either God (he says) is Incorporeal or
Finite. He knows I deny both, and say he is Corporeal and Infinite, against
which he offers no proof, but only (according to his custom of disputing) calls
it the root of Atheism; and interrogates me, what real thing is left in the
world, if God be Incorporeal, but Body and Accidents? I say there is nothing
left but Corporeal Substance. For I have denied (as he knew) that there is any
reality in accidents; and nevertheless maintain Gods Existence, and that he is
a most pure, and most simple Corporeal Spirit. Here his Lordship catching
nothing, removes to the eternity of the Trinity, which these my grounds (he
says) destroy. How so? I say the Trinity, and the Persons thereof are that one
pure, simple, and eternal Corporeal Spirit; and why does this destroy the
Trinity, more than if I had called it Incorporeal? He labors here and seeks
somewhat to refresh himself in the word Person, by the same grounds (he says)
every King has as many Persons as there by Justices of Peace in his Kingdom,
and God Almighty has as many Persons as there be Kings, why not? For I never
said that all those Kings were that God; and yet God gives that name to the
Kings of the earth. For the signification of the word Person, I shall expound
it by and by in another place. Here ends his Lordships School Argument; now let
me come with my Scripture Argument. St. Paul concerning Christ, ( Col. 2.9.)
says thus, In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily. This place
Athanasius a great and zealous Doctor in the Nicene Council, and vehement enemy
of Arius the Heretic, who allowed Christ to be no otherwise God, then as men
of excellent piety were so called, expounds thus. The fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him Bodily (Greek (...)) id est (...), id est; Realiter. So there
is one Father for Corporality, and that God was in Christ in such manner as
Body is in Body. Again, there were in the primitive Church a sort of Heretics
who maintained that Jesus Christ had not a true real Body, but was only a
Phantasm or Spright, such as the Latins called Spectra. Against the head of
this Sect (whose name I think was Apelles) Tertullian wrote a Book, now extant
amongst his other Works, entitled De Carne Christi, wherein after he had
spoken of the nature of Phantasms, and showed that they had nothing of reality
in them, he concludes with these words, whatsoever is not Body, is Nothing. So
here is on my side a plain Text of Scripture, and two ancient and learned
Fathers, nor was this Doctrine of Tertullian condemned in the Council of Nice;
but the division of the Divine Substance into God the Father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost. For these words, God has no parts, were added, for
explication of the word Consubstantial, at the request of the dissenting
Fathers, and are farther explained both in Athanasius his Creed, in these
words, not three Gods but one God, and by the constant Attribute ever since of
the Individual Trinity. The same words nevertheless do condemn the
Anthropomorphites also: For though there appeared no Christians that professed
that God had an Organical Body, and consequently that the Persons were three
Individuals, yet the Gentiles were all Anthropomorphites and there condemned by
those words, God has no parts.

And thus I have answered his accusation concerning the Eternity and Existence
of the Divine Substance, and made appear that in truth, the question between
us, is whether God be a Phantasme ( id est, an Idol of the Fancy, which St.
Paul says is nothing) or a Corporeal Spirit, that is to say, something that
has Magnitude.

In this place I think it not amiss, leaving for a little while this
Theological dispute, to examine the signification of those words which have
occasioned so much diversity of opinion in this kind of Doctrine.

The word Substance, in Greek Hypostasis, Hypostan, Hypostamenon signify the
same thing, namely, a Ground, a Base, any thing that has Existence or
Subsistence in it self, any thing that upholdeth that which else would fall, in
which sense God is properly the Hypostasis, Base, and Substance that upholdeth
all the world, having Subsistence not only in himself, but from himself;
whereas other Substances have their subsistence only in themselves, not from
themselves. But Metaphorically, Faith is called a Substance, Heb. 11.1. because
it is the foundation or Base of our Hope; for Faith failing our Hope falls. And
2 Cor. 9.4. St. Paul having boasted of the liberal promise of the Corinthians
toward the Macedonians, calls that promise the ground, the Hypostasis of that
his boasting. And Heb. 1.3. Christ is called the Image of the Substance (the
Hypostasis) of his Father, and for the proper and adequate signification of the
word Hypostasis, the Greek Fathers did always oppose it to Apparition or
Phantasme; as when a man sees his face in the water, his real face is called
the Hypostasis of the fantastic face in the water. So also in speaking, the
thing understood or named, is called Hypostasis, in respect of the name, so
also a Body colored is the Hypostasis, Substance and Subject of the color;
and in like manner of all its other Accidents. Essence and all other abstract
names are words artificial belonging to the Art of Logic, and signifies only
the manner how we consider the Substance it self. And of this I have spoken
sufficiently in Page 371.372. of my Leviathan. Body [Lat.] Corpus [Grae.]
(...), is that Substance which has Magnitude indeterminate, and is the same
with Corporeal Substance; but A Body is that which has Magnitude determinate,
and consequently is understood to be totum or integrum aliquid. Pure and Simple
Body, is Body of one and the same kind, in every part throughout, and if
mingled with Body of another kind, though the total be compounded or mixed, the
parts nevertheless retain their simplicity, as when water and wine are mixed,
the parts of both kinds retain their simplicity. For water and wine cannot both
be in one and the same place at once.

Matter is the same with Body; But never without respect to a Body which is
made thereof. Form is the aggregate of all Accidents together, for which, we
give the Matter a new name; so Albedo, whiteness is the Form of Album, or white
Body. So also Humanity is the Essence of man, and Deity the Essence of Deus.

Spirit is Thin, Fluid, Transparent, Invisible Body. The word in Latin
signifies Breath, Air, Wind and the like. In Greek (...)from (...), Spiro, Flo.

I have seen, and so have many more two waters, one of the River, the other a
Mineral Water, so like, that no man could discern the one from the other by his
sight; yet when they have been both put together, the whole substance could not
by the eye be distinguished from milk. Yet we know that the one was not mixed
with the other, so as every part of the one to be in every part of the other,
for that is impossible, unless two Bodies can be in the the same place. How
then could the change be made in every part, but only by the Activity of the
Mineral water, changing it every where to the Sense, and yet not being every
where and in every part of the water? If then such gross Bodies have so great
Activity, what shall we think of Spirits, whose kinds be as many as there be
kinds of Liquor, and Activity greater? Can it then be doubted, but that God,
who is an infinitely fine Spirit and withal intelligent, can make and change
all species and kinds of Body as he pleases; but I dare not say, that this is
the way by which God Almighty works, because it is past my apprehension, yet
it serves very well to demonstrate, that the Omnipotence of God implies no
contradiction; and is better than by pretense of magnifying the fineness of the
divine Substance, to reduce it to a Spright or Phantasm, which is Nothing.

A Person, [Lat.] Persona, signifies an intelligent Substance, that acts any
thing in his own or another Name, or by his own or another Authority. Of this
Definition there can be no other proof than from the use of that word, in such
Latin Authors as were esteemed the most skilful in their own Language, of which
number was Cicero. But Cicero, in an Epistle to Atticus, says thus, Vnus
sustineo tres Personas, Mei, Adversarii, and Judicis: That is, I that am but
one man, sustain three Persons; mine own Person, the Person of my Adversary,
and the Person of the Judge. Cicero was here the Substance intelligent, one
man; and because he pleaded for himself, he calls himself, his own Person; and
again, because he pleaded for his Adversary, he says, he sustained the Person
of his Adversary; and lastly, because he himself gave the Sentence, he says, he
sustained the Person of the Judge. In the same sense we use the word in English
vulgarly, calling him that acts by his own Authority, his own Person, and him
that acts by the Authority of another, the Person of that other. And thus we
have the exact meaning of the word Person. The Greek Tongue cannot render it;
for (...)is properly a Face, and Metaphorically, a Vizard of an Actor upon the
Stage. How then did the Greek Fathers render the word Person, as it is in the
blessed Trinity? Not well. Instead of the word Person they put Hypostasis,
which signifies Substance, from whence it might be inferred, that the three
Persons in the Trinity are three divine Substances, that is, three Gods. The
word (...), they could not use, because Face and Vizard are neither of them
honorable Attributes of God, nor explicative of the meaning of the Greek
Church. Therefore the Latin (and consequently the English) Church renders
Hypostasis every where in Athanasius his Creed by Person. But the word
Hypostatical Union is rightly retained and used by Divines, as being the Union
of two Hypostases, that is, of two Substances or Natures in the Person of
Christ. But seeing they also hold the Soul of our Savior to be a Substance,
which though separated from his Body, subsisted nevertheless in it self, and
consequently before it was separated from his Body upon the Cross, was a
distinct Nature from his Body, how will they avoid this Objection, That then
Christ had three Natures, three Hypostases, without granting, that his
Resurrection was a new vivification, and not a return of his Soul out of Heaven
into the Grave? The contrary is not determined by the Church. Thus far in
explication of the words that occur in this Controversy. Now I return again to
his Lordship's Discourse.


J. D. When they have taken away all incorporeal Spirits, what do they leave
God himself to be? He who is the Fountain of all Being, from whom and in whom
all Creatures have their Being, must needs have a real Being of his own. And
what real Being can God have among Bodies and Accidents? for they have left
nothing else in the Universe. Then T. H. may move the same Question of God,
which he did of Devils. I would gladly know in what Classis of Entities, the
Bishop ranketh God? Infinite Being and participated Being are not of the same
nature. Yet to speak according to humane apprehension, (apprehension and
comprehension differ much: T. H. confesses that natural Reason does dictate to
us, that God is Infinite, yet natural Reason cannot comprehend the Infiniteness
of God) I place him among incorporeal Substances or Spirits, because he has
been pleased to place himself in that rank, God is a Spirit. Of which place T.
H. gives his opinion, that it is unintelligible, and all others of the same
nature, and fall not under humane understanding.

They who deny all incorporeal Substances, can understand nothing by God, but
either Nature, (not Naturam naturantem, that is, a real Author of Nature, but
Naturam naturatam, that is, the orderly concourse of natural Causes, as T. H.
seems to intimate) or a fiction of the Brain, without real Being, cherished
for advantage and politic Ends, as a profitable Error, howsoever dignified
with the glorious title of the eternal Cause of all things.


T. H. To his Lordship's Question here, What I leave God to be, I answer, I
leave him to be a most pure, simple, invisible Spirit Corporeal. By Corporeal I
mean a Substance that has Magnitude, and so mean all learned men, Divines and
others, though perhaps there be some common people so rude as to call nothing
Body, but what they can see and feel. To his second Question, What real Being
he can have amongst Bodies and Accidents, I answer, The Being of a Spirit, not
of a Spright. If I should ask any the most subtle Distinguisher, what middle
nature there were between an infinitely subtle Substance, and a mere Thought or
Phantasm, by what Name could he call it? He might call it perhaps an
Incorporeal Substance, and so Incorporeal shall pass for a middle nature
between Infinitely subtle and Nothing, and be less subtle than Infinitely
subtle, and yet more subtle than a thought. It Is granted (he says) that the
Nature of God is incomprehensible. Does it therefore follow, that we may give
to the divine Substance what negative Name we please? Because he says, the
whole divine Substance is here and there and every where throughout the World,
and that the Soul of a man is here and there and every where throughout man's
Body, must we therefore take it for a Mystery of Christian Religion, upon his
or any Schoolman's word, without the Scripture, which calls nothing a Mystery
but the Incarnation of the eternal God? Or is Incorporeal a Mystery, when not
at all mentioned in the Bible, but to the contrary it is written, That the
fullness of the Deity was bodily in Christ? When the nature of the thing is
incomprehensible, I can acquiesce in the Scripture, but when the signification
of words are incomprehensible, I cannot acquiesce in the Authority of a
Schoolman.


J. D. We have seen what his Principles are concerning the Deity, they are full
as bad or worse concerning the Trinity. Hear himself. A person is he that is
represented as often as he is represented. And therefore God who has been
represented, that is, personated thrice, may properly enough be said to be
three Persons, though neither the word Person nor Trinity be ascribed to him in
the Bible. And a little after, To conclude, the doctrine of the Trinity as far
as can be gathered directly from the Soripture, is in substance this, that the
God who is always one and the same, was the Person represented by Moses, the
Person represented by his Son incarnate, and the Person represented by the
Apostles. As represented by the Apostles, the holy Spirit by which they spoke
is God. As represented by his Son that was God and Man, the Son is that God. As
represented by Moses, and the High Priests, the Father, that is to say, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is that God. From whence we may gather the
reason why those Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the signification of
the Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament. For they are Persons, that
is, they have their Names from representing, which could not be, till diverse
Persons had represented God, in ruling or in directing under him.

Who is so bold as blind Bayard? The Emblem of a little Boy attempting to lade
all the Water out of the Sea with a Cockle-shell, does sit T. H. as exactly as
if it had been shaped for him, who thinks to measure the profound and
inscrutable Mysteries of Religion, by his own silly, shallow conceits. What is
now become of the great adorable Mystery of the blessed undivided Trinity? It
is shrunk into nothing? Upon his grounds there was a time when there was no
Trinity. And we must blot these words out of our Creed, The Father eternal, the
Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal. And these other words out of our
Bibles, Let us make man after our Image. Unless we mean that this was a
consultation of God with Moses and the Apostles. What is now become of the
eternal generation of the Son of God, if this Sonship did not begin until about
4000 years after the Creation were expired? Upon these grounds every King has
as many Persons, as there be Justices of Peace, and petty Constables in his
Kingdom. Upon this account God Almighty has as many Persons, as there have
been Sovereign Princes in the World since Adam. According to this reckoning
each one of us like so many Geryons, may have as many Persons as we please to
make Procurations. Such bold presumption requires another manner of
confutation.


T. H. As for the words recited, I confess there is a fault in the
Ratiocination, which nevertheless his Lordship has not discovered, but no
Impiety. All that he objecteth is, That it follows hereupon, that there be as
many Persons of a King, as there be petty Constables in his Kingdom. And so
there are, or else he cannot be obeyed. But I never said that a King, and every
one of his Persons are the same Substance. The fault I here made, and saw not
was this; I was to prove, That it is no contradiction (as Lucian, and Heathen
Scoffers would have it) to say of God, he was One and Three. I saw the true
definition of the word Person would serve my turn in this manner; God in his
own Person both created the World, and instituted a Church in Israel, using
therein the Ministry of Moses; the same God in the Person of his Son God and
Man redeemed the same World, and the same Church; the same God in the Person of
the Holy Ghost sanctified the same Church, and all the faithful men in the
World. Is not this a clear proof, that it is no contradiction to say that God
is three Persons and one Substance? And does not the Church distinguish the
Persons in the same manner? See the words of our Catechism. Quest. What do
thou chiefly learn in these Articles of the Belief? Answ. First, I learn to
believe in God the Father, that has made me and all the World; Secondly, In
God the Son, who has redeemed me and all Mankind; Thirdly, In God the Holy
Ghost, that has sanctified me and all the elect people of God. But at what
time was the Church sanctified? Was it not on the day of Pentecost, in the
descending of the Holy Ghost upon the apostles? His Lordship all this while
has catched nothing. It Is I that catched my self, for saying, (instead of, By
the Ministry of Moses) in the Person of Moses. But this Error I no sooner saw,
then I no less publicly corrected then I had committed it, in my Leviathan
converted into Latin, which by this time I think is printed beyond the Seas
with this alteration, and also with the omission of some such passages as
Strangers are not concerned in. And I had corrected this Error sooner, if I had
sooner found it. For though I was told by Dr. Cosins, now Bishop of Duresme,
that the place above cited was not applicable enough to the Doctrine of the
Trinity, yet I could not in reviewing the same espy the defect till of late,
when being solicited from beyond Sea to translate the Book into Latin, and
fearing some other man might do it not to my liking, I examined this passage
and others of the like sense more narrowly. But how concludes his Lordship out
of this, that I put out of the Creed these words, The Father eternal, the Son
eternal, the Holy Ghost eternal? Or these words, Let us make man after our
Image, out of the Bible. Which last words neither I nor Bellarmine put out of
the Bible, but we both put them out of the number of good Arguments to prove
the Trinity; for it is no unusual thing in the Hebrew, as may be seen by
Bellarmine's quotations, to join a Noun of the plural Number with a Verb of the
singular. And we may say also of many other Texts of Scripture alleged to
prove the Trinity, that they are not so firm as that high Article requires.
But mark his Lordship's Scholastic charity in the last words of this period,
Such bold presumption requires another manner of confutation. This Bishop, and
others of his opinion had been in their Element, if they had been Bishops in
Queen Mary's time.


J. D. Concerning God the Son, forgetting what he had said elsewhere, where he
calls him God and Man, and the Son of God incarnate, he doubts not to say,
that the word Hypostatical is canting. As if the same Person could be both God
and Man without a Personal, that is, an Hypostatical Union of the two Natures
of God and Man.


T. H. If Christian Profession be (as certainly it is in England) a Law, and if
it be of the nature of a Law to be made known to all men that are to obey it,
in such manner as they may have no excuse for disobedience from their
ignorance, then without doubt all words unknown to the people, and as to them
insignificant, are Canting. The word Substance is understood by the Vulgar well
enough, when it is said of a Body, but in other sense not at all, except for
their Riches. But the word Hypostatical is understood only by those, and but
few of those that are learned in the Greek Tongue, and is properly used, as I
have said before, of the Union of the two Natures of Christ in one Person. So
likewise Consubstantial in the Nicene Creed, is properly said of the Trinity.
But to an English man that understands neither Greek nor Latin, and yet is as
much concerned as his Lordship was, the word Hypostatical is no less Canting
than Eternal now.


J. D. He allows every man who is commanded by his lawful Sovereign, to deny
Christ with his tongue before men.


T. H. I allow it in some Cases, and to some men, which his Lordship knew well
enough, but would not mention. I alleged for it, in the place cited, both
Reason and Scripture, though his Lordship thought it not expedient to take
notice of either. If it be true that I have said, why does he blame it? If
false, why offers he no Argument against it, neither from Scripture nor from
Reason? Or why does he not show that the Text I cite is non applicable to the
Question, or not well interpreted by me. First, He barely cites it, because he
thought the words would sound harshly, and make a Reader admire them for
Impiety. But I hope I shall so well instruct my Reader are I leave this place,
that this his petty Art will have no effect. Secondly, The Cause why he omitted
my Arguments was, That he could not answer them. Lastly, The Cause why he
urges neither Scripture nor Reason against it was, That he saw none
sufficient. My Argument from Scripture was this, ( Leviathan, page 271.) taken
out of 2 Kings 5.17. where Naaman the Syrian says to Elisha the Prophet, Thy
servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifice to other
Gods, but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when
my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my
hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon: when I bow my self in the house
of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing, and he said unto him, Go
in peace. What can be said to this? Did not Elisha say it from God? Or is not
this Answer of the Prophet a permission? When St. Paul and St. Peter commanded
the Christians of their time to obey their Princes, which then were Heathens
and Enemies of Christ, did they mean they should lose their Lives for
disobedience? Did they not rather mean they should preserve both their Lives
and their Faith, (believing in Christ as they did) by this denial of the
tongue, having no command to the contrary? If in this Kingdom a Mohammedan
should be made by terror to deny Mahomet and go to Church with us, would any
man condemn this Mohammedan? A denial with the mouth may perhaps be prejudicial
to the power of the Church, but to retain the Faith of Christ steadfastly in his
Heart, cannot be prejudicial to his Soul that has undertaken no charge to
preach to Wolves, whom they know will destroy them. About the time of the
Council of Nice, there was a Canon made (which is extant in the History of the
Nicene Council) concerning those that being Christians had been seduced, not
terrified, to a denial of Christ, and again repenting, desired to be readmitted
into the Church; in which Canon it was ordained that those men should be no
otherwise readmitted than to be in the number of the Catechized, and not to be
admitted to the Communion till a great many years penitence. Surely the Church
then would have been more merciful to them that did the same upon terror of
present death and torments.

Let us now see what his Lordship might, though but colourably, have alleged
from Scripture against it. There be three places only that seem to favor his
Lordship's opinion. The first is where Peter denied Christ, and weepeth. The
second is, Acts 5.29. Then Peter and the other Apostles answered and said, we
ought to obey God rather than men. The third is, Luke 12.9. But he that denies
me, shall be denied before the Angels of God.


T. H. For answer to these Texts, I must repeat what I have written, and his
Lordship read in my Leviathan, page 362. For an unlearned man that is in the
power of an Idolatrous King, or State, if commanded on pain of Death to worship
before an Idol, doing it, he detesteth the Idol in his Heart, he does well;
though if he had the fortitude to suffer Death, rather than worship it, he
should do better. But if a Pastor, who as Christ's Messenger has undertaken to
teach Christ's Doctrine to all Nations should do the same, it were not only a
sinful Scandal in respect of other Christian Men's Consciences, but a perfidious
forsaking of his Charge. In which words I distinguish between a Pastor and one
of the Sheep of his Flock. St. Peter sinned in denying Christ; and so does
every Pastor that having undertaken the Charge of Preaching the Gospel in the
Kingdom of an Infidel, where he could expect at the undertaking of his Charge
no less than Death. And why, but because he violates his Trust in doing
contrary to his Commission. St. Peter was an Apostle of Christ, and bound by
his voluntary undertaking of that Office, not only to Confess Christ, but also
to Preach him before those Infidels whom he knew would (like Wolves) devour
him. And therefore when Paul and the rest of the Apostles were forbidden to
preach Christ they gave this Answer, We ought to obey God rather than Men. And
it was to his Disciples only which had undertaken that Office, that Christ
says, he that denies me before Men, shall be denied before the Angels of God.
And so I think I have sufficiently answered this place, and showed that I do
not allow the denying of Christ, upon any color of Torments, to his Lordship,
nor to any other that has undertaken the Office of a Preacher. Which if he
think right, he will perhaps in this case put himself into the number of those
whom he calls merciful Doctors, whereas now he extends his severity beyond the
bounds of common equity. He has read Cicero, and perhaps this Story in him. The
Senate of Rome would have sent Cicero to treat of Peace with Marcus Antonius,
but when Cicero had showed them the just fear he had of being killed by him, he
was excused; and if they had forced him to it, and he by terror turned Enemy to
them, he had in equity been excusable. But his Lordship I believe did write
this more valiantly than he would have acted it.


J. D. He Deposes Christ from his true Kingly Office, making his Kingdom not
to Commence or begin before the day of Judgment. And the Regiment wherewith
Christ Governs his Faithful in this Life, is not properly a Kingdom, but a
Pastoral Office, or a right to Teach. And a little after, Christ had not Kingly
Authority committed to him by his Father in this World, but only Consiliary and
Doctrinal.


T. H. How do I take away Christ's Kingly Office? He neither draws it by
Consequence from my Words, nor offers any Argument at all against my Doctrine.
The words he cites are in the Contents of Chap. 17. de Cive. In the Body of the
Chapter it is thus. The time of Christ's being upon the Earth is called in
Scripture the Regeneration often, but the Kingdom never. When the Son of God
comes in Majesty, and all the Angels with him, then he shall sit on the seat of
Majesty. My Kingdom is not of this World. God sent not his Son that he should
judge the World. I came not to judge the World, but to save the World. Man, who
made me a Judge or Divider amongst you? Let thy Kingdom come. And other words
to the same purpose; out of which it is clear that Christ took upon him no
Regal Power upon Earth before his Assumption. But at his Assumption his
Apostles asked him if he would then restore the Kingdom to Israel, and he
answered, it was not for them to know. So that hitherto Christ had not taken
that Office upon him, unless his Lordship think that the Kingdom of God, and
the Kingdom of Christ be two distinct Kingdoms. From the Assumption ever since,
all true Christians say daily in their Prayers, Thy Kingdom come. But his
Lordship had perhaps forgot that. But when then begins Christ to be a King?
I say it shall be then when he comes again in Majesty with all the Angels. And
even then he shall reign (as he is Man) under his Father. For St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 15.25, 26. He must reign till he has put all Enemies under his feet; the
last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. But when shall God the Father
reign again? St. Paul says in the same Chapter verse 28. When all things shall
be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all. And verse 24. Then comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father;
when he shall have put down all Rule, Authority and Power. This is at the
Resurrection. And by this it is manifest, that his Lordship was not so well
versed in Scripture, as he ought to have been.


J. D. He takes away his Priestly or Propitiatory Office; And although this
Act of our Redemption be not always in Scripture called a Sacrifice and
Oblation, but sometimes a Price, yet by Price we are not to understand any
thing, by the value whereof he could claim right to a Pardon for us from his
Offended Father, but that Price which God the Father was pleased in mercy to
demand. And again, Not that the Death of one Man though without sin, can
satisfy for the Offenses of all Men in the rigor of Justice, but in the mercy
of God, that ordained such Sacrifices for sin, as he was pleased in mercy to
accept. He knows no difference between one who is mere man, and one who was
both God and man; between a Levitical Sacrifice, and the All-sufficient
Sacrifice of the Cross; between the Blood of a Calf, and the precious Blood of
the Son of God.


T. H. Yes, I know there is a difference between Blood and Blood, but not any
such as can make a difference in the Case here questioned. Our Savior's Blood
was most precious, but still it was Humane Blood; and I hope his Lordship did
never think otherwise, or that it was not accepted by his Father for our
Redemption.


J. D. And touching the Prophetical Office of Christ, I do much doubt whether
he do believe in earnest, that there is any such thing as Prophecy in the
World. He makes very little difference between a Prophet and a Madman, and a
Demoniack. And if there were nothing else (says he) that bewrayed their
madness, yet that very arrogating such inspiration to themselves, is Argument
enough. He makes the pretense of Inspiration in any man to be, and always to
have been, on opinion pernicious to Peace, and tending to the dissolution of
all Civil Government. He subjecteth all Prophetical Revelations from God, to
the sole Pleasure and Censure of the Sovereign Prince, either to Authorize
them, or to Exauctorate them. So as two Prophets prophesying the same thing at
the same time, in the Dominions of two different Princes, the one shall be a
true Prophet, the other a false. And Christ who had the approbation of no
Sovereign Prince, upon his grounds, was to be reputed a false Prophet every
where. Every man therefore ought to consider who is the Sovereign Prophet, that
is to say, who it is that is Gods Vicegerent upon Earth, and has next under
God the Authority of governing Christian Men, and to observe for a Rule that
Doctrine which in the Name of God he has Commanded to be taught, and thereby
to examine and try out the truth of those Doctrines which pretended Prophets,
with miracle, or without, shall at any time advance, etc. And if he disavow
them, then no more to obey their Voice; or if he approve them, then to obey
them as Men, to whom God has given a part of the Spirit of their Sovereign.
Upon his Principles the case holds as well among Jews and Turks and Heathens,
as Christians. Then he that teaches Transubstantiation in France, is a true
Prophet; he that teaches in it England, a false Prophet. He that blasphemeth
Christ in Constantinople, a true Prophet; he that does the same in Italy, a
false Prophet. Then Samuel was a false Prophet to contest with Saul a Sovereign
Prophet: So was the Man of God who submitted not to the more Divine and
Prophetic Spirit of Jeroboam. And Elijah for reproving Ahab. Then Michaiah had
but his deserts, to be clapped up in Prison, and fed with Bread of Affliction,
and Water of Affliction, for daring to contradict God's Vicegerent upon Earth.
And Jeremiah was justly thrown into a Dungeon, for Prophesying against Zedekiah
his Liege Lord. If his Principles were true, it were strange indeed, that none
of all these Princes, nor any other that ever was in the World, should
understand their own Privileges. And yet more strange, that God Almighty
should take the part of such Rebellious Prophets, and justify their Prophesies
by the Event, if is were true that none but the Sovereign in a Christian (the
reason is the same for Jewish) Commonwealth can take notice, what is or what is
not the Word of God.


T. H. To remove his Lordship's doubt in the first place, I confess there was
true Prophecy and true Prophets in the Church of God, from Abraham down to our
Savior the greatest Prophet of all, and the last of the Old Testament, and
first of the New. After our Savior's time, till the death of St. John the
Apostle, there were true Prophets in the Church of Christ, Prophets to whom God
spoke supernaturally, and testified the truth of their Mission by Miracles. Of
those that in the Scripture are called Prophets without Miracles, and for this
cause only, that they spoke in the Name of God to Men, and in the name of Men
to God, there are, have been, and shall be in the Church innumerable. Such a
Prophet was his Lordship, and such are all Pastors in the Christian Church. But
the Question here is of those Prophets that from the Mouth of God foretell
things future, or do other Miracle. Of this kind I deny there has been any
since the Death of St. John the Evangelist. If any Man find fault with this, he
ought to name some Man or other whom we are bound to acknowledge that they have
done a Miracle, cast out a Devil, or cured any Disease by the sole Invocation
of the Divine Majesty. We are not bound to trust to the Legend of the Roman
Saints, nor to the History written by Sulpitius of the Life of St. Martin, or
to any other Fables of the Roman Clergy, nor to such things as were pretended
to be done by some Divines here in the time of King James. Secondly, he says I
make little difference between a Prophet and a Madman, or Demoniack; To which
I say he accuses me falsely. I say only thus much, That I see nothing at all in
the Scripture that requires a belief, that Demoniacks were any other-thing
than Madmen. And this is also made very probable out of Scripture by a worthy
Divine Mr. Meade. But concerning Prophets, I say only that the Jews both under
the Old Testament and under the New, took them to be all one with Madmen and
Demoniacks. And prove it out of Scripture by many places both of the Old and
New Testament. Thirdly, that the pretense or arrogating to ones self Divine
Inspiration, is argument enough to show a Man is Mad, is my opinion; but his
Lordship understands not Inspiration in the same sense that I do. He
understands it properly of God's breathing into a Man, or pouring into him the
Divine Substance, or Divine Graces, and in that sense, he that arrogateth
Inspiration into himself, neither understands what he says, nor makes others
to understand him, which is properly Madness in some degree. But I understand
Inspiration in the Scripture Metaphorically, for Gods guidance of our minds to
Truth and Piety. Fourthly, whereas he says, I make the pretense of Inspiration
to be pernicious to Peace. I answer, that I think his Lordship was of my
Opinion, for he called those Men which in the late Civil War pretended the
Spirit, and New Light, and to be the only faithful men Phanaticks; for he
called them in his Book, and did call them in his Life time Phanaticks. And
what is a Phanatick but a Madman, and what can be more pernicious to Peace than
the Revelations that were by these Phanaticks pretended? I do not say there
were Doctrines of other Men, not called Phanaticks as pernicious to Peace, as
theirs were, and in great part a cause of those troubles. Fifthly, from that I
make Prophetical Revelations subject to the examination of the Lawful
Sovereign, he infers, that two Prophets prophesying the same thing at the
same time, in the Dominions of two different Princes, the one shall be a true
Prophet, the other a false. This consequence is not good, for seeing they teach
different Doctrines, they cannot both of them confirm their Doctrine with
Miracles. But this I prove (in the page 232 he cites) that, whether either of
their Doctrines shall be taught publicly or not, it is in the power of the
Sovereign of the Place only to determine. Nay, I say now further, if a Prophet
come to any private Man in the Name of God, that Man shall be Judge whether he
be a true Prophet or not, before he obey him. See 1 John 4. 1. Sixthly, whereas
he says, that upon my grounds Christ was to be reputed a false Prophet every
where, because his Doctrine was received no where. His Lordship had read my
Book more negligently than was fit for one that would confute it. My ground is
this, that Christ in right of his Father was King of the Jews, and consequently
Supreme Prophet, and Judge of all Prophets. What other Princes thought of his
Prophesies, is nothing to the purpose. I never said that Princes can make
Doctrines or Prophesies true or false, but I say every Sovereign Prince has a
right to prohibit the public Teaching of them, whether false or true. But
what an oversight is it in a Divine to say, that Christ had the Approbation of
no Sovereign Prince, when he had the Approbation of God, who was King of the
Jews, and Christ his Viceroy, and the whole Scripture written ( Joh. 20.31.)
to prove it? When his Miracles declared it; when Pilate confessed it; and when
the Apostles Office was to proclaim it? Seventhly, If we must not consider in
points of Christian Faith who is the Sovereign Prophet, that is, who is next
under Christ our Supreme Head and Governor, I wish his Lordship would have
cleared, ere he dyed, these few Questions. Is there not need of some Judge of
Controverted Doctrines? I think no man can deny it, that has seen the Rebellion
that followed the Controversy here between Gomar and Arminius. There must
therefore be a Judge of Doctrines. But (says the Bishop) not the King. Who
then? Shall Dr. Bramhall be this Judge? As profitable an Office as it is, he
was more modest than to say that. Shall a private Layman have it? No man ever
thought that. Shall it be given to a Presbyterian Minister? No; it is
unreasonable. Shall a Synod of Presbyterians have it? No; For most of the
Presbyters in the Primitive Church were undoubtedly subordinate to Bishops, and
the rest were Bishops. Who then? A Synod of Bishops? Very well. His Lordship
being too modest to undertake the whole Power would have been contented with
the six and twentieth part. But suppose it in a Synod of Bishops, who shall
call them together? The King. What if he will not? Who should Excommunicate
him, or if he despise your Excommunication, who shall send forth a Writ of
Significavit? No; all this was far from his Lordships thoughts. The power of
the Clergy, unless it be upheld legally by the King, or illegally by the
Multitude amounts to nothing. But for the Multitude, Suarez and the Schoolmen
will never gain them, because they are not understood. Besides there be very
few Bishops that can act a Sermon (which is a puissant part of Rhetoric) So
well as diverse Presbyterians, and Phanatick Preachers can do. I conclude
therefore, that his Lordship could not possibly believe that the Supreme
Judicature in matter of Religion could any where be so well placed as in the
Head of the Church, which is the King. And so his Lordship and I think the same
thing; but because his Lordship knew not how to deduce it, he was angry with me
because I did it. He says further that by my Principles, he that blasphemeth
Christ at Constantinople is a true Prophet, as if a man that blasphemeth
Christ, to approve his Blasphemy can procure a Miracle; for by my principles no
Man is a Prophet whose Prophecy is not confirmed by God with a Miracle. In the
last place out of this, That the lawful Sovereign is the Judge of Prophecy, he
deduces That then Samuel and other Prophets were false Prophets that contested
with their Sovereigns. As for Samuel he was at that time the Judge, that is to
say the Sovereign Prince in Israel, and so acknowledged by Saul. For Saul
received the Kingdom (from God himself, who had right to give and take it) by
the hands of Samuel. And God gave it him to himself only, and not to his Seed;
though if he had obeyed God, he would have settled it also upon his Seed. The
Commandment of God was, that he should not spare Agag. Saul obeyed not. God
therefore sent Samuel to tell him that he was rejected. For all this Samuel
went not about to resist Saul. That he caused Agag to be slain, was with Saul's
consent. Lastly, Saul confesses his sin. Where is this contesting with Saul?
After this God sent Samuel to anoint David, not that he should depose Saul, but
succeed him, the Sons of Saul having never had a right of Succession. Nor did
ever David make War on Saul, or so much as resist him, but fled from his
persecution. But when Saul was dead, then indeed he claimed his right against
the House of Saul. What Rebellion or Resistance could his Lordship find here,
either in Samuel or in David? Besides, all these Transactions are supernatural,
and oblige not to imitation. Is there any Prophet or Priest now that can set up
in England, Scotland or Ireland, another King by pretense of Prophecy or
Religion? What did Jeroboam to the man of God 1 Kings 13) that prophesied
against the Altar in Bethel, without first doing a Miracle, but offer to seize
him for speaking (as he thought) rashly of the Kings Act; and after the
miraculous withering of his Hand, desire the Prophet to pray for him? The sin
of Jeroboam was not his distrust of the Prophet, but his Idolatry. He was the
sole Judge of the truth which the man of God uttered against the Altar, and the
process agreeable to equity. What is the story of Eliah and Ahab (1 Kings 18.)
but a confirmation of the Right, even of Ahab to be the Judge of Prophecy?
Eliah told Ahab, he had transgressed the Commandment of God. So may any
Minister now tell his Sovereign, so he do it with sincerity and discretion.
Ahab told Eliah he troubled Israel. Upon this controversy Eliah desired trial.
Send, says he, and assemble all Israel; Assemble also the Prophets of Baal
four hundred and fifty. Ahab did so. The Question is stated before the People
thus, If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal follow him. Then upon the
Altars of God and Baal were laid the Wood and the Bullocks; and the cause was
to be judged by Fire from Heaven, to burn the Sacrifices; which Eliah procured,
the Prophets of Baal could not procure, Was not this cause here Pleaded before
Ahab? The Sentence of Ahab is not required; for Eliah from that time forward
was no more persecuted by Ahab, but only by his Wife Jezabel. The story of
Micaiah (2 Cron. 18.) is this, Ahab King of Israel consulted the Prophets, four
hundred in number, whether he should prosper or not, in case he went with
Jehosaphat King of Judah to fight against the Syrians at Ramothgilead. The
Prophet Micaiah was also called, and both the Kings Ahab and Jehosaphat sat
together to hear what they should prophecy. There was no Miracle done. The 400
pronounced Victory, Micaiah alone the contrary. The King was Judge, and most
concerned in the event; nor had he received any Revelation in the business.
What could he do more discreetly than to follow the Counsel of 400 rather than
of one Man? But the event was contrary; for he was slain; but not for following
the Counsel of the 400, but for his Murder of Naboth and his Idolatry. It was
also a sin in him, that he afflicted Micaiah in Prison; but an unjust Judgment
does not take away from any King his right of Judicature. Besides, what is all
this, or that of Jeremiah, which he cites last, to the Question of who is Judge
of Christian Doctrine?


J. D. Neither does he use God the Holy Ghost, more favorably than God the
Son. Where St. Peter says, Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Spirit; He says, By the Spirit, is meant the Voice of God in a Dream or
Vision Supernatural, which Dreams or Visions, he makes to be no more than
imaginations which they had in their sleep, or in an ecstasy, which in every
true Prophet were Supernatural, but in false Prophets were either natural or
feigned, and more likely to be false than true. To say God has spoken to him
in a Dream, is no more than to say, he dreamed that God spoke to him, etc. To
say he has seen a Vision or heard a Voice, is to say, That he has dreamed
between sleeping and waking. So St. Peter's Holy Ghost is come to be their own
imaginations, which might be either feigned, or mistaken, or true. As if the
Holy Ghost did enter only at their eyes, and at their ears, not into their
understandings, nor into their minds; Or as if the Holy Ghost did not seal unto
their hearts the truth and assurance of their Prophesies. Whether a new light
be infused into their understandings, or new graces be inspired into their
heart, they are wrought, or caused, or created immediately by the Holy Ghost,
And so are his imaginations, if they be Supernatural.


T. H. For the places of my Leviathan he cites, they are all as they stand both
true and clearly proved; the setting of them down by Fragments is no
Refutation; nor offers he any Argument against them. His consequences are not
deduced. I never said that the Holy Ghost was an Imagination, or a Dream, or a
Vision, but that the Holy Ghost spoke most often in the Scripture by Dreams and
Visions supernatural. The next words of his, As if the Holy Ghost did enter
only at their eyes, and at their ears, not into their understandings, nor into
their minds, I let pass, because I cannot understand them. His last words,
Whether new light, etc. I understand and approve.


J. D. But he must needs fall into these absurdities, who makes but a jest of
inspiration. They who pretend Divine inspiration to be a supernatural entering
of the Holy Ghost into a Man, are (as he thinks) in a very dangerous Dilemma;
for if they worship not the Men whom they conceive to be inspired, they fall
into impiety; and if they worship them, they commit Idolatry. So mistaking the
Holy Ghost to be corporeal, some thing that is blown into a Man, and the Graces
of the Holy Ghost to be corporeal Graces. And the words, inpoured or infused
virtue, and, inblown or inspired virtue, are as absurd and insignificant, as a
round Quadrangle. He reckons it as a common error, That faith and sanctity are
not attained by study and reason, but by supernatural inspiration or infusion.
And lays this for a firm ground; Faith and Sanctity are indeed not very
frequent, but yet they are not Miracles, but brought to pass by Education,
Discipline, Correction, and other natural ways. I would see the greatest
Pelagian of them all fly higher.


T. H. I make here no jest of Inspiration. Seriously, I say, that in the proper
signification of the words Inspiration and Infusion, to say virtue is inspired,
or infused, is as absurd as to say a Quadrangle is round. But Metaphorically,
for Gods bestowing of Faith, Grace, or other Virtue, those words are
intelligible enough.


J. D. Why should he trouble himself about the Holy Spirit, who acknowledges
no Spirit but either a subtle fluid body, or a Ghost, or other Idol or Phantasm
of the imagination; who knows no inward Grace or intrinsecal Holiness? Holy
is a word which in Gods Kingdom answers to that which men in their Kingdoms
use to call public, or the Kings. And again, wheresoever the word Holy is
taken properly, there is still some thing signified of propriety gotten by
consent. His Holiness is a Relation, not a Quality; for inward sanctification,
or real infused holiness, in respect whereof the third, Person is called the
Holy Ghost, because he is not only holy in himself, but also makes us holy, he
is so great a stranger to it, that he does altogether deny it, and disclaim it.


T. H. The word Holy I had defined in the words which his Lordship here sets
down, and by the use thereof in the Scripture made it manifest, That that was
the true signification of the word. There is nothing in Learning more difficult
than to determine the signification of words. That difficulty excuses him. He
says that Holiness (in my sense) is a Relation, not a Quality. All the Learned
agree that Quality is an Accident, so that in attributing to God Holiness (as a
Quality) he contradicts himself; for he has in the beginning of this his
discourse denied (and rightly) that any Accident is in God, saying whatsoever
is in God is the Divine Substance. He affirms also, that to attribute any
Accident to God, is to deny the simplicity of the Divine Substance. And thus
his Lordship makes God, as I do, a Corporeal Spirit. Both here, and throughout,
he discovers so much ignorance, as had he charged me with error only, and not
with Atheism, I should not have thought it necessary to answer him.


J. D. We are taught in our Creed to believe the Catholic or Universal Church.
But T. H. teaches us the contrary, That if there be more Christian Churches
than one, all of them together are not one Church personally, And more plainly,
Now if the whole number of Christians be not contained in one Commonwealth,
they are not one Person, nor is there an Universal Church, that has any
Authority over them. And again, The Universal Church is not one Person, of
which it can be said, that it has done, or Decreed, or Ordained, or
Excommunicated, or Absolved. This does quite overthrow all the Authority of
General Councils.

All other Men distinguish between the Church and the Commonwealth; only T. H.
makes them to be one and the same thing. The Commonwealth of Christian men,
and the Church of the same, are altogether the same thing, called by two names,
for two reasons. For the matter of the Church and of the Commonwealth is the
same, namely the same Christian men; and the Form is the same, which consists
in the lawful power of convocating them. And hence he concludes, That every
Christian Commonwealth is a Church endowed with all spiritual Authority. And
yet more fully, The Church if it be one Person, is the same thing with the
Commonwealth of Christians, called a Commonwealth, because it consists of
men united in one Person their Sovereign; And a Church because it consists in
Christian men united in one Christian Sovereign. Upon which account there was
no Christian Church in these Parts of the World, for some hundreds of years
after Christ, because there was no Christian Sovereign.


T. A. For answer to this Period, I say only this, That taking the Church (as I
do in all those places) for a company of Christian men on Earth incorporated
into one Person, that can speak, command, or do any act of a Person, all that
he cites out of what I have written is true; and that all private
Conventicles, though their belief be right, are not properly called Churches;
and that there is not any one Universal Church here on Earth which is a Person
endued with Authority universal to govern all Christian men on Earth, no more
than there is one Universal Sovereign Prince or State on Earth that has right
to govern all Mankind. I deny also that the whole Clergy of a Christian Kingdom
or State being assembled, are the representative of that Church further than
the Civil Laws permits; or can lawfully assemble themselves, unless by the
command or by the leave of the Sovereign Civil Power. I say further, that the
denial of this point tends in England toward the taking away of the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. But his Lordship has not here denied any
thing of mine, because he has done no more but set down my words. He says
further, that this Doctrine destroys the Authority of all General Councils;
which I confess. Nor has any General Council at this day in this Kingdom the
force of a Law, nor ever had, but by the Authority of the King.


J. D. Neither is he more Orthodox concerning the Holy Scriptures, Hitherto,
that is, for the Books of Moses, the power of making the Scripture Canonical,
was in the Civil Sovereign. The like he says of the Old Testament, made
Canonical by Esdras. And of the New Testament, That it was not the Apostles
which made their own Writings Canonical, but every Convert made them so to
himself. Yet with this restriction, That until the Sovereign Ruler had
prescribed them, they were but Counsel and Advice, which whether good or bad,
he that was counseled might without injustice refuse to observe, and being
contrary to the Laws established, could not without injustice observe. He
makes the Primitive Christians to have been in a pretty condition. Certainly
the Gospel was contrary to the Laws then established. But most plainly, The
word of the Interpreter of the Scripture is the word of God. And the same is
the Interpreter of the Scripture, and the Sovereign Judge of all Doctrines,
that is, the Sovereign Magistrate, to whose Authority we must stand no less,
than to theirs, who at first did commend the Scripture to us for the Canon of
Faith. Thus if Christian Sovereigns, of different Communications, do clash one
with another, in their interpretations, or misinterpretation of Scripture (as
they do daily) then the word of God is contradictory to it self; or that is the
word of God in one Commonwealth, which is the word of the Devil in another
Commonwealth. And the same thing may be true, and not true at the same time:
Which is the peculiar privilege of T.H. to make Contradictories to be true
together.


T. H. There is no doubt but by what Authority the Scripture or any other
Writing is made a Law, by the same Authority the Scriptures are to be
interpreted, or else they are made Law in vain. But to obey is one thing, to
believe is another; which distinction perhaps his Lordship never heard of. To
obey is to do or forbear as one is commanded, and depends on the Will; but to
believe depends not on the Will, but on the providence and guidance of our
hearts that are in the hands of God Almighty. Laws only require obedience;
Belief requires Teachers and Arguments drawn either from Reason, or from some
thing already believed. Where there is no reason for our Belief, there is no
reason we should believe. The reason why men believe, is drawn from the
Authority of those men whom we have no just cause to mistrust, that is, of such
men to whom no profit accrues by their deceiving us, and of such men as never
used to lie, or else from the Authority of such men whose Promises, Threats,
and Affirmations we have seen confirmed by God with Miracles. If it be not from
the Kings Authority that the Scripture is Law, what other Authority makes it
Law? Here some man being of his Lordships judgment will perhaps laugh and say,
it is the Authority of God that makes them Law. I grant that. But my question
is, on what Authority they believe that God is the Author of them? Here his
Lordship would have been at a Nonplus, and turning round, would have said the
Authority of the Scripture makes good that God is their Author. If it be said
we are to believe the Scripture upon the Authority of the Universal Church, why
are not the Books we call Apocrypha the Word of God as well as the rest? If
this Authority be in the Church of England, then it is not any other than the
Authority of the Head of the Church, which is the King. For without the Head
the Church is mute, the Authority therefore is in the King; which is all that I
contended for in this point. As to the Laws of the Gentiles, concerning
Religion in the Primitive times of the Church, I confess they were contrary to
Christian Faith. But none of their Laws, nor Terrors, nor a man's own Will are
able to take away Faith, though they can compel to an external obedience; and
though I may blame the Ethnic Princes for compelling men to speak what they
thought not, yet I absolve not all those that have had the Power in Christian
Churches from the same fault. For I believe since the time of the first four
General Councels, there have been more Christians burnt and killed in the
Christian Church by Ecclesiastical Authority, than by the Heathen Emperors Laws
for Religion only without Sedition. All that the Bishop does in this Argument
is but a heaving at the Kings Supremacy. Oh, but (says he) if two Kings
interpret a place of Scripture in contrary senses, it will follow that both
senses are true. It does not follow, For the interpretation, though it be made
by just Authority, must not therefore always be true. If the Doctrine in the
one sense be necessary to Salvation, then they that hold the other must dye in
their sins, and be Damned. But if the Doctrine in neither sense be necessary to
Salvation, then all is well, except perhaps that they will call one another
Atheists, and fight about it.


J. D. All the power, virtue, use and efficacy, which he ascribes to the Holy
Sacraments, is to be signs or commemorations. As for any sealing, or
confirming, or conferring of Grace, he acknowledges nothing. The same he says
particularly of Baptism: Upon which grounds a Cardinals red Hat, or a Sergeant
at Arms his Mace, may be called Sacraments as well as Baptism, or the holy
Eucharist, if they be only signs and commemorations of a benefit. If he except,
that Baptism and the Eucharist, are of Divine institution: But a Cardinals red
Hat or a Sergeant at Arms his Mace are not: He says truly but nothing to his
advantage or purpose, seeing he deriveth all the Authority of the Word and
Sacraments, in respect of Subjects, and all our obligation to them, from the
Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate, without which these words repent, and be
Baptized in the name of Jesus, are but Counsel, no Command. And so a Sergeant
at Arms his Mace, and Baptism, proceed both from the same Authority. And this
he says upon this filly ground, That nothing is a Command, the performance
whereof tends to our own benefit. He might as well deny the Ten Commandments
to be Commands, because they have an advantageous promise annexed to them, Do
this and thou shall live; And Cursed is every one that continues not in all
the words of this Law to do them.


T. H. Of the Sacraments I said no more, than that they are Signs or
Commemorations. He finds fault that I add not Seals, Confirmations, and that
they confer grace. First, I would have asked him if a Seal be any thing else
besides a Sign, whereby to remember somewhat, as that we have promised,
accepted, acknowledged, given, undertaken somewhat. Are not other Signs though
without a Seal, of force sufficient to convince me or oblige me? A Writing
obligatory, or Release signed only with a man's name is as Obligatory as a Bond
signed and sealed, if it be sufficiently proved, though peradventure it may
require a longer Process to obtain a Sentence, but his Lordship I think knew
better than I do the force of Bonds and Bills; yet I know this that in the
Court of Heaven there is no such difference between saying, signing, and
sealing, as his Lordship seems here to pretend. I am Baptized for a
Commemoration that I have enrolled my self. I take the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to Commemorate that Christ's Body was broken, and his Blood shed for my
redemption. What is there more intimated concerning the nature of these
Sacraments, either in the Scripture or in the Book of Common Prayer? Have Bread
and Wine and Water in their own Nature, any other Quality than they had before
the Consecration? It is true that the Consecration gives these bodies a new
Relation, as being a giving and dedicating of them to God, that is to say a
making of them Holy, not a changing of their Quality. But as some silly young
men returning from France affect a broken English, to be thought perfect in the
French language; so his Lordship (I think) to seem a perfect understander of
the unintelligible language of the Schoolmen, pretends an ignorance of his
Mother Tongue. He talks here of Command and Counsel as if he were no English
man, nor knew any difference between their significations. What English man
when he commands, says more than, Do this; yet he looks to be obeyed, if
obedience be due unto him. But when he says, Do this, and thou shall have such
or such a Reward, he encourages him, or advises him, or Bargains with him, but
Commands him not. Oh, the understanding of a Schoolman.


J. D. Sometimes he is for holy Orders, and gives to the Pastors of the Church
the right of Ordination and Absolution, and Infallibility, too much for a
particular Pastor, or the Pastors of one particular Church. It is manifest,
that the consecration of the chiefest Doctors in every Church, and imposition
of hands, does pertain to the Doctors of the same Church. And it cannot be
doubted of, but the power of binding and loosing was given by Christ to the
future Pastors, after the same manner as to his present Apostles. And our
Savior has promised this infallibility in those things which are necessary to
Salvation, to his Apostles, until the day of Judgment, that is to say, to the
Apostles and Pastors, to be Consecrated by the Apostles successively, by the
imposition of hands.

But at other times he casts all this Meal down with his foot. Christian
Sovereigns are the supreme Pastors, and the only persons whom Christians now
hear speak from God, except such as God speaks to in these days
supernaturally. What is now become of the promised infallibility?

And it is from the Civil Sovereign that all other Pastors derive their right
of teaching, preaching, and all other functions pertaining to that Office, and
they are but his Ministers in the same manner as the Magistrates of Towns, or
Judges in Courts of Justice, and Commanders of Armies. What is now become of
their Ordination? Magistrates, Judges, and Generals, need no precedent
qualifications. He makes the Pastoral Authority of Sovereigns to be Jure
divino, of all other Pastors Jure civili: He adds, neither is there any Judge
of Heresy among Subjects, but their own civil Sovereign.

Lastly, the Church Excommunicateth no man but whom she Excommunicateth by the
Authority of the Prince. And the effect of Excommunication has nothing in it,
neither of damage in this World, nor terror upon an Apostate, if the Civil
Power did persecute or not assist the Church. And in the World to come, leaves
them in no worse estate, than those who never believed. The damage rather
redoundeth to the Church. Neither is the Excommunication of a Christian
Subject, that obeys the Laws of his own Sovereign, of any effect. Where is
now their power of binding and loosing?


T. H. Here his Lordship condemns, first my too much kindness to the Pastors
of the Church; as if I ascribed Infallibility to every particular Minister, or
at least to the Assembly of the Pastors of a particular Church. But he mistakes
me, I never meant to flatter them so much. I say only that the Ceremony of
Consecration, and Imposition of hands belongs to them; and that also no
otherwise than as given them by the Laws of the Commonwealth. The Bishop
Consecrates, but the King both makes him Bishop and gives him his Authority.
The Head of the Church not only gives the power of Consecration, Dedication,
and Benediction, but may also exercise the Act himself if he please. Solomon
did it, and the Book of Canons says, That the King of England has all the Right
that any good King of Israel had. It might have added that any other King or
sovereign Assembly had in their own Dominions. I deny That any Pastor or any
Assembly of Pastors in any particular Church, or all the Churches on earth
though united are Infallible. Yet I say the Pastors of a Christian Church
assembled are in all such points as are necessary to Salvation. But about what
points are necessary to Salvation he and I differ. For I in the 43d chapter of
my Leviathan have proved that this Article, Jesus is the Christ, is the unum
necessarium, the only Article necessary to Salvation; to which his Lordship
has not offered any Objection. And he (it seems) would have necessary to
Salvation every Doctrine he himself thought so. Doubtless in this Article,
Jesus is the Christ, every Church is infallible; for else it were no Church.
Then he says, I overthrow this again by saying that Christian Sovereigns are
the Supreme Pastors, that is, Heads of their own Churches; That they have their
Authority Jure Divino; That all other Pastors have it Jure Civili: How came any
Bishop to have Authority over me, but by Letters Patents from the King? I
remember a Parliament wherein a Bishop, who was both a good Preacher and a good
Man, was blamed for a Book he had a little before Published in maintenance of
the Jus Divinum of Bishops; a thing which before the Reformation here, was
never allowed them by the Pope. Two Jus Divinums cannot stand together in one
Kingdom. In the last place he mislikes that the Church should Excommunicate by
Authority of the King, that is to say, by Authority of the Head of the Church.
But he tells not why. He might as well mislike that the Magistrates of the
Realm should execute their Offices by the Authority of the Head of the Realm.
His Lordship was in a great error, if he thought such encroachments would add
any thing to the Wealth, Dignity, Reverence or Continuance of his Order. They
are Pastors of Pastors, but yet they are the Sheep of him that is on earth
their sovereign Pastor, and he again a Sheep of that supreme Pastor which is in
Heaven. And if they did their pastoral Office, both by Life and Doctrine, as
they ought to do, there could never arise any dangerous Rebellion in the Land.
But if the people see once any ambition in their Teachers, they will sooner
learn that, than any other Doctrine; and from Ambition proceeds Rebellion.


J. D. It may be some of T. H. his Disciples desire to know what hopes of
Heavenly joys they have upon their Masters Principles. They may hear them
without any great contentment, There is no mention in Scripture, nor ground in
reason, of the Coelum Empyraeum, that is, the Heaven of the Blessed, where the
Saints shall live eternally with God. And again, I have not found any Text that
can probably be drawn to prove any Ascension of the Saints into Heaven, that is
to say, into any Coelum Empyraeum. But he concludes positively, that Salvation
shall be upon earth, when God shall Reign at the coming of Christ in Jerusalem.
And again, In short, the Kingdom of God is a civil Kingdom, etc. called also
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of Glory. All the Hobbians can hope for,
is, to be restored to the same condition which Adam was in before his fall. So
says T.H. himself, From whence may be inferred, that the Elect, after the
Resurrection, shall be restored to the estate wherein Adam was before he had
sinned: As for the beatifical vision he defines it to be a word unintelligible.


T.H. This Coelum Empyraeum for which he pretends so much zeal, where is it
in the Scripture, where in the Book of Common Prayer, where in the Canons,
where in the Homilies of the Church of England, or in any part of our Religion?
What has a Christian to do with such Language? Nor do I remember it in
Aristotle. Perhaps it may be in some Schoolman or Commentator on Aristotle, and
his Lordship makes it in English the Heaven of the Blessed, as if Empyraeum
signified That which belongs to the Blessed. St. Austin says better; that after
the day of Judgment all that is not Heaven shall be Hell. Then for Beatifical
vision, how can any man understand it that knows from the Scripture that no man
ever saw or can see God. Perhaps his Lordship thinks that the happiness of the
Life to come is not real but a Vision. As for that which I say ( Lev. page
345.) I have answered to it already.


J. D. But considering his other Principles, I do not marvel much at his
extravagance in this point. To what purpose should a Coelum Empyraeum, or
Heaven of the Blessed, serve in his judgment, who makes the blessed Angels
that are the Inhabitants of that happy Mansion, to be either Idols of the
brain, that is in plain English, nothing, or thin, subtle, fluid bodies,
destroying the Angelical nature. The universe being the aggregate of all
bodies, there is no real part thereof that is not also body. And elsewhere,
Every part of the Universe is Body, and that which is not Body, is no part of
the Universe. And because the Universe is all, that which is no part of it is
nothing, and consequently no where. How? By this Doctrine he makes not only
the Angels, but God himself to be nothing. Neither does he salve it at all by
supposing erroneously Angels to be corporeal Spirits, and by attributing the
name of incorporeal Spirit to God, as being a name of more honor, in whom we
consider not what Attribute best expresses his nature, which is
incomprehensible, but what best expresses our desire to honor him. Though we
be not able to comprehend perfectly what God is, yet we are able perfectly to
comprehend what God is not, that is, he is not imperfect, and therefore he is
not finite, and consequently he is not corporeal. This were a trim way to
honor God indeed to honor him with a lie. If this that he say here be true,
That every part of the Universe is a Body, and whatsoever is not a Body is
nothing. Then by this Doctrine, if God be not a Body, God is nothing; not an
incorporeal Spirit, but one of the Idols of the Brain, a mere nothing, though
they think they dance under a Net, and have the blind of Gods
incomprehensibility, between them and discovery.


T. H. This of Incorporeal substance he urged before, and there I answered it.
I wonder he so often rolls the same stone. He is like Sysiphus in the Poets
Hell, that there rolls a heavy stone up a hill, which no sooner he brings to
daylight, then it slips down again to the bottom, and serves him so
perpetually. For so his Lordship rolls this and other questions with much ado
till they come to the light of Scripture; and then they vanish, and he vexing,
sweating, and railing goes to it again, to as little purpose as before. From
that I say of the Universe he infers, that I make God to be nothing. But infers
it absurdly. He might indeed have inferred that I make him a Corporeal, but yet
a pure Spirit. I mean by the Universe, the Aggregate of all things that have
being in themselves, and so do all men else. And because God has a being, it
follows that he is either the whole Universe, or part of it. Nor does his
Lordship go about to disprove it, but only seems to wonder at it.


J. D. To what purpose should a Coelum Empyraeum serve in his Judgment, who
denies the immortality of the Soul? The Doctrine is now, and has been a long
time far otherwise; namely, that every man has eternity of life by nature, in
as much as his Soul is immortal. Who supposes that when a man dies, there
remains nothing of him but his Carkase; who makes the word Soul in holy
Scripture to signify always either the Life, or the Living Creature? And
expounds the casting of Body and Soul into Hellfire, to be the casting of
Body and Life into Hellfire. Who makes this Orthodox truth, that the Souls of
men are Substances distinct from their Bodies, to be an error contracted by the
contagion of the Demonology of the Greeks, and a window that gives entrance to
the dark Doctrine of eternal torments. Who expounds these words of Solomon,
[Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return
to God that gave it,] Thus, God only knows what becomes of a man's Spirit, when
he exspireth. He will not acknowledge that there is a Spirit, or any Substance
distinct from the Body. I wonder what they think does keep their Bodies from
stinking.


T. H. He comes here to that which is a great Paradox in School Divinity. The
grounds of my opinion are the Canonical Scripture, and the Texts which I cited
I must again recite, to which I shall also add some others. My Doctrine is
this, First, That the elect in Christ from the day of Judgment forward, by
virtue of Christ's Passion and Victory over death, shall enjoy eternal life,
that is, they shall be Immortal. Secondly, that there is no living Soul
separated in place from the Body, more than there is a living Body separated
from the Soul. Thirdly, That the reprobate shall be revived to Judgment, and
shall dye a second death in Torments, which death shall be everlasting. Now let
us consider what is said to these points in the Scripture, and what is the
harmony therein of the Old and New Testament.

And first, because the word Immortal Soul, is not found in the Scriptures, the
question is to be decided by evident consequences from the Scripture. The
Scripture says of God expressly (1 Timothy 6.16.) That He only has immortality,
and dwells in inaccessible light. Hence it follows that the Soul of man is
not of its own nature Immortal, but by Grace, that is to say, by the gift of
God. And then the question will be whether this grace or gift of God were
bestowed on the Soul in the Creation and Conception of the Man, or afterward
by his redemption. Another question will be in what sense immortality of
Torments can be called a gift, when all gifts suppose the thing given to be
grateful to the receiver. To the first of these, Christ himself says ( Luke
14.13, 14.) When thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, the
Blind, and thou shall be Blessed, for they cannot recompense thee; For thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of them that be just. It follows hence
that the reward of the Elect is not before the Resurrection. What reward then
enjoyes a separated Soul in Heaven, or any where else till that day come, or
what has he to do there till the Body rise again? Again St. Paul says ( Romans
2.6, 7.) God will render to every man according to his works. To them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for Honor, Glory and Immortality,
Eternal Life. But unto them that be contentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Here it is plain that God gives
Eternal Life only to well doers, and to them that seek (not to them that have
already) Immortality. Again (1 Timothy 1.10.) Christ has abolished Death, and
brought Life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel. Therefore before the
Gospel of Christ, nothing was Immortal but God. And St. Paul speaking of the
day of Judgment (1 Cor. 15.54.) says that This Mortal shall put on
Immortality, and that then Death is swallowed in Victory. There was no
Immortality of any thing Mortal till Death was overcome, and that was at the
Resurrection. And John 8.52. Verily, Verily, if a man keep my sayings he shall
never see Death, that is to say, he shall be Immortal; but it is no where said,
that he which keeps not Christ's sayings shall never see Death, nor be
Immortal, and yet they that say that the wicked, Body and Soul, shall be
tormented everlastingly, do therein say they are Immortal. Mat. 10.28. Fear not
them that can kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but fear him
that is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. Man cannot kill a Soul, for
the Man killed shall revive again. But God can destroy the Soul and Body in
Hell, as that it shall never return to life. In the Old Testament we read (
Genesis 7.4.) I will destroy every living Substance that I have made from off the
face of the Earth; therefore, if the Souls of them that perished in the Flood
were Substances, they were also destroyed in the Flood and were not Immortal. (
Math. 25.41.) Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. These words are to be spoken in the day of Judgment,
which Judgment is to be in the Clouds. And there shall stand the men that are
reprobated alive, where Souls according to his Lordships Doctrine were sent
long before to Hell. Therefore at that present day of Judgment they had one
Soul by which they were there alive, and another Soul in Hell. How his Lordship
could have maintained this, I understand not. But by my Doctrine, that the Soul
is not a separated Substance, but that the Man at his Resurrection shall be
revived by God, and raised to Judgment, and afterward Body and Soul destroyed
in Hellfire (which is the second death) there is no such consequence or
difficulty to be inferred. Besides it avoids the unnecessary disputes about
where the Soul of Lazarus was for four days he lay dead. And the order of the
Divine Process is made good, of not inflicting torments before the Condemnation
pronounced.

Now as to the harmony of the two Testaments, it is said in the old ( Genesis
2.17.) In the day that thou eatest of the Tree of Knowledge, dying thou shall
dye. Moriendo morieris, that is, when thou art dead thou shall not revive; for
so has Athanasius expounded it. Therefore Adam and Eve were not Immortal by
their Creation. Then ( Genesis 3.22.) Behold the man is become as one of us -- Now
lest he put forth his hand and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live
for ever, etc. Here they had had an Immortality by the gift of God, if they had
not sinned. It was therefore sin that lost them Eternal-life. He therefore that
redeemed them from sin was the Author of their Immortality, and consequently
began in the day of Judgment when Adam and Eve were again made alive by
admission to the new Tree of Life, which was Christ.

Now let us compare this with the New Testament. Where we find these words (1
Cor. 15.21.) since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the
dead. Therefore all the Immortality of the Soul, that shall be after the
Resurrection, is by Christ, and not by the nature of the Soul. verse 22. As by
Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Therefore since we
dyed by Adam's sin, so we shall live by Christ's Redemption of us, that is,
after the Resurrection. Again verse 23. But every man in his order; Christ the
first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. Therefore none
shall be made alive till the coming of Christ. Lastly, as when God had said,
That day that thou eatest of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall
dye, though he condemned him then, yet he suffered him to live a long time
after; so when Christ had said to the Thief on the Cross, this day thou shall
be with me in Paradise, yet he suffered him to lie dead till the General
Resurrection, for no man rose again from the dead before our Saviors coming,
and conquering death.

If God bestowed Immortality on every man then when he made him, and he made
many to whom he never purposed to give his saving Grace, what did his Lordship
think that God gave any man Immortality with purpose only to make him capable
of Immortal Torments? It Is a hard saying, and I think cannot piously be
believed. I am sure it can never be proved by the Canonical Scripture.

But though I have made it clear that it cannot be drawn by lawful consequence
from Scripture, that Man was Created with a Soul Immortal, and that the Elect
only, by the Grace of God in Christ, shall both Bodies and Souls from the
Resurrection forward be Immortal; yet there may be a Consequence well drawn
from some words in the Rites of Burial, that prove the contrary, as these.
Forasmuch as it has pleased Abmighty God of his great mercy, to take unto
himself the Soul of our dear Brother here departed, etc. And these, Almighty
God, with whom do live the Spirits of them that depart hence in the Lord. Which
are words Authorized by the Church. I wonder his Lordship that had so often
pronounced them, took no notice of them here. But it often happens that men
think of those things least, which they have most perfectly learnt by rote. I
am sorry I could not without deserting the sense of Scripture and mine own
Conscience say the same. But I see no just cause yet why the Church should be
offended at it. For the Church of England pretends not (as does the Church of
Rome) to be above the Scripture; nor forbids any man to Read the Scripture;
nor was I forbidden when I Wrote my Leviathan to Publish any thing which the
Scriptures suggested. For when I Wrote it, I may safely say there was no lawful
Church in England, that could have maintained me in, or prohibited me from
Writing any thing. There was no Bishop, and though there were Preaching, such
as it was, yet no Common Prayer. For Extemporary Prayer, though made in the
Pulpit, is not Common Prayer. There was then no Church in England, that any man
living was bound to obey. What I Write here at this present time I am forced to
in my defense, not against the Church, but against the accusations and
arguments o^ my Adversaries. For the Church, though it excommunicates for
scandalous life, and for teaching false Doctrines, yet it professes to impose
nothing to be held as Faith but what may be warranted by Scripture and this the
Church it self says in the 20th of the 39 Articles of Religion. An^ therefore
I am permitted to allege Scr^pture at any time in the defense of my Belief.


J. D. But they that in one case are grieved, in another must be relieved. If
perchance T. H. has given his Disciples any discontent in his Doctrine of
Heaven and the holy Angels, and the glorified Souls of the Saints, he will make
them amends in his Doctrine of Hell, and the Devils, and the damned Spirits.
First of the Devils; He fancieth that all those Devils which our Savior did
cast out, were Phrensies, and all Demoniacks (or Persons possessed) no other
than Madmen. And to justify our Savior's speaking to a Disease as to a
Person, produces the example of inchanters. But he declares himself most
clearly upon this Subject, in his Animadversions upon my reply to his defense
of fatal destiny. There are in the Scripture two sorts of things which are in
English translated Devils. One is that which is called Satan, Diabolus,
Abaddon, which signifies in English an Enemy, an Accuser, and a destroyer of
the Church of God, in which sense the Devils are but wicked men. The other sort
of Devils are called in the Scripture Daemonia, which are the feigned Gods of
the Heathen, and are neither Bodies nor spiritual Substances, but mere fancies,
and fictions of terrified hearts, feigned by the Greeks, and other Heathen
People, which St. Paul calls Nothings. So T.H. has killed the great infernal
Devil, and all his black Angels, and left no Devils to be feared, but Devils
Incarnate, that is, wicked men.


T. H. As for the first words cited ( Levi. page 38, 39.) I refer the Reader to
the place it self; and for the words concerning Satan, I leave them to the
judgment of the Learned.


J. D. And for Hell he describes the Kingdom of Satan, or the Kingdom of
darkness, to be a confederacy of deceivers. He tells us that the places which
set forth the torments of Hell in holy Scripture, do design Metaphorically a
grief and discontent of mind, from the sight of that eternal felicity in
others, which they themselves, through their own incredulity and disobedience
have lost. As if Metaphorical descriptions did not bear sad truths in them, as
well as literal, as if final desperation were no more than a little fit of
grief or discontent; and a guilty conscience were no more than a transitory
passion, as if it were a loss so easily to be born, to be deprived for evermore
of the beatifical Vision: and lastly as if the Damned, besides that unspeakable
loss, did not likewise suffer actual Torments, proportionable in some measure
to their own sins, and Gods Justice.


T. H. That Metaphors bear sad truths in them, I deny not. It is a sad thing to
lose this present life untimely. Is it not therefore much more a sad thing to
lose an eternal happy Life? And I believe that he which will venture upon sin,
with such danger, will not stick to do the same notwithstanding the Doctrine of
eternal torture. Is it not also a sad truth, that the Kingdom of darkness
should be a Confederacy of deceivers?


J. D. Lastly, for the damned Spirits, he declares himself every where, that
their sufferings are not eternal. The Fire shall be unquenchable, and the
Torments everlasting; but it cannot be thence inferred, that he who shall be
cast into that Fire, or be tormented with those Torments, shall endure and
resist them, so as to be eternally burnt and tortured, and yet never be
destroyed nor dye. And though there be many places, that affirm everlasting
fire, into which men may be cast successivily one after another for ever; yet I
find none that affirm that there shall be an everlasting life therein of any
individual Person. If he had said, and said only, that the pains of the Damned
may be lessened, as to the degree of them, or that they endure not for ever,
but that after they are purged by long torments from their dross and
Corruptions, as Gold in the fire, both the damned Spirits and the Devils
themselves should be restored to a better condition, he might have found some
Ancients (who are therefore called the merciful Doctors) to have joined with
him, though still he should have wanted the suffrage of the Catholic Church.


T. H. Why does not his Lordship cite some place of Scripture here to prove
that all the Reprobates which are dead, live eternally in torment? We read
indeed That everlasting Torments were prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
whose natures also are everlasting; and that the Beast and the false Prophet
shall be tormented everlastingly; but not that every Reprobate shall be so.
They shall indeed be cast into the same fire, but the Scripture says plainly
enough, that they shall be both Body and Soul destroyed there. If I had said
that the Devils themselves should be restored to a better condition; his
Lordship would have been so kind as to have put me into the number of the
Merciful Doctors. Truly if I had had any Warrant for the possibility of their
being less enemies to the Church of God than they have been, I would have been
as merciful to them as any Doctor of them all. As it is, I am more merciful
than the Bishop.


J. D. But his shooting is not at rovers, but altogether at random, without
either President or Partner. All that eternal sire, all those torments which he
acknowledges, is but this, That after the Resurrection, the Reprobate shall be
in the estate that Adam and his Posterity were in, after the sin committed,
saving that God promised a Redeemer to Adam and not to them. Adding, that they
shall live as they did formerly, Marry, and give in Marriage; and consequently
engender Children perpetually after the Resurrection, as they did before, which
he calls an immortallity of the kind, but not of the persons of men. It is to
be presumed, that in those their second lives, knowing certainly from T. H.
that there is no hope of Redemption for them from corporal death upon their
well-doing; nor fear of any Torments after death for their ill-doing, they will
pass their times here as pleasantly as they can. This is all the Damnation
which T. H. fancieth.


T. H. This he has urged once before, and I answered to it, That the whole
Paragraph was to prove, that for any Text of Scripture to the contrary, men
might, after the Resurrection live as Adam did on earth, and that
notwithstanding the Text of St. Luke chap. 20. verse 34, 35, 36. Marry and
propagate. But that they shall do so, is no assertion of mine. His Lordship
knew I held that after the Resurrection there shall be at all no wicked men;
but the Elect (all that are, have been, and hereafter shall be) shall live on
earth. But St. Peter says, there shall then be a new Heaven and a new Earth.


J. D. In sum I leave it to the free judgment of the understanding Reader, by
these few instances which follow, to judge what the Hobbian Principles are in
point of Religion. Ex ungue leonem.

First, that no man needs to put himself to any hazard for his Faith, but may
safely comply with the times. And for their Faith it is internal and invisible.
They have the license that Naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger
for it.

Secondly, he allows Subjects, being commanded by their Sovereign, to deny
Christ. Profession with the Tongue is but an external thing, and no more than
any other gesture, whereby we signify our obedience. And wherein a Christian,
holding firmly in his heart the Faith of Christ, has the same liberty which
the Prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman etc. Who by bowing before the Idol Rimmon
denied the true God as much in effect, as if he had done it with his Lips.
Alas, why did St. Peter Weep so bitterly for denying his Master, out of fear of
his Life or Members? It seems he was not acquainted with these Hobbian
Principles. And in the same place he lays down this general Conclusion. This
we may say that whatsoever a Subject is compelled to, in obedience to his
Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the Laws
of his Country, that action is not his, but his Sovereign's; nor is it he that
in this case denies Christ before men, but his Governor and the Law of his
Country. His instance in a Mohammedan commanded by a Christian Prince to be
present at Divine Service, is a weak mistake, springing from his gross
ignorance in Case-Divinity, not knowing to distinguish between an erroneous
Conscience, as the Mahometans is, and a Conscience rightly informed.


T. H. In these his two first instances I confess his Lordship does not much
belie me. But neither does he confute me. Also I confess my ignorance in his
Case-Divinity which is grounded upon the Doctrine of the Schoolmen. Who to
decide Cases of Conscience, take in, not only the Scriptures, but also the
Decrees of the Popes of Rome, for the advancing of the Dominion of the Roman
Church over Consciences; whereas the true decision of Cases of Consciences
ought to be grounded only on Scripture, or natural Equity. I never allowed the
denying of Christ with the Tongue in all men, but expressly say the contrary (
Lev. page 362.) in these words, For an unlearned man that is in the power of an
Idolatrous King or State, if commanded on pain of death to worship before an
Idol, he detesteth the Idol in his heart; he does well, though if he had the
fortitude to suffer death rather than worship it, he should do better. But if a
Pastor who as Christ's messenger has undertaken to teach Christ's Doctrine to
all Nations, should do the same, it were not only a sinful scandal in respect
of other Christian men's Consciences, but a persidious forsaking of his charge.
Therefore St. Peter in denying Christ sinned, as being an Apostle. And it is sin
in every man that should now take upon him to preach against the power of the
Pope, to leave his Commission unexecuted for fear of the fire; but in a mere
Traveller, not so. The three Children and Daniel were worthy Champions of the
true Religion. But God requires not of every man to be a Champion. As for his
Lordship's words of complying with the times, they are not mine, but his own
spightful Paraphrase.


J. D. Thirdly, if this be not enough, he gives license to a Christian to
commit Idolatry, or at least to do an Idolatrous act, for fear of death or
corporal danger. To pray unto a King voluntarily for fair weather, or for any
thing which God only can do for us, is divine Worship, and Idolatry. On the
other side, if a King compel a man to it by the terror of death, or other great
corporal punishment, it is not Idolatry. His reason is, because it is not a
sign, that he does inwardly honor him as a God, but that he is desirous to
save himself from death, or from a miserable life. If seems T. H. thinks
there is no divine Worship, but internal. And that it is lawful for a man to
value his own life or his limbs more than his God. How much is he wiser than
the three Children, or Daniel himself? who were thrown, the first into a fiery
Furnace, the last into the Lions Denn, because they refused to comply with the
Idolatrous Decree of their Sovereign Prince.


T. H. Here also my words are truly cited. But his Lordship understood not what
the word Worship signifies; and yet he knew what I meant by it. To think highly
of God (as I had defined it) is to honor him. But to think is internal. To
Worship, is to signify that Honor which we inwardly give, by signs external.
This understood (as by his Lordship it was) all he says to it is but a cavil.


J. D. A fourth Aphorism may be this, That which is said in the Scripture, it
is better to obey God than man, has place in the Kingdom of God by Pact, and
not by Nature. Why? Nature it self does teach us it is better to obey God than
men. Neither can he say that he intended this only of obedience, in the use of
indifferent actions and gestures, in the service of God, commanded by the
Commonwealth, for that is to obey both God and man. But if divine Law and
humane Law clash one with another, without doubt it is evermore better to obey
God than man.


T. H. Here again appears his unskilfulness in reasoning. Who denies, but it is
always, and in all causes better to obey God than Man? But there is no Law,
neither divine nor humane that ought to be taken for a Law, till we know what
it is, and if a divine Law, till we, know that God has commanded it to be
kept. We agree that the Scriptures are the Word of God. But they are a Law by
Pact. that is, to us who have been Baptized into the Covenant. To all others it
is an invitation only to their own benefit. It Is true that even nature
suggesteth to us that the Law of God is to be obeyed rather than the Law of
man. But nature does not suggest to us that the Scripture is the Law of God,
much less how every Text of it ought to be interpreted. But who then shall
suggest this? Dr. Bramhall? I deny it. Who then? The stream of Divines? Why so?
Am I that have the Scripture it self before my eyes, obliged to venture my
eternal life upon their interpretation, how learned soever they pretend to be,
when no counter-security that they can give me, will save me harmless? If not
the stream of Divines, who then? The lawful Assembly of Pastors or of Bishops?
But there can be no lawful Assembly in England without the Authority of the
King. The Scripture therefore what it is, and how to be interpreted, is made
known unto us here, by no other way than the Authority of our Sovereign Lord
both in Temporals and Spirituals, The Kings Majesty. And where he has set forth
no Interpretation, there I am allowed to follow my own, as well as any other
man, Bishop or not Bishop. For my own part, all that know me, know also it is
my opinion, That the best government in Religion is by Episcopacy, but in the
King's Right, not in their own. But my Lord of Derry not contented with this,
would have the utmost resolution of our Faith to be into the Doctrine of the
Schools. I do not think that all the Bishops be of his mind. If they were, I
would wish them to stand in fear of that dreadful Sentence, All covet all lose.
I must not let pass these words of his Lordship, If divine Law and humane Law
clash one with another, without doubt it is better evermore to obey God than
man. Where the King is a Christian, believes the Scripture, and has the
Legislative power both in Church and State, and makes no Laws concerning
Christian Faith, or divine Worship, but by the Counsel of his Bishops whom he
trusts in that behalf, if the Bishops counsel him aright, what clashing can
there be between the divine and humane Laws? For if the Civil Law be against
God's Law, and the Bishops make it clearly appear to the King that it clasheth
with divine Law, no doubt he will mend it by himself or by the advice of his
Parliament; for else he is no professor of Christ's Doctrine, and so the
clashing is at an end. But if they think that every opinion they hold, though
obscure and unnecessary to Salvation, ought presently to be Law, then there
will be clashings innumerable, not only of Laws, but also of Swords, as we have
found it too true by late experience. But his Lordship is still at this, that
there ought to be, for the divine Laws that is to say, for the interpretation
of Scripture, a Legislative power in the Church, distinct from that of the
King, which under him they enjoy already. This I deny. Then for clashing
between the Civil Laws of Indels with the Law of God, the Apostles teach that
those their Civil Laws are to be obeyed, but so as to keep their Faith in
Christ entirely in their hearts; which is an obedience easily performed. But I
do not believe that Augustus Caesar or Nero was bound to make the holy
Scripture Law; and yet unless they did so they could not attain to eternal life.


J. D. His fifth conclusion may be, that the sharpest and most succesful Sword,
in any War whatsoever, does give Sovereign Power and Authority to him that has
it, to approve or reject all sorts of Theological Doctrines, concerning the
Kingdom of God, not according to their truth or falsehood, but according to that
influence which they have upon political affairs. Hear him, But because this
Doctrine will appear to most men a novelty, I do but propound it, maintaining
nothing in this or any other Paradox of Religion, but attending the end of that
dispute of the Sword, concerning the Authority (not yet amongst my Countrymen
decided) by which all sorts of Doctrine are to be approved or rejected, etc.
For, the points of Doctrine concerning the Kingdom of God, have so great
influence upon the Kingdom of Man, as not to be determined, but by them that
under God have the Sovereign Power. -- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
Let him evermore want success who thinks actions are to be judged by their
events. This Doctrine may be plausible to those who desire to fish in troubled
Waters. But it is justly hated by those which are in Authority, and all those
who are lovers of peace and tranquillity.

The last part of this conclusion smells rankly of Jeroboam, Now shall the
Kingdom return to the house of David, if this people go up to do Sacrifice in
the house of the Lord at Jerusalem; whereupon the King took counsel, and made
two Calves of Gold, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem, behold thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. But by the just disposition of Almighty. God this Policy turned to a
sin, and was the utter destruction of Jeroboam and his Family. It is not good
jesting with edge-tools, nor playing with holy things: Where men make their
greatest fastness, many times they find most danger.


T. H. His Lordship either had a strange Conscience, or understood not English.
Being at Paris when there was no Bishop nor Church in England, and every man
writ what he pleased, I resolved (when it should please God to restore the
Authority Ecclesiastical) to submit to that Authority, in whatsoever it should
determine. This his Lordship construes for a temporizing and too much
indifferency in Religion; and says further that the last part of my words do
smell of Jeroboam. To the contrary I say my words were modest, and such as in
duty I ought to use. And I profess still that whatsoever the Church of England
(the Church, I say, not every Doctor) shall forbid me to say in matter of
Faith, I shall abstain from saying it, excepting this point. That Jesus Christ
the Son of God dyed for my sins. As for other Doctrins, I think it unlawful if
the Church define them for any Member of the Church to contradict them.


J. D. His sixth Paradox is a rapper, the Civil Laws are the Rules of good and
evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest, and therefore what the Lawgiver
commands that is to be accounted good, what he forbids bad. And a little after,
before Empires were, just and unjust were not, as whose nature is Relative to a
Command, every action in its own nature is indifferent. That it is just or
unjust proceeds from the right of him that commands. Therefore lawful Kings
make those things which they command, Just by commanding them, and those things
which they forbid Unjust by forbidding them. To this add his definition of a
sin, that which one does, or omitteth, says, or wills contrary to the reason
of the Commonwealth, that is, the [Civil] Laws. Where by the Laws he does not
understand the Written Laws, elected and approved by the whole Commonwealth,
but the verbal Commands or Mandates, of him that has the Sovereign Power, as
we find in many places of his Writings. The Civil Laws are nothing else but the
Commands of him, that is endowed with Sovereign Power in the Commonwealth,
concerning the future actions of his Subjects. And the Civil Laws are fastened
to the Lips of that man who has the Sovereign Power.

Where are we? In Europe or in Asia? Where they ascribed a Divinity to their
Kings, and, to use his own Phrase, made them Mortal Gods. O King live for ever.
Flatterers are the common Moths of great Palaces, where Alexander's friends
are more numerous than the King's friends. But such gross palpable pernicious
flattery as this is, I did never meet with, so derogatory both to piety and
policy. What deserved he who should do his uttermost endeavor to poison a
common Fountain, whereof all the Commonwealth must drink? He does the same who
poisoneth the mind of a Sovereign Prince.

Are the Civil Laws the Rules of good and bad, just and unjust, honest and
dishonest? And what I pray your are the Rules of the Civil Law it self? Even
the Law of God and Nature. If the Civil Laws swerve from these more authentic
Laws, they are Lesbian Rules. What the Lawgiver commands is to be accounted
good, what he forbids bad. This was just the garb of the Athenian Sophisters,
as they are described by Plato. Whatsoever pleased the great Beast [the
Multitude] they call holy, and just, and good. And whatsoever the great Beast
disliked, they called evil, unjust, profane. But he is not yet arrived at the
height of his flattery. Lawful Kings make those things which they command just
by commanding them. At other times when he is in his right wits he talks of
sufferings, and expecting their reward in Heaven. And going to Christ by
Martyrdom. And if he had the fortitude to suffer death he should do better.
But I fear all this was but said in jest. How should they expect their reward
in Heaven, if his Doctrine be true, that there is no reward in Heaven? Or how
should they be Martyrs, if his Doctrine betrue, that none can be Martyrs but
those who conversed with Christ upon earth? He adds, Before Empires were,
just and unjust were not. Nothing could be written more false in his sense,
more dishonorable to God, more inglorious to the humane nature. That God
should create Man and leave him presently without any Rules, to his own
ordering of himself, as the Ostridg leaves her Eggs in the sand. But in truth
there have been Empires in the World ever since Adam. And Adam had a Law
written in his heart by the finger of God, before there was any Civil Law. Thus
they do endeavor to make goodness, and justice, and honesty, and conscience,
and God himself, to be empty names, without any reality, which signify
nothing, further than they conduce to a man's interest. Otherwise he would not,
he could not say, That every action as it is invested with its circumstances,
is indifferent in its own nature.


T. H. My sixth Paradox he calls a Rapper. A Rapper, a Swapper and such like
terms are his Lordships elegancies. But let us see what this Rapper is. It Is
this, The Civil Laws are the Rules of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, Honest
and Dishonest. Truly I see no other Rules they have. The Scriptures themselves
were made Law to us here, by the Authority of the Commonwealth, and are
therefore part of the Law Civil. If they were Laws in their own nature, then
were they Laws over all the World, and men were obliged to obey them in
America, as soon as they should be shown there (though without a Miracle) by a
Friar. What is Injust but the Transgression of a Law? Law therefore was before
Unjust. And the Law was made known by Sovereign Power before it was a Law.
Therefore Sovereign Power was antecedent both to Law and Injustice. Who then
made Injust but Sovereign Kings or Sovereign Astemblies? Where is now the
wonder of this Rapper, That Lawful Kings make those things which they command
Just by commanding them, and those things which they forbid Unjust by
forbidding them? Just and Unjust were surely made; if the King made them not,
who made them else? For certainly the breach of a Civil Law is a sin against
God. Another Calumny which he would fix upon me, is, That I make the King's
verbal Commands to be Laws. How so? Because I say the Civil Laws are nothing
else but the Commands of him that has the Sovereign Power, concerning the
future Actions of his Subjects. What verbal Command of a King can arrive at the
ears of all his Subjects (which it must do ere it be a Law) without the Seal of
the Person of the Commonwealth (which is here the Great Seal of England?) Who
but his Lordship ever denied that the command of England was a Law to English
men? Or that any but the King had Authority to affix the Great Seal of England
to any Writing? And who did ever doubt to call our Laws (though made in
Parliament) the King's Laws? What was ever called a Law which the King did not
assent to? Because the King has granted in diverse cases not to make a Law
without the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons, therefore when there is
no Parliament in being, shall the Great Seal of England stand for nothing? What
was more unjustly maintained during the long Parliament (besides the resisting
and Murdering of the King) then this Doctrine of his Lordship's? But the Bishop
endeavored here to make the Multitude believe I maintain, That the King
sins not though he bid hang a man for making his Apparel otherwise than he
appointed, or his Servant for negligent attendance. And yet he knew I
distinguished always between the King's natural and politic capacity. What
name should I give to this wilful slander? But here his Lordship enters into
passion, and exclaims, Where are we, in Europe or in Asia? Gross, palpable,
pernicious flattery, poisoning of a Commonwealth, poisoning the King's mind.
But where was his Lordship when he wrote this? One would not think he was in
France, nor that this Doctrine was Written in the year 1658, but rather in the
year 1648, in some Cabal of the King's enemies. But what did put him into this
fit of Choler? Partly, this very thing, that he could not answer my reasons;
but chiefly, that he had lost upon me so much School-learning in our
controversy touching Liberty and Necessity, wherein he was to blame himself,
for believing that the obscure and barbarous Language of School Divinity could
satisfy an ingenuous Reader as well as plain and perspicuous English. Do I
flatter the King? Why am I not rich? I confess his Lordship has not flattered
him here.


J. D. Something there is which he has a confused glimmering of, as the blind
man sees men walking like Trees, which he is not able to apprehend and express
clearly. We acknowledge, that though the Laws or Commands of a Sovereign Prince
be erroneous, or unjust, or injurious, such as a Subject cannot approve for
good in themselves; yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may not oppose or resist,
otherwise than by Prayers and Tears, and at the most by flight. We acknowledge
that the Civil Laws have power to bind the Conscience of a Christian, in
themselves, but not from themselves, but from him who has said, Let every Soul
be subject to the higher Powers. Either they bind Christian Subjects to do
their Sovereign's Commands, or to suffer for the Testimony of a good
Conscience. We acknowledge that in doubtful Cases semper praesumitur pro Rege
and Lege, the Sovereign and the Law are always presumed to be in the right. But
in plain evident cases which admit no doubt, it is always better to obey God
than man. Blunderers whilst they think to mend one imaginary hole, make two or
three real ones. They who derive the Authority of the Scriptures or God's Law
from the Civil Laws of men, are like those who seek to underprop the Heavens
from falling with a Bullrush. Nay, they derive not only the Authority of the
Scripture, but even the Law of nature it self from the Civil Law. The Laws of
nature (which need no promulgation) in the condition of nature are not properly
Laws, but qualities which dispose men to peace and obedience. When a
Commonwealth is once settled, then are they actually Laws and not before. God
help us, into what times are we fallen, when the immutable Laws of God and
Nature are made to depend upon the mutable Laws of mortal men, just as one
should go about to control the Sun by the Authority of the Clock.


T. H. Hitherto he never offered to mend any of the Doctrines he inveighs
against; but here he does. He says I have a glimmering of something I was not
able to apprehend and express clearly. Let us see his Lordship's more clear
expression. We acknowledge, (says he) that though the Laws or Commands of a
Sovereign Prince be erroneous, or unjust, or injurious, such as a Subject
cannot approve for good in themselves, yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may
not oppose or resist otherwise than by Prayers and Tears, and at the most by
Flight. Hence it follows clearly, that when a Sovereign has made a Law, though
erroneous, then if his Subject oppose it, it is a sin. Therefore I would fain
know, when a man has broken that Law by doing what it forbad, or by refusing to
do what it commanded, whether he have opposed this Law or not. If to break the
Law be to oppose it, he grants it. Therefore his Lordship has not here
expressed himself, so clearly as to make men understand the difference between
breaking a Law and opposing it. Though there be some difference between
breaking of a Law, and opposing those that are sent with force to see it
executed; yet between breaking and opposing the Law it self there is no
difference. Also though the Subject think the Law just, as when a Thief is by
Law Condemned to dye, yet he may lawfully oppose the Execution, not only by
Prayers, Tears and Flight, but also (as I think) any way he can. For though his
fault were never so great, yet his endeavor to save his own life is not a
fault. For the Law expects it, and for that cause appoints Felons to be
carried bound and encompassed with Armed men to Execution. Nothing is opposite
to Law but sin. Nothing opposite to the Sheriff but force. So that his
Lordship's sight was not sharp enough to see the difference between the Law and
the Officer. Again, We acknowledge (says he) that the Laws have power to bind
the Conscience of a Christian in themselves, but not from themselves. Neither
do the Scriptures bind the Conscience because they are Scriptures, but because
they were from God. So also the Book of English Statutes binds our
Consciences in it self, but not from it self, but from the Authority of the
King, who only in the right of God has the legislative Powers. Again he says
We acknowledge that in doubtful cases, the Sovereign and the Law are always
presumed to be in the right. If he presume they are in the right, how dare he
presume that the cases they determine are doubtful? But says he, in evident
cases which admit no doubt it is always better to obey God than man. Yes, and
in doubtful cases also say I. But not always better to obey the inferior
Pastors than the Supreme Pastor, which is the King. But what are those cases
that admit no doubt? I know but very few, and those are such as his Lordship
was not much acquainted with.


J. D. But it is not worthy of my labor, nor any part of my intention, to
pursue every shadow of a Question which he springs. It shall suffice to
gather a Posie of Flowers (or rather a bundle of Weeds) out of his Writings,
and present them to the Reader, who will easily distinguish them from healthful
Plants by the rankness of their smell. Such are these which follow.


T. H. As for the following Posie of Flowers, there wants no more to make them
sweet, than to wipe off the Venom blown upon some of them by his Lordships
breath.


J. D. 1. To be delighted in the imagination only of being possessed of another
man's Goods, Servants, or Wife, without any intention to take them from him by
force or fraud, is no breach of the Law which says, Thou shall not covet.


T. H. What man was there ever whose imagination of any thing he thought would
please him, when not some delight? Or what sin is there, where there is not so
much as an intention to do injustice? But his Lordship would not distinguish
between delight and purpose, nor between a Wish and a Will. This was venom. I
believe, that his Lordship himself even before he was Married took some delight
in the thought of it, and yet the Woman then was not his own. All love is
delight, but all love is not sin. Without this love of that which is not yet a
man's own, the World had not been Peopled.


J. D. 2. If a Man by the terror of present death be compelled to do a Fact
against the Law, he is totally excused, because no Law can oblige a Man to
abandon his own preservation, nature compels him to the Fact. The like
Doctrine he has elsewhere. When the Actor does any thing against the Law of
Nature by the Command of the Author, if he be obliged by former Covenants to
obey him, not he, but the Author breaks the Law of Nature.


T. H. The second Flower is both sweet and wholesome.


J. D. 3. It is a Doctrine repugnant to Civil Society, that whatsoever a man
does against his Conscience is sin.


T. H. It Is plain, that, to do what a man thinks in his own Conscience to be
sin, is sin; for it is a contempt of the Law it self; and from thence ignorant
men, our of an erroneous Conscience, disobey the Law which is pernicious to all
Government.


J. D. 4. The Kingdom of God is not shut but to them that sin, that is, to them
who have not performed due obedience to the Laws of God; nor to them, if they
believe the necessary Articles of the Christian Faith.

5. We must know that the true acknowledging of sin is Repentance it self.

6. An opinion publicly appointed to be taught cannot be Heresy, nor the
Sovereign Princes that Authorized the same Heretics.


T. H. The 4th. 5th. and 6th. smoll well. But to say, that the Sovereign Prince
in England is a Heretic, or that an Act of Parliament is Heretical, stinks
abominably, as 'twas thought Primo Elizabethae.


J. D. 7. Temporal and Spiritual government are but two words to make men see
double and mistake their lawful Sovereign, etc. There is no other Government in
this Life, neither, of State, nor Religion but Temporal.

8. It is manifest, that they who permit a contrary Doctrine to that which
themselves believe and think necessary [to Salvation] do against their
Consciences, and Will, as much as in them lies the eternal destruction of
their Subjects.


T. H. The 7th. and 8th. are Roses and Jassamin. But his leaving out the words
[to Salvation] was venom.


J. D. 9. Subjects sin if they do not worship God according to the Laws of the
Commonwealth.


T. H. The 9th. he has poisoned, and made it, not mine; he quotes my Book de
Cive Cap. 15.19. Where I say, Regnante Deo per solam rationem naturalem, that
is, Before the Scripture was given, they sinned that refused to worship God,
according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Country, which has no ill scent,
but to undutiful Subjects.


J. D. 10. To believe in Jesus [in Jesum] is the same as to believe that Jesus
is Christ.


T. H. And so it is always in the Scripture.


J. D. 11. There can be no contradiction between the Laws of God, and the Laws
of a Christian Commonwealth. Yet, we see Christian Commonwealths daily
contradict one another.


T. H. The 11th. is also good. But his Lordship's instance, That Christian
Commonwealths contradict one another, have nothing to do here. Their Laws do
indeed contradict one another, but contradict not the Law of God. For God
Commands their Subjects to obey them in all things, and his Lordship himself
confesses that their Laws, though erroneous, bind the Conscience. But
Christian Commonwealths would seldom contradict one another, if they made no
Doctrine Law, but such as were necessary to Salvation.


J. D. 12. No man gives but with intention of some good to himself. Of all
voluntary Acts, the Object is to every man his own good. Moses, St. Paul, and
the Decij. were not of his mind.


T. H. That which his Lordship adds to the 12th. namely, that Moses, St. Paul,
and the Decij were not of my mind is false. For the two former did what they
did for a good to themselves, which was eternal Life; and the Decij for a good
Fame after death. And his Lordship also, if he had believed there is an eternal
happiness to come, or thought a good Fame after death to be any thing worth, he
would have directed all his actions toward them, and have despised the Wealth
and Titles of the present World.


J. D. 13. There is no natural knowledge of man's estate after death, much less
of reward which is then to be given to breach of Faith, but only a belief
grounded upon other men's saying, that they know it supernaturally, or that they
know those that knew them that knew others that knew it supernaturally.


T. H. The 13th. is good and fresh.


J. D. 14. David's killing of Uriah was no injury to Uriah, because the right
to do what he pleased was given him by Uriah himself.


T. H. David himself makes this good, in saying, To thee only have I sinned.


J. D. 15. To whom it belongs to determine controversies which may arise from
the diverse interpretations of Scripture, he has an imperial power over all men
which acknowledge the Scripture to be the Word of God.

16. What is Theft, what is Murder, what is Adultery, and universally what is
an injury, is known by the Civil Law, that is, by the Commands of the Sovereign.


T. H. For the 15th. he should have disputed it with the Head of the Church.
And as to the 16th. I would have asked him by what other Law his Lordship would
have it determined what is Theft, or what is Injury, than by the Laws' made in
Parliament, or by the Laws which distinguish between Meum and Tuum? His
Lordships ignorance smells rankly ('it is his own phrase) in this and many other
places (which I have let pass) of his own interest. The King tells us what is
sin, in that he tells us what is Law. He has authorized the Clergy to dehort
the people from sin, and to exhort them, by good motives, (both from Scripture
and Reason) to obey the Laws; and supposes them (though under forty years old)
by the help they have in the University, able in case the Law be not written,
to teach the people old and young, what they ought to follow in doubtful cases
of Conscience, that is to say, they are authorized to expound the Laws of
Nature; but not so as to make it a doubtful case whether the King's Laws be to
be obeyed or not. All they ought to do is from the King's Authority. And
therefore this my Doctrine is no Weed.


J. D. 17. He admits incestuous Copulations of the Heathens, according to
their Heathenish Laws to have been lawful Marriages. Though the Scripture teach
us expressly, that for those abominations the Land of Canaan spued our her
Inhabitants, Levit. 18.28.


T. H. The 17th. he has corrupted with a false interpretation of the Text. For
in that Chapter from the beginning to verse 20, are forbidden Marriages in
certain degrees of kindred. From verse 20, which begins with Moreover (to the
28th.) are forbidden Sacrificing of Children to Molech, and Profaning of God's
name, and Buggery with Man and Beast, with this cause expressed (For all these
abominations have the men of the Land done which were before you, and the Land
is defiled) That the Land spue not you out also. As for Marriages within the
degrees prohibited, they are not referred to the abominations of the Heathen.
Besides, for some time after Adam, such Marriages were necessary.


J. D. 18. I say that no other Article of Faith besides this, that Jesus is
Christ, is necessary to a Christian man for Salvation.

19. Because Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, therefore neither can his
Ministers, unless they be Kings, require obedience in his name. They have no
right of Commanding, no power to make Laws.


T. H. These two smell comfortably, and of Scripture. The contrary Doctrine
smells of Ambition and encroachment of Jurisdiction, or Rump of the Roman
Tyranny.


J. D. 20. I pass by his errors about Oaths about Vows, about the Resurrection,
about the Kingdom of Christ, about the Power of the Keys, Binding, Loosing,
Excommunication, etc. his ignorant mistakes of meritum congrui and condigni,
active and passive obedience, and many more, for fear of being tedious to the
Reader.


T. H. The tears of School Divinity, of which numer are meritum congrui,
meritum condigni, and passive obedience, are so obscure as no man living can
tell what they mean, so that they that use them may admit or deny their
meaning, as it shall serve their turns. I said not that this was their meaning,
but that I thought it was so. For no man living can tell what a School man
means by his words. Therefore I expounded them according to their true
signification. Merit ex condigno is when a thing is deserved by Pact; as when I
say the Labourer is worthy of his hire, I mean meritum ex condigno. But when a
man of his own grace throws Money among the people, with an intention that
what part soever of it any of them could catch, he that catches merits it, not
by Pact, nor by precedent Merit, as a Labourer, but because it was congruent to
the purpose of him that cast it amongst them. In all other meaning these words
are but Jargon, which his Lordship had learnt by rote. Also passive obedience
signifies nothing, except it may be called passive obedience when a man
refraineth himself, from doing what the Law has forbidden. For in his
Lordship's sense the Thief that is hanged for stealing has fulfilled the Law;
which I think is absurd.


J. D. His whole works are a heap of misshapen Errors, and absurd Paradoxes,
vented with the confidence of a Jugler, the brags of a Mountebank, and the
Authority of some Pythagoras, or third Cato, lately dropped down from Heaven.

Thus we have seen how the Hobbian Principles do destroy the Existence, the
Simplicity, the Ubiquity, the Eternity, and Infiniteness of God, the Doctrine
of the blessed Trinity, the Hypostatical Union, the Kingly Sacerdotal and
Prophetical Office of Christ, the Being and Operation of the Holy Ghost,
Heaven, Hell, Angels, Devils, the Immortality of the Soul, the Catholic and
all National Churches; the holy Scriptures, holy Orders, the holy Sacraments,
the whole frame of Religion, and the Worship of God; the Laws of Nature, the
reality of Goodness, Justice, Piety, Honesty, Conscience, and all that is
Sacred. If his Disciples have such an implicit Faith, that they can digest all
these things, they may feed with Ostriches.


T. H. He here concludes his first Chapter with bitter Reproaches, to leave in
his Reader (as he thought) a sting, supposing perhaps that he will Read nothing
but the beginning and end of his Book, as is the custom of many men. But to
make him lose that petty piece of cunning, I must desire of the Reader one of
these two things. Either that he would read with it the places of my Leviathan
which he cites, and see not only how he answers my arguments, but also what the
arguments are which he produces against them; or else that, he would forbear
to condemn me, so much as in his thought; for otherwise he is unjust. The name
of Bishop is of great Authority, but these words are not the words of a Bishop,
but of a passionate School-man, too fierce and unseemly in any man whatsoever.
Besides, they are untrue. Who that knows me will say I have the confidence of a
Jugler, or that I use to brag of any thing, much less that I play the
Mountebank? What my works are, he was no fit Judge. But now he has provoked me,
I will say thus much of them, that neither he, if he had lived could, nor I if
I would, can extinguish the light which is set up in the World by the greatest
part of them; and for these Doctrines which he impugneth, I have few opposers,
but such whose Profit, or whose Fame in Learning is concerned in them. He
accuses me first of destroying the Existence of God, that is to say, he would
make the World believe I were an Atheist. But upon what ground? Because I say,
that God is a Spirit, but Corporeal. But to say that, is allowed me by St.
Paul, that says There is a Spiritual Body, and there is an Animal Body. 1 Cor.
15. He that holds that there is a God, and that God is really somewhat (for
Body is doubtlesly a real Substance) is as far from being an Atheist, as is
possible to be. But he that says God is an Incorporeal Substance, no man can be
sure whether he be an Atheist or not. For no man living can tell whether there
be any Substance at all, that is not also Corporeal. For neither the word
Incorporeal, nor Immaterial, nor any word equivalent to it is to be found in
Scripture, or in Reason. But on the contrary that the Godhead dwells bodily
in Christ, is found in Colos. 2.9. and Tertullian maintains that God is either
a Corporeal Substance or Nothing. Nor was he ever condemned for it by the
Church. For why? Not only Tertullian but all the learned call Body, not only
that which one can see, but also whatsoever has magnitude, or that is
somewhere; for they had greater reverence for the Divine Substance than that
they durst think it had no Magnitude or was no where. But they that hold God to
be a Phantasm, as did the Exorcists in the Church of Rome, that is, such a
thing as were at that time thought to be the Sprights that were said to walk in
Churchyards, and to be the Souls of men buried, they do absolutely make God to
be nothing at all. But how? Were they Atheists? No. For though by ignorance of
the consequence they said that which was equivolent to Atheism, yet in their
hearts they thought God a Substance, and would also, if they had known what
Substance and what Corporeal meant, have said he was a Corporeal Substance. So
that this Atheism by consequence is a very easy thing to be fallen into, even
by the most Godly men of the Church. He also that says that God is wholly here,
and wholly there, and wholly every where, destroys by consequence the Unity of
God, and the Infiniteness of God, and the Simplicity of God. And this the
Schoolmen do, and are therefore Atheists by consequence, and yet they do not
all say in their hearts that there is no God. So also his Lordship by exempting
the Will of man from being subject to the necessity of God's Will or Decree,
denies by consequence the Divine Praescience, which also will amount to Atheism
by consequence. But out of this that God is a Spirit corporeal and infinitely
pure, there can no unworthy or dishonorable consequence be drawn. Thus far to
his Lordship's first Chapter in Justification of my Leviathan, as to matter of
Religion; and especially to wipe off that unjust slander cast upon me by the
Bishop of Derry. As for the second Chapter which concerns my Civil Doctrines,
since my errors there, if there be any, will not tend very much to my disgrace,
I will not take the pains to answer it.

Whereas his Lordship has talked in his discourse here and there ignorantly of
Heresy, and some others have not doubted to say publicly, that there be many
Heresies in my Leviathan; I will add hereunto for a general answer an
Historical relation concerning the word Heresy from the first use of it
amongst the Graecians, till this present time.


FINIS.
AN Historical Narration CONCERNING HERESY, AND THE Punishment thereof.

BY THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY.

At veluti Pueri trepidant, atque omnia caecis
In tenebris metuunt: Sic nos in luce timemus
Interdum nihilo quae sunt metuenda magis, quam
Quae Pueri in tenebris pavitant, metuuntque futura.
Lucr. lib. 2.3, 6. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1682.

Haerese^s Larvas, Seclarum immania Monstra

Hobbius invicto dispulit ingenio.

AN Historical Narration CONCERNING HERESY, AND THE Punishment thereof.
THE word Heresy is Greek, and signifies a taking of any thing, and
particularly the taking of an Opinion. After the study of Philosophy begun in
Greece, and the Philosophers disagreeing amongst themselves, had started many
Questions, not only about things Natural, but also Moral and Civil; because
every man took what Opinion he pleased, each several Opinion was called a
Heresy; which signified no more than a private Opinion, without reference to
truth or falsehood. The beginners of these Heresies were chiefly Pythagoras,
Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, Zeno; men who as they held many Errors, so also
found they out many true and useful Doctrines, in all kinds of Learning: and
for that cause were well esteemed of by the greatest Personages of their own
times; and so also were some few of their Followers.

But the rest, ignorant men, and very often needy Knaves, having learned by
heart the Opinions of these admired Philosophers, and pretending to take after
them, made use thereof to get their Living by the teaching of Rich men's
Children that happened to be in love with those great Names. Though by their
impertinent Discourse, sordid and ridiculous Manners, they were generally
despised, of what Sect or Heresy soever; whether they were Pythagoreans, or
Academicks (Followers of Plato) or Peripateticks (Followers of Aristotle:
Epicureans or Stoics) (Followers of Zeno) For these were the names of
Heresies, or (as the Latins call them) Sects, a sequendo, so much talked of
from after the time of Alexander till this present day, and that have
perpetually troubled or deceived the people with whom they lived, and were
never more numerous than in the time of the Primitive Church.

The Heresy of Aristotle, by the Revolutions of time has had the good fortune
to be predominant over the rest. However originally the name of Heresy was no
disgrace, nor the word Heretic at all in use. Though the several Sects,
especially the Epicureans and the Stoics, hated one another; and the Stoics
being the fiercer men, used to revile those that differed from them with the
most despightful words they could invent.

It cannot be doubted, but that, by the preaching of the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ in Greece and other parts of the Roman Empire, full of these
Philosophers, many thousands of men were converted to the Christian Faith, some
really, and some feignedly, for factious ends, or for need; (for Christians
lived then in common, and were charitable:) and because most of these
Philosophers had better skill in Disputing and Oratory than the Common people,
and thereby were better qualified both to defend and propagate the Gospel,
there is no doubt (I say) but most of the Pastors of the Primitive Church were
for that reason chosen out of the number of these Philosophers; who retaining
still many Doctrines which they had taken up on the authority of their former
Masters, whom they had in reverence, endeavored many of them to draw the
Scriptures every one to his own Heresy. And thus at first entered Heresy into
the Church of Christ. Yet these men were all of them Christians; as they were
when they were first baptized: Nor did they deny the Authority of those
Writings which were left them by the Apostles and Evangelists, though they
interpreted them many times with a bias to their former Philosophy. And this
Dissension amongst themselves, was a great scandal to the Unbelievers, and
which not only obstructed the way of the Gospel, but also drew scorn and
greater Persecution upon the Church.

For remedy whereof, the chief Pastors of Churches did use, at the rising of
any new Opinion, to assemble themselves for the examining and determining of
the same; wherein, if the Author of the Opinion were convinced of his Error,
and subscribed to the Sentence of the Church assembled, then all was well
again: but if he still persisted in it, they laid him aside, and considered him
but as an Heathen man; which to an unfeigned Christian, was a great Ignominy,
and of force to make him consider better of his own Doctrine; and sometimes
brought him to the acknowledgment of the Truth. But other punishment they could
inflict none, that being a right appropriated to the Civil Power. So that all
the punishment the Church could inflict, was only Ignominy; and that among the
Faithful, consisting in this, that his company was by all the Godly avoided,
and he himself branded with the name of Heretic in opposition to the whole
Church, that condemned his Doctrine. So that Catholic and Heretic were terms
relative; and here it was that Heretic became to be a Name, and a name of
Disgrace, both together.

The first and most troublesome Heresies in the Primitive Church, were about
the Trinity. For (according to the usual curiosity of Natural Philosophers)
they could not abstain from disputing the very first Principles of
Christianity, into which they were baptized, In the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. Some there were that made them allegorical. Others
would make one Creator of Good, and another of Evil; which was in effect to set
up two Gods, one contrary to another; supposing that causation of evil could
not be attributed to God, without Impiety. From which Doctrine they are not far
distant, that now make the first cause of sinful actions to be every man as to
his own sin. Others there were that would have God to be a body with Parts
organical, as Face, Hands, Fore-parts and Back-parts. Others, that Christ had
no real body, but was a mere Phantasm: (For Phantasms were taken then, and have
been ever since, by unlearned and superstitious men, for things real and
subsistent.) Others denied the Divinity of Christ. Others, that Christ being
God and Man, was two Persons. Others confessed he was one Person, and withal that
he had but one Nature. And a great many other Heresies arose from the too much
adherence to the Philosophy of those times, whereof some were suppressed for a
time by St. John's publishing his Gospel, and some by their own
unreasonableness vanished, and some lasted till the time of Constantine the
Great, and after.

When Constantine the Great (made so by the assistance and valor of the
Christian Soldiers) had attained to be the only Roman Emperor, he also himself
became a Christian, and caused the Temples of the Heathen Gods to be
demolished, and authorized Christian Religion only to be public. But toward
the latter end of his time, there arose a Dispute in the City of Alexandria,
between Alexander the Bishop, and Arius a Presbyter of the same City; wherein
Arius maintained, first, That Christ was inferior to his Father; and
afterward, That he was no God, alleging the words of Christ, My Father is
greater than I. The Bishop on the contrary alleging the words of St. John,
And the Word was God; and the words of St. Thomas, My Lord and my God. This
Controversy presently amongst the Inhabitants and Soldiers of Alexandria
became a Quarrel, and was the cause of much Bloodshed in and about the City;
and was likely then to spread further, as afterward it did. This so far
concerned the Emperors Civil Government, that he thought it necessary to call a
General Council of all the Bishops and other eminent Divines throughout the
Roman Empire, to meet at the City of Nice. When they were assembled, they
presented the Emperor with Libels of Accusation one against another. When he
had received these Libels into his hands, he made an Oration to the Fathers
assembled, exhorting them to agree, and to fall in hand with the settlement of
the Articles of Faith, for which cause he had assembled them, saying,
Whatsoever they should decree therein, he would cause to be observed. This may
perhaps seem a greater indifferency than would in these days be approved of.
But so it is in the History; and the Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation,
were not thought then to be so many as afterward they were defined to be by
the Church of Rome.

When Constantine had ended his Oration, he caused the aforesaid Libels to be
cast into the fire, as became a wise King and a charitable Christian. This
done, the Fathers fell in hand with their business, and following the method of
a former Creed, now commonly called The Apostles Creed, made a Confession of
Faith, viz. I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and
Earth, and of all things visible and invisible, (in which is condemned the Poly
theism of the Gentiles.) And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of
God, (against the many sons of the many Gods of the Heathen.) Begotten of his
Father before all worlds, God of God, (against the Arians) Very God of very
God, (against the Valentinians, and against the Heresy of Apelles, and others,
who made Christ a mere Phantasm.) Light of Light, [This was put in for
explication, and used before to that purpose, by Tertullian.] Begotten, not
made, being of one Substance with the Father. In this again they condemn the
Doctrine of Arius: for this word Of one substance, in Latime Consubstantialis,
but in Greek (...), that is, Of one Essence, was put as a Touchstone to discern
an Arian from a Catholic: And much ado there was about it. Constantine
himself, at the passing of this Creed, took notice of it for a hard word; but
yet approved of it, saying. That in a divine Mystery it was fit to use divina
and arcana Verba; that is, divine words, and hidden from humane understanding;
calling that word (...), divine, not because it was in the divine Scripture,
(for it is not there) but because it was to him Arcanum, that is, not
sufficiently understood. And in this again appeared the indifferency of the
Emperor, and that he had for his end, in the calling of the Synod, not so much
the Truth, as the Uniformity of the Doctrine, and peace of his People that
depended on it. The cause of the obscurity of this word (...), proceeded
chiefly from the difference between the Greek and Roman Dialect, in the
Philosophy of the Peripateticks. The first Principle of Religion in all
Nations, is, That God is, that is to say, that God really is Something, and not
a mere fancy; but that which is really something, is considerable alone by it
self, as being somewhere. In which sense a man is a thing real: for I can
consider him to be, without considering any other thing to be besides him. And
for the same reason, the Earth, the Air, the Stars, Heaven, and their Parts,
are all of them things real. And because whatsoever is real here, or there, or
in any place, has Dimensions, that is to say, Magnitude; and that which has
Magnitude, whether it be visible or invisible, finite or infinite is called by
all the Learned a Body. It follows, that all real things, in that they are
somewhere, are Corporeal. On the contrary, Essence, Deity, Humanity, and
suchlike names, signify nothing that can be considered, without first
considering there is an Ens, a God, a Man, etc. So also if there be any real
thing that is white or black, hot or cold, the same may be considered by it
self; but whiteness, blackness, heat, coldness, cannot be considered, unless it
be first supposed that there is some real thing to which they are attributed.
These real things are called by the Latin Philosophers, Entia subjecta,
substantiae; and by the Greek Philosophers, (...). The other, which are
Incorporeal, are called by the Greek Philosophers, (...); but most of the
Latin Philosophers use to convert (...)into substantia, and so confound real
and corporeal things with incorporeal; which is not well: For Essence and
Substance signify diverse things. And this mistake is received, and continues
still in these parts, in all Disputes both of Philosophy, and Divinity: For in
truth Essentia signifies no more, than if we should talk ridiculously of the
Isness of the thing that is. [By whom all things were made.] This is proved out
of St. John, cap. 1. verse. 1, 2, 3. and Heb. cap. 1. verse. 3. and that again
out of Genesis 1. where God is said to create every thing by his sole Word, as
when he said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. And then, that Christ
was that Word; and in the beginning with God, may be gathered out of diverse
places of Moses, David, and other of the Prophets. Nor was it ever questioned
amongst Christians (except by the Arians) but that Christ was God Eternal, and
his Incarnation eternally decreed. But the Fathers, all that write Expositions
on this Creed, could not forbear to philosophize upon it, and most of them out
of the Principles of Aristotle: Which are the same the Schoolmen now use; as
may partly appear by this, that many of them, amongst their. Treatises of
Religion, have affected to publish Logic and Physic Principles according to
the sense of Aristotle; as Athanasius, and Damascene. And so some later Divines
of Note, still confound the Concreet with the Abstract, Deus with Deitas, Ens
with Essentia, Sapiens with Sapientia, Aeternus with Aeternitas. If it be for
exact and rigid Truth sake, why do they not say also, that Holiness is a Holy
man, Covetousness a Covetous man, Hypocrisy an Hypocrite, and Drunkenness a
Drunkard, and the like, but that it is an Error? The Fathers agree that the
Wisdom of God is the eternal Son of God, by whom all things were made, and that
he was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, if they meant it in the Abstract: For if
Deitas abstracted be Deus, we make two Gods of one. This was well understood by
Damascene, in his Treatise De Fide Orthodoxa, (which is an Exposition of the
Nicene Creed) where he denies absolutely that Deitas is Deus, lest (seeing God
was made man) it should follow, the Deity was made man; which is contrary to
the Doctrine of all the Nicene Fathers. The Attributes therefore of God in the
Abstract, when they are put for God, are put Metonymically; which is a common
thing in Scripture; for Example, Prove. 8.28. where it is said, Before the
mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought forth; the Wisdom there
spoken of being the Wisdom of God, signifies the same with the wise God. This
kind of speaking is also ordinary in all Languages. This considered, such
abstracted words ought not to be used in Arguing, and especially in the
deducing the Articles of our Faith; though in the Language of God's eternal
Worship, and in all Godly Discourses, they cannot be avoided: And the Creed it
self is less difficult to be assented to in its own words, than in all such
Expositions of the Fathers. Who for us men and our Salvation came down from
Heaven, and was uncarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made
Man. I have not read of any exception to this: For where Athanasius in his
Creed says of the Son, He was not made, but begotten, it is to be understood of
the Son as he was God Eternal; whereas here it is spoken of the Son as he is
man. And of the Son also as he was man, it may be said he was begotten of the
Holy Ghost; for a Woman conceives not but of him that begets; which is also
confirmed, Mat. 1, 20. That which is begotten in her (...) is of the Holy
Ghost. And was also Crucified for us under Pontius Pilate: he suffered and was
buried: And the third day he rose again according to the Scriptures, and
ascended into Heaven: and fitteth on the right hand of the Father; And he shall
come again with Glory to judge both the Quick and the Dead. Whose Kingdom shall
have no end. [Of this part of the Creed I have not met with any doubt made by
any Christian.] Hither the Council of Nice proceeds in their general
Confession of Faith, and no further.

This finished, some of the Bishops present at the Council (seventeen or
eighteen, whereof Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea was one) not sufficiently
satisfied, refused to subscribe till this Doctrine of (...)should be better
explained. Thereupon the Council Decreed, that whosoever shall say that God
has parts, shall be Anathematized; to which the said Bishops subscribed. And
Eusebius by Order of the Council wrote a Letter, the Copies whereof were sent
to every absent Bishop, that being satisfied with the reason of their
subscribing, they also should subscribe. The reason they gave of their
Subscription was this, That they had now a form of words prescribed, by which,
as a Rule, they might guide themselves so, as not to violate the Peace of the
Church. By this it is manifest, that no man was an Heretic, but he that in
plain and direct words contradicted that Form by the Church prescribed, and
that no man could be made an Heretic by Consequence. And because the said Form
was not put into the body of the Creed, but directed only to the Bishops, there
was no reason to punish any Lay-person that should speak to the contrary.

But what was the meaning of this Doctrine, That God has no Parts? Was it made
Heresy to say, that God, who is a real substance, cannot be considered or
spoken of as here or there, or any where, which are parts of places? Or that
there is any real thing without length every way, that is to say, which has no
Magnitude at all, finite nor infinite? Or is there any whole substance, whose
two halves or three thirds are not the same with that whole? Or did they mean
to condemn the Argument of Tertullian, by which he confuted Apelles and other
Heretics of his time; namely, Whatsoever was not Corporeal, was nothing but
Fantasm, and not Corporeal, for Heretical? No certainly, no Divines say that.
They went to establish the Doctrine of One individual God in Trinity; to
abolish the diversity of species in God, not the distinction of here and there
in substance. When St. Paul asked the Corinthians, Is Christ divided? He did
not think they thought him impossible to be considered as having hands and
feet, but that they might think him (according to the manner of the Gentiles)
one of the Sons of God, as Arius did; but not the only begotten Son of God. And
thus also it is expounded in the Creed of Athanasius, who was present in that
Council, by these words, Not confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substances; that is to say, that God is not divided into three Persons, as man
is divided into Peter, James, and John; nor are the three persons one and the
same person. But Aristotle, and from him all the Greek Fathers, and other
Learned Men, when they distinguish the general Latitude of a word, they call it
Division; as when they divide. Animal into Man and Beast, they call these
(...), Species; and when they again divide the Species Man into Peter and John,
they call these (...), parts individuae. And by this confounding the division
of the substance with the distinction of words, diverse men have been led into
the Error of attributing to God a Name, which is not the name of any substance
at all, viz. Incorporeal.

By these words, God has no parts, thus explained, together with the part of
the Creed which was at that time agreed on, many of those Heresies which were
antecedent to that first General Council, were condemned; as that of Manes, who
appeared about thirty years before the Reign of Constantine, by the first
Article, I believe in one God; though in other words it seems to me to remain
still in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which so ascribes a Liberty of
the Will to Men, as that their Will and Purpose to commit sin, should not
proceed from the Cause of all things, God; but originally from themselves, or
from the Devil. It may seem perhaps to some, that by the same words the
Anthropomorphites also were then Condemned: And certainly, if by Parts were
meant not persons Individual, but Pieces, they were Condemned: For Face, Arms,
Feet, and the like, are pieces. But this cannot be, for the Anthropomorphites
appeared not till the time of Valens the Emperor, which was after the Council
of Nice between forty and fifty years; and was not condemned till the second
General Council at Constantinople.

Now for the Punishment of Heretics ordained by Constantine, we read of none;
but that Ecclesiastical Officers, Bishops and other Preachers, if they refused
to subscribe to this Faith, or taught the contrary Doctrine, were for the first
Fault Deprived of their Offices, and for the second Banished. And thus did
Heresy, which at first was the name of private Opinion, and no Crime, by
virtue of a Law of the Emperor, made only for the Peace of the Church, become a
Crime in a Pastor, and punishable with Deprivation first, and next with
Banishment.

After this part of the Creed was thus established, there arose presently many
new Heresies, partly about the Interpretation of it, and partly about the Holy
Ghost, of which the Nicene Council had not determined. Concerning the part
established, there arose Disputes about the Nature of Christ, and the word
Hypostasis, id est, Substance; for of Persons there was yet no mention made,
the Creed being written in Greek, in which Language there is no, word that
answers to the Latin word Persona. And the Union, as the Fathers called it,
of the Humane and Divine Nature in Christ, Hypostatical, caused Eutyches, and
after him Dioscorus, to affirm, there was but one Nature in Christ; thinking
that whenever two things are united, they are one: And this was condemned as
Arianism in the Councils of Constantinople and Ephesus. Others, because they
thought two living and rational Substances, such as are God and Man, must needs
be also two Hypostases, maintained that Christ had two Hypostases: But these
were two Heresies condemned together. Then concerning the Holy Ghost, Nestorius
Bishop of Constantinople, and some others, denied the Divinity thereof. And
whereas about seventy years before the Nicene Council, there had been holden a
Provincial Council at Carthage, wherein it was Decreed, that those Christians
which in the Persecutions had denied the Faith of Christ, should not be
received again into the Church unless they were again baptized: This also was
condemned, though the President in that Council were that most sincere and
pious Christian, Cyprian. And at last the Creed was made up entire as we have
it, in the Calcedonian Council, by addition of these words, And I believe in
the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son. Who with the Father and the Son together is Worshipped and Glorified.
Who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. I
acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of Sins. And I look for the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to come. In this addition
are condemned, first the Nestorians and others, in these words, Who with the
Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified: And secondly the
Doctrine of the Council of Carthage, in these words, I believe one Baptism for
the Remission of Sins: For one Baptism is not there put as opposite to several
sorts or manners of Baptism, but to the iteration of it: St. Cyprian was a
better Christian than to allow any Baptism that was not in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In the General Confession of Faith contained in
the Creed called the Nicene Creed, there is no mention of Hypostasis, nor of
Hypostatical Union, nor of Corporeal, nor of Incorporeal, nor of Parts; the
understanding of which words being not required of the Vulgar, but only of the
Pastors, whose disagreement else might trouble the Church; nor were such Points
necessary to Salvation, but set abroach for ostentation of Learning, or else to
dazzle men, with design to lead them toward some ends of their own. The Changes
of prevalence in the Empire between the Catholics and the Arians, and how the
great Athanasius, the most fierce of the Catholics, was banished by
Constantine, and afterward restored, and again banished, I let pass; only it
is to be remembered, that Athanasius is supposed to have made his Creed then,
when (banished) he was in Rome, Liberius being Pope; by whom, as is most
likely, the word Hypostasis, as it was in Athanasius's Creed, was disliked: For
the Roman Church could never be brought to receive it but instead thereof used
their own word Persona. But the first and last words of that Creed the Church
of Rome refused not: For they make every Article, not only those of the body of
the Creed, but all the Definitions of the Nicene Fathers to be such, as a man
cannot be saved, unless he believe them all steadfastly; though made only for
Peace sake, and to unite the minds of the Clergy, whose Disputes were like to
trouble the Peace of the Empire. After these four first General Councils, the
Power of the Roman Church grew up a pace; and either by the negligence or
weakness of the succeeding Emperors, the Pope did what he pleased in Religion.
There was no Doctrine which tended to the Power Ecclesiastical, or to the
Reverence of the Clergy, the contradiction whereof was not by one Council or
another made Heresy, and punished arbitrarily by the Emperors with Banishment
or Death. And at last Kings themselves, and Commonwealths, unless they purged
their Dominions of Heretics, were Excommunicated, Interdicted, and their
Subjects let loose upon them by the Pope; insomuch as to an ingenuous and
serious Christian, there was nothing so dangerous as to enquire concerning his
own Salvation, of the Holy Scripture; the careless cold Christian was safe, and
the skilful Hypocrite a Saint. But this is a Story so well known, as I need not
insist upon it any longer, but proceed to the Heretics here in England, and
what Punishments were ordained for them by Acts of Parliament. All this while
the Penal Laws against Heretics were such, as the several Princes and States,
in their own Dominions, thought fit to enact. The Edicts of the Emperors made
their Punishments Capital, but for the manner of the Execution, left it to the
Prefects of Provinces: And when other Kings and States intended (according to
the Laws of the Roman Church) to extirpate Heretics, they ordained such
Punishment as they pleased. The first Law that was here made for the
punishments of Heretics called Lollards, and mentioned in the Statutes, was in
the fifth year of the Reign of Richard the Second, occasioned by the Doctrine
of John Wickliff and his Followers; which Wickliff, because no Law was yet
ordained for his punishment in Parliament, by the favor of John of Gaunt, the
King's Son, during the Reign of Edward the third, had escaped. But in the fifth
year of the next King, which was Richard the Second, there passed an Act of
Parliament to this effect; That Sheriffs and some others should have
Commissions to apprehend such as were certified by the Prelates to be Preachers
of Heresy, their Fautors, Maintainers and Abettors, and to hold them in strong
Prison, till they should justify themselves, according to the Law of Holy
Church. So that hitherto there was no Law in England, by which a Heretic could
be put to Death, or otherways punished, than by imprisoning him till he was
reconciled to the Church. After this, in the next King's Reign, which was Henry
the Fourth, Son of John of Gaunt by whom Wickliffe had been favored, and who
in his aspiring to the Crown had needed the good Will of the Bishops, was made
a Law, in the second Year of his Reign, wherein it was Enacted, That every
Ordinary may convene before him, and imprison any person suspected of Heresy;
and that an obstinate Heretic shall be burnt before the People.

In the next King's Reign, which was Henry the Fifth, in his Second year, was
made an Act of Parliament, wherein it is declared, that the intent of
Heretics, called Lollards, was to subvert the Christian Faith, the Law of God,
the Church and the Realm: And that an Heretic convict should forfeit all his
Feesimple Lands, Goods and Chattels, besides the Punishment of Burning. Again,
in the Five and Twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, it was Enacted, That
an Heretic convict shall abjure his Heresies, and refusing so to do, or
relapsing, shall be burnt in open place, for example of others. This Act was
made after the putting down of the Pope's Authority: And by this it appears,
that King Henry the Eighth intended no farther alteration in Religion, than the
recovering of his own Right Ecclesiastical. But in the first year of his Son
King Edward the sixth was made an Act, by which were repealed not only this
Act, but also all former Acts concerning Doctrines, or matters of Religion; So
that at this time there was no Law at all for the punishment of Heretics.

Again, in the Parliament of the first and second year of Queen Mary, this Act
of 1 Ed. 6. was not repealed, but made useless, by reviving the Statute of 25
Hen. 8. and freely put it in execution; insomuch as it was Debated, Whether or
no they should proceed upon that Statute against the Lady Elizabeth, the Queens
Sister.

The Lady Elizabeth not long after by the Death of Queen Mary coming to the
Crown in the fifth year of her Reign, by Act of Parliament repealed in the
first place all the Laws Ecclesiastical of Queen Mary, with all other former
Laws concerning the punishments of Heretics, nor did she enact any other
punishments in their place. In the second place it was Enacted, That the Queen
by her Letters Patents should give a Commission to the Bishops, with certain
other persons, in her Majesty's Name, to execute the Power Ecclesiastical; in
which Commission the Commissioners were forbidden to adjudge any thing to be
Heresy, which was not declared to be Heresy by some of the first four General
Councels: But there was no mention made of General Councels, but only in that
branch of the Act which Authorized that Commission, commonly called The High
Commission; nor was there in that Commission any thing concerning how Heretics
were to be punished, but it was granted to them, that they might declare or not
declare, as they pleased, to be Heresy or not Heresy, any of those Doctrines
which had been Condemned for Heresy in the first four General Councels. So
that during the time that the said High Commission was in being, there was no
Statute by which a Heretic could be punished otherways, than by the ordinary
Censures of the Church; nor Doctrine accounted Heresy, unless the
Commissioners had actually declared and published, That all that which was made
Heresy by those Four Councels, should be Heresy also now: But I never heard
that any such Declaration was made either by Proclamation, or by Recording it
in Churches, or by public Printing, as in penal Laws is necessary; the
breaches of it are excused by ignorance: Besides, if Heresy had been made
Capital, or otherwise civilly punishable, either the Four General Councels
themselves, or at least the Points condemned in them, ought to have been
Printed or put into Parish Churches in English, because without it, no man
could know how to beware of offending against them.

Some men may perhaps ask, whether no body were Condemned and Burnt for
Heresy, during the time of the High Commission.

I have heard there were: But they which approve such executions, may
peradventure know better grounds for them than I do; but those grounds are very
well worthy to be enquired after.

Lastly, in the seventeenth year of the Reign of King Charles the First,
shortly after that the Scots had Rebelliously put down the Episcopal Government
in Scotland, the Presbyterians of England endeavored the same here. The King,
though he saw the Rebels ready to take the Field, would not condescend to that;
but yet in hope to appease them, was content to pass an Act of Parliament for
the abolishing the High Commission. But though the High Commission were taken
away, yet the Parliament having other ends besides the setting up of the
Presbyterate, pursued the Rebellion, and put down both Episcopacy and Monarchy,
erecting a power by them called The Commonwealth, by others the Rump, which
men obeyed not out of Duty, but for fear, nor was there any humane Laws left in
force to restrain any man from Preaching or Writing any Doctrine concerning
Religion that he pleased; and in this heat of the War, it was impossible to
disturb the Peace of the State, which then was none.

And in this time it was, that a Book called Leviathan, was written in defense
of the King's Power, Temporal and Spiritual, without any word against
Episcopacy, or against any Bishop, or against the public Doctrine of the
Church. It pleased God about Twelve years after the Usurpation of this Rump, to
restore His most Gracious Majesty that now is, to his Fathers Throne, and
presently His Majesty restored the Bishops, and pardoned the Presbyterians; but
then both the one and the other accused in Parliament this Book of Heresy,
when neither the Bishops before the War had declared what was Heresy, when if
they had, it had been made void by the putting down of the High Commission at
the importunity of the Presbyterians: So fierce are men, for the most part, in
dispute, where either their Learning or Power is debated, that they never think
of the Laws, but as soon as they are offended, they cry out, Crucifige;
forgetting what St. Paul says, even in case of obstinate holding of an Error,
2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose, if
God peradventure may give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth:
Of which counsel, such fierceness as has appeared in the Disputation of
Divines, down from before the Council of Nice to this present time, is a
Violation.

FINIS.

