THE HISTORY OF THE ASSOCIATION, Containing all the DEBATES In the Last House
of Commons, AT WESTMINSTER: Concerning an Association, for the Preservation of
the Kings Person, and the Security of the Protestant Religion.

The Proceedings about an Association in the Reign of Queen ELIZABETH, and a
true Copy of the Association, produced at the Earl of SHAFTSBURY'S Trial, and
said to be found in his Lordships Study. With some Observations on the whole.

To which is added by way of Postcript Reflections on the Parallel between the
late Association, and the Solemn League and Covenant.

LONDON, Printed for R. Janeway. 1682.

THE HISTORY OF THE ASSOCIATION, etc.
AFter the Bill of Exclusion was rejected in the House of Lords, the Commons
seemed to be at a stand, not knowing what to do. But soon after his Majesty in
his most Gracious Speech of the 15th. December 1680. having promised them The
fullest satisfaction their hearts could wish for the security of the Protestant
Religion, etc. He concludes thus, and being thus ready on my part to do all
that can reasonably be expected from me, I shall be glad to know from you as
soon as may be, how far I shall be assisted by you; and what it is you desire
from me; upon which grounds the first time you heard of the Bill of Association
being mentioned was in the Grand Committee, to secure the Kingdom against
Popery and Arbitrary Government, wherein Mr. Powel had the chair. At which time
the Lord C. and several others speak to this effect, as follows, all already
Printed in the Collection of the Debates of the House of Commons at
Westminster, 1680. Published by Richard Baldwin.

Ld. C. Sir, when I consider the Immunities and Advantages we enjoy by the
excellent composure of our Government both in Church and State, how the King as
Sovereign, enjoys all the Prerogative that can be necessary to make him either
great or happy, and the People all the Liberty and Privilege that can be
pretended for their encouragement to be industrious, and for securing to
themselves and Posterities the enjoyment of what they get by their industry.
How the Doctrine of the Church is void of Idolatrous Superstitious Opinions*
and the Government of Tyranny or absolute Dominion; I cannot but admire that
there should be any body amongst our selves that should aim at any alteration,
and be the occasion of this days Debate. But, Sir, it is too evident that such
there are, and that they have made a great advance to effect their design, by
many contrivances which they have persued for a long course of years, according
to the Results and Cousultations held by Jesuits for that purpose: But above
all, by converting to their Religion James Duke of York, the presumptive Heir
of the Crown, and by engaging him to espouse their interest with that zeal and
fervency which usually attends new Converts; especially when so great a glory
is proposed as the rooting out of a pestslent Heresy out of these three
Nations, and the saving of so many Souls as would depend thereon. The sad
effect of this Conversion we have felt for many years, it having had the same
operations in our Body Politic, as some sorts of lingering Poison has in
Bodies Natural; made us sick and consumptive, by infecting and corrupting all
the food and Physic which has been applied in order to reduce us to Popery
and slavery, worse than death it self. From this fatal act the declination of
the Grandieur of this Monarchy may be dated, and to the consequences thereof
its absolute ruin if not timely prevented) will be hereafter attributed. This
being our case, I could not but admire to see this House so long coming to
consider this weighty point; insomuch, that I began to persuade my self, that
either our dangers were not so great as our discourses upon some other
occasions had represented them, or that we were not in good earnest to
endeavor any redress. It is true when we consider what ill fortune we have had
with our Bid lately sent up to the house of Lords, we may with some reason be
discouraged. But I hope, Sir, that seeing our Country has thought us worthy to
be their Representatives, we shall not be so easily daunted in what so nearly
concerns them, but be as indefatigable in finding out ways for our
preservation, as our Enemies are to find out means for our destruction; hoping
we shall not meet always so bad success in the House of Lords: For though the
too much kindness of some men who pretended to be for the Bill, but underhand
made a party against it, did this time operate as fatally as Enmity disguised
in Friendship uses to do, yet I hope that in another occasion we may have
better success; not doubting but a great many Lords, when they are persuaded
that they shall not be able to find out any other way (as I hear they begin to
despair they shall) to secure the Protestant Religion, that they will join with
us in the same, or some other Bill to the same purpose: Especially my good
Lords the Bishops, who cannot be presumed to have made peace with Rome, but to
be ready to die for the Protestant Religion, and therefore doubtless will not
long stick at joining in a Bill to save it. But seeing that according to the
course of Parliaments we are not like to bring this to a trial for a long time
I am of Opinion we had best try something else; and although I know not what
other Act can be made to serve instead of that, but will either prove to weak
or two strong; yet seeing we are put upon it, we must try, that so we may not
be represented as stubborn. And therefore I humbly move you that a Bill may be
brought in for the Association of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.


R. M. Sir, great things are expected from this days Debate, and we could not
well have entered into it sooner; it now comes more seasonable than it would
have done before, because of the opportunities we have had to feel the pulse of
affairs since the beginning of the Session, and the time we have spent in
asserting the right of Petitioning, by which the essence of Parliaments, and
the foundation of the Peoples Liberties were struck at. And the Trial of my
Lord Stafford, and the Disinheriting-Bill could not possibly have been avoided.
And as our labor has not been lost in all, so I hope that at last we shall
have some benefit, of that spent about the Succession-Bill. For as it was said
at the passing of the Bill, that there were a Loyal Party that will never
acquiesce in it; so I do believe there is a true Protestant party that will
never acquiesce in any thing less than what may be sufficient for the security
of their Religion, which I am apt to believe will end in that Bill. But in the
mean time, that we may show that we are not humorists, let us try what strength
we can muster up to oppose these great Enemies by some other Laws; as when an
House is on fire we make use of Buckets and Tubs for casting of water, until
the great Engines can be got. But I would move you to be cautious what you do,
for I am afraid that the design of putting you upon finding out Expedients, is
not in order to have any thing done that is effectual against Popery, but in
order to have you offer at something that may purchase a disrepute on the
House, and give your Enemies an advantage to pursue their designs of breaking
us, by alleging that you aim at Laws that will overturn the Government. For
my part I am fully persuaded that this is the design of those that have put the
King so often to declare against altering the Succession, and to recommend
other ways; and that offer at what you will, if it be any thing that is like
to prove strong enough to secure us against Popery, that you will see the House
put off before it come to any perfection, and that in time it will be made use
of to arraign the Proceeding of Parliament, and to persuade the people that
this House did attempt to alter the Government by such and such Bills, and so
by degrees possess the People that Parliaments are either dangerous, or
inconsistent with the Government, that if possible they may be well content to
be without them. Sir, I am afraid that the Popish party are more serious in
this design than we are aware of; and that next to the great endeavors they
have used for many years to keep on our divisions in points of Religion, the
next great Artifice which they depend on, is the infusing into the people the
dislikes of Parliaments: For they well know that Popery can never be
established in this Nation, as long as Parliaments are permitted to Sit and
Act. Therefore, though I know it is below a House of Commons to mind every
little discourse, yet I think if we conclude that this powerful Party amongst
their many designs have this for one, that we ought to countermine it as much
as we can. We cannot well comprehend what a Bill of Association will be before
it be drawn up, nor what difficulties may be found in the contriving of it; and
therefore I think no great debate will be necessary about it before such a Bill
will be brought in. And I believe it will be found more likely to be
serviceable in case the Papists be banished; and therefore I conceive a Bill
for Banishment of all the considerable Bapists out of England may be very
nacessary. And if at the same time that we endeavor to secure our selves
against Poperty, we do not also do something to prevent Arbitrary Power, it
will be too little purpose; for the one will be sure to give a hand to bring in
the other; and I think nothing can prevent that; or rather both, better than
frequent Parliaments. And therefore I humbly move you that a Bill for securing
frequent Parliaments may be taken into your consideration.


Sir G. H. Sir, I think you are well adviced that the way to secure our selves
effectually against Popery, is to secure our selves also against Arbitrary
Government, and that the having of frequent Parliaments is the best way to
secure both; and therefore, Sir, I think you do well to move the House that a
Committee be appointed to inspect what old Laws there are for enforceing the
sitting of frequent Parliaments, that if they should be found deficient, some
new Laws may be made for that purpose. I do agree that a Bill for Banishing out
of England the most Considerable Papists may do well; but I hope, Sir, that if
you banish the Men, you will banish some Women too; For I do believe that some
of that Sex have been great Instruments in bringing about our ruin: and if in
time you would consider how to prevent the Royal Families marrying Popish
Women, it would be of great security hereafter. For I am of Opinion that the
late Queen Mother's Zeal for her Religion was not only a great occasion
(amongst many others) of the miseries that befell us in forty one, but the great
cause of all our Miseries now, by perverting the Duke from his Religion, as is
reported, and may reasonably be believed, if we conclude that she had that
Motherly care for the salvation of her Children as other Mothers usually have;
for according to her Opinion, it was not to be obtained out of the pale of that
Church: And no man can doubt but that the Protestant Interest has been much
Prejudiced by his Majesty's marrying a Princess of that Religion: For we have
plainly seen since the discovery of the Plot, how some of the most material
Jesuits and Popish Instruments have sheltered themselves under her Royal
Protection, and how they have helped to carry on the Plot, by being so impudent
as to pretend they had her patronage, and by abusing her Authority; but more
especially by the Dukes marrying the Princess of Modena, because of her near
Relation to the Pope and Cardinals. All which was plainly foreseen by that
Parliament which met a little before that Marriage, in 1673. and therefore they
made an Address to his Majesty, representing the said ill consequences,
desiring him not to permit it, because it would tend to the destrustion of the
Protestant Religion. But their endeavors were defeated by that Party, as we
may guess, seeing we find so much use of her name in Colemans Letters; for well
might they who have overruled in so many affairs as have been instanced in
this House, have an influence also in this, that so that Party might not want
so useful an Instrument in so great a station: and so the Parliaments Address
miscarried; but that they had either a good Judgment, or Prophetic Spirit, I
hope will never miscarry, but remain upon Record. And unless you do believe
that these Ladies are less compassionate than others usually are, how can it be
otherwise, their Principles considered; But, Sir, I will not trouble you
farther about it, but suppose it may be worth your consideration in due time.
In the interim, I agree for the Bill of Banishment and Association too.


I. B. Sir I retain a good opinion of an Association-bill, notwithstanding what
has been said as to the weakness it may receive from our unhappy Divisions in
point of Religion and Interest, too much promoted by some of our Clergy. For,
Sir, when I consider how the Laudean principles, as to raising of Money without
Parliaments in the late times, infected most of our Clergy, so as that they not
only preached up the Kings absolute Authority over men's Properties, but
branded with the title of Rebels, and condemned to Hell those that offered to
argue against it. I do conclude that it is usual for one or two Bishops, to
give measures or directions to the rest of the Bishops, and they to the Clergy
of their several Diocesses: And that therefore the Clergy derive the Politics
generally from one Bishop or two in some great station. Yet Sir, when I
remember how after some little time many of the Clergy fell off, and would not
follow such instructions; and how the People soon excused themselves from
following their advice in such Politics, and would not freely pay illegal
Taxes, notwithstanding all their endeavors. I am apt to think; Sir, that as
the People were not long then mislead, so as to submit to lose their Property,
so they will not now, to any thing that shall tend to the losing of their
Religion and Property both. They will soon discover what is their interest, and
how true interest will not lie. I have often told you within these walls, they
will soon apprehend that Popery will bring in slavery, and reduce them not only
to an Idolatrous Superstitious Religion, but to wear Wooden-shooes like the
French, and to eat Herbs like the Spaniard, because they will soon know that
they shall not be long Masters of any thing they have: And however they may be
persuaded for a while, I am confident they will at last consult how to save
their Bacon. They will discern that the Clergy may be good Divines, but not so
good Politicians; and that there may be some difference in point of Interest
between them and the Clergy, because Clergymen may be in a possibility of
being advanced by Popery if they submit; but the Laity under a probability of
losing all notwithstanding all submissions. Sir, I do not trouble you with this
Discourse out of a fear that our Clergy will not show themselves good
Protestants, for I have that veneration for them, and opinion of them, as to
believe that many of the Bishops and Clergy too, would as soon die for the
Protestant Religion as any persons in the Nation. But I am jealous that there
is some over-awing Power got in amongst them, something answerable to that of a
Popish Successor in the State; by whose means those Bills were so easily past
in the late long Parliament, under a pretense that they were for the
preservation of the Protestant Religion, which the Commons than found, and any
person that will now peruse them may find, would infalibly have brought in
Popery. And, how since the Plot, the danger of Fanatics is cried up more than
that of the Papists; and how tender they are in the point of a Popish
Successor, or joining in any thing against him. But though these things make me
jealous there is some body that misleads them now in matters relating to
Popery, as formerly in things relating to Property, yet I am of opinion that
they will ere long see, that to stand up for the Interest of a Popish
Successor, to have a Popish King, to weaken the Protestant Interest and to
speak ill of Parliaments, is not the right way to preserve the Protestant
Religion; but a plain contradiction, and an invention of Jesuits. And
therefore, Sir, I am for going on with the Allociation-Bill; for I will never
doubt, that the true Interest of the Nation, in so great a concern as this,
will long be baffled by such projectors. and therefore it is my desire, that
the House may be moved to appoint a Committee to draw up a Bill for that
purpose.


Sir W. H. Sir, I think you have been well moved, as well for the
Association-Bill, as the Banishing-Bill. By the one, you will send your Enemies
out of the Country; by the other, be in a good condition to keep them out,
which may go a great way to secure us.


Sir R. T. Sir, you have been verywell moved for the bringing in of such Bills
as may tend as much to the security of the Protestant Religion as any that can
be offered. That of Banishment will certainly go a great way to destroy, not
only their Power, but their Interest and Principles too, and be a great
disheartning to their party abroad. That Interest will not then have so many
Engines to work with here, as now they have. And the Bill of Association will
be necessary, that we may have a Law to defend our selves. The Association made
in Queen Elizabeth's time, will be a good President to draw it up by. And
seeing there is no opposition, I move you to put the Question.


R. M. Sir, By offering at the Exclusion Bill, we may conclude we have offended
the Duke of York, by this Bill for Banishment, all the rest of the considerable
Papists in England. As we have made many Enemies, so it will be convenient that
we should endeavor to get some Law to defend our selves against their
implacable designs. For which a Bill for an Association of all His Majesty's
Protestant Subjects may do well, and therefore I pray that we may move the
House to have it brought in,


Sir G. G. Sir, I am of opinion the Popish Plot goes on as much as ever, and
the Papists are so proud of it, as they cannot forbear bragging of their hopes
to see better days speedily. I think Sir, seeing we are not like for one while
to have the Exclusion-Bill, we shall appear neglectful of our duty, if we do
not try what security can be contrived by an Association-Bill. And therefore I
humbly pray that the House may be moved to appoint a Committee to draw up and
bring in a Bill for Associating all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

I find in Cooke's Reports, that when the Nation was in apparent danger, the
People might go directly to the King with their Grievances, and make their
Complaints and Petitions known. I think we may do well to consult this Text,
and see if we can find out any better way than what we have tried already, to
convey our humble Supplications to his Royal Person. In the mean time I think
you had not best to go off from the Bill of Association; for which we have a
President in Queen Elizabeth's time, first made by the Gentry, and afterward
confirmed by Act of Parliament.


L. G. Sir, I would not discourage you from going on with these Bills; but I am
afraid they will fall far short of the Power and strength that will be
necessary to root out an Interest that has been above an hundred years
reivetting it self by all arts and ways Imaginable, and has now fixed it self
so near the Throne. I must confess, I am afraid we are at labor in vain, and
that this Interest has so clenched it self (as the Jesuits term it) that it
will break not only this Parliament, but many more, if not all Parliaments, and
the Protestant Religion too. It is too weighty to be removed, or perverted, by
such little Bills as these: No, Sir, you will find, that nothing less than a
firm Union amongst all the Protestants in this Nation, can be sufficient to
give any check to this Interest. As long as there are amongst us so many
persons as know not rightly how to apply the dangers of the Church and State,
nor the miseries of Forty One, but will be lead by Popish Projectors; I am
afraid such Bills as these will not do our business: because they will not
destroy that footing which they have at Court, nor strengthen the Protestant
Interest, which must have its original from Union. It is strange, that none but
those who are for the Duke's interest, should be the only persons thought fit
to be in places of trust! It is so strange a way to preserve the Protestant
Church and Religion, that it raises with me a doubt, whether any such thing be
designed. Such Persons may be proper to manage Affairs in favor of the Popish
interest; but it is to be admired, that they, and they only, should be thought
fit to be entrusted with the Protestant interest. I think it as hard for them
to do it, as to serve two Masters. It is not usual in other Countries to retain
their Enemies in the Government, nor such as are Friends to their Enemies; and
it is strange that we, of all other Nations, should fall into this piece of
Policy. But Sir, for these reasons you may conclude, that unless what Laws you
make, be strong and well penned, they will signify nothing against so powerful
a Party as you have to do with.


Sir W. J. Sir, there has been so much said already upon the Subject Matter of
this Debate, that I shall have little occasion to trouble you long. The worthy
Member that spoke a while since, has showed you from whence our fears of
Popery arise, from the dependence they have of assistance from France, Ireland,
and Scotland in case there should be a Popish King, besides the Party they have
here, and the advantage they will have by the Government, which is already
secured for that Interest; and of it self would be sufficient to contest with
the Protestant interest, who in such a case would have no King to head them, no
persons in any place of trust to execute any Laws in their behalf, nor no legal
power to defend themselves. And therefore, seeing there is a Negative past upon
the Bill, we had contrived to secure us from these great dangers, I think Sir,
we may do well to try if we can get any thing else. But I am persuaded if this
Association-Bill be made as it should be, that we shall have no better success
with it than we had with the Exclusion-Bill: For I am afraid, that though we
are permitted to brandish our Weapons, yet that we should not be allowed to
wound Popery; but rather do believe, that they which advised the throwing out
of that Bill, will also do the same by this, or dissolve the House before it
come to perfection: For this Bill must be much stronger than that in Queen
Elizabeth's days; that was for an Association only after her death, but I cannot
tell if such a Bill will secure us now, the circumstances we are under being
very different. In Queen Etizabeths days the Privy Counselors were all for the
Queens Interest, and none for the Successors; now most of the Privy Counselors
are for the Successors, and few for the King's. Then the Ministers unanimously
agreed to keep our Popery, now we have to much reason to fear, there are many
that are for bringing it in. In those days they all agreed to keep the Popish
Successor in Scotland, now the Major part agreed to keep the Successor here;
all which must be considered in drawing out of the Bill.


After all these debates it was at length Resolved, That it is the opinion of
this Commit, that the House be moved, that a Bill be brought in for an
Association of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, for the safety of his
Majesty's Person, the defense of the Protestant Religion, and the preservation
of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, against all invasions and Oppositions;
and for preventing the Duke of York, or any other Papists, from succeeding to
the Crown.

December 17. 1680.
THe House resolved into a Committee, further to consider of ways and means to
secure the Kingdom against Popery and Arbitrary Government; and after several
Debates, how ineffectual all Laws would prove without having good Judges,
Justices, and others in Commission that will execute them, and how frequent
Parliaments would conduce to have Laws put duly in execution.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that the House be moved, that
a Bill be brought in for the more effectual securing of the Meetings and
Sittings of frequent Parliaments.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that the House be moved,
that a Bill be brought in that the Judges may hold their Places and Sallaries,
quam diu se been gesserint.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, that one means to prevent
Arbitrary Power is, that the House be moved, that a Bill be brought in against
illegal exaction of Money upon the people, to make it High Treason. Reported to
the House, and agreed to.

His Majesty's Speech made to both Houses, December. 15. was read.

J. H. Mr Speaker, SIR, The Veneration that is due to all His Majesty's
Speeches, does require that we should seriously Debate them before we give any
Answer to them; but the circumstances we are under at this time, challenge a
more than ordinary Consultation. For by the tenor of the Speech, I conclude,
that the Success of this Parliament depends upon our Answer to it, and
consequently the safety of the Protestant Religion, both at home and abroad.
And therefore I think my self very unable to advise in this matter, and should
not have attempted it, but that you have encouraged me by your leave to speak
first. So that if I offer any thing amiss, those that come after will have
opportunities to correct me. I would begin with the latter end of the Speech
first, because that part of it is most likely to be get a fair understanding
between his Majesty and this House. But I cannot but observe what great care is
here again taken of preserving the Succession in the Right Line, as in all
other his Majesty's Speeches ever since the Plot break out. I think more could
not be done, though it were in behalf of the Kings Son, and a Protestant too.
That limitation, and his Majesty's offers of securing the Protestant Religion,
(if by Succession in the Right Line may be meant the Duke) upon many Debates in
this House is found irreconcilable, and therefore must be imputed to those
that have advised his Majesty thereto. To preserve the Right of Succession in
the Duke, is to preserve something or nothing. The something must be no less,
then the Crown, in case of his Majesty's death, and so consequently the
interest of the Popish party, who after one hundred years endeavors to have a
Prince of their Religion, the indefatigable industry of the Jesuits to obtain
it, and the loss of so much Blood spent therein, will, besides their principles
and inclinations, lay on them great obligations to make use of the opportunity
to establish their Religion again in this Nation. So that I must confess, these
reservations look to me like a perfect design to save the whole Party,
accompanied with a power and a pretense sufficient to enable them to accomplish
their end. For to this, the saving the Dukes right does amount, and
consequently the destruction of the Protestant Religion. Which cannot be
imagined to proceed from his Majesty. In former times the interest of no one
man could ever bare up against the interest of the Nation, now, it seems, that
the Religion, Lives, and Liberties of all the people of this Nation; nay, I may
say, all the Protestants of the Three Nations must all be lost, rather then one
man be dispossessed of his right, though by his own Act has made himself
incapable to enjoy it. Certainly there must be more intended by this, then the
saving of one man, it must be the saving of a Party. And therefore, Sir, I am
afrraid we are but where we were two years ago. For it is plain to me, that
there is a certain fatal Scheme which has been exactly pursued these twenty
years, in order to destroy the Protestant Interest, and has had a strange
secret operation in the management of all our affairs. And although now and
then some accidents have happened, that have occasioned some alteration for a
time, as by his Majesty's recalling the Toleration, some Transactions of
Parliaments, the breaking out of the plot, and his Majesty's Toleration of his
Council, 1679. Yet I observe that after a little while there is no change in
the main, all returns to the old Scheme, as if there were a certain infallible
balance that did preponderate. We have had so much experience of his Majesty's
goodness and inclinations, that we cannot but conclude, that there is still
some such thing, as a wheel within a wheel, whether Jesuits, (for it is like
them) or who I cannot tell, nor how the Government is influenced, that the
Protestants should not be able to obtain any thing for their security. But we
may guess, and justly fear, that it will never be other ways, as long as there
is a Popish Successor. The truth is, we have a hard task to serve our King and
Country, in such a time as this is. We may expose our selves to the rage of a
powerful party, but I am afraid, get little to secure our selves against their
revenge. We are under the same inequailty as fair gamesters, that meet with
those that use false Dice, and are like to have the same ill luck at last,
unless his Majesty should be pleased to consider, who stands up most for his
Government, and who plays fairest, and accordingly, change his Councils. The
first three Paragraphs of the Speech are about Alliances, the fourth about
Tangier, the fifth about securing the Succession, the sixth to know what we
desire, and what we will do.

Sir, I take no delight in looking backward, but without doing it at this time,
I am afraid we shall not mend, as we go forward. It is not to be doubted, but
that as well for the security of the Nation, at home, as of Flanders against
the power of France and the Protestant Religion abroad, we are under a
necessity to make Alliances, and that they cannot be made nor supported without
Money. But did we not give above Two Millions for the preservation of the
Tripple-League, and was it not by the power of the French and Popish Party
employed to break it? Did we not a little while since give about a Million and
half for an actual French War, and was there not presently a general Peace
made? Do not all Foreign Nations complain, that notwithstanding all our
Treaties, pretenses, and Declarations, we have been only true to France? And
what reason have we now to imagine, that if we should give Money for Leagues,
that it would be employed otherwise then formerly? Is not the same Scheme of
Government pursued still? Is not the French Ambassador, and the French Women
too, as great at Court as ever? And have not the Dukes Creatures the management
of all our affairs? and if the Dukes interest, the French interest, and the
Popish interest be all one, can you imagine, that your Money shall be employed
to make any Alliances that shall be for the advantage of the Protestant
Religion. No, Sir, though his Majesty so intend it, yet the wheel within a
wheel, which has managed all other alliances hitherto, will also manage these,
and have the Disposal of your Money too, and pervert it to our Destruction. And
until things settle here at home, on a true Protestant bottom, it cannot be
imagined, that any Foreign Prince will depend on us, or make Alliances with
us. And therefore, as well for that, as because our Money may not probably be
disposed of for any good end, it is in vain to Treat of either Alliances or
Money. For until the Interest be changed at Court, that so there may be a
better understanding between the King and his People, it cannot produce any
thing for our advantage.

As to Tangier, and the Succession, there has been so much said already, when
those points were debated, that I will not trouble you with more at this time.

But I beg leave to add something about the latter part of the Speech, which
does a little comfort me, because I hope we may graft such an Answer thereupon,
as may beget a right understanding with His Majesty. I know this House is
constituted of persons much different from that of the Long Parliament, because
of the many Pensioners that were in it, and that we need not now be afraid to
talk of Money. I believe we all know, that without giving Money this Session,
the Nation can never be happy, nor His Majesty's Government so formidable as it
ought to be. And therefore I would humbly move you to appoint a Committee, to
draw up an Address to assure His Majesty, that when His Majesty shall be
pleased to grant us such Laws, as are necessary for the security of our
Religion, which may be particularized in the Address; that we will be ready to
give him what Money his occasions may require, not only for the support of
Tangier, and Alliances, but to enable him to have a good Fleet at Sea, for the
encouraging of Seamen, and security of Trade, and preservation of his
Dominions; that so we may show we are ready to express our duty, as well by our
acts as words.


Ld R. Mr. Speaker, Sir, being it is so apparent that all our fears of Popery
arise from, and center in the Duke of York; and that it is impossible the
affairs of this Nation should ever settle on a good Protestant bottom, as long
as there is a Popish Successor, which cannot be prevented but by the Succession
Bill. That there may be no ill construction made of our desires I would humbly
move you to offer to supply the King, with what money he may need for the
support of Tangier and Alliances, upon his granting of the Succession Bill
only, that so His Majesty may have no reason to be diffident of us: not
doubting, but that if we can once but lay a foundation for a good
Correspondence, that His Majesty will take so much content in it, beyond what
he does now enjoy, that to preserve it, he will afterward grant us what more
Bills may be further necessary for the security of the Protestant Religion. And
therefore I am not for clogging this Address with any request for anything
more, than that one Bill.


Sir W. J. Mr. Speaker. Sir, We have hitherto had so little success in our
endeavors, that we may justly suspect, we are permitted to sit here, rather to
destroy our selves, then to save our Country. It is a matter of admiration to
me, that those who have so often advised His Majesty, to put this and the
former Parliaments upon finding out Expedients, for securing the Protestant
Religion, without altering the Succession should all this while find out none
themselves, but still continue advising the King to put that upon us, which
after many Debates is found to be impossible. And that the King should always
have at his elbow, persons ready to remember him constantly to make his
limitation, which in all appearance must tend to the final destruction of the
Protestant Religion. And that there should be no body there, to mind him of
proposing some Expedients to prevent it, only in general words, of which no use
can be made, According to the opinion of Three successive Parliaments, the
limitation in favor of the Popish Interest, is plain, intelligible, and
practicable. I hope his Majesty against the next occasion, will require them
that have so advised him, to make the Expedients, and other ways to secure the
Protestant Religion, as plain and practicable; that so we may see if the
security of the Protestant Religion be designed in good earnest by such
advisers, which I cannot believe; because what they propose, is in my opinion a
contradiction in it self. Without the Exclusion-Bill, there can be no
Expedient, but what will leave us in that miserable condition, of having first
or last a contest with our lawful King. And there can be no such thing as
setting up a power to oppose him, but by putting a kind of Supreme Authority in
the Parliament, with a power to oppose, as well by making War as Laws, which
might prove the destruction of the Monarchial Government. The said trust or
power (without the Exclusion Bill) being not to be reposed in the next Heir, or
any single person, least he should dye before he come to have the power in him,
or utterly refuse to act if he should live to have a right by virtue of such a
settlement, to administer the Government. In such a case there would be no
lawful power lodged any where else, to oppose such a King, and there must not
be an inter Regnum. By this short account you may see, what difficulties all
expedients will be liable too, and may conclude, that those that advise the
King to make this Limitation, do intend it as an Expedient to make the
endeavors of Parliaments ineffectual, and to bring in Popery. And if you had
offered at such Expedients as I have mentioned, as the last House of Commons
was Arraigned for Omnipotent and Arbitrary, so would this with some worse
Character; as having attempted to destroy the Monarchical Government, that if
possible the King and People might be put out of love with Parliaments. But
Sir, though it is plain that things are thus out of order, yet let us not be
wanting in our duty, but give such an Answer to his Majesty, as may if
possible, create in him a good opinion Of his House, and satisfy him of the
necessity of the Bill of Exclusion, and that all other Acts of Grace will but
serve to fatten us for the slaughter of our Enemies. The last part of this
Speech, I believe, is his Majesty's own; he seems willing to know what you
expect from him, and what you will do for him, which I think is a fair
proposition to come to an understanding. And although it be not good manners to
offer to make a bargain with his Majesty; but as in bargains there is a quid
and pro quo, so in this. And I think we need not fear talking of money in this
House, being all seem resolved to give it freely, if we can be secured of our
Religion, but not otherways. And therefore I humbly conceive, you may
accordingly express your selves plain in your Address.


W. G. Mr. Speaker, Sir, if you do not represent all your Grievances in this
Address, as the condition of your giving Money, whatever you shall offer at
afterward, will be looks as clamarous and out of order. And therefore I would
advise you not to omit any one Grievance you expect any ^e ready in. And I am
for enumerating all your Grievances in the Address, which have been lately
Debated. And I do admire no body does take notice of the standing Army which if
not reduced to such a number as may be convenient for Guards, and so limited,
that they may not be increased, unless in case of a Rebellion or an Invasion,
all your Laws may signify nothing. And I am not satisfied, in the making of
such general offers of Money. For if you do, you will hear in time, that the
Fleet needs one Million Allyances as much more, and Tangier (though I think not
worth keeping) little less. A demand of Three Millions, grounded on your
general promise, would perplex the House how to come off with that reputation,
which a House of Commons ought to preserve with the King. I know not how such a
promise may be turned upon you, and therefore I am either for demanding more,
or promising less.


Sir E. H. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am very unwilling to have this Parliament
broken, yet I cannot agree, that to prevent it, we should offer so much, and
demand so little as has been mentioned. Have we not sat two days in a
Committee, to examine the dangerous estate of the Kingdom, and ordered several
good Bills to be brought in thereupon, for the securing us against Popery and
Arbitrary power, and shall we now the next day lay all those Bills aside, and
be content with the Exclusion-Bill only, which I think will be worth nothing,
unless you can get more. And therefore, though to obtain them you spoke plain
English, and mentioned what sum you intend to give, I think you will be safer
to offer Money in general words, without declaring what, or enumerating your
Bills.


G. V. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I cannot agree with this worthy Member, for it would
take up some days Debates, to agree what some is necessary to supply his
Majesty's occasions, and what sum to express. And it may be to no purpose, as
the case stands with us, unless we were sure his Majesty would find out some
way to bring the Exclusion Bill about again, then indeed we might come to
particulars. In the mean time, a promise in general words may be sufficient,
and save the House a great deal of time. And for my part, I am not for
enumerating many Bills, but should be content to give Money upon having the
Exclusion Bill only, which being so precisely necessary for the preservation of
our Religion all the world will justify us in the demanding it, before we part
with Money, and therefore I desire the Commit may draw up the Address
accordingly.


Resolved, That a Committee be appointed to prepare an Humble Address to His
Majesty, upon the Debate of the House, in answer to His Majesty's Speech.

December 20. 1680.
Mr. Hampden reports the Address; which was read.

The Humble Address of the House of Commons presented to his Majesty, in Answer
to his Majesty's Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament, upon the 15th
day of the same December.

May it please your most Excellent Majesty,

WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, have taken into our serious Consideration, Your Majesty's
Gracious Speech to both Your Houses of Parliament, on the 15th of this Instant
December; and do with all the grateful Sense of Faithful Subjects, and sincere
Protestants, acknowledge Your Majesty's great goodness to us, in renewing the
assurances You have been pleased to give us of your readiness to concur with us
in any m^^^ for the security of the Protestant Religion, and Your Gracious
Invitation of us to make our desires known to your Majesty.

But with grief of Heart we cannot but observe, that to these Princely Offers,
your Majesty has been advised (by what secret Enemies to Your Majesty and Your
People, we know not) to annex a Reservation, which if insisted on, in the
instance to which alone it is applicable, will tender all Your Majesty's other
Gracious Inclinations of no effect or advantage to us. Your Majesty is pleased
thus to limit Your promise of Concurrence in the Remedies which shll be
proposed, that they may consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in
it is due and legal course of Descent. And we d^ humbly inform four Majesty that
no Interruption of that Descent has been endeavored by us, except only the
Descent upon the Person of the Duke of York, who by the wicked Instruments of
the Church of Rome, has been manifestly perverted to their Religion. And we do
humbly represent to Your Majesty, as the Issue of our most deliberate Thoughts
and Consultations that for the Papists to have their hopes continued, that a
Prince of that Religion shall succeed in the Throne of these Kingdoms, is
utterly inconsistent with the Safety of your Majesty's Person, the preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the Prosperity, Peace, and Welfare of your
Protestant Subjects.

That your Majesty's Life is in continual danger, under the prospict of a
Popish Successor, is evident not only from the Principles of those devoted to
the Church of Rome, which allow that an Heritical Prince (and such they term
all Protestant Princes) Excommunicated and Deposed by the Pope, may be
destroyed and murdered, but also from the Testimonies given in the prosecution
of the horrid Popish Plot, against diverse Traitors attainted for designing to
put those accursed Principles into practice against Your Majesty.

From the expectation of this Succession, has the number of Pupists in your
Majesty's Dominions so much increased within these few years, and so many been
prevailed with to desert the true Protestant Religion, that they might be
prepared for the Favors of a Popish Prince, as soon as he shall come to the
possession of the Crown: And while the same Expectation lasts, many more will
be in the same danger of being perverted.

This it is that has hardened the Papists of the Kingdom, animated and
confederated by their Priests and Jesuits, to make a Common Purse, provide
Arms, make application to Foreign Princes, and solicit their Aid, for
imposing Popery upon us; and all this even during Your Majesty's Reign, and
while Your Majesty's Government and the Laws were our protection.

It is Your Majesty's Glory and true Interest, to be the Head and Protector of
all Protestants, as well abroad as at home: But if these hopes remain, what
Alliances can be made for the advantage of the Protestant Religion and
Interest, which shall give confidence to Your Majesty's Allies, to join so
vigorously with your Majesty, as the State of that Interest in the World now
requires, whilst they see this Protestant Kingdom in so much danger of a Popish
Successor; by whom at the present, all their Councils and Actions may be
eluded, as hitherto they have been, and by whom (if he should succeed) they are
sure to be destroyed?

We have thus humbly laid before your Majesty, some of those great Dangers and
Mischiefs which evidently accompany the expectation of a Popish successor. The
certain and unspeakable Evils which will come upon your Your Majesty's
Protestant Subjects and their Posterity, if such a Prince should inherit, are
more also than we can well enumerate.

Our Religion, which is now so dangerously shaken, will then be totally
overthrown; nothing will be left, or can be found to protect or defend it.

The execution of old Laws must cease, and it will be vain to expect new ones.
The most sacred Obligations of Contracts and Promises (if any should be given)
that shall be judged to be against the Interest of the Romish Religion, will be
violated; as is undeniable, not only from Argument and Experience elsewhere,
but from the sad Experience this Nation once had on the like occasion.

In the Reign of such a Prince, the Pope will be acknowledged Supreme (though
the Subjects of this Kingdom have sworn the contrary) and all Causes, either as
Spiritual, or in order to Spiritual Things, will be brought under his
Jurisdiction.

The Lives, Liberties, and Estates of all such Protestants, as value their
Souls and their Religion more than their secular Concernments, will be adjudged
forfeited.

To all this we might add, That it appears in the discovery of the Plot, that
Foreign Princes were invited to assist in securing the Crown to the Duke of
York, with Arguments from his great Zeal to establish Popery, and to extirpate
Protestants) whom they call Heretics) out of his Dominions, and such will
expect performance accordingly.

We further humbly beseech Your Majesty, in Your great Wisdom to consider,
Whether in case the Imperial Crown of this Protestant Kingdom should descend to
the Duke of York, the opposition which may possibly be made to his possessing
it, may not only endanger the farther descent in the Royal Line, but even
Monarchy it self.

For these Reasons we are most humble Petitioners to Your most Sacred Majesty,
That in tender commiseration of Your poor Protestant People, your Majesty will
be graciously pleased to depart from the Reservation in your said Speech; and
when a Bill shall be tendered to Your Majesty, in a Parliamentary way, to
dissable the Duke of York from inheriting the Crown, Your Majesty will give
your Royal Assent thereto; and as necessary to fortify and defend the same,
that Your Majesty will likewise be graciously pleased to Assent to an Act
whereby Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be enabled to Associate
themselves for the defense of Your Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion,
and the Security of your Kingdoms.

These Requests we are constrained humbly to make to Your Majesty as of
absolute Necessary, for the safe and peaceable Enjoyment of our Religion.

Without these things, the Alliances of England will not be valuable, nor the
People Encouraged to contribute to your Majesty's Service.

As some farther means for the Preservation both of our Religion and Propriety,
We are humble Suitors to your Majesty, that from henc^forth such persons only
may be Judges within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, as are men
of Ability, Integrity, and known affection to the Protestant Religion. And that
they may hold both their Offices and Salleries: Quam diu se been gesterint.
That (several Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of the Peace, fitly qualified for
those Employments, having been of late displaced, and others put in their room;
who are men of Arbitrary principles, and Countenancers of Papists and Popery)
such only may bear the Office of a Lord Lieutenant as are persons of Integrity
and known Affection to the Protestant Religion. That Deputy Lieutenants and
Justices of the Peace may be also so qualified, and may be moreover men of
ability, of Estates and Interest in their Country.

That none may be employed as Military Officers in Your Majesty's Fleet, but
men of known Experience, Courage, and Affection to the Protestant Religion.

These our humble Requests being Obtained, We shall on our part be ready to
Assist Your Majesty for the Preservation of Tangier, and for putting Your
Majesty's Fleet into such a condition as it may preserve Your Majesty's
Sovereignty of the Seas, and be for the Defense of the Nation.

If your Majesty has or shall make any necessary Alliances for the Defense of
Protestant Religion, and Interest and Security of this Kingdom, this house will
be ready to Assist and Stand by Your Majesty in the support of the same.

After this our Humble Answer to Your Majesty's Gracious Speech, we hope no
evil Instruments whatsoever shall be able to lessen Your Majesty's Esteem of
that Fidelity and Affection we bear to Your Majesty's Service; but that Your
Majesty will always retain in Your Royal Breast, that favorable Opinion of us
Your Loyal Commons, that those other good Bills which we have now under
Consideration, c nducing to the Great Ends we have before mentioned; as also
all Laws for the benefit and comfort of your People, which shall from time to
time be tendered for your Majesty's Royal Assent, shall find acceptance with
your Majesty.

E. V. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I have hearkened with all the attention I could to
this Address, and do agree with the first part of it. The Dangers and
Inconveniences arising from a Popish Successor, are very obvious; and that
there will be no Peace nor Tranquillity in this Nation for the present, as long
as there is a Popish Successor, and that our Religion will be lost, if there
should be a Popish King, I am afraid is too true: But yet I must crave leave to
dissent from the opinion of those worthy Members that have drawn it, as to the
other parts thereof. I think it is not convenient at this time, to press so
hard for the Exclusion, Bill, because we know we cannot have it without a
Prorogative, which for my part I fear at this time, as much as I do a Popish
Successor: For I do believe, if it should happen, that you will sooner see the
Duke at White Hall, than this Assembly meet together again between these Walls.
And therefore am not willing to give the Popish party such an advantage to
procure our Dissolution, lest they should lay hold of it, as I believe they
would; by which the Protestant Interest both abroad and at home, will be
ruined. And As I cannot agree in this, so neither in pressing the Association
Bill. For being it has not yet been brought into the House, we do not well
known what will be the purport of it. And it is not proper, that we should ask
of the King we know not what; nor expect that he should grant us what he can
know nothing of. And truly, Sir, I think that these things about the Judges,
Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, are minute things to be insisted
on at this time, compared with others which might be demanded. Queen Elizabeth's
Counselors never thought her safe, until the Popish Successor was enclosed in
a Tower; and I am afraid that you will never be safe, until you take some such
course that may bring things to an issue. When you have done that, and banished
all the considerable Papists out of England, I think we shall not be in so
apparent danger, as we now are. And seeing this may probably be granted, and
the other Bills not, I humbly move you to recommit the Address that it may be
better considered. I know not how this may agree with the sense of the House,
but I shall always crave leave to speak in this place according to my
Conscience, that so I may have peace within me; but readily submit to better
Judgments.


Sir W. J. Mr. Speaker. Sir, I am very glad that worthy member agrees in the
apprehensions of the dangers arising from a Popish Successor, and in the
necessity of the Bill of Exclusion; and am very sorry I cannot agree with him
in the rest of his Discourse. I cannot imagine, without a high reflection upon
his Majesty, that if he should be persuaded to prorogue the House for two or
three days, in order to pass the Exclusion Bill, that he should instead of
permitting us to meet again, dissolve the Parliament which is quite contrary to
it. I fear a Prorogation, without being intended for this; but if once we could
prevail with his Majesty to do it for this end, I shall not doubt the desired
effect. And in pressing the Association Bill, we shall not press the King to
grant us we know not what* The word Association may very well be understood,
and the ends of it are declared to be for the security of his Majesty's Person,
and the Protestant Religion. And if when drawn, it should be directed to other
ends. I suppose this House will take care to mend it; if not, the Kings promise
can bind no farther than to pass a Bill for those ends. But I do much admire to
hear, that the having of good Judges, Justices, and Commanders at Sea and Land,
is a trivial thing: For I think that all other things you desire without it,
would signify nothing. As long as the Laws and Militia of the Nation is in the
hands of persons not well-affected to the Protestant Interest, I am afraid we
shall have no security against Popery. As to the new way that has been
proposed of bringing matters relating to the Popish Successor, to such an
issue, as that he may be secured, as in Queen Elizabeth's time. If he had been
sensible that there are none in Office but what are for his Interest, he would
first have agreed to have endeavored to have got such changed, before he would
have proposed that way. And it would be necessary that we should also have such
Privy-Councellors as Queen Elizabeth had, and not Eleven to Seven for the
Popish Successor. And therefore seeing these Proposals have no more appearance
of being for your service, I see no reason you have to be diverted from the way
you were going: And therefore I humbly move to agree with your Committee.


The House Agreed.

December 21. 1680.
A Bill was read for Uniting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

P. Mr. Speaker. SIr, is it not to be doubted but that the happiness of this
Nation and safety of our Religion does depend very much upon preserving the
well-constituted Government of the Church, and that the Government in the State
will not long stand if that be pulled down, to which, I am afraid, this Bill
will contribute very much. Sir, it is well known, how notwithstanding all the
endeavors of his Majesty, as well in Parliament as otherwise, all the Acts
that are in force against Dissenters, all the endeavors of the Fathers of the
Church, there are a sort of men, and great numbers too, who will neither be
advised nor overruled, but under the pretense of Conscience break violently
through all Laws whatsoever, to the great disurbance both of Church and State.
And if you should give them more Liberty, you will encourage them to go on with
more boldness; and therefore I think it will be more convenient to have a Law
for forcing the Dissenters to yield to the Church, and not to force the Church
to yield to them; And I think we are going quite the wrong way to do the Nation
good. And therefore I (...) against this Bill.


D. Mr. Speaker. Sir, I would not open my mouth in favor of this Bill if I
thought it would any ways prejudice the Church, or Church Government; but I
believe it may have a quitecontrary effect, and tend more for the preservation
and safety of the Church and Church Government, than any Bill whatsoever that
could be contrived. We have a Church Government settled by Law, to which the
Major-part of the People like good Christians and Loyal Subjects give
obedience; but it is our misfortune that there are in the Nation a great many
which will not submit to this Government, which may be divided under three
Heads. 1. The Papists, who differ from us in points of Faith, and will not give
any obeisance but to the Church of Rome. 2. Independants, Presbyterians, and
some others, who agree in points of Faith, and differ only in some points of
Doctrine and Ceremonies, 3. Quakers, who disagree not only in points of
Doctrine and Ceremonies, but in points of Faith, and are a headstrong sort of
unreasonable people, that will not Submit to any Laws made about Religion, but
do give obedience to the Civil Magistrate upon all other occasions. The Church
of England men, are not only the greatest number, but have the Government of
their side. What Laws to make that may tend most to the preserving of it is
your business. It is in danger from the Papists on the one hand, and the rest
of the Protestant-Dissenters on the other, who in some measure agree in their
enmity and disrespect to the Church* and therefore the more care ought to be
taken for its preservation.

Having thus, Sir, discovered the danger of the Church in general, it will be
necessary, in order to find out a remedy, to discourse a little of the Strength
and Interest of each Party in particular.

Sir, the Papists are not the greatest number, but yet in my opinion, upon
several considerations, are most to be feared, because of their desperate
Principles which make them bold and indefatigable, and the assistance they may
have from Rome, France and Ireland; but above all, from the great share they
have in the management of the Government, by the means of a Popish Successor,
and the fear of their getting the Government into their hands hereafter, by
having a Popish King. Which of it self has been sufficient in former times to
change the Religion of this Nation, and may justly be feared, may have the same
effect again, unless the Protestants be well united. The Presbyterians,
Independants, and all other Dissenters, may be more in number than the Papists,
and may be willing enough to have the Church Government altered, if not
destroyed; yet being they cannot have any succor from abroad, nor from the
Government here at home, I cannot see any great danger of them. For it is not
probable that they shall ever have a King of their opinion, nor a Parliament,
by the discovery they made of their strength in the last Elections. For
according to the best calculation I can make, they could not bring in above one
in twenty. And therefore, because they have not such bloody desperate
Principles as the Papists, and because we agree in points of Faith, and so no
such great danger from them as from the Papists, I think we have reason to
conclude, that the Church is most in danger from the Papists, and that
therefore we ought to take care of them in the first place; and we cannot do
that by any way more likely to prove effectual, than by some such Bill as this.
Because if it should have the effect designed of bringing in many of the
Dissenters into the Church, it would disappoint them of the great hopes they
have grounded on our Divisions, and make the Church stronger, not only to
oppose the Papists, but such Fanatics as may not come in. And if we should be
so unfortunate as that this Bill should not have this success, I do not
understand it will any way weaken the Church Government. And therefore I am for
this Bill.


F. Mr. Speaker, Sir, this Bill is intended for the preservation of the Church,
and I am of opinion, is the only Bill that can be made in order thereto, our
circumstances considered. But I know not what effect it may have, because you
are to deal with a Stubborn sort of people, who in many things prefer their
humor before reason or their own safety, or the public good. But, Sir, I
think this is a very good time to try whether they will be won by the Cords of
Love or no, and the Bill will be very agreeable to that Christian Charity which
our Church professes; and I hope that in a time of so imminent danger as we are
in, of a common Enemy, they will consider their own safety, and the safety of
the Protestant Religion, and not longer keep afoot the unhappy Divisions that
are amongst us, on which the Papists ground their hopes. But rather seeing the
Church does so far condescend as to dispense with the Surplice and those other
things which they Scruple at, that they will submit to the rest that is
enjoined by Law, that so we may unite against the common Enemy. But if this
Bill should not have this desired effect, but on the contrary, notwithstanding
this condescension, they should continue their Animosities and disobedience to
the Church, I think still the Church will gain very much hereby, and leave that
party without excuse and be a just cause for the making of more coercive Laws.
So that upon all accounts you have been well moved for the passing of this Bill.


E. Mr. Speaker, Sir, I very much admire to hear it alleged, that this Bill
will tend to the advantage of the Church* For how can the pulling down of the
Pales, and weakening the Laws against its Enemies, be a way to preserve it? I am
of another opinion, and do think this Bill may not only occasion, a great
weakness, but give, I fear, a mortal Wound to the Church. Is it not much more
reasonable, that the Dissenters should submit to the Church, than the Church to
the Dissenters. And I am afraid, if once the Government should begin to yield
to them, it will be as in 41. nothing will serve but an utter subversion, the
having of one thing, will give occasion for demanding more; and will be
impossible to give them any satisfaction, without laying all open, and running
into confusion. It is our misery that the Church is in so much danger of
Popery, pray, Sir let us have a care how we increase her danger from Fanatics.
Instead of this Bill, I humbly conceive, that Laws to force the execution of
such Laws as are in being against the Dissenters, and what more may be
necessary to compel an entire obedience, (seeing the experience we have already
had of this other way has not proved effectual) may more contribute to the
strengthening of the Church, and prevention of Popery.


Mr. Speaker, Sir, as well Churchmen as Dissenters, do all know we have a
dangerous common. Enemy that is got within our bowels, and wants nothing but a
King to their minds to have the strength of the Nation, as well Civil as
Military, at their command, and so consequently a sufficient power to destroy
the Protestant Religion, if not prevented by a timely Union of the Protestant
Interest. The question that may properly arise at this time is, whether the
putting of the Laws we have already in Execution, and making more against
Dissenters, in order to bring them into the Church by force, or the making of
this Law to bring them in by fair means, be the most likely way to unite us,
that so we may be in a better condition to oppose the common Enemy, It is
obvious to me, that the making of new Laws, or execution of the old at this
time, is the ready way to ruin us; and what the Papists do certainly desire
and aim at above all things whatsoever. For if it should be put in practice,
the effect would be this, It would be the occasion of throwing off the further
prosecution of the Plot and Popery, and in a little time occasion, not only
more heats and animosities, but such a revengeful implacable Spirit amongst us,
as would prove irreconcilable, and give opportunity for the Popish Interest to
join with either party, or at least ways to abet and assist them under hand, so
as that they shall be easily provoked to destroy one the other. But if this
should not happen, what real Love, Friendship, or Obedience can the Church
expect from such persons, as by the execution of such Laws may be forced to
come to Church? How can they be depended on, or the Church be strengthened by
them? You may prevent their Conventicles, and force them either to come to
Church or pay Fines, or be Imprisoned; but you cannot expect that their
Opinions or Affections should be altered by such proceedings, without which the
Church can never be the stronger. It must be a work of time to reconcile the
Divisions that are amongst us, and may be a great and necessary employment for
many Parliaments hereafter, when the common Enemy does not give such a just
occasion of distraction, and for employing all your thoughts and care about him
when they may have more leisure, because their dangers may not be so imminent.
But to go about it at this time by any such Laws, is the ready way to weaken
the Protestant Interest, and bring ruin upon us. But suppose we would follow
this advise, and make new Laws, and require a severe execution of the old, how
can you imagine that as long as the Popish Interest is so prevalent, the
execution of such Laws shall be continued longer, than may be subservient to
the Interest of that party? Have we not had a sad experience of this? Has the
Oxford- act, or that of the 25 of Queen Elizabeth, or any other against the
Dissenters being executed in favor of the Church? are not the Dissenters as
many, if not more, now than ever? And is not experience in all affairs the best
Master? and is there any thing more visible, than that these Laws have been
made use of to serve the Popish Interest, or as Engines rather for the affairs
of the State than Church: when in the year 1670. by the severe execution of
these Laws all Meetings in Conventicles were prevented and many Dissenters came
to Church, did not the Tolleration happen thereupon? and was not the execution
of the Laws put ^oot, as may be presumed, by that great Papist Clifford, who
had then the greatest share (under his Majesty) in the Administration of the
Government? If the execution of the Laws against Dissenters had been for the
advantage of the Church, why was there then granted a Tolleration? and if the
Tolleration had been intended for the advantage of the Protestant Religion, why
were not the Churchmen, nor Dissenters of any kind, pleased with it, And if the
Oxford-act, and other Laws against Dissenters, were projected in favor of the
Protestant Religion, it was strange that they were so much promoted (as many
Members, now here, who did serve in those Parliaments do remember) by Sir Tho
Clifford, Sir Solomon Swale, and Sir Roger Strickland, who have since all
appeared to be Papists. Sir, we have been strangely led by the Popish Interest
for many years already, I pray Sir, let us not now at last do like Narcissus,
to be so much in love with a Shadow, as to fall into a Gulf and drown our
selves. Sir, I am afraid the Name of Church has been strangely made use of to
bring in Popery. I hope we shall endeavor to preserve, not only the Name, but
the Substance, I mean the Protestant Religion, otherwise we may come off no
better than the Dog in Aesop's Fables with his shoulder of Mutton. I hope that
what I have said, will not represent me as an Enemy to the Church, or Church
Government; I am sure, I am not conscious to my self, that I ever entertained a
thought against the preservation of either. All what I have said, does proceed
from an apprehension that our Churchmen of late have been out of the right way
to preserve either our Religion or our Church; Because the courses which they
take must (though I am far from suspecting they design it) give a great
assistance to Popery. I remember that after the Plot broke out, there was for a
little while a kind of a reconciliation amongst Protestants, and an united
opposition made to the common Enemy, and how then the Popish Interest gave way,
we may all remember but this was too much in favor of the Protestant Religion
to hold long. Within a few Months the fire broke out again, and the Pulpits
and the Press, instead of being employed against the Common Enemy, were reduced
to their old way, of carrying on the divisions amongst Protestants: And how the
Popish Interest have since gone on triumphant again, all here, I suppose, may
know. Sir, the Church has two strong Enemies, the Papists and Fanatics. We
are already engaged in a sharp contest with the Papists, and find they are
strong enough for us; Why must we now also enter into a fresh engagement with
the Fanatics, especially when we may be sure thereby to strengthen our
Enemies, and weaken our selves? Such advice cannot proceed from such as are
friends to the Protestant Church: If we should make new Laws against
Dissenters, as has been moved, and enforce the execution of the old ones, as
long as we have a Popish successor, can any man imagine, that the execution of
them will be longer kept afoot, than will consist with the Popish Interest.
Sir, our Church and Religion will be lost, if Union be not improved amongst
Protestants, and I think no Bill can promote it like this. And therefore I am
for the passing of this Bill.


Upon these Debates it was Resolved, That the said Bill be committed upon the
Debate of the House.

Upon the 4th. of January 1680 / 81. His Majesty was pleased to send a most
Gracious Message to the Commons in these words.

CHARLES R.

HIS Majesty received the Address of this House with all the disposition They
could wish, to comply with Their reasonable Desires; but upon perusing it, He
is sorry to see Their Thoughts so wholly fixed upon the Bill of Exclusion, as to
determine that all other Remedies for the suppressing of Popery will be
ineffectual: His Majesty is confirmed in his opinion against that Bill by the
Judgment of the House of Lords, who rejected it. He therefore thinks there
remains nothing more for Him to say in answer to the Address of this House, but
to recommend to Them, the Consideration of all other Means for the preservation
of the Protestant Religion, in which They have no reason to doubt of His
concurrence, whenever they shall be presented to Him in a parlimentary way; And
that They would Consider the present State of the Kingdom, as well as the
Condition of Christendom, in such a manner as may enable Him to preserve
Tangier, and serve His Alliances abroad, and the peace and Settlement at home.

All this while here was nothing but a means debated, conformable to the
encouragement which his Majesty himself had most graciously given them, which
next to the Bill of Exclusion, might be most probable (since the first was to
be laid aside) to secure his Majesty's Person and his Government, and
consequently the whole Kingdom, and the Protestant Religion. And thus at length
an Association was thought upon and found to be one of the best Expedients for
those most noble an pious ends aforesaid, as having been formerly practicable
for preservation of our Prince and Country in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. At
what time to prevent the wicked designs and seditious practices of the Pope,
the Spaniard and the Guises in France, and to provide for the Queens safety,
upon which the welfare both of the Realm and Religion depended, as now it does
on the life of our sacred Sovereign, many men of all degrees and conditions
throughout England, by Leicesters means, and out of their own public care and
love, while they stood not in fear of the Queen, but were full of fear for her,
bound themselves in an Association by mutual Vows, Subscriptions, and Seals, to
prosecute to the death, as far as lay in their power, all those that should
attempt any thing against the Queen. This Association was afterward confirmed
in Parliament in the year 1658. with the approbation and consent of all, at
what time it was Enacted that twenty four or more of the Privy Council or Lords
of Parliament to be de puted by the Queens Commission, should make inquisition
after all such as should invade the Kingdom, raise Rebellion, or attempt to
hurt or destroy the Queens person, for or by whomsoever employed that might lay
claim to the Crown of England: And that he for whom, or by whom they should
attempt the same should be utterly incapable of the Crown of England, deprived
wholly of all Right and Title to it, and prosecuted to death by all Faithful
Subjects, if he should be judged by those 24 men to be guilty of such Invasion,
Rebellion or Treasonable attempt, and by public Proclamation so declared:

The noise of such an Assotiation as this, for it cannot be imagined, that the
Parliament of England ever intended any other, rang such an astonishing peal in
the ears of the Kings, and Kingdoms Enemies, that to render the very name of
Association odious to the world, they framed an Infamous piece of Treason,
which they called the Association intended, and would needs to make the thing
pass the more Current and Probable have it found in the Study of the Right
Honorable Earl of Shaftsbury's; which follows in these words, as it was
Exhibited to the Grand Jury at the Old Baily.

Then this Paper was Read as follows. WE the Knights, etc. finding to the
grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests and Jesuits, with the Papists and their
Adherents and Abettors have for several years last past, persued a most
pernicious and hellish Plot, to root out the True Protestant Religion as a
pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life of our Gracious King, to subvert our
Laws and Liberties, and to set up Arbitrary Power and Popery.

And it being notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the
Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by
their Expectations of his succeeding to the Crown, and that through crafty
Popish Councils his design has so far prevailed, that he has created many and
great Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in
Church and State.

It appearing also to us, That by his Influence Mercenary Forces have been
levied and kept on foot for his secret designs contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent hazard
of his Majesty's Person, our Religion, and Government, if the danger had not
been timely foreseen by several Parliaments, and part of those Forces with
great difficulty, caused by them to be disbanded at the Kingdoms great Expense:
And it being evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the
Parliament to deliver his Majecty from the Councils, and out of the Power of
the said D. yet His Interest in the Ministry of State and others have been so
prevalent, that Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued and Dissolved when
they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill Ministers of
State their Assistants.

And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own power has procured
the Garrisons, the Army and Ammunition, all the power of the Seas and Soldiery,
and Lands belonging to these three Kingdoms to be put into the hands of his
Party and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and Order of the
last Parliament

And as we considering with heavy Hearts how greatly the Strength, Reputation
and Treasure of the Kingdom both at Sea and Land is Wasted and Consumed, and
lost by the intricate expensive management of these wicked destructive
Designs; and finding the same Councils after exemplary Justice upon some of
the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmest devilish Malice, and
desire of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being Murdered
to make way for the said D.'s Advancement to the Crown, and the whole Kingdom
in such case is destitute of all Security of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and
Liberty, (ad experience in the Case, Queen Mary having proved the wisest Laws
to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince.

We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way by a Bill for the purpose
to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and to
Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the first
means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left
almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our
selves to be entrusted to Advise an Act for the preservation of His Majesty and
the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the dangers aforesaid
are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the best means
that are in power to secure the Kingdom against them. We have thought fit to
propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves by solemn and
sacred promise of mutual Defense and Assistance in the preservation of the true
protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person and Royal State and our Laws,
Liberties and Properties, and we hold it our bounden Duty to join our selves
for the same intent in a Declaration of our United Affections and Resolutions
in the Form ensuing. I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemnly Promise, Vow,
and Protest to maintain and defend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person
and Estate, the true Protestant Religion, again Popery and all Popish
Superstition, Idolatry, or Innovation, and all those who do or shall endeavor
to spread or advance it within this Kingdom.

I will also, as far as in me lies, Maintain and defend his Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate; as also the Power and Privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject against all encroachments and Usurpation of
Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endeavor entirely to Disband all such
Mercenary Forces as we have reason to believe were Raised to Advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great Amazement and
Terror of all the good People of the Land.

Moreover J. D of Y. Having publicly professed and owned the Popish Religion,
and notoriously given Life and Birth to the Damnable and Hellish Plots of the
Papists against his Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of this Kingdom; I will never consent that the said J. D. of Y. or
any other, who is or has been a Papist, or any ways adhered to the Papists in
their wicked Designs, be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England,
But by all lawful means and by force of Arms, if need so require, according to
my Abilities, oppose him, and endeavor to subdue, Expel and Destroy him, if he
come into England, or the Dominions thereof, and seek by force to set up his
pretended Title, and all such as shall Adhere unto him, or raise any war,
Tinnult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as public Enemies of our
Laws, Religion and Country.



To this end we and every one of us whose hands are here under written, do most
willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other, jointly and
severally, in the bond of one firm and Loyal Society or Association, and do
promise and vow before God, That with our joint and particular Forces, we will
oppose and pursue unto Destruction all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall
oppose the Just and Righteous Ends of this Association, and Maintain, Protect
and Defend all such as shall enter into it in the just performance of the true
intent and meaning of it, And lest this Just and Pious work should be any ways
obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any evil minded
persons under pretense of raising Forces for the service of this Association,
should attempt or commit Disorders; we will follow such Orders as we shall from
time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it shall be sitting,
or the Major part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association,
when it shall be Prorogued or Dissolved: And obey such Officers as shall by
them be set over us in the several Countries Cities, and Buroughs, until the
next meeting of this or another Parliament; and will then show the same
Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the Prosecution thereof
during our Lives, upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted. and
suppressed as Perjured Persons, and Public Enemies to God, the King, and our
Native Country.

To which Pains and Punishment we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us without benefit of any Color or Pretense to excuse us.

In Witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do this present
Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit
any others hereafter into this Society and Association.

This contrived piece of scandalous Treason, is that which was said, or rather
sworn to have been found in the Earl of Shaftsbury's Study. Now, whether the
Paper were really in the Hair Trunk, or put into the Velvet Bagg among other
loose Papers, is a dispute of another Nature. However the Paper being found, or
pretendedly found in the Earls Study, the business was prosecuted by the
Attorney General, before special Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, the 24th.
of November 1681, upon a Bill of Endictment for High Treason, against Anthony
Earl of Shaftsbury. His Grand Jury were. The GRAND JURY.
Sir Samuel Barnardiston. John Morden. Thomas Papillon. John Dubois. Charles
Hearle. Edward Rudge. Humphrey Edwin. John Morris. Edmund Harrison. Joseph
Wright. John Cox. Thomas Parker. Leonard Robinson. Thomas Shepherd. John
Flavell. Michael Godfrey. Joseph Richardson. William Empson. Andrew Kendrick.
John Lane. John Hall.


Who having altogether heard and examined the Evidence that was brought against
him, of which the chiefest were a band of Irish Rakeshames, after a short,
though serious debate among themselves they returned the Bill IGNORAMUS.

The Kings and the Kingdoms Enemies being thus defeated in their Design, set
their Mercenary Pens at work to Prosecute the very ASSOCIATION which they had
themselves contrived with all the fury imaginable, and to that purpose it was
teized and clawed off and Parrallel'd with the Covenant, and laden with all
that IGNOMINY which it well deserved. Though all this while their Indignation
was not so much against this Form of ASSOCIATION of their own contriving, but
as it were through the sides of that, to wound all manner of Legal and Loyal
ASSOCIATIONS; more especially that which the PARLIAMENT were about to have
devised in a Legal and Parliamentary way, and in pursuance of his Majesty's
most Gracious promises. Thereupon after they thought they had rendered the
Issue of their own brains sufficiently deformed, as indeed it could appear no
otherwise in the eyes of all true Protestant Englishmen* then they began to
set up Abhorrencies of all manner of ASSOCIATIONS, and having drawn in the
Credulous, Ignorant, and Unwary to sign their plausible Addresses, threw them
at the feet of Majesty, as the choicest Jewels of the Kingdoms Loyalty, whereas
indeed the Grand Arcanum of these Abhorrences was to provoke and incence the
People against all manner of ASSOCIATIONS, how necessary and expedient for the
safety of the King and Kingdom, or how Legal soever, and thereby to put them
out of Love with the most probable means for the safety of their Prince and
themselves, and madly to abhor their own Preservation.

If self preservation be a thing to be allowed to all men, even every
individual Person by the Law of Nature, certainly the Preservation of the great
Monarch, and three Kingdoms is much more congruous even to the Laws of God. So
that indeed it is a shame that these late ABHORRERS should under the pretense
of Loyalty show themselves so Disloyal, and void of Future Prospect, as to be
gulled with the sh^ddow of a forged contrivance into a Dislike and Abhorrency
of Legal and Parliamentary Proceedings.

We find in the Learned Camden* that the Earl of Leicester, zealous for the
good of the Queen and Kingdom, and seeing the imminent dangers, wherein both
were involved, procured an ASSOCIAATION with Seals and Subscriptions to it*
without her knowledge (and yet she was Princess, that used to be very smart upon
those that attempted any thing without it.) Nevertheless she was so far from
thinking it a Crime, or blaming her Great Minister, that she not only gave her
Parliament Liberty to confirm it, but gave them her thanks in these words.

The Association you entered into for my safety, I have not forgotten, a thing I
never so much as thought of till a great number of hands and Seals to it were
showed me. This has laid a perpetual Tie and Obligation upon me, to bear you a
Singular good will and Love who have no greater Comfort then in Yours, and the
Commonwealth's Respect and Affection toward me. Cambdens Eliz. l. 3. p. 365.

From whence it may seem probable that the world would have had no reason to
think ill of any of those who had it in their power, seeing the Parliament
failed, had they imitated the Earl of Leicester, and procured an Association of
the same nature of all his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, rather than to promote and
connive at Abhorrences of the only way which the PARLIAMENT could think of for
his preservation: there is no question to be made but his Majesty who is all
goodness and clemency might have proved as thankful as Queen Elizabeth.

Sir Francis Whithins after the Deservedly Exploded Paper was read at the
Old Bailey, confessed, That it was plausibly penned at the beginning, and went
on a great way so, till the last clause but one; then which there is nothing
that makes it more probable, that this same Traitorous Association was written
and framed by some Jesuit, and that for mischiefs sake* for if ever they do
any good, it is always that will any may be at the end of (...) his Religious
long Cloak sweep the ground as well before as behind, his cloven feet will
appear one way or other. And this you see the holy Roman Catholic league,
conorived by the Jesuits against Henry the third of France, contained many
Heavenly and Pious pretenses, but aimed at the Destruction of the lawful
Monarch of France, and obliged his subjects to it: whereas the
Counter-Association of the French Protestants was made to better purposes, the
preservation of their Prince and the defense of themselves against the Pope and
the Guises their mortal Enemies, and then Rebels to their prince, of which the
King himself was not a little sensible, and indulged them several favors in
reference to the exercise of their Religion.

To Associate is no more then devovere se pro Regis and Patriae salute, to
devote himself for the safety of his King and Country. Now for men to be so
scandalously led away by their own imprudence, and the subtlety of others, as
to abhor the Defense of their King and Country, is an apparent sign, that few
of the Addressors ever considered what they writ or what they read.

The Consul or Preter among the Romans, had power to devote any Citizen of
Rome, in time of iminent danger, as a Piaculum to all one by his death the
anger of the Gods, and they who were thus devoted never disobeyed, but threw
themselves headlong into certain ruin, to preserve their own Country. By this
means Curtius and Decius saved the Romans in ancient time. Thus Leonides with
his three hundred Spartans Associated in an indispensible resolution to live
and dye for their Country saved Greece from that seemingly invincible power of
Xerxes; and after the destructive Battle of Cannae, Rome had been utterly lost,
had not Scipio Affricanus compelled them that were left behind and spared from
the Carthaginiam slaughter, to swear that they would never forsake their
Country* Of later times, the Prince of Orange was the person that caused
several Cities of the Low-Country's to enter into an Association, which was
called the Holy Union, and Peace of Religion.

From these or some such President the Earl of Leicester doubtless drew the
Plot from off that Association, which was afterward confirmed in Parliament,
and was so graciously accepted of the Queen, so that it was no wonder that the
Parliament proposed among themselves the same Expedient which their
Predecessors had made use of upon the same Importunities of danger to his
Present Majesty and his Kingdom. For which their Debates most certainly merited
a more kind reward and a higher Gratitude then hot brained Abhorrences of a
their Loyalty to their Prince* and Country, and the Reproach of a Fobb'd
Association, which (...) good man will ever believe to have come within the
Verge of their thoughts.

POST SCRIPT
UPon these Grounds, and upon these Reasons, I am apt to think the Author of
the Parallel was more Zealous, then Wise, or else he had little to do, to sweat
and turmoil himself in Satyrising against a thing that was never justified by
any person living, so that it was but a hard shift to beg a Question, that he
might show the world how well he could behave himself upon a better occasion:
Truly the Gentleman is very sharp, and his sharp^ess had been commendable, had
any been found Guilty, either of Framing or Abetting the Paper. But now we may
as well believe that he was the Author of it himself, and that he slid it into
the world, that he might have a Subject to exercise the cutting lashes of
rapsodies; it is such a pretty odd kind of way of writing, and indeed such a one
as hardly has any Parallel, for a man to rave and tear and fret himself for so
many Paragraphs together, that you would fear the melting of his grease; and
yet that his Reader must be forced at every stop, to ask the Gentleman what he
means? Who is it he storms against? If it be the Old Baily Association he fumes
at, as to the peccant part of it, there is no body but had as much to say, and
would have said as much against it, and perhaps more then he has done, had
there been occasion. But for people that never saw the thing, and perhaps never
heard of it till it was Printed by two Loyal Stationers for them, to be brought
under Suspicions of Treason and Rebellion, and rendered odious to the world,
seems rather a Plot upon the Innocent, then a Reproof or Rebuke of the Guilty,
so that what ever the Gentleman has said against the Association it self, shall
be freely granted him, he shall have the Bays and the Victory: But let him not
however be proud of it, because he has not abtained it over foes but friends,
besides I find the Gentleman is not an Enemy to all Associations neither, but
only Factious Associations, in which point we most harmoniously agree with him.

But why he should be so furious upon the late Juries as to tax them for a band
of Covenanting Associators such as would have acquitted the factious Inditor of
this Association, had they found him musing upon it at his Desk; such as would
have cleared a Protestant Joyner, had they seix'd him with his hand on his
Majesty, etc. I say why the Gentle should lay such dismal aspersions, and
hyperbolize in such a hotheaded and malicious Style upon the fame, the
reputation, nay the very thoughts of men, which it may be justly presumed were
altogether unknown to him, there is no true reason to be given, unless it were
some young Crape Gown Levite that had a mind to be dabling in Gall and Ink; and
then there are two. For among that sort of People there are many, for want of
Education, very Malapar tothers for want of that which in them should be most
conspicuous good Example, and out of a Cruel and Bonner-like Disposition, most
remarkable uncharitable: Otherwise the very names of most of the Gentlemen that
were upon those late Juries, had been a charm against those bloody reflections
and virulent repoaches, which the Paralleller, like a little God a Mighty, or
searcher of hearts has cast upon them. Let him be who he will, the rashness of
his Hyperboles plainly shows, that his Pen run before his Wit, and his
Inconderate Inveteracy before his Religion: As for his thoughts of the
Presbyterian Plot, they are not worth taking notice of, only it may not be a
miss to give you a short account of his Arguments by which he proves the late
Association to be a member of it.

Imprimis, Every Tyler, or Jack straw. Item, Conscience applied to the
Capriciousness of fancy. Item, Every froward Fool. Item, Each Dissenting Ass.
Item, Every prejudiced Noddle. Item, The Silly Rout.
I only cite the Stress, Marrow, Pith or Quinticense of the Gentleman's
Arguments; the rest would be too redious. Now is not this enough to convince
any man of Reason of the truth of the Presbiterian Plot, and that the Sham
Association was of their fraiming in imitation of the Covenant? Nay Gentlemen,
if age will not believe Pulpit Rhetoric, and Crape Gown Ecstasy -- You Are all
men of lost Consciences, Heaven have mercy on you defrauded judgments. But
these Declaimers do not consider the Fable of Esop, that man is born with two
pouches, one hanging before, wherein are the failings of other men ready at
hand? that behind contains their own miscarriages, which they want the help of
the brass screws, to turn their heads to look into. Only by this we find the
difference between a Popish and a Presbiterian Plot, that the first is a Plot
upon full Proof and Evidence, the other a Plot by Conjecture.

As for his large Comment upon the Association it self, let them give an answer
to it whom it concerns. Only I am apt to believe that had not those Loyal
Gentlemen that exposed it first to public view found out a way to print it for
the sake of a little gain, jig by joul with the Covenant, it had died upon the
Earls Acquittal, without ever been taken notice of, as being a thing little
known, and less regarded by all wise men who were not only sensible of the
Illegality of it, but well knew how unlikely, if not impossible it was to be
put in practice: So that the publishing of it was a thing done rather out of
the spite and malice of those Loyal Gentleman, or rather Factious Associators,
according to the Gentleman's own distinction between a True Patriot and a
Factious Associator, to inflame the Nation, and cast an Odium upon the
peaceable people of the Kingdom rather then to do their Prince any real
service. And perhaps it would have become the Parallel or himself, since he
would needs play the Gladiator, and exercise his pen against an Image of those
Gentlemen's erecting, to have better informed us who those persons against whom
he so bitterly declaimes, then to lay such opprobious Scandals upon Thousands;
for the Miscarriages of some few; and those few for ought I find as little
known to him, as the vast numbers of the Innocent.

FINIS

