Great Britains David and His Worthies
Dr Walker


Count Schonberg.


Col. Wolseley


Pr. of Denmark


King William III.


Duke Schonberg.


Count de Solmes.


L. Genesis Douglas.


M. Genesis Kirk




These Worthies Nine them selve shall Eternize
Their Acts one Volume could not well Comprize
Among whom, Great William justly leads.
Th^^'ve their Thousands he has ten thou. slain.
THE HISTORY OF THE Wars in Ireland, Betwixt Their Majesty's Army AND THE
Forces of the late King James.

GIVING An Impartial Relation of all the Battles, Sieges, Rencounters,
Skirmishes, and other Material Passages, Revolutions and Accidents that has
happened in that Kingdom since the Year 1688.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

To which is added, The Siege of Lymerick, to the Raising thereof; with the
Siege and Surrender of Bandon, Cork, the Old and New Fort, and Town of
Kin-sale; with other Material Occurrences.

By an Officer in the Royal Army.

Illustrated with the Lively Effigies of His Sacred Majesty, and the Great
Commanders in the Army.

London, Printed for Benj. Johnson, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1691.

Price Bound One Shilling.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE World is grown so Nice and Critical upon Dedications and Prefaces, that it
will needs be Judging the Book, by (what they call) the Wit of either; though
the former are generally stuffed with fulsom Panegyricks, extolling the Virtues
of some Grand Debauchee, or Lewd Sinner of the Age; and the latter are filled
up with Apologies to the Reader, pretending to give a Reason for the making
their Work Public; tho its not one time in a Thousand, that the World has the
true One.

The Matter herein contained, is TRVTH of History, which requires no Apology;
and, as such, I do here present it to the World, without either Vanity, or
Complement: Therefore, instead of a canting Preface, to fill a Vacancy, and
please the Stationer, I have put the Contents, or Table of Matters; whereby the
Reader, may, at once, take a full view of what is contained in this Little
History.

THE TABLE OF THE MATTERS Contained in this BOOK.
CHAP. I.
TYrconnel made Lord Deputy. The Foundation of the Irish Troubles. The
Protestants in general Disarmed, throughout Ireland. The Irish Cutthroats,
Sons and Grand-Sons of the Massakers of Forty One, Armed. The Irish Clergy
reassume their Bishoprics and Livings. Notorious Abuses committed on the
Protestant-Clergy The Act of Settlement broken by the Paplsts in all parts of
Ireland. Tyrconnel raises the Irish Raparees, upon the Late King's Abdieating
the Government in England, etc. The Protestants in the North Arm. The Gates of
Londonderry shut. Colonel Phillips made Governor. Then Colonel Lundy. The
Men of Inniskilling, etc. Assemble, and choose Gustavus Hamilton, Esp; their
Governor. A mutual Contract between Inniskilling and Derry. King William and
Queen Mary Proclaimed at Inniskilling.

CHAP. II
CAptain Hamilton Arrives from the Prince of Orange. Colonel Philips sent to
England for Aid. Cuningham and Richards Arrive in the Lough of Derry, with
their Regiments. King James Arrives with his Army before the Walls of Derry,
suspecting Treachery; the Army Fires their Cannon on them. Major Baker, and Dr.
Walker, chose Governors of Derry. Siege of Crome raised by the Men of
Inniskilling. The Two Mock Cannons taken. Colonel Lloyd takes the Castle of
Augher. Colonel Lloyd Defeats a Body of the Irish; takes Mac Donel, their
Commander, Prisoner. The strong Castles of Redhil and Bellishany taken by
Colonel Lloyd.

CHAP. III.
A Party of the Enemy at Derry march to Pennybourn-hill. Lord Strabane Summons
the Town, but they return a Gallant Answer The Besiegers raise several
Batteries, which are soon Dismounted by the Besieged. The Besieged make many
successful Sallies, killing multitudes of the Enemies. Major General Kirk, with
300 Sail Arrive in the Lough of Derry. General Rosen and Hamilton make great
Offers to the Gariison, are rejected. Great numbers of all sorts of poor
Protestants driven before the Walls. The Garrison reduced to the last extremity.
Derry relieved by Kirk, and the Siege raised; the numbers of Men killed.

CHAP. IV.
THE Inniskilling Men pursue the Rear of the Derry Irish Army, takes 400
Horses, and 300 Cows. The Town of Omagh Taken General Sarsfield and Colonel
Southerland appears with 6000 Men. Colonel Lloyd Besieges and takes Belturbet.
The Garrison made Prisoners of War. A Message from General Kirk to Inniskilling.
A Supply from General Kirk, of Ammunition and Officers sent to Inniskilling.
Colonel Woolsely Arrives in Inniskilling, Regiments the Forces there. General
Mac Carty appears with his Army before the Town of Crom, raises Batteries
against the Castle.

CHAP. V.
Colonel Berry Marches to Relieve Lisnaskea, and succeeds, Marches after the
Enemy. Colonel Berry Fights the Enemies Army, Commanded by Major General
Alexander Hamilton Defeats them, kills 200 of the Enemy, takes 30 Prisoners
Colonel Woolsely with 2000 Inniskilling Men, Fights Mac Carties Army of 6000,
gives them a Total Rout, kill 3300 of the Enemy, takes Mac. Carty himself
Prisoner, with all their Artillery, Arms, Baggage, etc.

CHAP. VI.
DUke Schonberg, with the Army, Embarks at Highlake, with Ninety Sail of Ships.
Lands at Bangor. The Men lie on their Arms all Night. The Castle of Antrim
Taken. The Enemy quits Belfast. Carrick-fergus resolves to make a resolute
Defense. The Duke in the Trenches. Batteries raised, and the Town Bombarded.
Hot Firing on both sides. Officers killed in the Trenches. The Famous Ingineer
Richards carried out Wounded. The Town offers to Capitulate, and Surrenders
upon Articles, after 20 days Siege. The Army Decamps, Marches to Newry; on the
approach of whom, the Duke of Berwick Burns and quits the Place The Army
Encamps on the Plains of Dundalk.

CHAP. VII.
DUke Schonberg, on the Burning of the Newry, sends a Trumpet to the Duke of
Berwick. The Enemy quit Dundalk without Burning it. Our Army Encamp on the
Plains of Dundalk. The Enemy about Ardee. Colonel Lloyd Defeats 5000 Irish
near Slego, Kills 700, and takes 300 Prisoners, with their Commander. A
Conspiracy of French Papists discovered in the English Camp. A Captain and Four
others Hanged. 50 more sent Prisoners to England. Colonel Lloyd with a Party
of Inniskilling-Men, takes the Castle of Dramnasna and James-Town. Great
Mortality in the Irish Camp, of which 15000 Die. Dake Schonberg's Proclamation
of Provisions. The Irish March into Winter Quarters. James-Town quitted. The
Fight at Slego, between Colonel Lloyd, a French Officer, and Sarsfield. The
English Army Decamp, and go into Winter Quarters. The Actions of the Newry,
between a Party of Colonel Ingolsby's, and 700 Irish. Colonel Cambon's Action
at Charlemont.

CHAP. VIII.
THE Irish Defeated at the Newry, by Brigadeer Steward, 30 Killed, and 7 Taken
Prisoners. Colonel Woolsely, takes Belturbet Lady Newcomens House Surrendered.
Duke Schonberg views Charlemont, and takes Booty under the Walls. Colonel
Berry, and St. John, takes great Plunder. Duke Schonberg's. Proclamation
against Cursing and Swearing. Duke Schonberg with a Party goes to Dundalk.
Colonel Woolsely Defeats the Duke of Berwick at Cavan, Kills 300, Takes great
number of Officers Prisoners, and 200 Common Soldiers. Brigadeer Nngent
Mortally Wounded. Four Thousand pound in Brass-Money taken from the Rebels. Sir
John Laneer takes Bedloe Castle. Prince Wirtenburgh and the Danes, Land at
Belfast. The Famour Action of Mounsieur Callimate at Charlemont. 5000 French
Land at Kingsale. Colonel Hamilton's Trial at Lisburn, for the escape of
General Mac-Carty.

CHAP. IX.
SIR Clovesly Shovel Arrives at Belfast with Money, Arms, and Ammunition for
the Army. The Famous Action of Sir Clovesly Shovel at the Bay of Dublin
related. Charlemont Surprised by an Ambuscade in the Night. The Governor of
Charlemont demands a Party, and Surrenders May 13th. the Articles of
Capitulation: The Duke views the Situation of Charlemont and the Garrison as
they March out. May 15th. Colonel Woolsely with Twelve Hundred Men Besieges
Bellingarny, raises Works against it, and beats the Enemy from their Out Works.
Preparations to Storm the Place. The Garrison hang out a White Flag, and after
Capitulates. The number Killed and Wounded in the Siege.

CHAP. X.
BRief Accounts of the Transactions of the Late King James, toward the
Protestants in several parts of Ireland. The sham Pardon of the Inhabitants of
the Town of Bandon, and the Cruelty afterward used toward them. The
Transactions of the Earl of Seaforth. Sir R. Neagle, and Sir Tho. Southwel.
Particular Cruilties toward the Protestants at Limerick and Dublin. The
several sham Proclamations to ensnare the Protestants. The particular Invoice
of the Protestants Goods seized in Dublin, and sent to the French King. The
Late King's seizing the Farmers Bread-Corn, to the almost starving of the
Protestant Inhabitants. The Inhumane and Barbarous Usage of the Protestants at
Galway, by Order of the Late King. The Ravishing of the Farmers Daughter in
Dublin, at Noonday, before her Fathers Face. The Murdering three Protestant
Clothiers in the Suburbs of Dublin. The Cruelties of the French toward the
English Clergy, etc.

CHAP. XI.
GReat Plunder taken by the English near Finagh and Kells, 27 Miles of Dublin.
Castle-Blany and several Villages burnt. The Rebels break down the Bridges
between Newry and Dundalk. Duke Schonberg goes to Belfast the 14th. June,
expecting the King. June 15th. The King Lands at Carrickfergus His great
Reception in all Places, with several addresses presented to him. June 24th.
His Majesty goes to Newry. A Camp is there formed. The King's Message to the
Irish. The Irish quit Dundalk, and retires to Ardee. The whole English Army
Encamps on the Plains of Dundalk. The Irish quit Ardee, post themselves on the
Boyne. June 30th. the King Encamps within sight of the Irish Army, Is Wounded
with a Cannon Ball, viewing the Enemies Camp. July 1st. Part of the English
Army passes the Boyne. The whole Irish Army Defeated, and retires after their
King to Dublin. The Condition of Dublin on the Approach of the English Army.
King James retires to Waterford. The English Army Encamp at Finglass, from
whence the King goes to Dublin.

CHAP. XII.
THE Kingss Declaration, Pardoning the Irish Commonality. Cavan and Slego,
Surrender. Longford, and Lord Longford's House Burnt. Earl Tyrone displaced at
Waterford, and Lacy made Governor. Four Hundred Head of Cattle taken from the
Baparees. Clonmell quitted, and Sarsefield, with Five Thousand Men, retires
from before it, toward Lymerick. Waterford Summoned by the King, begins to
Capitulate, Surrenders on Articles. Lord Dover and Howard Submit. Limerick
possessed by the French. The King on His way for England, alters His
Resolutions. Captain Buck Surrenders Duncannon. Douglas and Kirk, join the
Army. Yaughall Surrendered. The Army before Lymerick.

The History of The Wars in Ireland.
CHAP. I.
Tyrconnel made Lord Deputy. The Foundation of the Irish Troubles. The
Protestants in general Disarmed, throughout Ireland. The Irish Cutthroats,
Sons and Grand-Sons of the Massakers of Forty One, Armed. The Irish Clergy
reassume their Bishoprics and Livings. Notorious Abuses committed on the
Protestant-Clergy. The Act of Settlement broken by the Papists in all parts of
Ireland. Tyrconnel raises the Irish Raparees, upon the late King's Abdicating
the Government in England, etc. The Protestants in the North Arm. The Gates of
Londonderry shut. Colonel Philips made Governor. Then Colonel Lundy. The Men
of Inniskilling, etc. Assemble, and choose Gustavus Hamilton, Esquire their
Governor. A mutual Contract between Inniskilling and Derry. King William and
Queen Mary Proclaimed at Inniskilling.

THE late King James, sometime after his Accession to the Imperial Crown of
these Kingdoms, sending the Earl of Tyrconnel, his Deputy, into Ireland (an
Irish Papist, and one who was known to be a mortal Hater of the English
Interest) the Protestants in that Kingdom soon groaned under the Fears of
approaching Miseries, for he was scarce warm in his Place, before the
Protestants in general were Disarmed and Displaced; many of them, after the
most signal Services of their Fathers and themselves to the Crown; and the Arms
put into the hand of the Offspring of the Bloody Murderers of Forty One; nay,
not only the Offspring, but many of the very hands that committed those
Massacres, were Armed by Authority, at the same time that Protestants were
thrust out of the Army, on pretense that some one or other of their Relations
had engaged with the Usurpers; though themselves had served the King to their
utmost Extremities; and many were cashiered, against whom even that pretense
could not be found, and who had bought their Places with the King's License,
and laid out all they had upon it; till at last, being a Protestant, was given
for the reason: And they were discouraged by all the Artifice of Jesuit or
Irish, and even threatened another Massacre, by many of their lesser
Politicians. All the Bishoprics and Livings that fell in the King's Gift, were
kept Vacant, and the Revenues given to the Popish Clergy. Their Bishops kept
public Visitations in the Vacant Diocesses, and assumed even the Title; one of
whom was made Secretary of State, and signed himself by the Name of his
Bishoprics in all his Warrants and Dispatches, that none might plead Ignorance
of the King's Intentions toward us. And we were told by some of the prime
Ministers of State, That the King would fill no Protestant Vacancies in the
Church; so that we saw great part of the Churches in their Possession, and
nothing interpose for the remainder, but the Lives of the present Clergy. And
for our Civil Rights, our Judges, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, and even
Constables, were, for the most part, made of Papists: And the Act of Settlement
was then doomed in every Coffee-House to the same condemnation under which it
has fallen since. And the Army being entirely in these worst of Popish Hands,
the most Barbarous Irish, who had thrown off Humanity it self, our prospect was
all black and dismal.

In this condition we were in, when the news came that the late King James had
voluntary thrown up his Government, Disbanded his Army, and was retired, some
said, to a Monastry, some to Rome, and some Dead, as every Man's Fancy led him;
and which to believe we knew not.

At this very time Lord Tyrconnel Armed the Rabble of Irish Papists, to the
number of 50 or 60 Thousand, and to live upon the Country without Pay; whence
ensued miserable Depredations, open Noonday Robberies, and an inevitable and
sudden Ruin of the British and Protestant Interest in Ireland; for many of
these Newraised Men were so transported with the glorious Prospect they had
before them, that they had not the Continence, no, not their Priests, to
refrain telling us, That they were now our Masters, and we must submit to new
Laws. Then it was that we thought our selves no longer obliged to be active in
our own Destruction.

Now Londonderry and Inniskilling being the only Places (of any consideration)
in the Possession of the English; the former occasioned by the Lord Tyrconnel's
being so infatuated, as that when the 3000 Men were sent to England, to the
Assistance of his Master, against the Invasion of the Prince of Orange, He took
particular care to send away the White Remiment, Quartered in and about that
City; but seeing his Etror, he endeavored to repair it, by commanding the Lord
Antrim to Quarter there with his Regiment, consisting of a numerous swarm of
Irish and Highlanders, on the 6th of December 1688. this Regiment being on
their March, the Citizens receiving advice of it by one Colonel George Philips;
they, after several Consultations resolutely shuts up their Gates, and chose
the said Colonel their Governor; and dispatches Mr. D. Kermes to England, to
give an account of their Proceedings. News being brought to Dublin of this
Revolt (as they termed it) the Lord Mountjoy, and Lieutenant Colonel Lundy,
with Six Companies, are sent down to reduce the place, who appearing before the
Town, they let Mountjoy and Lundy in, on the Conditions that only Two Companies
of the Regiment (and they all Protestants) should enter with them, and that the
Town Companies, being Eight in number, should be allowed to keep their Arms;
the Lord Mountjoy made Lieutenant Colonel Lundy their Governor.

While these Affairs were carrying on at Derry for their own Defense, the Men
of Inniskilling were not Idle. On the second of December, 1688. there came a
Letter from Mr. Secretary Ellis, by the Lord Tyrconnel's Order, to the Provost
of Inniskilling, to provide Quarters for Two Foot Companies. Upon Saturday the
15. of December the Two Foot Companies came to Mac Guires Bridge, within Eight
short Miles of the Town; and upon Sunday, about Ten a Clock, word was brought
us, that they were within Four Miles, at which time most of the Men were at
Church, but they soon came out and Armed themselves; being drawn out, they were
about 200 Foot, and 150 Horse, and having consulted Matters, they sent some of
their Number to persuade them by fair means to return: And at the same time
Gustavus Hamilton, Esquire our present Governor, came with about 100 Horse, within
a Mile of the Town, to support it if there should be occasion; Our Horse, under
the Command of Captain Browning, and Lieutenant Carleton; and the Foot under
the Command of Captain Catheart, advancing toward the Enemy, they no sooner
came within View, but the Enemy immediately fled, and the next day got to
Cavan, 24 Miles from Inniskilling. About the 18th of December, the Men of
Inniskilling, and their Adherents, seeing Tyrconnel Arming the Irish on all
Hands, thought it advisable to put themselves into some Posture of Defense; and
at a full meeting, unanimously chose Gustavus Hamilton their Governor, a
Gentleman of a great Family, and as great Courage, he consented to take the
charge upon him, who (besides Two Foot Companies to be raised in and about the
Town) formed a good Troop of Horse, and a Foot Company, out of his own Estate,
and the Country adjoining. Sometime before, the Men of Inniskilling hearing
that Derry had denied Entrance to the Lord Antrim's Regiment, and were putting
themselves into a posture of Defense, against any Irish Garrison to be sent
there, which clearly resembled their own case. On the 20th of December, they
sent Capt. Cathcart, and Lieutenant Mac Cormick, to acquaint the Garrison with
what they had done, craving their advice and assistance in case of any Trouble,
promising the same to them, if they stood in need of it; to which Message the
Men of Derry sent a very kind return by those Gentlemen that were sent. The
Month of January was spent at Inniskilling in raising more Troops and
Companies. The Month of February was spent in Consultations with Colonel Lundy,
and the leading Men in the Counties of Derry, Dunegal, Tyrone, Cavan, and
elsewhere.

March 11. King William and Queen Mary were Proclaimed with much Joy.

March 20. Upon the Lord Gilmoy's coming with part of the Irish Army into the
County of Cavan, the several Garrisons there, with all the Protestants (being
ordered by Colonel Lundy) left the places, and came running to Inniskilling;
the same Colonel Lundy did endeavor to persuade the Governor of Inniskilling
to do the like.

CHAP. II.
Captain Hamilton Arrives from the Prince of Orange. Colonel Philips sent to
England for Aid. Cunningham and Richards Arrive in the Lough of Derry, with
their Regiments. King James Arrives with his Army before the Walls of Derry,
suspecting Treachery; the Army Fires their Cannon on them. Major Baker, and Dr.
Walker, chose Governors of Derry. Siege of Crome raised by the Men of
Inniskilling. The Two Mack Cannons taken. Colonel Lloyd takes the Castle of
Augher. Colonel Lloyd Defeats a Body of the Irish; takes Mac Donel, their
Commander, Prisoner. The strong Castles of Redhil and Bellishany taken by
Colonel Lloyd.

ON the 21st of March, Captain J. Hamilton Arrived from England, in the Lough
of Derry, with Ammunition and Arms, 480 Barrels of Powder, and Arms for 2000
Men, and assurance of more Supplies; he likewise brought a Commission from the
King and Queen for Lundy to be Governor.

March 23. Colonel Philips is sent from Derry to England, to solicit a speedy
Supply.

April 15. 1689. Colonel Cunningham and Colonel Richards came into the Lough
from England, with Two Regiments, and other Necessaries for Derry.

April 17. Upon the News of K. James's Army being on their March toward
Londonderry, Colonel Lundy immediately calls a Council and that Colonel
Richards and Cunningham should be Members of it, accordingly they met; but
being Gentlemen wholly unacquainted with the condition of the Town, they make
an Order that the Two Regiments that Richards and Cunningham had brought with
them should not be Landed: That the Governor and principal Officers should
privately withdraw themselves from the Town, that the Inhabitants, by a timely
Capitulation, may make the better Terms with the Enemy.

After this Resolution, an Instrument was prepared to be sent to King James,
who was advanced in Person with his Army as far as St. John's-Town; but many
Gentlemen of the Garrison did not only refuse to subscribe, but expressed
themselves with threatenings to Hang the Governor and his Council; but yet the
Council sent one Captain White to the late King.

Upon the 18th of April, the late King advanced with his Army before the Walls
of Derry, with Flying Colors: And Orders were given by the Council, That none
should dare Fire till the King's Demands were first known; but the Men on the
Walls wondering to see Lieutenant General Hamilton (contrary to his Engagement
with White, not to come within Four Miles) approach their Walls, they imagined
they were Betrayed, thought it reasonable to consider their own Safety, and so
immediately Fired the Guns on the Enemy.

The Enemy being great Strangers to this sort of Exercise, ran away: A great
many were Killed: King James, in some disorder, retired with his Army to St.
John's Town; in the mean time the Town Clerk informed the Inhabitants of the
whole Proceeding of the Council of War, which very much enraged them.

The Governor and his Council thinking themselves in danger, from the Citizens,
make their private escape to the Ships in the River at Kilmore, though not
without hazard.

April 19th the Garrison seeing they were Deserted, and left without a
Governor, and having unanimously resolved to defend the Town against the Enemy,
they unanimously chose Mr. Walker, and Major Baker, their Governors, who having
accepted the Government of the Garrison; these Gentlemen chose Eight Colonels,
and Regimented the Men, which, on the Muster, were 7020 Men, 341 Officers; they
then viewed the Stores, and gave all necessary Orders.

But to return again to the Men of Inniskilling, the Lord Gilmoy thinking to
persuade the whole Country to do as those about Cavan had done. On the 21. of
March he came to Belturbet, and the next day sent a Party to Crom, to Besiege
it with Two Mock Cannon made with Tin; He Summons the place, but to no purpose;
and the next day being the 22. he sent a Letter to the Governor of
Inniskilling, in the nature of a Summons; but the Governor and Garrison
resolved not to submit to any but King William and Queen Mary. The 24th of
March the Governor sent 200 of his best Men to relieve Crom, who, after some
Opposition, got into the Castle by Water; and having joined those that were
within, Sallied out, and raised the Siege, beating them from their Trenches,
Killed between 30 and 40, took many Arms, with their Two Mock Cannon.

March 25. 1689. Having Intelligence that Captain J. Hamilton was Arrived at
Derry with store of Ammunition and Arms, the Governor of Inniskilling sent Two
Gentlemen, with a Guard, with Letters to Colonel Lundy and Capt. Hamilton for a
supply of Arms and Ammunition the latter was very willing to supply us, but
Colonel Lundy having the whole Command, would not give us one fixed Arm.

April 13. By the Procurement of Mr. Hamilton, Instructions were ordered on
both sides, That if at Inniskilling it was reported that Derry was Taken, they
should not believe it, unless they received it from Colonel Walker's own Hand;
and if at Derry it was reported, at any time, That Inniskilling was Taken, they
should not believe it, unless it came from under Governor Hamilton's one Hand;
and this was very happily concluded on, for there was scarce a Week, after the
Siege of Derry began, but the Irish got means to spread a Report, That Derry or
Inniskilling were taken, a Stratagem to dishearten the Garrison of both places.

April 24. Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd, with a Party of Horse and Foot, marched
out of Inniskilling to Angher, where the Garrison fled before he came there: He
caused the Castle to be Burnt, least the Irish should return: He returned by
the way of Moneghan to Inniskilling, with a very great Booty of Cows and Sheep,
etc. which came very seasonably. At this time there came to Inniskilling from
Bellishany, some Troops and Foot Companies of excellent Men, of the Lord
Kingston's: And then Governor Hamilton raised a Fort on the common Hill, next
the Stone Bridge, which is now of very considerable strength, and great
security to the Town.

May 4. The Governor had an Express sent him from Captain Falliot, Governor of
Bellishany, acquainting him that a considerable Party of Men were come to
Besiege that place, and desired Relief: Governor Hamilton immediately drew out
of the several Garrisons under his Command, what Men he could spare; and the
next day sent Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd with 12 Foot Companies, and some Troops
of Horse, toward Bellishany, who meeting the Enemies Horse near Baleek, a
Village three Miles nearer Inniskilling than Bellishany, and after an
Engagement, soon put them to the Rout, Killed about 120 of them, and took 60
Prisoners: All their Foot fled away over the Bogs, toward Sligoe, and got off
safe, except some few that were taken in the Fish-Islands near Bellishany, with
their Captain Mack Donagh.

In the latter end of May, Information came to Inniskilling, that Red-hill and
Bellinacareg, in the County of Cavan, were Garrisoned by the Irish; Lieutenant
Colonel Lloyd was immediately dispatched against them; but he no sooner set out
with about 1500 Horse and Foot; but the News of his March was brought to the
County of Cavan before him; upon which all the Irish Fled, and he no sooner
came to Red-hill, but the Garrison held a sign for a Treaty, and having
Conditions immediately Surrendered the Place, with all that was in it; from
thence they marched to a very strong place, called Bellinacareg; but the news
of the Taking of Red-hill, struck so great a Terror in those of the Castle,
that, in a little time after we came before it, they held out a White Flag for
Treaty, and did capitulate, leaving the Arms and Ammunition, and what Goods
were in the Castle to the Plunder of the Soldiers. The news of the taking of
Red-hill and Bellinacareg, was soon brought to Dublin, with a Report that the
Inniskilling Army was Marching thither; being ever after this reputed among the
Irish to be above 15000 well Armed Men.

CHAP. III.
A Party of the Enemy at Derry march to Pennybourn-Hill. Lord Strabane Summons
the Town, but they return a Gallant Answer. The Besiegers raise several
Batteries, which are soon Dismounted by the Besieged. The Besieged make many
successful Sallies, killing multitudes of the Enemies. Major General Kirk, with
30 Sail Arrive in the Lough of Derry. General Rosen and Hamilton make great
Offers to the Garrison, are rejected. Great numbers of all sorts of poor
Protestants driven before the Walls. The Garrison reduced to the last
extremity. Derry relieved by Kirk, and the Siege raised; the numbers of Men
killed.

AND now to return to the Affairs of Derry, April 20. A part of the Enemy
marched to Penybourn-Hill, Two Mile from the Town, and pitched their Tents; the
same day the Lord Strabane, and after him several Trumpets, came to the Walls
to offer Proposals, but the Garrison would not hear of any.

April 21. The Enemy Planted a Demiculverin 180 Perches from the Town: The same
day the Besieged Sallied out, and Killed 200 of the Enemy, and Mamoe the French
General.

April 23. The Besiegers Planted Four Demi-culverins in Strong's Orchard, 80
Perches from the Town, and Played incessantly.

April 28. The Besieged made another Sally, and Killed many.

May 5. This Night the Besiegers make a Battery on the Windmil-Hill.

May 6. The Besieged resolved to ruin that Battery, and, in order thereunto,
make a Sally, which Governor Walker heads; and they (with a great Slaughter)
beat the Enemy from their Trenches, and ruined their new Works: In this Action
500 of the Enemy were Killed, and 200 Wounded: After this the Enemy were so
daunted, that for several Weeks they lay still.

June 4. The Besiegers make an Attack at the Windmil-Works, and our Men put
themselves in a readiness to receive them: The Enemy came on, after the Turkish
mode, with most dreadful shrieks from most parts of their Camp, and the
numerous Rabble that attended them, but they, in a very little time, betook
themselves to their old defense, and ran for it, not being able to stand our
Firing.

The Enemy, in this Action, lost 400 of their Fighting Men, and most of their
Officers: This Night, and the next day, the Enemy, from Strong's Orchard,
continued Playing their Bombs, which were 273 pound weight apiece, which tore
up the Streets, and beat down the Houses, and Killed many People.

June 15. We discovered a Fleet of 30 Sail of Ships in the Lough, which proved
to be Major General Kirk from England; but they could neither come nor send to
us, nor we to them, for some time, by reason of a Boom laid a cross the River,
guarded by Two Forts on each side: At last, by means of a Boy, a correspondence
was kept, by which we gave the Major General an account of the condition of the
Garrison; and he promised to Relieve the Garrison, either by way of the River,
or Land, cost him what it would. In June Conrad de Rosen, the French Marsh.
General and Lieutenant General Hamilton, at several times, make great offers,
if they would Surrender the Garrison, and desperate Threats if they refused,
which was so far from availing any thing, that an Order was made to make it
present Death to mention a Surrender.

June 30. Governor Baker dies, very much lamented.

July 2. The Enemy drive a great number of poor Protestants (according to
former threatenings) under the Walls, which the Besieged perceiving, immediately
(in sight of their Camp) erect a Gallows, and signified to them, they were
resolved to hang their Friends, that were their Prisoners, if they did not
suffer those poor People to return to their own Houses; and upon earnest
solicitations of the Prisoners, the poor People were removed.

July 25. The Besieged made a Sally with 400 Men, and surprised the Enemy in
their Trenches, Killed 300 of their Men, besides Officers.

July 27. The Garrison is reduced to 4456 Men, and under the greatest extremity
of Famine.

July 30. About an hour after Sermon, being in the midst of our extremity, we
saw some Ships in the Lough make toward us; and we soon discovered Major
General Kirk had sent them, according to his Promise, when we could hold out no
longer. They were Two Ships with Provisions, etc. and the Dartmouth Frigate.
The Enemy Fired most desperately upon them, from the Fort of Culmore, and both
sides the River; and they made sufficient returns with the greatest Bravery:
The Mountjoy, one of the Victuallers, made a great stop at the Boom, occasioned
by her Rebound, after striking and breaking it: Upon this the Enemy set up the
loudest Huzza's, and the most dreadful to the Besieged that ever they heard;
Fired all their Guns upon her, and were preparing their Boats to Board her;
but, by great Providence, firing a Broadside, the shock loosened her, so that
she got clear, and passed the Boom; and at length all the Ships got to them, to
the unexpressible Joy and transport of the whole Garrison, for they only
reckoned on Two days Life, having only 9 Horses lest: Hunger and the fateague
of War had so prevailed in the Town, that of 7500 Men Regimented, we had now
alive but 4300.

This brave undertaking, added to the great Success God had blessed them in all
their undertaking, and so dicouraged the Enemy, that, on the last of July, they
ran away in the Night time, Robbed and Burnt all before them for several Miles,
leaving nothing with the Country People, but what they hid the Night before.

Thus, after 105 days being close Besieged, by near 20000 Men, constantly
supplied from Dublin, God Almighty was pleased, in the greatest Extremity, to
send Relief.

The Enemy lost about 9000 Men before the Walls, and 100 of their best
Officers, from April 24. to July 22. Five Hundred Eighty seven Bombs were
thrown into the City.

CHAP. IV.
The Inniskilling Men pursue the Rear-of the Derry Irish Army, takes 400
Horses, and 300 Cows. The Town of Omagh Taken. General Sarsfield and Colonel
Southerland appears with 6000 Men. Colonel Lloyd Besieges and takes Belturbet.
The Garrison made Prisoners of War. A Message from General Kirk to
Inniskilling. A Supply from General Kirk, of Ammunition and Officers sent to
Inniskilling. Colonel Woolsely Arrives in Inniskilling, Regiments the Forces
there. General Mac Carty appears with his Army before the Town of Crom, raises
Batteries against the Castle.

BUT to return to the Actions of the Men of Inniskilling: June 3. Information
was brought to Inniskilling, that the Irish Army before Derry, had sent a great
many of their Troops Horses to Graze near Armagh, Eight Miles from us: The
Governor, the next day, sent Two Troops, and ordered them to stay at Trellick;
they had not staid there above Two days, when taken with them another Troop,
and Two foot Companies, they went in the Evening toward Omagh, and before
Eight a Clock the next day, they returned to Trellick with near 200 Horses
belonging to the Enemies Tooops, and near as many more smaller Horses fit for
Labor, and about 300 Cows; by this we did disable at least Three Troops of the
Enemy, and Mounted many of our Men. Soon after hearing that Derry must
Surrender very soon, unless Relieved, and believing that much of our safety did
depend upon it, the Governor of Inniskilling resolved in Person, with all the
strength he could make, to endeavor its Relief, or Perish in the Attempt; and
having drawn all his Men into the Field, being about 2000, on the 10th of June
he Marched to Trellick, and the next Night came near Omagh and by Morning
possessed themselves of the whole Town; but they had not been here many hours,
but several Expresses came from Inniskilling to the Governor and Officers,
informing that Colonel Sarsfield, with near 6000 Men was come to Besiege
Bellishany, 20 Miles from Inniskilling; and that Col. Sowtherland was come to
Belturbet, the same distance from Inniskilling, on the other hand; and that one
or both the Armies would be very soon at Inniskilling; on which a Council of
War was called, and it was resolved, we should return to the defense of
Inniskilling; but they were ever resolved not to suffer the Enemy to come so
near them, as to lay Siege to the Town; and therefore the Governor ordered
Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd to take the Field with the greatest Strength we could
make in Foot and Horse, and march against Southerland.

June 17. Colonel Lloyd came with his Men to Mac Guires Bridge, a place not
full half way betwixt Inniskilling and Belturbet; from which place the Irish
spy went in the Night, and acquainted Col. Southerland, That all the Forces of
Inniskilling were coming against him; when this news was brought to
Southerland, and he believing former Reports, That Inniskilling were 15000
Strong, he immediately retired toward Charlemont, leaving 80 Dragoons, and
about 200 Foot, in the Church of Belturbet, to see if they could make good the
Place against the Inniskilling Men, until he could get force enough for their
Relief: Our Men being got to Belturbet, the Enemy Fired very fast at us, but
with their usual Success; we had not Attackt the place above Two hours, but
they offered to Capitulate, it being agreed, That all the Officers and Soldiers
should be our Prisoners: There were Thirteen Commission Officers, and
Lieutenant Colonel Scot, their Commander; we got likewise 700 Muskets, a
Barrel and half of Powder, several Horses, and 20 Horse Load of Bisquets, 100
Barrels of Wheat, 50 of Flower, and near 300 common Soldiers Prisoners.

July 3. A Letter came from Bellishany to Inniskilling, signifying that Captain
Hobson, with the Bonaventure Frigate was there, sent from Major General Kirk at
the Lough of Derry, to know their condition, and if they wanted any Ammunition,
etc. which was a very acceptable Message.

The Governor ordered, that very night, Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd, and other
Officers, to take some Troops and March the next day toward Bellishany; and
the day following being the 5th of July, the Officers went on Board, where they
were Treated with great Civility, by Captain Hobson; and they fully informing
him of the state of their Affairs, he gave good encouragement, assuring, that
very soon there would care be taken to Relieve them: He gave them 30 Barrels of
Powder, which the Officers, within Two days, sent safe to Inniskilling, and Two
of the number went back in the Bonadventure, with a Message to Major General
Kirk, for Commissions (to regulate the Men not disciplined) some more
Ammunition and Arms, and some Officers; who, on the 12th came to the General in
Derry Lough, where he lay with the Fleet: He, for about two days, did inform
himself, by them, of the condition Inniskilling was in, what store of Men
belonged to that Garrison, and how Armed. They had then about 27 Troops, 30
Foot Companies, and some few Troops of Dragoons; the Foot were indifferently
well Armed, but the Horse and Dragoons not so well. The Major General had few
Arms fit for Horse, but he gave them 600 Fire-looks for Dragoons, 1000 Muskets
to raise more Foot, with 20 more Barrels of Powder, with Bullets and Match,
Eight small Canon, and some Hand-Granado's; He sent likewise Commissions for a
Regiment of Horse, consisting of 16 Troops, 50 Men in each Troop; for a
Regiment of Dragoons, consisting of 12 Troops, 50 Men in each Troop; and for
Three Regiments of Foot, 18 Companies in each, Two whereof to be Granadeers, 60
Men in each Company; and one Independent Troop of Horse to each Regiment. The
Major General gave them some very good Officers, viz. Colonel Woolsely to be
Commander in chief, and Colonel of Horse; and Captain Berry, Lieutenant
Colonel, Captain Stone Major; Captain Win to be Colonel of the Dragoons; and
for our Three Regiments of Foot, Gustavus Hamilton, the Governor of
Inniskilling, was made first Colonel, and Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd, and Major
Tiffin, the other Two. And they being thus furnished according to desire, they
took leave of the Major General, Sunday the 20th of July; but, through contrary
Winds, came not to Bellishany till Friday the 26th, where they were no sooner
come, but notice was given them, that Lieutenant General Macarty, with a
considerable Army, was come to Belturbet, in order to Besiege Inniskilling:
Upon this, the Officers went the next day to Baleek; and on Sunday the 28. went
from thence by Water, and Landed safe at Inniskilling, and were received with
some Ceremony, and great Rejoycings. That Night advice came, That Lieutenant
General Macarty was before Crom, and was raising a Battery against the Castle:
Upon which Colonel Woolsely made all the expedition possible, to get together
what Forces he could, in order to Relieve them, and sent for part of the Forces
from Bellishany; but Mac Carty marches toward Lisnaskeae.

CHAP. V.
Colonel Berry Marches to Relieve Lisnaskea, and succeeds, Marches after the
Enemy. Colonel Berry Fights the Enemies Army, Commanded by Major General
Alexander Hamilton, Defeats them, kills 200 of the Enemy, and takes 30
Prisoners. Colonel Woolsely. with 2000 Inniskilling Men, Fights Mac Carties
Army of 6000, gives them a Total Rout, kills 3300 of the Enemy, takes Mac Carty
himself Prisoner, with all their Artillery, Arms, Baggage, etc.

IN formation being brought, That a part of Mac Carties Army was marching
toward Lisnaskea, within 10 Miles of us: Upon this, Lieutenant Colonel Berry,
the next Morning, being July 30, was sent with Eight Troops of Horse, Three
Companies of Foot, and Two Troops of Dragoons, with order to get to the Castle
of Lisnaskea before the Enemy, and to place a Garrison in it, if he found it
Tenable, otherwise to Burn it: But when he came there, he found the place of no
consequence, and so left it. The next day, being the last of July, he marched
his Men toward the Enemy (who lay about Six Miles from him): he had not
marched above Two Miles, when, near a place called Donagh, his Scouts did
discover a considerable Body of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons; who immediately
advertise Colonel Berry of their approach, who Retreats with his Men toward
Lisnaskea again; and in the way, on a rising ground, had a full view of the
Enemy, and found them above double the number of his own; on which he sends an
Express to Colonel Woosely at Inniskilling, for Relief; and Retreats about a
Mile from Lisnaskea, by a by-road, where coming to a Bog, with a narrow short
Cause-way through it, that scarce Two Horsemen could ride a Breast; at the end
of this Cause-way Berry halted, resolving to make good that Pass against the
Enemy, till he should be Relieved: There was a Thicket of Underwood just by the
Causeway, where the Foot were placed; the Horse a little farther off, and gave
the word Oxford: They made but a very short stay there, when Colonel A.
Hamilton, (Mac Carty's Major General) came in view with a considerable Body of
Men, who alighting from his Horse, ordered his Dragoons to do so to, and very
bravely advanced near the end of the Causeway, his Men firing briskly at ours,
but with little Success; for they only wounded some sour or five of our Men:
But ours were better Marksmen, they shot about a dozen Men dead at the end of
the Cause-way, and wounded Colonel Hamilton their Leader, who being wounded,
retreated, and ordered another Officer to lead on the Men, who was immediately
Killed, with some more of the Men, which the Enemy perceiving, and having no
one to lead them on, began to Retreat from the end of the Cause-way, which our
Men seeing, gave a Huzza, and cried out, The Rogues are running; and
immediately our Foot and Dragoons took the Bog on each hand, and our Horse
advanced on the Cause-way toward them; which the Enemy perceiving, began at
first to retreat a little faster from us; but their Retreat soon turned to a
most disorderly Flight, without offering to face about, or Fire any more at us;
our Horse soon over-took them, and fell in among their Foot, and such Dragoons
as were on foot, and made a very great Slaughter of them, having the chase of
them through the Town of Lisnaskea, and near a Mile farther; and the Execution
had been greater, but notice was brought to Berry, That Lieut. General Mac
Carty, with the Body of his Army was advancing toward him: Upon this he sounds
a Retreat, and brings back his Men to the place where the Fight first began,
having Killed about 200, and taken 30 Prisoners, with a great quantity of Arms,
etc. This happened about Nine in the Morning.

About 12 of the Clock the same day, there came an Express from Colonel
Woolsely to Lieut. Colonel Berry, desiring him to March his Party to Lisnaskea,
where he would meet him, with the rest of the Army, at the Moat of the Town,
where, in a little time, they both met: Colonel Woolsely acquainted the
Officers, That the Party under his Command had marched in such great have to
Relieve their Brethren, that they had scarce brought a Meals Meat with them;
therefore it must be resolved, either immediately to go Fight Mac Carty, or
else return to Inniskilling again; the former of which was resolved on, by the
unanimous consent of all the Soldiers. Upon this Colonel Woolsely, and the
other Colonels, drew up all the Men in Battalia, and gave them the word No
Popery; and then drew out four Men out of every Troop, with an Officer to
Command them, for a Forlorn: Our whole Number, when all were joined, consisted
but of 2000 Men, or something upwards.

The Forlorn Colonel Woolsely ordered to March on about half a Mile before the
Army: We had not marched a Mile from Donagh, when our Forlorn came in view of
the Forlorn of the Enemy, who immediately retreated before our Men; we advanced
after them, till we came within half a Mile of Newtown-Butler, where is a large
Bog, and a little beyond a steep Hill, where the Enemy were drawn up
advantagiously. After our Men had past the Bog in good order, and came up to
the Enemy, within Musket Shot, they began to Fire at us, but before Three
Vollies had been discharged on each side, our Men saw them begin to draw off,
and Retreat, which they misapprehending, believed them running away, and our
Officers had much ado to keep them from pursuing with what speed they could:
But Colonel Woolsely, from a Hill, saw them go off in so good order, that he
believed it was either to draw our Men into an Ambush, or else Post themselves
to better Advantage; therefore sent Command, That no Man should go out of his
Rank, but pursue them in good Order: Thus the Enemy retreated in good Order,
and our Men after them, a Mile beyond Newtown-Butler, where they came to a
Hill, just above a Bog, much such a place as before, having their Cannon placed
at the end of the Cause-way; Colonel Berry and Major Stone advanced with the
Horse to the Cause-way, but the Enemy plied their Canon so hard, that the Horse
could not Advance, but our Foot and Dragoons advanced on both sides, through
the Bog, (the Enemy still keeping their Ground) till at last they came up and
seized their Cannon, and Killed their Canoneers, and then advanced toward the
Body of their Men, that were drawn up a little above them: As soon as our Horse
perceived their Canon were secured by our Foot, they advanced over the
Cause-way, which the Enemies Horse perceiving, they, with the mounted Dragoons,
wheeled, and fled toward Wattle-Bridge, deserting their Foot: Their Foot stood
their Ground till our Men came among them; but then perceiving their own Horse
and Dragoons fled, and ours coming up to them, they thought it no time to stay
any longer, but turned their backs, and instead of going to the left hand,
where they had an open Country, fled all to the right, where they had a great
Bog (which they ran through) for above a Mile, leading toward Loghearn; most
of them throwing away their Arms into Turf-pits: Our Horse followed theirs in a
String, over the narrow ways, from the place where the Enemy had planted their
Cannon to Wattle-Bridge, and left a good Guard of Horse there, to secure the
Pass. Our Horse kept all the Road between the Two places, that not one of their
Foot could pass them: Our Foot in the mean time followed theirs, through the
Bog, into a Wood near Loghearn, and gave Quarter to none but Officers; which
the Enemy perceiving, and having no Courage to fight for their Lives,
desperately took the Lough, to the number of 500; and but one Man of them
escaped drowning, or else was Killed coming out. Our Men continued all Night
beating the Bushes for them; and thus ended that days great Service: Whence we
may reckon the safety of the Protestants in Ireland; God having given them the
greatest and most remarkable Victory over the Irish, that was obtained in this,
or any former Age: They were reckoned 6000, and the Protestants not much above
2000; we killed that day, in the Morning and Afternoon, about 3000; took 400
Prisoners; and there were drowned in several places of Loghearn, as was
computed, about 500. The Irish themselves confess there were 3000 of their Men
wanting, when those that fled came to Dublin. We had in this Action but 20 Men
Killed, and about 50 Wounded, whereof many Mortal.

Lieutenant General Mac Carty, after the Fight, when his Men were fled, he with
about five or six Officers, went into a Wood near the place where the Canon
were planted; and some small time after came out of the Wood with those that
were with him, on Horseback, and Fired his Pistol at the Party that were
guarding the Cannon. Our Men, when they came first from the Wood, thought them
some of their own Party, (supposing all the Enemy fled) and never questioned
them till Mac-Carty fired his Pistol; and the 7 or 8 of the Soldiers fired
their Muskets at him, shot his Horse dead, and wounded him very ill in several
places, and then to put him out of pain, one of the Soldiers clubbed his Musket
to have knocked out his Brains, which one of those that came with him from the
Wood perceiving, called to the Soldier to hold his Hand, for it was their
General Mac-Carty; at the hearing of which, Captain Cooper came up, and gave
Lieutenant General Mac-Carty, and those that were with him, Quarter, and that
Night carried him to Newtown-Butler: and he being asked how he came so rashly
to hazard his Life, when he might have gone off with his Horse, when they made
their escape, professed, That he found now the Kingdom like to be lost, his Army
being the best (for their number) that K. James had, unless those before Derry,
who were then much broken; and that he came with a design to lose his Life, and
was sorry that he missed of his End, being unwilling to outlive that day.

On Sunday Morning, August 4. Advice came to Inniskilling, that the Siege of
Derry was raised, on Thursday the first of August in the Morning, a little
before day, and that the Army which lay before it, was marched past Omagh. Upon
this Lieutenant W. Charleton was sent, with about a Troop of detatched Horse,
to follow the Irish Army on their March toward Charlemont; who returned on
Monday, and told us, That he had seen the Rear of them pass by Castle
Crowfield, within Three short Miles of Dunganon, and so it was in vain to
follow them.

And thus having defeated Lieutenant General Mac-Carty's Party, taken him
Prisoner, Sarsfield fled, and the Siege of Derry being raised, their Fears were
now at an end, and for some time Inniskilling was at quiet, from all their
Enemies; and the name of Inniskilling Men became a Terror to the Irish: They
had nothing left to Employ them, after this, but to take care to Regiment their
Men, according to their Commissions Major General Kirk gave them.

August 7. Mr. A. Hamilton was sent by the Officers at Inniskilling, to Major
General Kirk, to Congratulate with him for his happy Successes, in the Relief
of Derry; the General received him very favorably, and sent him back with
Orders to Colonel Woolsely, to send him 700 Horse and Dragoons, that he might
March the Foot he had toward Colrain; and so toward Duke Schomberg (whom he
had Advice was at Sea.) The Inniskilling Horse marched before the Major General
all the way, until his Party joined Duke Schomberg, at Carick-fergus.

CHAP. VI.
Duke Schomberg, with the Army, Embarks at Highlake, with Ninety Sail of Ships.
Lands at Bangor. The Men lie on their Arms all Night. The Castle of Antrim
Taken. The Enemy quits Belfast. Carick-fergus resolves to make a resolute
Defense. The Duke in the Trenches. Batteries raised, and the Town Bombarded.
Hot Firing on both sides. Officers Killed in the Trenches. The Famous Engineer
Richards carried out Wounded. The Town offers to Capitulate, and Surrenders
upon Articles, after 20 days Siege. The Army Decamps, marches to Newry; on the
approach of whom, the Duke of Berwick Burns and quits the Place. The Army
Encamps on the Plains of Dundalk.

ON Thursday the 8th of August, 1689. Duke Schomberg Embarked at Highlake, on
Board the Cleveland-Yatch, about six in the Morning; the whole day was employed
in getting the Forces on Board, and the next day they continued still in the
Road, the Wind South S. East, but often veering, the remainder of the Foot
Embarked: Saturday, about Three in the Afternoon, the Fleet weighed, but came
to an Anchor in the same Road, lower down. Sunday the Fleet continued at
Anchor, it being Calm; but on Monday about Four in the Afternoon, the Wind
being at S. S. E. and S. E. the Bonadventure, Captain Hobson Commander, Fired a
Gun, and put our his light in the main Topmast Shrouds, That being the Signal
for Sailing. The Fleet consisting of between 80 and 90 Sail: The Men of War
were, the Bonadventure, Antelope, James Gally, Princess Ann, etc. (the whole
Fleet being under Sail): About six a Clock, the Bonadventure put out a sign on
the Mizen-Shroud for all the Masters to come on Board, where they received
Orders to Sail directly for Carick fergus; but in case of bad Weather, that
they could not reach thither, then to Sail for Longrea in Scotland, and if they
fell short of that, to Ramsy-Bay in Scotland.

Tuesday the 13th at break of day, the Fleet were fairly up with the Mountain
of Dundium, in the North of Ireland: About Three in the Afternoon (the Wind
still being at South-East) they came up the Lough, about a League and half from
Corick-fergus: At four the Fleet came to an Anchor in Bangor-Bay; immediately
the General put out a Jack-flag at the Mizzen-Pick, that being the Signal for
Landing the Men: They Encamped in the fields, close to Shore-sides, and lay on
their Arms all tha Night: The next Morning the Rebels in Carick-fergus set fire
to the Scotch and Irish Quarters, parts of the Town so called, which continued
burning all that Night and the next day. On Thursday Lieutenant Colonel
Fielding, with a Party of about 250 Men, went out to see what posture the Enemy
about Belfast were in, and returned that Evening. Thursday the 16th a Party of
Three hundred Firelocks, Commanded by Lieut. Colonel Caulfield, marched on
through Belfast (where Colonel Wharton's Regiment had posted themselves) and
possessed himself of the Town and Castle of Antrim, the Rebels marching out the
Night before in great confusion, toward Toom, where a small Fort had been
thrown up formerly to secure a pass that is there. Tuesday the 20th Lieutenant
Colonel Caulfield, with 250 of his Party, returned to the Army, 50 remaining to
secure the Town and Castle, Commanded by Captain Ormsby, and Lieutenant Wallis.
On Thursday, Seven Regiments of Foot Encamped almost round the Town of Carick
fergus; that day was spent in Planting the Canon and Mortars, and in making
some small Trenches: The Town desired a Parley, which, though granted, came to
nothing, They requiring time to send to the late King, for leave to Surrender;
this held for a short while, after which the Cannons and Bombs were played very
smartly against the Lord Dunegal's House (out of which they had Planted Two
Guns, that did us some little damage) and against the Half Moon, on the right
of the Castle, our Soldiers mounted the Trenches with great Bravery, and having
made their approaches near the Town, fired their small Shot very thick, nor
were the Enemy Idle, though we lost very few Men, only a Captain Killed, and
Lieutenant Adams Wounded in the Thigh (which proved Mortal,) our Army still
nearer approaching and Playing their Cannon, and throwing their Bombs and
Carcasses in great numbers into the Town and Castle. Thursday the 22. about 50
Sail of Ships came up the Lough, who had brought over four Regiments of Foot,
and one of Horse: The day and night was spent in smart firing on both sides,
with the loss of some few Officers and private Soldiers. Friday the 23. about
Three a clock, the Town again desired a Parley, and would Surrender. The Duke
allowing them to march out without striping, and their hands in their Pockets,
without being Plundered, which the Duke refused, and would agree to no less than
the making them all Prisoners of War, during their Majesty's Pleasure: The time
of the Parley, Duke Schomberg went through the Trenches and viewed them, as
also the Walls of the Castle. The Parley being over, the Duke gave Orders to
the Engineers and Gunners to go on as Vigorously as possible they could; though
before, the Duke had ordered them to spare the Castle: Our Batteries being only
one on the Windmil-Hill; with Mortars, and another against the North-Gate of
four Guns; the Duke ordered a very large Mortar to be planted on a new Battery,
close under the Walls, near the Lord Dunegal's House, with a small Field-piece,
which did great Execution; our Canon, Mortars, and small Shot, playing very
furiously all the Night.

Saturday the 24. At break of day the Town was all over covered with Dust and
Smoke, etc. and about Eight, some Houses were flaming. Engineer Richards who
came from Derry, was carried to Belfast, being Wounded in three several places,
as he was in the Trenches. At Two a Clock this day came one Mr. Spring to the
Duke, who made his escape over the Walls, and gave an account, That all the
Soldiers lay continually on the Walls; so that the Bombs only afflicted the
Protestants in the Town: And that O Mac-Carty Moor, and Owen Mac-Carty were the
only Two that obstructed the Surrendering of the Town. Sunday and Monday there
was smart Firing on both sides, and some Breaches made in the Walls. On
Tuesday, being the 27. a White Flag was hung out. After the Ships, no less than
our Army, had done them very great damage, they being moved in a Line against
the Castle, and they Surrendered on condition to have their liberty to march to
the next Garrison. The next day the Army marched to Belfast, leaving Sir H.
Ingolsby's Regiment in Garrison there.

On Monday Sept. 2. The whole Army marched Two Miles beyond Lisnegarvy.

Tuesday 3. They Encamped near the Town of Dramore; and the same Night the
Train of Artillery came up and joined the Army.

Wednesday we Encamped on the side of a Hill, near the Town of Lough-brickland,
in Two Lines, as at first.

Thursday the 5. The Army Encamped about a Mile short of the Newry: The night
before, the Duke of Berwick left the Town, after having Burnt all but a few
Houses. The next day the Army passed through the Town, and continued their
March toward Dundalk.

CHAP. VII.
Duke Sconberg, on the Burning of the Newry, sends a Trumpet to the Duke of
Berwick. The Enemy quit Dundalk without Burning it. Our Army Encamp on the
Plains of Dundalk. The Enemy about Ardee. Colonel Lloyd Defeats 5000 Irish near
Slego, Kills 700, and takes 300 Prisoners, with their Commander. A Conspiracy
of French Papists discovered in the English Camp. A Captain and Four others
Hanged. 150 more sent Prisoners to England. Colonel Lloyd with a Party of
Inniskilling-Men, takes the Castle of Dramnasna and James-Town. Great Mortality
in the Irish Camp, of which 15000 Die. Duke Schomberg's Proclamation of
Provisions. The Irish March into Winter Quarters. James-Town quitted. The Fight
at Slego, between Colonel Lloyd, a French Officer, and Sarsfield. The English
Army Decamp, and go into Winter Quarters. The Actions of the Newry, between a
Party of Colonel Ingolsby's, and 1700 Irish. Colonel Cambon's Action at
Charlemont.

THE Enemy having Burnt the greater part of the Town of Newry, before they
quitted it, the General sent a Trumpeter ( Sept. 6.) to the Duke of Berwick,
who Commanded there, to let him know, That if they went on to Burn in this
Barbarous manner, he would not give any Quarter; which Message had this Effect,
That the Irish abandoned Dundalk without doing any harm to the Town, leaving
behind a great deal of Provisions, which their fear and have would not suffer
them to carry away. The Army continued about Dundalk and the Newry for several
days, waiting the coming of their Artillery, which coming up on the 16 Instant,
and on the 17 and 18 we Encamped very advantagiously on the Plains about
Dundalk; at the same time, the Enemy lay Entrenched at Ardee, about 46000
Strong. After we were Encamped, our Army almost every day increased with new
Forces, either from England or Scotland, for several Weeks.

On the 25. The Irish Forces, Quartered in and about Connaught, came with a
design to surprise the Town of Slego, to the number of 5000 Horse and Foot,
Commanded by Colonel O Kelly: Of which Colonel Lloyd having timely
Intelligence, mustered up his Inniskilling Forces, making in all about 1000
Horse, Foot and Dragoons, with whom he was resolved to Fight the Enemy; and
having Posted his Horse very advantagiously, on a rising Ground, and lined the
Hedges with his Foot, in a Lane near the Town of Boil, through which they were
to Pass: The Enemy were no sooner come up, but our Men charged them with all
the Vigor and Courage imaginable, and after a short time put them to Flight,
which Colonel Lloyd perceiving, took a circumference with his Horse and
Dragoons, and got into Boil (through which the Enemy were to pass) before
them, where meeting with the Enemy, charged them in the Front with his Horse,
whilst the Foot fell upon the Rear, that they killed 700 on the spot, and took
300 Prisoners, among which were Colonel O Kelly, their Commander, and 40 other
Officers, a great number of Arms, 8000 Head of Cattle, etc. The News of this
great Victory coming to His Grace the Duke of Schonberg, He ordered the Cannon
to be Fired in all the English Quarters.

On the 28th A Treacherous Conspiracy was discovered in our Camp, which was
carried on by some French Papists: The particulars of which was as follows:

A Captain, in one of the French Regiments, being informed by one of his
Soldiers, That four other Soldiers, and a Drummer, who were Papists, designed
to go over to the Irish Army, he caused them to be seized, and found Letters
about one of them to Monsieur D' Avaux, who being examined, declared he had the
Letters from one Du Plessy, likewise a Papist, who now served as a private
Soldier, in one of the French Regiments, though he had been formerly a Captain of
Horse in France, from whence he was forced to retire, on the Account of a
Murder he had committed there. Du Plessy being seized, upon his Examination
confessed, That he had written to the late King, and to Monsieur D' Avaux,
giving them an account, that there were diverse Papists in the French Regiments,
and promising to bring them over to the Irish Camp, upon condition he might
have the Command of them, and his Pardon in France. He, and his sive
Accomplices were brought to a Trial, where Sentence of Death passed upon them,
and they were Executed accordingly. After which, the Three French Colone's made
strict enquiry what Papists there were in their Regiments, and found about 150.
who, by Order of the General, were secured, and sent Prisoners to Carlingford,
and afterward to England. Most of these had deserted the French Service this
Summer, and passing to Holland, and thence to England, upon the Report, that
Three French Regiments were levying here, had Listed themselves in the same;
the Officers raising their Companies in so much have, that they had not time to
examine them very strictly.

On the 1st of October Colonel Thomas Lloyd being informed, That the Irish had
put a Garrison of about 80 Men into James-Town, which is no inconsiderable Pass
upon the River Shannon, he marched thither with the Inniskilling Men under his
Command: Upon our approach they Fired very briskly upon us, though without
doing us any other damage, than that one Man was Shot in his Leg, and a Horse
Killed; Colonel Lloyd having lodged his Dragoons as near the Town, as he could
conveniently do, Marched with the Horse toward a Pass upon the same River,
called Drumnasna, Colonel Mac Donel's House, which was immediately Surrendered
to him, where he found Two great Pantoons, which would have facilitated his
going over the Water, to have Surrounded the Town. But about Twelve at Night,
some Protestants came and gave him notice, That the Rebels had abandoned the
place; whereupon he possessed himself of it, and afterward returned with a
considerable Booty.

October 10. Several Irish Deserters came into our Camp, who gave us an
account, That the late King James had lost above Fifteen Thousand of his Army
since they had been Encamped about Ardee, that a very malignant Fever did rage
in their Camp, with several other Distempers: About this time, a great deal of
Rain fell for several days together, which occasioned such great quantities of
standing Water, that great numbers, both of Officers and Soldiers, dyed in the
English Camp, but not near so many as dyed in the Irish. His Grace the Duke of
Schonberg being Informed, That notwithstanding there was so great a Plenty in
our Camp, of almost all sorts of Provisions, yet the Sutlers, and other Country
People that attended the Camp, extorted extravagant Rates from the Soldiers in
the Army; He caused a Proclamation to be Published, limiting the Prizes of all
sorts of Provisions to a certain moderate Rate.

On the 1st of November the Irish Army decamped, and March d into
Winter Quarters, having lain Encamped about Ardee, ever since the 10th of
September, without attempting to force our Camp, notwithstanding they were near
double the number.

November 4. Advice came to James-Town, That Colonel Sarsfield, with a detached
Body of Five Thousand choice Men out of the Irish Army, and joined with Two
Thousand of the Connaught Forces, was coming to Attack that place; on which the
Garrison, not finding themselves able to engage with so great numbers as the
Irish were, retreated thence to Sligoe; Killing, in their Retreat, 45 of the
Irish, with the loss of Nine of their own Party: Sarsfield, with his Army, the
next day, came before the Town of Sligoe, whereupon Colonel Russel, with the
Horse under his Command (apprehending Sarsfield's Party to be too strong for
them) retreated to Bellishannon, advising the Foot also to quit the Town: But
one Monsieur De St. Sauvem, who Commanded about Two Hundred Foot, most
Granadeers, and Colonel Lloyd with the Inniskilling Foot, bravely stood to it,
resolving to Fight the Enemy; and upon their approaching the Town, the French
Captain, with his Men, went and took a Pass not far from the Town, which he
maintained against all Sarsfield's force, till all their Ammunition was spent;
the Monsieur himself, an excellent Marksman, often firing in the Head of them;
after which, he and his Men Retreated to the Town, with no great loss, and
defended themselves with their Bionets in their Muskets, till they took
Possession of the Two Forts beyond the Town. The French Captain and his Party
possessing the lower Fort; and Lloyd, with the Inniskilling Men, went to the
upper Fort; from whence Lloyd that Night went toward Inniskilling, falling on
the Irish in a Pass which he was to go over, and Killing Two hundred, losing
but Twenty five himself: The French, in their Retreat, carried Fire and
Provisions into the Fort, wherein they found three Barrels of Powder, with
which they defended themselves bravely for three days; and on the Third, at
Night, the Irish lying secure in the Town, they Sallied from the Fort, on the
Irish, killed about One hundred and Twenty, and drove the rest out of the Town;
which account being brought to Duke Schonberg, he dispatched away all the
Inniskilling Horse and Dragoons, with Two Regiments of Foot; but before they
could arrive, the Town was pressed on by Sarsfield's whole Army, with so great
Vigor, that they were forced to quit it in the Night, and made an handsome
Retreat to Inniskilling.

November. 8. Our Army began to Decamp, Ten Regiments marched away last Night,
and the rest followed this day; and His Grace the Duke of Schonberg marched
away to Lisnegarvy, and from thence to Lisburne. Our Army lay Encamped from the
16th of September, to the 18th of November, on the Plains of Dundalk; during
which time, little of Action happened between the Two Armies, but Skirmishes
with the Out-Scouts, occasioned chiefly by our want of Horse, and the Cowardice
of the late King James and his Army, that they durst not make any attempt on
our Camp, notwithstanding their Army consisted of near double our number.

On the 24th of November a Detached Party of select Irish came about break of
day to Newry-Bridge, before they were perceived: The Two Sentinels that were
placed there, having twice discharged their Muskets, were killed on the Spot,
and the Enemy got into the Town; but, after an hours dispute, were beaten out
again, by a small Party of Colonel Ingolsby's Regiment; in this occasion we
lost 2 Capt 6 or 7 private Soldiers, and a Lieutenant and an Ensign were
Wounded. About Ten a Clock of the same day the Irish returned, and got over the
Bridge a a second time; but our Men received them so warmly, that they soon
returned in great confusion, leaving Twelve of their Company Slain on the
Bridge, with Two or Three Officers, whom they dragged away with them; and in
this last Action we had only Two Men Wounded: The Courage and Bravery of the
English is rendered extremely remarkable, by the vast inequality of these Two
Parties; the Enemy being Seventeen Hundred Strong, Horse, Foot, and Dragoons.

On the 26th of November, Colonel Cambon going to take a view of the Castle and
Garrison of Charlemont, took with him a small Party, consisting of Sixty of
Colonel Leviston's Regiment of Dragoons, who coming within Two Miles of the
Place were discovered by the Enemies advanced Sentinels; the Garrison took the
Alarm, and when our Men came to the Hill, from whence they might view the
place, they found all the Hedges and Bushes lined; whereupon the Dragoons
alighted, and beat the Rebels from their Post; how many were Killed or Wounded
as they ran over the Bog was not certainly known, but the Dragoons had a fair
Mark at 300 of them, as they run to the Town. Our Men found Eight or Nine Dead
on the place, among the Hedges.

CHAP. VIII.
The Irish Defeated at the Newry, by Brigadeer Steward, 30 Killed, and 7 Taken
Prisoners. Colonel Wolsely takes Belturbet. Lady Newcomens House Surrendered.
Duke Schonberg views Charlemont, and takes Booty under the Walls. Colonel
Berry, and St. John takes great Plunder. Duke Sconberg's Proclamation against
Cuasing and Swearing. Duke Sconberg with a Party goes to Dundalk. Colonel
Woolsely defeats the Duke of Berwick at Cavan, kills 300, takes great number of
Officers Prisoners, and 200 Common Soldiers. Brigadeer Nugent Mortally Wounded.
Four Thousand pound in Brass-Money taken from the Rebels. Sir John Laneer takes
Bedloe-Castle. Prince of Wirtenburgh and the Danes, Land at Belfast. The Famous
Action of Monsieur Callimate at Charlemont. 5000 French Land at Kinsale.
Colonel Hamilton's Trial at Lisburn, for the Escape of General Mac-Carty. The
Famous Action of Sir Cloudsly Shovel at Dublin-Bay.

NOv. 29. Brigadeer General Steward receiving Intelligence by some Irish
Deserters, That the Rebels Quartered in Dundalk, had formed a Design, to
surprise the Town and Pass of the Newry, particularly by the Earl of Antrim's
Regiment Quartered there. He immediately drew out what Horse and Foot the
little time would permit, which exceeded not in all above Two Hundred and Fifty
Men, and went in Person at the Head of them, and drew them up on a very
advantageous Ground near the Pass, just as the Enemy came up; and our Party
Attackt them so vigorously, that they soon put the Enemy to the Rout, Killing
30 on the Spot, and taking Seventeen Prisoners, among which were Five Officers:
He likewise took some hundred Head of Cattle, and small Garrons. And had our
Party been larger, the General was resolved to have marched to Dundalk.

December. 4. Colonel Wolsely marched out with a small Party of the Inniskilling
Forces in the Night to Belturbet, and taking the Garrison at a surprise, upon
the first Summons they yielded, to be conducted to the next Garrison. About the
same time, a considerable Party of the Irish Forces had Attacked the House of
the Lady Newcomen, in the County of Longford, which she defended very Bravely,
with the assistance of Two hundred of her British Tenants, that she had got
into her House; neither could they take it for some time, though they had made
several vigorous Attacks upon it, (it being above 20 Miles from any English
Garrison) until they had brought some of their Fieldpieces and Bombs against
it; yet such was the Gallantry and Resolution of the Lady, wherewith she
maintained the Place, even after the arrival of these Warlike Engines, that she
forced the Enemy to give very advantageous and honorable Terms; namely, That
her Ladyship and Domestic Servants should continue in the House as formerly,
the Garrison having free liberty to March with their Arms, Bag and Baggage to
Lisnegarvy.

On the 12th of December His Grace the Duke of Schonberg went, with a small
Party, to view the situation of Charlemont, and took from under the Walls of
the place, fifty Horses, forty Cows, and about the like number of Sheep,
without the least opposition from the Rebels in Garrison, except the firing of
the Canon, which did us no harm. Our Forces at this time began to be in a very
good condition; and most of the Soldiers that were Sick in the Hospital, began
now to be very well recovered, and gone to their Quarters, but we had it
confirmed among us, from all hands, that there still continued a great
Mortality among the Irish Army.

On the 1st of January, Lieut. Colonel Berry went out with a detached Party
from Clownish, and after having ranged for some time, without being able to
discover any Enemy, he returned with the Plunder of Fifteen Hundred Cows,
besides Sheep and Garrons, or small Horses; and some time after, another Party,
which Colonel Saint John's sent out from Armagh, brought back Sixty Horses, and
an Hundred and fifty Sheep.

January 8. About this time Parties went out from several of our Garrisons, and
made Excursions into the Enemies Quarters, and brought away several Thousand
Head of black Cattle, Sheep, and small Horses or Garrons.

Complaint being made to His Grace the Duke of Schonberg at Lisburne, of some
Irregularities of our Army, particularly, the too frequent use of Cursing and
Swearing; His Grace immediately ordered the following Proclamation to be
Published, Entitled,

A Proclamation by Frederick, Duke of Schonberg, Lord General of all Their
Majesty's Forces, etc.
WHereas the Horrid and Detestable Crimes of Profane Cursing, Swearing, and
taking Gods Holy Name in vain, being Sins of much Guilt and little Temptation,
have, by all Nations and People, and that in all Ages, been punished with sharp
and severe Penalties, as great and grievous Sins: And we, to our great Grief
and Trouble, taking notice of the too srequent practice of these Sins, by
several under Our Command; and that some have arrived to that height of
Impiety, that they are heard more irequently to invoke God to Damn them, than
to Save them; and this notwithstanding the heavy and dreadful Judgments of God
upon us, at this very time, for these and our other Sins, and notwithstanding
the Penalties enjoined by Their Majesty's Articles of War on these Offenders;
And we justly fearing that Their Majesty's Army may be more prejudiced by these
Sins, than advantaged by the Conduct and Courage of those Guilty of them, do
think fit, strictly to Charge and Command all Officers and Soldiers under Our
Command That they, and every of them, from hence-forward do forbear all vain
Cursing, Swearing, and taking God's Holy Name in vain, under the Penalties
enjoined by the aforesaid Articles, and Our further Displeasure: And that all
Officers take particular care to put the said Articles of War in execution, on
all under their respective Commands, guilty of the said Offenses, as they will
answer the contrary at their utmost Peril.

Given at Our Head Quarters at Lisburn, the 18th of January, 1689. in the First
Year of Their Majesty's Reign. Signed SCHONBERG.

On the 25th of January, His Grace the Duke of Schonberg set out from Lisburn,
to visit our Forces in the Frontier Garrisons, and gave the necessary Orders,
and returned again on the 30th.

On Feb. 6. A great number of Victuallers arrived at Belfast, and brought us an
account, that the Danish Forces were on their March, in order to their being
Embarked for this Kingdom.

Feb. 12. His Grace the Duke of Schonberg, our General, having advice brought
him to Lisburn, That the Enemy were in motion about Dundalk, he drew some
Troops together, and Marched himself with them to Dramore; but Sir John Lanier
and Colonel La Melioner, who were sent before with a Party, and went as far as
Carlingford, returned with an account that there were only Three Regiments at
Dundalk, neither that Garrison nor Droghedagh having received any
reinforcements, the Troops were countermanded, except a Detachment of 500 Horse
and Dragoons, and as many Foot, which was sent under the Command of Sir John
Lanier, toward Dundalk, who had afterward diverse successful Skirmishes with
the Enemy.

On the 13th His Grace returned to Lisburne, where he received the following
Account, by Letters from Colonel Wolsely, Dated at Belturbet, the 12th, as
follows:

I send your Grace this Express, to give you an account of the Fight we had
Yesterday with the Enemy at Cavan: On Monday, at Four in the Afternoon, I
marched from Belturbet with a Detachment of 700 Foot, and 300 Horse and
Dragoons: We passed the River at 12 at Night, Two Miles above Callihays, where
were Two of the Enemies Scouts; The Signal of our Motion was given, by Firing
several Muskets down the River, and making a great Fire upon a high Hill. I
had carried my Men all over about one a Clock, and intended to have been at
Cavan about an hour before day, but the Ways were so bad, and defiles so many,
that we got not thither till half an hour after daybreak, where we found the
Duke of Berwick, (which I did not expect) who arrived there the Night before
with 2500 Men, which, with the Garrison, made a Body of 4000 Men, all drawn up
in good order before the Town, and near the Fort; so soon as I had disposed of
my Men as the Ground would give me leave, I charged them, and after an hours
dispute, we beat them out of the Field. The Duke of Berwick had his Horse shot.
Colonel O Rely, Governor of Cavan, killed on the place, with two Lieutenant
Colonels, the one a Frenchman, the other an Irishman, whose Name was
Goughagan, a Man in great Esteem with them; but most of our Men fell presently
upon the Plunder, both in the Field and in the Town, so that we were in the
greatest confusion imaginable, which the Enemy seeing from the Fort, made a
very strong Sally upon us, and came on so briskly that I thought all had been
lost: I went with all the speed I could to a place, where I had posted some
Detatchments of Foot at the beginning of the Fight, who had not been engaged at
all, and I found them all there, being about 250; with these, and about 80
Horse and Dragoons, I opposed the Enemy, who I judged to be about 1500: At the
same time, seeing it impossible to get our Men out of the Town, I sent a Party
of Horse with Orders to Burn it, which was immediately done, and so the
Soldiers were forced to quit it, and having joined those that were Fighting, we
drove the Enemy like Sheep into the Fort, which being a strong Place, and full
of Men, and our Men being extremely fatiegued, I did not think fit to Attack
it. It was a very unfortunate force, which the Soldiers, falling to Plunder,
put upon me, to Burn the Town, for there was in it as much Provision as would
have served this Garrison six Months: All the Houses were full of Bread, Meal,
and Wheat, and a vast quantity of Oats and Beans.

The Prisoners give me this Account; That the Duke of Berwick was to Command,
at Cavan, a Body of Ten Thousand Men, which were to be made up by Detachments
out of the whole Army: The first place he was to Attack was this, which was to
have been done this day, and these were the Forces, your Grace had so frequent
Intelligence of; but I suppose the Neck of this Design is broke, we having
destroyed all their Provisions both for Men and Horse; and what I believe is as
great a loss to them, we have blown up all their Ammunition which was lodged in
the Town: So soon as my Men have refreshed themselves, I will have another Bout
with them for the Fort, which I believe they will quit of themselves, for they
have no Provisions or cover for their Men, now the Town is destroyed. We have
lost about Twenty Men; my Major Traherne, Captain Armstrong, and Captain Mayo,
with Captain La Maugere, a French Reformed Officer, were killed, and Captain
Blood an Ingineer shot in the side: Of the Enemy, Three Hundred were killed;
and four Captains, five Lieutenants, two Ensigns, and a Quartermaster, with
Two Hundred Men taken Prisoners. Our Men showed in this (as in former
occasions) a very great forwardness to Engage the Enemy, notwithstanding the
inequality of their Number, and gave new prooss of their Courage and Bravery;
and particularly Major General Kirk's Men.

The Eight French Officers your Grace sent hither, likewise behaved themselves
very well.

This day, being February the 16th, His Grace received another Express from
Colonel Wolsely, with the following Account, Written at Belturbet the 14th
Instant.

Since I Writ my last, a Gentleman is come in here from the County of
Westmeath, who tells me, he saw, after the Fight at Cavan, great numbers of
Soldiers, all without Arms, having thrown them away in their flight; so that
the Road and Ditches were filled with them: That he saw likewise a great many
Wounded Men, among whom were several Officers: That Brigadeer General Nugent
was Mortally Wounded: And that the Irish own the loss of Three Hundred Men, and
of Fourteen Commission Officers killed upon the Place. We have taken from the
Enemy 4000 pound in Brass Money. February 17. Twelve Officers, French and
Irish, that were Taken at the Battle at Cavan, were brought Prisoners to the
Castle of Carick-fergus.

February 20. Sir John Lanier, with his Party at the Newry, marched from thence
to Dundalk; and passing by Bedloe-Castle, in which there was an Ensign, with
Thirty Four Men, Colonel Levison's Dragoons immediately Stormed it, Killed Ten
of the Rebels, and took the rest Prisoners, and Burnt the Castle, in which
there was a great deal of Provisions: Then they advanced to the back of the
Town of Dundalk; Brigagadeer Steward marching at the same time with the Foot,
to the other side of the Town, and Burnt about Twenty Houses; the Garrison
keeping close with their Intrenchments: After which they returned to Newry,
with a Booty of a Thousand Cows, and Two Hundred Garoons, having had a French
Lieutenant Killed, and five Dragoons Wounded.

March 6. Four Hundred Danes Landed at Belfast, and the next day, the Prince of
Wirtenburgh, their General, Landed with many more: On which, His Grace the Duke
of Schonberg, went from Lisburne to take a View of the Danish Forces, and gave
Orders for their several Quarters in particular Towns.

The Regiment of Callimote being posted this Winter along the River called
Black-Water, and near Lough-Neagh; they greatly straightened the Garrison of
Charlemont, on that side, and hindered their having any Correspondence with the
County of Tyrone.

On the 8th of March Colonel La Callimote possessed himself of a small Village
within a Mile of Charlemont. The Enemy, upon notice of it, came out with 300
Men to Attack us; but though we had not had time to Entrench our selves, yet we
repulsed them with the loss of Three Men on their side, and one wounded on
ours. We were employed the next day, and the following, in casting up some
little Works, and in observing the Avenues of the Place, and the Enemies
Out-Posts on both sides the River, which we obliged them to abandon, giving
them every Night new Alarms.

On the 12th Instant, about Nine at Night, Colonel Callimote marched with a
Party of his Regiment, and a small Detachment of Colonel Saint John's, making
in all about Eighty Soldiers and Twenty Officers, whom he caused to Embark at a
place called Dery-Gally, in Three large Boats. Being come within half a Mile of
Charlemont he Landed his Men, and leaving a Guard with the Boats, marched to
the Town, and though they were discovered at a good distance, by the light of
the Moon, yet they passed the Ditch, and made themselves Masters of the
Main-Guard. Our Men divided themselves into Two Parties, the one marched
toward the Gate of the Castle, to hinder the Rebels from Sallying out, and the
other Attackt a Redoubt, lately Built within Thirty Paces of the Counterscarp
to cover their Bridge, which might contain Thirty Men, and had now in it
fifteen with a Sergeant, and after some little Resistance, entered the same,
killing Six, and taking the rest Prisoners. Monsieur de la Board, Major to La
Callimote, with Thirty Men, took another Redoubt, and we Plundered and Burnt
the Houses, as far as the Gate of Armagh, which the Enemy had abandoned. After
this, the day coming on, Colonel Callimote retired with his Party, with Drums
Beating, and Colors Flying, by the Causey that leads to Black-Water Town. The
whole Action was carried on with a great deal of Vigor and Conduct: The Rebels
lost above Fifty Men, killed and taken Prisoners: On our side, Major La Board
was Killed, with a Carthage Shot, from the last Cannon that was Fired; and
Lieutenant Colonel Belcassel, and Captain Le Rapin were Wounded; the first in
the Head, and the other in the Thigh; and besides these, we had but one Man
Killed and Five or Six Wounded. There were then about 450 Men.

March 14th. Five thousand French Foot Landed at the Port of Kin-sale, with two
Generals, the Count de Lauzun, and the Marquess de Lery; in Exchange for these,
the late King James sent his Brother Lewis, some time after, Five Thousand
Irish, under the Command of Genesis Mac-Carty.

March 15. Colonel Gustavus Hamilton, was brought to his Trial, for the Escape
of Major General Mac Carty from Inniskilling, he being Governor of the Town,
when the General Escaped in the beginning of January last. The Colonel had
often urged for a Trial, but was delayed above Two months, partly for want of
Field-Officers, who were the only Persons that could try him, they being
Commanded to their Posts upon the Alarms we had from Cavan, and Dundalk. The
Court being sat, Major General Lanier President, the Judge Advocate, Sir John
Topham, laid the Charge against him, which having fully done, the Court
demanded of the Colonel what he had to offer for himself: Upon this the
Colonel produced a Letter from his Superior Officer, wherein he commanded him
to take Moncashells Parol for his Behavior. Upon this the Court said, he need
say no more, for the Letter he produced spoke enough to show his Innocence.

The President acquainted the Duke of Schonberg with it, who sent for Moll
Hamilton, and told him, He was sorry for what trouble was given him, but that
what was done, was to satisfy others more than himself, of his Innocence.

March 23th. At Night Colonel Wolseley sent a Party of 200 Men, to fetch in
some Cattle, for the use of his Garrison at Belturbet; who leaving Cavan on the
right Hand, went Three Miles beyond it, and brought away 1000 Head of Cattle;
but as they were returning back by the River, by which they came, they found
400 of the Enemy drawn up in Battalia to hinder their Passage, but our Men
having put themselves in a Posture, Attacked them with that Courage and
Resolution, that they soon put them to the Rout, Killed Forty, and took Eight
Prisoners, and Pursued the rest to the very Gates of Belinicargate;

April 6th. Colonel Wolsely this Evening Marched from Belturbet, with 700 Men,
drawn out of the Regiments of Kirk, Earl Gravan, and the Inniskilling Troops;
and having ordered half of them to make an Incursion toward Finag, under the
command of Lieutenant Colonel Tretchtoune, he advanced with the rest to Attack
the Castle of Killishandra, (Situated about Seven Miles from Belturbet, the
like distance from Cavan, and Nine from Finag) where he arived the 7th. about
break of Day, and by the help of some Hedges and Ditches, brought all his Men
within Musket Shot of the Castle, and fixed a Miner to the Wall: The Mine was
fixed, and ready to Play by Ten the next Morning, when Colonel Wolsely sent to
Summon the Garrison; who thereupon sent out an Officer to Treat, and about two
Hours after, the Conditions were agreed upon, which were, that the Garrison
should March out with their Arms and Baggage: And accordingly the Castle-Gate
was delivered up about Noon, and the Garrison, Commanded by one Captain Darchey,
Marched out an Hour after, being 160 Detached Men, out of several Regiments,
and were Guarded to Cavan: In this Action, we lost Three Men, and had Five
wounded; and 100 Men were put into the Castle, which is a Post of very good
consideration to us, it opening a free passage into Connaught, and to all that
part of Leinster, that lies on the Shannon. After this, Colonel Wolsely
returned to Belturbet; whither the General sent a Battalion of Danes to
reinforce him, with Orders to enter upon new Action.

On the 8th. Colonel Cutts, and Colonel Babingtons Regiments, with the last
Regiment of Danish Horse, and Recruits for the other Regiments arrived at
Belfast.

On the 10th. Colonel Tiffin, Governor of Bellishannon, sent out a Party
consisting of 200 Firelocks of his own Regiment, and 20 Dragoons, Commanded by
his Lieut. Colonel, with Orders to March within two Miles of Sligo, where the
Enemy kept the Castle; they arrived there before Day, brought away 400 Cows,
150 Sheep, 80 Goats, and 60 Horses; the Enemy having taken the Allarm, pursued
them with two Troops of Horse, one of Dragoons, and three Companies of Foot,
and overtook them within eight Miles of Bellishannon, on which our Forces
putting themselves in the best Posture of Defense, the short time would permit,
Attacked the Enemy with great bravery; and after less than half an Hours
dispute, put them to the Rout, killing a Captain, and 16 Soldiers; after
which, they brought their Booty clear off.

CHAP IX.
Sir Clovesly Shovel Arrives at Belfast with Money, Arms, and Ammunition for
the Army. The Famous Action of Sir Clovesly Shovel at the Bay of Dublin
related. Charlemont Releived in the Night by Five Hundred Irish. The Garrison of
Charlemont Surprised by an Ambuscade in the Night. The Governor of Charlemont
demands a Parley, and Surrenders May 13th. the Articles of Capitulation the Duke
views the Situation of Charlemont and the Garrison as they March out. May 15th.
Colonel Wolsely with Twelve Hundred Men Besieges Bellingarny, raises Works
against it, and beats the Enemy from their Out Works. Preparations to Storm the
Place. The Garrison hang cut a White Flag, and after Capitulates. The number
Killed and Wounded in the Siege.

APRIL 12th. Sir Clovesly Shovel in the Monk, with several other Ships under
his Command, Arrived at Belfast, with Men, Arms, and Ammunition, and a
considerable Sum of Money, to Pay the Army. There being a great many small
Vessels in the River of Dublin Laden with Hides, Tallow, Frize and other Goods
belonging to the Protestants of that City, and Forced from them, in order to be
sent for France; of which Sir Clouesly Shovel in the Monk, having Intelligence
of it, the 18th. of April in the Morning, as he was returning from Belfast, he
stood into the Bay, with several Vessels in his Company, and saw a Ship a Mile
within the Bar, at a place called Polebege, and being come to an Anchor, Sir
Clovesly Shovel went on Board the Monmouth Yacht; and at a little more than
half Flood, the Wind being Northerly, with the said Yatch, Two Men of War Hoys,
a Ketch, and the Pinnaces went over the Bar, upon which the Ship
befor-ementioned, removed above a Mile higher, up to Salmon-Pool, and there run
a-ground, within Shot of a French Man of War, of Twelve Guns, and Two or Three
English Ships that lay a ground, filled with Soldiers who kept Firing at us:
We followed, and attacked her, and after some dispute, Sir Clovesly Shovel made
a Signal for the Fire Ship to come in, which when the Enemy perceive they
forsook the Ship, and got away in their Boats; we went on Board, and got out an
Anchor, and by heaving some of her things overboard, brought her off. In
turning out, the Wind vearing out of the Sea, one of our Hoys ran aground, and
we could not get her off, before the Water fell away from her; therefore our
Men all lay by her, and got her Anchor out ready to heave off next High Water;
at Low Water, the Hoy was on dry Ground, and many Thousand People came upon the
Sands, where was likewise the Late King James: We lay in our Boats Armed, and
Two Protestants, among many others that were running about the Sands, at length
got to us. The Guards to show their briskness, advanced toward us, and among
the rest, a Frenchman came Riding to the Water side, and called us in English,
as well as he could, a great many hard Names, and Fired his Pistols; we Shot
his Horse, and Rowed a Shore: the French Man slipped his Legs out of his Boots,
and ran away, but the Sailers went a shore, and unrigged his Horse.

The Ship we took was the Pelican, the biggest of the two Scotch Frigates taken
last Summer; she had twenty Guns, and above forty Men; three or four we found
dead on the Deck, and one wounded; as also a Spaniard and an English man, who
were forced aboard: They informed Sir Cloudsly, that twelve Men were killed,
and that several that went on Shore were wounded; and that this Frigate lay
there to be Convoy to the Vessels that were Laden with the Protestants Goods,
that the late King James was sending for France. This was one of his best Men
of War. Captain Wright, Commander of the Monmouth Yacht, was very serviceable;
for besides his carrying the Fleet in, he behaved himself very well in the
Action, as did all the Officers and Sailors in General, who showed an
extraordinary forwardness to Engage; and the chief Officers of all the Ships
desired to go in their Boats, expressing in this occasion a great Zeal for
Their Majesty's Service.

On the 22th. of April, in the Night, a Party of between four and five hundred
of the Rebels, having passed the Boggs, which were then in many places dry, got
into Charlemont, with some few Horses laden with Provisions. The Sieur
Daveseant, Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment of Cambon, having notice
thereof, and that the Enemy were speedily to return to Castle-Blany, laid part
of the said Regiment in Ambush, divided into three Parties, under the Command
of the Sieur Vebron, who acted as Major, Captain Moutant, and Captain la
Charroy. The first and second Night the Enemy did not appear, but the third
they came out, and happened to fall into the least of our Parties, which was
but of forty Men. Captain la Charroy who Commanded them, perceiving the Enemy,
let their Van Guard pass by, and then ordered his Men to Fire on the main
Party, of whom eight, with an Officer were killed, and the rest fled in great
Confusion toward Charlemont, leaving behind them 110 Muskets, 6 Halbards, 5
Drums, and 60 Hats. So soon as 'twas Day, our Men were reinforced by the other
Parties, and we found the Enemy (who had rallied) drawn up on a Hill, about a
Mile and a half from the Town; they no sooner saw us, but fled again toward
Charlemont, and our Men pursued them as far as the Counterscarp, and took five
Prisoners, and seven Horses, not having lost one Man on our side. The same
Night another Party of the Enemy made a Sally upon an Out-Guard, belonging to
la Callimote's Quarters, of about 40 Men, who retired to a place where were
Posted 60 Men of Colonel Cutt's Regiment, and then making head against the
Enemy, beat them back to the Town, killed 9, and took 8 Prisoners, besides
diverse Wounded, whom they carried off. On our side 3 were killed, and 4 or 5
wounded. An account of these Actions being sent to the General, he immediately
ordered two more Regiments of Foot to march forthwith and reinforce the
Blockade of Charlemont, in order to keep in the 500 Men that came with the
Relief, which did quickly streighten the Garrison, by spending their
Provisions, so that in a few days time they were reduced to great extremity,
and on the 11th. of May the Governor of Charlemont demanded a Parley, which
being granted, with leave to send to the General, the Lieutenant-Governour, and
a Colonel, went to Lisburn, with Orders from that Garrison, on the 12th; and
the same day the Articles were agreed upon for the Surrender of that place, as
follows; That all the Garrison, viz. the Governor, Officers, Soldiers,
Gunners, and all other Inhabitants, (the Deserters who run from us since the
first day of September last, only excepted,) and all other Persons in the said
Garrison shall have their Lives secured, and march out with their Arms, Bag and
Baggage, Drums Beating, Colors Flying, Match lighted, Bullets in their mouths,
each Officer and Soldier 12 Charges of Powder, with Match and Ball
proportionable, and their Horses, without any molestation in their Persons and
Goods now in their Possession, (not belonging to the Stores) upon any pretense
whatsoever.

That the said Garrison may march the nearest way to Dundalk, and not be
compelled to march above 8 or 9 Miles a Day.

That all sick and wounded Officers, and other Persons that are not able to
march at present, may remain within the said Garrison till they are able to
march, and then to have a Pass to go to the next Irish Garrison.

That none of the Army under His Graces Command, shall enter the said Fort,
except such who are appointed by him to take possession of the same, 'till the
Garrison be marched clear out of the Gates.

That there shall be a sufficient Convoy appointed for the said Garrison to
conduct them to the place beforementioned.

That they shall deliver fully and wholly, without any imbezlement or
diminution, all the Stores belonging to the said Fort; and that an Officer
shall be immediately admitted to take an account of the same.

That the Fort shall be put into the Possession of such Forces, as his Grace
shall think fit, at eight of the Clock on Wednesday, being the fourteenth day
of May; at which Hour the said Garrison shall march out, and an Hour before the
outward Gate shall be delivered to such Forces as his Grace shall appoint; in
case a supply of one Months Provisions for eight Hundred Men be not brought
into the Garrison for their Relief, between the signing hereof, and the said
time.

That the abovementioned Articles shall be inviolably performed on both sides,
without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or Fraud whatsoever, according to
true intent and meaning thereof.

Lastly, That all Acts of Hostility shall cease between the said Garrison and
Army, so soon as notice can be given on both sides.

In pursuance of this Capitulation, the Governor Teage o Regan, and the
Garrison (who had almost consumed all their Provisions) marched out on the 14th
Instant, 800 strong, leaving in the place a good quantity of Ammunition, and 17
Pieces of Brass Cannon, and two Mortars. His Grace the Duke of Schonbergh went
to Legacury, to see the Garrison as they marched away, and afterward visited
Charlemont, which is very strong and considerable by its Situation, four
Companies of Colonel Babington's Regiment were put into Garrison

On the 16th his Grace, our General, received a Letter from Colonel Wolsely,
given an account of the taking the Castle of Bellingargy, near Cavan, as
follows.

Belturbet, May 14.
ON Monday Night last, I marched out of this Town, with a Detachment of 1200
Men; and the next Morning I came before the Castle of Bellingargy, which place
I found much stronger than it had been represented to me, and no man but an
Irishman would have been beaten out of it without Cannon, which I wanting, I
betook my self to the only way left to reduce it; which was to make Blinds, and
raise Works behind them to overlook the Enemies; and so the whole day was spent
in making them, and the Fascines, 'till four in the Afternoon, and then all
things being ready, Colonel Foulkes, with a Detachment of Foot, set upon a
Party of the Enemy that were Posted in an Island in the River, under the
Castle, in which place we determined (if possible) to raise our Works; but the
Enemy Flying as soon as we set upon them, our Men instead of falling to their
Work, pursued them up to their Trenches, and would not be got off; and the
Enemy lying hard upon them, I ordered some Detachments to give the Enemy a
diversion on the other side of the Castle, by making a false Attack: These, as
soon as they received the Orders, pressed the place with as much heat as the
others had done, and beat the Enemy out of a Ravelin, which was raised before
the Drawbridge, and Fired upon them through their own Spike holes, that the
Enemy were forced to quit most of their Works in several places; which as soon
as I perceived, I ordered the Horse and Dragoons to bring up all the Fascines
to the brim of the Ditch, and began to fill up the Ditch; which the Enemy
perceiving, they hung out a white Flag; and after some time spent in
Capitulation, we came to this Agreement. That they should have Quarter for
Life, and be conveyed to the next Garrison; but they left their Arms behind
them, with all their Ammunition and Stores, which was but two Barrels and a
half of Powder, and one and a half of Ball: The Garrison was four Companies
consisting of some what more then 200 Men. I had the ill Fortune, in the heat
of the Business, to be shot in the Belly; but so favorable, that I hope, in
few days, I shall be able to get on Horseback again; though I was forced to
with draw out of the Fight, as soon as I was Wounded; but my Post was supplied
by Colonel Foulke, who managed the Assault with great Bravery, and greater
Conduct than ever I could pretend to. This is the strongest place I have ever
seen in Ireland; the Rampart is so high, that it is a difficult matter to get
up, though none there to keep one out, which made me the willinger to take it
upon Terms, because I saw it would unavoidably cost me a great many Men to take
it by force; the beat of the Soldiers running on without Orders, made it cost
me much dearer than I expected, The Account of what we have lost, is as
follows: Killed out of Colonel Hamilton's Regiment 4 Soldiers, and 16 more
Wounded; with an Ensign killed out of the Danish Battalion, 1 Captain, and 4
Soldiers; and 1 Captain, 3 Sergeants, and 14 Soldiers wounded. Out of Colonel
Foulkes Regiment, Captain Dubois killed, with 3 Gentlemen that carried Arms,
and 6 Soldiers, and 10 wounded.


CHAP. X.
Brief Accounts of the Transactions of the Late King James, toward the
Protestants in several parts of Ireland. The sham Pardon of the Inhabitants of
the Town of Bandon, and the Cruelty afterward used toward them. The
Transactions of the Earl of Seaforth, Sir R. Neagle, and Sir Tho. Southwel.
Particular Cruelties toward the Protestants at Limrick and Dublin. The several
sham Proclamations to ensnare the Protestants. The particular Invoice of the
Protestants Goods seized in Dublin, and sent to the French King. The late
King's seizing the Farmers Bread-Corn, to the almost starving of the Protestant
Inhabitants. The Inhumane and Barbarous Usage of the Protestants at Galway, by
Order of the late King. The Ravishing of the Farmer's Daughter in Dublin, a^
Noonday, before her Fathers Face. The Murdering three Protestant Clothiers i^
the Suburbs of Dublin. The Cruelti^ of the French toward the English Clergy,
etc.

THE late King, at his first Arrival in Ireland, to ingratiate himself with the
Protestants, and to beget an opinion of his great Clemency among the People, he
very graciously condescended t^ grant a general and free Pardon to the
Inhabitants of the Town of Bandon, amusing them with an assurance of an
a^solute Indemnity for their Transgression^ but soon after he remitted them to
t^ severity of the Law, and exposed the^ to a Trial for their Lives, upon whi^^
they were all found Guilty of Hig^ Treason; and no other Conseque^ could
rationally be expected, when b^ Judges and Jury were composed of ^exorable
Papists: And in the m^ time this mighty Crime was no m^ than that the
Inhabitants of the Place ^serving their Neighbors to be op^ Robbed and
Pillaged, and from Clandes^ Thievery to proceed to violent De^dation, they
thought it prudent to (...) their Gates, and avoid Plunder by ^cessary Defense
and Self-preservation.

This was the first Essay of the ^cious Indulgence of a Popish King (...)
Protestant Subjects: This was a (...) Specimen of what is to be exp^ from him
who will mortgage his ^son to the humor of his Priests.

The business of Sir Thomas Southwel i^ ^together of another Nature; and a^ ^e
repetition of it may justly cause an ^horrence of those Blood-suckers, who
^light in the torment and ruin of such (...) call Heretics; so the Example may
^monish all Men of State and Degree, (...) to truckle their Authority in
Vassal^ to their Servants and Inferiors.

The Earl of Seaforth taking a particu^ fancy to Sir Thomas Southwel, a very
^eful young Gentleman (and under ^demnation for his reputed Rebelli^ procured a
Warrant from the Late ^g to Sir Richard Neagle his Attorney-^eral, to pass a
Pardon for him, which said Earl showed to Sir Richard; but (...) a most
unmannerly and churlish ^on refused to obey it; saying, it was (...) than the
King could do. The Earl ^ed to his Master, and reported the ^er of the
Attorney General; who (...) sent for owned it to the King, and ^ly told him, It
was not in his (...) to grant him a Pardon; where^ the King passionately locked
him^ in his Closet.

(...) who in England was flattered into ^it of an absolute and unlimitted
Power to dispense with the established Laws; is not allowed in Ireland, the
privilege inherent to all Sovereign Powers, by the Law of Nations, to pardon
the Offenses of a Subject. But even in this it has appeared (as by several
other instances) that he is permitted to pardon any Crime in a Roman Catholic,
but in relation to a Protestant, the Law is indispenable.

And what favor Protestants are to expect under a Popish King, and in a
Kingdom where Popery is predominant; let all men judge by their procedure in
Ireland, where almost all the Churches (where the Irish Arms were prevalent)
except in Dublin, were seized by Authority, the Protestant Ministers were
Deprived, and Popish Priests settled and inducted into Livings, and
Ecclesiastical Preferments.

It is a matter not unworthy the Observation; how dexterously the Government
there could prevaricate in their dealings with the poor enslaved Protestants;
For upon any apprehention of Succors arriving from England, or other pretext
to fleece and squeeze them,; an Information was presently given, how numerous
the Protestants were, and what danger may arise from thence; and then they were
forthwith confined, and hurried away to Prison, and their Houses and Goods
exposed to the Rapine of the Irish and French: At another time, when it might
be subservient to their designs, to lessen the number, and undervallue the
strength of the Protestants; then they give out that their number was but
small, and their interest inconsiderable: And this is very remarkable in a late
Passage. at the City of Limorick, where the Cabal of the Papists projecting to
get the Churches (there) into their Hands, Represented to the King and Council,
that the Protestants in that Place were so very few, that there was no need to
Assign them any more then one Church for their Meeting; and this Suggestion was
fortifyed by a Letter from the Earl of Limmerick, attesting the same.

If at any time an Information was given to the Government of any Money, Plate,
or other things valuable in the hands of a Protestant, tho guarded by the
solemnity of a Protection; this was soon seconded by the suspection of some
Plot against the Government, and immediately a Party was sent to seize their
Persons, to Search and Plunder their Houses; and so after the Infliction of all
^orts of Misery and Distress, they are admitted to Liberty, under the Caution
of Bonds for good behavior; but nothing left to sustain them, or to prevent
the Calamitous Assaults of Poverty and Famine: At another time they proceed
with a more Jesuitical Fierceness, for having in their Eye a concealed purchase
of Money, or good Movables, in the Hands of a Protestant; immediately an Order
was secretly Granted to seize the Persons, and secure their Goods; and then to
amuse the World with an Opinion of their Justice and Lenity; a Proclamation was
contrived with a plausible promise of Indemnity, to all Protestants under their
Protection, and an invitation to all Men, to rest secure under the Benignity of
it: But in the mean time the matter is so ordered, that the Proclamation shall
not be Published, nor delivered into the Sherriffs Hands, or other Officers,
tho anti-dated before the Issuing such Order, till a certain Advertisement be
received, that the Order is Executed, and the Work done.

What a miserable and an unexpected Oppression is it, that the poor Subjects
shall be compelled to part with their Goods and Merchandise for a contemtible
lump of Brass, or Pewter? Yet such ever has been the constant proceeding of
the Late King toward his Subjects of Ireland; whose Goods and Commodities he
rather Seizes than Buyeth, and becoming the grand Merchant of the Kingdom, he
is the general ingrosser of all Trade, which he Vents and Exports to his dear
Correspondent in France: Bargaining with the Owner at such a rate, as the Buyer
is pleased to make, and discharging his Contract in Bills of Copper, Pewter,
and Brass, which can in no way avail the poor Seller, or support him in the
circulation of his Trade. I will only present the Reader with one instance
(among innumerable others) and give him an Authentic Account of what Goods
were taken up in Dublin at one time, for the Kings use, (i. e.) were seized by
Armed Force, and a Price set upon them, at the pleasure of the Taker.

Seized in the City of Dublin for the King's use, February 6. 1689.
Tanned Hides. Raw Hides. Stones of Wool at 18 ps in the Stone. Tuns of Tallow.
stones of Butter. In Oxmantown. 00920 02140 St. Andrew's, St. Peter's, and St.
Brides. ^1166 02190 St. Catherins, St. James, and St. Nichol. without. 05071
03192 61105 389 40 Within the City. 11619 07192 18771. 14687. 61105. 389. 40.

This with much more, (about the time Sir Clovesly Shovel stood before Dublin,)
was a carrying on Board the Ships that lay in the Harbor, to be transported to
France; which for that small time, Sir Clovesly Shovel tarried there, had some
intermission; but as soon as he was gone, the same, and many more hands were
employed, that all might be sent off; whilst the like methods were a putting in
Execution in all parts of the Country, seizing and carrying away what the
Protestants had, in order to be sent after the former, by the next opportunity;
beggering the Inhabitants, and Impoverishing the Kingdom, by a wilful
Devastation of those staple Commodities, for which no other return could be
expected, (none else being promised) but materials to murder the remainder of
the poor unhappy Protestants, under their Government.

The Country being well stor d with Grane of all sorts, especially the Countys
about Dublin, whereof the Gen rality of the Inhabitants are Protestants; a very
plausible Proclamation was issued out to encourage the Farmers, to supply and
furnish the Markets, which when they had for some time frequented, another
Proclamation came forth, setting a precise Rate (but much lower then the common
Market price) upon all kinds of Grane, Provisions, and other Merchantable
Commodities, constraining the Seller to part with his Goods at the Rates
prescribed, on pain of loosing all without a satisfaction; or in plain English,
to seize on Men's properties and effects, under pretense and color of
furnishing the King's Stores.

After the late King had made Brass Money current in Ireland, it was at first
pretended to pass only in Payments between Man and Man in their daily Commerce
and Dealings, and in public payment in Duties to the Exchequer. But soon
after, the Irish beginning to consider, that they were generally Indepted to
the English, and that this might be a fit season, and a lucky opportunity to
get their Debts easily and cheaply discharged, a Proclamation was published,
enjoining and requiring, that Copper and Brass Money should pass as current
Money within the Realm of Ireland, in the payment of Bills, Bonds, Debts by
Record, Mortgages, and all other Payments whatsoever. By which knack, many a
poor Protestant was fob'd out of his Right, and compelled to take a heap of
Trash for his Debt, (as he was for his Wheat and other Commodities, or be
precluded from any further Satisfaction. And thus Colonel Roger Moore was
served, who having an Encumbrance of 3000 p. upon the Lord Dillar's Estate, who
is married to a Daughter of the Lord or Lady Tyrconnel; she sent for him, and
told him, that having some Money at her command, and being very desirous to
take off the burden from her Daughters Estate, she was content to pay him off
in ready Moneys, provided he would make some handsome abatement of the Sumn
due. The Gentleman being complaissant to the Lady, and very willing to receive
Money in such a time of scarcety, freely consented to abate a thousand Pound,
so the rest might be paid down at once: The Lady seemed very thankful, and
appointed him to come next day, and bring the Deeds and Obligations with him,
and so receive his Money. Accordingly he came, and having given a Legal
Release; the Lady opened a Door, and showed him along Table, covered over with
Copper and Brass, and tendered it for his Payment, which whether he rejected it
in passion, or hired a Cart to carry it away, I cannot tell; but this I can
say, having an Estate which was Mortgaged to the old Proprietor, before 1641.
to which on Payment of the Mortgage Money, he hoped to be rostored by Repealing
the Acts of Settlement; he repaired to me, and desired me to appoint time, and
place for Payment of the Mortgage Money, of which, I have taken time to
consider. One of the most eminent Silver Smiths of Dublin, having sold all his
Plate to a Papist, who promised to pay him his price (agreed upon) in Silver
and Gold; but no faith being to be kept with Heretics, the Goldsmiths was
compelled to take Brass and Copper, and soon after this, the late King put out
his Savoury and Fruitful Proclamation, to make Brass Money pass in Satisfaction
of all Debts, signed at Dublin Castle, February 4th, 1689.

They were grown so severe to the poor Protestants, that they would not suffer
them to buy a Loaf of Bread from a Baker, but at the second hand from the
Soldiers, and were forced to pay a treble rate for it; and even that liberty
was restrained, when the French came to be Garrisoned in Dublin; so that I
fear, that many of them were starved in the streets.

But I challenge all Histories and Records of Nations, to parallel the late
shameful usage of the poor Protestant Prisoners in Galway, upon whom was placed
so odious a Cheat, so unmanlike Sham, that posterity will hardly be induced to
believe it; and I must implore the Charity of the present Age, not to look upon
it as a Fable; but it is so certain, and so sad a truth, that I defy the
Subtility and Impudence of a Jesuit to gainsay, or contradict it. There was a
Stipulation made not long since, between the late King James, and the French
Tyrant, to exchange some Regiments of Auxillaries, and about 5000 Men being
accordingly sent from France, and Landed in Ireiand, the late King ordered the
like number of Irish to be forthwith embarked, and transported into France,
under the Conduct of Major General Mac-Carte, (under whom they would do great
feats, as by experience, the Inniskilling Men,) among whom, the Regiment under
the command of Coll. Robert Fielding, known by the name of handsome Fielding,
was appointed to be one; but before he could get his Regiment on board, a great
number of the Men run away, according to their natural and usual custom; so
that he became mightily puzzled, what shift to make to recruit his Regiment,
whereupon this expedient way found out: There was in Galway about 120
Prisoners, (who had been seized for endeavoring to make their escape with Sir
T. Southwell out of the Irish Quarters;) and who had endured the miseries of
close Confinement, Cold, Hungry, and a daily Expectation of a violent Death for
above 14 Months, lying under Condemnation for pretended Treason: To them Coll.
Fielding applied himself, and proposed to them, that for every one of them that
would raise 8 Men, and deliver them to him to recruit his Regiment, such should
not only have their immediate Liberty, but an absolute Pardon for all that was
past; and to that purpose he produced a Warrant for a General Pardon; the poor
Gentlemen overjoyed with the security of their Lives, and the Prospect of their
Liberty, consented readily to the Capitulation, and with all earnestness betook
themselves to the performance of what was expected on their parts, and in a
very short time about 14 of the Prisoners brought in the number demanded of
them, and delivered them to the Conduct of the Colonel, who carried on the
Intreague without Suspicion; but alas the poor unfortunate Gentlemen having
accomplished their undertaking, with extraordinary Pains and Charges, being
obliged to pay great sums of Money to those Mercinary Men; no sooner was the
Colonel with his Men shipped away, but an order was sent from the late King, to
seize upon those deluded Gentlemen, and to recommit them to their former
Prison, on pretense of the Contract made with them by Colonel Fielding, was
not done with his Allowance; the Great Turk would blush to be charged with such
an Action, and a very Heathen would abhor it; an Action fit only for the
Monsieur of France, and such Princes as are influenced by his Example.

The French as they past by any of our Clergy in Dublin, threatened them sadly
on which the Clergy held frequent Consultations how to secure themselves, and
delivered their poor Flocks from the daily Threats and Menaces of the French
Vultures. It was moved that the Clergy should disguise themselves in Frieze
Coats, not finding it probable to escape the then impending Dangers in their
Gowns; this motion was rejected by the Majority, and still depending on his
Protection, who stills the Winds, and the raging of the Seas.

The French had not been two days in Dublin, when they murdered two or three
Protestant Cloathiers, in a part of the City, called the Comb; for that great
Crime of protecting their Wives from being made Prostitutes to the French; of
which Inhumane act, no notice was ever taken by the late King or his
Government, more than if two Dogs had been shot. About the same time, some of
them took a Country Maid that came to Market with her Father, and defloured her
in the open streets at Noonday. Many such barbarous pieces of Villainy has been
perpetrated by those Blood-suckers, whose continual Practice was in all parts
of the World where they have been, to burn and demolish such Places as were not
tenable by them; and so they moved in their Councils, that famous City of
Dublin should be dealt with; first, to shut up the Protestants in the Churches
and Hospitals, and then if they lost the day, to set fire to all; whereby, not
only the City, but the Protestants also would be destroyed; whereupon the Irish
Papists Traders in the City, and those of the Army, that either themselves,
Relations or Friends, owned Houses in it, applied themselves to their King, and
told him they should suffer in that Expedition, as well as the Protestants; and
that they would not draw a Sword in his defense, unless all thoughts of burning
the City were set aside, and declared, that as soon as they saw, or heard of
any appearance of Fire, they would fly from his Service, and submit to King
William's Mercy; of which, now they have had a good experiment.

CHAP. XI.
Great Plunder taken by the English near Finagh and Kells, 27 Miles of Dublin.
Castle-Blany and several Villages burnt. The Rebels break down the Bridges
between Newry and Dundalk. Duke Schonberg goes to Belfast the 14 June,
expecting the King. June 15. The King lands at Carrickfergus. His great
reception in all places, with several addresses presented to him. June 24 His
Majesty goes to Newry. A Camp is there formed. The King's Message to the Irish.
The Irish quit Dundalk, and retires to Ardee. The whole English Army Encamps on
the Plains of Dundalk. The Irish quit Ardee, post themselves on the Boyne. June
30th, The King Encamps within sight of the Irish Army. Is wounded with a Cannon
Ball, viewing the the Enemies Camp. July 1. Part of the English Army passes the
Boyne. The whole Irish Army defeated, and retires after their King to Dublin.
The Condition of Dublin on the Approach of the English Army. King James retires
to Waterford. The English Army Encamp at Finglass, from whence the King goes to
Dublin.

MAY 18. One of our Parties of 80 Horse and Dragoons, most English that were
Quartered about Hilsbrough, went within a Mile of Finnaugh, and took 5
Prisoners and 80 Horses, and several hundred head of Cattle. The Enemy sallied
out of the Town of Finnaugh with 100 Horse, but having just showed themselves,
returned in again, and our Men marched away quietly with their Booty.

May 23. Colonel Wolsely detached a Party of 100 Foot, 36 Horse, and some
Dragoons, they went as far as Kells, within 27 Miles of Dublin, and brought
back a good booty, Cows, Sheep and Horses, without meeting with any opposition.
This day news came to the General, that the Rebels had burnt Castle-Blany, and
several other Villages thereabouts.

June 6. The Count de Schonberg arrived at Belfast with Forces, Arms and
Ammunition, and likewise 200 Carpenters, Smiths, and other Artificers for the
Service of the Army.

One Captain Smith, formerly of Dundalk, went by the general order on the 12th
of June, with a Party of Horse from the Newry, to review the Roads thence to
Dundalk, and found all the Bridge and Causayes broke, to preven^ our march; all
the Roads betwixt Lisbourne and the Newry, and from thence toward Dundalk,
were immediately ordered to be mended, and vast quantities of Provisions and
Stores were daily sent toward Ardmagh.

The General expecting the King Landing, came to Belfast the 14th instant in
the Afternoon, and sent out Men to all the adjacent Coasts to watch; and at
nine that Night, the Post of Donnoghedee coming with the Packet, brought
advice, the King had passed by that place toward Belfast.

The next day being Saturday, about three in the Afternoon, the General
received advice, His Majesty was come into the Lough; and thereupon in his
Coach, and Set of small black Barbery Horses, posted away to meet the King at
Carrickfergus; His Majesty on his Landing, immediately mounted, and rode on
Horseback through the main street of the Town, where the almost numberless
crowds of People bid His Majesty welcome, with continual shouts and
Acclamations at the White-House, three miles hence, half way betwixt this and
Carrickfergus; the General met the King at four of the Clock, who was pleased
for to alight, and go into his Coach, attended only with one Troop of Horse,
and a few Gentlemen, and immediately drove over the Strand hither.

The uncertainty of the time, and place of His Majesty's Landing; and the
suddenness of the News was such, that few of the Multitude that flocked hither
to see it, had their ends, the Generals motion was so quick; yet before they
got into the Town, there were abundance that met them, and coming to the
North-Gate, he was received by the Sovereign, and Burgesses of Belfast in their
Formalities, a Guard of the Foot Guards, and a general continued Shout and
Shouts of, God save the King, God bless our Protestant King, God bless King
William.

Being come to the Castle, His Majesty alighted, and with the General walked
into, and round a very fine Garden at the back side thereof.

Then His Majesty went into an Apartment appointed for him, and immediately
issued out Orders for bringing ashore 200000 l. which came with him into the
Lough, and 15 Tuns of Halfpence, and Farthings in Tin, and that an Account be
forthwith sent to the Agents of all Regiments, to bring in their Accounts
within three Days, in order to receive their Men's pay, etc. In order to which,
His Majesty presently fell upon Measures how to clear all Quarters, and
discharge the Country, and ordered the Train to be ready to march in a Week. As
the King was coming over the Strand, another Coach of the Generals met him,
which his Grace called too out of the former, and ordered straight forward to
the White-House, to receive into it such persons of Quality as they should find
first Landing. Not far from the said North-gate, His Majesty was met by Dr.
George Walker, late Governor of London Derry, and about twelve of the
Episcopal Clergy, who followed the Coach to the Castle, and when His Majesty
alighted, Addressed him in a Congratulatory Speech on his Arival.

At Night the Streets were filled with Bonfire-Works, which were no sooner
lighted, but the Allarm Signal was given by discharge of Guns, so planted, that
from one place to another throughout the whole Country in our hands in a few
Minutes, all places had notice of the King's Arival, and in three Hours made
Bonfiers so thick, that the whole Country seemed in a flame. So that the Enemy
could not but see, and conjecture the cause to their Eternal Grief.

At Lisbourne, One George Gregson, the most eminent Preaching Quaker in the
Province of Vlster, not making a Bonfire, the Soldiers broke all his Windows,
pulled down the Pales round his House, forced his Wheel-barrows, Shovels,
Pick-Axes, Tubs, Pitch and Tar Barrels out of his backside, and piled them up
before his Door in a stately Bonfire; and had not his House been Lieutenant
General Douglass's Quarters, it had been impossible to save it from pulling
down, so angry were the People.

On the 16th, Lieutenant General Douglass came hither; as likewise a great
number of Presbyterian Ministers, who came to wait on His Majesty, and
presented him with a Loyal Address. A little after the Kings landing at the
Lough, betwixt Carrickfergus and Belfast, seemed to be like a Wood, there being
in it no less then between 6 or 700 Sail of Ships, most laden with Provisions
and Ammunition; the Plenty and Order of all things there was most wonderful,
and not credible to any, but those that saw it, no Army in Christondom the
like, and yet all Goods held a good Rate, Bear 13 or 14 pound the Tun, Claret
and White Wind, 15 pound the Hogshead, Canaries and Sherries, 10 s. a Gallon,
Malaga, and right good Brandy, 8 s. a Gallon, Wheat 1 p. 5 s. the Bristol
Barrel, Malt 17 s. a Larrel, Flowers 15 d. the Stone, Cheese 1 p. 15 s. the
Hundred, Salt 1 s. the Gallon, and so proportionable for all other Goods for
Back and Belly.

His Majesty continued at Belfast till June 19. at which time he went to
Lisbourn, and dined with the General, and the same Night he went to Hilsbrough,
accompanied with Prince George, Lord General Douglass, the Earl of Oxford, and
a great many other Nobility and Gentry.

June 20. This Day Landed at the White-House, 2500 Horse from Scotland; a Camp
is now forming near Tanderagee, about 20 Miles South from Lisbourne and on the
very Frontiers between Ardmagh and the Newry, whither all the Army is marching.

The following Address was humbly. presented to his Majesty upon his Arrival in
Ireland.
GReatest of Kings, conquer what is your own,
And add poor Irel. to sweet Engl. Crown,
Pull the Stift neck of every Papist down;
Set Captives free, who on the Willow Trees,
Hang useless Harps that tuned such Songs as these.
Ah! Mighty Prince, how do our Sorrows swell,
What Tongues, or Pens, can our great Miseries tell,
Who in the midst of Satan's Subjects dwell?
Disarmed, and Plundered, Captived here we lie,
Gladly we would, alas but cannot fly.
Irish and French insult, Triumph and Kill,
And who dare say the Ruffians have done ill,
Since all their Law is Couched in their Will?
The Papists Locusts do the Church devour,
Ravish our Wives, and our young Maids deflour;
Arise, Great Sir, and like a Rampant Lion,
Revenge the Affronts of poor distressed Sion;
Blessed be the Angel, brings the best of Kings,
With Expedition on the Cherub's Wings;
Blessed be the Wind and Tide that wastes you over,
To your sad Subjects on the Irish shore:
And ever blessed be they that Fight your Cau'e,
And with their Swords maintain Great Britain's Laws
On the 22. of June, His Majesty went from Hilsbrough, to the Town of Newry,
where he viewed the part of his Army that was encamped there, consisting of
24000 Horse, Foot and Dragoons, His Majesty being informed by his Scouts there,
that the Irish Forces with their King, were come to a Pass within four Miles of
the Newry, betwixt that and the Town of Dundalk; His Majesty sent a Trumpeter
to acquaint the Irish, that in case they burnt any more Houses, He had given
order to His Army that they should not give Quarter to a Man, either French or
Irish they should meet with. And that very Night His Majesty gave Order for 500
Horse and Dragoons to be Detached, under the Command of Lieutenant Genesis
Schravemore, to march toward Dundalk, and mark out a place to Encamp in; the
Irish seeing some of the Horse that were the advanced Guard, appear, and they
thinking the whole Army was approaching, immediately quitted their Pass, and
fled to Ardee, burning their Tents for haste, but left the Town standing, being
apprehensive that the King would be as good as his word, some of our advanced
Party marched so near the Enemy, that they plainly saw them set Fire to their
Tents, and the confusion they were in.

The Passes being clear, His Majesty immediately advanced with the Forces from
the Newry toward Dandalk, and sent orders for General Douglass's, and the
other Forces to change their march before designed them, and immediately to
march, and join him at Dundalk: On the 27th, we Encamped on the Plains of
Dundalk, where we rested the next day, and understood that the Enemy were
retired from Ardee, and had Posted themselves on the South side of the River
Boyne; the King went himself beyond Ardee, to view the ground, and on the 29th,
he marched thither, and on the 30th, His Majesty Encamped in sight of the
Enemy, the River Boyn being between us and them; the King's Tent was pitched
about a Mile short of the Boyne, and as much above Drogheda. His Majesty at his
Arival near the River, about Noon rode in full view of the Irish Army, which
lay encampt upwards on the other side. The Enemy soon discovered it must be His
Majesty who was so attended, which made them draw down two pieces of six pound
Ball from the Forts a little higher, and planted them opposite to the place
where our Horse was drawn up, they presently began to fire, and one of the
Balls passed so close to His Majesty, that it took away a piece of his Coat,
Wastcoat and Shirt, raised the Skin on the blade of his Right Shoulder, and
drew a little Blood; but a Plaster being put on, His Majesty continued on
Horseback without the least concern, till four in the Afternoon, when he
dined, and in the Evening was on Horseback again, though he had been up from
one in the Morning. The Enemy spent about two hundred Balls, and killed us four
or five Men, and about ten Horses; for it was here that our Horse stood the
shot of the Enemy, every Man on foot by his Horse several hours, while there
passed the Shot before mentioned. At last when the King had said, Now I see my
Men will stand, some Guns were sent to our Horse, and about five in the
Evening, we brought some of our Guns to bear, and dismounted one of theirs, and
with our Bombs, beat down several Tents, next adjoining to those of the late
King James, and the Count de Lauzun. His Majesty rested very well at Night, and
at Eight the next Morning, being July 1. was again-on Horseback; and while the
great Bullets were flying, the Prince of Dermstadts Horse was shot in the Neck.
By a Protestant Deserter that swam over the River last night, we were informed,
that the Enemy were 25000 strong, that they had sent away some of their
heaviest Baggage, in order (as they gave out) to Fight us. The King commanded
the Count de Schonberg to march with all the Horse and Dragoons of the first
and second Line of the Right Wing, and the Brigade of Trelawney, and to pass
the River about four Miles from the Camp, in order to take the Enemy in Flank,
while the rest of our Army passed it nearer Drogheda, over against their Camp;
which the Enemy perceiving, they marched part of their Army to oppose the Count
de Schonberge, (who had already broke some of their Squadrons of Horse, and
Dragoons that advanced to hinder his passing the River) and drew them up in
Batalia about a Mile and a half from the place where he had passed the River.
The King being informed of what had passed on that side, sent Licutenant
General Douglass with two Brigades of Foot, to reinforce the Count d^
Schonberg, who thereupon changed his Order of Battle, making a Wing of Horse on
his Right, and another on his Left, and placing the Foot in the middle. In this
posture he marched toward the Enemy, whom he found drawn up in Batalia, and
charging the Enemy, after some small Resistance, put them into disorder, and
followed them Fighting as far as the Village called Duleek. The Earl of
Portland, and Monsieur Overkirke had part in this Action as Mareschals de Camp.

In the mean time the King caused the rest of the Foot of the first Line,
consisting of the Brigades of la Meloniere, which was on the Right, of Hanmer,
and the Danes to march.

The three Batalions of the Dutch Guards were at the head of them, and passed
the Ford on the Right, over against the Village before mentioned, from whence
they beat the Enemy that were posted there. The Battalion of la Meloniere
followed them on the Lest; and these four Battalions being the first that
passed the River, suffered pretty much; of the latter, there were five Officers
killed, and eight wounded, and about sixty Soldiers killed and wounded.
Monsieur Calimote followed the Dutch Guards, with his Detachement of 600 Men,
whereof mention was made before, and after them the Regiment Cambon: And here
it was that Colonel Calimote received a Shot, of which he is since dead, and
several of his Officers were killed upon the place; Duke Schonbergh headed the
Dutch Foot-Guards, and the King the Inniskilling Horse; telling them, They
should be His Guards that Day. Some of the Irish Horse opposed the Dutch Foot,
who fought up to the middle in Water, and were almost born down, before some
Horse (which they long called for) could come up to their Relief: In passing
this Ford, Dr. Walker (Famous for the Siege of Derry) was killed.

The Brigade of Hanmer passed next another Ford, the Count de Nassau being at
the head of them, as Major General; and the Danes passed on their left,
Commanded by the Prince of Wirtembergh: After these passed the Horse of the
left Wing; but in the mean time some of the Enemies Squadrons (as before
mentioned) advanced and Attacked our Foot: And a Squadron of the Enemies Guard
du Corpse, pierced with great Vigor as far as a little Village where we lost
our great General, his Grace the Duke of Schonberg, who advanced thither to
observe the Enemies motion. Those that were about his Grace, had before done
all they could to persuade him to retire from thence, but they could not
prevail with him. He was killed with a Carbine shot, in the Neck, and three
Cuts over the Head, and one on his Face. Captain Foubert, who was next to him,
and had likewise received a wound in the Arm, got from his Horse to help the
Duke; but he died immediately without speaking a word.

By this time the King had got over the River; who in passing it with his
Horse, met with the like opposition. The Danish Horse once gave way, but the
King went himself, and brougt them up again; and at the head of the Horse
Charged the Enemy; who after some Resistance retired Fighting, Commanded by
Lieutenant General de la Hoquelle and Lieutenant General Hamilton, Monsieur de
Lauzun being with the body who made head against the Count de Schonberg, the
late King James himself no^ Engaging, but standing at the Rear of them, on a
rising Ground, out of harm^ way:

The Enemy retreated from Defile to Defile; our Horse pursuing them as far as
Duleek, where the King, with the Forces he had with them, joined those of the
Count de Schonberg.

The Enemy retired about 3 Miles farther, and there Posted themselves in a very
advantageous place; and the King followed them with his Horse and Dragoons, and
Orders were given to Attack them there; but it being very late, and the Fight
having lasted from 10 in the Morning 'till 9 at Night, his Majesty did not
think fit to engage the Troops any farter, but ordered the Horse and Dragoons
to remain in Arms all Night: He returned to Duleek, where the Foot Encampt: But
in the Night the Enemy retired in great Confusion; We took their Baggage, and
eight Pieces of Cannon.

July the 2d. the King sent Monsieur de la Meliouere, Brigadier-General, with a
Detachment of 300 Foot, and 1000 Horse, with 8 Pieces of Cannon, to invest
Drogheda: Being arrived there, the Governor received the first Summons with
great contempt; but the King sending him Word, That if they forced his Cannon
to be Fired on them, he would not give them any Quarter. This so frighted the
Governor, that having kept the Trumpeter some time, he returned Monsier de la
Melionier this Answer; That he would Surrender the Place upon fair
Capitulation, viz. To march out with Arms and Baggage, Colors Flying, etc. but
that otherwise he would defend the place to the last Extremity. Melonier sent
him Word, That his Orders were only to suffer them to march out without Arms;
and that he must quickly resolve whether he would accept of this Offer. In the
mean time Monsieur de la Meloniere had caused two Batteries to be raised, which
would be ready the next Morning by break of Day. But the Officers of the
Garrison, after having consulted together, resolved to yield; and the
Capitulation being Signed, they delivered up a Gate, and marched out about an
Hour after, between thirteen and fourteen hundred Men, and were conducted to
Athlone, the Officers being permitted to wear their Swords. After which,
Monsieur de la Meloniere gave Protections to a great many Papists, who expected
to have plundered, and marched to join the Army.

On Tuesday, immediately after the Defeat, the Late King James Fled to Dublin,
and came in there about 10 at Night, with about 200 Horse, all in disorder; and
about 12, the whole Body of the Irish Horse came into the City.

At Five the next Morning, being Wednesday, July the 2d. King James having sent
for the Irish Lord Mayor, and some principal Persons to the Castle, told them,
That he found all things against him; that in England he had an Army which
would have Fought, but they proved false, and deferted him; That here he had an
Army which was Loyal enough, but would stand by him: He was now necessitated to
provide for his safey; and that they should make the best Terms for themselves
that they could. He told his monial Servants, That he should have now no
farther occasion to keep such a Court as he had done, and that therefore they
were at Liberty to dispose of themselves: He desired them all to be kind to the
Protestant Inhabitants, and not to injure them, or this City; for though he
quitted it, he did not quit his Interest in it; and so with two or three in
Company he went to Bray, and along by the Sea to Waterford; having appointed
his Carriages to meet him another way. We hear he did not sleep 'till he got on
Shipboard; and having been once driven in again, is since clear gone off.

All this day, being Wednesday, nothing was to be seen in Dublin, but Officers
and Carriages, and the principal Persons of the Town, their Wives and Families
going away; others coming in dusty and weary, getting away as fast as they
could. About four in the Afternoon the Protestants were affrighted with the
appearance of the Irish Horse, which were drawn out of the City early in the
Morning, and which they hoped had been quite gone, entering into Town, followed
by the French and Irish Foot, in a full Body; but they only marched through the
Town to go farther; the Militia that kept the City followed them; only the
Governor remained: At last he resolyed to march also, and to drive two or
three hundred of the principal Prisoners before him; but while they were
preparing for this, a false Allarm was spread, that a Party of the English
being Landed at the Harbor, were just at the Towns end; it was too duskie to
disprove this by view, and they had not leisure to send a Messenger, but in
haste shifted for themselves.

The Protestants now began to look out, not knowing well in what Condition they
were in; but venturing to the Castle, they found Captain Farlow, who had been a
Prisoner there, keeping Garrison alone. Upon this, Captain Fitzgerald, and
several others, who had been Prisoners, went and stayed there all Night; but
still they were unsecure, having no Arms. Early next Morning, being Thursday,
the Protestants ran about to Roman Catholics Houses, demanding their Arms, who
being quite dispirited, delivered them without dispute. By Six in the Morning,
the Bishop of Mead, Dr. King, and other Principal Protestants, formed a
Committee in the Castle, and fixed a Protestant Militia; and sent away an
Express to the King, of the Towns being at Liberty. This Express found Him
Marching up to Dublin, in Two Lines, expecting to meet the Irish at Swords.
Till Afternoon, this Thursday, the Protestants did not hear a Word of the
English Army. But upon the having certain Account of the Approach of the
English Army, the Protestants ran about, saluting and embracing one an other,
and blessing God for this Wonderful Deliverance, as if they had been alive from
the Dead. At Eight that Night, one Troop of Dragoons came as a Guard to an
Officer, that came to take Charge of the Stores. It was impossible, the King
himself coming after this, could be welcomed with equal Joy, as this one Troop;
the Protestants hung about the Horses, and were ready to pull the Men off them,
as they Marched up to the Castle.

The next Morning, being Friday, July 4. The Duke of Ormond, and Monsieur
Overkirk, came in with Nine Troops of Horse; and the King being Encamped, by
Finglas, came on Sunday to St. Patricks Church, and heard a Sermon, Preached by
Dr. King, concerning the Power of God; of which, that which seemed to us
greatest upon Earth, mighty Armies, was a faint Shadow. The King went back to
His Camp to Dinner, not suffering any Soldiers to come into the City, except a
few for Guards.

By some Persons, in our Army, that have viewed the Dead, at the Boyne, I am
told, that there was not above Sixteen Hundred Killed, on both Sides, tho
perhaps you may hear of greater Numbers in England, which is a wonderful Thing,
that so small a loss should disperse the whole Irish Army, who seemed to be
blown away only by a Wind from God.

July the 5th. The Town of Wexford Declared for His Majesty; the Manner of it
was thus, Colonel Butler, Lord Lieutenant of the whole County, hearing that
the Late King James was gone by; on Wednesday last, he posted after Him, and
from Duncannon, wrote to his Son to come to him, and to follow the Late King
James to France: He wrote also another Letter to Captain Kelly, to come away
with his Company, and to set the Castle of Wexford on Fire, which was under his
Command; but this Letter falling into the Hands of an English Merchant, where
Colonel Butler was Quartered; he did not deliver it, but told the Captain how
he was sent for, concealing that part of the Letter about burning the Castle:
And so soon as he and his Company were gone, the Protestants there rose,
disarmed the Papists, and seized the Castle; and at their humble Request, by
Two Messengers, His Majesty sent, some few Days after, a Regiment, with Arms
and Ammunition to secure them.

CHAP. XII.
The King's Declaration, Pardoning ihe Irish Commonality. Cavan and Slego,
Surrender. Lonford, and Lord Longford's House burnt. Earl Tyrone displaced at
Waterford, and Lacy made Governor. Four Hundred Head of Cattle taken from the
Raparees. Clonmell quitted, and Sarsefield, with Five Thousand Men, retires
from before it, toward Lymerick. Waterford Summoned by the King, begins to
Capitulate, Surrenders on Articles. Lord Dover and Howard Submit. Lymerick
possessed by the French. The King on his way for England, alters His
Resolutions. Captain Burk Surrenders Duncannon. Douglas and Kirk, join the
Army. Yaughal Surrendered. The Army before Lymerick.

JUly 9. This Morning Early His Majesty Decamped from Finglas, to a place
called Cromlin, three Miles on the Southside of Dublin. This Day was Published
at the Camp, Their Majesty's Declaration, which follows;

THE Declaration OF WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland; To all the People of the Kingdom of Ireland, to whom it
may concern.
William Rex,

AS it has pleased Almighty God to bless Our Arms, in this Kingdom, with a
late Victory over our Euemies, at the Boyne; and with the Possession of Our
Capital City of Dublin, and with the General Oispersion of all that did oppose
Us: We are now in so happy a prospect of our Affairs, and of extinguishing the
Rebellion of this Kingdom; That we hold it reasonable to think of mercy, and to
have a Compassion upon those whom We judge to have been seduced; Wherefore,
We do hereby Declare, We shall take into Our Royal Protection all poor
Laborers, Common Soldiers, Country Farmers, Ploughmen and Cottiers,
whatsoever; as also, all Citizens, Townsmen, Tradesmen, and Artificers, who
either remained at Home, or having fled from their Dwellings, shall by the
First Day of August next, repair to their usual Places of Abode; Surrendering
up what Arms they have, to such Justices of the Peace, as are, or shall be
appointed by Us, not only to receive the same, but also to Register the
Appearance of such of the said Persons as shall come in, and submit to Our
Authority. For Our Royal Intention is, and We do hereby Declare, That We will
not only Pardon all those poor People, as to their Lives and Liberties, who
shall come in by the time aforesaid, for all Violences they have done or
committed by the Command of their Leaders, during the War, but We do promise to
secure them in their Goods, their Stocks of Cattle, and all their Chattels
personal whatsoever, Willing and Requiring them to come in; and where they were
Tenants, there to preserve the Harvest of Grass and Corn for the supply of
Winter. But forasmuch as many of them had a legal Right to the Tenancy of
several Lands, some holden from Protestants, and some held from Popish
Proprietors, who have been concerned in the the Rebellion agaiust us: Our Will
and Pleasure is, that all those Tenants who held from Our good Protestant
Subjects, do pay their Rents to their respective Landlords: And that the
Tenants of all those who have been concerned in the present Rebellion against
us, do keep their Rent in their hands until they have notice from the
Commissioners of Our Revenue, unto whom they are to account for the same. And
as we do hereby strictly forbid all Violence, Rapine, and Molestation, to any
who shall thus come in, and remain Obedient to us; so for those of this, or any
other Rank or Quality, who are already in Our Quarters, and within our Power,
and Obedient to Us, We do hereby charge and require that they be not molested
in any sort, without Our particular Command. For the desperate Leaders of the
present Rebellion, who have violated those Laws, by which this Kingdom is
united, and inseperably annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, who have
called in the French, who have Authorized all Violences and Depredations
against the Protestants, and who rejected the Gracious Pardon We offered them
in Our Proclamation of the Twenty second of February, 1688. As We are now, by
God's great Favor, in condition to make them sensible of their Errors, so are
We resolved to leave them to the event of War, unless by great and manifest
demonstrations, We shall be convinced they deserve Our Mercy, which We shall
never refuse, to those who are truly Penitent.

Given at Our Royal Camp at Finglass, near Dublin, the seventh day of July,
1690. In the Second Year of Our Reign.
July 11. The King set out from Cromlin to Kilkenny, with a part of his Army;
General Douglas, with another part, went some days before toward Athlone; and
a third by way of Bray, toward Wexford.

July 14. His Majesty Encamped at Inchiquin, 21 Miles from Dublin, where News
was brought to the Camp, That Cavan and Sligoe had voluntarily Surrendered; and
that the Irish Villains, called Raparees, had Burnt Longford, and the Lord
Longford's House.

July 15. His Majesty, with the Army, Encamped at Castle-Dermote.

On the 16th, We Marched to Caterlough, which was but five Miles.

On the 17th, We Encamped about Kells, leaving the Road to Kilkenny, that City
being above four Miles out of our way; here, by some Deserters come into our
Camp, we understood, That the Earl of Tyrconnel (who, since King James's
leaving of Ireland, styles himself, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland) having some
Jealousy of the Earl of Tyrone, Governor of Waterford, sent for him to
Lymerick, and made Old Colonel Lacy Governor in his stead, and that the Enemy
had in it about 1600 Men. Colonel Eppinger, who was sent from Dublin, with a
small Party, by Sea, toward Wexford (that being Deserted, as you have heard)
took Possession of the Place, and secured a Garrison in it; he sound a
considerable quantity of Provisions there, and his Men, a little after, took
400 Head of Cattle from the Raparees, who had taken them a little time before
from the Country People, on whom they have, ever since the Battle at the Boyne,
committed many Outrages, and done much Mischief.

July 19. We came to a place called Bennets-bridge, within 16 Miles of
Waterford, where we Encamped. Here we understood, that on the 18th the Enemy
quitted Clonmel, notwithstanding it is a very considerable Pass, lately
strengthened by the addition of several new Fortifications, and Major General
Sarsfield was Posted there with 5000 Irish; but on the approach of our Army in
its Neighborhood, he retired toward Lymerick. This day four French Officers
came over to us, they give an account, That the Earl of Tyrconnel, and the
Count De Lausun are Fortifying of Lymerick, the remains of the Army being in
that Neighborhood, but in a very ill condition, having lost all their Baggage.
This day His Majesty Dined with the Duke of Ormond, at the Castle of Kilkenny.

On the 20th, We Decamped from Bennets-Bridge, and marched about seven Miles,
to a place called Rossen-narrow, and the next day we came to Carick. His
Majesty commanded a Trumpet to be sent to Summon Waterford, requiring them to
Surrender the Place: They desired time till the next Morning, when they sent
out Articles, but the King not approving thereof, let them know, that they
should go out with their own Arms and Baggage only, and that if they did not
accept thereof, but stayed till they were Attacked, he would give them no
Quarter. However they sent some of their Scruples again the next day, and Major
General Kirk was sent thither with five Regiments, and several Pieces of
Cannon, to answer them; the next day in the Afternoon, the Capitulations were
Signed, and the next day after, the Garrison Marched out with their Arms and
Baggage, the number of 1600, and were conducted to Mallow, 12 Miles in their
way to Lymerick: The Garrison would not have had so good Terms, only His
Majesty had Compassion on 300 Protestant Families in the Town. Several of the
Irish Officers staid behind in the Town, and prayed His Majesty's Protection.
The same day, the Lord Dover, and Lord George Howard, with several others,
submitted themselves to the King. The Garrison of Athlone, upon the approach of
Lieutenant General Douglas, broke down their Bridge, Burnt part of the Town,
and retired into the Castle. The French, when they first came to Lymerick, took
Possession of it with their Infantry, under the Command of the Count De Lausun,
and they would not suffer any Irish to come into the Town, but turned out the
Garrison they found there; so that the Lord Tyrconnel, and General Sarsfield,
with their Irish, were forced all to Encamp without the Town.

July 25. The King viewed the Walls of Waterford, without entering into the
Town, and returned back to the Camp, which was about Three Miles distant, where
all things were ready for an Attack. His Majesty Dined in the Camp, and then
returned to Carick that Night. From Waterford His Majesty sent a Summons to the
Governor of Duncannon-Fort, Captain Michael Burk, offering the same
Capitulation which had been granted to Waterford, and letting him know, if he
refused, or delayed to comply, he must expect no Mercy. He insisted upon six
days, to consult the Lord Tyrconnel, which being refused, he declared he would
take that time, whereupon the Cannon was ordered down, in order to an Attack;
but the next day, being the 26th in the Evening, Sir Cloudsly Shovel, appearing
with 16 Frigates in view, it so terrisied them, that the Governor wrote to
Major General Kirk, that they would accept of what had been offered; which His
Majesty being made acquainted with, he was pleased to Order, That they should
still have the benefit of the Articles that were at first proposed, and the
Fort was accordingly Surrendered, whereby we are possessed of a very
advantageous Post, which commands the River of Waterford.

On the 27. His Majesty left the Camp, and set forward for Dublin, resolving to
return immediately for England.

On the 29. The King arrived at Chapple-Izod. His Majesty having resolved to
Besiege Lymerick, where the Enemy have drawn what force they can together, sent
Order to Lieutenant General Douglas to March from Athlone, and join the Count
De Solmes; and the better to dispose of things for the pushing on the Siege,
His Majesty altered His Resolutions of going immediately for England, and put
off His Journey for some time.

On the 27. We Marched from Carick, under the Command of the Count De Solmes;
His Majesty, as aforementioned, being gone for Dublin, and came this day to the
Town of Clonmel, which is Eight very long Miles; this Place seems to be very
strongly situated, and doubtless might have held out for some time, had it been
Garrisoned by any but Irish Men. The 28. We Marched seven Miles farther; And
the next day, being the 29th. We Encamped at a place called Goolin-Bridge,
which is about 23 Miles from Lymerick: Here, as soon as we arrived, we had the
confirmation, that the French had possessed themselves of the City of Lymerick,
and that they would not suffer any of the Irish Forces to come into it, having
turned out those few that were in Garrison there.

August the first, Some Parties of Horse marched from our Camp, and advanced
within sight of the Enemy at Lymerick, who, on the approach of these advanced
Parties, were in great consternation; and they brought us word, that the gross
of the Irish Army, consisting of about 25000 Men, were (upon the hearing of the
advance of our Army) retired from beyond the Shannon.

August 2. Advice was brought into the Camp, of the Surrender of the Town of
Youghal, the manner as follows:

The Garrison that Marched from Waterford, according to their Articles of
Capitulation, were conducted as far as the Town of Youghal, which is about 14
Miles, by 50 of Colonel Levison's Dragoons, under the Command of one Captain
Pownal, who having some Communication with the Governor of the Place (who was
before Governor of Carick-fergus) he told him the certain ruin he would bring
upon himself and Garrison, if he thought of holding out, and therefore advising
him to Surrender; the Governor desired he would wait his Answer till Ten at
Night, at which time, by agreement, he Marched out with Three Companies of
Foot, and gave him Possession of the Town: Captain Pownal being entered, having
first searched for Mines, found in the Place 14 Cannon mounted, and two without
Carriages, (but neither Powder nor Ball) 350 Barrels of Oats, 215 Stone of
Wool, and several other sorts of Provisions.

August the third, A Deserter came into our Camp from Lymerick, and told us,
That yesterday Morning, the second Instant, he saw the French March out of Town
with Eight Fieldpieces; and that the common report was, That they were going
to Galway, to Embark there for France, that being a more convenient Port for
their taking Shipping than Lymerick; Galway being but Nine Miles from the Mouth
of the Bay, and Lymerick is Sixty: And that as soon as the French had quitted
the Place, and were marched out, the Three Regiments of the Irish, under the
Command of one Colonel Lutterel, marched in, and took Possession of it. He
could not tell the certain number of the French Ships that were in the River of
Lymerick, but says, he saw only Three Provision-Ships at the Key; and that the
Rebels in the Place were very much disheartened, being in little hopes of
farther Supply. The Regiments, that were sent to Reduce the Town of Waterford,
and Fort of Duncannon, under the Command of Major General Kirk, joined us on
Saturday; and Lieutenant General Douglas lies Encamped within Five Miles of us.

August 5. An Account was brought to the Camp, That a mixed Body of the Enemies,
and Rabble Rapparees together, were gone from the County of Cork, to Plunder
the Town of Youghal, which a Troop of our Dragoon; lately possessed themselves
of; upon which, befides some Companies of Foot that were ordered thither some
days since, a Detachment of Six hundred Horse, from our Camp, are sent to
oppose them.

On the 6. We Decamped from Coolen-Bridge, and Marched in Two Bodies toward
Lymerick, the Infantry taking their way by a place called Sallaweed, and the
Chavalry by Cullen.

On the 7. We came to Carickellish, which is Six Miles from Lymerick; and here
our Horse and Foot joined in one Body again; and in the Evening some small
Detached Parties were sent to observe the Posture and Motions of the Enemy;
but, on the approach of our Men, the Enemy retired in great precipitation from
place to place, and in the Night burnt a great many small Houses and Cabbins
within Three Miles of the Town.

On the 8. At One in the Morning, His Majesty sent out Nine hundred Horse, and
Two hundred Foot, under the Command of the Earl of Portland, and Brigadeer
Stewart, etc. who advanced within Cannon-Shot of the Town, notwithstanding the
opposition made by Three Regiments of the Enemies Foot, one of Horse, and
another of Dragoons, who stood but one Firing, though they had the covert of the
Hedges; through which they Fired. About Four hours after, this Detachment
returned to our Camp, and gave the King an account of the Posture the Enemy
were in: And about Seven a Clock His Majesty went himself with a fresh Party of
200 select Horse, who approached within Two Miles of the Town.

October. 9. At Five this Morning our whole Army Decamped, Colonel Earl leading
the Van with 200 Horse, and 1000 Chosen Foot. Upon our approach we found the
Enemy drawn up within Two Miles of the City of Lymerick; their Horse made a
show of Resistance, and stood our first Charge, but soon afterward gave way,
when they threw themselves behind the Hedges, and Fired so from thence, that
our Horse could not come to them: Upon which we brought some small Field Pieces
to Fire upon them, and about One a Clock Colonel Earl Attacked them with his
Foot, who run on with that Bravery, though the Enemy made a great Fire through
the Hedges, that within Two hours time they possessed themselves of Two
advantageous Posts, called Ireton Fort, and the Old Kirk. Then the Besieged
began to Fire from the Town with their great Guns, which killed us some Men,
but in all this days Action we had not above 35 Killed and Wounded, though above
250 of the Enemy were killed in their several Retreats, among which were
several Officers of Note. Betwixt six and seven in the Evening His Majesty
ordered a Trumpeter to be sent with a Summons to the Town. The Trumpeter was
sent back with this Answer from Monsieur Boiseleau the Governor, That as King
James had entrusted him with that Garrison, he would recommend himself to the
Prince of Orange by a vigorous Defense. About Eight at Night the King went to
his Camp, having been on Horseback from Four in the Morning, giving the
necessary Orders, and exposing himself amidst the greatest of Dangers.

October. 10. Early this Morning Lieutenant General Gnikle, and Major General
Kirk, with 5000 Horse, Foot and Dragoons, Marched over the Ford at Annaghbeg, a
place about Two Miles above the Town, where 11 of the Enemies Regiments of
Horse and Foot were ready to maintain the Pass, but when our Forces came, they
found the Enemy had quitted their Station, having retired in the Night; here
our Foot were forced to wade up to the middle in Water. About Eight the King
went over in Person, and ordered Three Regiments of Foot, with some Pieces of
Cannon to be Posted there.

The 11. was spent in visiting the several Posts, and giving the necessary
Orders about the Siege.

The 12. His Majesty Commanded Brigadeer Stewart, with a Detachment, and Four
Pieces of Cannon, to go early this Morning and Attack Castle Connel, which is
of considerable Strength, situated on the Shannon, about Four Miles from
Lymerick: There were in it above 140 Men, Commanded by Captain Barnwel, who had
refused to Surrender upon the Summons sent him the Night before, but no sooner
saw the Cannon but submitted at Discretion. The same day fell out the unhappy
accident of surprising our Cannon by Sarsfield, who burst Two of them. This
accident hindered us several days in our carrying on the Siege of Lymerick.

On the 14. An Express came to our Camp from Youghal, giving an account, That
the Garrison there consisting of 50 Foot, and 36 Dragoons, hearing what
mischief the Raparees did near the Castle-Martyr; the Officers that Commanded
drew out both the Horse and Foot, and Marched to Attack them, but the Foot not
being able to March so fast as the Dragoons, the latter met near Castle-Martyr
300 Rapparees, Horse and Foot, and immediately Routed them, killing 60, and
taking 17 Prisoners, and the Foot being come up, they Summoned the Castle,
which Surrendered upon liberty to go to Cork.

August 16. This Morning was Published a Proclamation in behalf of the Clergy
and their Tithes; and most part of the day was spent in concerting Matters
abous the Siege of Lymerick.

On the 17. The whole day was spent in making the necessary Preparations, and
getting all things ready for the opening of the Trenches which in the Evening
was put in Execution; the Trenches were opened with several Battalions,
consisting of English, French, and Danish Infantry, Commanded by the Generals,
Prince Wirtemberg, Kirk, Petteau, and Bellasis. We advanced this Night about
300 Paces, and took Two Redoubts from the Enemy; from whence they might have
disturbed our Workmen.

The 18. About Ten at Night, the Trenches were Relieved by Lieutenant General
Douglas, my Lord Sidney, and Count Nassau, with 7 Battallions of Foot; and this
Night we made our regular approaches toward another strong Redoubt of the
Enemies.

The 19. The Trenches were Relieved by the Pr. of Wirtemberg, Maj. Genesis Kirk,
Petteau, and Sir H. Bellasis, Brigadeer, and we continued our approaches
toward the said Redoubt, which the King gave orders should be Attackt the next
day.

The 20. The Trenches were Relieved by Lieut. Genesis Douglas, Sidney, Nassau, and
Stewart; the Signal was given by Three Guns, about Two in the Afternoon, when
our Men that were Detached for this Service to the Number of 150 (choice select
Men) besides Officers, immediately fell on, and with extraordinary Courage
entered the Fort, and drove out the Enemy, killing about Forty of them.

The 21. We carried on our Trenches, and finished them to that degree, so as to
hinder any more Sallies.

The 22. We raised a Battery of Eight Guns, and 24 pound Ball, and Two of 18,
against the Enemies high Towers, from whence they Fired upon our Men, and we
have quite levelled them.

The 23. This Morning one of Gilmoy's Troopers came over to us, and brought
with him a Boy and Four good Horses. This Afternoon we Played furiously into
the Town with our Bombs, etc. which Fired the Town in several places, one fell
into their great Magazine of Hay, which was consumed, and several Houses burnt,
the Fire lasting there about six hours; another set Fire to a place near the
Church, which was not consumed till Five the next Morning, and as that was
quenched, we Fired another place, which was Blown up by the Enemy.

The 24. This Morning our Guns Fired very briskly at the Walls, but being too
far off did little Execution, so that Two new Batteries were this day made,
within Eighty Paces of the Wall, and our Trenches were carried on within
Pistol-shot of the Counterscarp; and our Guns were carried this Night down to
the said Batteries, first against the Wall of Eight half Cannon; the other of
Two 18 Pounders, against the Kings-Island.

The 25. This Morning, about break of day, we began to Fire from our new
Batteries against the Wall, but it Rained so hard till Three in the Afternoon,
that our Men could not work the Guns; however, on any intermission of the Rain,
our Guns played violently against the walls and from Three, we Fired at least
300 Shot, with good Success against the Walls.

The 26. We widened the Breach we had made the day before in the Wall of the
Town, and beat down part of the Enemies Pallisado's on the Counterscarp. This
Night we set Fire to the Town again, which Burnt very vehemently.

The 27. The King ordered an Attack to be made on the Counterscarp, which was
begun about Three in the Afternoon; a Detached Party of Granadeers made the
onset, and was seconded by other Detachments, who went on with that Heat and
Courage, that having gained the Counterscarp, and a Fort which the Enemy had
under the Walls, instead of lodging themseves there, as they were ordered to
do, they mounted the Counterscarp, following the Irish that fled that way, and
some were entering into the Town; but the Enemy being entrenched behind the
Breach, and having Planted Cannon against it, they were cut off. The Fight
lasted Three hours, during which the Enemy were still supplied with fresh Men.
What Men we have lost in these several Actions we cannot precisely say, but by
the best computation its thought we may have lost about 700 killed and wounded,
during the beginning of the Siege.

The 28. At Night we advanced our Trenches about ^0 yards, notwithstanding it
had Rained most part of the day; it continued to Rain all this Night, and all
the next Day to the 30 th, almost without Intermission; so that our M^n waded
above their middle in the Trenches: On which, after a Council of War being
called, His Majesty thought fit to give Order for the raising the Siege.

The 30. In the Afternoon the Cannon and heavy Baggage were sent from the Camp.

On the 31. Five Thousand Horse being ordered for a Reer-Guard to Repress any
Sallies, the whole Army Decamped, and marched off in very good Order, and
without any disturbance from the Enemy, toward Clonmel.

September. 1, 2, 3, and 4. The Army, with the Artillery, continued in their
motion, taking very slow Marches.

Sept. 5. We came to Typerary, which is about Twenty Miles from Lymerick. His
Majesty having given the necessary Orders, disposed the Army, and named the
Lord Viscount Sidney, and Thomas Coningsby, Esquire to be Lords Justices of
Ireland, left the Camp very early in the Morning, accompanied with the Prince
of Denmark to Waterford, and Dined with Colonel Brewer, the Governor; and, in
the Afternoon, the Wind proving fair, they Embarked at Duncannon-Fort, and
immediately Sailed out of the Bay, accompanied with Two Men of War, Three
Yatches, and several small Tenders.

September. 6. This day several Regiments of Horse and Foot, under the Command of
Lieutenant General Douglas, Marched from the Camp, toward the North.

Sept. 7. Monsieur Forest went this Morning with 900 Horse and Foot, and Four
Cannon, and took a considerable Post called Kilmalock, which intercepts the
Passage betwixt Cork and Lymerick.

Sept. 9, 10, 11, 12. We lay quiet in our Camp, and nothing of moment occurred.

Sept. 13. This Morning the Major General Scravemore and Teteau, Marched from
our Camp with 3000 Horse and Foot toward Mallow. The Deserters that came into
our Camp last Night, assured us, That the Irish were falling into miserable
Necessities, and that they are divided amongst themselves.

Sept 14. Early this Morning we Decamped under the Command of our General, the
Count De Solmes, and Marched to a place called Cashil, the Sea of an
Archbishop, near which place we Encamped.

The next day, being the 15th, an Account was brought from a Captain in Colonel
Levison's Dragoons, that he had, with his Troop, fallen upon 1400 Rapparees,
that were coming from Cork to Lismore, and that he had killed 40, and taken 3
Prisoners.

Sept. 16. Early this Morning 100 Detached Horse were sent out to look after a
Party of Rapparees, who had killed three of our Forragers in this Neighborhood.

Sept. 17. This day it was confirmed by several Persons that came to our Camp
from Lymerick, That the French are all gone from Galway, and that the Irish are
in a very ill condition, not knowing how to Subsist this Winter.

Sept. 18. This day advice came to our Camp, That Major General Scravemore and
Teteau, who Marched from hence on the 13th Instant, with 2000 Horse and Foot
from Typerary, sent Colonel Donep with a Detachment to Burn the Bridge of
Malla, and to view the Castle, which having performed, he returned to the
Generals the 17th.

Sept. 20. Sarsfield having passed the Shannon with Fourteen Regiments of
Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, and Three Field Pieces, Marched to Bir, an open
Village, and Attacked Sir L. Parsons House, in which were Eighty Men, who Fired
so briskly, that they killed about 100 of the Enemy; upon which, and the news
of the approach of our Forces, under the Command of Lieutenant General Douglas,
and Sir J. Lanier, they retired in disorder. This Afternoon the Count De
Solmes, our General, left the Camp, and is gone to Dublin, in his way to
England.

Sept. 21. This Morning Two Persons came into our Camp from Galway, who confirm
the former Account we had of Tyrconnel and Lausun's being gone off with the
French Forces for France, of whom diverse are left Sick in the Suburbs of that
Place.

Sept. 22. This Morning Advice was brought to the Camp, That (yesterday being
the 21st) the Earl of Marlborough, with the English Forces, and the whole
Fleet, arrived before the Harbor of Cork, where they Anchored. Upon which,
Major General Scravemore and Teteau, Marched to join them with 1200 Horse and
Dragoons, and Two Battallions of Danes, who were followed by some Dutch and
French.

Here we shall leave the Camp at Cashil, and give an account of the Actions of
the Army, Commanded by the Earl of Marlborough

Sept. 23. This day the greatest part of the Army Landed at Passage, between
Four and Five in the Morning, and the rest in the Afternoon, and at the same
time the light Artillery were put on Shore.

Sept. 24. About Six hundred Seamen, Gunners, and Carpenters voluntary went on
Shore, and were immediately Detached to be employed in Mounting and Placing the
Cannon to Batter the Town; and the whole Army Marched, and Encamped within a
Mile and half of the Town: And this Evening 1000 Men were Detached, and ordered
to possess themselves of several advantageous Posts, within Musket shot of the
Town, which the Enemy, upon their approach, soon quitted.

Sept. 25. This day the Camp advanced within Musket Shot of the South, and the
Danes did the like on the North.

The 26. we advanced our Guards into the Ruins of the Suburbs, and played upon
the Old Fort, from Two Batteries.

The 27. We made a Breach in the East part of the Wall, from a Battery of Two
24 Pounders, and Three of 18 Pounders. Toward the Evening the Enemy beat a
Parley, and sent out an Officer to Capitulate, and Hostages were exchanged, but
the Enemy not agreeing to the Terms proposed.

The 28. In the Morning Four Regiments were appointed under the Command of
Brigadeer Churchil, to pass over to an Island lying near the Wall, where the
Breach was made, which they performed with great Courage, passing through the
Water which at low Ebb was up to their Armpits. The Granadeers Commanded by
the Lord Colchester; having the Van, Marched forward, exposed to all the
Enemies Fire, through the Island, within 20 yards of the Wall of the Town, and
possessed themselves of an House under the Wall The Volunteers who went on with
this first Detachment, were the Duke of Grafton (who was Mortally Wounded) the
Lord O Bryon, Colonel Greenvile, the Captains Cornwall, Leighton, Neville,
Fairbone, and several other Sea Officers. Immediately after this, the Enemy
beat a Parley, but my Lord Marleborough would not allow them any other
Conditions than to be Prisoners of War, which they yielded to; and the
Capitulation was Signed. Accordingly the same Night 200 Men entered into the Old
Fort, which is very Strong: And this Morning, being the 29th, we took
Possession of the Town. The Garrison which consisted of between 4 and 5000 Men,
being made Prisoners of War. We have not lost in all this Siege above Fifty
Men, and some few Wounded.

Immediately after the Articles of Cork was Signed, 500 Horse was sent with a
Summons to Kin-sale, upon the appearance of whom, the Governor presently gave
Orders to set Fire to the Town in several parts; which as soon as done, they
all ran to the Old Fort; but our Men espying it, got in and quenched it before
it had Burnt one House; after which, the Old Fort was Summoned to Surrender,
but the Governor returned Answer, That he would Defend it to the last Man. Upon
which an account was sent to the Earl of Marleborough to acquaint him with the
State of things; who Marched with the rest of the Forces, October. 1. from Cork
to Five Mile Bridge.

October. 2. The Earl of Marleborough, etc. Arrived before Kin-sale, and toward
the Evening the Forces Encamped, and took their Posts about the New Fort; and
Major General Teteau was ordered with 800 Men to Attack the Old Fort.

October. 3. The Major General having passed the River in the Night, a little
after Daybreak he Stormed the Fort, making a show of Attacking it where it was
weakest; while in the mean time he caused a Detachment to make an Assault in
another place, where the Enemy least apprehended it, which sueceeded so well,
that our Men all at once gained the little Bastions. At the same time several
Barrels of Powder took Fire, and blew up Fifty of the Enemy. Instead of 150 we
found in it 450 Men, of whom about 220 were killed and blown up, and the rest
made Prisoners of War. The Governor, with several other Officers were found
Slain upon the Ramparts. Our Soldiers got a great deal of Plunder. My Lord
Marleborough then sent a Summons to the New Fort, who answered, That it would
be time enough to Capitulate a Month hence, upon which, my Lord ordered
Batteries to be raised against it; and on the 5th we opened our Trenches, and
on the 9th had advanced them to the Counterscarp, but the ill Weather hindered
the coming up of our Cannon till the 11th, when part of it arrived. The 12th in
the Morning Six Pieces were Mounted at the Danes Atrack, and Two Mortars at the
English, which Fired all that day.

The 13th, Two 24 Pounders were placed on the same Battery: The Danes, on their
side, had made a reasonable Breach, and the Night following, to disturb the
Enemy, they made a false Attack.

The 15th the Cannon continued to Play all the Morning, and every thing was
prepared to have laid our Galleries over the Ditch, but at One a Clock the
Enemy beat a Parley, and desired Hostages might be exchanged, which being done,
the Articles of Surrender were agreed on, and Signed about Midnight, by which
the middle Bastion was to be delivered up the next Morning; and the Garrison,
consisting of about 1200 Men, Marched out the next day after with their Arms
and Baggage, and to be conducted to Lymerick. We have had in the Attack of this
Place about 250 Men killed and wounded.

FINIS.

