THE HISTORY OF Reynard the Fox, AND REYNARDINE his Son. IN TWO PARTS.

With Morals to each Chapter, explaining what appears Doubtful or Allegorical:
and every Chapter illustrated with a curious Device, or Picture, representing
to the Eye all the material Passages. Written by an eminent Statesman of the
German Empire, and since done into English, Dutch, French, Italian, etc.

Printed for the Booksellers of London and Westminster.



THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Kind READER,
IN this small History, under the Tables or Stories of Birds and Beasts, you
will find things not only pleasant but advantageous to the Improvement of your
Understanding, to a degree, that you may read Men as well as Books, by their
Actions deciphered in it: Here you may see Policy, Deceit, Wisdom, Power,
Strength, and many other Things lively set forth; and by the Events and
Success, whether Good or Bad, judge accordingly of those that use them, whether
they tend to honest or evil Purposes.

Here, as in a Mirror, the politic Statesman may see his Counterfeit; the
flattering Parasite how to carry himself even, and sail with all Winds; the
Powerful and Mighty, how weak it is to rely wholly on Strength, when they have
a subtle Enemy to deal with; and those that trust fawning Friendship, are
convinced, that in Adversity but few will stand by them: and a number of other
Things is contained in it, suiting the States and Conditions of all sorts of
People.

It is a Book that has been printed in most European Languages, as, Dutch,
French, Italian, etc. and that other Nations, who have given it high Encomiums
and Applause; it being, originally, written by an Ancient Statesman of the
German Empire, to show some Men their Follies, and correct the Vices of the
Times he lived in: Therefore receive it not as a Trifle, but as a Work of
Weight and Moment, which cost much sound Judgment and Labor in Compiling, and
being done into Englisi, it varies little from the Original: However, as it is,
I recommend it to you, in hopes you will find as much Pleasure and Advantage in
Reading and well Weighing it as I did.

Your Friend, and Humble Servant, D. P.

The History of Reynard the Fox. The First Part.
CHAP. I.
How Lion summoned all the Beasts of the Forest to the Annual Feast of
Pentecost, to be held at his Royal Palace of Sanden; with the several
Complaints there made against Reynard the Fox, etc.



WHen the Sun returned to rescue the drooping Earth from the cold Embraces of
Winter, and clothed each Tree and Field in a pleasant Livery of Green,
enameled over with fragrant Flowers of various Colors; then it was, the noble
Lion, King of Beasts, sent out his Royal Mandates to all his Subjects, the
Inhabitants of Woods, Forests, and Fields, to attend him at his Royal Palace of
Sanden, there to celebrate the annual Feast of Pentecost: Which was no sooner
signified to 'em, that it was his Pleasure they should give their Attendance,
without any Excuse or Delay, but they stocked thither in great Numbers, (as
well to show their Obedience, as to avoid his Displeasure) at the Time
appointed; and being called over, none was found wanting but the Fox; who,
conscious of Guilt for the many Injuries he had done, kept close in his Den, as
fearing they would make such just Complaints against him, as might endanger his
Life: Nor were his Fears vain, or suggested; for the King with the Queen on his
right Hand, and the Leopard, his Kinsman, on the left, being feated on the
Throne, under the Canopy of a spacious Oak, and Silence being commanded, he
proceeded to commend them for their ready Obedience, in giving such exact and
punctual Attendance; but missing the Fox, he wondered how he alone should
neglect being there at this so solemn a Meeting, since he had always held him
as a Friend, in high Esteem; which made them enquire about his Welfare,
supposing some Sickness or Misfortune had befell him: But while his Wonder
lasted, Sir Isgrim, the Wolf, stood up and accused him in this manner:

My most Gracious Sovereign Lord, I well know, that it is neither Sickness or
any Illhap, that makes Reynard decline appearing before your Majesty, with the
rest of your Subjects; but his great Guilt for the many Outrages and Violences
he has committed against a number here present, whose just Complaints he fears
will be laid against him, to bring him to deserved Punishment and Disgrace, for
abusing not only us, but your Majesty, in condemning your Orders and Commands,
notwithstanding your Clemency toward him heretofore, and the many Favors
you have heaped upon him; and particularly, as to the great Injury he has done me
and my Family, I have brought many to testify it, and which, being plainly
proved, I doubt not of your Majesty's Consent to Redress and Revenge my Wrongs.
Then thus, Dread Sovereign it was, My Wife and Children being at home, and
basking at their Ease, whilst I was ranging abroad, Reynard coming that way,
entered my House forcibly, against my Wife's Consent, and after many Scofflings
and Tauntings at her, and my young Ones, in a scornful kind of sporting manner,
whisking up his Tail, he so bepiss'd their Eyes, that by the stink and
sharpness of his Urine, they immediately became blind, and have ever since
continued so, to the great Grief and Sorrow of me and my poor Wife: And although
a Day was set that he should come to answer for this Injury, and the Book was
tendered him to swear, whether he was Guilty of it, or not; yet he refused to
do it, in Contempt of your Majesty's Command and Royal Authority. Many more
Injuries I could reckon up, as diverse noble Beasts here present can testify;
but they are so many, and grievous, that should I tell 'em all, they would tire
your Patience, and discompose your Majesty with too great an Anger: and
therefore expecteing the Justice of the Law, for what I have related, and more
particularly for the Shame and Villainy he offered my Wife, which in this Place
I am unwilling to mention, I shall at this Time say no more, lest I should seem
too tedious to your Grace.

He had no sooner ended, but Curtis the Hound, (formerly a Lady's Lap-dog, but
turned off when French Spanels came into Favor) in a pitious Tone, began to
yel'p out his Complaint against the Fox, saying, May it please your Majesty,
Though I was brought up tenderly, lay warm, and fared sumptuously at my Lady's
Table every Day, yet, losing my Mistress's Favor, to make room for a French
Cur, I was thrust out of Doors in a cold Winter, and forced to ramble up and
down till almost starved; but at last Fortune turned a little favorable, and
gave me a good Chance to find a Pudding; which, though Reynard knew it was all I
had to live on, he violently took it from me, so that through Cold and Hunger, as
your Highness may plainly see, I am almost starved to death; and therefore I
demand Justice against him.

Sir Tibert, the Cat, hearing this, and being akin to Reynard, in a Rage
started out of the Throng, and humbly besought his Majesty's Leave to speak;
which the King granting, he proceeded in this wise:

May it please my Sovereign Lord, I own that grievous Complaints are made
against my Kinsman Reynard, in his absence; yet were their Actions narrowly
searched into, who make the Complaints, they would appear worse to your
Majesty, than what they lay to the Fox's Charge: For though I pretend not in
every thing to vindicate him, yet thus much I must say, touching the Accusation
of this scoundrel Hound, If Reynard took the Pudding from him, he only deceived
the Deceiver; for this Thief, my Liege, stole it from me after I had ventured
my Life for it in a Mill, by taking it thence whilst the Miller was tumbling a
handsome Wench on the Sacks; and he meeting me before I could convey it to my
Storehouse, by purposely crossing the Way upon me, without a Word speaking,
took it by Violence from me: Besides, this is long since, and seeing it was
most properly mine, and I forgive my Kinsman, there can be no just ground of
Indictment against him upon his Accusation, since according to the old Proverb,
To deceive the Deceiver, is no Deceit. And further, if, without offending, I
might produce Evidence, I doubt not but to prove the Wolf's Accusation
malicous, and to clear the Fox in all Points.

At these last Words, the Panther rising from his Seat with a composed
Countenance, said; Sir Tibert, you are carried too far by the Bonds of
Friendship, in Vindication of your Kinsman, more than he deserves, since most
know him to be a Theif and a Bloodsucker, a Dettroyer of the King's peaceable
Subjects, and a Hater of them all, making it his Study how to bring them into
Mischief, and then his Pastime to insult over, and devour such as are too
feeble for him, or not wife enough to shun his Craftiness; a Person altogether
regardless of the King's Honor, which he would not only contemn, but suffer
the utmost, for so small a thing as the Leg of a fat Hen or Goose.

And to make this more plain, I shall only instance what I was an Eyewitness
of, in relation to poor Keyward the Hare, who now is under the King's
Protection, by whose Royal Goodness he is defended from Reynard's Insults: This
crafty Villian, Reynard, pretending to be in Orders, and a Chaplain, so far
insinuated on the poor Hare's Belief, with a show of Sanctity, cloakde with
Hypocrisy, in hopes of satisfying his own End, that the silly Creature agreed
he should teach him his Creedo, and being by that means in his Power, he made
him sit between his Legs to sing; but it had like indeed to have been his last
Song, for the Fox caught him so fast by the Throa, that had I not been passing
by, and at the Cry rushed in to his assistance, he had died there, and served
Reynard and his Family for a Holiday-feast. And that this, my Lord the King, is
true, you may easily perceive by the yet bleeding Wound on Keyward's Throat.

Therefore, may Liege, if you suffer such Outrages to go unpunished, it will be
a Dishonor to your Royal Dignity, a manifest Violation of the Laws; and not
only reflect on your self, but on your Children, that are now, or shall
hereafter be begotten, and many Years to come will not be able to blot out the
Slander of this Evil.

This was applauded by most, and the King by 'em entreated to execute the Laws
in punishing of the Fox; but especially the Wolf urged it vehemently, saying,
The Panther has spoke the Truth, and therefore his Advice and Council ought not
to be rejected.

But whilst the King was about to give Sentence, his Eyes sparking like Fire,
and groaning within himself, so that most Beasts trembled, up started Grimbard
the Brock, Nephew to Reynard, entreating, That in his Uncle's absence he might
plead for him, to the Accusation laid to his Charge; which, with some
difficulty, the King consented to; and then he proceeded in this manner:

As to the Wolf, said he, my Dread Sovereign, you cannot, I hope, but conceive
in your Princely Wisdom, what he says against my Uncle proceeds only from
Malice; and that, according to the old Proverb, Never speaks well; Kings as
well as meaner Persons, are not exempted from it.

Then turning to him, said, Sir Isgrim, notwistanding all that you have
alleged, I wish you durst to venture your Honesty with my Kinsman's, upon the
Trial of both your Lives, that he, who upon plain Proof and Conviction, should
be found guilty of the greatest Crimes, might die in a Halter. I boldly tell
you, here in the Face of the Court, and as much as you suppose you stand in the
King's Favor, on such a Trial your Guilt will appear so hanious, that if you
were not ashamed to do it, it would be in vain to ask Mercy: How often, with
your venomous Teeth, have you maliciously worred and wounded my Kinsman, put
him in peril of his Life, and defrauded him of what he labored and ventured
hard for, that you might satisfy your greedy Maw? Amongst many of which
Injuries and Outrages, I shall here, for Brevity's sake, reckon up but a few:
You have perhaps forgot how you cheated him of a large Plaice, which he, at the
hazard of his Life, ventured into a Cart for, and throwing it down, you
immediately took it by Violence from him, and for his share, gave him only the
Bones, which you durst not eat, for fear they should stick in your Throat, and
made you howl, as when you implored the Crane's Aid, and proved ungrateful to
her, in denying her the promised Reward, though by putting her long Neck down
your Throat, she had eased your Misery, and in all probability saved you from
being chok'd. At another time you served my Kinsman a base fraudulent Trick, by
taking from him a Flitch of Bacon, which he got out of a Chimney, not without
danger of breaking his Neck; and though he was so kind, when he perceived you
almost starved, to offer you Part, nothing would serve you but the Whole; though
till you came to devour the last Morsel, you all along promised to leave him a
sufficient Share; and finding he was deluded by you, he went only away sighing,
without making any just Reproach. Nor was this all, for following him at a
distance, you perceived he was going in search for Provision, you soon found
he, by his Cunning, had sung a large Sow asleep, and gotten from her one of her
fattest Pigs, which you likewise greedily seized, though at his return, in hopes
to get another, he was not only torn by the enraged Sow, but taken by the Owner
in a Sack, out of which he gnawed his way, whilst the Peasant carried him at
his Back, to have him worried in the Marketplace by Mastiffs. These, and
innumerable other Injuries, have you at sundry times done my Kinsman Reynard;
wherefore you, and not he, ought to be punished.

And therefore I beseech his Majesty to consider these things, and to judge
impartially. I confess, there is one Accusation of Sir Isgrim's of no weight,
which is, That my Kinsman has lain with his Wife; it is very true, he has done
so but it was at her own Entreaty, and six Years before she was married; and
she was so pleased with the Kindness he did her, that she has ever since born a
tender Affection to him; and therefore it is a Folly for him to complain, who
at that time had no Interest in her, as to her Honesty or Dishonesty.

The Brock had no sooner ended his Discourse, in Vindication of his Kinsman,
but Keywood the Hare, in a pitious Tone; began his Complaint in the manner as
the Panther related.

To which the Brock again replied, That if the Hare would undertake to learn,
and proved a Dunce, it was not reasonable, that Reynard, as his Schoolmaster,
should correct him; for if Scholars have not due and moderate Correction, it is
impossible there should be any capable of managing Matters in State and
Religion.

Lastly, The Hound, forsooth, makes his Complaint for the loss of his Pudding;
he might have behaved himself better in his Mistress's Service, than to have
been turned out to a desperate Fortune; besides, we hear what Sir Tibert says,
he stole it first from him; so that had my Cousin hanged him up when he took
him, he had offended none but the King, in doing Justice without his Leave,
which he forbore to do, in regard to your Majesty, as being Wise, and well
understanding the Laws: Besides, how can he do amiss, who does nothing without
the Advice of the Priest? He is a Gentleman, and a true Man, and since your
Majesty's Proclamation for a Cessation of Hostilities, he has so far complied,
that he has injured none, keeping his Body under by Abstinence, eating but once
a Day, often chastising it, and wearing a Hair-shirt next to his Skin: and, as
I have been informed, it is above a Year since he eat any Flesh, by those that
came but very lately from him. He has forsaken his Castle of Malepardus for a
poor Hermitage, forswearing Hunting, and all other Recreations, living by Alms,
doing infinite Good, and repenting him of his Sins; so that he is grown meager
and lean, sequestring himself from Company, as one weary of the Vanities of
this transitory World.

Whilst the Brock was thus laboring to excuse and vindicate Reynard, the whole
Assembly was surpised at the approach of Chanticleer the Cock, who, with two
Hens, in a mournful manner, came down the Hill toward 'em, bringing upon a
Bier a dead Hen, with her Head bitten off; as he approached, he smote his Wings
against his Sides in a melancholy manner, whilst the two Hens cackled out great
and doleful Lamentations, each of them bearing a Taper, their Names being
Cragant and Tantart, and were found to be the Daughters of Coppel the dead Hen.
But whilst the Wonder lasted, after they had made a great Wailing, and were
come before the King, the Bier was no sooner set down, but Chanticleer humbled
himself, and craved Audience; which being granted, he thus proceeded:

Great and just Prince, I humbly beseech you to hear and revenge the Injuries
done to me by Reynard the Fox, as also to my Children: For thus, most gracious
Sovereign, it happened, that when the Spring appeared in its Glory, I, by
reason of the great Stock my Wife Coppel had brought forth, being in the height
of my Pride and Gallantry, having then eight valliant Sons and seven beautiful
Daughters, which walked at pleasure in a well-fenc'd Yard, guarded by several
fierce Mastiffs, I thought my self the happiest of all Creatures; but, alas! my
Joy was soon turned into Mourning, and I cast from the height of my imagined
Felicity to the depth of Misery; for whilst we remained there fearless of
Danger, deceitful Reynard came one Day (after he had many times attempted to
leap the Walls in vain, and had been hunted away by the Mastiffs) in a
religious Habit, telling over his Beads, and making Signs of Humility and
Devotion, he called to me through the Wicket in a friendly manner, showing me
your Majesty's Letter sealed with your great Seal, wherein I found you had made
an Universal Peace among Beasts and Fowls, throughout your whole Empire; yet,
knowing him a Dissembler, and suspecting them to be counterfeit, as I since
understand they were, I at first but lightly credited him, till with many Oaths
and Protestations he avowed it to be truth; and, that for his part he had done
with the World, and was become a Monk, intending to take a long Pilgrimage to
repent of his Sins; showing me his Books, Beads, Hair-shirt, and all other
religious Accoutrements; and persevering to affirm it with such seeming
Sanctity, that I could not any longer mistrust; and being willing to walk at
large, seeing him go away sighing, saying his Credo, and telling over his
Beads, I called my Family about me, and informed 'em of the News, who were
exceeding glad thereof; so that by Consent we flew over the Walls to range in
the Fields; though I may ever rue that Day; for as we carelessly picked about, the
Fox, who lay' behind a Bush, crept on his Belly till he came between the Wall
and us, and suddenly surpised one of my Sons, whom he murder'dpack'd up, and
bore away, to my unspeakable Grief; and having had so sweet a Bait, neither the
Mastiffs or Hunters could keep him away, till at several Surprises, he had
stolen away thirteen of my Children, leaving me but two; and yesterday, Coppel,
my dear Wife, was surpised by this Traitor, whose Head, as your Majesty may
perceive, he bit off, and had born away her Body, but being pursued by the
Hounds, he was compel d to let her fall, and fly for his Life.

And thus your Majesty, having heard my Wrongs, I implore you, by that Justice
and Compassion that reigns in your Royal Breast, to revenge 'em on the
bloody-minded Reynard.

Moral.] By this we see however wicked Men flatter 'emselves with escaping
unpunished by hiding 'emselves from Justice; yet it the more proves their
Guilt, by imboldening, in their absence, their Enemies to complain against 'em:
Which is demonstrated by the Wolf, who, as guilty as the Fox, nevertheless
takes this time to make his Complaints against him; and so gives Encouragement
to others, who in all likelihood otherwise would not have done it. The Brock's
pleading for the Fox, denotes, that rich Men and Flatterers, though never so
vicious rarely want any Advocate to excuse 'em, though they shame 'emselves in
doing it, as the Brock did, when the Cock appeared with his fresh Complaint
against the Fox, etc.

CHAP. II.
How the King answered the Cock, and caused his Wife to be Buried. How Bruin
the Bear was sent by the King's Command to fetch the Fox to Court; and the
Trick Reynard put on him in his Search for Honey: And how the Cat was sent for
him.



UPon the Complaint of Chanticleer, the King grew exceeding angry, and turning
his Eyes on Grimbard the Brock, who had thus labored to excuse and Justify
Reynard, he sternly said, What think you now, Sir Grimbard, of this Recluse?
Where is the Fox's Penitency? See how he has fasted, prayed, and mortified his
Body, to your Shame, that dare to vindicate such a Traitor and Murderer. But,
by my Crown, I swear, if I have Life long remaining in me, he shall dearly pay
for this. But at present, Sir Chanticleer, all that we can do for you, is to
give Coppel your dear Wife honorable Burial, which shall be at my Charge. And
in the mean time, I will call a Council, to consider of Ways and Methods to do
you Justice and Right against her Murderer. Whereupon he appointed the Goat and
Ram to sing Mass at the Interment of Coppel, and that great Mourning should be
made over her; so, upon this the Bier was taken up, and carried before the Cock
and his two Daughters, who followed in Mourning-hoods, attended by many other
Courtiers, making a doleful Lamentation.

Coppel, Chanticleer's dear Wife,
Who by a Traitor lost her Life;
Pray come with him, you to weep are able,
For her, whose unjust Death was lamentable.
Whilst these Things passed, the King was at close Council with his Nobles,
consulting how he might bring the Fox to deserved Punishment; and, after some
Debates, it was concluded, he should be immediately sent for, to make his
personal Appearance before the King, without any Excuse to Delay, there to
answer such Matters as he stands charged with; and that Sir Bruin the Bear
should deliver him the Summons, sealed with the King's Signet; whereupon the
King called him in him, saying,

Sir Bruin, it is our Pleasure you carry this Mandate to Reynard; but, withal,
I advise you beware of him, for he is full of Policy, being a Craft-master at
Flattery and Dissimulation, lest he betray you into Snares and Intanglements,
and bring you to Scorn or Mockery; therefore let me advise you not to rely upon
your Strength too much, but use Policy and Caution, that you may return in
Safety and Honor.

The Bear hearing this, and that the Trust of fetching Reynard to Court, was
reposed in him, could not refrain laughing to himself, a while, for the hopes
he expected of being revenged on him; and boldly made this Reply to the King:
My Lord, said he, let me alone with the Fox, I have Discretion enough to deal
with him; I shall defeat his Designs, and baffle all Pretensions he can have on
me. And so the Bear departed that Night, that he might be going early in the
Morning on wards of his Journey toward Malepardus.

The next Morning, Sir Bruin, taking the King's Letter with him, set forward,
passing over Mountains and through many thick Forests, till he came to Reynard's
chief Castle, when scorning to go in, but resolving Reynard should do him the
Honor to come and wait on him without, sitting on his Tail before the Gate, he
lifted up his Voice, saying, Reynard, come forth to me, your Kinsman Bruin, who
am come with the King's Mandate, to summon you to Court, to answer the
Complaints there laid to your Charge; therefore I advise you, in a friendly
manner, to come forth and go along with me, thereby to shun the Danger, that
for the Contempt of Royal Authority, (...) further befall you.

The Fox heard this, but made no answer, till he had consulted how to be
revenged on the Bear, whom he well-knew had no Love for him, but was rather his
mortal Enemy; and having cast several things in his mind, whilst the Bear lay
clamouring again for him to come out, he immediately threw open the Gates, and
embracing him, said,

Dear Uncle Bruin, I am overjoyed to see you; pardon, I pray you, my slowness
of coming, for when you first began to call, I was in the middle of my
Evening-song; and Devotion, you know, must be minded before all other Business.
Truly you sweat, Uncle, and seem much tired, pray enter in and rest you; Could
the King, in all his Court, sent no meaner a Servant than your noble Self (who
is both Rich, and Wise, and Powerful, nearly allied to him in Blood) on such an
unworthy Errand? I am exceeding sorry for it; but if he had not sent, I
intended to have been at Court to Morrow; However, dear Uncle, since you are
come, the hope of good Council I expect from you, much lessens the Weight of my
Dread; only what grieves me is, I fear in accompanying you I shall be tedious
to you, my Body is so much distempered since I have left off eating Flesh, and
be taken me to a new Diet, which has grievously swelled me.

What Meat is that, Nephew? said the Bear.

Alas, replied Reynard, it is of so poor a sort, that it signifies nothing for
me to tell it to you; you eat of the daintiest and most costly Fare: However,
not with standing this Excuse, which the Fox purposely made, to make the Bear
mere eager to know it; he pressing him to declare what it was, Reynard told him
it was Honey, of which he had found such abundance, that it could not, but in a
long time, be exhausted. This made the Bear hug himself in Joy, for there is
nothing in the World, that that Creature loves more than Honey, so that many
times they run the hazard of their Eyes being stung out in rifling the
Treasure, both of the wild and tame Bees, by unadvisedly thrusting their Heads
in among 'em, when the little Creatures, finding the Bears shagged Skin
impe^^rable by their short Weapons, cluster about their Eyes, Nose, and Mouth,
and sting them in a furious manner.

The remembrance of this, however; did not frighten Sir Bruin, for without
asking whether it was in Hives or Trees, he instantly embraced the Fox, telling
him, if he would help him to as much of that lordly Fare as would suffice him,
he would be his Friend for ever, and stand by him against his greatest Enemies,
till he had made them silent and ashamed of their Accusations.

Upon this, the Fox having considered how to lay a Trap for the credulous Bear,
though he had been per-admonish'd by his Sovereign, to beware of his Wiles, found
an easy Advantage herein; for remembering that when he had stole a Pullet in
Lanfret, the Carpenters Yard, the Night before, he perceived two Wedges
sticking in a mighty Oak, which being about the middle, divided one end to a
great wideness; and, thought he, if I get the Bear to put in his Head, that I
might draw out the Wedges and catch him by the Ears, I should make fine Sport.

Whilst Reynard was musing on this Project, the Bear lay urging him to declare
where this Treasure was; which, he said, were he a King, he would give his
Crown and Kingdom to be possessed of.

Why, truly Uncle, said Reynard, not to keep you much longer from what you
desire, if I thought you were in earnest, I could conduct you to the Yard,
where is no less there than ten Tun.

Aye; but are you in earnest, dear Cousin? said the Bear.

Why do you think, said Reynard, I jest in this Matter?

No, no, dear Nephew; come along; oblige me in this, and bind me to you for
ever.

So away they went together, the Prior in expectation, and the Fox laughing in
his Sleeve, to think how finely he should fool his Great-uncle; traveling
together in diverse Discourses till they came within sight of the House, which
Reynard no sooner showed to Bruin, but he exceedingly rejoiced; and as they
approached it, the Fox said to him in Derision, Pray, Uncle, be moderate in
eating, for scuh luscious Meat will put you into a Surfeit.

Let me alone for that, said the Bear; I warrant you I know well enough how to
govern my Appetite.

Well, said the Fox, Uncle, I know you are discreet; and leave it to you.

By this Time they were come into the Yard, where the Fox showed him the Cleft
of the Tree, telling him, there were some part of the Honey; which, when he had
dispatched, he would show him more. The Bear, greedy of the Morsel, not
mistrusting the Treachery of his Kinsman, thrust in his Head and Fore-feet; but
whilst he was searching about, Reynard pulled out the Wedges, and caught him
in the Cleft.

The Bear, finding himself thus unexpectedly surpised, through Shame and Pain,
roared out most hideously, so that he raised not only the Carpenter's Family,
but upon their Cry, the Village; who came running with Staves, Clubs, and all
sorts of Weapons; and, among the rest, Dame Jollock, the Parson's Wife, came
running with her Distaff in her Hand; so that poor Sir Bruin was extremely
belabour'd, whilst the Fox stood at a Distance, fleering and scoffing at his
Calamity: But finding his Lise in in danger by the Blows that were laid on him,
he put too all his Strength, and with much struggling rent his Head and Feet out
of the Cleft; yet with the loss of his Ears, part of the Skin of his Face, and
most of that of his Feet: whose bloody Face, and furious Teeth, frighting the
whole Assembly, they parted in a Lane, and gave way for him; yet followed, as
soon as he was passed, with might Strokes, till the Bear making to the River
plunged into it, and by the force of his Body, threw Dame Jollock and some
others into the Water, where they floated like Shittle-cocks; to whose Relief
the Priest, and others came running; the Former offering a full Pardon and
Indulgence for seven Years to come, to any that would save Dame Jollock; so, at
last, this occosion'd the saving of them all, and proved a Kindness to Sir
Bruin; for whilst they were busy about it, he had ^wam a League down the River
with the Current; and then got on Land, to bemoan his unadvised trusting the
Fox, after he had been forewarned about it; but as it happened he landed on the
same side the Fox was on, who had just then stole a Hen out of a Farm-yard, and
was going home with great Joy; concluding Bruin was dead of the Effusion of
Blood that slow'd from him, and the mighty Blows he had received: but when he
saw him there, he was extremely grieved, yet he resolved to scoff him, thereby
to increase his Misery, saying, How now, Uncle? it seems you would not take my
Advice, but have over-eat your self; see what comes of Greediness; now, perhaps
you may fall into a Surfeit, and complain of me at Court; though what I did was
well meant, and at your earnest Desire.

A Plague take you, replied Sir Bruin, for your Kindness; was I able to catch
you, you should dearly pay for this Trick you have put upon me: Fool that I
was, to believe a professed Villian, especially when I had so much Warning
beforehand; but I hope to live to revenge this Treachery.

Well, said the Fox, that you must plot; and so fare you well.

The Bear was more grieved at these Taunts than at his Wounds, though the Blood
ran suriously from his Face and Feet; but finding no Remedy, after many
Groanings, he threw himself in the River again, and swam to the other side,
where landing, and not being able to use his Fore-feet to go, he tumbled over
Head and Heels, till he came to the Court.

The Lion no sooner saw him in this Condition, but he suspected some Treachery;
and demanded who durst so misuse him: Sir Bruin having taken Breath, roared
out, in a piteous Tone. O my Lord, revenge me of this wicked Villian, Reynard,
who has done me all this Injury and Disgrace. Then he proceeded to tell the
whole Story of his Misfortune, as it had befell him.

The Royal Lion hearing this Relation, groa^'d within him for Anger, saying,
How durst that Villian be so hardy, as thus to abuse my Messenger, and one of
so noble a Rank? By my self, I swear, it shall be retaliated with the bloodiest
Revenge that ever Traitor suffered, as a Warning to all others.

Then he called a Council, to devise how to bring his Purposes about; and after
many Debates, it was concluded he should be summoned to appear; else to be
Outlawed for High Treason on his Refusal, and all his Honors and Estate
confiscated.

Then they ordered, that Sir Tybert the Cat, who was wise and judciious, should
be sent to fetch him to Court; who being called, and having before pleaded in
Reynard's behalf, against the Complaint of Curtis the Hound, would fain have
excused this Undertaking; but the King's Injuction being strickly laid on him
to perform it, he obeyed; only saying, That if the Bear, who was of mighty
Strength, had been so abused by him, it was not likely but his Misfortunes
would be greater, as being weak; and that those who advised his Majesty to send
him, were his Enemies.

However, Sir Tybert went with his Summons, and being on his way, a Swallow
flew toward him, which is one of St. Martin's Birds, which he entreated to
turn on the right Hand, but the Bird turned on the left, which he thought an
ill Augury; yet went with heavy Cheer, till he came to Malepardus, where he
found Reynard sitting before the Gate, to whom he produced his Summons.

The Fox hereupon welcomed him with all the Blandishments and Flatteries
imaginable, saying, I will obey it: Yet, said he, dear Cousin Tybert, after
your great Travel; let me entreat you to enter my poor House and refresh
yourself with such Provisions as I have, which are, indeed, but mean; and in
the Morning I will go with you, for you I dearly love, and can trust; the Bear
indeed was with me, but used such brutish Rudeness, that I was afraid to
accompany him, lest he should destroy me by the way: but as for you, I know you
to be wise, learned, and good-natured; so that were I laboring under any
Disease, I would put forth all my Strength to accompany you.

Well, said Tybert, I believe you; but I remember a little while since, you
were talking of Provision, I must confess my tedious Journey has raised an
Appetite in me, pray Cousin, what have you got to eat.

Truly, replied Reynard, I am but slenderly provided at this time, my best Fare
is only a few Honey-combs and to those you shall be heartily welcome

Alas, said Sir Tybert, that is Meat too dainty and luscious for me; besides,
I Am not used to eat of it; but if you could help me to half a dozen Mice, you
would infinitely oblige me, and make me your Servant for ever,

Mice, replied Reynard, love you them so well? sure you are but in Jest, but if
in Earnest, take no farther care, for here is a Priest that has a Barn hard by,
where they swain in such abundance, that you and all your Kindred are not able
to destroy them.

Well, said Tybert, lead me to the Place where these Delicates are, and you
shall find how faithful I will ever be to you.

Follow me then, said the Fox; and so together they went to the Barn.

Now it had so fallen cut, that the Fox, the Night before, had stolen a fat
Hen, and the Priest, in hopes to take him at his next coming, had placed a Gin
at the entrance of the Hole, of this he was aware, and laughed to himself to
think how the Cat would be noos'd in it; saying, Hark, Sir Tybert, how they
squeak; here is the Hole, enter in, and you will not fail of having your Belly
full in a few Minutes; in the mean while I will stay and watch without, that
none come to interrupt you. But dear Coufin, be not too tedious, for I know my
Wife will be impatient to see and embrace you.

Aye, but, said the Cat, do you imagine I may safely enter at this Hole? These
Priests are crafty Fellows, and couch Danger in the most seeming Places of
Security.

O! never fear it, said the Fox: Why, what will you turn Coward, and be
fainthearted? I never perceived this Timer ousness in you before; in Man, in,
and fear no Danger.

Upon this the Cat sprung in, and was immediately taken in the Gin, which
Danger he no sooner perceived, but he would a sprung out again, which drew it
so close, that he was almost strangled, struggling and crying out bitterly: All
this while, Reynard was a Lo^ker on, greatly rejoicing and scoffing in thin
manner: Hah. Cousin Tybest, have you laid hold on the Mice? I hope they are
fat, for your sake; methinks you sing merrily at your Meat; Pray is it the
Court-fashion? If the Priest knew you was there, he would afford you such Sauce
to your Meat, the ^^ke you never tasted before: I wish the Wolf was here, and
coupl'd with you, then your Mewing and his How^g, would make a curious Consort
for the Bear to dance to.

The Cat all this while, making a slouncing to and fro, to get loose, awaked
the Parson; who, supposing it had been the Fox that had been taken, alarmed his
whole Family, and ordering Dame Jollock, his Wife, to light up an
Offering-candle, he leaped out of Bed, and run down Stairs, being followed by
Martinet his Son, and others, who laid so unmercifully on Tybert, that they not
only woefully bruised him, but Martinet, thinking at one Blow to deprive him of
Life, beat out one of his Eyes, which the Cat perceiving, and finding what
danger he was in, taking a desperate Leap between the naked Priest's Legs, with
his Claws and Teeth caught hold of his Genitals, and brought 'em clear away,
which made him a perfect Eunuch; this Dame Jollock seeing, cried out most
pitiously, and swore she had rather have lost ten Years Offerings, than one
small Morsel of those precious Jewels; cursing her hard Misfortune, and the
time that ever the Gin was placed there, to occasion this Loss and Sorrow;
saying to her Son, See Martinet, thy Father's Delight, and my Jewel, taken away
by the cursed Cat, so that now it is quite spoiled; and though he may be
recovered, and live long, yet he can never be recovered to my Satisfaction, or
be any ways useful to me; but it is spoiled to his Shame, and my utter Loss; O
Woe is me!

Whilst she thus lamented, the Parson fell down in a Swound; while Reynard lay
fleering at a distance, saying, Dame Jollock, be not so grieved, there is many
a Chapel has but one Bell in it, and that is sufficient to call the good Wives
together: here is something yet left, therefore be not so discontented.

Now it so happened, whilst they were reviving the Priest from the Swound his
Pain and Anguish had put him into, one rubbing his Temples, another running for
Holy Water to sprinkle his Face, and the rest very busy about him, that Sir
Tybert took the opportunity to gawn the Cord in sunder, and give 'em the slip;
which the Fox seeing, much grieved that he had escaped; he rerurning to
Melapardus, and the Cat, in that miserable plight, to the Court, there to
complain of Reynard's Treachery.

The King was exceedingly enraged upon hearing and beholding what had happened
to his second Messenger, through the Fox's Villainy, vowing a cruel Revenge, and
called a Council how to contrive it, so that he might be brought to speedy
Justice. But, here Grimbard the Brock, Reynard's Kinsman, once more persum'd to
interpose on his behalf: saying, May it please my Lord, Though my Uncle were more
Wicked than these Complaints make him, yet there are sufficient Remedies
against his Mischiefs: Therefore if you proceed to Justice, I beseech your
Majesty it may be done as appertains to one of his Rank, which is, to give him
a third Summons, and then, upon his Refusal to Appear, you may pronounce
Judgment and Sentence of Death against him.

Upon this the King stornly demanded of the Brock, if he knew any one that
world trust him, seeing two of his faithful Servants had been betrayed already
to the hazard of their Lives.

That will I, said Grimbard, if your Highness pleases to command it; and no
doubt but I shall bring him with me.

Then the King ordered him to prepare for his Journey; and above all things, to
take heed to his Safety: and so the Council broke up.

Moral.] This shows, that the Brook being disgraced for standing up for his
Kinsman, gave not over to vindicate him; so some Men, innocent 'emselves, think
all so, and run 'emselves into Hazards, by vindicating their vicious Actions.
The King's decently buiying the Hin, show the Effects of a good Disposition to
the Injured, in giving what present Satisfaction they can. In the Bear's
Readiness to fetch the Fox, we find those that hate us, will take hold of any
Advantage to do us Mischief, though they run a Hazard in doing it; as we find by
his being intrapped by the Fox's Cunning, with a feigned Bait of Honey. By the
Cat's going unwillingly, signifies Prudence not to venture upon an Undertaking
against cunning crafty Men, lest we be unadvisedly ensnared, as the Cat was in
hopes of Mice.

CHAP. III.
How Grimbard the Brock was sent to command the Fox to come to Court; how he
consented to come, and was Shriven by him; and the Excuse he made before the
King of the Crimes laid to his Charge; whereupon he was condemned to be hanged;
with the Confession he made.



EArly the next Morning Grimbard, the Brock, took leave of the King, and went
on his Journey to Malepardus, where he found Reynard and Ermilin his Wife
playing with their Young; and when they had saluted one another, he said, Dear
Uncle, take heed to your self, almost ever one at Court is against you, and
your Death will certaintly ensue, with those of your Wife and Children; also
the Destruction of this your fair Palace and other Edifices, if you speedily
appear not to vindicate your self; which if you do, upon this third Summons,
you will foil your Adversaries, and put 'em to Silence; for you know better how
to plead your own Cause then any one; you have passed through many Dangers, and
came off with Safety: then do not incense the King in standing out, but go
along with me.

I fear not, replied Reynard, and therefore will go to Court; not to answer to
Crimes, but because I know it stands in need of my Council; nor do I doubt to
make my Defense, and shame my Accusers.

Accusers, indeed, in Men absence are bold, said the Brock, but when they come
Face to Face, they have little to say to 'em.

Hereupon Reynard, being about to depart, addressed him to his Wife, saying,
Dame Ermilin, take care of my Children, Reynardine and Rossel, and doubt not,
but, if I escape, I shall make quick returu to you.

Then he took his leave, and went with the Brock, leaving them Weeping, and in
great Heaviness for his Departure.

Reynard and Grimbard had not gone above a Mile on their way, before the Fox
sighed grievously, and appeared very pensive; of which Alteration the Brock
demanding the Reason, the Fox fetching a deeper Sigh than before, replied, Dear
Nephew, since I am going to venture my Life, and some things lie heave on my
Conscience, it is but reasonable to disburthen myself of 'em, and confess 'em
to you, that so, according to your Wisdom, you being in Orders, may absolve me
of them, that I may speak the more boldly, when I come to make my Defense.

Content, said the Brock, so that for the future you will become a true Penitent.

This the Fox promised, and began to make his Confession: I have, said he,
grievously offended against almost all Creatures: Bruin the Bear, was brought
near unto Death by me; Tybert the Cat I likewise snared, and caused to lose his
Eye; Chanticleer I have abused, and devoured many of his Children; nay the King
and Queen have not been free from my Malice; the Wolf I have injured many ways,
calling him Uncle, the better to delude him into Danger, though he is not any
ways akin to me, no part of his filthy Blood running in my Veins, however, by
this Decoy, I gained so upon his Easiness, as to make him believe he was
exceeding learned, and that I would prefer him to be a Parish clerk, which he
joyfully hearkening to, I told him, the first Step to it was to toll the Bell:
Well, he desired me that I would teach him to do it; so finding out Day the
Chappel-door carelessly left open, I fastened his Foot to a Bellrope, when
making a Jangling with the Bell, the Vill ge rose upon him and almost murdered
him; I taught him to catch Fish with his Tail in the frosty Weather; and led
him to a rich Priest's House to steal Bacon, where feeding so unreasonably that
he could not get out at the Hole he entered, I snatched a Hen from the Priest's
Table and running away with it, dropped it where the Wolf was, where my Pursuers
found him, and having, as they thought, beat him to Death, they dragged him out
and threw him into a Ditch; where notwithstanging, he revived, and crawled home
with broken Bones, cursing me all the way; But the more the Fox is cursed, the
better he thrives; for I caught by the way a Stubble-goose, and putting her up
into my Mail, went to Malepardus, and made merry with my Wife and Children:
Another time I led him to a Place where I told him, there was seven Hens and a
Cock, which indeed there was before I had stole (...), and conveyed them to my
Den, and there I thrust him on a Trap-door, so that he fell down into the House
many Stories, raised the Family, who crying out; The Wolf, the Wolf, rose with
Tongs and Shovels, and so belabour'd him, that had he not escaped at a Door,
left open by Carelessness, they had there ended his Life. Thus at sundry times
I Have brought him to the Brink of the Grave: yet, like a true Fox, can deny it
upon the account of any Danger to my self, as confidently as if I had never
seen him in all my Life: I have offended Dame Arsewind his Wife, of which I
must likewise repent, though I am now ashamed before you, who are a very modest
Person, to express the manner of it:

Nay, said Grimbard, if you make your Shrift imperfectly, I know not how to
allot your Penance, and absolve you.

Truly, replied the Fox, I Have often lain with her; first by force, when I
persuaded her to thrust her Head and Fore-feet into a Yoke, telling her it was
a Nun's Veil and that I Would teach her to sing her Ave Mary and afterwaads often
by her Consent, since she has been married to Isgrim; and now I Have told you
all; order me my Penance.

Well, said Grimbard, break of that Hazel-wand with your Teeth. Which the Fox
readily did; then said the Brock, Give yourself three Stripes on the Body. With
this he also complied; then said the Brock Lay it down and leap over it,
without bowing your Legs thrice. This he did likewise. Now, said Grimbard,
there remains but one thing more, and I absolve you, and that is, take it up
and kiss it gently, in token of your Repentance and Humility.

This done, the Brock absolved him of his Murders, Thefts and other Crimes to
that Day: So that the Fox exceedingly rejoiced, not that he fancied it
signified any thing, but that it being told at Court, might stand him in stead
with the Overcredulous, and beget in them a better Opinion of him for the
future. Yet for all this, Reynard could not long dislemble, for as they passed
by a Nunnery where many Geese and Pullen were straggling on the Common, he
leaped at a fat Hen, but she struggled and got away from him, leaving him only
his Mouth full of Feathers; for which the Brock extremely chid him, putting him
in mind of what he had lately promised; but it signified little, for till they
were out of sight, he looked back and kept his Eyes on them, his Chops watring
after (...) dainty a Morsel; for which, when the Brock again chid him; he
replied,

Dear Nephew, you do me Injury, for I was only looking toward yon holy Place,
and saying a Placedo for all the Souls of the Hens, Geese, Ducks, etc. that
have been wounded and devoured by me.

Ah, said Grimbard, I am afraid you are of the Nature of the Cat in the Fable,
whom (...) young Man so entirely loved, that he prayed in the Temple of Venus,
till, for his sake, the Goddess turned her into a Wo^han; but no sooner was she
in Bed with her Bridegroom, in the height of Joy and Delight, but seeing a
Mouse on the Floor, ^he leaped from her Husband's Arms to ^ursue her,
forgetting how she was changed and designed for other things; which so ^nraged
Venus, that she transformed her a^ain into her former Likeness. You are ^ise,
Uncle, and can make a Moral Construction of this; fit to be applied to your
present Circumstance; therefore be cautious, and well consider your Ways for
the future.

Whilst this Discourse continued, they came within sight of the Court, which
made Reynard tremble; however, he resolved to face the Storm; and so, with the
Porter's leave, they entered the Gates of the Royal Palace of Sanden.

No soon was the Fox's Arrival known, but all the Beasts whom he had injured
prepared to exhibit their Complaints against him, but as he passed through Troops
of 'em, he kept his Countenance, without any sign of Fear, or Regard of their
threatening Looks, as if he had been the innocentest Creature in the World. When
he came before the King, who sat in a Chair of State. his Queen on the right
Hand, and his Counselors about him, he fell on his Knees, craving the Blessing
of Heaven and Earth on their Majesty's and all their Royal Progeny, wishing
them Success, Health and Victory, with many other flattering Expressions, to
curry Favor; but they were little minded by any, as knowing they proceeded
rather from Fear than Reverence or Re pect; hovever, he thus craftily began to
excuse himself:

I do not doubt, most gracious Sovereign, ^^t though I am the truest of all
Servants to our Majesty, yet I am envied for it by ma^y in this Court, who
labor to rise by my ^^ll; yet though Flatterers always look in Princes Courts
with their false Tales, and set (...), to abusy Royal Ears, yet your Majesty is
known to be of a more discerning Judgment than so to be imposed on; herefore I
doubt not but those who would ^us^ you with unjust Complaints against (...)
your faithful Servant, will be brought (...) deserved Shame.

He would have proceeded, but the King ^grily interrupting him said, Hold your
^eace, Traitor; I know, by Dissimulation and fair Speeches you would evade your
punishment, and lay Crimes to the Charge ^f others; but your Blandishments will
^ot now avail you, you have too often de^ved me, and broken the Peace I
strictly ^mmanded to be inviolably kept.

Then all present began to cry out against (...) Fox of the several Injuries he
had done ^em; but the Lion commanded Silence, and thus proceeded: Thou wicked
Wretch, ^ost thou see how many accuse thee? and ^arest thou pretend to be
Innocent? With that Face can thou say thou art my faithful Servant, since so
often you have wilfully broken my Commands? But a severe Punishment hangs over
thy Head.

Alas replied the Fox, I see many powerful Enemies here, who, by their rash
Unadvisedness, or covetous Inclinations, have rushed into Misfortunes, and now
are prepared with Malice enough to lay the Fault on me: Could I help it, if Sir
Bruin got a bloody Pate by his greedy Search after Honey in the Carpenter's
Yard? Had (...) had any regard of your Majesty's Affairs, (...) would have
immediately returned to give an Account of his Errand, and not, by preferring
his own Advantage, fallen into the Hands of Men who so misused him. As for the
Cat, his Fault was the same, to prefer a few silly Mice before your Interest,
or the Regards of your Commands; and though being took in the Priest's Barn in a
Gin, he lost an Eye, yet by biting off the Priest's Genitals, he has
disappointed all the young Women in the Parish, who used to be refreshed with
that most comfortable Morsel: These Injuries the Bear and Cat received, were
none of my Offense it is plain, but sought by themselves. But you, my gracious
Lord, may do your Pleasure with your humble Slave who has no other Hope against
such powerful Opponents, but in your Royal Clemency, though my Death is too mean
a Sacrifice for your Anger, and can yield you little Profit; yet whatever you
determine, I shall patiently submit to.

When Reynard had proceeded thus far, Bellin the Ram, and Oseway the Ewe, stepped
from among the Crowd, and humbly besought the King, that they might have a fair
Hearing; and so did some hundreds more who had been injuried by him, all with
one Cry imploring Justice against him. This made Reynard look pale, especially
when he found the King was no longer to be won on his side, for he caused him
immediately to be arrested, and upon plain Proof of many notorious Crimes, by
several credible Witnesses against him, Sentence was passed upon him, That he
should be executed on a Pair of Gallows of twenty Foot high (...) which
Sentence was immediately recorded.

This made Sir Reynard look very melancholy and dejected, especially because
the King had strictly commanded, that none of his Friends should interceed for
his Pardon; but his Enemies greatly rejoiced, as not doubting but they should
now be revenged on him; which made the Brock, and others of his Blood, seeing
they could do him no Good, retire from Court, discontented, which the King
observing, said to his Council, It is needful that we take mature Deliberation
on this weighty Matter; For the Fox has Faults, that have created him many
Enemies, yet I perceive his Virtue has chained to him close many fast Friends.

Whilst the King was thus discoursing, the Cat, impatient of Revenge, urged the
Wolf and the Bear to hasten Reynard's Execution, alleging, the Night was at
hand, and then he would give them the slip, and escape into some Hole, Bush or
Brake, where they should not, without great Difficulty, if at all, recover him:
Besides, Sir Isgrim, consider it was by his means your two Brothers were hanged
some Years since, where the Gallows is yet standing; let us convey him thither.

At this Reproach Isgrim grew very angry, ^et resolved to be revenged; they
lead him ^the Bear before and the Wolf behind) to ^e place of Execution, where
Tybert, who ^as appointed Hangman, had got with the ^ozed Rope; and there when
the King, Queen, and Nobles had placed them on ^affolds, to see his last, they
raised the ^dder, and the Cat let him to the middle ^it with the Rope about his
Neck; when ^rning to that side the King and Queen (...) on, he said, Now I am
in great Sorrow, ^rounded with the Terrors of Death, though I have seen my Father
die this way with much Gentleness, yet as a poor dying Wretch, all I entreat
is, That I may disburthen my Conscience, and open the Secrets of my Heart, to
die with the more Ease, that I may not be disturbed in my Grave, by going out
of the World with any thing that may be burdensome to my Conscience.

This Request was thought reasonable by all, and the King thereupon giving
Reynard leave to speak; after fetching a deep sigh, he thus proceeded: Alas! I
see few here whom I have not offended in a grievous manner, though in my Youth I
was accounted Virtuous; but playing with Lambs, at last I fortunated to bite
one, and tasting the sweetness of his Blood, I could not forbear till I had
murdered many, this carried me likewise among the Goats, to destroy many of
their Kids, then I fell upon Hens, Geese, etc. and so by degrees my Crimes
increased to greater matters, till roving in the Winter, I met with Sir Isgrim,
who lay in a hollow Tree almost famished, and made him believe he was my Uncle,
declaring unto him my Pedigree, so that he seemed to be very glad of his
Kindred; and from that Day (which I am bound to curse) I struck a League of
Friendship with him, and we together murdered many of your noble Subjects, the
lesser not being sufficient for his hungry Maw, as, Bucks, Does, Rams, Ews, and
the like; of which I had, to my present Grief, but a very slender Share; not
that I wanted it, but to see his Ingratitude, who set for him all Game; for
then I had, and still have, more Treasure then ten Carts can carry.

When the King heard him speak of such great Riches, he interrupted him, and
commanded him to declare how he came by it; as being desirous to be possessed
of it: To which the Fox replied, My Lord, this Wealth indeed was stole, and had
it not been so it had cost you your Life, which Heaven desend from the bloody
Designs of your Enemies. When the Queen heard him say so, she started, saying,

Reynard, I command you to conceal nothing of this dangerous Conspiracy against
the Life of my dear Lord.

To which he replied, Must gracious Lady, I think it well becomes me, in this
case, to disburthen my Conscience, that I may go out of the World with more
Peace of Mind: Certain it is that the King should have been murdered by his own
Subjects; and though many of the Conspirators are my near Kindred, yet, as a
dying Wretch, for whom no hopes of Life do remain, I will not spare to discover
'em or the public Good, in the Preservation of your Majesty's, who had ever
this time been deposed and murdered, had it not been prevented by my means; and
hereupon he looked so pitifully, that the Queen entreated the King, that the
Fox might have Liberty to make the matter more plain; which being granted, and
Silence commanded, he again proceeded.

Some Years since my Father searching the Earth in a strange Hiddernes^,
happened to find the Treasure of King Ermerick, consisting of Jewels, Silver,
Gold and other rich things, whereupon he great proud, and held in Contempt all
the Beasts of the Forest; then calling Sir Tybert to him, he ordered him to go
to the Forest of Arden, and seek out Sir Bruin, with Letters, wherein he
acquainted him with his good Fortune, and tendered his Fealty to him, saying,
If he should come to him, he would make him King and set your Royal Crown upon
his Head; which he, who is the most ambitious of all Creatures, delayed not to
come, and then they sent for Grimbard my Nephew, and Isgrim, and many others,
so that the Conspiracy grew strong, and diverse were sent out to levy Forces to
be paid with the Treasure my Father had sound, which they secretly listed in
great Numbers, throughout your Dominions; but while they thought to bring their
wicked Purposes to an Issue, Grimbard, at one of their Feasts being fluster'd
with Wine, declared all to Dame Slopard his Wife, and though he commanded her
Secrecy on Pain of her Life, yet, affrighted at such horrid Treasons, she
could not long conceal it, but tol all to my Wife Ermelin, as they were passing
over a Heath, saying their Ava Maria; and though she savore her to Secrecy by
the three Kings of Cullen, yet she could not refrain to reveal it to me in a
great Consternation: Nor was I less astonished when I heard it, my Heart sunk
down as cold as Lead; yet I made it my Business to Counter-Plot my Father, and
so narrowly watched him, to find where his Treasure lay, (and preserve your
Majesty) that one Day I see him come out of a Hole, looking every Way, to see
the Coast clear, and I being unseen of him, he threw in the Earth, and smoothed
it over with his Tail, going immediately to the Conspirators, to tell 'em all
was safe.

The Night was no sooner come, but I brought my Wife and Children to the Place,
and with infinite Labor we removed it to another Place, which Loss, wh^ my
Father came to understand, (...) knowing how to recover it again, he, through
Shame, Anger, and Vexation, hanged himself; which I contentedly could behold,
for the Preservation of your Majesty's Lives; for when the rest heard of this
Disaster, and the Loss of the Treasure that should pay their Forces, they
disbanded their Armies, and broke up their Consultation with great Confusion.

Thus, by my Policy, the Bear was frustrated from placing himself in your Royal
Throne, though from this good Service to your Crown and Dignity sprung all my
Miseries, by making myself such potent Enemies, whose Malice has persecuted me
to the Gates of Death, whilst they, who would have destroyed you, are of your
Privy Council, trampling on me who am fallen into Misery and Disgrace, for
doing that, which by my Allegiance I was bound to do. And here he ended very
sad and pensive, though in his Mind he was otherways, as knowing this feigned
Story would work his Deliverance, and gain Advantage over his Enemies.

Moral] By the Brock's being sent, shows when others are endangered, to try
such as the vicious Party has a Kindness for, or will appear in his
Vindication, that they may either prevail, or run the Hazard of their own
Folly. His Shrift to him, shows Hypocrisy, and a seeming Religion when in
Danger, that those who are innocent may pity and stand by 'em, being deceived
by their specious Pretenses of reforming their Lives, yet are so habitually
wicked, they cannot long conceal it, as appears by the Fox's catching at the
Capon, etc. His Excuses at Court, shows when Men are in Danger, they will not
stick at any Falsehood to free themselves, as by the Fox's feigned Treasure
appears.

CHAP. IV.
How the King credited him, and caused him to be taken from the Gallows,
whereupon he vowed a Pilgrimage; and brought the Bear and Wolf into great
Distress, and was himself highly honored: How he murdered Keyward the Hare,
and sent his Head to the King by Billing the Ram, who was there upon given to
the Bear and Wolf to be slain, etc.



THE Fox by his Dissembling Speech having possessed the King with hopes of
gaining vast Sums of Treasure, and how he had befriended him in preventing the
Treachery designed against him, he caused him immediately to be taken down from
the Gallows, and questioned him where the great Riches he spoke of was, who
told him it was hid by him in a Wilderness called Hulsterlo, under the bottom
of a Beech-tree, by the side of the River Creckneypet, that runs through the
Wilderness. At this the Lion stared on him as if he believed it not; saying, he
had heard of most Places in the World, as well Cities and Towns, as Forests and
Rivers, but never heard of these. O my Lord, replied the Fox, as I am a dying
Creature, unless your Mercy be extended to me, it is certainly true; and if my
Words gain no belief, even Keyward the Hare, though he declares himself, without
Cause my Enemy, if he be sworn, will give you an Account of the Wilderness and
River. Then was Keyward called and put to his Oath to answer nothing but the
Truth to such Questions as should be demanded of him. Then said the Fox,
Keyward, let not Prejudice hinder you to answer my Question, Know you
Creckneypit? Yes, very well, replied the Hare, it is a great River that runs
through the Wilderness of Hulsterlo, where Father Simony the Monk, was taken
coming false Money, many Years before Ringwood the Hound and I scraped
Acquaintance: I may well remember it, for there I have endured many bitter
Winters. Upon giving this Testimony he was ordered to withdraw. Then said the
Fox, May my Relation be now credited? Yes, Reynard, said the King, and I
entreat you to excuse my Jealousy, which could not be less, since you have so
many times deceived me; but, however, it will be convenient that you go with
me, and show me the Place. Alas, said Reynard, I should be proud to attend upon
your Majesty, and the willingest Creature in the World to do it, had I not
Yesterday made a Vow if I escaped with Life and Liberty, I would immediately
take a Pilgrimage to Rome to be absolved of the Pope's Curse, which I lay
under, for persuading the Wolf to run away from a Monastery where he had
entered himself a Monk, upon his complaining to me that he was almost famished
for want of Food, though indeed he eat as much as six; and from thence I intend
to pass to Jerusalem, and to mortify myself by Fasting and doing good Works,
that I may wash off the Stains my Crimes have fixed on me. Well, replied the
King, if such a Vow be upon you, and you under the Censure of the Church, you
shall not accompany me, but depart and perform what you have promised: I will
take Keyward the Hare and some others with me, who may direct me as well.

The Fox greatly rejoiced at this; and the Conference was no sooner over, but
the King and Queen mounted on a Scaffold, in sight of all Beasts present,
placing the Fox between 'em, and Silence being commanded the Lion thus began:
All you my Subjects, who are here assembled, give good Attention to what I
shall say: In Reynard I find no Fault, or at least such as he has repented of;
therefore I constitute him one of my supreme Ministers in State Affairs, and of
my Household the chief Officer, freely acquitting him of all his Trespasses, and
consigning to him a general Pardon for all Crimes committed by him to this very
Moment; and therefore command you, upon your Allegiance, to do to him, his Wife
and Children, that Reverence as is due to their Characters; for he is going a
Pilgrimage to Rome to repent him of his Sins, and obtain the Pope's Absolution.

When the Wolf, Bear and Cat heard this, they were much grieved that his
Flatteries and Lies had prevailed against the Truth; so that the Wolf could not
forbear complaining against the Fox to the King, with such Arrogance, that
being seconded in the manner by the Bear, it was taken so heinously, that they
were both arrested for High Treason, and bound hand and foot, so that they
could not stir from the Place where they lay; afterward they were cast into a
Dungeon, which not only overjoyed the Fox, that his Project had taken so well,
but struck the rest of his Enemies with such Fear, that they immediately
departed; yet here he stopped not, but petitioned the Queen to have as much of
the Bear's Skin as would make a Male; as also to have the Wolf's two Foreshoes,
and his Wife's Hinder shoes, to keep his Feet from the Stones and and Gravel
which were taken from them with great Pain and Danger of their Lives; yet
notwithstanding the intolerable Pain, they durst not revile the treacherous
Fox, who had been the Occasion of their Miseries.

When Reynardine had greased and fitted on his Shoes, he desired that his Staff
might be blessed and delivered to him according to the Use of Pilgrims; which
the King commanded the Ram to do, as also to say Mass over him before he
departed; but he refused it, because he was under the Pope's Curse, unless the
King would secure him against the Bishop and Ordinary; but when he saw the Lion
angry, he trembled for Fear, and immediately sung Mass over the Fox, who little
regarded it, more than to have the Honor of it; then giving Benediction to his
Staff and Male, he delivered it to him; so the Lion and all the Beasts attended
the Fox part of his Way, who seemed loath to depart, though inwardly he desired
nothing more than to be rid of their Attendance; so that he entreated the King
to return for his Health's sake, and to prevent the Danger that might happen if
the Wolf and Bear should get loose and raise Tumults and Commotions; so taking
solemn Leave, the King returned with all the Beasts, except Keyward and Sir
Bellin, whom Reynard persuaded to go further with him; so, by degrees, with
pleasant Tales and Discourses, he drilled 'em by unknown Ways, to Malepardus,
that being his furthest intended Pilgrimage; and now he was fully resolved to
be revenged on the Hare for accusing him to the King; wherefore at the Gate of
his Palace, he said, Sir Bellin, if you will but stay a little here, I and
Keyward will step in a few Moments, and take Leave of my Wife and Children,
where he shall be Witness to a few Passages and Vows between us, that if either
break 'em, the Law may inflict due Punishment; so going in, they found the
Shefox and her young Ones at their Ease; yet she no sooner see Reynard return
in Safety, but leaping up, she run to embrace him, and ask of his Welfare, and
how he sped at Court; which he told her from Point to Point, with all the
Honor that had been done him, how he had left the Bear and Wolf in Prison, and
deceived the King; and, as for this Keyward he is my Enemy, and has vehemently
accused me, and I have decoyed him hither, to take Revenge, and feast on his
Carcass.

Keyward no sooner heard this, but he trembled, and cried to Bellin for Help;
but Reynard soon caught him by the Throat, and stopped his Noise, so they eat
him up all but the Head, which the Fox saved to ensnare the Ram's Life.

After they had merrily breakfasted on poor Keyward's Carcass, the Fox declared
to his Wife, That this Fact known at Court, would make all be disbelieved he
had said, and then speedy Search would be made after him: therefore if she
would agree to it, he thought fit, for both their Safeties, to change the Place
of their Abode, and live Incognito, but she urged so many Reasons against it,
that he resolved not to remove.

Whilst these things passed within, Bellin was without waiting, with much
impatience for the Hare's Return, that they might go back to Court, and
therefore called aloud for him to come forth; whereupon the Fox went to him,
and said, Good Sir Bellin, be not angry, for Keyward is so engaged in Discourse
with his Aunt, he cannot leave her, nor can she as yet part with him, her Love
is so great to him; but if you will be pleased to go a softly Pace before, you
know he is light, and will easily overtake you before you have traveled many
Miles. Nay, said the Ram, but, if I mistake not, I heard Keyward piteously cry
out, Murder. Alas, replied the Fox, then you are mistaken indeed; can you so
much as fancy he can receive any Hurt under my Roof? far be that Thought from
you: True it is, there is some thing in it; you might hear him cry indeed, for
when I told my Wife the long and dangerous Pilgrimage I had undertaken, she
swounded away for Grief; whereupon Keyward, through the great Affection he bears
her, fearing she would have died, cried out, O! Sir Bellin, help, help, my Aunt
dies: but soon she was revived to his and my unspeakable Joy, whereupon he left
crying. But letting these things pass, you remember I promised to send the King
Letters before my Departure, which all this while I have been writing, and must
entreat you, dear Cousin, to carry.

I would be your Friend in this, said the Ram, but I am, as you see, unprovided
of any thing to put 'em in, and to carry 'em in my Mouth would look ridiculous.
Well, said the Fox, for this trouble not yourself, you shall have my Mail,
which you may hang about your Neck, and carry with little trouble; they are so
well penned that you will gain Credit by 'em, if not Preferment; I am consent
you should have the Praise of 'em, and say you dictated the Words, whilst I
writ them down. This made the silly Ram, who was ambitious, greatly to rejoice;
so the Mail, with murdered Keyward's Head in it, was hung about his Neck, and
so he took his Leave, flattering himself with the conceived Hopes of
Advancement all the way he went to Court, considering many ignorant Persons,
who have had the Vanity to attribute the Labors of others to 'emselves, have
m^ with Advancement; and why might not we be of that Number?

When he came to Court almost breathless for haste, he found the King sitting
amongst his Nobles, discoursing of Reynard's Pilgrimage, many pitying him for
his tedious Journey he had undertaken, and applauded him for his Reformation
from a wicked, to a virtuous Life; but when the Lion say the Bear's Skin-mail
about the Ram's Neck, with something weighty in it, he wondered, and the more,
because he came without the Hare; and thereupon demanded where he left the Fox:
My Lord, replied he, I attended him to his House, and from thence I brought
these Letters, which, indeed are of my own indicting, though my Cousin writ them
over, and recommended them to your Majesty, not doubting but they will give your
Highness great Satisfaction.

The King commanded Bocart his Secretary to take off the Mail, open it, and
read the Letters with a laudible Voice; but instead of Letters, he had no
sooner put his Hand therein, but he drew out murdered Keyward's Head, which
struck the whole Assembly into a great Consternation; and the Ram seeing how he
was imposed on, trembled, and fell on his Knees, craving Mercy. The King having
by this time recovered himself from his Amaze, with an angry Voice, his Eyes
sparkling like Lightning, said, How blinded was I in my Understanding, ever to
credit this Traitor Reynard, who under all his fair Speeches, covers Malice and
Mischief. Whereupon he groaned terribly, and hung down his Head for Anger and
Shame to be so imposed on, as likewise did the Queen; which Sir Firelapel the
Libbard, who sat next to the King, perceiving, thus began:

Let not Sorrow come near your Highness's Heart for this traiterous Deed, but
keep it for nobler Purposes: Are not you Lord of the Forests, and all your
Subjects in your Power to punish as you please? To this the King replied, Dear
Cousin, such unexpected Mischef and Disgrace as this cannot but touch me near;
I am, to my Shame, betrayed by a base Villian, whom I too fondly, and against
Reason, credited, one who has made me do Injury to my best Friends, and even
those of my Blood, as is testified in what I have unadvisedly done to the Wolf
and Bear on his Accusation, and my Queen's Persuasions, which will stick as a
Stain and Reproach on me for ever.

Let not your Majesty say so, replied the Libbard, you stand above all
Injuries, and your Smiles can easily cure the Wounds you have made, the
Recompenses you are able to give, are sufficient to reward those that may
complain: If the Bear and Wolf have been injured by Reynard's false
Accusations, there is a present way before you to make them amends: since the
Ram has confessed himself a Party with Reynard in Keyward's Death, owned he
indicted the Letters, which in plain Terms was murdering the Hare, for no
better Construction can be made of it, seeing he has audaciously brought his
Head to your Majesty, let him and his Lineage be given to them as a Prey: And
for Reynard, tho he is not in your Power at present, yet we will go and besiege
his Castle, take him thence by force, and bring him bound to your Majesty, to
do with him as you shall think fit.

This Council highly pleased the King, who immediately sent the Libbard to
fetch Sir Bruin and Sir Isgrim from Prison, where they lay in Chains, expecting
every Hour the Sentence of Death; but Sir Firelapel no sooner pronounced their
Pardon, but those Fears vanished, they rejoyed when he told them the King was
not only sorry for their Punishment he had caused to be inflicted on 'em, but
as a Recompense, had delivered into their Power the Ram and his whole Lineage,
to devour and destroy at their Pleasure, wherever they met 'em for ever; as
also to hunt and destroy Reynard the Fox, and all his Lineage wherever they
should find him or them; and for which Privilege they should receive Letters
Patents under the Royal Signet, not to be revoked, if they kept their Fealty
inviolable; upon these Terms, coming into the King's Presence, they were
received into Favor again, so that at the King's Command. Bellin was
immediately slain, and after him, they went out and destroyed a great many of
his Kindred, as well sucking Lambs, as Ewes, and so continue to persecute them
to this Day.

Now upon this Reconciliation great Feasting was made at Court, which continued
many Days, to which resorted all Beasts, and as many Birds as were in
Friendship with the King; but the Fox he kept close, and would not be present,
though he was cited, so that all manner of Recreations were to be seen there:
But during this, came Laprel, the Coney, with a grievous Complaint against
Reynard, That whereas he was passing by Malepardus, and perceiving him standing
in the Habit of a Pilgrim at the Gate, supposing to have passed peaceably by
him, he leaped on him at unawares, and struck him such a violent Blow between
the Head and Shoulders, that he fell down, and had he not suddenly recovered,
and leaped from between Reynard's Claws, though very much wounded, he had there
devoured him.

The Coney had no sooner made an end of his Complaint, and prayed Justice, but
Corbant the Rook came flying before the King with a piteous Noise, saying, I
beseech your Majesty to hear and revenge my Wrongs on bloody Reynard; for so it
happened that this Morning, Sharpbeak my Wife, leaving our young Ones in a
neighboring Wood, flew to the Heath to seek some Food for 'em, where, to our
great Amazement, we saw Reynard lie stretched on the Ground like a dead
Carcass, his Tongue lolling out of his Mouth, and his Eyes fixed and staring;
who, Woe is me! my Wife in her Simplicity, laying her Head to his Mouth, to hear
if she could perceive him Mouth, to hear if she could perceive him breath, the
treacherous Dissembler, who had put himself into that Posture to move our
Compassion, and draw us within his, reach, leaped up on a sudden, and catching
hold of her Neck, bit her Head off: Whereupon, affrighted, I flew into the Air,
or else, with the same Greediness, he had taken me along with her, but getting
to a Tree, I there sat secure, though in great Sorrow to see him devour her Body;
which done, he went away; then flew I with doleful Cries to the Place, and
gathered up all her Remains, which were only these Feathers, which I brought
before your Majesty, as a Testimonial of her Murder.

The Moral.] By the Honor the King did the Fox, shows, that great Ones may be
deceived by specious Pretenses, especially if they are covetiously given, as
the Lion's Hopes of gaining the Treasure made him acquit Reynard, whom, a
little before, he had justly condemned. By the Misery he put the Wolf and Bear
to, signifies be sudden Turn of Affairs, and how to complain unseasonably
brings Mischief. His slaying the Hare, and sending his Head by the Ram,
^en^tes, innocent Persons are betrayed into Mischief unadvisedly under specious
Pretenses of Friendship. The Complaints of the Coney and ^ook, a wicked Habit
in the Fox.

CHAP. V.
^^w the King, upon these fresh Complaints, ^grew exceeding angry: How Grimbard
the Brock gave him Advice of it; and how the Fox was a second time absolved,
and excused himself to the King: How Dame Rukenaw ^he She Ape, pleaded for him,
and the King consented to hear him.



THE King, upon these new Complainrs and Villainies, was so moved against ^ard,
that he vowed the bloodiest Re^ge that ever Creature fell under, from ^ch all
his Flatteries should never be able ^eliver him: Is this, said he, his
Pilgrimage to Rome, and the Holy Land? For this did he procure his Shoes and
Scrip, to the hazard of my Friends Lives? Well, he shall dearly rue it: though,
indeed, I should never have believed him, but for the Persuasions of my Queen.
When he had thus said, with a stern Countenance, he commanded his Nobles to
give Counsel, so that his Honor might in this Case be saved, and his Fame not
evil spoken of. At this the Bear and Wolf greatly rejoy'd, as still thirsting
after Revenge; yet they kept Silence. expecting others to speak first; but none
doing it, the King grew exceeding angry, looking grimly on them, till the Queen
said, Sir, It Is no part of Royal Wisdom to protest, or believe any thing till
the Matter be made apparent therefore you ought to have both your Ears open in
this Case, as well to the Complainants, as Complained; so that weighing the
Cause in Equity, you may the better do Justice: And however I may have erred in
persuading you to any thing in Favor of him, I am thus far sure, that it will
be most for your Honor, since he cannot fly out of your reach, to try him by
the Laws.

This Speech of the Queen's was seconded by the Libbard, who said she had
spoken very graciously, and that he could not in reason go from what she had
said, in trying the Fox, by which, if found Guilty, would leave him without
Excuse: Therefore said he, it is fit he should be summoned, and confronting his
Accusers, make his Defense.

This moved Sir Isgrim to Anger, fearing, if the Fox had this Favor allowed,
he would not, by one Trick or other, fail to get another Advantage over him;
saying, If my Lord the King's pleasure be to comply with your Advice, none of
us must gainsay it; however, I will maintain Reynard a false Traitor, and one
whose Life is deservedly forfeited, if but for his late abusing the King, with
a false Story at Creckneypit, which was only feigned to get his Liberty, and to
bring the King's true Subjects into Disgrace, that he might go on in his
Rogueries, and rob and spoil all that pass by his Castle: You see likewise, how
little he respects the King, who the other Day gave him his Life, that he has
sent him, in Derision, Keyward's Head, and laughs at the thoughts of his
deceiving him with a feigned Pilgrimage.

The King heating this, made but light of what the Queen and Libbard had said,
and therefore resolving to take him from his Castle by Force, and execute him
on his former Sentence, he commanded all the Beasts to arm, and attend him for
that Purpose within six Days; ordering those that were not foee to this, as any
way favoring the Fox, to turn their Back, that he might know them for his
Enemies; and hereupon the Assembly broke up.

Grimbard, hearing what Danger Reynard was in, privately withdrew, to advertise
him of it, that so he might make timely Provision for his Safety: Reynard no
sooner saw him, but concluding he came with bad News, demanded what brought him
thither? To which the Brock, replied, O Uncle! fly for your Life, the King,
with all the Power of his Kingdom, is arming against you; your Enemies Bruin
and Isgrim, are released out of Prison; and have slain the Ram, for bringing
Keyward's Head; likewise all his Lineage is given up to their Power, and they
are now in higher. Favor than ever, wherefore they will not fail to urge your
Destruction; there are likewise exhibited against you, new Complaints by
Corbant the Rook, and Laprel the Coney.

Well, Nephew, replied the Fox, I return you hearty Thanks for your officious
Care; but were there a Thousand conspiring against me, I value 'em not a Rush;
for if I can have liberty to speak for my self to the King, I shall be even
with some of 'em, before they are aware; Therefore trouble not your self,
Nephew, but let us go in and feast on this Pair of young Pigeons, I just now
took, as they attempted to fly out of their Nest: So, charging him he should
tell his Wife nothing of the Danger, in they went, where Ermelin received the
Brock very kindly. After Dinner, Reynard requested Grimbard that he would
promise to stand by him, and get him as many Friends as he could to do the
like, for he was resolved to come to Court, and once more face his Enemies. You
do well in that, replied the Brock, and on my Life, I will undertake for you,
that you shall not be without Friends to second you, nor want the Favor to
speak freely before the King. Then Reynard called his Sons before him, and
declared to the Brock how forward they were at their Game, that they had the
true Quality of the Fox, which was to entangle and betray, and kill when they
seemed most compassionate and all that he had further to learn 'em before they
were sent out, was to avoid Gins; Snares, and Hounds; which Towardliness of his
young Kindred made the Brock greatly rejoice; and having rested a little, they
prepared to depart; Reynard charging his Wife to be troubled at no News she
should hear, but construe it to the best; as also to be careful of herself and
his Children, and keep close the Gates, not letting any one in, Friend or Foe,
till his return, or that she heard further from him: And so away they went
together, not telling his Wife the Cause of his Journey, whereupon he left her
in exceeding Sorrow for his so sudden and unexpected Departure,

Being on the Way, the Fox urged the Brock to take his Confession a second
time, for that since he was last shriven, he had committed many Sins; to which
Grimbard agreeing, he thus proceeded: You know very well how I caused the Bear
and the Wolf to be served by fasly accusing 'em to the King, as also Dame
Arsewind, whose Hinder-shooes were stripped off at my Request, and further then,
know, that the Story that I told the King of the Treasure was all feigned, as
was the Conspiracy of Bruin and Isgrim; Keyward I killed, and betrayed the Life
of Bellin, in sending his Head by him to the King; the Coney I wounded, and
would have slain, had he not slipped out of my Hand; Sharpbeak I did slay and
eat; I further put an almost fatal Trick upon the Wolf, which in my last
Confession I omitted to mention, which was thus: As we passed over a Heath, by
a Wood-side, the Wolf being very hungry, espied a Mare with a curious-fat Colt
running by her Side; at this his Chaps watered, but fearing the Mare's
Strength, he resolved to try another Way, whereupon he sent me to know whether
she would sell it, and if so, what the Price would be; when I, to please him at
that time, went and asked the Question; to which the Mare replied; she would
willingly sell him for ready Money; but when I came to demand her Price, she
said, she could not tell it; but if I could read, I might find it written at
the botoom of her Hind-foot: Ho, ho, thought I, are you thereabouts; well, this
will pass on my Uncle Isgrim, but not on me; then I told her truly, that I
could not read, nor did I come to purchase for myself, but for the Wolf, who is
hard by expecting your Answer: Then, said the Mare, let him come and read it
himself, that we may speedily agree: So I went and told him, if he could read
he might have his Belly full, for the Mare would freely sell her Foal, if he
could read to her the Price of him, which, she said, was written on the Bottom
of her Hind-foot.

Read, replied Isgrim, (with a kind of Disdain) why I have studied at both
Universities, and can read perfectly well all Languages: Therefore, if that be
all, let me alone to buy the Purchase. So away he went, but had no sooner taken
up the Mare's Foot, but the crafty Jade, whilst he was poring on it, smote him
fall on the Forehead, so that he tumbled over and over, lying and pitiously
howling on the Ground, whilst she galloped away, laughing at the Trick, her
Foal following her the same Pace, till they were both out of sight; whereupon I
went to him, and said, Dear Uncle, what have you eaten up all the Colt, and
lefe menor one small Morsel? But pray what did you find written on the Mare's
Foot; it should be a pricked Song by your singing; indeed you have now showed
yourself a good Scholar, and gained a plentiful Feast by it. O Nephew, replied
he, do not add more Misery to me by scossing at me, you see I am all bloody and
desperately wounded, for whilst I was looking or her Foot, taking the Nails to
be Letters, the damned Jade, with her long Leg, and Iron-heel, smote me on the
Head, that she has even beat out my Brains. Alas, said I. Uncle, I am sorry for
that; but indeed I took you to be one of the greatest Scholars; but, I see,
according to the old Proverb, That the greatest Scholars are not the wisest
Men. This, with my smiling, made him fret exceedingly, but all in vain, he knew
not how to help himself.

Upon this Reynard desired the Brock to absolve him; which he did, by making
him take certain Stones out of a Brook, and laying them at a Distance, roll
himself three times over them; and so they went on, discoursing of Flatteries
of Courtiers, the Dissimulation of Priests and Women, etc. till they came to
the King's Presence, where he saw many of his Friends, which made him not a
little rejoice; then he fell down before the Throne, whilst the King wondered
how he durst venture to appear; and thus began to deliver himself: My dread
Sovereign Lord the King, and Lady the Queen, May all Blessings descend upon you
to crown you with a lasting Health and Happiness, and give you Wisdom, that you
may truly discern between Right and Falsehood; to know who are your Friends, and
who are your Enemies: Here, I am come to excuse my elf of Crimes unjustly laid
to my Charge since my late Departure; or else by this time, I had been far on
my Pilgrimage; therefore I beseech your Majesty to let me see my Accusers that
dare to impute to me any Failing in my Promise, or Disobedience to your Majesty.

To this the King replied, with a stern Countenance, Reynard, I know you are
subtle, and full of Deceit; but this Day shall be the end of your taking Pride
in my Disgrace, for which your Life shall immediately pay the Price of my
Dishonor: You have showed your Obedience to my Commands, in the Violence and
Murder you offered to the Coney and Rook, who are here to testify again you.

My dread Sovereign, replied the Fox, their Accusations I would gladly hear;
however, I know it to be false.

Then they accused him, as has been recited; upon which the Fox replied, My
Lord, this is a palpable Malice, and no Truth, they are suborned by my Enemies,
to bring these Slanders against me: I confess when my Nephew Grimbard, brought
me Tidings of it, I was preparing for my Pilgrimage, but it so troubled me,
that I resolved not to go till I had cleared myself before your Majesty: The
Coney, whom I ever held as my Friend, came to my House, as I was saying
Mattins, and was kindly welcomed, and feasted by my Wife, with such, as on a
Fast Day, I could keep in my House; but having refreshed himself, Russel my
Son, who waited at Table, offered to take away what he had left; whereupon the
Coney gave him a violent Blow on his Mouth, which made him bleed; which his
Brother Reynardine seeing, and being grieved thereat, fell upon him, and would
have slain him, had not I, upon his crying out, come from my Devotions and
taken him off, giving my Son severe Correction for breaking the Rules of
Hospitality in my House; but, it seems, for the good Deed, his Malice has made
him post to your Highness, and accuse me of a Crime I am ignorant of.

As for the Rook, there is nothing more false than this Accusation; for, as
Yesterday, I was sitting at my Door, he came flying about me with great Cries,
of which I demanded the Cause, he said, Woe is me! for my Wife, Dame Sharpbeak,
is dead. How came she by her Death? said I. Alas, replied he, Yesterday on the
Heath she found the Carcass of a dead Hare, which she eating, and it being full
of Worms, they eat through her Stomach and killed her. This, my Lord, is the
Truth, neither more nor less.

If this be true, which I very much doubt, replied the King, there is another
Treason against you, which I believe, you cannot deny, that is, the Murder of
Keyward, whose Head you sent me, in Derision, by Bellin, the Ram, who has been
executed, as being only your Messenger, and for which you shall surely die.

At this Reynard was much dejected, but being comforted by Dame Rukenaw the
She-Ape, his Aunt, he took Courage, and replied, Alas, my gracious Lord, you
tell me strange News; is the poor Hare dead? It grieves me to think on it: he
was very dear to me, and far be it from me, that I, who loved him, should have
a Hand in his Death.

Then said the King, sternly, Thou dissembling Traitor, dare thou pretend to
guild over thy Wickedness with plausible Words; thou art now too sure in my
Hands to escape my Justice.

This made him fetch many deep Sighs, as fearing now his last Hour was come;
which the She-Ape perceiving, addressed herself on his behalf, to the King in
this manner: My gracious Lord, I beseech you, for a while, suspend your Anger,
and hear what I Have to say.

At first the King refused her Request, but the Queen and Libbard interceeding,
she had leave to proceed.

Then said she, My gracious Lord, there are many here that complain, who have
more grievously offended; my Kinsman's Merits plead for him, when they can
pretend to none, that has been any ways serviceable to your Highness; it is not
unknown to your Majesty, what Services yourself and Predecessors have received
from his Father and self, having born greater Reputation in Court than either
the Bear or Wolf, or all their Kindred; their wise Councils have been in great
Esteem, when others have been rejected; but now things go strangely, his
Services are forgot, and those that deserve not, are token into Favor, who
rather seek to Debase, than Advance, your Majesty's Honor and Dignity.

The King replied, Dame Rukenaw, had the Offenses done by Reynard been to you
you would have resented 'em more: He has been so wicked, that of all others,
there is none but yourself will speak well of him; and you only he has deceived
into a belief of his Sanctity, by Flattery and Dissimulation.

Nay, replied she, my Lord, I am more wise than to be deceived, I know much
Good of him, and therefore love him; I can tell how his Judgment and Wisdom has
been applauded by your Majesty; you may we remember a Man and a Serpent came to
the Court for Judgment, and he wisely determined it; when neither the Bear,
Wolf or any other knew how to do it; the Ca^ was briefly thus: A Man on the
Roa^ found a Serpent entangl'd in a Snare, who cried pitiously to him for help,
which moved the Man to Compassion; so that upon the Serpent's Oath, not to hurt
him, he delivered him from certain Death; whereupon they traveled together,
till the Serpent grew hungry, flew at the Man; but ^^e starting aside, put him
in mind of his Oath; to which he replied, I remember ^t well; but now Hunger
dispences with ^t, I may lawfully kill thee, However, the ^an desired, that his
Case might be tried ^y the next Passenger, which happened to ^e Tisellen the
Raven, and Slinope his Son, who gave Judgment against the Man, in ^opes to get
a share: but he refused to stand ^o their Award, as Delighters in Blood, ^s
also he did that of the Bear and the Wolf, who gave the like Sentence against
him for the same Reason, appealing from ^^em to your Majesty, whom he knew to
(...) Noble, Merciful, and Wise, yet much ^erplex'd to determine this Matter:
by ^our Desire the Fox undertook to do it: ^en he desired to see the Serpent in
the same ^se he was when the Man released him: hereupon, by your own Command,
be^g nooz'd in the Snare, out of which he ^d been delivered, my Kinsman then
said, If the Man will release him now, and trust to his Oath, then the Serpent
shall be at liberty to choose whether he will eat him, or forbear; but if he
thinks he will break his Oath, then I leave it to his Discretion to do as he
pleases. To which the Man replied, I will not release him; for if he, who is
once perjured, ^et loose, he will not hereafter regard any Oath, but certainly
destroy me. So the Serpent for his former Ingratitude was left in the Snare to
be famished. This Judgment of Reynard's was then highly applauded, as just and
equitable, by yourself and all the Court, above what had ever been given in any
doubtful Case; though he boasted not of it, as many would have done, though less
deserving: Besides these, and other things, he has many Kindred that will stand
by him with their Lives and Fortunes; as for my part, I and my three Children
will die in his Cause, rather than he should suffer any Injury; which a number
more will not fail to do. Then she called forth all her Kindred and Relations,
saying, Come forth all my dear Friends, and stand by your Kinsman Reynard, all
of you Petition for him to his Majesty, that he may give him the Privilege of
the Law.

Then presently leaped forward a great number of Beasts, as the Squirrel,
Weazel, Ferrit, Otter, etc. all of them loving Pullen as well as Reynard,
standing by him, and beseeching the King in his behalf, for they stood in awe
of Dame Rukenaw, and durst not disoblige her.

The Queen seeing this, said, Truly Dame, I and Sir ^^relupel told the King as
much, but his Anger, for the Death of Keyward, blinded his Judgment and Reason
so, that he would not give us the hearing.

To this the King replied, Truly I was a little overseen in it, for that
Disgrace done me, gave me no time to consider; but now he shall answer for
himself, and if the Laws will quit him, I Am contented.

At this unexpected Turn of his Affairs, Reynard greatly rejoiced, and gave
hearty Thanks to his Aunt, who had gained this Advantage for him; saying, Dear
Aunt, I Am now confident all my Adversaries shall not prevail against me.

Moral.] The Anger of the Lion, shows the Disposition of a good Prince, to be
offended at Vice and Injustice, or at the Injuries done to his good Subjects;
and the Persuasion of the Queen and Libbard shows the Temper every good Prince
ought to be endowed withal, not to be too hasty or passionate, but to
administer Justice with Moderation. The Wolf's Envying shows the Malice of a
subtle Foe is to take all Advantages. The Brock's secret going to the Fox shows
the Office of a good Friend; as does the Ape's, who spoke for him; but the
Fox's second Repentance, a continued Dissimulation, to ensnare the Belief of
the Credulous.

CHAP. VI.
How the Fox, having liberty to plead, protested his Innocence; and described
certain Jewels he sent to the King and Queen by the Ram, grieving for the loss
of them; and his own Services and Merits, gains the King's good Opinion.



THE Fox having now free leave to plead, said, May it please my gracious Lord,
you much astonished me, when you mentioned the Death of Keyward the Hare; if he
be dead! O where is Bellin the Ram, that he may stand forth and clear my
Innocence; besides, I tremble to think what precious Jewels are lost, if he has
miscarried, all the Wealth of both the Indies cannot make a Recompense for
their inestimable Value; but more it grieves me, they should be detained from
you, to whom I sent one of them, and the other two to my Lady the Queen, in
Reqiutal of her Kindness to me in my late Misery.

Nay, said the King, however it happened, I received no Jewels, the Ram only
brought me the Head of Keyward,

Upon this, the Fox looked very sad and dejected, crying out, Wo^ and alas, to
me! that ever I should trust so faithless a Messenger with such inestimable
Treasure; the loss of these Jewels, I know, will be the Death of my Wife, when
the doleful Tidings comes to her. Well, said Dame Rukenaw, sorrowing for 'em
will little avail; let us hear 'em described, and then we'll take care to find
'em out, in whose Hands they are, if all the wise Women in the Country can
discover 'em.

O! dear Aunt, said Reynard, you do but say this to take off my Sorrow, for I
am confident, into whose Hands soever they are fallen, they will not part with
them for any thing on Earth; no Crowns or Kingdoms can buy them from them, if
they but know their Virtues, however, though their Remembrance does add to my
Affliction, yet, to please you, if the King and Queen desire it, I will
describe them. Upon this, having Leave given, he began in this manner:

The firist, said he, that I sent to my Lord the King, was a King of Gold, in
which was placed a Jewel of great Price, it was inamel'd with Sable and Azure,
and within it engraven three Hebrew Characters, which I could not read; but
going to a great Astrologer and Linguist, he told me, they were the Names which
Seth brought out of Paradise, when he fetched from the Guardian Angel some of
the Oil of Mercy to heal his Father Adam' s grievous Distemper, and whosoever
wrote it, should he free from Thunder and Lightning, and any Conspiracies
against him live long, be always victorious, resist Temptations, Witchcraft,
and be Prudent and Healthful: The Stone set in it was of three several Colors,
the first like Christial, glittering with Sparkles of Fire, so that in the Dark
it gave a mavelous Light; the second was clear and sparkling with
Flame-colour, having a Virtue to cure any Defect in the Eyes or Body, only by
stroaking the Place grieved, and indeed most Distempers, especially all Venom:
The last was of Emerald-colour, mixed with small Spots of Purple, so that
whoever wore it, should be matchless for Valor, altogether unconquerable, not
stirred to Passion, but Wise, Just, and Merciful: (...) had many other rare
Virtues, so that I could not imagine any Creature on Farth worthy to possess it
but your Majesty, who is the best of Princes. The other two Jewels I sent to my
Lady the Queen, one of 'em was a Comb, made of the Shoulder Bone of Pantherus,
a Beast found near Paradise, whose Beauty and Smell allures all Beasts to him,
and in this one Bone all the Virtues of him is contained, yet it was polished
so light, that any Breath of Wind would move it from its place; the Scent of it
was so rare, that it cured Appoplexies, and all Diseases of the Head, beyond
the Skill of the most learned Doctors; and between the Teeth of it, which
looked like Silver, were spaces in which curious Figures were engraven, and
inlaid with Gold, representing the Story, how the three Goddesses strove for
the Golden Apple, and chose Paris, Son to King Parimus, Judge, to determine the
Strife; who seeing them all naked, for the Inscription one it was, Be it be
given to the Fairest; he decreed it to Venus the Queen of Beauty, in lieu
whereof, she gave him the beauteous Hellen of Greece, Wife to King Manelaus,
which caused the ten Years Wars of Troy, and in the end, the Destruction of
that famous City by the Greeks. The next Jewel as I may well term it, was a
Mirror, or Glass, wherein whoever looked, might see things at a great distance,
as plain as if they had been near them, yea, for many Miles: The Wood of the
Frame was of such a Nature, that it was exceeding light, no Worms, or space of
Time was capable to corrupt or destroy it; and on it were framed many curious
Stories, inlaid with Wood of various Colors, enamal'd with Gold, the Words
being written under the Figures in Letters of Gold to explain 'em: The first
was the Fable of the Horse, who being at Contention with the Heart, and not able
to overcome him, implored the Herdsman to mount on his Back, that so he might
pursue his Adversary; but being weary, the Heart by much outstripping him, he
desired his Rider to light, that he might rest. Nay said he, not so, for having
a Bridle in your Mouth, and Spurs at my Heels, you having once voluntarily
given up your Power and Freedom, shall be at Command. At which the poor Horse,
too late, seeing what Misery his Thurst of Revenge had brought him into, only
sighed and bewailed his Captivity. At another Corner of the Frame was, the
Fable of the Ass and the Hound: It so happened, that an old rich Farmer had a
little Hound that he entirely loved, who used to play with him, leaped into his
Lap, and feed at his Table, whose lazy kind of Life the Ass seeing, and how
much the Hound was made of for it, whilst himself, who by his Labor brought in
much Gain, was turned into a dirty Hovel, to feed on Chaste and Straw, resolved
to try if his flattering his Master might bring him into as great Favor;
whereupon one Day as he came home he met him, leap^d upon him, frisk'd his
Tail, and shook his Ears; but his Master little minding it he came nearer to
him, and standing on his Hind legs, laid his Fore-feet on his Shoulders,
braying horribly, and offered to kiss him; by which the Master was thrown to
the Ground, crying out piteously, Help, help, this wicked Ass will murder me.
Whereupon his Servants came running with Cudgels, and so belabour'd poor
Baldwin the Ass, that with a bruised Pate and broken Bones, he was forced to
fly to his Hovel for Shelter, where lying down on dirty Sraw, he thus
complained to himself; O Woe is me! I see I must be a poor laborious Ass, whilst
idle Parasites Flatterers live by my Toil and Sweat, in Ease and Pleasure. At
another Corner was the Story of my Father and Sir Tybert, who traveling
together by a Wood-side, and being espied by the Huntsmen and Hounds, when my
Father said to the Cat, Climb up that Tree, for I have a hundred Wiles to
escape. Whereupon he immediately chamber'd up a high Oak, where, among the
thick Boughs, he remained secure and unseen, whilst my Father was pursued near
at the Heels; and had he not dropped his Mail, and flipp'd into a Hole, he had,
notwithstanding all his Wiles, become a Breakfast to the greedy Hounds; whilst
the Cat stood securely scoffing, saying, Now, Sir Reynard, it is time to use all
your Cunning, or your Skin goes to the Furrier's At the fourth Corner was the
Story of the ungrateful Wolf, to the Crane, who having with his long Neck and
Bill, pulled a Bone out of his Throat, that stick cross, which grievously
pained him, and had certainly killed him; he not only refused Sir Gruin the
Crain, his Reward, but scoffingly told him, It was well he escaped with Life;
since when his Head was in his Mouth, it was in his Power to have bit it off;
and since he was so kind as not to do it, he ought to take that for
Satsfaction: which proves his high Ingratitude, not only to the Crane, but to
me who have done him much good. These, and a number more, were the Devices that
beautified this stately Jewel, which makes me shed Tears for its Loss, since,
with such Care, I took it from the rest of my Father's Treasure, to preserve it
for your Majesty: And one thing more there is that much troubles me, which is,
That your Majesty should say, That neither my Father nor myself have done any
Good, but been troublesome to the Court: Remember, I beseech you, when you were
young, how your Royal Father, lying on a languishing Bed, despairing of Life my
Father came from his studying Physic at Montpelier, and coming into the King's
Presence, he said, Ah! Reynard, I am grievous sick, and must die, unless your
Learning and Skill in Physic can find a Remedy.

Let not my Lord say so, replied he, then feeling his Pulse, and viewing his
Urine he found it was a Pleurisy, and might be cured, by eating the Liver of a
Wolf of seven Years growth. This, Isgrim's Father hearing began to tremble; but
the languishing King casting his Eyes on him, said, Sir Isgrim, you hear this,
and I am sorry it falls on you, yet, for the Public Good, you must not value
your Life, since in mine the whole Commonwealth is so nearly concerned.

Then the Wolf began to excuse it, saying, He was not meant by it, for he was
but five Years old.

However, said my Father, that matters not, let me see the Liver, and then I
can tell whether it will fit or not.

So the Wolf was slain by the King's Cook, his Liver taken out and dressed, and
thereupon your Father recovered his Health, and lived many Years; though perhaps
your Highness was so young then, that this Passage is slipped out of your
Memory; though my Father was honored for this with a Gold Chain and Medal, which
I yet have. Nay as for my own part, I may boast of some little Service done to
your Majesty; you may well remember, how when this Wolf present, and I, had
killed a fat Swine, you and your Queen came very hungry out of the Forest,
where you had been taking the Air, and demanded a Share, but Isgrim grumbl'd,
and would allow you none of his Part; however, I bestowed mine on you freely;
but that not sufficing, you demanded some of his, which he was conveying away,
and for his Refusal gave him such a Blow with your Royal Paw, as fetched the
Skin over his Ears, and then compelled him to hunt for more; when I going with
him, we soon found a fat Calf and brought it to you, and it being my Lot to
divide it, I gave half to the Queen and half to you; the Intrails I sent to the
Princes your Children, giving the Wolf only the Head, and being myself
contented with the Feet, which made you ask, Who taught you to divide so well?
To which, pointing at the Wolf's Ears, I replied, That Fxample before me made
me see how to behave my self toward my Betters. This you applauded, and was
very much pleased at what I had done; but now, by Flatterers and Upstarts, all
my past Services are forgotten, and I am trampled on, who having done well,
whilst they for doing wickedly, are exalted: There was a time that nothing was
done without my Advice, but that is past, and I must be content with my
Sufferings.

Well, replied the King, grieve not so much Sir Reynard, for that Day mny be
restored, if you behave yourself as becomes your Birth; I have nothing more to
lay to your Charge, but Keyward's Death, and and the Disgrace you put upon me
in doing it; but Bellin being executed, and no Witness to prove it, as to
Matter of Fact, I must take your Word that you are innocent, and acquit you.

Upon this the Fox fell on his Knees, and returned him hearty Thanks; vowing,
by his Holiness's Toe, none could be more sorry than he for the Death of the
Hare: but more particularly for the Loss of the Jewels, which, he said, the
treacherous Ram had embezelled; but that Search should be made for 'em in all
Parts of the World, both by Art Magic and strict Enquiry; which highly pleased
the King and Queen; so that the Fox was dismissed to take his Repose, and make
merry with his Friends; whilst the King consulted what should be done for him.

The Moral.] The Relation the Fox makes of the Jewels, which he knew would be
Baits to a covetous Mind, shows a cunning Dissembler, who knows how to blow
with all Winds, he well knew if this gained Belief, his Intention of sending
'em to their Majesty's would gain his Pardon, which he fancied his seeming
Sorrow would work on 'em, upon their Loss, and that his inculcating to the
King, his Father's, and his own Services, would much further it; which indeed,
is the greatest Insinuation to gain Belief of our Innocence.

CHAP. VII.
How the Fox made his Peace with the King; and how he was complained against by
the Wolf. whereupon they exchanged Gloves, in order to try their Innocence by
Combat.



THE Fox at this unexpected Deliverance, and Hopes of Advantage, was exceeding
joyful, laughing his Enemies to Scorn; which so enraged the Wolf, that he
resolved to lay new Accusations to his Charge; and therefore when he was called
into the Council, he stood up and craved An (...); which being granted, O my
(...) your Wisdom should again be deceived by this Traitor, composed of all
Falsehoods and Deceits, to whose Oath there is no Credit to be given: This
Villian, notwithstanding he now looks so demure, lately ravished my Wife; and
put us both in Danger of our Lives: for persuading her to take Fish with her
Tail, whilst she, silly Soul, staid so long in a frosty Morning till it was
frozen in, he leaped upon her and ravished her before my Face, I being then at
a Distance from him; but upon my Approach he ran away, and raised the Village
upon us, so that we were desperately wounded, and she freed from the Ice, with
the Loss of four Inches of her Tail.

To this the Fox replied, My Lord, It is altogether Untruth as to any Rape; I
taught her indeed to catch Fish, and she caught a great Number; but she over
greedy, staid too long, till she was frozen in, then she called me to help her
out, which I labored to do with all my Strength, but he, over-jealous of her,
seeing me at a distance, supposed me over-familiar with her; to avoid whose
Fury, I retired; then they ran howling about the Fields to catch 'em a Heat,
which made the People come out armed in Pursuit of 'em. This, my Lord is the
Truth, and Truth is the Badge of our Family; which in eight Days I Will prove by
sufficient Witnesses.

Then said Dame Arsewind, O thou dissembling Villian! this is not only true,
but more; for finding you once in a Well, got down in a Bucket, I asked what
you was doing? and you replied, you had there found so many Fish, that you had
almost broke your Belly with 'em, and yet great store was remaining; then said
I, Reynard, how may I come to help you to devour 'em? O Aunt, said you, get
into the other Bucket, which is aloft, and you will be presently with me; so I
leaped in, when by my Weight I descended, and you ascending got out; then with
Taunts and Jears, you left me there, where I narrowly escaped with Life, being
found half starved by the Swains, that came to draw Water for their Sheep, who
miserably beat me.

Why Aunt, replied the Fox, if this be true, it was but Self-preservation, and
there is no Mortal, I think, but would free himself from Trouble, when it lies
in his Power to accomplish it; besides, you were more able to bear the Strokes
than I, being both feeble and tender: In this I have taught you that Wit, never
to trust Friendship too far, before you have tried it, lest you repent your
Credulity too late.

Well, Villian, said Isgrim, you may triumph over my Wife's Weakness, though it
becomes you not; but do you remember, Varlet, how you served me with the
She-Ape?

I remember, replied the Fox, she gave you due Correction for your Sawciness
and Brutality; and, if you please, I will relate the Story before this noble
Assembly.

With all my Heart, said Isgrim, if you will speak Truth.

Fear it not, said the Fox; And thus my gracious Lord, it happened, As I was
ranging the Woods, Isgrim found me, complaining of Hunter, asking me if I had
any thing to give him, or could set any Prey for him; for he is naturally lazy
of himself, and will rather undergo the Hazard of starving, than labor, as
other Creatures do for their Food: I told him, at that time I could not, and so
we traveled together in various Discourses, till we heard a great (...) in a
Hole, under a Tust of Bushes, where I imagined there might be some Prey;
thereupon desired him to go in, by reason of his great Strength, to seize it,
but he strained Courtesy with me, saying, He was afraid least Serpents should
lurk there; but I being wise and subtle, might better avoid the Danger, and he
would stay till I returned to give him an Account; so, to please him, I
ventured, and found there a monstrous She-ape with her Young, the uggliest that
ever I beheld, the Place stunk abominably with their Piss and rotten Litter
they lay on; yet being willing to pleasure him with Food, of which I saw great
store I spoke her very fair, calling her Aunt though indeed, none but Rukenaw of
that Kind is my Aunt, saying, Much Joy to you and my fair Cousins, your
Children; I would have visited you sooner had I known of your Lying in.

Truly, Reynard, replied she, I am sorry you find me no better provided; but
to such as I have you are heartily welcome.

Then she set before me Vension, and other Provisions, on which I seemed
heartily to feed, the better to please her, though indeed, the Stench had much
impaired my Appetite: Then said she, Nephew, I am glad you are come, being the
worthiest and wisest Gentleman in the King's Dominions, that I may recommend
the Care of my Children to you, to be trained up in virtuous and industrious
Ways, that they may know how to live, and behave themselves in the World with
Credit.

I told her I would do any thing for her, and the good of my young Cousins at
my next visit, which should be very shortly; so being willing to be out of this
noisome Place, I made my Compliment of Leave; but she forced upon me a side of
Venison, to carry to my Wife, which when I came out, I gave to the Wolf who lay
howling under a Tree for Meat; but that not half sufficing him, he asked if
there were any more in the Place? I told him there was, and he might have it,
if he could dissemble and give smooth Words; O, said he, let me alone for that:
and so he grecdily entered, yet he had not long been there, but I heard him
howl most terribly, and soon after he came rushing out, with his Ears bloody,
and his Skin torn in many Parts; for, it seems, he had not only reproached her
with her own and her Youngs Ugliness but went to take away her Meat by force,
wherefore they all fell upon him, and used him as he deserved, for so ill
timing his brutish Language, since he ought to know according to the old
Proverb, That how deformed soever they be, each one esteems her own the
fairest. This my Lord, is the Truth of the Matter, and if he can deny it, let
him speak.

The Wolf hearing this, fell into a great Rage, (for indeed he had been
betrayed into that Place by Reynard) saying, Thou Traitor, this, as all the
rest thou have alleged, is utterly false; and to justify it, and that thou
art the basest of all Traitors, I will prove upon thy Body by Combat, according
as the Laws direct: in Confirmation whereof, I throw down my Gage before the
King, if thou dare take it up to answer me.

The Fox doubting his Strength, knew not what to think of it: yet considering
the Wolf's Claws, since the last stripping, were not grown again, and
contemning to let his Courage fall before so many of his Kindred; and that what
he had said might thereupon be suspected, he recollected his Spirits, and
starting up, said, Whosoever accused him as a Traitor, was a Liar to his Face,
and he would prove it upon his Body by Arms, when, or wheresoever he should be
required to it. That do I, said Isgrim. Then there, said the Fox, is my Gage to
answer thee. These being mutually exchanged, were delivered to the King, who
allowed the Combat to be the next Day, and took Sureties of 'em for the
performing it.

Dame Rukenaw understanding this, came to the Fox, and drawing him aside, after
she had commended his Courage, as a Grace to his Family, who had been valiant,
doing many brave exploits in Arms, at home and abroad, she proceeded to give
him some Council as to this particular Affair, saying, Good Nephew, be
attentive to my Advice, and then the Wolf shall not prevail against you

Dear Aunt, replied Reynard, your Love and wise Councils have always been so
available to me, that I shall not forget the least of your Instructions, but,
to the utmost, put in Practice whatsoever you desire. Then she proceeded in
this manner.

You must, to make you the nimbler, and not to be laid hold on, have all your
Hair shaved off, except that on the Tail, which you shall reserve to offend
your Enemy; then I will sleek you over with an Ointment that shall harden your
Skin, and yet make it so stick, that he can never lay hold of you.

This being done, Reynard looked very airy and gay, and so he went to Bed, in
great Hopes of obtaining the Victory: Many other Advices she gave him, too
tedious here to mention, and not much to the purpose of the History; but one
among the rest, was, That the next Morning he should drink stoutly, the better
to expel any Fear; and to piss upon his Tail, and sprinkle it as he saw
occasion, thereby to blind the Wolf, and hinder his Pursuit. For this the Fox
gave her infinite Thanks, and kept her Councils in his Mind, as resolving to
put 'em in Practice.

He slept little that Night for thinking of his next Day's Enterprise; but the
Wolf slept soundly, as fancying himself sure of the Victory; by which we may
see how Men are often disappointed of their Expectations. In the Morning his
Kinsman the Otter came to him, and brought him a young Duck, saying, Take good
Heart, and eat this to strengthen you, for great is your Undertaking, and
requires your utmost Strength and Policy to acquit yourself nobly

I thank you for your present Advice, said the Fox, and so they breakfasted
together.

Moral.] By the Wolf's Complaint, is showed an insatiable Thirst of Revenge for
Injuries done him. By the Fox's accepting the Challenge, denotes, that politic
Men, though weak, are in Expectation to overcome the Strong, that are given up to
unadvised Rashness. The She-wolf's Misfortunes, denotes, Covetousness brings
Danger. The Fox's Escape that way, Self-preservation. And the She-Ape's Cave,
that good Words are bitter than bad.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Fox entered into Combat with the Wolf, and overcome him: And how
thereupon he was advanced by the King to many Honors.



AFter this Refreshment, Reynard went, attended by a great number of his
Kinsfolks, to enter the Lists, where the Wolf stood raving, and accusing him as
a Traitor; and though he had accepted the Challenge, he was so guilty he durst
not appear; but when they saw him marching very stately in that Trim, they
star'd on him; whereupon the King said, Reynard, I see you more regard your
Safety than your fine Apparel. But he only made his Obeisance and passed on;
then entering the List, they were both sworn by the Libard, appointed Marshal
of the Field, that their Causes were right and just; and every one, on pain of
Death, except the Combatants, to avoid the List: And now the King, Queen, and
Nobles, having taken their places, the Trumpets sounded the Signal to begin the
Combat.

Upon this the Wolf came toward the Fox with open Mouth and extended Paws, as
if he would immediately have devoured him; but Reynard nimbly leaped between
his Legs, and when he turned again upon him, he pissed on his Tail, and dashed
it in his Eyes, which so blinded him, that it hindered his Pursuit, and in the
next Course he cast up the Sand with his Hind-feet, which sticking to the
Urine, put him to more Pain, which whilst he was clearing, he sprung upon him,
and with his Claws tore the Skin of his Eye-brow down to the middle of his
Face, whereupon his Eye hung out, and Blood flowed exceedingly; but this
enraged Sir Isgrim the more, so that violently falling upon him, he rushed him
to the Ground, and whilst he labored to get from under him, he catc'h one of
Reynard's Feet in his Mouth, whereupon he cried out, Now Traitor, thou are at
my Mercy, confess thy Sins, and all the Injuries done to me before thou dyest,
for now thy End is come.

The Fox finding himself in this piteous Plight, betook him to his
Dissimulation, humbly beseeching Mercy, and for spairing his Life, himself, his
Family, and whole Estate should be at his Service, to dispose of as he pleased;
that he would freely confess his Guilt, and be at his Command to bring him
Provisions at all times; that he was sorry he had undertaken the Combat
against him.

O thou base Dissembler, replied the Wolf, these fair Speeches are made only to
escape from the Advantage I have over you, and then you will sing a new Song to
my Disgrace; but I have been too often deceived, ever to trust you more; but
will now take my Revenge at full, for the Injuries done to my Wife and myself,
which cry aloud for Vengeance.

Reynard perceiving there was no good to be done by Flattery, had, by this
time, bethought himself of a Stratagem; and thereupon, putting down his other
Foot between the Wolf's Legs, he caught him fast hold by the Stones, and made
him howl in a lamentable manner, so that the Fox had an Opportunity to free his
other Foot, when leaping upon him, he dragged him about the List, as one half
dead, biting and taring him in diverse places; so that his Friends beholding in
what a sad condition he was, petitioned the King to cause the Combat to cease,
and take it into his own Hands for the Decision; of which he accepted, as being
unwilling to lose the Lives of either of his Subjects. Then the Marshal went to
Reynard, and told him, The King would speak with him; and he must, upon pain of
high. Displeasure, desist from any further Violence toward the Wolf, for he
would, no doubt, decree him the Victory.

My Lord, said Reynard, whatever the King pleases to command, I yield ready
Obedience to. All his Kindred came running to him, and proffered their humble
Service; nay, happy was he that could be owned by him, as knowing he was now on
the rising Ground; if he had lost the Victory, they for the most part would
have disowned him to be any of their Relations: For such is the Fashion of this
World, ever to adore the Rising sun; nay, many embraced him with dissembling
Affection, and elaimed Kindred of him, who before was his Enemies: so much the
Terror of this wrought in their Minds: And thus with a stately Train of about a
hundred, or more, he presented himself before the King, falling on his Knees;
but the King commanded him to rise up, saying, Reynard, you have cause to
rejoice at this Victory you have obtained, contrary to my Expectations, in
which you have won much Renown; therefore seeing Right and Justice declare on
your side, I acquit you of all things laid to your Charge, by Isgrim, or any
other; and as soon as his Wounds are cured, he shall be tried, if you please.

Upon this the Fox replied, My Gracious Lord, I have no Malice against him, but
his to me has brought him to deserved Punishment; yet, if your Majesty pleases,
I can freely pardon him, and these my Enemies that stand about you, who sided
with him when in great Favor with your Majesty, and could raise them to
Promotion; but now they shrink from him, and are ashamed to own him; they'er
like the Kennel of Hounds, who waited for one bold Hound, who went into a
Lord's Kitchen to steal Provision, he came out, indeed, with a fair Rib of
Beef, but the Cook running after him, threw sealding Water on him, that took
off his Hair behind, which they, at first, not espying, began to praise him for
his Ventersomeness, but seeing how he had suffered, they slunk away from him,
and would no more admit him into their Company, lest they should be served in
the like manner for partaking with him. These, in like manner have left the
Wolf in his Extremity, whom I, though he is my cruellest Enemy pity.

This dissembling of the Fox gained much Applause, so that he was immediately
conducted to the Court, where a noble Feast was prepared for him, with Music
and Rejoicing, every one praising and extolling him for his fortunate Victory:
So that now from the Depth of Misery, he was rising to the Pinnacle of Honor,
every one crouding to offer their Service to him. Then was he exalted on the
King's right Hand, who said, Reynard, I expect now you should steadfastly keep
your Allegiance, and let not my Ears be filled with any more Complaints of you,
then shall you always govern in this high Station, and I will be guided by your
Wisdom; whilst, at my express Command, all the Beasts of the Forest bow as you
(...) by 'em, and if any do you Injury, I will highly revenge it: So appoint
you chief Justice of all my Teritories.

Reynard's Kindred, as well as himself, upon hearing this, returned the King
Thanks; who told 'em, it was much short of what he intended to do for him;
desiring 'em to admonish him, when they saw him forget himself, as to be
inolinable to go astray; which the She-Ape undertook to do for herself, and all
the rest; saying, She and all the rest would renounce him if he should fail in
any thing he had promised.

Then said the Fox, My most Gracious Lord, I am altogether unworthy of the
Honors you have hea^ed on me; yet will I make it the whole study and business
of my Life, in some measure, to deserve 'em; my Council and Diligence shall
never be wanting, either to Advise or Counter-plot your Enemies. This said,
upon leave given, departed with all his Kindred for Malepardus.

Whilst the Fox was led to the King, the Bear, Cat, and Dame Arsewind, removed
the Wolf out of the Field, he being, through Pain, in a deadly Swound, and laying
him on clean Litter, dressed his Wounds, and sent for Cordials that revived
him; but he no sooner came to his Senses, and remembered what had happened, but
he howled pi^^ously, not so much for the Smart and Anguish he felt, though it was
great, as for the Disgrace he had suffered, and that he saw his Friends, who
statter'd him in his prosperous Estate, had most of 'em forsaken him, and gone
over to the Fox, as thinking with him to be in the warmer ^un: However, those
few Friends that were about him comforted him in the best manner, and carried
him into his own House, putting him to Bed in a high Fe^er, occasioned by his
Wounds; of which ^e was soon recovered, but, at the Fox's Instigation he was
banished into Ireland, with his Wife and Children, in which Country, he and his
Generation have ever since gone howling about the Bogs, Woods and Mountains,
often scaring poor Teague out of his Senses.

Reynard, as I have said, being on his way homeward with a numerous Train of
his Kindred, with a Promise speedily to return to Court; they petitioned for
Places of Honor and Trust under him; to which, Courtier-like, he made 'em a
world of fair Promises, more than ever he performed: When he came in sight of
his Castle, he saw his Wife and Children standing at the Gate, who were
overjoyed at his return, and hasted to meet him, embracing and welcoming him
and all his Friends; Then he told his Wife of his Success, and the King's
Favor to him; how he was advanced to the Height of all Honors, to raise up
and pull down who he pleased; commanding her instantly to prepare a sumptuous
Banquet; which the She-Ape, and some others helped her to do, the Task being
too great for her alone.

In two Hours time the Table was spread, with Fowl, Fish, and Fruit of all
sorts; to which Reynard bid his Friends heartily welcome, So they feasted
together all that Day, and lay there all Night; and the next Morning Reynard,
by the Power the King had given him, Knighted his two Sons, Rossel and
Reynardine; and in Honor of their Advancement, prepared another stately
Banquet, and then dismised all those that came with him: And thus being high
advanced, he kept his Station in spite of his Enemies, gathering great Wealth,
and highly advancing his Children, living many Years in much Fame and Renown;
in which I leave him, and conclude the Subject History of this Book, which if
well regarded, may not only prove pleasant, but very profitable to the Reader.

Moral.] The Wolf's Fury here, signifies a Man desperately bent on Revenge, so
that his Rage makes him blind, and careless of his Safety, whereby he lies
unguarded for his Enemies, who cunningly take advantage over him; which, had he
stood upon better Consideration defended, they could not have done. The Fox
using his Tail, shows that Policy often overcomes Strength. By the Wolf's
catching him by the Foot, is noted, how many Men, not knowing how to make use
of their Advantage, overslip it to their Misfortune. By the Fox's Advancement,
we see Power comes swiftly when least expected. And by the Beasts siding with
him, shows us, that Fear or Hopes of Riches will bring over even our Enemies to
our side; yet ought we not to rely on such, longer than our Prosperity lasts.
By the Wolf's being lest by all but a few, signifies, that none but Relations,
or near Friends, who have a Feeling in our Sufferings, will stand by us in the
Storms of Adversity. From the Beasts Submission and Earnestness to make Peace
with the Fox, we learn, that though our siding with a miserable Party, or Cause,
be never so just, it is better to forego it, and endeavor a Reconcilliation,
when we have to do with a powerful Adversary.

The End of the First Part.
The History of Reynardine. The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
How Reynard, sending his Sons away with h^ Riches, to hide them, was himself
taken an^ executed for his Treasons. How the Rich^ were lost, Rossel slain,
with the Combat^ between the Bear, Panther and Tiger, abo^ the Spoil, etc.



REynard the Fox, notwithstanding the late Honors conferred of him b^ the
King, having private Intelligence, by means of the Brock, that the Cheats and
Fallacies he had put upon the Royal Lion were discovered, he proclaimed a
Traitor, and great Preparations made to apprehend him; doubting his Safety in
the Castle of Malepardus, and being grown aged, and un^it for Travel, called to
him Reynardine and Rossel, his two Sons, to whom he communicated the State of
his Assairs, bidding them take Laprel the Coney with them, for a Guide, and
carry his Treasure with them into the Forest of Longwood, and there hide it in
the Cave Laprel would show them, and remain there to expect the Event of his
Fortune; and to prevent a Discovery, they should kill the Coney as soon as the
Treasure was safely stowed: So delivering to them his Riches, and sending some
Servants with them to carry it to the Confines of the Forest; the Sun was no
sooner set, but they departed with Tears, which presaged they should never see
each other more.

Reynard's two Sons had no sooner left him, but his Castle was besieged by the
command of the Lion, and all his startingholes so^owly guarded, that attempting
to make (...) Escape, he was caught by Sir Bruin the Bear, his mortal Enemy,
and dragged to the Court, where the Lion giving free License to all that would,
to bring their Accusations against him, such great Numbers, whom he had
injuried appeared, and their Complaints were so grievous, and apparently
proved, that the Savage King, without giving him leave to make his Defense, as
he had formerly done, least his Flatteries should again make him relent to
pardon him, ordered him immediately to be hanged; appointing the Wolf his
Executioner. And thus ended Reynard the Fox after all his Cunning and Polices,
his Days by an untimely Death; which shows, however Men may flatter themselve,
there is no State, how great so ever, or cunningly supported, certain upon
Earth.

Now whilst these things passed, Reynards Sons had sent away the Servants, and
lodged their Treasure only with the help of Laprel the Coney, that no more
knowing where they had reposed it, it might, as they conceived, be the more
assuredly safe; the which, when they had done, the Coney for his Service
demanded his Reward; but instead of a Recompense, met with Death, for,
surprizingly picking a Quarrel with him, on the account of his mistrusting
their Bounty, they fell upon him, slew him and threw his dead Body out of the
Cave, thinking themselves now secure, though it soon proved otherwise; for
having Notice of their Father's Death, and that they were Proscribed and
Banished on Pain of Death never to return to their own Country, ^ing least some
of the Servants, who had brought the Treasure to the Confines of the Forest,
might give notice of it, they resolved to remove it to another Forest, and
there to divide it into two Parcels, and live retire, till they could dispose
of it to their greater Advantages, in buying honorable Places, or in
purchasing their Peace and Freedom of returning home: But as they were doing
this, Corbant the Rook, whose Wife, Dame Sharpbeak, Reynard their Father had
slain, allured by the Scent of the dead Coney, came slying thither, and knowing
who they were, secretly watched, unseen to them whither they carried the
Treasure; and then, taking Wing, flew up and down the neighboring Forests till
he found out Bruin the Bear, Truculem the Tiger, and Versute the Panther,
preparing early in the Morning to go a Hunting; to these, with much Joy, he
revealed what he had seen, promissng them, for a tenth Part of the Riches, to
show them the place where it was lodged.

To this they easily and joyful consented, desiring instantly to be conducted
thither; Corbant delayed not to do it, and by that time they arrived there, the
Sun was setting, when having pointed to the places, by flying with his Beak
against them, the Bear immediately entered Reynardine's Cave, which he
perceiving, and finding not only his Riches, but that also his Life would
become a Prey to that mortal and implacable Enemy of his Family, if he was
taken by him, he immediarel bolted through a Retreating-hole, and fled with all
speed possible for his safety.

The Bear having seized and brought forth the Treasure, he proceeded to
Rossel's Cave; who upon the Bear's entering, being of a fiery Temper, and much
less cunning than his Brother, resolved to defend his Treasure, or lose his
Life; so flying at Sir Bruin with his sharp Teeth, he caught him fast by the
Nose, and bit him so grievously, that he roared out terribly; whereat the Tiger
came rushing in, and immediately slew poor Rossel, throwing his dead Body out
of the Cave, and removing all the Treasure to a distant Forest, where they fell
to sharing it by Lots, till a rich Crown, exceeding bright, set with Jewels,
appearing amongst the Spoils, every one covering to have it, and not agreeing,
the Content grew so hot, that a bloody Combat ensued, with wild Uproar and
Noise, so that Noble, the Lion Prince, Son to the King, being abroad with his
Guard taking the Air in the Forest, hearing it, made thither, and soon, by his
Presence and Commands, parted the Fray; then being informed of the Cause of
their Difference, he told them, he would end the Cause of their Strife; and so
taking up the Crown, set it on his own Head; none daring to contradict it; though
they flattered him, in hopes to have it again, with the present of a large Gold
Chain, but it proved ineffectual for he carried the Crown to the Court, and
there presented it to his Royal Father, as will more fully hereafter appear.

Moral.] By Reynard' s being taken at last and executed, it appears, that though
evil Men may escape for a time, Mischief will certainly overtake them in the
end. The loss of the Treasure, signifies, ill got Gains prosper not. By the
Bear, etc. falling out in dividing the Spoil, and the Lion's taking the Crown,
shows Covetousness and Ambition will in the end most certainly bring both
Sorrow and Strife.

CHAP. II.
How Reynardine, in his Travels, met the Brock, and what Council he gave him.
How the Lion, upon seeing the Crown, presaged the Ruin of his Family, which so
fell out. How the Fox entered into Religious Orders, had a hard Penance
ordered him for Thieving, which made him run away. How he preached to a Flock
of Geese, etc.



REynardine, as is said, having escaped with Life, thought he lost his
Treasure, flying by many obscure Ways, coming into the Kingdom of Zalap, there
he met with his Cousin Grimbard the Brock, whom he saluted, and making himself
known to him, told him of the Loss, and the Danger he had escaped; desiring him
to advise him how he might be safe for the future.

To this the Brock replied, Dear Cousin, you ask a proper Question; for this
Country being open, and full of People, who take Pleasure in Hunting, and
destroying us poor Beasts, it will be proper I show you the Holes under Ground
that you may escape upon any Pursuit, or else, your Life will be always in
danger. Nay then, said the Fox, I wish I had not come into this Country, but
still remained amongst Woods and Forests, places of surest Retreat; but being
here, I now submit to be advised and guided by you in all things.

Hereupon the Brock showed him many Sculking-holes, and places of Retreat: yet
Reynardine, hearing the Cries of Hounds, and Shouts of Hunters from many
places, began to tremble, and seemed not to like them as sufficient Refuges in
time of Danger; and therefore desired his Kinsman to think of some other way
for his continuing in Safety. Truly, replied the Brock, I know none, unless
you will enter into Religious Orders; there you may live fat and plentifully
among the Monks, and Friars, if you can endure the Austerity of their Lives.
Alas, said the Fox, that I will willingly undertake, rather than be every
moment in Jeopardy of my Life.

Upon this the Brock procured him a Pilgrim's Weed to pass the better
undiscovered, and bid him follow him to the Abbey of Manton, where he would
interceed with the Prior to receive him; where I must leave them on their way,
and follow the young Lion to the Court.

The young Lion having carried the Crown with him, as is said, he presented it
to his Father, who looked wishfully on it, groaned within himself, as calling
to mind a Prophecy, that when that Crown should be found and presented him, the
Day of Death drew near, and soon after it his Posterity should utterly fail
from the Kingdom; wherefore he willed him to take it from his sight, and lock
it up in a secret place, where none might ever see it, or come to wear it: This
the Prince obeyed, and soon after his Father died, and he succeeded, as his
eldest Son, King of Beasts; but his Brother Haughty, conspiring with the Bear,
Tiger, and Panther, sew him, and soon after was slain himself, and so ended
that Race, as their Father had predicted.

During these Transactions, Reynardine was come to the Monastry of Manton, and
there taking leave of the Brock, went to crave Admittance, and made his Apology
so well to the Prior, that he was kindly received, and admitted to enter on his
Probation; wherein he behaved himself so modestly, and seemingly devout, that
the Prior highly approved of him, and placed him under the Cook, to serve in
the Kitchen; at which he greatly rejoiced, as knowing here he should stuff his
Gut well; but so many things were pilfered and stole, that he accusing others,
was himself accused, who was, indeed the Thief; yet he bore it out stoutly,
till one Day he was catched by the Prior, who watched through a private
Peep-hole, going off with a whole Carp in his Sleeve, yet, upon his Submission,
his Penance was alloted to fast two Days, and to live in a lonesome Cell,
without the Gates of the Monastery.

This hard Usage so angered the Fox, that soon after he gave them the slip with
his Religious Habit; but having traveled far, and growing very hungry, at last
he espied a Flock of Geese in a Pond, where he could not come at them without
fear of drowning, and therefore to decoy them on Land, in a demure manner,
begins to Preach to them; the silly Geese seeing him in that Habit, and, to
appearance, so devoutly penitent, had no Mistrust of him, left the Water, and
came foolishly gaggling round about him, desiring to see his Book, that they
might say an Ave Maria, which he willingly showed them; but whilst they were
poring on it, at two snaps he bit off two of their Heads, which so affrighted
the other, that they ran screaming into the Pond again, and kept themselves in
the Deep, till they saw him greedily gorge his Paunch on their Fellows Carcases.

Well knowing how he should be pursued, as indeed he was, by the Monks and
Owners of the Geese, he left that Province, and returned again to Zalap; there
fell to Shriving a pracel of Ferrets, for which they were to steal him a Nest
of Rabets; after that an Ass for a Bundle of Straw; but the former was catched
by the Warriner, and condemned to perpetual Imprisonment; and the latter
soundly drubbed by the Owner of the Straw, upon his entering the Barn to fetch
it; whilst the Fox laughed heartily, to see what Fools he had made them, and
into what Danger they were brought; and after having Shriven many others, and
got store of Food from them, in promise of Indulgenices upon his return from
the Pope. Now as he traveled he met the Brock, whom he very kindly saluted,
telling him all his Adventures, and what had befell him from their parting, and
great was the Rejoicing between them; when traveling onwards, they came to the
Palace of Sir Firelapel the Libard, who lying sick, and having Notice by his
Servant, that a Priest approached, desired he might come in and Confess him;
when in Confession, he declared he had been chiefly instrumental in bringing
Reynard the Fox, to the Gallows; this Reynardine stomached exceedingly, but
concealed himself and his Resentments to a fitter Opportunity, which wrought
the Libard's Destruction.

Going from hence, one Evening, intending to rob a Farmer's Barn of a fat
Pullet, the Train of his, Gown was catched in a Trap, and upon the Alarm it
gave, he was forced to leave it behind him and fly for his Life, which put an
end to the Fox's Priesthood; who, by that borrowed Shape and seeming Sanctity,
had deluded many silly Beasts.

Moral.] The Lion's Presage of Destruction to his Family on sight of the Crown,
signifies, we ought even to shun the sight of things that threaten Danger, and
may prove fatal to us. The Fox's taking on him a Religious Life, and his
Proceedings therein, shows how crafty Men, under such Pretenses, delude the
Ignorant. His losing his Gown, signefies, such Deceivers are at last laid open,
and fall idto Disgrace and Contempt.

CHAP. III.
How the Fox flying, almost starved, by a Stratagem cheats the Wolf of his
Prey, then flies; and, by the Advice of the Ape, turning Physician, poisons Sir
Firelapel the Libard, to revenge his Father's Death; the Ape is hanged, but he
flies; and in Disguise, endeavors, by the means of Grimlook the Mastiff, to
enter the Monastry of Manton, but is descovered by Brindle.



THE Fox had no sooner left his Religious Habit, but he became despised and
persecuted by those that had adored him in that Disguise; so that wanting the
fat Morsels they were wont to supply him withal, he grew in great Distress and
Poverty, much bewailing the loss of his Gown, which, had he kept, would have
been an Estate to him; for under that he deceived whom he (...) but now he was
despised by all, and threatened with Death, though he alleged he was their very
Priest, but that his Gown was stolen from him while he laid it aside to Fast
and Pray; But finding this not believed, and fearing in a Mutiny, to lose his
Life, he gave those that watched him the slip, and wandered a long time, starved
almost in the Woods; when ranging one Morning, he espied, from a Hill, Isgrim
the Wolf, who had just killed a Pig; the Fox knowing the Enmity between him and
his Father, stood long musing whether he should dare to go to him or not, and
beg a Supply; at last Necessity urged him, rather to hazard, than certainly die
by starving; and so, in a most humble manner, though under a crafty Guise,
approached Sir Isgrim, and, in a fair Tone, said, Dear Cousin, can you tell me
where a Leech lives, that I may go to him for Physic? Cousin me, no Cousins,
replied the Wolf sternly, I am no^ Kin^ to you, but scorn you and all your
treacherous Race; however, I Will venture so much Kindness toward you, to ask
you what you ail.

Alas, said the Fox, meeting with a dilicious Booty, I have eaten so much, that
I am even ready to burst: What dilicious Booty was it? said the Wolf; I have
been hunting all this barren Country over and could find nothing, but what I
ventured my Life for, in leaping a Stye for this poor Pig, flghting first the
sharp-twanged Sow, and, ever I could bear it off, the Farmer's Men, alarmed by
her Cries, fell on me, in my flght, and almost broke my Bones; and you well
know, could I have got any thing else, I would not have ventured so for Swine's
Flesh, which I least of all esteem:

Truly, replied Reynardine, the Prey that I found, were a couple of fat Lambs,
whether droped by some Cart that were carrying them to Market, or that they had
strayed thither, I know not: but sure I am, I took them napping and slew them
both, then dragging them into a dry Ditch, under a Quickset-hedge, so I gorged
my self with their Blood, and some of their Intrails, that I am surfeited. Ah,
said the Wolf smiling, Fasting and Action will soon recover you, without
running the Danger of being killed by a Physician: But Cousin, said he, very
lovingly embracing him, seeing you can eat no more of this Prey, before it be
tainted and spoiled, if you will be so kind as to direct me to it, you will
bind me to you for ever, and make me forget all the Wrongs your Father has done
me, for there is nothing in the World I like better than Lamb.

The Fox finding he had worked his Ends, directed him to the Place, with all
the Marks and Tokens where he should find this imaginary Prey, about a League
distant; the credulous Wolf, not scrupling the Truth of it, left the Pig half
eaten, the Fox feigning to sleep till his return, and posts to the place; in
the mean while Reynardine filled his hungry Belly, and then posted away with
speed, crossing many Ways, to avoid the Fury of the Wolf, who, having in vain
fought for the supposed Lambs, returned in great Fury to take Revenge on the
Fox for deluding of him, and finding he had devoured the Prey he left behind
him, he howled out many grievous Curses against him; but searching in all
places of the neighboring Forest could not find him; for Reynardine, fearing
the Event, had earthed himself.

The Fox having staid in the Hole till it was dark, knowing the Wolf was then
gone to rest, crep out, and posted with all speed to the Province of Ferraria,
there, early in the Morning, he met Grimbard the Brock, and relating to him all
that had passed, since they parted last, desiring his Council, to help him to
some business whereby he might susstain himself; but thinking of none, he
recommended him to Dame Arsewind the She-Ape, who lived in a Cell near
adjoining; she immediately persuaded him to turn Physician, since Dr.
Simpleton, the Ass, had taken up that Profession and gotten great Gains by it:
And so habiting himself accordingly, he throve mightily upon it, which made
Simpleton repine; but the Fox, being much the cunninger, increased in Fame, so
that Sir Firelapel heard of it, and sent for him; but the malicious Fox,
remembering his Father's Death, having got a great Reward, gave him so great a
Dose of Opium, that i^ made him, sleep his last; but soon after the Ape and he
falling out about putting the Money, she left him, and discovered the Murder,
but not being able to prove it, you confessing herself accessory to it, she was
hanged. Then Reynardine chose Tybert the Cat for his Associate, and got great
Gains by it; so that Simpleton the Ass finding himself disparaged by this new
Doctor, who pretended he came from a far Country, and his Trade falling off, in
despair hanged himself; at which the Fox laughed heartily, as now having all in
his own Hands, so that he got great Gains; but being discovered not to be
Doctor Pedanto, as he gave out he was, but Reynardine the Fox, being in the
midst of all his Pride and Success, looked on as an Imposture and Cheat, notice
was give of it to the King, so that he was proclaimed a Traitor, for now the
Murder of Sir Firelapel appeared against him; and in flying to Manton, he was,
by the way, set upon and robbed of all his Treasure, becoming again very Poor,
so that to free himself from the Danger that threatened, he procured a
Mountebank to cut off his Ears and Tail, so that being altogether disguised, he
hoped to get into the Monastery again, from whence you have heard he fled:

Coming near to the Monastery, he met Grimlook the Mastiff, whom he knew to
have been Porter of the Gate when he left the place: him he salutes. and
entreats (...) do him the kindness to speak to the Prior and Senior Monks, that
he might be admitted; to this Grimlook told him, he could not, for he was out
of his Place, but he would recommend him to his Cousin Brindle, who was then
Porter. This he did, but though Reynardine had changed his Name to Shifter,
Brindle knew him, though he said nothing, and promised to do what had been
proposed, but fearing at last it was a Plot between Grimlook and the Fox, to
work him out of his Place, he discovered all to the Prior, who not only refused
Reynardine's Admittance, but for ever banished Grimlook for having any entrance
into the Monastery, which before he had, by a private Hole, which on this
occasion was stopped up.

Moral.] The Fox being despised upon the Loss of his Religious Habit, shows,
that Hypocrites and Dissemblers when found out, are hated, though never so much
praised before. His cheating the Wolf, shows, that Policy in many cases, is
more advantageous than Strength. His turning Physician, denotes, how easily
People are to be deluded by fair Pretenses.

How the Fox is the Habit of a Stranger, entertained by Loed Versute the
Panther, and by what means he poisoned him, to revenge his Brother's Death; and
then, for the dissembling Sorrow he expressed, the King made him one of his
Purvoyors. How, lest he should be discovered, he made away the Brock, the Cat,
and Grimlook the Mastiff. How he is known by Brindle, and accused to the King,
etc.

REynardine now again put to his Shifts, gets privately into the Forest of
Ferraria, and putting on a cast Habit he found there, went to the Palace of the
Lord Versute the Panther, and by many fair Words, got to be entertained in his
Service, pretended he was a Stranger well born, but traveling, had been robbed
of all his Wealth; telling them many strange Stories of his Travels, partly
true and partly false, too tedious here to be recited; and here the better to
disguise himself, he went by the Name Crabron, and so insinuated into the
Panther's Favor, that his chief Servant, who waited on him, being called to
serve the King in a very eminent Station, he was preferred to that Place, using
great Diligence to please his Lord, though Revenge was his Aim, for the Death
of his Brother Russel, and the Loss of his Father's Treasure; which, as you
have heard, the Panther was mainly instrumental in; nor was it long ever an
opportunity was put into his Hands to execute his Designs: For the Panther
falling grievous sick, Dr. Assino, Brother to Simpleton the Ass, was sent for,
who had supplied his Brother's Place, and was no wiser than himself: This
Ass-doctor gave his Patient many Potions, but to little purpose: for the
Panther being grievously surfeited by devouring a Stagg he had run down, and
withal his Body very foul, his Stomach was sorely afflicted and tormented:
Assino not knowing what further to do to give him Ease, or any ways to relieve
him: The Fox understanding this, was exceeding joyful, and coming into the
Presence of the Panther, while the Ass-doctor was gone to take care of the
Medicines, least any one should play some evil Trick in his Absence: But the
Fox's Design being Michief and Destruction, he in the Nighttime, infused a
deadly Bane into it, which, upon taking, soon killed the Panther, who died in
great Torment; and though they were both of them vehemently suspected, yet
according to the common Rule of pretended ignorant Quacks, they strongly
alleged, That the Panther being old, his time was come, which had it not, a
Medicine so excellently prepared, had wrought his Recovery; using many
Allegations to prove it by the Rules of Physic and Nature, and the Fox, the
better to excuse himself, lamented his Death extremely, to appearance, often
going to his Grave, and there shedding feigned Tears; so that at length he was
not only concluded Innocent, but much commended for the great Love they
supposed he bore his deceased Lord; and the King hearing of it, sent for him to
Court, and made him his Purveyor.

The Fox thus raised, begins to fear every one that had formerly known him in
Disguise, least they should betray him, and therefore resolved, as fast as he
could, to make them away, that they should tell no Tales: his first Project was
to betray the Cat to a place, where in hopes of Mice, she was strangled in a
Snare, and when dead, the Fox buried him privately, that the thing might not be
known, nor enquired into: Grimlook the Mastiff, who knew him, as having
discovered himself to him in hopes of getting into the Monastery, was the next
whose Life he aimed at; and thus he contrived his Death, having found a deep
Well in the Forest, with much Water in it, laid Reeds and rotten Sticks a cross
it, and upon them Earth, and then green Grass and Leaves, as a Carpet, thither
he conveyed Marrow-bones, and one, above the rest, with much Flesh on it, and
invited Grimlood to Dinner; who overjoyed at the opportunity, as being out of
Place, and very hungry, accepted the supposed kind Offer, and being led by
Revnardine to the place, he had no sooner leaped on it with all his weight, as
greedy to catch the Prey, but down sunk he and the Banquet together into the
Well; where, howling for help in vain, the Fox tumbled great Stones upon him
and drowned him, then covering the place, returned to Court, rejoicing, as now
supposing he was rid of all those that could impeach him, or bring him into
Danger; but while he was hugging himself in this good Luck, Brindle, for Theft,
being expelled the Monastery at Manton, came into the Forest to seek his
Living, and finding the Fox high in Favor, would have scraped Acquaintance
with him, but he utterly denied ever to have known him; which so insenced
Brindle, that he resolved to discover his true Name to the King, and
accordingly did, with all the Circumstances how he hah caused himself to be
disguised, and came to the Monastery of Manton, and how he was known there, and
denied Admittance: Upon this Crabron, the disguised Reynardine, was sent for,
and charged by the King, on the Words of Brindle, as a Traitor; but he stoutly
denied all, alleging, That it was Malice in the Mastiff, because he had not
preferred him according to his Desire. This so enraged Brindle, that witout
considering he was in the King's Presence, ^e fell upon the Fox, and had killed
him, had he not been taken off.

For this Indiscretion he was committed to Prison; during his being there, the
Fox devised to make him away, and habiting himself like a Lord's Sorvitor, he
brought him Food, as from his Lord, which the Mastiff, without Suspicion,
eating, soon died, with all the Symptoms of Poison, but none yet knew who did
it.

Moral.] The Fox's entering into the Panther's Service, and poisoning him,
denotes a revengeful Person, who, under the greatest Show of Friendship, hides
his Malice till he can execute his Vengeance. His betraying Grimlook, and
poisoning Brindle, denotes, that when we suspect our Guilt will be discovered,
base Meant are used to prevent it.

CHAP. V.
The Fox was again questioned, found Guilty, and condemned; but reprieved upon
promise to discover a vast Treasure; how the Luche^ is sent with him to fetch
it, but the Fox given him the slip, and flies again to Zalap.

THE Fox, by this time, well knowing that ^dle was dead, appeared early in the
Presence of the King, and desired, that now what he had to say in excuse of
Yesterday's Accusation might be heard: The King told him it should, when the
Witness appeared, who was immediately sent for; but, instead of bringing him,
the Jailer came to excuse his Death; saying he was poisoned; and that he verily
believed, by all Circumstances, he had been the occasion of it himself: For,
says he, (...) offered him Food Yesterday, but he would eat none, raving at a
strange rate, till a Stranger came, whom I suppose, was his Consederate in the
Mischief, and from him he took Food and eat it greedily.

The King hearing this strange Story, was much perplexed, and shrewdly
suspected his Servant Crabron had a hand in it, but having no Proof, he held
his Peace for a time.

The Fox now supposing he was safe, all being destroyed that could accuse or
discover him; in the midst of all his Jolity, was dashed by the arrival of
Lightfoot the Greyhound, who has lived in the Monastery of Manton; of him the
King enquired, Whether ever he knew one Reynardine, that had been an Officiate
in the Monastery? To this he replied, He had, indeed, heard of such a one's
being there, and of the Pranks he had played; which agreeing with what Brindle
had said, increased the King's Suspicion, especially when confirmed by
Quickscent the Lurcher, that came from the said Monastery; so, whatever Excuses
Crabron, or the disguised Reynardine could make, the King's Anger increasing,
he resolved to extort a true Confession out of him, which he seemed to decline,
by racking him: Crabron hearing his Decree, begged heartily to have it excused,
and greatly urged his Innocence; but could not prevail, for the King's
Suspicion more and more increasing, he ordered four strong Beasts to take him
and draw his Limbs diverse ways, and not to leave off till he had confessed the
truth.

This Punishment being immediately put in execution, Craborn crying out very
grievouslly, as if he had been torn in sunder, though, to say the truth, he was
little hurt, yet his Tormentors not leaving off, thinking he should at last be
killed in earnest, with a mournful Voice he begged to be delivered out of their
Hands, and he would freely confess all. This being ordered, he, instead of
performing it, proceeded only to excuse himself of not knowhis Accusers, or
ever being in the Country where the Monastery stood; which much enraged the
King, but for that time he thought it sufficient to commit him to strong Ward
in Prison, and on the Morrow cause him to be racked again, till he clearly
confessed the truth of the matter.

Upon this the Fox was carried off, grievously complaining he should die with
the Anguish of his Tortures, for his Limbs were all disjoynteds, but this
served only as a Pretense to make his Guards the more careless of him, that he
might the better make his Escape, which accordingly he did; for being lodged in
the Ground-room of the Prison, and strongly locked and bolted in, whilst his
Goalers slept, he dug a Hole under the Foundation of the Wall, and creeping
through it, fled; but they for their Drowsiness paid very dear, the incensed
King causing them, the next Day, to be executed, as Traitors, for conspiting
with Crabron, and furthering his Escape to plot new Treasons against his Royal
Crown and Dignity; all they could allege not availing them.

The Fox having escaped thus luckily, traveled all Night, till he came into
the Forest of Pitwood, where Sir Chanticleer the Cock, with his numerous
Progeny, held his Residence, of whom he made a grievous Spoil, till, at last,
the old Cock suspecting who he was, hasted to young Sir Firelapil, and made him
acquainted with his thoughts; this young Gallant knowing the King's
Proclamation was out against the Fox, with Promise of a great Reward and
Preferment to those that should apprehend him, acquainted the King with it, and
undertook to seize him and bring him to Court with him; yet Quickscent
following his footing, after a tedious Race, run him down and took him; at this
the Libard grinned, knowing his Honor was eclisp'd thereby, therefore he took
the Fox by force from the Lurcher, and made him his Prisoner; but the Bear,
Wolf and Hanna envying him that Advantage, fell upon him to take the Prisoner
from him; but the two last of these he slew, and put the first, sore wounded,
to flight; in the mean while the Fox had escaped, had not the Lurcher had a
watchful Eye over him, and taken him on fresh Pursuit. Then he was brought to
Court, where the King up braided him with his Father's, and his own
Treacheries, and ordered him immediately to the Gallows, placing a Writing on
his Head of the several Namms he had gone by to deceive and betray the Beasts
of the Forest.

When he was ascending the Ladder, he made a free Confession of all his Crimes
he had committed, except the Murders, which he labored to excuse; and then to
insinuate himself with the King, in expectation of Pardon, he made a long
feigned Story of an infinite Mass of Treasure not yet discovered, giving a
large Catalogue of Jewels, Rings, Gold-chains, and Money; then seemly offered
himself to Death, without telling the place where they lay: To this the King
began to harken attentively, yet doubted it was a dissembling to save his Life;
yet Covetousness prompting him eargerly to thurst after so great Riches, he,
upon Craborn's solemn Oath that all was true, caused him to be taken from the
Gallows and returned to Prison, till he had considered the matter, whether it
might be true or not; and demanding if it could not be taken up without him, he
being kept as a Pledge for the Certainty of its being there; No, replied the
Fox, for it was secured by one Ad^lman an Inchanter, who is now dead, and the
Spell is so strong, that without it be dissolved by Sacrifices, which I must
offer, it cannot be taken up.

The King hearing him name Ad^lman, and that he was dead, resolved, for a
better Confirmation of the Truth of the whole matter, to know whether there was
such a Person, and thereupon sent with speed to enquire, which proving so, and
that he was dead, made him the easier credit the rest: then calling the
Lurcher, he commanded him to go with the Fox and see the Treasure, but besure
to watch him narrowly, least he gave him the slip: This he undertook, and so
away they traveled, early in the Morning, to the Forest of Longwood, and the
Fox pretending to be near the place, made a Circle, and prepared his
Sacrifices, which were to be offered up unto Fortune, Venus, Mars, Mercury, and
Pluto, five several Days in five several Circules; but on the first Day the
Lurcher being tired out by walking so long to watch the Fox, who himself slept
soundly a Nights, could hold up no longer, but falling asleep, the Fox took the
Advantage he had looked for, and secretly stole away; which when the Lurcher,
starting from his sleep, found, he hunted and beat the Forest about, but all in
vain, for Reynardine was got beyond his reach; so that after a tedious and
fruitless Search, with Fear, Shame and Anger he returned again to the Royal
Court at Sanden.

Moral.] By the Fox's feigning hidden Treasure, denotes, crafty Men, by Policy,
escape Danger, when Strength fails them. The Lyon-giving Credit to it, and
saving his Life, denotes, Covetousness over-ballances Justice, and corrupts the
Judge. By the Fox's pretending to Sacrifices, shows, that Religion, as a Cloak,
is often pretended, to cover intended Frauds, and notorious Villainies, etc.

CHAP. VI.
How the Lurcher's returning without the Fox, angers the King, and causes him
to put out his Proclamation for apprehending him. How many Beasts went in
search of him, and the Mischief that befell them by the means of the Brock. How
the Fox is taken by the Ass and escapes, leaving him in Slavery, and what after
befell on that Account. In what manner the Fox lived till he was again taken by
the Lurcher.

THE King finding himself thus deluded by the Fox, was exceeding angry, blaming
much the Lurcher, but more himself, for crediting so cunning a Dissembler; yet
resolving to be revenged, he put out his Proclamation, encouraging the Pursuit
of him with promise of Reward and Honors; so that a number of Beasts hasted to
the Kingdom of Zalap, whether they suspected him to be gone; each posting
several ways to outstrip each other, as fearful, by coming too late, to lose
this Honor; and with them went the Brock, the Fox's Friend, to give him
private Notice of the Dangers, if he might find him out without any others
knowing it; and indeed he had the luck to do it, as knowing well what kind of
places he used to lurk in, in such eminent time of Danger, and gave him Notice
of all that had passed, and what Beasts were come out in Search of him: as the
Tiger, the Boar, the Horse, Goat, Bull, Camel, (...) the Ass, Brother to the
Ass-doctor, and many others.

To this (...), for so now must I call him again, replied, I fear not all
these, dear Cousin, so much as I do Quickscent the Lurcher, if he be not with
them to (...) me out, I am safe enough. Indeed, said the Brock, I had forgot
him, he is here: but I Will quickly send him upon a false Rumor: I Will raise a
great way off, that he may not yet get the Scent of you, when you are disposed
to travel abroad; and so contrive it with the rest, that most of them shall
repent their coming in search of you.

The Fox here upon heartily thanked him, and brought out a young Pheasant he
had newly taken, on which they supped and were merry, and a little before Day
the Brock left him, and labored to draw the Beasts from his Hole, and by
crafty Devices, sent them to such places to search, that they either fell into
Snares, Slavery, or were many of them slain by the Country People.

However, the Fox hearing more were coming, and being scanty of Provision, went
to the Palace of Squire Careless, and entertained himself as a Servant to him,
upon Condition he might have Liberty to walk about the House, and not be (...)
as many of his Kindred were.

This being agreed on, having made Friendship with the (...) of the Place, he
lived in great Plenty for a time; but one Day as he lay basking in the Sun in
the Courtyard aseep, the Dogs being likewise asleep in the Kennels, after full
Bellies, Witless the Ass coming by, and peeping over the Wicket, espied the
Fox; then setting his Arse against it, he forced it open, and entering,
surprised the sleeping Fox, running away with him, in great haste in his Mouth,
unseen of any Body: The Fox sinning himself thus tricked by the Ass, began
gently to slatter and entreat him, saying, he was exceeding glad, since it must
be, that he was fallen into the Hands of (...) counteous and generous a Person,
to w^ when he first heard the Proclamation, he would willing have surrendered
himself, could he have conveniently found him, praising his Understanding and
prudent Conduct to the Skies; so that the Ass thinking all real, protested he
was sorry now he had taken him, and would let him go, were it not that he
expected to be made a Lord for taking him; which Honor he had along time
extremely cove^ed, that he might out-brave his Kinsman the D^, who, being rich,
looked shie, and scorned him for his Poverty. The Fox heartily thanked him for
his good Meaning toward him; but desired to know how they should do to shift
for Provision in their Way to the Court, considering it would take them up
eight Days. As for me, said the Ass, every Lane will afford Thistle and Boughs;
but for you, who are wont to live on Flesh, I know not how you will fair,
unless you make Provision to carry with you. That I have done, said the Fox,
for about Mile in our Way, I have a Storehouse, where I have laid up
Provisions against any time of Necessity that may fall out: and if you be
pleased to carry so much as is needful for me, you will exceedingly oblige me.
Yes, said the Ass, with a very good Will: come, let us hasten on our Journey,
and I will do you all the Service I can; nor would I have been instrumental in
this your Misfortune, had it not been in hopes to have been a Lord. Upon this
they set foreward, discoursing together on their Way of diverse matters, till
walking by a Park side, with high Pails, the Fox espied a convenient Hole; then
said he, glad of the Opportunity, In this place is my Provision, I have it in a
Wallet, stay you here and I will fetch it instantly. The Ass was loath to trust
him at such a Disadvantage; but before he could reply, the nimbly Fox
whippedin, and then it was to no purpose to argue.

However, the Ass in Expectation of his Return, which he intended not, stood
waiting, resting his Nose on the top of the Pa^ls, which was as much as he
could reach when he stood on his Hind-feet, so that it was impossible for him
to leap over: Now the mean while the Fox hasted to the Wood-man, that was
lopping in the neighboring Forest, saying, Sir Wood-man, I bring you the
rarest News you can wish for. What is that? says the Woodman. Why, replied he,
yonder is a strange wild Ass without an Owner, fat, lusty, and of a large size,
that will, if you take him, do you great Service in carrying Wood or other
Burdens, much to the ease of your own Labor. Where is he? said the Wood-man.
Let me but see him, and I Will halter him, I Will warrant you, and soon make him
tame: and for your Kindness in showing me him, when ever you chance to be
hunted, make into this Forest, and I will do my Endeavor to secure you from
the Fury of the Hounds.

The Fox thanked him, and immediately lest him to the Place where the Ass stood
^ing, or in Asses Language calling out, Sir Reynardine, Sir Reynardine, make
haste, that we may proceed on our Journey.

The Wood-man, upon this, coming slily behind him, creeping under the shelter
of the Bank, so that he could not be seen of the Ass, all on a sudden, to the
Ass's great Surprise, clapped a strong Haltar about his Neck, fastening it
immediately to a strong Post that upheld the Pails, and though the Ass struggled
and brayed hideously, all was in vain, the more he struggled, the more the
Wood-man cudgeled him; till quite tired, and sore bruised, he was forced to lie
down, and submit himself to his Mercy.

The Fox seeing this, laughed heartily, to think how he had taken his Taker;
yet, not appearing in sight, he lay close to see the Ass carried away, and then
posted back to Squire Careless's House, arriving there before he was missed;
and soon after he had the pleasure to see Witless, with other Asses, come laden
with heavy Bundles of Wood on a Pack-saddle, into the Courtyard; the Wood-man
serving the Squire with Fuel.

Coming to him, he thus saluted him; My Lord Witless, I am glad to see you
invested in your new Honor; your Coat of Arms methinks, suits you rarely well,
and your other Accou^rements are very splendid, I have seen many, but none like
it for Beauty and Gayness Hah! the Packsaddle and Cross-sticks in a green
Field, emblazoned with a ^^altar and Girths; it is all admirable! above what
your Lordship's Ancestors durst pretend to.

The Ass hearing these Taunts, verily believed he had betrayed him into
Slavery, and therefore, in a Fury, ran at him to trampie him under his Feet,
with loud B^s; but the Fox, being nimble, shipped into the hole of his Kennel,
lay ^e, and saw the Ass sev^^ely banged for breaking his Girths in struggling,
and letting the Wood fall about the Yard: And though the Ass labored hard to
excuse it, and accuse the Fox of Treachery; yet the Wood-man not understanding
his Language, exasperated by his Braying, beat him but the more; so that
finding himself in a piteous plight, he was forced to be mute: and upon his
return, grievously complained to his Fellow-asses of his hard Usage; who bid
him be of good Comfort, since he was not yet acquainted with his Master's
Humors, which when he was, and he knew how to please him, his Condition would
be more tolerable, as themselves they said had proved: For, said one of them,
though he be a little rough, he is a careful Provider for us; for in the hard
times of Winter, when there is nothing growing that is pleasant to feed on, he
will rob all the Barns and Stacks within ten Miles, to get us Provinder, and
load us home with it, to our great Satisfaction, when other Asses, turned to
shift on a Heath or Common, are ready to perish with Cold and Hunger. This
Discourse a little comforted Witless, and made him bear his Slavery the better,
which he did not so much stand upon, as that he had of being made a Lord.

Moral.] By the unfortunate ends of the Fox's Pursuers, for the most part,
signifies, Men that are too forward to seek the risin of others, fall into ruin
themselves. By the Brock, is signified, that among many Enemies, one may find a
true Friend. The Ass's taking the Fox, signifies, Ignorance aided by Strongth,
may on a Surprise, overcome the Witty; by the Fox's deluding the Ass and
bringing him into Slavery, signifies, in the end, that Policy is better than
Strength, and ever a secure Foundation to build on; for without the latter, the
former stands not long:

CHAP. VII.
How Squire Careless Breaking, the Fox entered into the Service of one
Gripepenny, a miserable Miser; the Agreement he made with him, and in what
manner they lived together, till the Fox was accidentally discovered and seized
on by Quickscent the Lurcher.

REynardine the Fox, living at Squire Careless's House, and not only providing
for himself, but often brought Presents of Poultry, Rabits and the like for his
Master, which greatly pleased him; but his Riot and Extravagance was so great,
in keeping open House, and entertaining lewd Fellows, as Fiddlers,
Morrice-dancers, and the like, that a while after the Fox came hither, his
Creditors Clamours frighted him away, and all he had was seized on: nay, the
Fox, had he not been nimble, to escape through a Hole, had fallen into their
Clutches, and been a Slave, or his Skin, perhaps, sold to the Furrier, to pay
part of his Master's Debts

The Fox thus luckily escaping at breaking up of Housekeeping, was however,
put to shift for a new Master, not daring to venture much abroad in the
Daytime, as knowing the Lurcher and others were yet abroad in search of him:
and there fore casting in his mind whether to go, at length he bethought
himself of an old Miser, called Gripe penny, who lived a miserable covetous
life, though the Fox, the Incomes I shall bring him by (...) Theft will make
this Fellow entertain me with a good Will. To his House therefore he hasted,
and proffered him his Service; but when the Miser heard he had been a Servant
to Squire Careless, he took up a Staff, crying out, Varlet, hence from my Door,
with speed, or I will cripple you, you are one of those extravagant Villains
that ruined my careless and foolish Neighbor: and would you get Entertainment
in my House to ruin me too? Away with you Rascal.

The Fox hearing this Language, began mi^ily to entreat him, saying, Have
patience a little, and I will satisfy you other ways. As how? as how? Speak
quickly then said Gripepenny. Why, reverend Sir, said the Fox, though I lived
with Squire Careless, yet I eat not of his Meat, nor drank of his Cup, all I
had of him was but a little Lodging, and for that I greatly recompensed him,
for few Nights pussed, but ranging abroad, I brought him either a big, Goose,
Turkey ^ullet, Cock, Capon, Duck, Rabit or the like; which might have supplied
his House in a great measure, had not his (...) way of-living been so excessive.

This made the Miser rejoice, and thereupon requested him to come in; then he
demanded if he would serve on these Terms: Yes, said the Fox, withal my Heart,
if may have my free liberty to go and come when I please, That you shall, said
the Miser, if I find you faithful and dilligent in what you have promised.
Doubt not that said, the Fox; but then I must have Holes to (...) and out at my
Pleasant, to (...). That you shall have, said the (...). And (...) all things
were accordingly (...) and he should to his Lodging, in a (...) he Backside,
and some Seraps of (...) and Cheese given him for a (...) but badly relished;
yet being hungry, and in hopes of better Cheer when he went abroad at Night, he
seemed contented with it, that his new Master might not think he was over fine
mouthed.

No sooner was the Night come, but he went a Forraging in the Neighboring
Hen-roests, and having sufficed himself with fat Pullen, he brought his Master
Gripepenny home a fat Goose, he catched napping under a Hovel in a Farmer's
Yard: This pleased the old Miser wonderfully; but being too covetous to eat
such a dainty Morsel, he pulled it, and sold it in the Market, buying Neckbeef
with part of the Money. And thus they lived together. Reynardine frequently
supplying him, till an unlucky Accident happened.

The Lurcher being still on the Search, and having made a Vow never to return
to Court without the Fox, rambling over many other Kingdoms, and scented all
the most likely places to find him, but met with Disappointments, when being
about to leave off seeking any further, dispairing of Success, and yet resolved
to keep his Vow, and not return to the Lion's Court, being tired and
overheated, he lay down on the backside of Grip^penny's House, in a dry Ditch,
close under the Pa^ls; yet long he had not been there, careful and pensive,
but, to his great Joy, he espied the Fox coming out at his Hole, but it being
yet Day, and he suddenly poping in again, he thought it not fit to seize him,
but for fear of being discovered, withdrew to a neighboring Wood till Night,
into which, he doubted not but the Fox would come for his Prey.

In this the Lurcher was not mistaken, for in the dusk of the Evening he came
ranging, after his accustomed manner, to see if the Coasts were clear; for
about this Wood there were many Farm-houses and so close the Lutcher lay, that
he came very near him before he stirred; then whilst the Fox was scenting the
Wind, to know which way his Game lay, he suddenly leaped on him, carrying him
by the mape of the Neck into the middle of the Wood; the surprised Fox, all the
way crying piteously out for help; and it being then dark, the Lurcher bound
him for that Night, and notwithstanding his Flattery and Entreaties, early the
next Morning, forced him to go along with him to the Court; where being come,
the Fox was immediately committed close Prisoner, and Quinckscent the Lurcher,
for his Service got great Credit and Applause, the King giving him the Title
Lord Quickscent, and caused his honor to be proclaimed; and, as a Reward, put
a Golden Collar about his Neck.

Moral.] By Gripepenny' s entertaining the Fox, when he heard his Story,
signifies, that covetous Men for their own Advantage, care not how thievish, or
wickedly their Gains are come by. By the Lurcher's taking the Fox at last,
denotes, that wicked Men, how cunning soever they be, do not always escape.

CHAP. VIII.
The Fox being imprisoned, mediates his Escape, gets his Irons taken off^ly
fatr Promises to the Jailer, then put a Trick upon him, and attempting to
escape, finding it difficult, eathed himself in the Prison; and upon Enquiry,
not being found, the Jailer is hanged.

THE Fox lying Pensive in Prison, expecting the time of his approaching Death,
and not hoping for Mercy, had many serious thoughts upon him: but the chiefest
was, if possible, to make his escape, but then considering how strongly he was
iron'd, and that his Guards were vigilant, if he should attempt it, and not
succeed, his Death would be the more speedy, and that not without Torments:
However, he often cast it in his Mind, but finding it in a manner impossible,
concluded himself overtaken.

Yet persive in these Thoughts, at length overcoming in his Mind all supposed
Difficulties that stood in his way, he resolved to try if any Stratagem might
free him: first he flattered with promise of great Reward, his Jailer, if he
would take off his Irons, which he said, being too strait, greatly pained him;
hoping if he were cased of that Encumbrance, he might be in a fair way to
escape; but in this he found him very difficult: Fox, said he, if it were
known, I shall lose my Place, if not my Life; especially should your escape be
furthered by it; for I well remember, when you escaped before, those that
guarded you, were without Mercy put to Death, Ah! said the Fox, I know it as
well as you, and mourned their Misfortunes much, and often wished, I being
Guily, had died, rather than those Innocents have suffered in my place; but now
I have repented me of my Sins, which then I had not done, which made me fearful
of Death; but now my Thoughts are fully prepared for it, and I am so weary of
my Life, through the Troubles and Fears I have undergone, that I am so far from
thinking of making my Escape, that would the King grant me his Pardon, it would
be little welcome to me.

Nay, said the Jailer, if to take off your Irons, in way of Courtesy to ease
you, might do you a Kindness, could I do it, I so much honor your Race, that I
would do you such a Courtesy: But how shall I come by the Reward, if you are
executed; have you any Money about you? The Reward, said the Fox, you shall be
sure of, though I have no Money about me; for when I know I must go to the Place
of Execution, I will privately whisper you in the Ear, the Place where I have
hid so great a Treasure, as will enrich you and your Kindred all your Days

The Fox's Irons were no sooner off, though he pretended to be crippled with
them, but he began to rejoice, hoping now to have another Trial for his Escape,
to defeat his Enemies of their Expectations; but his main Business was how to
get the Jailer out of the way, who had strict Command, on pain of Death,
narrowly to watch him Day and Night, till he was delivered into the Execu^ner's
Hands.

Whereupon after he had complained a while his Head aked, he fell a reaching
and vomiting, declaring, he was piteous Sick, and desired to have a Physician
and a Confessor sent for fearing in the case of the latter, he might die before
Sentence was passed upon him, and he was willing to make peace with his
Conscience before he departed. The Jailer, who had strick Orders to let none
come at him, without they brought the King's Signet, said he could not do this;
desiring him in these Extramities, to make use of him, pretending, boastingly
of his own Parts and Acquirments, to be both Priest and Physician. The Fox was
glad to hear this, and desired, in the first place to know what Drugs he had;
For, said he, this Disease has before seized me, but never so violently, and
threatened me very near with Death, and knowing what I formerly used, if I see
your Drugs, I will choose the most proper.

The Jailer readily obeyed, and fetched a confused M^dley of such things as he
had (...) together, to give his Prisoners when sick, ^b (...) at a venture,
either for Killing or Curing; and the Fox having tumbled them over, to his
great Satisfaction found a pretty good quantity of Opinus, which his Jailer
being ignorant of, among others, he chose, and defining him to fetch him some
Wine to mix them with, the better to take them: The Jailer flattering himself,
if he pleased him well, and he should now die, he would at large discover to
him his Treasure he had hid, and no body beside should know it, fetched a
Quart. The Fox reproved him for his Lavishness, as being, he said, far too much
for a sick Person. O, replied the Jailer, you may well enough use it, or if you
do not, I can well enough dispense with it.

This was to the Fox's purpose, and thereupon, with some of it, he proceeded to
mix what Drugs he pleased, secretly conveying the Opium into the rest; then
feigning to be much better, heartily thanked him, and told him, he might take
it away; and for his Confession, he would defer it till he saw how he should
be, if he thought he should live, he would reserve it to be made at the
Gallows, where his own Confessor was to attend him.

The Jailer seemed satisfied, and gulped down the rest of the Wine to the good
Recovery of the Fox's Health, and his finding great Favor with the King; and
so sitting down, immediately fell into a profound Sleep. Then the Fox took the
Keys and opened the Inner-door, in hopes to open the other and escape; but
there contrary to expectation, he found a Guard, who it seems, watched Night
and Day; this much startled him, wherefore he returned and attempted the
Windows, but the Bars were so close, that he could not get his Head through; but
then a Project coming into his Mind, he pulled of some of his Wool and stuck
it on the Grates, that however, when search was made, they might think he had
escaped that way, as being grown thin and lean by his long Fasting; and then
give over in that place, and not mistrusting him there, the Doors being lest
open, he might escape unseen. Upon this he went and fed lustily on such
Provisions as he had, that he might thereby subsist the longer, and so under an
old Pair of Stairs in the Passage, eathed himself, drawing in the Earth and
covering himself so close, that he had only a Breathing place, and so continued
as long as might be. Now two Days being passed, his Execution was designed the
next Morning, and a great Guard came to receive the Prisoner; but instead of
this the Jailer a wakened from the Effects of his sleepy Dose, in great
Perplexity, and about to hang himself through Fear of worse Punishment for his
Neglect, and the Anger, that at the same time possessed him for his giving
Credit to the Fox's Flatteries and Dissimulation, whom he, at the same time,
knew had often deceived wiser than himself.

Of him they enquired for the Prisoner, she wing the King's Order for him to
deliver him into their Hands; to which he answered, in a distracted manner, he
knew not what was become of him, but believed him to be the Devil, for he had
got from him invisible, the Doors being shut; telling them the Story of his
pretended Sickness, but nothing of his taking off the Irons, nor that himself
had profoundly slept. The Fox heard all this, and could not forbear laughing:
Then they looked about to see what Place possibly he might get out at, and
finding no Suspicion of any, till they came to the Window, where they found his
Wool sticking on the Iron-bars; whereupon some said he was gone that Way, but
others considering the Narrowness of the Space between, said it was impossible.
However, they commanded the Jailer to go along with them, and give an Account
of it to the King, that the matter might be rightly understood, and they freed
from Suspicion and Blame: This Fear made him loath to go; but they told him, if
he would not go willingly, they would compel him, and then it would look as if
he had purposely permitted the Escape; whereupon he accompanied them to Court.

The King hearing the Story, and how he had again been deluded, groaned with
himself for Anger, immediately causing the G^aler to be put to Death with
Torments; putting out a fresh Proclamation, and sending Pursuers again in
Search of the escaped Fox.

Moral.] The Fox's dissembling with the Jailer, and promising great Rewards,
denotes, Covetousness blinds Men's Foresight, and makes them do things that
will certainly bring them to Destruction. The Fox's taking this Course,
denotes, in a desperate Case, nothing is to be omitted, that carries with it a
Shadow of Safety.

CHAP. IX.
Reynardine attemping to escape, is prevented, and brought before the King, and
boldly confesses his Crimes, then being ordered to the Gallows, he, by a
Stratagem, hangs the Executioner, but is after-wards hanged and quartered
himself.

THE FOX, in his close hiding, being driven to great Straits for want of
Provision, and almost stifled, began to contrive what way he might yet take to
make his Escape, he attempted therefore to dig a Hole under the Prison-wall,
and escape that way, but found it so rocky, after he had dug half a Fathom,
that he could go no further; this put him into a pitiful Plight, whereupon he
concluded to he privately behind the Outward-door, and when it was opened,
steal out, if he might, unseen.

This he attempted, but without Success; for soarce was he got out of the
Courtyard but he was espied and so furiously pursued by many Beasts, that he,
in the chase of a Mile or two, was taken, and immediately dragged to the Court,
with great Shouts and Acclamations. The King hearing the Noise demanded the
Cause, and being told that Reynardine was retaken, he greatly rejoiced,
commanding he should be brought before him, which he was with a sorrowful and
dejected Countenance; then he commanded Manacles should be put on him, to
prevent his starting for the future.

This done, he said, Reynardine, thou Traitor, you see even Destiny it self has
designed you for a shameful Death, from which all your Wiles can not free you:
What can you now say to the many Murders charged against you? Hold up your
Head, and, if Shame and Horror will permet you, clear your Conscience by a free
Confession.

To this the Fox replied, Dread Sovereign, I own myself worthy of Death: for
indeed I have grievously offended against your Highness, and hurt most Beasts
in the Forests; many I have murdared in Revenge of my Father's Death, and
others to prevent being discovered: As to the first, I poisoned the Leopard and
Panther, who I was informed had betrayed my Father, and brought him to a
shameful Death, and thereby pulled down your Wrath, upon me, and his whole
Posterity: Grimlock the Mas^st, Brindle, and Tybert the Cat, I made away least
knowing me in my Disguise, they should discover me, and so betray my Life to
your Anger: And the like I would have done by others, had I not been prevented:
for Self-preservation is a powerful thing, and would make any one, as I think,
prefer his own Life before the Life of another. As for the Injury I did to
(...) I am sorry for it, but Necessity, that has no Law, drove me to it; You,
in part, was the Cause of it, by banishing me, and forcing me into those
Straits, which, for the (...). Support of my Life, made me commit the Crime,
where I had no Malice, nor received no Injury: My Hypocrisy in pretending to
be a Monk, having gotten that Habit, and under a Veil of Sanctity, cheating
many, I repent me of it; yet are there many worse Hypocrites than I, that wear
them, making Religion a Trade and Gain, more than a real Profession. That I
turned Physician I own, and that in mere Emulation to spoil the Ass Doctor's
Trade; though since, I think there are so many Pretenders, as skilful in Physic
as himself, that few but Asses turn Physicians; and as I did a little purposed
Mischief, they do a great deal; mine was on a just Revenge, purposely, whilst
their is ignorantly, for Lucre and Self-Interest: for where they to be paid if
the Patient lived, and not if he died, they would be more careful, or their
Trade would be of little Value; but die or die not, it being all one many
times, when the Patient's Money is exhausted, and the Desease grows tedious to
them, and they know not what to make of it, they try Practices at random, if he
lives so, if not, why then truly his time was come and why could help it? And
therefore for this. I think, I ought not to be so much blamed,

The King hearing him speak thus boldly, and in some measure, justify part of
his Proceedings, wondered at his Impudence, and demanded where the Treasure
was, he pretended to be hid by A^ the Enchanter? Oh, replied he, that was in
Aesop's Fables to gain Credit, that I might get him to escape; and my intended
Sacrifices like (...) Miracles: Nay, you, if I thought, as I be: (...) they
will not, smooth Flatteries would pass upon you, I am not so willing to Die,
but I would (...) once more.

That shall not be, said the King, unless you us Witchcraft to vanish into the
Air; whereupon he ordered him to be immediately carried into the outward Court,
where a Gibbet was erected, (...) there to be executed; commanding the Lurch to
do that Office, who seemed very unwilling but the King's eexpress Command
compelled him to it. Then were his Manacles taken off, and he mounted the
Ladder, after the Lurcher, having the Halter about his Neck; being mounted, and
the Rope fastne^^ to the Gibbet, he desired time to prepare himself, desiring
them that were Specta tors to join with him in singing Mass, which when they
devoutly was doing, poring upon their Books, he slipped the Halter off his
Neck, and cast the Noose about the Luroher's, throwing him off the Ladder,
saying, Harm watch, harm catch; an immediately leaping down, narrowly prevented
by the long Libard, from escaping; which, while they were doing, and not
minding the Lurcher, he hung so long till he was quite dead; then they bound
the Fox Hand and Foot, carried him (...) the Ladder, and taking the dead
Lurcher out thrust his Head in, and by hard pulling his Legs immediately hanged
him. And the King hearing what he had done, caused him to be quartered and they
set up in the Places where he had don the most Mischief. Then went the Poets to
wo^ on his last Speech and Confession, to the Tune of many doleful Ditties,
which got them a comfortable Penny in hard Times.

Moral.] The Fox's endeavoring to escape, and being prevented, denotes however
wicked Men may escape, (...) length their Cunning fails them. His Confession
de^^ tes, that those who do wickedly, will excuse themselves on the wicked
Deeds of others. His Hanging the Lurcher, shows, that Malice and Revenge is not
overcome by the fear of Death.

FINIS.

