BEHEMOTH; OR AN EPITOME OF THE Civil Wars OF ENGLAND, From 1640, to 1660.

By THOMAS HOBS of Malmsbury.

LONDON, Printed ANNO DOM. 1679

THE HISTORY OF THE Civil Wars OF ENGLAND.
A. IF in time, as in place there were Degrees of high and low; I verily
believe that the highest of time, would be that which passes betwixt, 1640,
and 1660. For he that thence as from the Divils Mountain, should have looked
upon the World, and observed the Actions of Men, especially in England, might
have had a prospect of all kinds of Injustice, and of all kinds of Folly that
the world could afford, and how they were produced by their Hypocrisy and
self-conceit, whereof the one is double Iniquity, and the other double Folly.


B. I should be glad to behold the Prospect. You that have lived in that time,
and in that part of your Age; wherein Men used to see best into good and evil;
I pray you set ^^e (that could not see so well) upon the same Mountain, by the
relation of the actions you then saw, and of their causes, Pretentions,
Justice, Order, Artifice and Events.


A. In the year 1640. The Government of England was Monarchical, and the King
that reigned, Charles the I. of that Name, holding the Sovereignty by Right of
a Descent continued above 600 years; and from a much longer Descent King of
Sotland, and from the Time of his Ancestors Henry the 2. King of Ireland, a man
that wanted no Virtue, either of Body or Mind, nor endeavored any thing more,
than to discharge his duty toward his God, in the well-governing of his
Subjects.


B. How could he than miscarry, having in every County so many Train'd-bands,
as would (put together) have made an Army of 60000 Men, and diverse Magazines of
Ammunition, in places fortified.

If those Soldiers had been (as they and all others of his Subjects ought to
have been) at his Majesty's command: The Peace and Happiness of the three
Kingdoms, had continued, as it was left by K. James; but the people were
corrupted generally, and Disobedient Persons esteemed the best Patriots.


B. But sure, there were Men enough, besides those that were ill-affected, to
have made an Army sufficient for to have kept the People from uniting into a
Body able to oppose him.


A. Truly, if the King had had Money, I think he might have had Soldiers
enough in England; for there were very few of the common People that cared much
for either of the Causes, but would have taken any side for pay and plunder:
But the Kings Treasure was very low, and his Enemies that pretended the Peoples
ease from Taxes, and other specious things, had the Command of the Purses of
the City of London, and of most Cities and Corporate Towns in England, and of
many particular Persons besides.


B. But how comes the People to be so corrupted, and what kind of People were
they that did so seduce them?


A. The Seducers were of diverse sorts. One sort were Ministers, Ministers (as
they called themselves) of Christ; and sometimes in their Sermons to the People
Gods Ambassadors, pretending to have a Right from God to govern every one his
Parish, and their Assembly, the whole Nation.

Secondly, There were a very great number, though not comparable to the other,
which notwithstanding that the Popes Power in England, both Temporal and
Ecclesiastical had been by Act of Parliament abolished, did still retain a
belief, that we ought to be governed by the Pope; whom they pretended to be the
Vicar of Christ, and in the Right of Christ to be the Governor of all
Christian People, and these were known by the Name of PAPISTS, as the Ministers
I mentioned before, were commonly called PRESBYTERIANS.

Thirdly, There were not a few, who in the beginning of the Troubles were not
discovered, but shortly after declared themselves for a Liberty in Religion,
and those of different Opinions one from another: Some of them (because they
would have all Congregations free and independent upon one another) were called
INDEPENDANTS; others that held Baptism to Infants, and such as understood not
into what they are Baptized to be ineffectual, were called therefore
ANABAPTISTS: Others that held, that Christ's Kingdom was at this time to begin
upon Earth. were called FIFTH-MONARCHY-MEN; besides diverse other Sects as
QUAKERS, ADAMITES, etc. whose names and peculiar Doctrines I do not very well
remember, and these were the Enemies, which arose against his Majesty from the
private Interpretation of the Scripture exposed to every Man's scanning in his
Mother Tongue.

Fourthly, There were an exceeding great number of Men of the greater sort,
that had been so educated, as that in their youth having read the Books written
by famous men of the Ancient Grecian and Roman Commonwealths, concerning their
Policy and great Actions, in which Book the Popular Government was extolled by
that glorious Name of Liberty, and Monarchy disgraced by the Name of Tyranny:
they became thereby in love with their form of Government: And out of these men
were chosen the greatest part of the HOUSE OF COMMONS: Or if they were not the
greatest part, yet by advantage of their Eloquence were always able to sway the
rest.

Fifthly, The City of London, and other great Towns of Trade, having in
admiration the prosperity of the low Countries, after they had revolted from
their Monarch, the King of Spain, were inclined to think, that the like change
of Government here would to them produce the like prosperity.

Sixthly, There were a very great Number, that had either wasted their
fortunes, or thought them too mean for the good part? they thought were in
themselves: and more there were that had able bodies, and saw no means how
honestly to get their Bread: These longed for a War, and hoped to maintain
themselves hereafter by the lucky choosing of a Party to side with, and
consequently did for the most part serve under them, that had greatest plenty
of Money.

Lastly, The People in general were so ignorant of their Duties, as that not
one perhaps of 1000. knew what Right any man had to command him, or what
necessity there was of King or Commonwealth, for which he was to part with his
Money against his will, but thought himself to be so much Master of whatsoever
he possessed, that it could not be taken from him upon any pretense of Common
Safety without his own consent. King, they thought was but a Title of the
highest honor, which Gentlemen, Knight, Baron, Earl, Duke, were but steps to
ascend to with the help of Riches, and had no Rule of Equity, but Precedents
and Custom, and he was thought wisest and fittest to be chosen for a
Parliament, who was worst averse to the granting of Subsidies, or other public
Payments.


B. In such a Constitution of People, methinks the King is already outed of his
Government: so as they need not have taken Arms for it: For I cannot imagine,
how the King should come by any means to resist them.


A. There was indeed very great difficulty in the business, but of that point
you will, be better informed in the pursuit of this Narration.


B. But I desire to know first the several grounds of the Pretenses, both of
the Pope and of the Presbyterians, by which they claim a Right to govern us, as
they do in chief, and after that, from whence, and when crept in the Pretenses
of that Long Parliament for a Democrasie.


A. As for the Papists, they challenge this Right from a Text in Deuteronomy. 7. and
other like Texts, according to the Old Latin Translation, in these words, And
he that out of Pride shall refuse to obey the Commandment of that Priest, which
shall at that time Minister before the Lord thy God, that man shall, by the
Sentence of the Judge, be put to Death: And because the Jews were the people of
God then, so is all Christendom the People of God now, they infer from thence,
that the Pope, whom they pretend to be High Priest of all Christian People,
ought also to be obeyed in all his Decrees by all Christians upon pain of
Death: Again, whereas in the New Testament: Christ says, all Power is given
unto me in Heaven and in Earth, go therefore and teach all Nations, and baptize
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and
teach them to observe all those things, that I have commanded you, from thence
they infer, that the Command of the Apostles was to be obeyed, and by
consequence the Nations were bound to be governed by them, and especially by
the Prince of the Apostles, St. Peter, and by his Successors the Popes of Rome.


B. For the Text in the Old Testament, I do not see how the Commandment of God
to the Jews to obey their Priests can be interpreted to have the like force in
the Case of the other Nations Christian, more then upon Nations Unchristian:
For all the World are Gods People, unless we also grant, that a King cannot of
an Infidel be made Christian without making himself subject to the Laws of that
Apostle of Priest, or Minister, that shall convert him. The Jews were a
peculiar people of God, a Sacerdotal Kingdom, and bound to no other Law, but
what first Moses, and afterward every High Priest did go and receive
immediately from the Mouth of God in Mount Sinai in the Tabernacle of the Ark,
and in the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple. And for the Text in St. Matthew: I
know the words in the Gospel are not, Go teach, but Go and make Disciples; and
that there is a great difference between a Subject and a Disciple, and between
teaching and commanding; and if such Texts as these must be so interpreted, why
do not Christian Kings lay down their Titles of Majesty and Sovereignty, and
call themselves the Popes Lieutenants? But the Doctors of the Romish Church
seem to decline that Title of Absolute Power, in their distinction of Power
Spiritual and Temporal, but this Distinction I do not vell understand.


A. By Spiritual Power they mean the Power to determine Points of Faith, and to
be Judges in the Inner Court of Conscience of Moral Duties, and of a Power to
punish those men that obey not their Precepts by Ecclesiastical Censure, that
is, by Excommunication; and this Power, they say, the Pope has immediately
from Christ, without dependence upon any King or Sovereign Assemblies, whose
Subjects they be that stand Excommunicate: But for the Power Temporal, which
consists in judging and punishing those actions, that are done against the
Civil Law, they say, they do not pretend to it directly, but only indirectly;
that is to say, as far forth as such actions tend to the hinderance or
advancement of Religion, in ordine ad spiritualia.


B. What Power then is left to Kings and other Civil Sovereigns, which the Pope
may not pretend to be in ordine ad Spiritualia?


A. None, or very little; and this Power the Pope not only pretends to in all
Christendom, but some of his Bishops also in their several Diocesses, jure
Divino; that is, immediately from Christ, without deriving it from the Pope.


B. But what if a man refuse Obedience to this pretended Power of the Pope and
his Bishops, what harm can Excommunication do him, especially if he be a
Subject of another Sovereign?


A. Very great harm; for by the Popes or Bishops signification of it to the
Civil Power, he shall be punished sufficiently.


B. He were in an ill case then that adventured to write or speak in defense of
the Civil Power, that must be pun shed by him, whose Rights he defended like
Uzza, that was slain, because he Would needs, unbidden, put forth his hand to
keep the Ark from falling. But what if a whole Nation should revolt from the
Pope at once? what effect could Excommunication have upon the Nation?


A. Why they should have no more Mass said by any of the Pope's Priests.
Besides, the Pope would have no more to with them, but cast them off; and so
they would be in the same case as if a Nation should be cast by their King, and
left to be governed by themselves, or whom they would.

B. This would not so much be taken for a punishment to the People as to the
King; and therefore when a Pope Excommunicates a whole Nation, methinks he
rather Excommunicates himself than them. But I pray you tell me what were the
Rights the Pope pretended to in Kingdoms of other Princes?


A. First, and exemption of all Priests, Friars, and Monks in Criminal Causes,
from the Cognizance of Civil Judges. Secondly, Collation of Benefices on whom
he pleased, Native or Stranger; and Exaction of Tenths, Fruits, and other
Payments. Thirdly, Appeals to Rome in all Causes, where the Church could
pretend to be concerned. Fourthly, To be the Supreme Judge concerning the
Lawfulness of Marriage, ( i, e. concerning the Hereditary Succession of Kings)
and to have the Cognizance of all Causes concerning Adultery and Fornication.


B. Good! a Monopoly of Women.


A. Fifthly, a power of absolving Subjects of their Duties, and of their Oaths
of Fidelity to their Lawful Sovereigns, when the Pope should think fit, for the
extirpation of Heresy.


B. This power of absolving Subjects of their obedience, as also that other of
being Judges of Manners and Doctrine, is as absolute a Sovereignty as if
possible to be; and consequently there must be two Kingdoms in one and the same
Nation, and so no man be able to know which of his Masters he must obey.


A. For my part, I should rather obey that Master that had the Right of making
Laws, and of inflicting Punishments, than him that pretends only to a right
of making Canons, that is to say, Rules: and no Right of Co-action, or
otherwise Punishing, but by Excommunication.


B. But the Pope pretends also, that his Canons are Laws; and for punishing,
can there be a greater than Excommunication, supposing it true (as the Pope
says it is) that he that dies Excommunicate is damned; which supposition, it
seems, you believe not, else you would rather have chosen to obey the Pope,
that could cast your Body and Soul into Hell, than the King that can only kill
the Body.


A. You say true; for it were very uncharitable in me to believe, that all
Englishmen (except a few Papists) that have been born and called Heretics,
ever since the Reformation of Religion in England, should be damned.


B. But for those that die Excommunicate in the Church of England at this day,
do you not think them also damned? and he that is Excommunicate for
disobedience to the King's Law, either Spiritual or Temporal, is Excommunicate
for sin, and therefore if he die Excommunicate, and without desire of
reconciliation, he dies impenitent; you see what follows. But to die in
disobedience to the Precepts and Doctrine of those men, that have no Authority
or Jurisdiction over us, is quite another case, and brings no such danger
with it.


B. But what is this Heresy which the Church of Rome so cruelly persecutes, as
to depose Kings that do not, when they are bidden turn all Heretics out of
their Dominions?


A. Heresy is a Word, which when it is used without passion, signifies a
private Opinion; so the different Sect of the old Philosophers, Academians,
Peripateticks, Epicureans, Stoics, etc. were called Heresy: But in the
Christian Church, there was, in the signification of that word, comprehended, a
sinful opposition to him that was chief Judge of Doctrines in order to the
Salvation of men's Souls; and consequently Heresy may be said to bear the same
relation to the Power Spiritual, that Rebellion does to the Power Temporal, and
is suitably to be persecuted by him that will preserve a Power Spiritual, and
dominion over men's Consciences


B. It would be very well (because we are all of us permitted to read the holy
Scriptures, and bound to make them the Rule of our actions both public and
private) that Heresy were by some Law defined, and the particular Opinions set
forth, for which a man were to be condemned and punished as a Heretic; for
else, not only men of mean capacity, but even the wisest and devoutest
Christian may fall into Heresy, without any will to oppose the Church; for the
Scriptures are hard, and the interpretations different of different men.


A. The meaning of the word Heresy is by Law declared in Act of Parliament, in
the First Year of Queen Elizabeth; wherein it is ordained, that the Persons who
had by the Queens Letters Patents, the Authority Spiritual (meaning the High
Commission) shall not have Authority to Adjudge any matter or cause to be
Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been Adjudged to be Heresy, by the
Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the First 4 General Councils, or
by any other General Council, where the same was declared Heresy by the
express and plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures or such as hereafter
shall be adjudged Heresy, by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm; with
the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation.


B. It seems therefore, if there arise any new Error that has not been yet
declared Heresy, (and many such may arise) it cannot be Judged Heresy without
a Parliament; for how foul soever the error be, it cannot have been declared
Heresy, neither in the Scriptures nor in the Councils, because it was never
before heard of; and consequently there can be no Error unless it fall within
the compass of Blasphemy against God, or Treason against the King) for which a
man can in Equity be punished: Besides who can tell what is declared by the
Scripture, which every man is allowed to read and interpret to hemself? nay
more, what Protestant either of the Laity or Clergy (if every General Council
can be a competent Judge of Heresy) is not already condemned; for diverse
Councils have declared a great many of our Doctrines to be Heresy (as they
pretend) upon the Authority of the Scriptures.


A. What are those points, that the first four General Counsels have declared
Heresy?


B. The first General Council held at Nicaea declared all to be Heresy, which
was contrary to the Nicene Creed. Upon occasion of the Heresy of Arrius, which
was the denying the Divinity of Christ, the Second General Council held at
Constantinople, declared Heresy the Doctrine of Macedonius, which was that the
Holy Ghost was created. The Third Council assembled at Ephesius, condemned the
Doctrine of Nestorius, that there were two persons in Christ. The Fourth held
at Calcedon condemned the Error of Emtyches, that there was but one nature in
Christ. I know of no other Points condemned in these four Councels, but such as
concern Church Government, or the same Doctrines taught by other Men in other
words: And these Councels were all called by the Emperors, and by them their
Decrees confirmed, at the Petition of the Councels themselves.


A. I see by this, that both the Calling of the Council, and the confirmation
of their Doctrine and Church Government had no obligatory force, but from the
Authority of the Emperor; how comes it then to pass, that they take upon them
now a Legislative Power, and say their Canons are Laws? That Text, all Power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth, had the same force then as it has now, and
conferred a Legislative Power on the Councils not only over Christian men, but
over all Nations in the world.


B. They say no; for the Power they pretend to is derived from this, that when
a King was converted from Gentilism to Christianity, he did by that very
Submission to the Bishop that converted him, submit to the Bishops Government,
and became one of his sheep, which Right therefore he could not have over any
Nation, that was not Christian.


A. Did Silvester (which was Pope of Rome in the time of Constantine the Great
converted by him) tell the Emperor his New Disciple before hand, that if he
became a Christian he must become the Popes Subject.


B. I believe not, for it is likely enough, if he had told him so plainly, or
but made him suspect it, he would either have been not Christian at all, or,
but a Counterfeit one.


A. But if he did not tell him so, and that plainly it was foul play, not only
in a Priest, but in any Christian. And for this Derivation of their Right from
the Emperors consent, it proceeds only from this, that they dare not challenge
a Legislative power, nor call their Canons, Laws in any Kingdom in Christendom;
farther than the Kings make them so: But in Peru, when Atabalipa was King, the
Friar told him, that Christ being King of all the World had given the diposing
of all the Kingdoms there to the Pope: And that the Pope had given Peru to the
Roman Emperor Charles the 5. and required Atabalipa to resign it, and for
refusing it, seized upon his Person by the Spanish Army there present, and
murdered him: You see by this how much they claim, when they have power to make
it good.


B. When began the Popes to take this Authority upon them first?


A. After the Inundation of Northern People had overflowed the Western Parts of
the Empire, and possessed themselves of Italy, the People of the City of Rome
submitted themselves, as well in Temporals as Spirituals to their Bishop; and
then first was the Pope a Temporal Prince, and stood no more in so great fear
of the Emperors, which lived far off at Constantinople: In this time it was
that the Pope began by pretense of his Power Spiritual, to encroach upon the
Temporal Rights of all other Princes of the West, and so continued gaining upon
them, till his Power was at the highest, in that 300 years or thereabout, which
passed between the time of Pope Leo the 3. and Pope Innocent the 3. For in this
time Pope Zachary 1. deposed Chilperick, then King of France, and gave the
Kingdom to one of his Subjects Pepin: And Pepin took from the Lombards a great
part of their Territory, and gave it to the Church: Shortly after the Lombards
having recovered their Estate, Charles the Great retook it, and gave it to the
Church again, and Pope Leo the 3. made Charles Emperor.

B. But what Right did the Pope there pretend for the creating of an Emperor?


A. He pretended the Right of being Christ's Vicar, and what Christ could give,
his Vicar, might give; and you know that Christ was King of all the World.


B. Yes, as God, and so he gives all the Kingdoms of the World, which
nevertheless, proceed from the consent of People either for fear; or hope.


A. But this Gift of the Empire was in a more special Manner; in such a manner,
as Moses had the Government of Israel given him, or rather as Joshua had it
given him, to go in and out before the People, as the High Priest should direct
him, and so the Empire was understood to be given him on condition to be
directed by the Pope: For when the Pope invested him with the Regal Ornaments,
the People all cried out Deus dat, that is to say, it is God that gives it: And
from that time all, or most of the Christian Kings do put into their Titles the
words Dei gratia, that is, by the gift of God: And their Successors use still
to receive the Crown and Scepter from a Bishop: It Is certainly a very good
Custom for Kings to be put in mind by whose gift they reign, but it cannot from
that Custom he inferred, that they receive the Kingdom, by mediation from the
Pope, or by any other Clergy: For the Popes themselves received the Papacy from
the Emperor, the first that ever was elected Bishop of Rome, after Emperors
were Christians, and without the Emperors consent executed himself by Letter to
the Emperor; with this, that the People and Clergy of Rome forced him to take
it upon him, and prayed the Emperor to confirm it, which the Emperor did but
with Reprehension of their Proceedings and prohibition of the like for the time
to come: the Emperor was Lotharius, and the Pope Calixtus the first.


A. You see by this the Emperor never acknowledged this gift of God was the
gift of the Pope, but maintained the Popedom was the gift of the Emperor; but
in process of time by the negligence of the Emperor (for the greatness of Kings
makes them that they cannot easily descend into the obscure and narrow Mines of
an ambitious Clergy,) they found means to make the people believe, there was a
Power in the Pope and Clergy: which they ought to submit unto, rather than to
the Commands of their own King, whenever it should come into Controversy, and
to that end devised and decreed many new Articles of Faith, to the diminution
of the Authority of Kings, and to the disjunction of them and their Subjects,
and to a closer adherence of their Subjects to the Church of Rome's Articles,
either not at all found in, or not well founded upon the Scripture, as first,
That it should not be lawful fur a Priest to Marry. What influence could that
have upon the power of Kings? do you not see that by this, the King must of
necessity either want the Priesthood, and therewith a great part of the
Reverence due to him from the most Religious part of his Subjects, or else want
Lawful Heirs to succeed in? by which means being not taken for the Head of the
Church, he was sure in any controversy between him and the Pope, that his
Subjects would be against him.


B. Is not a Christian King as much a Bishop now, as the Heathen Kings were of
old? for amongst them, Episcopus was a name common to all Kings; is not he a
Bishop now, to whom god has committed the charge of all the Souls of his
Subjects, both of the Laity and of the Clergy? And though he be in relation to
our Savior, who is the chief Pastor of Sheep, yet compared to his own
Subjects, they are all Sheep, both Laick and Clergy, and he the only Shepherd;
and seeing a Christian Bishop is but a Christian endued with power to govern
the Clergy; it follows, that every Christian King is not only a Bishop but an
Archbishop, and his whole Kingdom his Diocese: And though it were granted, that
Imposition of hands were necessary for a Priest, yet seeing Kings have the
power of Government of the Clergy that are the Subjects, even before Baptism,
the Baptism it self where he is received as a Christian, is a sufficient
Imposition of Hands, so that whereas before he was a Bishop, now he is a
Christian Bishop.


A. For my part I agree with you, this prohibition of Marriage to Priests came
in about the time of Pope Gregory the Seventh, and William the First, King of
England, by which means the Pope had in England, what with Secular, and what
with Regular Priests, a great many lusty Batchelors at his service. Secondly,
that Auricular Confession to a Priest was necessary to Salvation. It Is true,
that before that time, Confession to a Priest was usual, and performed for the
most part (by him that Confessed) (...)People. And the end which the Pope had
in multiplying Sermons, was no other, but to prop and enlarge his own Authority
over all Christian Kings and States.


B. Within the same time, that is, between the time of the Emperor Charles the
Great, and of King Edward the Third of England, began their second Policy,
which was, to bring Religion into an Art, and thereby to maintain all their
Degrees of the Roman Church by Disputation, not only from the Scriptures, but
also from the Philosophy of Aristotle, both Moral and Natural; and to that end
the Pope exhorted the said Emperor by Letters, to erect Schools of all kinds of
Literature, and from thence began the institution of Universities; for not long
after, the Universities began in Paris, and in Oxford. It is true, that there
were Schools in England before that time, in several places, for the
instruction of Children in the Latin Tongue, that is to say, in the Tongue of
the Church; but for an University of Learning there was none erected till that
time, though it be not unlikely there might be then some that taught
Philosophy, Logic, and other Arts, in diverse Monasteries, the Monks having
little else to do but to study. After some Colleges were built to that
purpose, it was not long before many more were added to them by the Devotion of
Princes and Bishops, and other wealthy men, and the Discipline therein was
confirmed by the Popes that then were, and abundance of Scholars sent thither
by their friends to study, as to a place from whence the way was open and easy
to preferment both in Church and Commonwealth. The profit the Church of Rome
expected from them, and in effect received, was the maintenance of the Pope's
Doctrine, and of his Authority over Kings and their Subjects, by School
Divines, who striving to make good many points of Faith incomprehensible, and
calling in the Philosophy of Aristotle to their assistance, wrote great Books
of School Divinity, which no man else, nor they themselves, were able to
understand, as any man may conceive that shall consider the writing of Peter
Lombard, or Scotus, or of him that wrote Commentaries upon him, or of Suarez,
or of any other School-Divines of later times, which kind of Learning
nevertheless has been much admired by two sorts of men, otherwise prudent
enough. The one of which sorts were those that were already Devoted, and really
affectionate to the Roman Church, for they believed the Doctrine before, but
admired the Arguments, because they understood them not, and yet found the
Conclusions to their mind; The other sort were negligent men, that had rather
admire with others, than take the pains to examine, so that all sorts of people
were fully resolved that both the Doctrine was true, and the Pope's Authority
no more then that was due to him. I see that a Christian King, or State, how
well soever provided he be, of Money and Arms, (where the Church of Rome has
such authority) will have but a hard match of it, for want of men; for their
Subjects will hardly be drawn into the Field, and fight with courage against
their Consciences.


A. It is true that great rebellions have been raised by Churchmen in the
Pope's quarrel against Kings, as in England against King John, and in France
against King Henry the Fourth, wherein the Kings had a more considerable part
on their sides, than the Pope had on his, and shall always have so, if they
have Money; for there are but few, whose Consciences are so tender as to refuse
Money when they want it, but the great mischief done to Kings upon pretense of
Religion, is when the Pope gives power to one King to Invade another.


B. I wonder how King Henry the Eighth so utterly extinguished the Authority of
the Pope in England, and that without any Rebellion at home, or any Invasion
from abroad?


A. First, The Priests, Monks and Friars, being in the height of their Power,
were now, for the most part grown insolent and licentious, and thereby the
force of their Arguments was now taken away by the scandal of their lives,
which the Gentry, and men of good education, easily perceived, and the
Parliament consisting of such persons, were therefore willing to take away
their Power, and generally the Common people which for a long time had been in
love with Parliaments, were not displeased therewith. Secondly, The Doctrine of
Luther beginning a little before, was now by a great many men of the greatest
Judgments so well received, as that there was no hope to restore the Pope to
his Power by Rebellion. Thirdly, The Revenue of the Abbeys and all other
Religious Houses, falling hereby into the Kings hands, and by him being
disposed of to the most eminent Gentlemen in every County, could not but make
them do their best to confirm themselves in the possession of them. Fourthly,
King Henry was of a nature quick, and severe in the Punishing of such as should
be the first to oppose his designs. Lastly, As to Invasion from abroad, if the
Pope had given the Kingdom to another Prince, it had been in vain, for England
is another manner of Kingdom than Navarre, besides the French and Spanish
Forces were employed at that time one against another; and though they had been
at leisure, they would have found perhaps no better success than the Spaniard
found afterward in 1588. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the Insolence, Avarice,
and Hypocrisy of the then Clergy, and nothwithstanding the Doctrine of Luther,
if the Pope had not provoked the King by endeavoring to cross his Marriage
with his second Wife, his Authority might have remained in England till there
had risen some other quarrel.


B. Did not the Bishops that then were, and had taken an Oath, wherein was
among other things that they should defend and maintain the Regal Rights of St.
Peter, the words are Regalia Sancti Petri, which nevertheless some have said
are Regulas Sancti Petri, (that is to say) St. Peter's Rules or Doctrine, and
that the Clergy afterward did read it, (being perhaps written in Shorthand)
by a mistake to the Pope's advantage, Regalia. Did not (I say) the Bishops
oppose that Act of Parliament against the Pope's against the taking of the Oath
of Supremacy?


A. No, I do not find the Bishops did many of them oppose the King; for having
no power without him it had been great imprudence to provoke his Anger; there
was besides a Controversiy in those times between the Pope and the Bishops,
most of which did maintain, that they exercised their Jurisdiction Episcopal in
the Right of God, as immediately as the Pope himself did exercise the same over
the whole Church; and because they saw that by this Act of the King in
Parliament they were to hold their power no more of the Pope, and never thought
of holding it of the King, they were perhaps better content, to let the Act of
Parliament pass in the reign of King Edward the Sixth, the Doctrine of Luther
had taken such great root in England that they threw out a great many of the
Pope's new Articles of Faith, with Queen Mary succeeding him, restored again,
together with all that had been abolished by King Henry the Eighth, saving
(that which could not be restored) the Religious Houses, and the Bishops, and
Clergy of King Henry were partly burnt for Heretics, partly fled, and partly
recanted; and they that fled betook themselves to those places beyond Sea,
where the Reformed Religion was either protected, or not prosecuted, who after
the decease of Queen Mary returned again to favor and preferment under Queen
Elizabeth, that restored the Religion of her Brother King Edward, and so it had
continued to this day excepting the interruption made in this late Rebellion of
the Presbyterians and other Democratical men: But thus the Romish Religion were
now cast out by the Law, yet there were abundance of people, and many of them
of the Nobility that still retained the Religion of their Ancestors, who as
they were not much molested in points of Conscience, so they were not by their
own Inclination very troublesome to the Civil Government, but by the secret
practice of Jesuits and other Emissaries of the Roman Church, they were made
less quiet than they ought to have been; and some of them to venture upon the
most horrid Act that ever had been heard of before, I mean upon the Gunpowder
Treason, and upon that account the Papists in England have been looked upon as
men that would not be sorry for any disorders here that might possibly make way
to the restoring of the Pope's Authority: and therefore I named them for one of
the distempers of the State of England in the time of our late King Charles.


B. I see that Monsieur du Plesis and Dr Morton Bishop of Durham writing of the
progress of the Pope's Power, and intituling their Books, one of them, The
Mystery of Iniquity, the other, The Grand Imposture, were both in the right,
for I believe there was never such another cheat in the World: And I wonder
that the Kings and States of Christendom never perceived it.


A. It is manifest they did perceive it. How else durst they make War against
the Pope, and some of them take him out of Rome it self, and carry him away
Prisoner? but if they would have freed themselves from his Tyranny, they should
have agreed together and made themselves every one (as Henry the Eighth did)
Head of the Church within their own respective dominions, but not agreeing they
let his power continue, every one hopeing to make use of it (when there should
be cause against his neighbor.)


B. Now, as to the other Distemper by Presbyterians. How came their Power to be
so great, being of themselves for the most part but so many poor Scholars?


A. This Controversy between the Papist and Reformed Churches could not choose
but make every man, to the best of his power, examine by the Scriptures which
of them was in the right, and to that end they were translated into Vulgar
Tongue: Whereas before the Translation of them was not allowed, nor any man to
read them, but such as had express License so to do, for the Pope did
concerning the same, that Moses did concerning Mount Sinai, Moses suffered no
man to go up to it, to hear God speak or gaze upon him, but such as he himself
took with him, and the Pope suffered none to speak with God in the Scriptures
that had not some part of the Pope's Spirit in him, for which he might be
trusted.


B. Certainly Moses did therein very wisely, and according to God's own
Commandment.


A. No doubt of it, and the event it self has made it since appear so; for
after the Bible was Translated into English, every Man, nay every Boy and Wench
that could read English, thought they spoke with God Almighty, and understood
what he said, when by a certain Number of Chapters a Day they had read the
Scriptures once or twice over, the Reverence and Obedience due to the Reformed
Church here, and to the Bishops and Pastors therein, was cast off, and every
man became a Judge of Religion and an Interpreter of the Scriptures to himself.


B. Did not the Church of England intend it should be so: What other end could
they have in recommending the Bible to me, if they did not mean I should make
it the Rule of my Actions, else they might have kept it, though open to
themselves, to me Sealed up in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and fed me out of it,
in such measure as had been requisite for the Salvation of my Soul, and the
Churches peace.


A. I confess this License of Interpreting the Scripture was the cause of so
many several Sects, as have lain hid till the beginning of the late King's
Reign, and did then appear to the disturbance of the Commonwealth, but to
return to the Story, Those persons that fled for Religion in the time of Queen
Mary, resided, for the most part, in places where the Reformed Religion was
professed and governed by an Assembly of Ministers, who also were not a little
made use of (for want of better Statesmen) in points of Civil Government, which
pleased so much the English and Scotch Protestants that lived amongst them,
that at their return they wished there were the same Honor and Reverence given
to the Ministry in their own Countries, and in Scotland (King James being then
young) soon (with the help of some of the powerful Nobility) they brought it to
pass; also they that returned into England in the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, endeavored the same here, but could never effect it till this
last Rebellion, nor without the help of the Scots, and it was no sooner
effected but it was defeated again by the other Sects, which by the preaching
of the Presbyterians and private Interpretation of Scripture, were grown
numerous.


B. I know indeed, that in the beginning of the late War, the Power of the
Presbyterians was so very great, that not only the Citizens of Londen were,
almost all of them, at their Devotion; but also the greatest part of all other
Cities and Market Towns of England: But you have not yet told me by what Art
and what Degrees they became so strong.


A. It was not their own Art alone that did it, but they had the con^urrence of
a great many Gentlemen, tha^ did no less desire a Popular Government in the
Civil State, than these Ministers did in the Church; and a^^ these did in the
Pulpit draw the People to their Opinions, and to a dislike of the
Church Government, Canons, and Common Prayer Book, so did the other make them
in love with Democracy by their Harangues in the Parliament, and by their
discourse and communication with people in the Country, continually extolling
of Liberty, and inveighing against Tyranny, leaving the people to collect of
themselves, that this Tyranny was the present Government of the State. And as
the Presbyterians brought with them into their Churches their Divinity from the
Universities, so did many of the Gentlemen bring their Politics from thence
into the Parliament: but neither of them did this very boldly in the time of Q.
Eliz. and though it be not likely that all of them did it out of malice, but
many of them out of error, yet certainly the chief Leaders were ambitious
Ministers, and ambitious Gentlemen, the Ministers envying the Authority of
Bishops, whom they thought less learned; and the Gentlemen envying the
Privy Council, whom they thought less wise than themselves. For it is a hard
matter for men, who do all think highly of their own Wits (when they have also
acquired the Learning of the University) to be persuaded, that they want any
ability requisite for the Government of a Commonwealth, especially having read
the Glorious Histories, and the Sententious Politics of the Ancient Popular
Government of the Greeks and Romans, amongst whom Kings were hated, and branded
with the name of Tyrants; and Popular Government (though no Tyrant was ever so
cruel as a Popular Assembly) passed by the name of Liberty. The Presbyterian
Ministers in the beginning of the Reign of Q. Eliz. did not (because they durst
not) publicly preach against the Discipline of the Church; but not long after
(by the favor perhaps of some great Courtier) they went abroad Preaching in
most of the Market Towns of England (as the Preaching Friars had formerly done)
upon Working-days in the morning; in which these, and others of the same
Tenets, that had charge of Souls, both by the Manner and Matter of their
Preaching, applied themselves wholly to the winning of the People to a liking
of their Doctrines, and good opinion of their Persons.

And first, for the manner of their Preaching, they so framed their Countenance
and Gesture at the entrance into the Pulpit, and their Pronunciation, both in
their Prayer and Sermon, and used the Scripture Phrase, whether understood by
the People or not, as that no Tragedian in the World could have acted the part
of a right godly man better than these did, insomuch that a man unacquainted
with such Art, could never suspect any ambitious Plot in them, to raise
Sedition against the State, as they then had designed, or doubt, that the
vehemence of their Voice (for the same words, with the usual Pronunciation, had
been of little force) and forcedness of their Gesture and Looks, could arise
from any thing but zeal to the Service of God. And by this Art they came into
such credit, that numbers of men used to go forth of their own Parishes and
Towns on working-days, leaving their Calling; and on Sunday leaving their own
Churches to hear them Preach in other places, and to despise their own and all
other Preachers that acted not as well as they. And as for those Ministers that
did not usually Preach, but instead of Sermons did read to the People such
Homilies as the Church had appointed, they esteemed and called them Dumb Dogs.

Secondly, for the matter of their Sermons, because the anger of the People in
the late Roman Usurpation was then fresh, they saw there could be nothing more
gracious with them, than to Preach against such other Points of the Romish
Religion as the Bishops had not yet condemned, that so receding farther from
Popery than they did, they might with glory to themselves, leave a suspicion on
the Bishops, as men not well purged from Idolatry.

Thirdly, before their Sermons, their Prayer was, or seemed to be, ex tempore,
which they pretended to be dictated by the Spirit of God within them, and many
of the People believed, or seemed to believe it; or any man might see, that
they did not take care beforehand what they should say in their Prayers: and
from hence came a dislike of the Common Prayer Book, that men might not see to
what they were to say Amen.

Fourthly, They did never in their Sermons, or but lightly, against the
Lucrative Vices of men of Trade or Handicraft, such as are feigning, lying,
couzening, hypocrisy, and other uncharitableness, (except want of charity to
their Pastor, and to the Faithful) which was a great ease to the generality of
Citizens, and the Inhabitants of Market Towns, and no little profit to
themselves.

Fifthly, By preaching up an opinion, that men were to be assured of their
salvation, by the testimony of their own private spirit, meaning the holy Ghost
dwelling within them: And from this opinion, the People, that found in
themselves a sufficient hatred toward the Papists, and an ability to repeat
the Sermons of these men at their coming home, made no doubt, but that they had
all that was necessary, how fraudulently and spitefully soever they behaved
themselves to their Neighbors, that were not reckoned amongst the Saints, and
sometimes to those also.

Sixthly, They did indeed with great earnestness and severity inveigh often
against two sins, Carnal Lust, and vain Swearing, which without question was
very well done, but the common people were thereby inclined to believe, that
nothing else was sin, but that which was forbidden in the Third and Seventh
Commandment; for few men do understand by the name of Lust, any other
Concupiscence, than that which is forbidden in the Seventh Commandment; for men
are not ordinarily said to Lust after another man's Cattle, or other Goods or
Possessions, and never made much scruple of the acts of Fraud and Malice, but
endeavored to keep themselves from Uncleanness only, or at least from the
scandal of it. And whereas they did both in their Sermons and Writings maintain
and inculcate, that the very first motions of the Mind, that is to say, the
delight Men and Women took in the sight of one another Form, though they
checked the proceeding thereof, so that it never grew up to be a Design, was
nevertheless a Sin; they brought Young men into Desperation and to think
themselves damned because they could not (which no man can, and is contrary to
the Constition of Nature) behold a delightful Object without Delight; and by
this means they became Confessors to such as were thus troubled in Conscience,
and were obeyed by them, as these Spiritual Doctors in all Cases of Conscience.


B. Yes, diverse of them did preach frequently against Oppression.


A. It Is true, I had forgot that, but it was before such as were free enough
from it, (I mean) the Common People, who would easily believe themselves
oppressed, but never Oppressors: And therefore you may reckon this amongst
their Artificers, to make their People believe they they were oppressed by the
King, or perhaps by the Bishops, or both, and inclined the meaner sort to their
Party afterward when there should be occasion; but this was but sparingly done
in the time of Q. Eliz. whose fear and Jealousy they were afraid of: Nor had
they as yet any great power in the Parliament House, whereby to call in
question her Prerogative by Petitions of Right, and other Devices as they did
afterward when Democratical Gentlemen had received them into their Council,
for the design of changing the Monarchical Government into Popular, which they
called Liberty.


B. Who could think that such Horrible Designs as these could so easily and so
long remain, covered with the Cloak of Godliness; for that they were most
Impious Hypocrites is manifest enough, by the War these proceedings ended in,
and by the War committed? But when began first to appear in Parliament the
attempt of Popular Government and by whom?


A. As to the time of attempting the change of Government from Monarchical to
Democratical, we must-distinguish They did not challenge the Sovereignty in
plain terms, and by that name, till they had slain the King; nor the Rights
thereof, altogether, by particular Heads, till the King was driven from London
by Tumults raised in the City against him, and retired for the security of his
person to York, where he had not been many days when they sent unto him
Nineteen Propositions, whereof above a Dozen were Demands of several Powers,
Essential parts of the Power Sovereign, but before that time they had demanded
some of them (in a Petition which they called a Petition of Right) which
nevertheless the King had granted them in a former Parliament: though he
deprived himself thereby, not only of the Power to Levy Money without their
consent, but also of his ordinary Revenue by Custom of Tonnage and Poundage,
and of the Liberty to put into Custody such men as he thought likely to disturb
the Peace, and raise Sedition in the Kingdom: As for the men that did this,
it is enough to say, they were the Members of the last Parliament, and of some
other Parliaments in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles I. and the end
of the Reign of King James: To name them all is not necessary, farther then the
Story shall require; most of them were Members of the House of Commons, some
few also of the Lords: But all such as had a great Opinion of their sufficiency
in Politics, which they thought was not sufficiently taken notice of by the
King.


B. How could the Parliament, when the King had a great Navy, and a great
number of Trained Soldiers, and all the Magazines of Ammunition in his power,
be able to begin the War.


A. The King had these things in his Right, but that signifies little, when
they had the Custody of the Navy and Magazines, and with them all the Trained
Soldiers, and in a manner all the Subjects were by the Preaching of
Presbyterian Ministers and the seditious whispering of false and ignorant
Politians made his Enemies, and when the King could have no Money but what the
Parliament should give him, which you may be sure should not be enough to
maintain his Legal Power, which they intended to take from him. And yet I think
they would never have adventured into the Field but for that unlucky business
of imposing upon the Scots (who were all Presbyterians) our Book of Common
Prayer, for I believe the English would never have taken well that the
Parliament should make War upon the King upon any provocation, unless it were
in their own defense, in case the King should first make War upon them, and
therefore it behoved them to provoke the King that he might do something that
might look like Hostility: It happened in the year 1637. that the King by advice
(as it is thought) of the Archbishop of Canterbury, sent down a Book of Common
Prayer into Scotland, not differing in substance from ours, nor much in words,
besides the putting of the word Presbyter for that of Minister, commanding it
to be used (for Conformity to this Kingdom) by the Ministers there, for an
ordinary of Divine Service, this being read in the Church at Edinburgh, caused
such a Tumult there, that he that read it had much ado to escape with his
life, and gave occasion to the greatest part of the Nobility, and others, to
enter (by their own Authority) into a Covenant amongst themselves to put down
Episcopacy without consulting the King; which they presently did, animated
thereto by their own Confidence, or by assurance from some of the Democratical
Englishmen, that in former Parliaments had been the greatest opposers of the
King's Interest, that the King would not be able to raise an Army to chastise
them without calling a Parliament, which would be sure to favor them, for the
thing which those Democraticals chiefly then aimed at, was to force the King to
call a Parliament, which he had not done of ten years before, as having found
no help, but hindrance, to his designs in the Parliaments he had formerly
called. Howsoever contrary to their expectation by the help of his better
affected Subjects of the Nobility and Gentry, he made a shift to raise a
sufficient Army to have reduced the Scots to their former obedience, if it had
proceeded to Battle: And with this Army he marched himself into Scotland, where
the Scotch Army was also brought into the Field against him, as if they meant
to fight; but then the Scotch sent to the King for leave to treat by
Commissioners on both sides, and the King willing to avoid the destruction of
his own Subjects, condescended to it, the issue was peace, and the King
thereupon went to Edinburgh and passed an Act of Parliament there to their
Satisfaction


B. Did he not then confirm Episcopacy?


A. No, but yielded to the abolishing of it, but by the means the English were
crossed in their hope of a Parliament, but the Democraticals, formerly opposers
of the King's Interest, ceased not to endeavor still to put the two Nations
into a War, to the end the King might buy the Parliaments help at no luss a
price than Sovereignty it self.


B. But what was the Cause that the Gentry and Nobility of Scotland were so
averse from Episcopacy? For I can hardly believe that their Consciences were
extraordinarily tender, nor that there were so very great Divines as to know
what was the true Church Discipline established by our Savior and his
Apostles, nor yet so much in love with their Ministers as to be overruled by
them in the Government either Ecclesiastical or Civil, for in their lives they
were just as other men are, Pursuers of their own Interests and Preferments,
wherein they were not more opposed by the Bishops than by their Presbyterian
Ministers.


A. Truly I do not know, I cannot enter into other men's thoughts farther than I
am led by the consideration of Human Nature in general: Bet upon this
consideration I see. First, That men of Ancient Wealth and Nobility are not apt
so to brook, that poor S^hollars should (as they must when they are made
Bishops) be their Fellows. Secondly, That from the emulation of Glory between
the Nations, they be willing to see their Nation afflicted with Civil War, and
might hope by aiding the Rebels here to acquire some Power over the English; at
least so far as to establish here the Presbyterian Discipline, which was also
one of the points they afterward openly demanded. Lastly, They might hope for
in the War some great sum of Money as a reward of their assistance, bendes
great Booty, which they afterward obtained, but whatsoever was the cause of
their hatred to Bishops, the pulling them down was not all they-timed at; if it
had (now that Episcopacy was abolished by Act of Parliament) they would have
rested satisfied, which they did not; for after the King was returned to London
the English Presbyterians and Democraticals, by whose favor they had put down
Bishops in Scotland, thought it reason to have the assistance of the Scotch for
the pulling down the Bishops in England; and in order thereunto, they might
perhaps deal with the Scots secretly to rest unsatisfied with that pacification
which they were before contented with; howsoever it was, not long after the
King was returned to London they sent up to some of their friends at Court a
certain Paper containing (as they apprehended) the Articles of the said
pacification: a false and scandalous Paper, which was by the King's Command
burnt (as I have heard) publicly, and so both parties returned to the same
Condition as they were in when the King went down with his Army.


B. And so there was a great deal of Money cast away to no purpose; but you
have not told me who was General of that Army.


A. I told you the King was there in person, he that commanded under him was
the Earl of Arundel; a man that wanted not either Valor or Judgment, but to
proceed to Battle, or to Treaty, was not in his power but in the King's.


B. He was a man of a most Noble and Loyal Family, and whose Ancestors had
formerly given a great overthrow to the Scots in their own Country, and in all
likelihood he might have given them the like now, if they had Fought.


A. He might indeed, but it had been but a kind of Superstition to have made
him General upon that account, though many Generals heretofore have been chosen
for the good luck of their Ancestors in the like occasions. In the long War
between Athens and Sparta a General of the Athenians by Sea, won many Victories
against the Spartans, for which cause, after his death, they chose his Son for
General, with ill success. The Romans that conquered Carthage, by the valor
and conduct of Scipio, when they were to make War again in Africa against
Caesar, chose another Scipio, a man valiant and wise enough; but he perished in
the Employment. And to come home to our own Nation, the Earl of Essex made a
fortunate Expedition to Cadiz, but his Son, sent afterward to the same place,
could do nothing. It Is a foolish Superstition to hope, that God has entailed
Success in War upon a Nation or Family.


B. After the pacification broken, what succeeded next?


A. The King sent Duke Hamilton with Commission and Instructions into Scotland
to call a Parliament there, (but all was to no purpose) and to use all the
means he could otherwise; but the Scots were resolved to raise an Army, and to
enter into England, to deliver (as they pretended) their grievances to his
Majesty in a Petition, because the King (they said) being in the hands of evil
Counselors, they could not otherwise obtain their right: but the truth is,
they were otherwise animated to it by the Democratical and Presbyterian
English, with a promise of reward, and hope of Plunder. Some have said, that
Duke Hamilton also did rather encourage them to, than deter them from the
Expedition, as hoping, by the disorder of the two Kingdoms, to bring to pass
that which he had been formerly accused of, to endeavor to make himself King
of Scotland: but I take this to have been a very uncharitable Censure, upon so
little ground to judge so uncharitably of a man, that afterward lost his life
in seeking to procure the liberty of the King his Master. This resolution of
the Scots to enter into England being known, the King wanting Money to raise an
Army against them, was now, as his Enemies here wished, constrained to call a
Parliamene to meet at Westminster the 13. of April, 1640.


B. Methinks a Parliament of England, if upon any occasion, should furnish the
King with Money now in a War against the Scots, out of an inveterate
disaffection to that Nation, that had always taken part with their Enemies the
French, and which always esteemed the Glory of England an abatement of their
own.


A. It Is indeed commonly seen, that Neighbour-Nations envy one another Honor,
and that the less potent bears the greater malice; but that hinders them not
from agreeing in those things which their common ambition leads them to. And
therefore the King found for the War but the less help from this Parliament;
and most of the Members thereof in their ordinary discourses seemed to wonder,
why the King should make a War upon Scotland, and in that Parliament sometime
called them their Brethren the Scots: but instead of taking the King's
business, (which was the raising of Money) into their consideration, they fell
upon the redressing of Grievances, and especially such way of levying Money, as
in the last intermission of Pa^liament the King had been forced to use, such as
were Ship Money, Knigh^hood, and such other Vails (as one may call them) of the
Regal Office, which Lawyers had found justifiable by the ant^ent Records of the
Kingdom: Besides, they fell upon the actions of diverse Ministers of State,
though done by the Kings own Command and Warrant, insomuch that before they
were called, the Money which was necessary for this War (if they had given
Money, as they never meant to do) had come too late, It is true, there was
mention of a sum of Money to be given the King by way of bargain, for
relinquishing his right to Ship Money, and some other of his Prerogatives; but
so seldom, and without determining any Sum, that it was in vain for the King to
hope for any success; and therefore on the Fifth of May following he dissolved
them.


B. Where then had the King Money to raise and pay his Army?


A. He was forced the second time to make use of the Nobility and Gentry, who
contributed some more, some less, according to the greatness of their Estates;
but amongst them all, they made up a very sufficient Army.


B. It seems then, that the same men that crossed his business in the
Parliament, now out of Parliament advanced it all they could; what was the
reason of that?


A. The greatest part of the Lords in Parliament, and the Gentry throughout
England, were more affected to Monarchy than to a Popular Government; but so,
as not to endure to hear of the King's absolute Power, which made them in time
of Parliament easily to condescend to abridge it, and bring the Government to
mixed Monarchy, as they called it, wherein the absolute Sovereignty should be
divided between the King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons.


B. But how if they cannot agree?


A. I think they never thought of that; but I am sure they never meant the
Sovereignty should be wholly either in one or both Houses; besides, they were
loath to desert the King when he was invaded by Foreigners, for the Scots were
esteemed by them as a Foreign Nation.


B. It is strange to me, that England and Scotland being but one Island, and
their Language almost the same, and being governed by one King, should be
thought Foreigners to one another: The Romans were Masters of many Nations, and
to oblige them the more to obey the Edicts of the Law sent unto them by the
City of Rome, they thought fit to make them all Romans; and out of diverse
Nations, as Spain, Germany, Italy, and France, to advance some, that they
thought worthy, even to be Senators of Rome, and to give every one of the
common People the privilege of the City of Rome, by which they were protected
from the contumelies of other Nations where they resided: Why were not the
Scotch and English in like manner united into one People?


A. King James, at his first coming to the Crown of England, did endeavor it,
but could not prevail: But for all that, I believe the Scotch have now as many
privileges in England as any Nation had in Rome, of those which were so (as
you say) made Romans, for they are all Naturalized, and have right to buy Land
in England to them and their Heirs.


B. It Is true of them that were born in Scotland after the time that King James
was in possession of the Kingdom of England.


A. There be very few now that were born before. But why have they a better
right that were born after than they that were born before?


B. Because they were born Subjects to the King of England, and the rest not.


A. Were not the rest born Subjects to King James? and was not he King of
England?


B. Yes, but not then.


A I understand not the subtilty of the distinction; but upon what Law is that
distinction grounded? is there any Statute to that purpose?


B. I cannot tell, I think not, but it is grounded upon Equity.


A. I see little equity in this, that those Nations that are bound to equal
obedience to the same King, should not have equal Privileges: and now seeing
there be so very few born before King James' coming in, what greater
privileges had those ingrafted Romans, by their Naturalization in the State of
Rome, or in the State of England, the English themselves more than the Scotch?

D. Those Romans, when any of them were in Rome, had their voice in the making
of Laws.


A. And the Scotch have their Parliaments, wherein their assent is required to
the Law there made, which is as good. Have not many of the Provinces of France
their several Parliaments, and several Constitutions? yet they are all equally
Natural Subjects to the King of France. And therefore for my part, I think they
were mistaken, both English and Scotch, in calling one another Foreigners.
Howsoever that be, the King had a very sufficient Army, wherewith he marched
toward Scotland, and by that time he was come to York, the Scots Army was
drawn up to the Fronteers, and ready to march into England, (which also they
presently did) giving out all the way, that their march should be without
damage to the Country, and that their Errand was only to deliver a Petition
to the King for the redress of many pretended Injuries they had received from
such of the Court, whose counsel the King most followed: so they passed through
Northumberland quietly till they came to a Ford in the River of Tine, a little
above Newcastle, where they found some little opposition from a party of the
King's Army sent thither to stop them, whom the Scots easily mastered; and as
soon as they were over, seized on Newcastle, and coming farther on, upon the
City of Duresme, and sent to the King to desire a Treaty, which was granted,
and the Commissioners on both sides met at Rippon, the conclusion was that all
should be referred to the Parliament which the King should call to meet at
Westminster the third of November following in the same year 1640. And
thereupon the King returned to London.


B. So the Armies were disbanded.


A. No, The Scotch Army was to be defrayed by the Counties of Northumberland
and Duresme, and the King was to pay his own till the disbanding of both should
be agreed upon in Parliament.


B. So in effect both the Armies were maintained at the King's Charge, and the
whole Controversy to be desided by a Parliament, almost wholly Presbyterian,
and as Partial to the Scotch as themselves could have wished.


A. And yet for all this they durst not presently make War upon the King; there
was so much yet left of Reverence to him in the Hearts of People as to have
made them odious if they had declared what they intended, they must have some
color or other to make it be believed, that the King made War first upon the
Parliament. And besides they had not yet sufficiently disgraced him in Sermons
and Pamphlets, nor removed from about him those they thought could best counsel
him, therefore they resolved to proceed with him like skilful hunters, First to
single him out by men disposed in all parts to drive him into the open field,
and then in case he should not seem to turn head to call that making a War
against the Parliament. And first, They called in question such as had either
Preached, or written, in defense of those Rights which belonging to the Crown
they meant to usurp, and take from the King to themselves, whereupon some few
Writers and Preachers were Imprisoned, or forced to fly: The King not
protecting these, they proceeded to call in question some of the King's own
Actions in his Ministers, whereof they Imprisoned some, and some went beyond
Sea, and whereas certain persons having endeavored by Books and Sermons to
raise Sedition, and committed other Crimes of high Nature, had therefore been
censured by the Kings Council in the Star Chamber, and Imprisoned; the
Parliament by their own Authority, to try (it seems) how the King and the
people would take it (for their Persons were inconsiderable) ordered their
setting at Liberty, which was accordingly done, with great Applause of the
People that flocked about them in London in manner of a Triumph. This being
done without resistance, the Kings Right to Ship Money.


B. Ship Money: what is that?


A. The Kings of England for the defense of the Sea had power to Tax all the
Counties of England whether they were Maritine or not, for the Building and
Furnishing of Ships, which Tax the King had then lately found cause to impose,
and the Parliament exclaimed against it as an oppression: And one of their
Members that had been Taxed but 20 Shillings, (mark the Oppression, a
Parliament Man of 500 l. a Year Land Taxed at 20 Shillings) they were forced to
bring it to a Trial at Law, he refusing payment, and he was cast again: When
all the Judges of Westminster were demanded their Opinions concerning the
legality of it; of Twelve, that there are, it was judged Legal by Ten; for
which, though they were not punished, yet they were affrighted by the
Parliament.


B. What did the Parliament mean when they did exclaim against it as illegal?
Did they mean it was against Statute Law, or against the Judgments of Lawyers
given heretofore, which are commonly called Reports? or did they mean it was
against Equity, which I take to be the same with the Law of Nature?


A. It is a hard matter, or rather impossible to know what other men mean,
especially, if they be crafty, but sure I am Equity was not their ground for
their pretense of Immunity from Contributing to the King, but at their own
pleasure, for when they have laid the Burden of defending the whole Kingdom
and governing it upon any person whatsoever; there is little Equity he should
depend on others for the means of performing it, or if he do, they are his
Sovereign, not he theirs, and as for the Common Law, contained in Reports, they
have no force but what the King gives them, besides it were unreasonable that a
corrupt or foolish Judge's unjust Sentence should by any time, how long soever,
obtain the authority and force of a Law, but among the Statute Laws there is
one called Magna Charta, or The great Charter of the Liberties of English men,
in which there is one Article that no man shall be destrained, that is, have
his Goods taken from him otherwise than by the Law of the Land.


B. Is not that a sufficient ground for their purpose?


A. No, that leaves us in the same doubt which you think it clears; for where
was the Law of the Land then? Did they mean a another Magna Charta that was
made by some King more ancient yet? No, that Statute was made not to exempt any
man from payments to the public, but for securing of every man from such as
abused the King's Power by surreptitious obtaining of the King's Warrants, to
the oppressing of those against whom he had any Suite in Law: But it was
conducing to the end of some rebellious Spirits in this Parliament, to have it
interpreted in the wrong sense, and suitable enough to the understanding of the
rest, or most part of them to let it pass.


B. You make the Members of that Parliament very simple men, and yet the people
chose them for the wisest of the Land.


A. If Craft be Wisdom they were wise enough, but wise as I define it, is he
that knows how to bring his business to pass without the assistance of Knavery
and ignoble shifts, by the sole strength of his good contrivance. A Fool may
win from a better Gamster by the advantage of false Dice, and Packing of Cards.


B. According to your definition there be few wise men now adays, such Wisdom
is a kind of Gallantry that few are brought up to; and most think Folly, fine
Clothes, great Feathers, Civilty toward men that will not swallow Injuries,
and injury toward them that will, is the present Gallantry; but when the
Parliament afterward having gotten the power into their hands levied Money to
their own use, what said the People to that.


A. What else, but that it was legal, and to be paid as being Imposed by
consent of Parliament.


B. I have heard often that they ought to pay what was imposed by consent of
Parliament to the use of the King, but to their own use, never before; I see by
this it is easier to gull the multitude than any one man amongst them, for what
one man that has his Natural Judgment depraved by accident, could be so easily
coused in a matter that concerns his Purse, had he not been passionately
carried away by the rest to change of Government, or rather to a liberty of
every one to govern himself.


A. Judge then what kind of men such a multitude of Ignorant People were like
to elect for the Burgesses, and Knights of Shires.


B. I can make no other Judgment, but that they who were then elected, were
just such as had been elected for former Parliaments, and as are like to be
elected for Parments to come, for the Common people have been, and and always
will be ignorant of their duty to the Public, as never meditating any thing,
but their particular Interest, in other things following their immediate
Leaders, which are either the Preachers, or the most potent of the Gentlemen
that dwell amongst them, as Common Soldiers for the most part follow their
Captains, if they like them: If you think the late miseries have made them
wiser, that will quickly be forgot, and then we shall be no wiser then we were?


A. Why may not men be taught their Duty? that is, the Science of Just and
Unjust, as diverse other Sciences have been taught, from true Principles and
Demonstrations? and much more easily than any of those Preachers and
Democratical Gent. could Rebellion and Treason.


B. But who can teach what none have learned? or if any man has been so
singular, as to have studied the Science of Justice and Equity, how can he
teach it safely, when it is against the interest of those that are in
possession of the power to hurt him?


A The Rules of the Just and Unjust sufficiently demonstrated, and from
Principles evident to the meanest capacity have not been wanting; and
notwithstanding the obscurity of their Author, have shined not only in this,
but in Foreign Countries, to men of good Education; but they are few in respect
of the rest of men, whereof many cannot read; many, though they can have no
leisure, and of them that have leisure, the greatest part have their minds
wholly employed and taken up by their private businesses or pleasures: so that
it is impossible that the multitude should ever learn their Duty but from the
Pulpit, and upon Holy Days; but then, and from thence it is, that they learned
their Disobedience; and therefore the light of that Doctrine has been hitherto
covered and kept under, hereby a cloud of adversaries, which no man's private
reputation can break through, without the Authority of the Universities; but
from the Universities came all those Preachers-that taught the contrary. The
Universities have been to this Nation, as the Wooden-horse was to the Trojaus.


B. Can you tell me why, and when, the Universities here first began?


A. It seems, for the time, they began in the Reign of the Emperor Charles the
Great, before which time, I doubt not, but there were many Grammar-Schools for
the Latin Tongue, which was the Natural Language of the Roman Church; but for
Universities, that is to say, Schools for the Science in general, and
especially for Divinity, it is manifest, that the institution of them was
recommended by the Pope's Letter to the Emperor Charles the Great, and
recommended farther by a Council held in his time, I think at Chal. sur. Saone;
and not long after was erected an University at Paris, and the University
called University College at Oxford; and so by degrees several Bishops,
Noblemen, and rich men, and some Kings and Queens contributing thereunto, the
Universities at last obtained their present splendour.


B. But what was the Pope's design in it?


A. What other design was he like to have, but what you heard before? the
advancement of his own Authority in the Countries where the Universities were
erected; there they learned to dispute for him, and with unintelligible
distinctions to blind men's eyes, whilst they encroached upon the Rights of
Kings; and it was an evident argument of that design, that they fell in hand
with the work so quickly: For the first Rector of the University of Paris, as I
have read some-where, was Peter Lombard, who first brought in to them the
Learning called School Divinity, and was seconded by John Scot of Duns, who
lived in or near the same time, whom any ingenious Reader, not knowing what was
the design, would judge to have been the most egregious Blockhead in the world;
so obscure and senseless are their Writings: And from these, the Schoolmen that
succeeded learnt the trick of imposing what they lift upon their Readers, and
declining the force of true Reason by verbal Forks, I mean distinctions that
signify nothing, but serve only to astonish the multitude of ignorant men; as
for the understanding Readers, they were so few, that these new sublime Doctors
cared not what they thought, these Schoolmen were to make good all the
Articles of Faith which the Pope from time to time should command to be
believed; amongst which, there were very many inconsistent with the Rights of
Kings, and other Civil Sovereigns, as asserting to the Pope all Authority
whatsoever, they should declare to be necessary in ordine ad Spiritualia, (that
is to say) in order to Religion.

From the Universities also it was that Preachers proceeded, and were poured
out into City and Country, to terrify people into obedience to the Popes
Canons and Commands, which for fear of wakening Kings and Princes too much,
they durst not yet call them Laws.

From the Universities it was, that the Philosophy of Aristotle was made an
ingredient to Religion, as serving for a Salve to a great many absurd Articles
concerning the nature of Christ's Body, and the state of Angels and Saints in
Heaven: which Articles they thought fit to have believed, because they bring
some of them profit, and others reverence to the Clergy, even to the meanest of
them; for when they shall have made the People believe, that the meanest of
them can make the Body of Christ, who is there that will not both show them
reverence, and be liberal to them or to the Church, especially in the time of
their sickness, when they think they make and bring to them their Savior?


B. But what advantage to them in these Impostures was the Doctrine of
Aristotle?


A. They have made more use of his Obscurity than his Doctrine; for none of the
ancient Philosophers Writing; are comparable to those of Aristotle, for their
aptness to puzzle and entangle men with words, and to breed disputation, which
must at last be ended in the determination of the Church of Rome. And in the
Doctrine of Aristotle they made use of many points; as first, the Doctrine of
separated Essences.


B. What are separated Essences?


A Separated Beings.


B. Separated from what?


A. From every thing that is.


B. I cannot understand the Being of any thing, which I understand not to be;
but what can they make of that?


A. Very much in questions concerning the nature of God, and concerning the
state of man's Soul after death in Heaven, Hell, and Purgatory; by which you
and every man knows how great obedience, and how much Money they gain from the
common People: Whereas Aristotle holds the Soul of Man to be the first giver
of Motion to the Body, and consequently to it self: They make use of that in
the Doctrine of Free Will, what and how they gain by that, I will not say.

He holds forth, that there be many things that come to pass in this World
from no necessity of Causes, but mere Contingency, Casualty, and Fortune?


B. Methinks in this they make God stand idle, and to be a mere spectator in
the Games of Fortune; for, what God is the cause of, must needs come to pass;
and, in my opinion, nothing else. But because there must be some ground for
Justice of the eternal Torment of the Damned, perhaps it is this, That men's
Wills and Propensions are not (they think) in the hands of God, but of
themselves. And in this also I see something conducing to the Authority of the
Church.


A. This is not much, nor was Aristotle of such credit with them, but that when
his opinion was against theirs, they could slight him; whatsoever he says is
impossible in Nature, they can prove well enough to be possible from the
Almighty power of God, who can make Bodies to be in one and the self-same
place, and one Body to be in many places at the same time, if the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation require it, though Aristotle deny it. I like not the design
of drawing Religion into an Art, whereas it ought to be a Law. And though not
the same in all Countries, yet in every Country indisputable; nor that they
teach it as Arts ought to be taught, by showing first the meaning of their
Terms, and then deriving from them the Truth they would have us believe, nor
that their Terms are for the most part untelligible, though to make it seem
rather want of Learning in the Reader, than want of sair dealing in themselves;
they are for the most part Latin and Greek words, wried a little the point
toward the Native Language of the several Countries where they are used. But
that which is most intoll^rable is, That all Clerks are forced to make as if
they believe them, if they mean to have any Church-Preferment, the Keys whereof
are in the Popes hands; and the common People, whatsoever they believe of those
s^bt^^ Doctrines, are never esteemed better Sons of the Church for their
Learning. There is but one way there to Salvation, that is, extraordinary
Devotion and Liberality to the Church, and readiness for the Churches sake, if
it be required, to fight against their Natural and Lawful Sovereigns.


B. I see what use they make of Aristotle's Logic, Physic and Metaphysics:
But I see not yet how his Politics can serve their turn.


A. Nor I, It has (I think) done them no good, though it has done us here much
hurt by accident; for men grown weary at last of the Insolence of the Priests,
and examining the Truths of those Doctrines that were put upon them, began to
search the sense of the Scriptures as they are in the Learned Languages; and
consequently Studying Greek and Latin, became acquainted with the Democratical
Principles of Aristotle and Cicero, and from the Love of their Eloquence, fell
in Love with the Politics, and more and more, till it grew into the Rebellion
we now talk of, without any other advantage to the Roman Church, but that it
was awakening to us, whom since we broke out of their Net in the time of Henry
8. they have continually endeavored to recover.


B. What have they gotten by teaching of Aristotle's Ethics?


A. It is some advantage to them, that neither the Morals of Aristotle, nor of
any other, have done them any harm, nor us any good. Their Doctrine have caused
a great deal of Dispute concerning Virtue and Vice, but no knowledge of what
they are, nor any method of attaining Virtue, nor of avoiding Vice.

The end of Moral Philosophy, is to teach men of all sorts their Duty, both to
the public, and to one another. The Estimate Virtue, partly by a Mediocrity of
the Passions of Men, and partly by that, that they are praised; whereas it is
not the much or little praise that makes an Action Virtuous, but the Cause; nor
much or little blame that makes an Action Vicious, but its being unconformable
to the Laws, in such men as are subject to the Law; or its being unconformable
to Equity or Charity in all men whatsoever.


B. It seems you make a difference between the Ethics of Subjects, and the
Ethics of Sovereigns.


A. So I do: The Virtue of a Subject is comprehended wholly in obedience to the
Laws of the Commonwealth. To obey the Laws is Justice and Equity, which is the
Law of Nature, and consequently is Civil Law in all Nations of the World; and
nothing is Injustice or Iniquity, otherwise then it is against the Law:
Likewise to obey the Law is the Prudence of a Subject; for without such
obedience the Commonwealth (which is every Subjects safety and protection)
cannot subsist. And though it be Prudence also in private men, justly and
moderately to enrich themselves; yet craftily to withold from the Public, or
defraud it of such part of the Wealth as is by Law required, is no sign of
Prudence, but of want of knowledge of what is necessary for their own defense.

The Virtues of Sovereigns are such as tend to the maintenance of Peace at
Home, and to the resistance of Foreign Enemies. Fortitude is a Royal Virtue,
and though it be necessary in such private men as shall be Soldiers; yet for
other men the less they dare the better it is, both for the Commonwealth, and
for themselves. Frugality (though perhaps you would think it strange) is also a
Royal Virtue, for it increases the public stock, which cannot be too great for
the Public Use, nor any man too sparing of what he has in trust for the good
of others. Liberality also is a Royal Virtue, for the Commonwealth cannot be
well served without Extraordinary Diligence and Service of Ministers, and great
Fidelity to their Sovereign, who ought therefore to be encouraged, and
especially those that do him service in the Wars. In sum, all Actions or
Habits are to be esteemed Good or Evil, by their Causes and Usefulness in
reference to the Commonwealth, and not by their Mediocrity, nor by their being
commended; for several men praise several Customs, and that which is Virtue
with one, is blamed by others; and contrarily, what one calls Vice, an other
calls Virtue as their present Affections lead them.


B. Methinks you should have placed amongst the Virtues, that which in my
Opinion is the greatest of all Virtues, Religion.


A. So I have, though it seems you did not observe it: But whether do we
Disgress from the way we were in?


B. I think you have not Digressed at all; for I suppose your purpose was to
acquaint me with the History, not so much of those Actions that past in the
time of the late Troubles, as of their Causes, and of the Counsels, and
Artifi^es by which they were brought to pass. There be diverse men that have
written the History, out of whom I might have Learned what they did, and
somewhat also of the Contrivance: But I find little in them of it. I would ask
therefore, since you were pleased to enter into this Discourse at my request;
be pleased also to inform me after my own method. And for the danger of
Confusion that may arise from that, I will take care to bring you back to the
place from whence I drew you; for I well remember where it was.


A. Well then, to your Question concerning Religion, Inasmuch as I told you,
that Virtue is comprehended in Obedience to the Laws of the Commonweath,
whereof Religion is one, I have placed Religion amongst the Virtues.


B. Is Religion then the Law of a Commonwealth?


A. There is no Nation in the World, whose Religion is not Established, and
receives not its Authority from the Laws of that Nation. It is true that the
Law of God receives no obedience from the Laws of Men: But because men can
never by their own Wisdom come to the knowledge of what God has spoken and
Commanded to be Observed, nor be obliged to obey the Laws, whose Author they
know not; they are to acqui^ss in some humane Authority or other: So that the
Question will be, Whether a man ought in matter of Religion (that is to say)
when there is question of his D^ty to God and the King, to rely upon the
Praeaching of their Fellow Subjects, or of 2 Stranger, or upon the voice of the
Law?


B. There is no great difficulty in that point, for there is none that Preach
here, or any where else, at least ought to Preach, but such as have Authority
so to do, from him or them that have the Sovereign Power: So that if the King
give us leave, you or I may as lawfully Preach as them that do, and I believe
we should perform that Office a great deal better than they, that preached us
into Rebellion.


A. The Church Morals are in many points very different from these that I have
here set down for the Doctrine of Virtue and Vice, and yet without any
conformity with that of Aristotle: for in the Church of Rome the principle
Virtues are to obey their Doctrine, though it be Treason, and that is to be
Religious; to be beneficial to the Clergy, that is their Piety and Liberality;
and to believe upon their word, that which a man knows in his Conscience to the
false, which is the Faith that they require: I could name a great many more
such points of their Morals, but that I know you know them already, being so
well versed in the cases of Conscience written by their Schoolmen, who measure
the goodness and wickedness of all Actions by their Congruity with the Doctrine
of the Roman Clergy.


B. But what is the Moral Philosophy of the Protestant Clergy in England?


A. So much as they show of it in their Life and Conversation, is for the most
part very good, and of very good example, much better than their Writings.


B. It happens many times that men live honestly for fear, who if they had
Power would live according to their own Opinions; that is, if their Opinions be
nor right, Unrighteously.


A. Do the Clergy in England pretend as the Pope does, or ^s the Presbyterians
do, to have a right from God immediately to govern the King and his Subjects in
all points of Religion and Manners? If they do, you cannot doubt but that if
they had Number and Strength (which they are never like to have) they would
attempt to attain that Power, as the others have done.


B. I would be glad to see a System of the present Morals written by some
Divine of good Reputation and Learning, and of the late King's party.


A. I think I can recommend unto you the best that is extant, and such an one
as (except a few passages that I mislike) is very well worth your reading; the
Title of it is, The whole Duty of Man, laid down in a plain and familiar way.
And yet I dare say, that if the Presbyterian Ministers even those of them that
were the most diligent Preachers of the late Sedit on, were to be tried by it,
they would go near to be found Not Guilty. He has divided the Duty of Man into
three great Branches, His Duty to God, to Himself, and to his Neighbor. In his
Duty to God he puts the acknowledgment of him in his Essence, and his
Attributes, and in believing of his Word; his Attributes are, Omnipotence,
Omniscience, Infiniteness, Justice, Truth, Mercy, and all the rest that are
found in Scripture. Which of these did not those Seditious Preachers
acknowledge equally with the best of Christians? The Word of God are the Books
of holy Scripture, received for Can nical in England.


B. They receive the World of God, but it is according to their own
interpretation.


A. According to whose interpretation was it received by the Bishops and the
rest of the Loyal Party, but their own? He puts for another Duty Obedience and
Submission to God's Will. Did any of them, nay, did any man living, do any
thing, at any time, against God's Will?


B. By God's Will I suppose he means there his revealed Will, (that is to say)
his Commandments, which I am sure they did most horribly break, both by their
Preaching and otherwise.


A. As for their Actions, there is no doubt but all men are guilty enough (if
God deal severely with them) to be damned: and for their Preaching, they will
say, they thought it agreeable to God's revealed Will in the Scriptures; if
they thought if so, it was not disobedience but error, and how can any man
prove they thought otherwise?


B. Hypocrisy has this great prerogative above other sins, that it cannot be
accused.


A. Another Duty he sets down is to honor him in his House, that is, the
Church, in his Possessions, in his Day, in his Word and Sacraments.


B. They perform this Duty (I think) as well as any other Ministers, I mean,
the Loyal Party; and the Presbyterians have always had an equal care to have
God's House free from profanation, to have Tithes duly paid, to have the
Sabbath day kept holy, the Word preached, and the Lord's Supper and Baptism
duly administered. But it is not the keeping of the Feasts and of the Fasts, one
of those Duties that belong to the Honor of God, if it be, the Presbyterians
fail in that.


A. Why so? they kept some Holidays, and they had Feasts among themselves,
though not upon the same Days that the Church ordains, but when they thought
fit: as when it pleased God to give the King any notable Victory, and they
governed themselves in this point by the holy Scriptures, as they pretend to
be, and can prove they did not believe so.


B. Let us pass over all other Duties, and come to that Duty which we owe to
the King, and consider whether the Doctrine taught by these Divines, which
adhered to the King, be such, in that point, as may justify the Presbyterians
that incited the People to Rebellion; for that is the thing you call in question.


A. Concerning our Duty to our Rulers, he has these words, An obedience we
must pay either Active or Passive; the Active, in the case of all Lawful
Commands, that is, when ever the Magistrate commands something which is not
contrary to some command of God, we are then bound to act according to that
command of the Magistrate, to do the thing he requires; but when he enjoins any
thing contrary to what God has commanded, we are not then to pay him this
Active obedience, we may, nay, we must refuse thus to act; (yet here we must be
very well assured, that the thing is so contrary, and not pretend Conscience
for a cloak of stubbornness) we are in that case to obey God rather than men.
But even this is a season for the Passive obedience, we must patiently suffer
what he inflicts on us for such refusal, and not, to secure our selves, rise up
against him.


B. What is there in this to give color to the late Rebellion?


A. They will say, they did it in obedience to God, inasmuch as they did
believe it was according to the Scripture, out of which they will bring perhaps
examples of David and his Adherents, that resisted King Saul, and of the
Prophets afterward, that vehemently from time to time preached against the
Idolatrous Kings of Israel and Judah: Saul was their Lawful King, and yet they
paid him neither Active nor Passive obedience, for they did put themselves into
a posture of defense against him, though David himself spared his person, and
so did the Presbyterians put into their Commission to their General, that they
should spare the King's Person. Besides, you cannot doubt, but that they who in
the Pulpit did animate the People to take Arms in defense of the then
Parliament, alleged Scripture, that is the Word of God for it. If it be lawful
then for Subjects to resist the King when he commands any thing against the
Scripture, that is contrary to the command of God, and to be Judge of the
meaning of the Scripture, it is impossible that the life of any King, or the
peace of any Christian Kingdom can be long secure. It is this Doctrine that
Divides a Kingdom within it self, whatsoever the men be (Loyal or Rebels) that
Write or Preach it publicly. And thus you see, that if those seditious
Ministers be tried by this Doctrine, they will come off well enough.


B. I see it, and wonder at People, that having never spoken with God Almighty,
nor knowing one more than another, what he has said, when the Laws and the
Preacher disagree, should so keenly follow the Minister, for the most part an
ignorant, though a ready tongued Scholar, rather than the Laws that were made
by the King, with the consent of the Peers and the Commons of the Land.


A. Let us examine his words a little nearer; first, concerning Passive
obedience. When a Thief has broken the Laws, and, according to the Law, is
therefore executed, can any man understand, that this suffering of his is an
obedience to the Law? Every Law is a Command to do or to forbear; neither of
these is fulfilled by suffering. If any suffering can be called obedience, it
must be such as is voluntary; for no voluntary action can be counted a
submission to the Law. He that means that his suffering should be taken for
obedience, must not only not resist, but also fly, nor hide himself to avoid
his punishment. And who is there among them that discourses of Passive
obedience, when his life is in extreme danger, that will voluntarily present
himself to the Officers of Justice? Do not we see that all men when they are
led to Execution, are both bound and guarded, and would break loose, if they
could, and get away? such is their Passive obedience. Christ says, The Scribes
and Pharisees sat in Moses's chair; all therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do, Matthew. 23.3. which is a doing an an Active
obedience; and yet the Scribes and Pharisees appear not by the Scriptures to
have been such godly men, as never to command any thing against the revealed
will of God.


B. Must Tyrants also be obeyed in every thing actively, or is there nothing
wherein a Lawful Kings commands may be disobeyed; what if he should command me
with my own hands to execute my Father, in case he should be condemned to die
by the Law?


A. This is a case that need not be put, we never have read or heard of any
King or Tyrant so inhumane as to command it; if any did, we are to consider,
whether that command were one of his Laws; for by disobeying Kings, we mean
disobeying his Laws, those his Laws that were made before they were applied to
any particular person: For the King, though as a Father of Children, and a
Master of domestic Secrets, yet commands the People in general never but by a
precedent Law, and as a Public, not a Natural Person; and if such a Command as
you speak of were contrived into a general Law, (which never was, nor never
will be) you were bound to obey it, unless you depart the Kingdom after the
publication of the-Law, and before the condemnation of your Father.


B. Your Author says farther, in refusing active obedience to the King, that
commanded any thing contrary to God's Law, we must be very well assured that
the thing is so contrary; I would fain know-how is it possible to be assured?


A. I think you do not believe, that any of those Refusers do immediately, from
God's own mouth, receive any Command contrary to the Command of the King, who
is God's Lieutenant, nor any other way than you and I do; that is to say, than
by the Scriptures: And because men do for the most part rather draw the
Scriptures to their own sense, than follow the true sense of the Scripture,
there is no other way to know certainly, and in all cases, what God commands or
forbids us to do, but by the sentence of him or them, that are constituted by
the King to determine the sense of the Scriptures, upon hearing of the
particular Case of Conscience which is in question; and they that are so
constituted, are easily known in all Christian Commonwealths, whether they be
Bishops, or Ministers, or Assemblies that govern the Church under him or them
that have the Sovereign Power.


B. Some doubts may be raised from this that you now say; for if men be to
learn their Duty from the Sentence which other men shall give concerning the
meaning of the Scriptures, and not from their own Interpretation, I understand
not to what end they were Translated into English, and every man not only
permitted, but also exhorted to read them; for what could that produce but
diversity of Opinion, and consequently (as man's nature is) Disputation, breach
of Charity, Disobedience, and at last Rebellion? Again, since the Scriptures
were allowed to be read in English, why were not the Translations such, as
might make all that is read understood, even by mean capacities? Did not the
Jews, such as could read, understand their Law in the Jewish Language, as well
as we do our Statute Laws in English? And as for such places of the Scripture
as had nothing of the Nature of a Law, it was nothing to the Duty of the Jews
whether they were understood or not, seeing nothing is punishable but the
transgression of some Law. The same question I may ask concerning the New
Testament; for I believe that those men, to whom the Original Language was
natural, did understand sufficiently what Commands and Counsels were given them
by our Savior and his Apostles, and his immediate Disciples. Again, how will
you answer that question which was put by St. Peter and St. John, Acts 4.19.
when by Ananias the High Priest, and others of the Council of Jerusalem, they
were forbidden any more to teach in the Name of Jesus, Whether is it right in
the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God?


A. The case is not the same, Peter and John had seen and daily conversed with
our Savior, and by the Miracles he wrought did know he was God, and
consequently knew certainly, that their disobedience to the High Priest's
present command was just. Can any Minister now say, that he has immediately
from God's own mouth received a Command to disobey the King, or know otherwise
than by the Scripture, that any Command of the King, that has the form and
nature of a Law, is against the Law of God, which in diverse places he directly
and evidently commands to obey him in all things. The Text you cite does not
tell us, that a Minister's Authority, rather than a Christian King's, shall
decide the questions that arise from the different Interpretations of the
Scripture. And therefore where the King is Head of the Church, and by
consequence (to omit, that the Scripture it self was not received but by the
Authority of Kings and States) chief Judge of the Rectitude of all
Interpretations of the Scripture, to obey the King's Laws and public Edicts,
is not to disobey, and obey God: A Minister ought not to think, that his skill
in the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew Tongues, if he have any, gives him a triviledge
to impose upon all his fellow subjects his own sense, or what he pretends to be
his sense of every obscure place of Scripture; nor ought he, as often as he
has found some fine Interpretation not before thought on by others, to think
he had it by Inspiration, as fine as he thinks it, is not false; and then all
his stubbornness and contumacy toward the King and his Laws is nothing but
pride of heart and amb^tion, or else imposture. And whereas you think it
needless, or perhaps hurtful, to have the Scriptures in English, I am of
another mind; There are so many places of Scripture easily to be understood,
that teach both true Faith and good Morality, and that as fully as it is
necessary to Salvation, of which no Seducer is able to dispose the mind of any
ordinary Readers, that the reading of them is so profitable, as not to be
forbidden, without great damage to them and the Commonwealth.


B. All that is required both in Faith and Manners for Man's Salvation, is, I
confess, set down in Scripture as plainly as can be: Children, obey your
parents in all things. Servants, obey your masters in all things. Let all men
be subject to the higher powers, whether it be the King, or those that are sent
by him. Love God with all your soul, and your neighbor as your self, are words
of the Scripture, which are well enough understood; but neither Children, nor
the greatest part of Men, do understand why it is their duty so to do; they see
not that the safety of the Commonwealth, and consequently their own, depends
upon the doing of it. Every man by Nature, without Discipline, does in all his
actions look upon, as far as he can see, the benefit that shall redound to
himself by his obedience; he reads, that covetousness is the root of all evil,
but he thinks, and sometimes finds it is the root of his Estate. And so in
other cases, the Scripture says one Scripture says one thing, and they think
another, we^ghing the commodities or incommodities of this present life only,
which are in their sight, never putting into the scales the good and evil of
the Life to come, which they see not.


A. All his is no more than happens where the Scripture is sealed up in Greek
and Latin, and the People taught the same things out of them by Preachers, but
they that are of a Condition and Age fit to examine the sense of what they
read, and that take a delight in searching out the grounds of their duty,
certainly cannot choose but by reading of the Scriptures come to such a sense of
their Duty, as not only to obey the Laws themselves, but also to induce others
to do the same, for commonly Men of Age and quality are followed by their
inseriour Neighbors that look more upon the example of those Men whom they
Reverence, and whom they are unwilling to displease, then upon Precepts and
Laws.


A. These men of the Condition and Age you speak of are in my opinion the
unfittest of all others to be trusted with the reading of the Scriptures; I
know you mean such as have studied the Greek or Latin, or both Tongues, and
that are withal such as love knowledge, and consequently take delight in
finding out the meaning of the most hard Texts, or in thinking they have found
it in case it be new and not found out by others; these are therefore they that
pretermitting the easy places, that teach them their duty, fall to scanning
only the Mysteries of Religion: Such as are, how it may be made out with wit,
that there be three that bear Rule in Heaven, and those three but one, how the
Deity could be made flesh, how that flesh could be really present in many
places at once? where is the place, and what the Torments of Hell and other
Metaphysical Doctrines? whether the Will of Man be free, or governed by the
will of God, whether Sanctity comes by Inspiration or Education: by whom Christ
now speaks to us, whether by the King, or by the Bible to every man that reads
it, and interprets it to himself, or by a private Spirit, to every private Man:
These and the like po^nts are the study of the curious and the cause of all our
late mischief; and the cause that makes the plainer sort of men whom the
Scriptures had taught belief in Christ, love toward God, obedience toward the
King, and sobriety of Behavior; forget it all, and place their Religion in the
Disputable Doctrines, of your wise men.


A. I do not think these men fit to interpret the Scriptures to the rest: nor
do I say that the rest ought to take their interpretation for the word of God.
Whatsoever is necessary for them to know more, does them no good; but in case
any of these unnecessary Doctrines shall be Authorized by the Laws of the King
or other state: I say it is the duty of every Subject not to speak against
them, in as much as it is every Man's duty to obey him, or them that have the
Sovereign power, and the wisdom of all such powers, to punish such as shall
publish or teach their private Interpretations when they are contrary to the
Law: and likely to incline men to sedition or disputing against the Law.


B. They must punish then the most of those that have had there breeding in the
Universities, for such curious questions in Divinity are first started in the
Universities; and so are all those politic questions concerning the rights of
Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, and there they are furnished with
Arguments for Liberty, out of the works of Aristotle, Plato Cicero, Seneca, and
out of the Histories of Rome and Greece for their disputation against the
necessary power of their Sovereigns; therefore I dispare of any lasting peace,
among our selves, till the Universities here shall bend and direct their
studies to the settling of it, That is, to the Teaching of Absolute obedience to
the Laws of the King, and to his public Edicts under the great Seal of
England: For I make no doubt but that solid reason backed with the Authority of
so many Learned men, will more prevail for the keeping of us in peace within
our selves than any victory over the Rebels; but I am afraid it is unpossible
to bring the Universities to such a compliance with the Actions of State as is
necessary for the business; seeing the Universities have heretofore from time
to time maintained the Authority of the Pope, contrary to all Laws; Divine,
Civil, and Natural: against Right of our Kings, why can they not as well when
they have all manner of Laws and Equity on their side, maintain the Rights of
him that is both Sovereign of the Kingdom, and Head of the Church.


B. Why then were they not in all points for the Kings power presently after
that. King Henry 8. was in Parliament declared Head of the Church, as much as
they were before for the Authory of the Pope.


A. Because the Clergy in the Universities by whom all things there are
governed, and the Clergy without the Universities as well Bishops as Inseriour
Clerks did think that the pulling down of the Pope, was the setting up of them,
(as to England) in his place, and made no question the greate^t part of them,
but that their spiritual power did depend not upon the Authority of the King,
but of Christ himself derived to them by successible Imposition of hands from
Bishop to Bishop? notwithstanding they knew, that ^i^is derivation passed
through the hands of Popes and Bishops whose Authority they had cast off, for
though they were content that the Divine right which the Pope pretended to in
England should be denied him, yet they thought it rot so fit to be taken from
the Church of England, whom they now supposed themselves to represent.

It seems they did not think it reasonable, that a Woman, or a Child, or a Man,
that could not construe the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Bible, nor know perhaps the
Declensions and Conjugations of Greek, or Latin, Nounes and Verbs, should take
upon him to govern so many Learned Doctors in matters of Religion, meaning
matters of Divinity, for Religion has been for a long time, and is now by most
people taken for the same thing with Divinity, to the great advantage of the
Clergy.


A. And especially now amongst the Presbyterians, for I see few that are
esteemed by them very good Christians besides such as can repeat their Sermons
and wrangle so: them about Interpretat on of the Scripture, and fight for them
also with their Bodies or Purses when they shall be required to believe in
Christ is nothing with them, unless you believe as they bid you, Charity is
nothing with them unless it be Charity and Liberality to them, and partaking
with them in Faction; How we can have peace while this is our Religion, I
cannot tell Haeret Laterilethalis arundo. The seditious Doctrine of the
Presbyterians has been stuck so hard in the Peoples heads and memories, (I
cannot say into their hearts, for they understood nothing in it, but that they
may lawfully rebel) That I fear the Commonwealth will never be cured.


A. The two great Virtues that were severally in Henry the 7. Henry the 8. When
they shall be Jointly in one King, will easily cure it, that of Henry the 7.
was without much noise of the people to fill his Coffers, that of Henry the 8.
was an early severity, but this without the former cannot be exercised.


B. This that you say looks (methinks) like an advice to the King to let them
alone till he have gotten ready money enough to levy and maintain a sufficient
Army, and then to fall on them and destroy them.


A. God forbid that so horrible Unchristian and unhumain design should ever
enter into the Kings heart, I would have him have money enough, readily to
raise an Army, able to suppress any Rebellion and to take from the Enemies all
hope of success, that they may not dare to trouble him in the Reformation of
the Universities, but to put none to death, without the Actual committing such
Crimes as are already made Capital by the Laws, the Core of Rebellion as you
have seen by this, and read of other Rebellions, are the Universities, which
nevertheless are not to be cast away, but to be better disciplined, that is to
say, that the Politics there taught be made to be (as true Politics should
be) such as are fit to make men know that it is their duty to obey all Laws
whatsoever that shall be by the Authority of the King enacted, till by the same
Authority they shall be repealed such as are fit to make men understand that
the Civil Laws are Gods Laws, as they that make them, and to make men know that
the people and the Church are one thing, and have but one Head, the King; and
that no man has Title to govern under him that has it not from him; that the
King owes his Crown to Cod only and to no man Ecclesiastic, or other, and that
the Religion they teach there be a quiet waiting for the coming again of
blessed Savior, and in the mean time a Resolution to obey the Kings Laws,
which are also Gods Laws, to injure no man, to be in Charity with all men, to
cherish the Poor and Sick, and to live Soberly, and free from Scandal, without
mingling our Religion with points of Natural Philosophy, as freedom of Will,
Incorporeal substance; Everlasting News, Ubiquities, Hypostases. Which the
people understand not, nor will ever care for, when the Universities shall be
thus disciplined, there will come out of them from time to time, well
Principled Preachers, and they that are ill principled from time to time fall
away.


B. I think it a very good course, and perhaps the only one that can make our
peace amongst our selves constant: for if men know not their Duty, what is
there that can force them to obey they Laws? An Army you will say; but what shall
force the Army, were not the Trained Bands an Army? Were they not the
Janisaries that not long ago slew Osman in his own Palace at Constantinople! I
am therefore of your opinion, both that men may be brought to a love of
Obedience by Preachers and Gentlemen that imbibe good Principles in their Youth
at the Universities; and also that we never shall have a lasting peace, till
the Universites themselves be in such manney (as you have said) reformed, and
the Ministers know they have no Authority but what the supreme Civil Power
gives them: and ^^e Nobility and Gentry know, that the Liberty of a State is
not an Exemption from the Laws of their own Country, whether made by an
Assembly, or by a Monarchy, but an Exemption from the constraint and Insolence
of their Neighbors.

And now I am satisfied in this point, I will bring you back to the place from
whence my Curiosity drew you to this long digression; We were upon the point of
Shipmoney; one of those grievances which the Parliament exclaimed against, as
Tyranny and Arbitrary Government, thereby to single out (as you called it) the
King from his Subjects, and to make a party against him, when they should need
it: And now you may proceed if it please you, to such other Artifices as they
used to the same purpose.


A. I think it were better to give over here our discourse of his business, and
refer it to some other day that you shall think fit.


B. Content that day, I believe is not far off:


A. You are welcome, yet if you had stayed somewhat longer: My Money would have
been so much the better provided for you.


B, Nay! I pray you give me now what you have about you, for the rest I am
content to take what time you please.


A. After the Parliament had made the people believe that the Extorting of
Ship Money was unlawful, and the people thereby inclined to think it
Tyrannical; in the next place to increase their disaffection to his Majesty:
They accused him of a purpose to Introduce and Authorize the Roman Religion in
this Kingdom: Than which nothing was more hateful to the people, not because it
was Erroneous (which they had neither Learning nor Judgment enough to examine)
but because they had been used to heat it inveyed against, in the Sermons and
Discourses of the Preachers whom they trusted to, and this was indeed the most
effectual calumny to alienate the peoples affections from him that could
possibly be invented; the color they had for this stand was: First, that there
was one Rosseti Resident, (at and a little before the time) from the Pope with
the Queen. And one Mr. George Con-secratary to the Cardinal Francisco
Barb^rini, Nephew to Pope Urban the Eighth sent over under favor, and
protection of the Queen (as was conceived) to draw as many persons of quality
about the Court, as he should be able, to reconcile themselves to the Church of
Rome, with what success I cannot tell, but it is likely he gained some,
especially of the weaker Sex; If I may say they were gained by him, when not
his Arguments but hope of favor from the Queen in all probability prevailed
upon them.


B. In such a Conjuncture as that was, it had perhaps been better they had not
been sent.


A. There was exception also taken at a Covent of Friars, Capucines in
Sommerset-house; though allowed by the Articles of Marriage; and it was
reported that the Jescites also were shortly after to be allowed a Covent in
Clerkenwel, and in the mean time the principal Secretary Sir Francis Windebank
was accused for having by his Warrant set at liberty some English Jesuits that
had been taken and Imprisoned for returning into England after Banishment
contrary to the Statute, which had made it Capital, also the great resort of
English Catholics to the Queens Chapel gave them Color to blame the Queen
her self, not only for that, but also for all the favors that had been shown
to the Catholics, insomuch that some of them did not stick to say openly that
the King was governed by her.


B. Strange Injustice! The Queen was a Catholic by Profession, and therefore
could not but endeavor to do the Catholics all the good she could, she had
not else been truly that which she professed to be, but it seen^s they meant
to force her to Hypocrisy, being Hypocrites themselves: Can any man think it a
Crime in a Devour Lady (of what Sect soever) to seek Favor and Benediction of
that Church whereof she is a Member.


A. To give the Parliament another Color for their Accusation on foot for the
King, as to introducing of Popery, there was a great Controversy between the
Episcopal and Presbyterian Clergy about Free Will. The Dispute began first in
the Low Countries, between Gomar and Arminius, in the time of King James, who
foreseeing it might trouble the Church of England, did what he could to compose
the difference, an Assembly of Divines was therefore got together at Dort, to
which also King James sent Divine or two, but it came to nothing, the question
was left undecided, and became a Subject to be disputed of in the Universities;
here all the Presbyterians were of the same mind with Gomar, but a very great
many others not, and those were called here Arminians, who because the Doctrine
of Free Will had been exploded as Papistical, and because the Presbyterians
were far the greater number, and already in favor with the People, they were
generally hated; it was casie therefore for the Parliament to make that Calumny
pass currently with the People; when the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Laud,
was for Arminius, and had a little before, by his Power Ecclesiastical,
forbidden all Ministers to Preach to the People of Predestination; and when all
Ministers that were gracious with him, and hoped for any Church-preferment fell
to Preaching and Writing for Free Will to the uttermost of their Power, as a
proof of their Ability and Merit. Besides they gave out, some of them, that the
Archbishop was in heart a Papist, and in case he could effect here a
Tolleration of the Roman Religion to have Cardinal's Hat, which was not only
false, but also without any ground at all for a Suspicion.


B. It is a strange thing that Scholars obscure men, that could receive no
Charity, but from the flame of the State should be suffered to bring their
unnecessary Disputes, and together with them their quarrels out of the
Universities into the Commonwealth, and more strange that the State should
engage in their Parties, and not rather put them both to silence: A State can
constrain obedience, but convince no Error, nor alter the mind of them that
believe they have the better reason; Suppression of Doctrines dues but unite
and exasperate, that is, increase both the malice and power of them that have
already believed them; But what are the Points they disagree in? Is there any
Controversy between Bishop and Presbyterian concerning the Divinity or Humanity
of Christ? Do either of them deny the Trinity, or any Article of the Creed?
Does either Party Preach openly, or Write directly against Justice, Charity,
Sobriety, or any other Duty, necessary to Salvation, except only the Duty to
the King, and not that neither, but when they had a mind either to Rule or
Destroy the King? Lord have mercy upon us. Can no body be saved that
understands not their Disputations? or is there more requisite either of Faith,
or Honesty for the Salvation of one Man than another? What needs so much
preaching of Faith to us that are no Heathens, and believe already all that
Christ and his Apostles have told us is necessary to salvation, and more too?
Why is there so little Preaching of Justice? I have indeed heard Righteousness
often recommended to the People, but I have seldom heard the Word Justice in
their Sermons: nay, though in the Latin and Greek Bible the word Justice occurr
exceeding often, yet in the English (though it be a word that every man
understands (the word Righteousness) which few understand to signify the same,
but take it rather for Righteousness of Opinion, than of Action or Intention)
is put in the place of it.


A. I confess I know very few Controversies amongst Christians of points
necessary to Salvation; they are the Questions of-Authority and Power over the
Church, or of Profit, or Honor to Churchmen, that for the most part raise all
the Controversies: For, what man is he that will trouble himself, and fall out
with his Neighbors for the saving of my Soul, or the Soul of any other than
himself? When the Presbyterian Ministers, and others, did so furiously Preach
Sedition, and animate men to Rebellion in these late Wars, who was there that
had not a Benefit, or having one, feared not to lose it, or some other part of
h^s Maintenence, by the alteration of the Government, that did voluntarily,
without any eye to reward, Preach so earnestly against Sedition, as the other
party Preached for it? I confess, that for ought I have observed in History,
and other Writings of the Heathens, Greek and La^ine, that those Heathens were
not at all short of us in point of Virtue and Moral Doties, notwithstanding
that we have had much Preaching, and they none at all; I confess also, that
considering what harm might proceed from a Liberty that Men have upon every
Sunday, and ost^e^, to Harangue all the People of a Nation at one time, whilst
the State is ignorant what they will say, and that there is no such thing
permitted in all the World out of Chrisiendom, ^or therefore any Civil Wars
about Religion; I have thought much Preaching an incovenience, nevertheless I
cannot think, that Preaching to the People the points of their Duty both to God
and Man can be too frequent, so it be done by Grave, Discreet, and Ancient men,
that are Reverenced by the People, and not by light quibling young men, whom no
Congregation is so simple as to look to be taught by, (as being a thing
contrary to nature) or to pay them any Reverence, or to care what they say,
except some few that may be delighted with their Jingling: I wish with all my
Heart there were enough of such Discreet and Ancient men, as might suffice for
all the Parishes in England, and that they would undertake it; but this is but
a wish, I leave it to the wisdom of the State, to do what it pleases.


B. What did they next?


A. Whereas the King had sent Prisoners into Places remote from London three
Persons, that had been condemned for publishing seditious Doctrine, some in
Writing, some in public Sermons; that Parliament (whether with his Majesty's
consent or no I have forgotten) caused them to be released, and to return to
London, meaning, I think, to try how the People would be pleased therewith, and
by consequence, how their endeavors to draw the Peoples Affections from the
King had already prospered. When these three came through London, it was a kind
of Triumph, the People flocking together to behold them, and receiving them
with such Acclamations, and almost Adoration, as if they had been let down from
Heaven: Insomuch that the Parliament was now sufficiently assured of a great
and tumultuous Party, whenever they should have occasion to use it, on
confidence whereof, they proceeded to their next Plot, which was to deprive the
King of such Ministers, as by their Courage, Wisdom and Authority, they thought
most able to prevent, or oppose their further Designs against the King: And
first the House of Commons resolved to impeach the Earl of Strafford, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, of High Treason.


B. What was that Earl of Strafford before he had that Place: And how had he
offended the Parliament, or given them cause to think he would be their Enemy?
For I have heard, that in former Parliaments, he had been as Parliamentary as
any other.


A. His Name was Sir Thomas Wentworth, a Gentleman both for Birth and Estate
very considerable in his own Country, which was Yorkshire; but more
considerable for his Judgment in the Public Affairs, not only of that
Country, but generally of the Kingdom; either as Burgess for some Borrough, or
Knight of the Shire: For his Principles of Politics, they were the same that
were generally proceeded upon by all Men else, that are thought sit to be
chosen for the Parliament; which are commonly these, To take for the Rule of
Justice and the Government, the Judgments and Acts of former Parliaments,
which are commonly called Precedents; to endeavor to keep the People from
being subject to Extra-Parliamentary Taxes of money; and from being with
Parliamentary Taxes too much oppressed; to preserve to the People their Liberty
of Body from their Arbitrary Power of the King out of Pa^liament; to seek
Redress of Grievances.


B. What Grievances?


A. The Grievances were commonly such as these: The King's too much Liberality
to some Favorite; the too much Power of any Minister of State of Officer; the
M^sdemeanours of Judges Civil or Spiritual, but especially all Unparliamentary
raising of Money upon the Subjects. And commonly of late till such Grievances
be redressed, they refuse, or at least make great difficulty to furnish the
King with Money, necessary for the most urgent occasions of the Commonwealth.


B. How then can a King discharge his Duty, as he ought to do; or the Subject
know which of his Masters he is to obey? For here are manifestly two Powers,
which when they chance to differ, cannot both be obeyed.


A. It Is true, but they have not often differed so much to the danger of the
Commonwealth, as they have done in this Parliament of 1640. In all the
Parliaments of the late King Charles before the year 1640. my Lord of Strafford
did appear in opposition to the King's Demands, as much as any man, and was for
that Cause very much esteemed and cried up by the People as a good Patriot, and
one that courageously stood up in defense of their Liberties, and for the same
cause was so much the more hated, when afterward he endeavored to maintain
the Royal and Just Authority of his Majesty.


B. How came he to change his mind so much as it seems he did?


A. After the Dissolution of that Parliament holden in the year 1627 and 1628,
the King finding no Money to be gotten from Parliaments, which he was not to
buy with the Blood of such Servants and Ministers as he loved best, abstained a
long time from calling any more, and had abstained longer, if the Rebellion of
the Scotch had not forced him to it. During that Parliament the King made Sir
Thomas Wentworth a Baron, recommended to him for his great ability, which was
generally taken notice of by the disservice he had done the King in former
Parliaments, but which might be useful also for him in the times that came on;
and not long after that he made him of the Council, and again Lieutenant of
Ireland, which place he discharged with great satisfaction and benefit to his
Majesty, and continued in that Office, till by the Envy and Violence of the
Lords and Commons of that unlucky Parliament of 1640. he died, in which year he
was made General of the King's Forces against the Scotch that then entered into
England, and the year before Earl of Strafford. The Pacification being made,
and the Forces on both sides Disbanded, and the Parliament at Westminster now
Sitting, it was not long before the House of Commons accused him to the House
of Lords of High Treason.


B. There was no great probability of his being a Traitor to the King, from
whose favor he had received his greatness, and from whose protection he was to
expect his safety: What was the Treason they laid to his Charge?


A. Many Articles were drawn up against him, but the sum of them was contained
in these two; First, That he had traitorously endeavored to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm, and instead thereof to introduce
an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law. Secondly, That he had
labored to subvert the Rights of Parliaments, and the ancient course of
Parliamentary Proceedings.


B. Was this done by him without the knowledge of the King?


A. No.


B. Why then if it were Treason, did not the King himself call him in question
by his Attorney? What had the House of Commons to do without his Command to
accuse him to the House of Lords? They might have complained to the King, if he
had not known it before, I understand not this Law.


A. Nor I.


B. Had this been by any former Statutes made Treason?


A. Not that I ever heard of; nor do I understand that any thing can be Treason
against the King, that the King hearing and knowing does not think Treason: But
it was a piece of that Parliaments Artifice to put the word Traitorously to any
Article exhibited against a Man whose life they meant to take away.


B. Was there no particular Instance of action or words, out of which they
argued that endeavor of his, to subvert the fundamental Laws of Parliament,
whereof they accused him?


A. Yes, they said he gave the King counsel to reduce the Parliament to their
duty by the Irish Army, which not long before my Lord of Strafford himself had
caused to be levied there for the King's service; but it was never proved
against him, that he advised the King to make use of it against the Parliament.


B. What are those Laws that are called fundamental? for I understand not how
one Law can be more fundamental than another, except only that Law of Nature
that binds us all to obey him whosoever he be, whom lawfully and for our own
safety we have promised to obey, nor any other fundamental Law to a King but
Salus Populi, The safety and well being of the people.


A. This Parliament in the use of these words when they accused any Man never
regarded the signification of them, but the weight they had to aggravate their
accusation to the Ignorant multitudes which think all faults heinous that are
expressed in heinous terms: If they hate the reason accused as they did this man
not only for being of the Kings party, but also for deserting the Parliaments
party as an Apostate.


B. I pray you tell me also what they meant by Arbitrary Government, which they
seemed so much to hate: Is there any Governor of a people in the World that is
forced to Govern them, or forced to make this and that Law whether he will or
no! I think, or if any be that forces him, does certainly make Laws and Govern
Arbitrarily.


A. That is true, and the true meaning of the Parliament was, that not the King
but they themselves should have the Arbitrary Government; not only of England
but of Ireland, and (as it appeared by the event) of Scotland also.


B. How the King came by the Government of Scotland and Ireland by descent of
his Ancestors, every body can ^ell, but if the King of England and his Heirs
should chance (which God forbid) to fail, I cannot imagine what Title the
Parliament of England, can acquire thereby to either of those Nations.


A. Yet they say, they have been conquered anciently by the English Subjects
Money.


B. Like enough, and suitable to the rue of their imdence.


A. Impudence in Democratical Assemblies does almost all that is done, it is the
Goddess of Rhetoric, and carries on proof with it for though ordinary men will
not from so great boldness of affirmation conclude, there is great boldness of
affirmation; conclude there is a great probability in the King affirmed upon
this accusation: He was brought to his Trial at Westminster Hall before the
House of Lords, and found Guilty, and presently after declared a Traitor by a
Bill of Attainder, that is, by Act of Parliament.


B. It is a strange thing that the Lords should be induced upon so light
grounds to give a sentence, or give their assent to a Bill, so prejudicial to
themselves and their posterity,


A. 'Twas not well done, and yet (as it seems) not ignorantly; for there is a
clause in the Bill, that it should not be taken hereafter for an example, that
is, for a prejudice in the like case hereafter.


B. That is worse than the Bill it self, and is a plain confession, that their
Sentence was unjust; for what har^^ is their in the example of just Sentences?
Besides, if hereafter the like case should happen, the Sentence is not at all
made weaker by such a provision.


A. Indeed I believe, that the Lords, most of them, were not-willing to condemn
him of Treason, they were awed to it by the clamor of the common people, that
came to Westminster, crying out, Justice, Justice against the Earl of
Strafford, the which were caused to flock together by some of the House of
Commons, that were well assured, after the Triumphant Welcome of Prinne,
Burton, and Bastwick, to put the People into Tumult upon any occasion they
desired: They were awed unto it partly also by the House of Commons it self,
which if it desired to undo a Lord, had no more to do but to Vote him a
Delinquent.


A. A Delinquent! what is that? A sinner is it not? Did they mean to undo all
sinners?


A. By Delinquent they meant only a man, to whom they would do all the hurt
they could; but the Lords did not yet, I think, suspect they meant to casheer
their whole House.


B. It Is a strange thing, the whole House should not perceive the ruin of the
King's power, or weakening of themselves; for they could not think it likely,
that they ever^ meant to take the Sovereignty from the King, to give it to them
who were few in number, and less in power, than so many Commoners, because less
beloved by the People.


A. But it seems not so strange to me for the Lords, for their personal
abilities, as they were no less, so also were they no more skilful in the
Public affairs than the Knights and Burgesses; for there is no reason to
think, that if one that is to day a Knight of the Shire in the Lower House, be
to morrow made a Lord, and a Member of the Higher House, is therefore wiser
than he was before: they are all of both Houses prudent and able men as any in
the Land, in the business of their private Estates, which requires nothing but
diligence and a Natural Wit to govern them; but for the Government of a
Commonwealth neither Wit, nor Prudence, nor Diligence is enough, without
infallible Rules, and the true Science of Equity and Justice.


B. If this be true, it is impossible any Commonwealth in the World, whether
Monarchy, Aristocracy, or Democracy, should continue long without change or
sedition, tending to change either of the Government, or of the Governors.


A. It Is true, nor have any the greatest Commonwealths in the World been long
from Sedition; the Greeks had it, first, their Petty Kings, and then by
Sedition came to be Petty Commonwealths, and then growing to be greater
Commonwealths, by Sedition again became Monarchies, and all for want of Rules
of Justice for the common People to take notice of; which if the People had
known in the beginning of every of these Seditions, the ambitious persons could
never have had the hope to disturb their Government after it had been once
settled; for ambition can do little without hands, and few hands it could have,
if the common People were as diligently instructed in the true Principles of
their Duty, as they are terrified and amazed by Preachers with fruitless and
dangerous Doctrines concerning the nature of Man's Will, and many other
Philosophical Points, that tend not at all to the salvation of the Soul in the
World to come, nor to their ease in this life, but only to the discretion
toward the Clergy, of that Duty which they ought to perform to the King.


B. For ought I see, all the States of Christendom will be subject to those
fits of Rebellion as long as the World lasts.


A. Like enough, and yet the fault (as I have said) may be easily mended, by
mending the Universities.


B. How long had the Parliament now sitten?


A. It began November. 3. 1640. My Lord of Strafford was Impeached of Treason
before the Lords, November 12, sent to the Tower, November 22, his Trial began
March 22, and ended April 13. After his Trial he was voted guilty of High
Treason in the House of Commons, and after that in the House of Lords, May 6,
and on the 12 of May beheaded.


B. Great Expedition! But could not the King for all that have saved him by a
Pardon?


A. The King had heard all that passed at his Trial, and had declared he was
unsatisfied concerning the Justice of their Sentence, and (I think)
notwithstanding the danger of his own Person from the fury of the People, and
that he was counseled to give way to his Execution, not-only by such as he
most relied on, but also by the Earl of Strafford himself, he would have
pardoned him, if that could have preserved him from the Tumult raised and
countenanced by the Parliament it self, for the terrifying of those they
thought might favor him, and yet the King himself did not stick to confess
afterward that he had done amiss, in that he did not rescue him.


B. 'Twas an Argument of a good disposition in the King, but I never read that
Augustus Caesar acknowledged that he did a fault in abandoning Cicero to the
fury of his Enemy Antonius, perhaps because Cicero having been of the contrary
Faction to his Father, had done Augustus no service at all, not out of favor
to him, but only out of enmity to Antonius, and of love to the Senate, that is
indeed out of love to himself that swayed the Senate, as it is very likely the
Earl of Strafford came over to the King's Party for his own ends, having been
so much against the King in former Parliaments.


A. We cannot safely judge of men's intentions, but I have observed often that
such as seek preferment by their Stubbornness have missed of their aim, and on
the other side, that those Princes, that with preferment are forced to buy the
Obedience of their Subjects, are already, or must be soon after in a very weak
condition, for in a Market where Honor is to be bought with Stubbornness,
there will be a great many as able to buy as my Lord Strafford was.


B. You have read that when Hercules fighting with the Hydra, had cut off any
one of his many Heads, there still arose two other Heads in it is place, and yet
at last he cut them off all.


A. The story is told false, for Hercules at first did not cut off those Heads
but bought them off, and afterward when he saw that did him no good, then he
cut them off and got the Victory.


B. What did they next?


A. After the first Impeachment of the Earl of Strafford, the House of Commons
upon December 18. accused the Archbishop of Canterbury also of High Treason,
that is, of a Design to introduce Arbitrary Government, etc. For which he was (
February 18.) sent to the Tower, but his Trial and Execution were deferred a
long time, till January 10. 1643. for the entertainment of the Scots that were
come into England to aid the Parliament.


B. Why did the Scots think there were so much danger in the Archbishop of
Canterbury? he was not a Man of War, nor a Man able to bring an Army into the
Field; but he was perhaps a very great Politician.


A. That did not appear by any remarkable events of his Councils, I never heard
but he was a very honest man for his Morals, and a very zealous promoter of the
Church Government by Bishops, and that he desired to have the Service of God
performed, and the House of God adorned as suitably as was possible, to the
Honor we ought to do to the Divine Majesty. But to bring, as he did, into the
State his Former Controversies, I mean his squablings in the University about
Free Will, and his standing upon Punctilio's concerning the Service Book and
its Rubricks was not (in my opinion) an Argument of his sufficiency in Affairs
of State. About the same time they passed an Act (which the King consented to)
for a Triennial Parliament, wherein was Enacted, That after the present
Parliament, there should be a Parliament called by the King within the space of
three years, and so from three years to three years to meet at Westminster upon
a certain day named in the Act.


B. But what if the King did not call it; finding it perhaps inconvenient or
hurtful to the Safety or Peace of his People which God has put into his
Charge; for I do not well comprehend how any Sovereign can well keep a People
in order when his hands are-tied, or when he has any other Obligation upon
him, than the benefit of those he Governs. And at this time for any thing you
told me they acknowledged the King for their Sovereign.


A. I know not, but such was the Act: And it was farther Enacted, That if the
King did it not by his own Command, then the Lord Chancellor or the Lord
Keeper for the time being should send out the Writs of Summons: And if the
Chancellor refused, then the Sheriffs of the several Counties of themselves at
the next County Courts before the day set down for the Parliament's meeting,
should proceed to Election of the Members for the said Parliament.


B. But what if the Sheriffs refused?


A. I think they were to be sworn to it, but for that and other particulars I
refer you to the Act.


B. To whom should they be sworn when there is no Parliament?


A. No doubt, but to the King, whether there be a Parliament sitting or no.


B. Then the King may Release them of their Oath.


A. Besides, They obtained of the King the putting down the Star Chamber and
the High Commission Courts.


B. Besides, If the King upon the refusal, should fall upon them in an Anger,
Who shall (the Parliament not sitting) Protect either the Chancellor or the
Sheriffs in their Disobedience?


A. I pray you do not ask me any Reason of such things, I understand no better
than you: I tell you only an Act passed to that purpose, and was Signed by the
King in the middle of February, a little before the Archbishop was sent to the
Tower. Besides this Bill, the two Houses of Parliament agreed upon another,
wherein it was Enacted, That the present Parliament would continue till both
the Houses did consent to the Dissolution of it; which Bill also the King
Signed the same day he Signed the Warrant for the Execution of the Earl of
Strafford.


B. What a great Progress made the Parliament toward the ends of the most
seditious Members of both Houses in so little time. They sat down in November,
and now it was May; in this space of time, which is but half a year, they won
from the King the Adherence which was due to him from his People: they drove
his faithfullest Servants from him, beheaded the Earl of Strafford, Imprisoned
the Archbishop of Canterbury, obtained a Triennial Parliament after their own
Dissolution, and a continuance of their own sitting as long as they listed;
which last amounted to a total extinction of the King's right in case that such
a Grant were valid, which I think is not: unless the sovereignty it self be in
plain terms renounced; which it was not, but what Money by way of subsidue or
otherwise did they grant the King in recompense of all these his large
concessions?


A. None at all, but often promised they would make him the most glorious King
that ever was in England; which were words that passed well enough for
welmeaning with the common People.


B. But the Parliament was contented now: for I cannot imagine what they should
desire more from the King, than he had now granted them.


A. Yes they desired the whole and absolute sovereignty, and to change the
Monarchical Government into an Oligarchie, that is to say, to make the
Parliament consisting of a few Lords, and about 400 Commoners, absolute in the
sovereignty for the present, and shortly after to lay the House of Lords aside,
for this was the Design of the Presbyterian Ministers, who taking themselves to
be, by right, the only Lawful Government of the Church, endeavored to bring
the same Form of Government into the Civil state, and as the Spiritual Laws
were to be made by their Synods, so their Civil Laws should be made by the
House of Commons; who, as they thought, would no less be ruled by them
afterward, than formerly they had been; wherein they were deceived, and found
themselves out-gon by their own Disciples, though not in Malice yet in Wit.


B. What followed after this?


A. In August following the King supposing he had now sufficiently obliged the
Parliament, to proceed no farther against him, took a Journey into Scotland, to
satisfy his Subjects there, as he had done here; intending perhaps so to gain
their good wills, that in case the Parliament here should levy Arms against
him, they should not be aided by the Scots; wherein he also was deceived, for
though they seemed satisfied with what he did (whereof one thing was his giving
away to the Aboletion of Episcopacy:) Yet afterward they made a League with
the Parliament, and for Money (when the King began to have the better of the
Parliament) invaded England, in the Parliaments Quarrel, but this was a Year or
two after.


B. Before you go any farther, I desire to know the Ground and Original of that
Right, which either the House of Lords, or House of Commons, or both together
pretend to.


A. It is a question of things so long past that they are now forgotten; nor
have we any thing to conjecture by, but the Records of our own Nation; and some
small and obscure fragments of Roman Histories: And for the Records, seeing
they are of things only done sometimes justly, sometimes unjustly you can never
by them know what Right they had, but only what Right they pretended.


B. Howsoever let me know what light we have in this matter from the Roman
Histories.


A. It would be too long, and an useless digression to ^^^all the Ancient
Authors that speak of the forms of those Commonwealths, which were amongst our
first Ancestors, the Saxons and other Germans, and of other Nations, from whom
we derive the Titles of Honor, now in use in England; nor will it be possible
to derive from them any Arguments of Right, but only Examples of fact, which by
the Ambition of Potent Subjects, have been oftener unjust than otherwise; and
for those Saxons or Angles, that in Ancient times by several Invasions, made
themselves Masters of this Nation, they were not in themselves one Body of
Commonwealth, but only a League of diverse Petty German Lords and States, such
as was the Grecian Army in the Trojan War, without other Obligations, than
that which proceeded from their own fear and weakness; nor were these Lords for
the most part the Sovereigns at home in their own Country, but chosen by the
people for the Captains of the Forces they brought with them; And therefore it
was not without Equity, that when they had conquered any part of the Land, and
made some one of them King thereof, the rest should have greater Privileges
than the common People and Soldiers, amongst which Privileges, a man may
easily conjecture this to be one; that they should be made acquainted, and be
of Council with him that has the Sovereignty in matters of Government, and
have the greatest and most honorable Offices, both in Peace and War: But
because there can be no Government where there is more than one Sovereign, it
cannot be inferred that he had a Right to oppose the King's Resolutions by
force, nor to enjoy those honors and places longer than they should continue
good Subjects: And we find that the Kings of England did upon every great
occasion call them together by the name of Discreet and Wise men of the
Kingdom, and hear their Councils, and make them Judges of all Causes, that
during their Sitting were brought before them. But as he summoned them at his
own pleasure; so had he also ever at his pleasure power to Dissolve them. The
Normans also that descended from the Germans, as we did, had the same Customs
in this particular; and by this means, this Privilege have the Lords to be of
your King's great Council; and when they were assembled, to be the highest of
the King's Court of Justice, continued still after the Conquest to this day.
But though there be amongst the Lords diverse Names or Titles of Honor, yet
they have their Privilege by the only name of Baron, a name received from the
Ancient Gauls, amongst whom that name signified the King's man, or rather one
of his great men: By which it seems to me, that though they gave him Council
when he required it, yet they had no Right to make War upon him, if he did not
follow it.


B. When began first the House of Commons to be part o^ the King's great
Council?


A. I do not doubt but that before the Conquest, some discreet men, and known
to be so, by the King, were called by special Writ to be of the same Council,
though they were not Lords. But that is nothing to the House of Commons: the
Knights of ^lares, and Burgesses, were never called to Parliament, for ought
that I know, till the beginning of Edward the first, or the latter end of the
Reign (...) Henry the third, immediately after the mis-behaviour of the Barons;
and for ought any man knows, were called on purpose to weaken that Power of the
Lords, which they had so freshly abused. Before the time of Henry the third,
the Lords were de^^o^^ed most of them from such as in the Invasions and
Conquests of the Germans were Peers and ^ellow-Kings, 'till one was made King
of them ^^ll, and their Tenants were their Subjects, as it is at this day with
the Lords of France. But after the time of Henry the third, the Kings began to
make Lords in the place of them, whose Issue failed Titularly only; without the
Lands belonging to their Title; and by that means their Tenants being bound no
longer to Terve them in the Wars, they grew every day less and less able to
make a Party against the King, though they continued still to be his great
Council: And as their Power decreased. To the Power of the House of Commons
increased: But I do not find that they were part of the King's Council at all,
nor Judges over other men, though it cannot be denied but a King may ask their
advice, as well as the advice of any other. But I do not find that the end of
their summoning was to give advice; but only in case they had any Petitions for
Redress of Grievances, to be ready there with them whilst the King had his
great Council about him.

But neither they, nor the Lords, could present to the King as a Grievance;
That the King took upon him to make the Laws, to choose his own Privy Council,
to raise Money and Soldiers, to defend the Peace and Honor of the Kingdom, to
make Captains in his Army, to make Governors of his Castles whom he pleased;
for this had been to tell the King that it was one of their Grievances that he
was King.


B. What did the Parliament do whilst the King was in Scotland?


A. The King went in August; after which the Parliament, September the 8th,
adjourned till the 20th of October, and the King returned about the end of
November following, in which time the most Seditious of both Houses, and which
had designed the Change of Government, and to cast off Monarchy, (but yet had
not wit enough to set up another Government in its place, and consequently left
it to the chance of War) made a Cabal amongst themselves, in which they
projected how by seconding one another to Govern the House of Commons; and
invented how to put the Kingdom by the Power of that House into a Rebellion,
which they then called a posture of Defense against such Dangers from abroad as
they themselves should feign and publish. Besides, whilst the King was in
Scotland, the Irish Papists got together a great Party, with an Intention to
Massacre the Protestants there, and had laid a design for the ^eizing of Dublin
Castle, October the 20th. where the King's Officers of the Government of the
County made their Residence, and had effected it, had it not been Discovered
the night before: The manner of the discovery, and the Murders they committed
in the Country afterward, I need not tell you, since the whole story of it is
extant.


B. I wonder they did not expect and provide for a Rebellion in Ireland, as
soon as they began to quarrel with the King in England: For was there any body
so ignorant as not to know that the Irish Papists did long for a change of
Religion there, as well as the Presbyterians in England? Or that in general the
Irish Nation did hate the name of Subjection to England, or would longer be
quiet than they feared an Army out of England to chastize them? What better
time then, could they take for their Rebellion than this, wherein they were
encouraged, not only by our weakness, caused by this Division between the King
and his Parliament, but also by the Example of the Presbyterians, both of the
Scorch and English Nation? But what did the Parliament do upon this occasion in
the King's absence?


A. Nothing; but consider what use they might make of it to their own ends;
partly by imputing it to the King's evil Counselors, and partly by occasion
thereof to demand of the King the Power of Pressing and Ordering of Soldiers,
which Power whosoever has, has also without doubt the whole ^overaignty.


B. When came the King back?


A. He came back the 25th of November, and was welcomed with the Acclamations
of the common people, as much as if he had been the most beloved of the Kings
before him, but found not a Reception by the Parliament answerable to it: They
presently began to pick new Quarrels against him out of every thing he said to
them. December 2. the King called together both Houses of Parliament, and then
did only recommend unto them the raising of Succors for Ireland.


B. What Quarrel could they pick out of that?


A. None but in order thereto, as they may pretend, they had a Bill in
Agitation to assert the power of Levying and Pressing ^oldiers to the two
Houses of the Lords and Commons; which was as much as to take ^^om the King the
Power of the Militia, which is in effect the whole Sovereign Power; for he that
has the Power of Levying and Commanding of his Soldiers, has all other Rights
of Sovereignty which he shall please to claim: The King hearing of it, called
the Houses of Parliament together again on December the 14th, and then pressed
again the business of Ireland, (as there was need) for all this while the Irish
were murdering the English in Ireland, and strengthening themselves against the
Forces they expected to come out of England, and withal told them, he took
notice of the Bill in Agitation for Pressing of Soldiers; and that he was
content it should pass with a Salvo Jure both for him and them, because the
present time was unreasonable to dispute it in.


B. What was there unreasonable in this?


A. Nothing; what is unreasonable is one question; what they quarreled at is
another: They quarreled at this, that His Majesty took notice of the Bill
while it was in debate in the House of Lords, before it was presented to him,
in the Course of Parliament: And also that he showed himself displeased with
those that propounded the third Bill; both which they declared to be against
the Privileges of Parliament, and petitioned the King to give them Reparation
against those by whose evil Council he was induced to it, that they might
receive condign punishment.


B. This was cruel proceeding: Do not the Kings of England use to sit in the
Lords House when they please? And was not this Bill then in debate in the House
of Lords? It is a strange thing that a man should be lawfully in the company of
men, where he must needs hear and see what they say and do; and yet must not
take notice of it; so much as to the same Company; for though the King was not
present at the Debate it self, yet it was lawful for any of the Lords to make
him acquainted with it. Any one of the House of Commons, though not present at
a Proposition, or Debate, in the House, nevertheless hearing of it from some of
his fellow Members, may certainly, not only take notice of it, but also speak
to it in the House of Commons: But to make the King give up his Friends and
Counselors to them to be put to Death, Banishment or Imprisonment, for their
good will to him, was such a Tyranny over a King, no King ever exercised over
any Subject, but in cases of Treason, or Murder, and seldom then.


A. Presently hereupon grew a kind of War between the Peers of Parliament, and
those of the Secretaries, and other able Men that were with the King. ^or upon
the 15th of December they sent to the King a Paper called a Remonstrance of the
State of the Kingdom, and with it a Petition, both which they caused to be
published; in the Remonstrance they complained of certain mischievous Designs
of a Malignant Party then, before the beginning of the Parliament grown ^^pe,
and did set forth what means had been used for the preventing of it by the
Wisdom of the Parliament; what Rubs they had found therein; what course was fit
to be taken for the restoring and establishing the Ancient Honor, Greatness
and Safety of the Crown and Nation: And of those Designs the Promoters and
Actors were, they said, 1. Jesuits and Papists. 2. The Bishops, and part of the
Clergy, that cherish formality as a support of their own Ecclesiastical Ty^^nny
and Usurpation. 3. Counselors and Courtiers, that for private ends (they said)
had engaged themselves to farther the Interests of some Foreign Princes.



B. It may well be, that some of the Bishops, and also some of the Court may
have, in pursuit of their private Interest, done something indiscreetly, and
per^^ps wickedly; therefore I pray tell me particularly what their Crimes were;
for me thinks the King should not have connived at any thing against his own
Su^^eam Authority.


A. The Parliament were not very keen against them that were against the King.
They made no doubt but all they did was by the King's Command, but accused
thereof the Bishops, Counselors, and Courtiers, as being a more mannerly way
of Accusing the King himself, and defaming him to his Subjects. For the truth
is, the Charge they brought against them was so general, as not to be called an
Accusation, but Railing. As first; They said, they nourished Questions of
Prerogatives and Liberty between the King and his People, to the end, that
seeming much addicted to His Majesty's Service, they might get themselves into
places of greatest Trust and Power in the Kingdom.


B. How could this be called an Accusation, in which there is no Fact for any
Accusers to apply their Proof to, or their Witnesses? for, granting that these
Questions of Prerogative had been moved by them, who can prove that their End
was to gain to themselves and Friends the Places of Trust and Power in the
Kingdom?


A. A second Accusation was, that they endeavored to suppress the Purity and
Power of Religion.


B. That Is Canting. It is not in Man's power to suppress the Power of Religion.


A. They meant, that they suppressed the Doctrine of the Presbyterians; that is
to say, the very Foundation of their Parliaments Treacherous Pretensions.

A third; That they cherished Arminians; Papists, and Libertines (by which they
meant the common Protestants that meddle not with Disputes) to the end they
might compose a body fit to Act according to their Counsels and Resolutions.

A fourth; That they endeavored to put the King upon other courses of raising
of Money, than by the ordinary way of Parliaments. Judge whether these may be
properly called Accusations, or not rather ^pightful Reproaches of the King's
Government.


B. Methinks this last was a very great fault; for what good could there be in
putting the King upon any odd course of getting Money, when the Parliament was
willing to supply him as far as to the security of the Kingdom, or to the
honor of the King should be necessary?


A. But I told you before they would give him none, but with a Condition he
should cut off the heads of whom they pleased, how faithfully soever they had
served him; and if he would have sacrificed all his Friends to their Ambition,
yet they would have found other excuses to deny him Subsidies; for they were
resolved to take from him the Sovereign Power to themselves, which they would
never do without taking great care that he should have no Money at all. In the
next place, they put into the Remonstrance as faults of them whose Council the
King followed, All those things which since the beginning of the King's Reign
were by them misliked, whether faults or not, and whereof they were not able to
judge, for want of knowledge of the Causes and Motives that induced the King to
do them, and were known only by the King himself, and such of his Privy Council
as he revealed them to.


B. But what were those particular pretended faults?


A. First, The Dissolution of the last Parliament at Oxford.

Secondly, The Dissolution of his second Parliament, being in the second year
of his Reign.

Thirdly, The Dissolution of his Parliament in the fourth year of his Reign.

Fourthly, The fruitless Expedition against Cales.

Fifthly, the Peace made with Spain, whereby the Palatine's Cause was deserted
and left to chargeable and hopeless Treaties.

Sixthly, The sending of Commissions to raise Money by way of Loan.

Seventhly, Raising of Ship Money.

Eighthly, Enlargements of Forests contrary to Magna Charta.

Ninthly, The Designment of Engrossing all the Gunpowder into one hand, and
keeping it in the Tower of London.

Tenthly, A Design to bring in the Use of Brass-Money.

Eleventhly, The Fines, Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations, Whippings,
Pillories, Gaggs, Confinements and Banishments, by Sentence in the Court of
Star Chamber.

Twelfthly, The displacing of Judges.

Thirteenthly, The Illegal Acts of Council Table.

Fourteenthly, The Arbitrary and Illegal Power of the Earl-Marshal's Court.

Fifteenthly, The Abuses in Chancery, Exchequer-Chamber, and Court of Wards.

Sixteenthly, The selling of Titles of Honor, of Judges and Sergeants Places,
and other Offices.

Seventeenthly, The Insolence of Bishops, and other Clarks in Suspensions,
Excommunications, and Degradations of diverse painful, and learned, and pious
Ministers.


B. Were there any such Ministers Degraded, Depraved, or Excommunicated?


A. I cannot tell. But I remember I have heard threatened diverse painful,
unlearned and seditious Ministers.

Eighteenthly, The Excess of Severity of the High-Commission-Court.

Nineteenthly, The Preaching before the King against the Property of the
Subject, and for the Prerogative of the King above the Law, and diverse other
petty Quarrels they had to the Government; which though they were laid upon
this Faction, yet they knew they would fall upon the King himself in the
Judgment of the People, to whom by Printing it was communicated.

Again, After the Dissolution of the Parliament May the 5th, 1640. they find
other faults; as the Dissolution it self; the Imprisoning some Members of both
Houses; a forced Loan of Money attempted in London; the Continuance of the
Convocation when the Parliament was ended; and the favor showed to Papists by
Secretary Windebank and others.


B. All this will go current with common people for Mis-government, and for
faults of the King's, though some of them were Misfortunes, and both the
Misfortunes and the Mis-governments (if any were) were the faults of the
Parliament, who by denying to give him Money, did both frustrate his Attempts
abroad, and put him upon those extraordinary ways (which they call Illegal) of
raising Money at home.


A. You see what a heap of Evils they have raised to make a show of ill
Government to the People, which they second with an enumeration of the many
services they have done the King in overcoming a great many of them, though not
all, and in diverse other things, and say, that though they had contracted a
Debt to the Scots of 22000 l. and granted six Subsidies, and a Bill of
Pole Money worth six Subsidies more, yet that God had so blessed the Endeavors
of this Parliament, that the Kingdom was a gainer by it; and then follows the
Catalogue of those good things they had done for the King and Kingdom: For the
Kingdom they had done (they said) these things; They had abolished Ship Money,
They had taken away Coat and Conduct-money, and other Military Charges, which
they said amounted to little less than the Ship Money; That they suppressed all
Monopolies, which they reckoned above a Million yearly saved by the Subject;
That they had quelled Living Grievances meaning, Evil Counselors and Actors by
the Death of my Lord Strafford; by the flight of the Chancellor Finch, and of
Secretary Windebank, by the Imprisonment of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Judges; that they had past a Bill for a Triennial Parliament, and another for
the Continuance of the present Parliament, till they should think fit to
Dissolve themselves.


B. That is to say, for ever, if they be suffered. But the sum of all those
things which they had done for the Kingdom, is, that they had left it without
Government, without Strength, without Money, without Law, and without good
Council.


A. They reckoned also putting down of the High Commission, and the abating of
the Power of the Council Table, and of the Bishops, and their Courts; the
taking away of unnecessary Ceremonies in Religion, removing of Ministers from
their Livings that were not of their Faction, and putting in such as were.


B. All this was but their own, and not the Kingdoms business.


A. The Good they had done the King was, first, (they said) the giving of 25000
l. a month for the Relief of the Northern Counties.


B. What need of Relief had the Northern more than the rest of the Counties of
England?


A. Yes, In the Northern Counties were quartered the Scotch Army, which the
Parliament called in to oppose the King, and consequently their Quarters was to
be discharged.


B. True, but by the Parliament that called them in.


A. But they say no; and that this Money was given the King, because he is
bound to protect his Subjects.


B. He is no farther bound to that, than they to give him Money wherewithal to
do it. This is very great Impudence; to raise an Army against the King, and
with that Army to oppress their Fellow Subjects, and then require that the King
should relieve them; that is to say, be at the Charge of Paying the Army that
was raised to fight against him.


A. Nay farther, they put to the King's Accounts the 30000 l. given to the
Scots, without which they would not have Invaded England; besides many other
things that I now remember not.


B. I did not think there had been so great Impudence and Villainy in Mankind.


A. You have not observed the world long enough to see all that is ill: such was
their Remonstrance, as I have told you; with it they sent a Petition containing
three points.

First, That His Majesty would deprive the Bishops of their Votes in
Parliament, and remove such Oppressions in Religion, Church, Government, and
Discipline, as they had brought in.

Secondly, That he would remove from his Council, all such as should promote
the Peoples Grievances, and Employ in his great and public Affairs such as the
Parliament should confide in.

Thirdly, That he would not give away the Lands Escheated to the Crown by the
Rebellion in Ireland.


B. This last point, methinks, was not wisely put in at this time; it should
have been reserved till they had subdued the Rebels, against whom there were
yet no Forces sent over: It Is like selling the Lion's Skin, before they had
killed him. But what answer was made to the other two Propositions?


A. What answer should be made but a Denial?

About the same time the King himself Exhibited Articles against six persons of
the Parliament, five whereof were of the House of Commons, and one of the House
of Lords, accusing them of High Treason: and upon the fourth of January went
himself to the House of Commons to demand those five of them; but private
notice having been given by some Treacherous person about the King, they had
absented themselves, and by that means frustrated His Majesty's Intention; and
after he was gone, the House making a heinous matter of it, and a High Breach
of their Privileges, adjourned themselves into London, there to sit as a
General Committee, pretending they were not safe at Westminster; for the King,
when he went to the House to demand those persons, had somewhat more attendance
with him (but not otherwise armed than his servants used to be) than he
ordinarily had, and would not be pacified (though the King did afterward wave
the prosecution of those persons) unless he would also discover to them those
that gave him Counsel to go in that manner to the Parliament House, to the end
they might receive condign punishment, which was the Word they used instead of
Cruelty.


B. This was a harsh Demand: Was it not enough that the King should forbear his
Enemies, but also that he must betray his Friends? If they thus tyrannize over
the King before they have gotten the Sovereign Power into their Hands, how will
they tyrannize over their Fellow Subjects when they have gotten it?


A. So as they did.


B. How long staid that Commitee in London?


A. Not above 2 or 3 Days, and then were brought from London to the
Parliament House by Water in great Triumph, guarded with a tumultuous number of
Armed Men, there to sit in security in despite of the King, and make Traitorous
Acts against Him, such and as many as they listed, and under favor of these
Tumults, to frighten away from the House of Peers all such as were not of their
own Faction; for at this time the Rabble was so insolent, that scarce any of
the Bishops durst go to the House for fear of Violence upon their Persons:
insomuch that Twelve of them excused themselves of Coming thither, and by way
of Petition to the King remonstrated that they were not permitted to go quietly
to the Performance of that Duty, and protesting against all Determinations as
of none Effect, that should pass in the House of Lords during their forced
Absence, which the House of Commons taking hold of, sent up to the Peers one of
their Members to accuse them of High Treason; whereupon Ten of them were sent
to the Tower, after which time there was no more words of their High Treason,
but there passed a Bill, by which they were deprived of their Votes in
Parliament: And to this Bill they got the King's Assent, and in the beginning
of September after they Voted the Bishops should have no more to do in the
Government of the Church, but to this they had not the King's Assent, the War
being now begun.


B. What made the Parliament so averse to Episcopacy, and especially the House
of Lords, whereof the Bishops were Members: For I see no reason why they should
do it to gratify a number of poor Parish Priests that were Presbyterians, and
that were never likely to serve the Lords; but, on the contrary, to do their
best, to pull down their power, and subject them to their Synods and Classes.


A. For the Lords, very few of them did perceive the intention of the
Presbyterians; and besides that, they durst not, I believe, oppose the Lower
House.


B. But why were the Lower House so earnest against them?


A. Because they meant to make use of their Tenants; and with pretended
Sanctity, to make the King and his Party odious to the People, by whose help
they were to set up Democracy, and Depose the King; or to let him have the
Title only so long as he should Act for their purposes: But not only the
Parliament, but in a manner all the People of England, were their Enemies upon
the account of their behavior, as being (they said) too imperious. This was
all that was colorable laid to their charge; the main of the pulling them down
was the Envy of the Presbyterians, that incensed the People against them, and
against Episcopacy it self.


B. How would the Presbyterians have the Church to be governed?


A. By National and Provincial Synods.


B. Is not this to make the National Assembly an Archbishop, and the
Provincial Assemblies so many Bishops?


A. Yes; but every Minister shall have the delight of sharing the Government,
and consequently of being able to be revenged on them that do not admire their
Learning, and help to fill their purses, and win to their service them that do.


B. It Is a hard Case, that there should be two Factions to trouble the
Commonwealth without any Interest of their own, other than every particular
man may have; and that their quarrels should be only about Opinions, that is,
about who has the most Learning, as if their Learning ought to be the Rule of
Governing the whole World. What is it they are Learned in? is it Politics and
Rules of State? I know it is called Divinity; but I hear almost nothing preached
but matter of Philosophy; for Religion in it self admits of no Controversy:
It Is a Law of the Kingdom, and ought not to be disputed. I do not think they
pretend to speak with God, and know his will by any other way than reading the
Scriptures, which we also do.


A. Yes, some of them do, and give themselves out for Prophets, by
extraordinary Inspiration; but the rest pretend only (for their Advancement to
Benefices, and Charge of Souls) a greater skill in the Scriptures than other
men have by reason of their breeding in the Universities, and knowledge there
gotten of the Latin Tongue, and some also of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues
wherein the Scriptures were written; besides their knowledge of Natural
Philosophy, which is there publicly taught.


B. As for the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, it was once (to the Detection of the
Roman Fraud, and to the Ejection of the Romish Power) very profitable, or
rather necessary. But now that is done, and we have the Scripture in English,
and Preaching in English, I see no great need of Latin, Greek and Hebrew: I
should think my self better qualified by under standing well the Languages of
our Neighbors, French, Dutch, and Italian. I think it was never seen in the
world before the Power of Popes was setup, that Philosophy was much conducing
to power in a Commonwealth.


A. But Philosophy, together with Divinity, has very much conduced to the
Advancement of the Professors thereof, to places of the greatest Authority,
next to the Authority of Kings themselves, in most of the Ancient Kingdoms of
the world, as is manifestly to be seen in the History of those times.


B. I pray you cite me some of the Authors and places.


A. First, what were the Druids of old time in Britany and France, what
Authority these had you may see in Caesar, Strabo, and others, and especially
in Diodorus Siculus, the greatest Antiquary perhaps that ever was, who speaking
of the Druids (which he calls Sarovides) in France, says thus; There be also
amongst them certain Philosophers and Theologians that are exceedingly
honored, whom they also use as Prophets. These men by their skill in Augury,
and Inspection into the Bowels of Beasts sacrificed, foretell what is to come,
and have the multitude in obedience to them; and a little after; It is a custom
amongst them, that no man may sacrifice without a Philosopher, because (say
they) men ought not to present their Thanks to the Gods, but by them that know
the Divine Nature, and are as it were of the same language with them; and that
all good things ought by such as these to be prayed for.


B. I can hardly believe that those Druids were very skilful either in Natural
Philosophy or Moral.


A. Nor I; for they held and taught the Transmigration of Souls from one Body
to another, as did Pythagoras, which Opinion, whether they took from him, or he
from them, I cannot tell. What were the Magi in Persia but Philosophers and
Astrologers? You know how they came to find our Savior by the Conduct of a
Star, either from Persia it self, or from some Country more Eastward than
Judea: were not these in great Authority in their Country? And are they not in
most part of Christendom, thought to have been Kings? Egypt has been thought
by many the most Ancient Kingdom and Nation of the world, and their Priests had
the greatest power in Civil Affairs that any Subject ever had in any Nation.
And what were they but Philosophers and Divines? Concerning whom the same
Diodorus Siculus says thus; The whole Country of Egypt being divided into
three parts, the Body of the Priests have One as being of most credit with the
people, both for their Devotions toward the Gods, and also for their
Understanding gotten by Education, and presently after: for generally those men
in the greatest Affairs of all the King's Counselors, partly Executing, and
partly Informirg and Advising; foretelling him also (by their skill in
Astrology and Art in the Inspection of Sacrifices) the things that are to come;
and reading to him out of their Holy Books such of the Actions there recorded,
as are profitable for him to know. It Is not there as in Greece, one man, or one
woman that has the Priesthood, but they are many that attend the Honors and
Sacrifices of the Gods, and leave the same Employment to their posterity, which
next to the King have the greatest Power and Authority. Concerning the
Judicature amongst the Egyptians, he says thus; From out of the most eminent
Cities, Hieropolis, Thebes and Memphis, they choose Judges, which are Council
not inferior to that of Areopagus in Athens, or that of the Senate in
Lacedoemon; when they are met, being in number thirty, they choose one from
among themselves to be Chief Justice; and the City, whereof he is, sends
another in his place: This Chief Justice wore about his neck, hung in a gold
Chain, a Jewel of precious Stones; the name of which Jewel was Truth, which
when the Chief Justice had put on then began the Pleading, etc. And when the
Judges had agreed on the Sentence, then did the Chief Justice put this Jewel of
Truth on one of the Pleas. You see now what power was acquired in Civil matters
by the conjuncture of Philosophy and Divinity: Let us come now to the
Commonwealth of the Jews; was not the Priesthood in a Family (namely the
Levites) as well as the Priesthood of. Egypt? Did not the High Priest give
Judgment by the Brestplate of Vrim and Thummim? Look upon the Kingdom of
Assyria, and the Philosophers and Chaldeans; had not they Lands and Cities
belonging to their Family, even in Abrabam's time, who dwelt (you know) in Vr
of the Chaldeans? Of these the same Author says thus; The Chaldeans are a Sect
in Politics, like to that of the Egyptian Priests; for being ordained for the
service of the Gods, they spend the whole time of their life in Philosophy,
being of exceeding great reputation in Astrology, and pretending much also to
Prophecy, foretelling things to come by Purifications and Sacrifices; and to
find out by certain Incantations the preventing of harm, and the bringing to
pass of good. They have also skill in Augury, and in the Interpretation of
Dreams and Wonders; nor are they unskilful in the Art of Foretelling by the
Inwards of Beasts sacrificed, and have their Learning not of the Greeks; for
the Philosophy of the Chaldeans goes to their family by Tradition, and the Son
receives it from his Father. From Assyria let us pass into India, and see what
esteem the Philosophers had there. The whole multitude (says Diodorus) of the
Indians, is divided into seven parts, whereof the first is the Body of the
Philosophers, for number the least, but for eminency the first; for they are
free from Taxes; and as the are not Masters of others, so are no others Masters
of them. By private men they are called to the Sacrifices, and to the care of
the Burials of the Dead, as being thought most beloved of the Gods, and skilful
in the Doctrine concerning-Hell; and for this Employment receive Gifts and
Honors very considerable. They are also of great use to the people of India,
for being taken at the beginning of the year in the great Assembly, they
foretell them of great Drouths, great Rains, also of Winds, and of Sicknesses,
and of whatsoever i profitable for them to know beforehand.

The same Author concerning the Laws of the Aethiopians, says thus, The Laws
of the Aethiopians seem very different from those of other Nations, and
especially about the Election of their Kings; for the Priests propound some of
the chief men among them named in a Catalogue: and when the God, (which
according to a certain Custom is carried about to Feastings) does accept of
him, the Multitude Elect for their King, and presently adore and honor him as
a God, put into the Government by Divine Providence. The King being chosen, he
has the manner of his life limited to him by the Laws, and does all other
things according to the custom of the Country, neither rewarding nor punishing
any man otherwise than from the beginning is Established amongst them by Law;
nor use they to put any man to death, though he be condemned to it, but to send
some Officer to him with a Token of Death, who seeing the Token, goes presently
to his own house, and kills himself presently after Bat the strangest thing of
all is that which they do concerning the Death of their Kings. For the Priests
that live in Meroe, and spend their time about the worship and honor of the
Gods, and are in greatest Authority; when they have a mind to it, send a
Messenger to the King, to bid him dye, for that the Gods have given such order,
and that the Commandments of the Immortals are not by any means, to be
neglected by those that are by nature Mortal, using also other speeches to him,
which men of simple Judgment, that have not reason enough to dispare against
those unnecessary commands, as being educated under an old and undelible ^^lom
are (...) to admit of; therefore in former times the Kings did obey the
Priests, not as mastered by force and Arms, but as having their reason mastered
by superstition. But in the time of Ptolomy the second, Ergamenes, King of the
Aethiopians, having had his breeding in Philosophy after the manner of the
Greeks, being the first that durst dispute their power, took heart as befitted
a King; came with Soldiers to a place called Abaton, where was then the Golden
Temple of the Aethiopians; killed all the Priests, abolished the Custom, and
rectified the Kingdom according to his will.


B. Though they that were killed were most damnable Impostors, yet the Act was
cruel.


A. It was so; but were not the Priests cruel to cause their Kings, whom a
little before they adored as Gods, to make away themselves? The King killed
them for the safety of his person, they him, out of Ambition, or love of
Change. The King's Act may be colored with the good of his People; the Priests
had no pretense against their Kings, who were certainly very godly, or else
would never have obeyed the command of the Priests by a Messenger unarmed to
kill themselves. Our late King, the best King perhaps that ever was (you know)
was murdered, having been first persecuted by War at the Incitement of
Presbyterian Ministers, who are therefore guilty of the Death of all that fell
in that War, which were, I believe, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, near one
hundred thousand persons. Had it not been much better that those seditious
Ministers which were not perhaps a thousand, had been all killed before they
had Preached? It had been (I confess) a great Massacre; but the killing of a
hundred thousand is a greater.


B. I am glad the Bishops were out at this business; as ambitious as some say
they are, it did not appear in that business; for they were Enemies to them
that were in it.


A. But I intend not by these Quotations to commend either the Divinity, nor
the Philosophy of those Heathen people, but to show only what the Reputation of
those Sciences can effect among the people: For their Divinity was nothing but
Idolatry, and their Philosophy (excepting tho knowledge of the Egyptian
Priests, and from them the Chaldeans had gotten by long Observation and Study
in Astronomy, Geometry, and Arithmetic) very little, and that in great part
abused in Astrology and Fortune-telling; whereas the Divinity of the Clergy in
this Nation (now considered apart from the mixture that has been introduced by
the Church of Rome, and in part retained here of the babbling Philosophy of
Aristotle, and other Greeks, that has no Affinity with Religion, and serves
only to breed Disaffection, Dissension, and finally Sedition and Civil War, as
we have lately found by dear experience in the Differences between the
Presbyterians and Episcopals) is the true Religion. But for these Differences,
both Parties, as they were in Power, not only suppressed the Tenets of one
another, but also whatsoever Doctrine looked with an ill Aspect upon their
Interest; and consequently all true Philosophy, especially Civil and Moral,
which can never appear propitious to Ambition, or to an Exemption from
Obedience due to the Sovereign Power.

After the King had accused the Lord Kimbolton, a Member of the Lords House,
and Hollis, Haslerig, Hampden, Prinn, and Stroud, five Members of the Lower
House, of High Treason; and after the Parliament had Voted out the Bishops from
the House of Peers, they pursued especially two things in their Petitions to
His Majesty, the one was, that the King would declare who were the persons that
advised him to go as he did to the Parliament House to apprehend them; and that
he would leave them to the Parliament to receive condign punishment; and this
they did to stick upon His Majesty the dishonor of Deserting his Friends, and
betraying them to his Enemies. The other was, that he would allow a Guard out
of the City of London to be commanded by the Earl of Essex; for which they
pretended they could not else sit in safety, which pretense was nothing but an
upbraiding of His Majesty for coming to Parliament better accompanied than
ordinary, to seize the said five sedicious Members.


B. I see no reason in petitioning for a Guard, they should determine it to the
City of London in particular, and the Command by name to the Earl of Essex,
unless they meant the King should understand it a Guard against himself.


A. Their meaning was, that the King should understand it so, and as (I verily
believe) they meant he should take it as an affront; and the King himself
understanding it so, denied to grant it, though he were willing, if they could
not otherwise be satisfied, to command such a Guard to wait upon them, as he
would be responsible for to God Almighty. Besides this, the City of London
petitioned the King (put upon it, no doubt, by some Member of the Lower House)
to put the Tower of London into the hands of persons of Trust, meaning such as
the Parliament should approve of. And so appoint a Guard for the safety of His
Majesty and the Parliament. This method of bringing Petitions in a Tumultuary
manner by great multitudes of Clamorous people, was ordinary with the House of
Commons, whose Ambition could never have been served by way of Prayer and
Request, without extraordinary terror.

After the King had waved the prosecution of the five Members, but denied to
make known, who had advised Him to come in person to the House of Commons, they
questioned the Attorney General, who, by the King's command, had Exhibited the
Articles against them, and Voted him, A Breaker of the Privilege of
Parliament. And no doubt had made him feel their Cruelty, if he had not
speedily fled the Land.

About the end of January, they made an Order of both Houses of Parliament, to
prevent the going over of Popish Commanders into Ireland; not so much fearing
that, as that by this the King Himself choosing his Commanders for that
Service, might aid Himself out of Ireland against the Parliament. But this was
no great matter in respect of a Petition they sent His Majesty about the same
time, that is to say, about the Twenty seventh, or Twenty eighth of January,
1641. wherein they desired, in effect, the absolute Sovereignty of England,
though by the name of Sovereignty they challenged it not, whilst the King was
living; for to the end, that the fears and dangers of this Kingdom might be
removed, and the mischievous designs of those who are Enemies to the Peace of
it, might be prevented, they pray that His Majesty would be pleased to put
forthwith,

First, The Tower of London.

Secondly, All other Forts.

Thirdly, The whole Militia of the Kingdom into the hands of such Persons as
should be recommended to him by both the Houses of Parliament.

And this they style a necessary Petition.


B. Were there really any such fears and dangers generally conceived here? Or
did there appear any Enemies at that time, with such designs as are mentioned
in the Petition?


A. Yes, but no other fear of danger, but such as discreet and honest men might
justly have of the designs of the Parliament it self, who were the greatest
Enemies to the Peace of the Kingdom that could possibly be. It Is also worth
observing, that this Petition began with these words, Most Gracious Sovereign;
so stupid they were, as not to know, that he that is Master of the Militia, is
Master of the Kingdom, and consequently is in possession of a most absolute
Sovereignty. The King was now at Windsor, to avoid the Tumults of the Common
People before the Gates at Whitehall, together with the Clamors and and
Affronts there the Ninth of February; after, he came to Hampton Court, and
thence went to Dover with the Queen, and the Princess of Orange his Daughter,
where the Queen, with the Princess of Orange, embarked for Holland, but the
King returned to Greenwich, whence he sent for the Prince of Wales and the Duke
of York, and so went with them toward York.


B. Did the Lor^s join with the Commons in this Petition for the Militia.


A. It appears so by the Title, but I believe they durst not but do it; the
House of Commons took them but for a Cipher, Men of Title only, without real
Power, but they were very much mistaken; for the House of Commons never
intended they should be sharers in it.


B. What Answer made the King to this Petition?


A. That when He shall know the Extent of Power which is intended to be
established in those persons, whom they desire to be the Commanders of the
Militia in the several Counties, and likewise to what time it shall be limited;
that no Power shall be Executed by His Majesty alone, without the advice of
Parliament, then he will declare that (for the securing them from all Dangers
or Jealousies of any) then His Majesty will be content to put into all the
places, both Forts and Militia in the several Counties, such persons as both
the Houses of Parliament shall either approve, or recommend unto him, so that
they declare before unto His Majesty, the names of the persons whom they
approve or recommend, unless such persons shall be named, against whom he shall
have just and unquestionable Exceptions.


B. What Power? For what Time? And to whom did the Parliament grant concerning
the Militia?


A. The same Power which the King had before planted in his Lieutenants, and
his Deputy Lieutenants in the several Counties, and without other limitation of
time, but their own pleasure.


B. Who were the Men that had this Power?


A. There is a Catalogue of them Printed, they are very many, and most of them
Lords; nor is it necessary to have them named, for to name them, is (in my
opinion) to brand them with the mark of Disloyalty, or of Folly. When they had
made a Catalogue of them, they sent it to the King, with a new Petition for the
Militia.

Also presently after they sent a Message to His Majesty, praying Him to leave
the Prince at Hampton Court; but the King granted neither.


B. Howsoever it was well done of them to get Hostages (if they could) of the
King, before He went from them.


A. In the mean time, to raise Money, for the reducing of Ireland, the
Parliament invited Men to bring in Money by way of Adventure, according to these
Propositions.

First, That two Millions, and five hundred thousand Acres of Land in Ireland,
should be assigned to the Adventurers, in this proportion.

For an Adventure of 200 l. -- 1000 Acres in Vlster. 300 l. -- 1000 Acres in
Conaught. 450 l. -- 1000 Acres in Munster. 600 l. -- 1000 Acres in Lemster.


All according to English Measure, and consisting of Meadow, arable and
profitable Pasture; Bogs, Woods, and Barren Mountains, being cast in over and
above.

Secondly, A Revenue was reserved to the Crown, from 1 d. to 3 d. on every Acre.

Thirdly, That Commissions should be sent by the Parliament, to erect Manors,
settle Wastes and Commons, maintain preaching Ministers, to create
Corporations, and to regulate Plantations. The rest of the Propositions concern
only the times and manner of payment of the Sums subscribed by the Adventurers;
and to those Propositions His Majesty assented, but to the Petition for the
Militia, His Majesty denied His Assent.


B. If He had not, I should have thought it, a great Wonder. What did the
Parliament after this?


A. They sent Him another Petition, which was presented to Him when He was at
Theobalds, in his way to York; wherein they tell him plainly, That unless He be
pleased to assure them by those Messengers them sent, that He would speedily
apply His Royal Assent to the satisfaction of their former Desires, they shall
be forced, for the Safety of his Majesty and his Kingdoms, to dispose of the
Militia by the Authority of both Houses, etc.

They Petitioned His Majesty also, to let the Prince stay at St. James's, or
some other of His Majesty's Houses near London. They tell him also, That the
Power of Raising, Ordering and Disposing of the Militia, cannot be granted to
any Corporation, without the Authority and Consent of Parliament. And those
Parts of the Kingdom, that have put themselves into a posture of Defense, have
done nothing therein, but by direction of both Houses, and what is justifiable
by the Laws of this Kingdom.


B. What Answer made the King to this?


A. It was a putting of themselves into Arms, and under Officers, such as the
Parliament should approve of.

Fourthly, They Voted that His Majesty should be again desired, that the Prince
might continue about London.

Lastly, They Voted a Declaration to be sent to His Majesty by both the Houses,
wherein they accuse His Majesty of a design of altering Religion, though not
directly Him, but them that counseled Him; whom they also accused of being the
Inviters and Fomenters of the Scots War, and Framers of the Rebellion in
Ireland. And upbraid the King again, for accusing the Lord Kimbolton, and the
Five Members; and of being privy to the purpose of bringing up His Army, which
was raised against the Scots, to be employed against the Parliament. To which
His Majesty replied from New Market.

Whereupon it was Resolved by both Houses, That in this Case of extreme Danger,
and of His Majesty's Refusal, the Ordinance agreed upon by both Houses, for the
Militia, does oblige the People by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. And
also that whosoever should execute any Power over the Militia, by color of any
Commission of Lieutenancy, without Consent of both Houses of Parliament, shall
be accounted a Disturber of the Peace of the Kingdom.

Whereupon His Majesty sent a Message to both Houses from Huntingdon, Requiring
Obedience to the Laws Established, and Prohibiting all Subjects, upon pretense
of their Ordinance, to Execute any thing concerning the Militia, which is not
by those Laws warranted.

Upon this the Parliament Vote a standing to their former Votes; as also, That
when the Lords and Commons in Parliament, which is the Supreme Court of
Judicature in the Kingdom, shall declare what the Law of the Land it, to have
this not only questioned, but contradicted, is a high Breach of the Privilege
of Parliament.


B. I thought that he that makes the Law, ought to declare what the Law is; for
what is it else to make a Law, but to declare what it is; so that they have
taken from the King not only the Militia, but also the Legislative Power.


A. They have so. But I make account the Legislative Power (and indeed all
Power possible) is contained in the Power of the Militia.

After this they seize such Money as was due to His Majesty upon the Bill of
Tunnage and Poundage, and upon the Bill of Subsidies, that they might disable
him every way they possibly could. They sent Him also many other contumelious
Messages and Petitions after His coming to York, amongst which one was, That
whereas the Lord Admiral, by indisposition of Body, could not command the Fleet
in Person, He would be pleased to give Authority to the Earl of Warwick to
supply his place; when they knew the King had put Sir John Penington in it
before.


B. To what End did the King entertain so many Petitions, Messages,
Declarations, and Remonstrances, and vouchsafe His Answers to them, when He
could not choose but clearly see they were resolved to take from Him His Royal
Power, and consequently His Life? For it could not stand with their safety, to
let either Him or His Issue live, after they had done Him so great Injuries.


A. Besides this, the Parliament had at the same time a Committee residing at
York, to spy what His Majesty did, and to inform the Parliament thereof; and
also to hinder the King from gaining the People of that County to His Party: so
that when His Majesty was Courting the Gentlemen there, the Committee was
Instigating of the Yeomanry against Him; to which also the Ministers did very
much contribute, so that the King lost His opportunity at York.


B. Why did not the King seize the Committee into His hands, or drive them out
of His Town.


A. I know not; but I believe, He knew the Parliament had a greater Party than
He, not only in Yorkshire, but also in York.

Toward the End of April the King, upon Petition of the People of Yorkshire,
to have the Magazine of Hull to remain still there, for the greater security of
the Northern Parts, thought fit to take it into his own hands. He had a little
before appointed Governor of the Town the Earl of Newcastle, but the Townsmen
having been already corrupted by the Parliament, refused to receive him, but
refused not to receive Sir John Hotham, appointed to be Governor by the
Parliament. The King therefore coming before the Town, Guarded only by a few of
His own Servants, and a few Gentlemen of the Country thereabouts, was denied
Entrance by Sir John Hotham that stood upon the Wall; for which Act, he
presently caused Sir John Hotham to be Proclaimed Traitor, and sent a Message
to the Parliament, requiring Justice to be done upon the said Hotham, and that
the Town and Magazine might be delivered into His hands.

To which the Parliament made no Answer, but instead thereof published another
Declaration, in which they omitted nothing of their former Slanders against His
Majesty's Government, but inserted certain Propositions declarative of their
own pretended Right, viz.

I. That whatsoever they declare to be Law, ought not to be questioned by the
King.

II. That no Precedent can be Limits to bound their Proceedings.

III. That a Parliament, for the Public Good, may dispose of any thing wherein
the King or Subject has a Right; and that they, without the King, are this
Parliament, and the Judge of this Public Good, and that the King's consent is
not necessary.

IV. That no Member of either House ought to be troubled for Treason, Felony,
or any other Crime, unless the Cause he first brought before the Paliament,
that they may judge of the Fact, and give leave to proceed, if they see Cause.

V. That the Sovereign Power resides in both Houses, and that the King ought to
have no Negative Voice.

VI. That the Levying of Forces against the Personal Commands of the King,
(though accompanied with his presence) is not Levying War against the King, but
the Levying of War against his Politic Person, viz. his Laws, etc.

VII. That Treason cannot be committed against his Person, otherwise than as he
is entrusted with the Kingdom, and discharges that Trust; and that they have a
Power to judge, whether he has discharged his Trust, or not.

VIII. That they may dispose of the King when they will.


B. This is plain-dealing, and without hypocrisy; Could the City of London
swallow this?


A. Yes, and more too, if need be; London (you know) has a great Belly, but no
palate nor taste of Right and Wrong.

In the Parliament Roll of Henry IV. amongst the Articles of the Oath the King
at his Coronation took, there is one runs thus.

Concedes Justas Leges and Consuetudines esse tenendas, and promi^tes per te
eas esse protegendas, and ad honorem Dei corroborandas quas Vulgus elegerit.

Which the Parliament urged for their Legislative Authority, and therefore
interpret quas Vulgus elegerit, which the People shall choose; as if the King
should swear to protect and corroborate Laws before they were made, whether
they be Good or Bad: whereas the words signify no more, but that he shall
protect and corroborate such Laws, as they have chosen; that is to say, the
Acts of Parliament then in being.

And in the Records of the Exchequer it is thus Will yea grant to hold and keep
the Laws, and rightful Customs, which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have?
And will you defend and uphold them, etc?

And this was the Answer His Majesty made to that Point.


B. I think His Answer very full and clear; but if the words were to be
interpreted in the other sense, yet I see no reason why the King should be
bound to swear to them; for Henry IV. came to the Crown by the Votes of a
Parliament, not much inferior in wickedness to this Long Parliament, that
Deposed and Murdered their Lawful King, saving that it was not the Parliament
it self, but the Usurper that murdered King Richard II.


A. About a week after, in the beginning of May, the Parliament sent the King
another Paper, which they styled, The Humble Petition and Advice of both
Houses: Containing Nineteen Propositions, which when you shall hear, you shall
be able to judge what Power they meant to leave to the King, more than to any
of His Subjects. The first of them is this:

I. That the Lords, and other of His Majesty's Privy Council; and all great
Officers of State both at home and abroad, be put from their Employments, and
from his Council, save only such as should be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament; and none put into their places, but by approbation of the said
Houses. And that all Privy Counselors take an Oath for the due Execution of
their places, in such form as shall be agreed upon by the said Houses.

II. That the great Affairs of the Kingdom be Debated, Resolved and Transacted
only in Parliament; and such as shall presume to do any thing to the contrary,
to be reserved to the Censure of the Parliament; and such other Matters of
State as are proper for His Majesty's Privy Council, shall be Debated and
Concluded by such as shall from time to time be chosen for that place by both
Houses of Parliament. And that no Public Act concerning the Affairs of the
Kingdom which are proper for his Privy Council, be esteemed valid, as
proceeding from the Royal Authority, unless it be done by the Advice and
Consent of the Major part of the Council, attested under their Hands; and that
the Council be not more than 25, nor less than 15; and that when a Counselors
place falls, it shall not be supplied, without the assent of the Major part of
the Council; and that such choice also shall be void, if the next Parliament
after confirm it not.

III. That the Lord High Steward of England, Lord High Constable, Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal,
Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, chief Governor of
Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards, Secretaries of
State, Two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, be always chosen with the
Approbation of both Houses of Parliament; and in the Intervals of Parliament,
by the Major part of the Privy Council.

IV. That the Government of the King's Children shall he committed to such as
both Houses shall approve of; and in the Intervals of Parliament, such as the
Privy Council shall approve of, that the Servants then about them, against whom
the Houses have just exception, should be removed.

V. That no Marriage be concluded, or treated of, for any of the King's
Children, without consent of Parliament.

VI. That the Laws in force against the Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants,
be strictly put in execution.

VII. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Peers be taken away; and
that a Bill be passed for the Education of the Children of Papists in the
Protestant Religion.

VIII. That the King will be pleased to reform the Church Government and
Liturgy, in such manner as both Houses of Parliament shall advise.

IX. That he would be pleased to rest satisfied with that course, the Lords and
Commons have appointed for ordering the Militia, and recall his Declarations
and Proclamations against it.

X. That such Members as have been put out of any Place or Office since this
Parliament began, may be restored, or have satisfaction.

XI. That all Privy Counselors and Judges take an Oath, the Form whereof shall
be agreed on, and settled by Act of Parliament, for the maintaining the Petition
of Right, and of certain Statutes made by the Parliament.

XII. That all the Judges and Officers placed by Approbation of both Houses of
Parliament, may hold their places quamdiu been se gesserint.

XIII. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether
they be within the Kingdom, or fled out of it; and that all persons cited by
either House of Parliament, may appear and abide the Censure of Parliament.

XIV. That the General Pardon offered by his Majesty, be granted with such
Exceptions as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament.


B. What a spightful Article is this? All the rest proceeded from Ambition,
which many times well-natur'd men are subject to; but this proceeded from an
inhumane and devilish cruelly.


A. XV. That the Forts and Castles be put under the Command of such Persons, as
with the Approbation of the Parliament the King shall appoint.

XVI. That the extraordinary Guards about the King be discharged, and for the
future none raised but according to the Law, in case of actual Rebellion or
Invasion.


B. Methinks these very Propositions sent to the King, are an actual Rebellion.


A. XVII. That his Majesty enter into a more strict Alliance with the United
Provinces, and other Neighbor Protestant Princes and States.

XVIII. That his Majesty be pleased, by Act of Parliament, to clear the Lord
Kimbolton, and the Five Members of the House of Commons, in such manner, as
that future Parliaments may be secured from the consequence of evil Precedent.

XIX. That his Majesty be pleased to pass a Bill for restraining Peers, made
hereafter from sitting or voting in Parliament, unless they be admitted with
consent of both Houses of Parliament. These Propositions granted, they promise
to apply themselves to regulate his Majesty's Revenue to his best advantage,
and to settle it to the support of his Royal Dignity, in Honor and Plenty; and
also to put the Town of Hull into such hands as his Majesty shall appoint, with
consent of Parliament.


B. Is not that to put it into such hands as His Majesty shall appoint by the
consent of the Petitioners, which is no more than to keep it in their hands, as
it is? Did they want, or think the King wanted common sense, so as not to
perceive that their promise herein was worth nothing?


A. After the sending of these Propositions to the King, and His Majesty's
refusal to grant them, they began on both sides to prepare for War, the King
raising a Guard for his Person in Yorkshire, and the Parliament thereupon
having Voted, That the King intended to make War upon his Parliament, gave
Order for the Mustering and Exercising the People in Arms, and published
Propositions to Invite and Encourage them to bring in either ready Money or
^late, or to promise under their hands to maintain certain numbers of Horse,
Horsemen, and Arms, for the Defense of the King and Parliament, (meaning by
King, as they had formerly declared, not his Person, but his Laws) promising to
repay their Money with Interest of Eight Pound in the Hundred, and the Value of
their Plate with Twelve Pence the Ounce for the Fashion. On the other side, the
King came to Nottingham, and there did set up his Standard Royal, and sent out
Commissioners of Array to call those to him, which by the ancient Laws of
England were bound to serve in the Wars. Upon this occasion there passed diverse
Declarations between the King and Parliament, concerning the Legality of this
Array, which are too long to tell you at this time.


B. Nor do I desire to hear any Mooting about this Question, for I think that
general Law of Salus Populi, and the Right of defending himself against those
that had taken from him the Sovereign Power, are sufficient to make Legal
whatsoever he should do, in order to the recovery of his Kingdom, or the
punishing of the Rebels.


A. In the mean time the Parliament raised an Army, and made the Earl of Essex
General thereof; by which Act they declared what they meant formerly, when they
Petitioned the King for a Guard, to be Commanded by the said Earl of Essex. And
now the King sends out his Proclamations, forbidding Obedience to the Orders of
the Parliament concerning the Militia; and the Parliament send out Orders
against the Executions of the Commissions of Array; hitherto (though it were a
War before) yet there was no Blood shed, they shot at one another nothing but
Paper.


B. I understand now how the Parliament destroyed the Peace of the Kingdom, and
how easily, by the help of Seditious Presbyterian Ministers, and of ambitious
ignorant Orators, they reduced the Government into Anarchy: but I believe it
will be a harder task for them to bring in Peace again, and settle the
Government either in themselves, or in any other Governor, or form of
Government; for granting that they obtain the Victory in this War, they must be
beholding for it to the Valor, good Conduct, or Felicity of those to whom they
give the Command of their Armies, especially to the General, whose good success
will, without doubt, bring with it the love and admiration of the Soldiers, so
that it will be in his power either to take the Government upon himself, or to
place it where himself thinks good. In which Case, if he take it not to
himself, he will be thought a Fool; and if he do, he shall be sure to have the
Envy of his subordinate Commanders, who will look for a share either in the
present Government, or in the Succession to it; for they will say, Has he
obtained this Power by his own without our Danger, Valor, and Council? And must
we be his Slaves, whom we have thus raised? Or is not there as much Justice on
our side against him, as was on his side against the King?


A. They will and did, insomuch that the reason why Cromwell, after he had
gotten into his own hands the absolute Power of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
by the Name of Protector, did never dare to take upon him the Title of King,
nor was ever able to settle it upon his Children, his Officers would not suffer
it, as pretending after his death to succeed him; nor would the Army consent to
it, because he had ever declared to them against the Government of a Single
Person.


B. But to return to the King, What Means had he to pay? What Provision had he
to Arm, nay Means to Levy an Army, able to resist the Army of the Parliament,
maintained by the great Purse of the City of London, and Contributions of
almost all the Towns Corporate in England, and furnished with Arms as fully as
they could require?


A. It Is true, the King had great disadvantages, and yet by little and little
he got a considerable Army, with which he so prospered, as to grow stronger
every day, and the Parliament weaker, till they had gotten the Scots with an
Army of 21000 Men to come into England to their assistance; but to enter into
the particular Narrative of what was done in the War, I have not now time.


B. Well then, we will talk of that at next meeting.


B. WE left at the Preparations on both sides for War, which when I considered
by my self, I was mightily puzzled to find out what possibility there was for
the King to equal the Parliament in such a course, and what hopes He had of
Money, Men, Arms, Fortified Places, Shipping, Council, and Military Offices,
sufficient for such an Enterprise against the Parliament, that had Men and
Money as much at Command, as the City of London, and other Corporation Towns
were able to furnish, which was more than they needed. And for the Men they
should set forth for Soldiers, they were almost all of them spightfully bent
against the King, and his whole Party, whom they took to be either Papists, or
Flatterers of the King, or that had designed to raise their Fortunes by the
Plunder of the City, and other Corporation Towns; and though I believe not that
they were more valiant than other Men, nor that they had so much Experience in
the War, as to be accounted good Soldiers; yet they had that in them, which in
time of Battle is more conducing to Victory than Valor, and Experience both
together, and that was Spite.

And for Arms, they had in their hands the chief Magazines, the Tower of
London, and Kingston upon Hull, besides most of the Powder and Shot that lay in
several Towns, for the use of the Trained Bands.

Fortified places there were not many then in England, and most of them in the
hands of the Parliament.

The King's Fleet was wholly in their Command, under the Earl of Warwick;
Counselors they needed no more, than such as were of their own Body, so that
the King was every way inferior to them, except it were perhaps in Officers.


A. I cannot compare their chief Officers for the Parliament. The Earl of Essex
(after the Parliament had Voted the War) was made General of all their Forces,
both in England and Ireland, from whom, all other Commanders were to receive
their Commissions.


B. What moved them to make the Earl of Essex General? And for what cause was
the Earl of Essex so displeased with the King, as to accept that Office?


A. I do not certainly know what to answer to either of those Questions, but
the Earl of Essex had been in the Wars abroad, and wanted neither Experience,
Judgment nor Courage to perform such an undertaking; and besides that, you have
heard, (I believe) how great a Darling of the People his Father had been before
him; and what Honor he gad gotten by the success of his Enterprise upon Cales,
and in some other Military Actions.

To which I may add, That this Earl himself was not held by the People to be so
great a Favorite at Court, as that they might not trust him with their Army
against the King, and by this you may perhaps conjecture the cause for which
the Parliament made choice of him for General.


B. But why did they think him discontented with the Court?


A. I know not that, nor indeed that he was so; he came to Court as other
Noblemen did, when occasion was to wait upon the King, but had no Office till a
little before this time, to oblige him to be there continually; but I believe
verily, that the unfortunateness of his Marriage, had so discountenanced his
Conversation with Ladies, that the Court could not be his proper Element,
unless he had had some extraordinary favor there, to balance that calamity.
For particular discontent from the King, or intention of revenge for any
supposed disgrace, I think he had none; nor that he was any ways addicted to
Presbyterian Doctrines, or other Phanatic Tenets in Church or State, saving
only that he was carried away with the stream (in a manner) of the whole
Nation, to think that England was not an absolute, but a mixed Monarchy, not
considering that the Supreme Power must always be absolute, whether it be in
the King, or in the Parliament.


B. Who was General of the King's Army?


A. None yet but Himself, nor indeed had He yet any Army; but there coming to
him at that time two Nephews, the Princes Rupert and Maurice, He put the
Command of His Horse into the hands of Prince Rupert, a man than whom no man
living has a better courage, nor was more active and diligent in prosecuting
his Commission; and though but a young man then, was not without experience in
the conducting of Soldiers, as having been an Actor in part of his Father's
Wars in Germany.


B. But how could the King find Money to pay such an Army as was necessary for
Him, against the Parliament?


A. Neither the King nor Parliament had much Money at that time in their own
hands, but were fain to rely upon the Benevolence of those that took their
parts, wherein (I confess) the Parliament had a mighty great advantage. Those
that helped the King in that kind, were only Lords and Gentlemen, which not
approving the proceedings of the Parliament, were willing to undertake the
payment every one of a certain number of Horse, which cannot be thought any
very great assistance, the persons that paid them being so few; for other
Moneys that the King then had, I have not heard of any but what he borrowed
upon Jewels in the Low Countries; whereas the Parliament had a very plentiful
Contribution, not only from London, but generally from their Faction in all
other places of England, upon certain Propositions, (published by the Lords and
Commons in June, 1642. at which time they had newly Voted, That the King
intended to make War upon them) for bringing in of Money or Plate, to maintain
Horse and Horsemen, and to buy Arms for the preservation of the public Peace,
and for the defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament; for the
Repaying of which Money and Plate, they were to have the Public Faith.


B. What Public Faith is there, when there is no Public? What is it that can be
called Public, in a Civil War, without the King?


A. The truth is, the Security was nothing worth, but served well enough to
gull those seditious Blockheads that were more fond of change, than either of
their peace or profit; having by this means gotten Contributions from those
that were the well-affected to their Cause, they made use of it afterward, to
force the like Contribution from others; for in November following, they made
an Ordinance for Assessing also of those that had not contributed then, or had
contributed, but not proportionably to their Estates. And yet this was contrary
to what the Parliament promised and declared in the Propositions themselves;
for they declared in the first Proposition, That no man's Affection should be
measured by the proportion of his Offer, so that he expressed his good will to
the Service in any proportion whatsoever.

Besides this, in the beginning of March following, they made an Ordinance to
Levy weekly a great Sum of Money upon every County, City, Town, Place, and
Person of any Estate almost in England; which weekly Sum (as may appear by the
Ordinance it self, printed and published in March, 1642, by Order of both
Houses) comes to almost 33000 l. and consequently to above 1700000 l. for the
year. They had, besides all this, the profits of the King's Lands and Woods,
and whatsoever was remaining unpaid of any Subsidy formerly granted Him, and
the Tunnage and Poundage usually received by the King, besides the profit of
the Sequestration of great persons, whom they pleased to Vote Delinquents, and
the profits of the Bishops Lands, which (...)^troversie, understood not the
Reasons of either Party; and for those that by Ambition were once set upon the
Enterprise of changing the Government, they cared not much what was Reason and
Justice, in the Cause, but what Strength they might procure, by reducing the
multitude, with Remonstrances from the Parliament House, or by Sermons in the
Churches; and to their Petitions, I would not have had any answer at all more
than this, That if they would disband their Army, and put themselves upon his
Mercy, they should find Him more Gracious than they expected.


A. That had been a gallant answer indeed, if it had proceeded from Him after
some extraordinary great Victory in Battle, or some extraordinary assurance of
a Victory at last in the whole War.


B. Why, what could have happened to Him worse, than at length He suffered,
notwithstanding His gentle answer, and all His reasonable Declarations?


A. Nothing; but, who knew that?


B. Any Man might see, that He was never like to be restored to His Right
without Victory, and such His Statutes being known to the People, would have
brought to His assistance many more hands, than all the arguments of Law, or
force of Eloquence, couched in Declarations, and other Writings, could have
done by far; and I wonder what kind of Men they were, that hindered the King
from taking this Resolution.


A. You may know by the Declarations themselves, which are very long, and full
of Quotations of Records, and of Cases formerly Reported, that the Penners of
them were either Lawyers by Profession, or such Gentlemen as had the ambition
to be thought so. Besides, I told you before, that those which were then
likeliest to have their counsel asked in this business, were averse to absolute
Monarchy, as also to absolute Democracy, or Aristocracy; all which Governments
they esteemed Tyranny, and were in love with Monarchy, which they used to
praise by the name of mixed Monarchy, though it were indeed nothing else but
pure Anarchy: and those Men whose Pens the King most used in these
Controversies of Law, and Politics, were such (if I have not been misinformed)
as having been Members of this Parliament, had declaimed against Ship Money,
and other Extra-Parliamentary Taxes, as much as any: but when they saw the
Parliament grow higher in their demands, than they thought they would have
done, went over to the King's Party.


B. Who were those?


A. It is not necessary to name any Man, seeing I have undertaken only a short
Narration of the Follies and other Faults of Men during this trouble, but not
(by naming of persons) to give you or any man else occasion to esteem them the
less, now the faults on all sides have been forgiven.


B. When the Business was brought to this height, by levying of Soldiers, and
seizing on the Navy, Arms, and other Provisions on both sides, that no Man was
so blind, as not to see they were in an estate of War one against another, why
did not the King (by Proclamation or Message) according to his undoubted Right,
Dissolve the Parliament, and thereby diminish in some part the Authority of
their Levies, and of other their unjust Ordinances?


A. You have forgotten that I told you that the King Himself, by a Bill that He
passed at the same time when He passed the Bill for the Execution of the Earl
of Strafford, had given them Authority to hold the Parliament, till they should
by consent of both Houses dissolve themselves: If therefore He had by any
Proclamation or Message to the Houses dissolved them, they would, to their
former Defamations of His Majesty's actions, have added this, That He was a
Breaker of His Word, and not only in Contempt of Him, have continued their
Session, but also have made advantage of it, to the increase and strengthening
of their own Party.


B. Would not the King's raising of an Army against them, be interpreted as a
purpose to dissolve them by force? And was it not as great a breach of promise
to scatter them by force, as to dissolve them by Proclamation? Besides I cannot
conceive that the passing of that Act was otherwise intended than
conditionally, so long as they should not ordain any thing contrary to the
Sovereign Right of the King, which condition they had already by many of their
Ordinances broken; and, I think, that even by the Law of Equity, which is the
unalterable Law of Nature, a man that has the Sovereign Power cannot, if he
would, give away the right of any thing which is necessary for him to retain
for the good Government of his Subjects, unless he do it in express words,
saying, That he will have the Sovereign Power no longer; for the giving away
that which by consequence only draws the Sovereignty along with it, is not (I
think) a giving away of the Sovereignty, but an error, such as works nothing
but an invalidity in the Grant it self. And such was the King's passing this
Bill, for the continuing of the Parliament, as long as the Two Houses pleased.
But now that the War was resolved on, on both sides, what needed any more
dispute in writings?


A. I know not what need they had, but on both sides they thought it needful to
hinder one another as much as they could from levying of Soldiers, and
therefore the King did set forth Declarations in Print, to make the people know
that they ought not to obey the Officers of the new Militia set up by the
Ordinance of Parliament, and also to let them see the Legality of His own
Commissions of Array; and the Parliament on their part did the like, to
justify to the people the said Ordinance, and to make the Commission of Array
appear unlawful.


B. When the Parliament were Levying of Soldiers, was it not lawful for the
King to Levy Soldiers, to defend Himself and His Right, though there had been
no other Title for it, but His own preservation, and that the name of
Commission of Array had never been heard of?


A. For my part, I think there cannot be a better Title for War, than the
defense of a Man's own Right, but the People at that time thought nothing
lawful for the King to do, for which there was not some Statute made by
Parliament. For the Lawyers, I mean the Judges of the Courts of Westminster,
and some few others, though but Advocates, yet of great Reputation for their
skill in the Common Laws and Statutes of England, had infected most of the
Gentry of England with their Maxims and Cases prejudged, which they call
Precedents, and made them think so well of their own knowledge in the Law, that
they were glad of this occasion to show it against the King, and thereby to
gain a Reputation with the Parliament, of being good Patriots, and wise
Statesmen.


B. What was this Commission of Array?


A. King William the Conqueror had gotten into his hands by Victory, all the
Lands in England, of which he disposed some part, as Forests and Chaces for his
own Recreation, and some part to Lords and Gentlemen, that had assisted him, or
were to assist him in the Wars; upon which he laid a charge of service in his
Wars, some with more Men, and some with less, according to the Lands he had
given them; whereby, when the King sent Men unto them with Commission to make
use of their Service, they were obliged to appear with Arms, and to accompany
the King to the Wars, for a certain time at their own Charges, and such were
the Commissions by which this King did then make his Levies.


B. Why then was it not Legal?


A. No doubt but it was Legal, but what did that amount to with Men that were
already resolved to acknowledge for Law, nothing that was against their design
of abolishing Monarchy, and placing a sovereign and absolute Arbitrary Power in
the House of Commons.


B. To destroy Monarchy, and set up the House of Commons, are two Businesses.


A. They found it so at last, but did not think it so then.


B. Let us come now to the Military power.


A. I intended only the Story of their Injustice, Impudence and Hypocrisy;
therefore for the proceeding of the War, I refer you to the History thereof,
written at large in English.

I shall only make use of such a Thread as is necessary for the filling up of
such Knavery and Folly also, as I shall observe in their several Actions.

From York the King went to Hull, where was His Magazine of Arms for the
Northern Parts of Ergland, to try if they would admit Him; the Parliament had
made Sir John Hotham Governor of the Town, who caused the Gates to be shut, and
preseating himself upon the walls, flatly denied Him entrance; for which the
King caused him to be preclam'd Traitor, and sent a Message to the Parliament,
to know if they owned the Actions?


B. Upon what grounds?


A. Their pretense was this. That neither this, nor any other Town in England
was otherwise the King's, than in Trust for the People of England.


B. I cannot see the force of this Argument: We represent the People: Ergo, all
that the People has is ours. The Mayor of Hull did represent the King, Is
therefore all the King had in Hull the Mayor's? The People of England may be
represented with Limitations, as to deliver a Petition, or the like, does it
follow, that they who deliver the Petition, have Right to all the Towns in
England? When began this Parliament to be a Representative of England? Was it
November 3. 1640? Who was it the day before that had the Right to keep the King
out of Hull, and possess it for themselves? For there was then no Parliament,
whose was Hull then?


A. I think it was the King's; not only because it was called the King's Town
upon Hull, but because the King Himself did then and ever represent the Person
of the People of England. If He did not, who then did, the Parliament having no
Being?


B. They might perhaps say, the People had then no Representative.


A. Then there was no Commonwealth, and consequently all the Towns of England
being the Peoples, you and I, and any Man else, might have put in for his
share. You may see by this, what weak People they were, that were carried into
the Rebellion, by such weak reasonings as this Parliament used; and how
impudent they were, that did put such Fallacies upon them.


B. Surely they were such, as were esteemed the wisest Men in England, being
upon that account chosen to be the Parliament.


A. And were they also esteemed the wisest Men of England, that chose them?


B. I cannot tell that; for I know it is usual with the Freeholders in the
Counties, and the Tradesmen in the Cities and Buroughs, to choose, as near as
they can, such as are most repugnant to the giving of Subsidies.


A. The King in the beginning of August, after He had summoned Hull, and tried
some of the Counties thereabout, what they would do for Him, set up His
Standard at Nottingham, but there came not in thither Men enough to make an Army
sufficient to give Battle to the Earl of Essex.

From thence He went to Shrewsbery, where He was quickly furnished; and
appointing the Earl of Lindsey to be General, He resolved to march toward
London.

The Earl of Essex was at Worcester with the Parliament Army, making no offer
to stop Him in His passage, but as soon as He was gone by, marched close after
him.

The King therefore, to avoid being enclosed between the Army of the Earl of
Essex, and the City of London, turned upon him, and gave him Battle at
Edgehill; where, though he got not an entire Victory, yet he had the better,
if either had the better; and had certainly the fruit of a Victory, which was
to march on, in his intended way toward London, in which the next morning he
took Banbury Castle, and from thence went to Oxford, and thence to Brentford,
where he gave a great Defeat to Three Regiments of the Parliaments Forces, and
so returned to Oxford.


B. Why did not the King go on from Brentford?


A. The Parliament, upon the first notice of the King's marching from
Shrewsbery, caused all the Trained Bands, and the Auxiliaries of the City of
London (which were so frighted, as to shut up all their shops) to be drawn
forth; so that there was a complete and numerous Army ready for the Earl of
Essex, that was crept into London just at that time to head it, and this was it
that made the King retire to Oxford.

In the beginning of February, after Prince Rupert took Cirencest^r from the
Parliament, with many Prisoners, and many Arms, for it was newly made a
Magazine; and thus stood the business between the King's and the Parliaments
Forces.

The Parliament in the mean time, caused a Line of Communication to be made
about London and the Suburbs of 12 miles in compass, and constituted a
Committee for the Association, and the putting into a posture of defense the
Counties of Essex, Cambridge, Suffolk. and some others; and one of those
Commissioners was Oliver Cromwell, from which employment he came to his
following greatness.


B. What was done, during this time, in other parts of the Country?


A. In the West, the Earl of Stamford had the employment of putting in
execution the Ordinance of Parliament for the Militia; and Sir Ralph Hopton for
the King, executed the Commission of Array. Between those two was fought a
Battle at Liscard in Cornwall, where Sir Ralph Hopton had the Victory, and
presently took a Town called Saltash, with many Arms, much Ordnance, and many
Prisoners. Sir William Waller in the mean time seized Winchester and Chichester
for the Parliament.

In the North, for the Commission of Array, my Lord of Newcastle; and for the
Militia of the Parliament, was my Lord Fairfax. My Lord of Newcastle took from
the Parliament Tadcaster, in which were a great part of the Parliaments Forces
for that County, and had made himself, in a manner, Master of all the North.
About this time, that is to say, in February, the Queen landed at Burlington,
and was conducted by my Lord of Newcastle, and the Marquis of Montross, to
York; and not long after, to the King.

Diverse other little Advantages, besides these, had the King's Party of the
Parliaments in the North.

There happened also between the Militia of the Parliament, the Commission of
Array in Staffordshire, under my Lord Brook for the Parliament, and my Lord of
Northampton for the King, great contention, wherein both these Commanders were
slain; for my Lord Brook besieging Lichfield-Close, was killed with a shot,
notwithstanding which they gave not over the Siege, till they were Masters of
the Close. But presently after my Lord of Northam^ton bes^^ed (...) again for
the King, which to relieve, Sir William Brereton, and Sir John Gell, advanced
toward Lichfield, and were met at Hopton-heath by the Earl of Northampton, and
routed. The Earl himself was slain, but his Forces with Victory returned to the
Siege again; and shortly after seconded by Prince Rupert, who was then abroad
in that Country, carried the place.

These were the chief Actions of this year 1642. wherein the King's Party had
not much the worse.


B. But the Parliament had now a better Army, insomuch that if the Earl of
Essex had immediately followed the King to Oxford (not yet well fortified) he
might, in all likelihood, have taken it; for he could not want either Men or
Ammunition, whereof the City of London (which was wholly at the Parliaments
devotion) had store enough.


A. I cannot judge of that; but this is manifest, considering the estate the
King was in at his first marching from York, when he had neither Money, nor
Men, nor Arms enough, to put him in hope of Victory, that this year (take it
altogether) was very prosperous.


B. But what great Folly or Wickedness do you observe in the Parliaments
Actions for this first year?


A. All that can be said against them in that point, will be excused with the
pretext of War, and come under one Name of Rebellion, saving that when they
summoned any Town, it was in the Name of the King and Parliament.

The King being in the contrary Army, and many times beating them from the
Siege, I do not see how the right of War can justify such Impudence as that.
But they pretended that the King was always virtually in the Two Houses of
Parliament, making a distinction between his Person Natural and Politic,
which made the Impudence the greater, besides the folly of it: For this was but
an University Quibble, such as Boys make use of in maintaining (in the Schools)
such Tencts as they cannot otherwise defend.

In the end of this year, they solicited also the Scots to enter England with
an Army, to suppress the power of the Earl of Newcastle in the North, which was
a plain Confession, that the Parliament Forces were at this time inferior to
the King's; and most men thought, that if the Earl of Newcastle had then
marched Southward, and joined his Forces with the King's, that most of the
Members of Parliament would have fled out of England.

In the beginning of 1643. the Parliament seeing the Earl of Newcastle's power
in the North grown formidable, sent to the Scots, to hire them to an Invasion
of England; and (to complement them in the mean time) made a Covenant among
themselves, such as the Scots before had made against Episcopacy, and
demolished Crosses, and Church-windows (such as had in them any Images of
Saints) throughout all England.

Also in the middle of the year, they made a Solemn League with the Nation,
which was called, The Solemn League and Covenant.


B. Are not the Scots as properly to be called Foreigners, as the Irish? seeing
then they persecuted the Earl of Strafford, even to death, for advising the
King to make use of Irish Forces against the Parliament; with what face could
they call in a Scotch Army against the King?


A. The King's Party might easily here have discerned their design, to make
themselves absolute Masters of the Kingdom, and to dethrone the King.

Another great Impudence, or rather a Bestial Incivility it was of theirs, That
they Voted the Queen a Traitor, for helping the King with some Ammunition, and
English Forces, from Holland.


B. Was it possible that all this could be done, and Men not see that Papers
and Declarations must be useless? And that nothing could satisfy them, but the
Deposing of the King, and setting up of themselves in his place.


A. Yes, very possible, for who was there of them, though knowing that the King
had the Sovereign Power, that knew the Essential Rights of Sovereignty? They
dreamt of a mixed Power of the King and the Two Houses, That it was a divided
Power, in which there could be no Peace, was above their understanding,
therefore they were always urging the King to Declarations, and Treaties, (for
fear of subjecting themselves to the King in an absolute obedience) which
increased the hope and courage of the Rebels, but did the King little good; for
the People either understand not, or will not trouble themselves with
Controversies in writing, but rather by his compliance by Messages, go away
with an opinion, That the Parliament was likely to have the Victory in the War.

Besides, seeing that the Penners and Contrivers of those Papers, were formerly
Members of the Parliament, and of another mind, and now revolted from the
Parliament, because they could not bear that sway in the House which they
expected men were apt to think, they believed not what they wrote.

As for Military Actions (to begin at the Head Quarters) Prince Rupert took
Brinningram, a Garrison of the Parliaments.

In July after, the King's Forces had a great Victory over the Parliaments near
the Devizes on Roundwaydown, where they took 2000 Prisoners, four Brass Pieces
of Ordnance, 28 Colors, and all their Baggage. And shortly after Bristol was
surrendered to Prince Rupert for the King; and the King himself marching into
the West took from the Parliament many other considerable places.

But this good Fortune was not a little allayed, by his besieging of Gloucester,
which, after it was relieved to the last gasp, was relieved by the Earl of
Essex, whose Army was before greatly wasted, but now recruited with Trained
Bands, and Apprentices of London.


B. It seems not only by this, but also by many Examples in History, That there
can hardly arise a long or dangerous Rebellion, that has not some such
overgrown City, with an Army or two in its belly, to foment it.


A. Nay more, those great Capital Cities, when Rebellion is upon pretense of
Grievances, must needs be of the Rebel Party, because the Grievances are for
Taxes, to which Citizens, (that is Merchants, whose profession is their private
gain) are naturally mortal Enemies, their only glory being, to grow excessively
rich, by the wisdom of buying and selling.


B. But they are said to be, of all Callings, the most beneficial to the
Commonwealth, by setting the poorer sort of people on work.


A. That is to say, by making poor people sell their Labor to them at their
own prizes, so that poor people, for the most part, might get a better Living
by working in Bridewell, than by spinning, weaving, and other such labor as
they can do, saving that by working slightly, they may help themselves a
little, to the disgrace of our Manufacture. And as most commonly they are the
first Encouragers of Rebellion, presuming in their strength; so also are they,
for the most part, the first that repent, deceived by them that command their
strength.

But to return to the War: Though the King withdrew from Gloucester, yet it was
not to fly from, but to fight with the Earl of Essex, which presently after he
did at Newbery, where the Battle was bloody, and the King had not the worst,
unless Cirencester be put into the Scale, which the Earl of Essex had in his
way a few days before surpised.

But in the North and the West the King had much the better of the Parliament;
for in the North, at the beginning of the year, May 29. the Earls of Newcastle
and Cumberland defeated the Lord Fairfax (who commanded in those parts for the
Parliament) at Bramhammoor, which made the Parliament to hasten the assistance
of the Scots.

In June following, the Earl of Newcastle routed Sir Thomas Fairfax (Son to the
Lord Fairfax) upon Adderton-heath, and in pursuit of them to Bradford, took and
killed 2000 Men, and the next day took the Town and 2000 Prisoners more, (Sir
Thomas himself hardly escaping) with all their Arms and Ammunition; and besides
this, made the Lord Fairfax quit Hallifax and Beverley.

Lastly, Prince Rupert relieved Newark, besieged by Sir John Meldrum for the
Parliament with 7000 men, whereof 1000 were slain, the rest upon Articles
departed, leaving behind them their Arms, Bag and Baggage.

To balance in part this success, the Earl of Manchester, whose Lieutenant
General was Oliver Cromwell, got a Victory over the Royalists, near Horn-Castle,
of which he slew 400, took 800 Prisoners, and 1000 Arms, and presently after
took and plundered the City of Lincoln.

In the West, May 16. Sir Ralph Hopton at Stratton in Devonshire, had a Victory
over the Parliamentarians, wherein he took 1700 Prisoners, 13 Brass Pieces of
Ordnance, and all their Ammunition, which was 70 Barrels of Powder, and their
Magazine of their other Provisions in the Town.

Again at Landsdown, between Sir Ralph Hopton and the Parliamentarians under
Sir William Waller was fought a fierce Battle, wherein the Victory was not very
clear on either side, saving that the Parliamentarians might seem to have the
better, because presently after Sir William Waller followed Sir Ralph Hopton to
the Devizes in Wiltshire, though to his cost, for there he was overthrown, as I
have already told you.

After this, the King in Person marched into the West, and took Exeter,
Dorchester, Barnstable, and diverse other places, and had he not at his Return
besieged Gloucester, and thereby giving the Parliament time for new Levies,
'twas thought by many he might have routed the House of Commons. But the end of
this year was more favorable to the Parliament; for in January the Scots
entered England, and March the first crossed the Tyne; and whilst the Earl of
Newcastle was marching to them, Sir Thomas Fairfax gathered together a
considerable Party in Yorkscire, and the Earl of Manchester from Lyn advanced
toward York; so that the Earl of Newcastle having two Armies of Rebels behind
him, and another before him, was forced to retreat to York, which those three
Armies joining presently besieged, and these are all the considerable Military
Actions in the year 1643.

In the same year the Parliament caused to be made a new great Seal, the Lord
Keeper had carried the former Seal to Oxford: Hereupon the King sent a
Messenger to the Judges at Westminster, to forbid them to make use of it; this
Messenger was taken, and condemned at a Council of War, and Hanged for a Spy.


B. Is that the Law of War?


A. I know not: But, it seems, when a Soldier comes into the Enemies Quarters,
without address, or notice given to the chief Commander, that it is presumed he
comes as a Spy.

The same year, when certain Gentlemen at London received a Commission of Array
from the King, to Levy Men for his Service in that City, being discovered, they
were Condemned, and some of them Executed. This Case is not unlike the former.


B. Was not the making of a new great Seal a sufficient proof that the War was
raised, not to remove evil Counselors from the King, but to remove the King
himself from the Government; what hope then could there be had in Messages and
Treaties?


A. The Entrance of the Scots was a thing unexpected to the King, who was made
to believe by continual Letters from His Commissioners in Scotland, and Duke
Hamilton, that the Scots never intended any Invasion. The Duke being then at
Oxford, the King (assured that the Scots were now entered) sent him Prisoner to
Pendennis Castle in Cornwall.

In the beginning of the year 1644. the Earl of Newcastle being (as I told you)
besieged by the joint Forces of the Scots, the Earl of Manchester, and Sir
Thomas Fairfax; the King sent Prince Rupert to relieve the Town, and as soon as
he could, to give the Enemy Battle; Prince Rupert passing through Lancashire,
and by the way having stormed the seditious Town of Bolton, and taken in Stock
ford and Leverpool, came to York, July 1. and relieved it, the Enemy being
risen thence, to a place called Marston-moor, about four miles off, and there
was fought that unfortunate Battle, that lost the King, in a manner, all the
North; Prince Rupert returned by the way he came, and the Earl of Newcastle to
York, and thence with some of His Officers over the Sea to Hamburgh.

The Honor of this Victory was attributed chiefly to Oliver Cromwell; (the Earl
of Manchester's Lieutenant General:) the Parliamentarians returned from the
Field, to the Siege of York, which, not long after, upon honorable Articles
was surrendered; not that they were favored, but because the Parliament could
not employ much time, nor many men in the Siege.


B. This was a great and sudden abatement of the King's prosperity.


A. It was so, but amends was made him for it within 5 or 6 weeks after; for
Sir William Waller (after the loss of his Army at Roundway-down) had another
raised for him by the City of London, who, for the payment thereof, imposed a
weekly Tax of the value of one Meals meat upon every Citizen. This Army, with
that of the Earl of Essex, intended to besiege Oxford, which the King
understanding, sent the Queen into the West, and marched himself toward
Worcester. This made them to divide again, and the Earl to go into the West,
and Waller to pursue the King. By this means it so sell out, that both their
Armies were defeated; for the King turned upon Waller, routed him at
Copredy-Bridge, took his Train of Artillery, and many Officers, and then
presently followed the Earl of Essex into Cornwall, where he had him at such
advantage, that the Earl himself was fain to escape in a small Boat to
Plymouth; his Horse broke through the King's Quarters by night, but the
Infantry were all fore'd to lay down their Arms, and upon conditions never more
to bear Arms against the King, were permitted to depart.

In October following, was fought a second and sharp Battle at Newbery; for
this Infantry making no Conscience of the Conditions made with the King, being
now come toward London, as far as Basingstoke, had Arms put again into their
hands; to whom some of the Trained Bands being added, the Earl of Essex had
suddenly so great an Army, that he attempted the King again at Newbery, and
certainly had the better of the day, but the night parting them, had not a
complete Victory. And it was observed here, that no part of the Earl's Army
fought so keenly, as they who had laid down their Arms in Cornwall.

These were the most important Fights in the year 1644, and the King was yet
(as both himself and others thought) in as good a condition as the Parliament,
which despaired of Victory by the Commanders then used; therefore they voted a
new modelling of the Army, suspecting the Earl of Essex, though I think
wrongfully, to be too much a Royalist, for not having done so much as they
looked for in this second Battle at Newbery.

The Earls of Essex and Manchester perceiving what they went about, voluntarily
laid down their Commissions; and the House of Commons made an Ordinance, That
no Member of either House, should enjoy any Office or Command Military or Civil.

With which oblique blow they shook off those that had hitherto served them too
well, and yet out of this Ordinance they excepted Oliver Cromwell, in whose
Conduct and Valor they had very great confidence, (which they would not have
done, if they had known him as well then, as they did afterward) and made him
Lieutenant General.

In the Commission to the Earl of Essex, there was a Clause for Preservation of
His Majesty's Person, which in this new Commission was left out, though the
Parliament (as well as the General) were as yet Presbyterians.


B. It seems the Presbyterians also (in order to their ends) would fain have
had the King murdered.


A. For my part, I doubt it not: For a Rightful King living, an usurping Power
can never be sufficiently secured. In this same year the Parliament put to
death Sir John Hotham and his Son, for tampering with the Earl of Newcastle,
about the Rendition of Hull. And Sir Alexander Carew, for endeavoring to
deliver up Plymouth, where he was Governor for the Parliament. And the
Archbishop of Canterbury, for nothing but to please the Scots. For the General
Article of going about to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Land, was no
Accusation, but only soul words.

They then also voted down the Book of Common Prayer, and ordered the use of a
Directory, which had been newly composed by an Assembly of Presbyterian
Ministers.

They were also then with much ado prevailed with for a Treaty with the King at
Vxbridge, where they remitted nothing of their former demands.

The King had also at this time a Parliament at Oxford, consisting of such
discontented Members as had lest the Houses at Westminster, but sew of them
had changed their old principles, and therefore that Parliament was not much
worth. Nay rather, because they endeavored nothing but Messages and Treaties;
that is to say, defeating the Soldiers hope of benefit by the War, they were
thought by most men to do the King more hurt than good.

The year 1645, was to the King very unfortunate; for by the loss of one great
battle, he lost all he had formerly gotten, and at length his life.

The new modeled Army, after consultation whether they should lay Siege to
Oxford, or march Westward, to the relief of Taunton, (then besieged by the Lord
Goring, and desended by Blake, famous afterward for his Actions at Sea)
resolved for Taunton, leaving Cromwell to attend the motions of the King, though
not strong enough to hinder him. The King upon this advantage drew his Forces
and Artillery out of Oxford. This made the Parliament to call back their
General Fairfax, and order him to besiege Oxford. The King in the mean time
relieved Chester, which was besieged by Sir William Brereton, and coming back,
took Leicester by force, a place of great importance, and well provided of
Artillery, and Provision, Upon this success, it was generally thought that the
King's party was the stronger. The King himself thought so, and the Parliament
in a manner, confessed the same, by commanding Fairfax to rise from the Siege,
and endeavor to give the King battle; for the Successes of the King, and the
treacherous divisions growing now among themselves, had driven them to rely
upon the fortune of one day, in which, at Naseby, the King's Army was utterly
overthrown, and no hope left him to raise another; therefore after the battle
he went up and down, doing the Parliament here and there some shrewd turns, but
never much increasing his number.

Fairfax in the mean time first recovered Lei^ester, and then marching into the
West, subdued it all, except only a few places, forcing, with much ado, my Lord
Hopton (upon honorable conditions) to disband his Army, and with the Prince of
Wales, to pass over to Scilly, whence not long after they went to Paris.

In April, 1646, General Fairfax began to march back to Oxford, in the mean
time Rainsborough, who besieged Woodstock, had it surrendered. The King
therefore, who was now also returned to Oxford, from whence Woodstock is but
six miles, not doubting but that he should there by Fairfax be besieged, and
having no Army to relieve him, resolved to get away disguised to the Scotch
Army to New^rk, and thither he came the 4th of May; and the Scotch Army being
upon remove homewards, carried him with them to Newcastle, whither he came May
the 13th.


B. Why did the King trust himself with the Scots? They were the first that
rebelled. They were Presbyterians, i. e cruel. Besides, they were indigent, and
consequently might be suspected would sell him to his Enemies for money. And
lastly, They were too weak to defend him, or keep him in their Country.


A. What could he have done better? For he had in the Winter before sent to the
Parliament, to get a Pass for the Duke of Richmond, and others, to bring them
propositions of Peace, it was denied; he sent again, it was denied again. Then
he desired he might come to them in person; this also was denied. He sent again
and again to the same purpose; but instead of granting it, they made an
Ordinance, That the Commanders of the Militia of London, in case the King
should attempt to come within the Line of Communication, should raise what
Forces they thought fit to suppress Tumults, to apprehend such as came with
him; and to secure (i.e. to imprison) his Person from danger.

If the King had adventured to come, and had been imprisoned, what would the
Parliament have done with him? They had dethroned him by their Votes, and
therefore could have no security while he lived, though in Prison; it may be
they would not have put him to death by a High Court of Justice publicly, but
secretly some other way.


B. He should have attempted to get beyond Sea.


A. That had been from Oxford very difficult. Besides, it was generally
believed that the Scotch Army had promised him, that not only His Majesty, but
also his Friends that should come with him, should be in their Army safe, not
only for their persons, but also for their honors and consciences. It Is a
pretty trick, when the Army, and the particular Soldiers of that Army are
different things, to make the Soldiers promise what the Army means not to
perform.

July 11. the Parliament sent their Propositions to the King at Newcastle,
which Propositions they pretended to be the only way to a settled and
well-grounded Peace. They were brought by the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of
Suffolk. Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Hyppesley, Mr. Goodwin, and Mr. Robinson,
whom the King asked, If they had power to treat? And when they said No, he
asked why they might not as well have been sent by a Trumpeter. The
propositions were the same dethroning ones which they used to send, and
therefore the King would not assent to them. Nor did the Scots swallow them at
first, but made some exceptions against them; only it seems, to make the
Parliament perceive, they meant not to put the King into their hands gratis;
and so at last the bargain was made between them, and upon payment of 200000 l.
the King was put into the hands of the Commissioners, which the English
Parliament sent down to receive him.


B. What a vile Complexion has this Action, compounded of feigned Religion,
and very covetousness, cowardice, perjury, and treachery?


A. Now the War that seemed so just, by many unseemly things is ended, you will
see almost nothing in these Rebels but baseness and falseness, besides their
folly.

By this time the Parliament had taken in all the rest of the Kings Garrisons,
whereof the last was Pendennis Castle, whither Duke Hamilton had been sent
Prisoner by the King.


B. What was done during this time in Ireland and Scotland?


A. In Ireland there had been a Peace made, by order from His Majesty, for a
time, which by divisions by the Irish was ill kept. The Popish Party (the
Pope's Nuncio being then there) took this to be the time for delivering
themselves from their subjection to the English; besides, the time of the Peace
was now expired.


B. How were they subject to the English, more than the English to the Irish?
They were subject to the King of England, but so also were the English to the
King of Ireland.


A. The distinction is somewhat too subtle for common understanding. In
Scotland the Marquis of Montross for the King with a very few men had
miraculously with Victories overrun all Scotland, where many of his Forces
(out of too much security) were permitted to be absent for a while, of which
the Enemy having intelligence, suddenly came upon them, and forced them to fly
back into the High-lands to recruit; where he bagan to recover strength, when
the King commanded him (being then in the hands of the Scots at Newcastle) to
disband, and he departed from Sco^land by Sea.

In the end of the same year 1646. the Parliament caused the King's great Seal
to be broken. Also the King was brought to Holmeby, and there kept by the
Parliaments Commissioners, and here was an end of that War as to England and
Scotland, but not to Ireland. About this time also dyed the Earl of Essex, whom
the Parliament had discarded.


B. Now that there was Peace in England, and the King in Prison, in whom was
the Sovereign Power?


A. The Right was certainly in the King, but the exercise was yet in no body,
but contended for, as in a game at Cards, (without fighting both the years
1647. and 1648.) between the Parliament and Oliver Cromwell, Lieutenant General
to Sir Thomas Fairfax. You must know that when King Henry VIII. abolished the
Pope's Authority here, and took upon him to be the Head of the Church, the
Bishops, as they could not resist him, so neither were they discontented with
it. For whereas the Pope before allowed not the Bishops to claim Jurisdiction
in their Diocesses, Jure Divino, that is, of Right immediately from God, but by
the Gift and Authority of the Pope; now that the Pope was outed, they made no
doubt but the divine Right was in themselves.

After this, the City of Geneva, and diverse other places beyond Sea, having
revolted from the Papacy, set up Presbyteries for the Government of their
several Churches; and diverse English Scholars that went beyond Sea, during the
Persecution of Queen Mary, were much taken with this Government; and at their
return in the time of Q. Elizabeth, and ever since, have endeavored to the
great trouble of the Church and Nation, to set up that Government here, wherein
they might domineer, and applaud their own Wit and Learning. And these took
upon them not only a Divine Right, but also a Divine Inspiration; and having
been connived at, and countenanced sometimes in their frequent Preaching, they
introduced many strange and many pernicious Doctrines, out-doing the
Reformation (as they pretended both of Luther and Calvin) receding from the
former Divinity, or Church-Philosophy, (for Religion is another thing) as much
as Luther and Calvin had receded from the Pope, and distracted their Auditors
into a great number of Sects, as Brownists, Anabaptists, Independants,
Fifth-Monarchy Men, Quakers, and diverse others, all commonly called by the name
of Fanatics, insomuch as there was no so dangerous an Enemy to the
Presbyterians, as this Brood of their own hatching.

These were Cromwell's best Cards, whereof he had a very great number in the
Army, and some in the House, whereof he himself was thought one, though he were
nothing certain, but applying himself always to the Faction that was strongest,
was of a color like it. There was in the Army a great number (if not most
part) that aimed only at Rapine, and sharing the Lands and Goods of their
Enemies; and these also, upon the opinion they had of Cromwell's Valor and
Conduct, thought they could not any way better arrive at their Ends, than by
adhering to him.

Lastly, In the Parliament it self, though not the major part, yet a
considerable number were Fanatics, enough to put in doubts, and cause delay in
the Resolutions of the House; and sometimes also by advantages of a thin House,
to carry a Vote in favor of Cromwell, as they did upon the 26 of July; for
whereas on the 4th of May precedent, the Parliament had Voted, That the Militia
of London should be in the hands of a Committee of Citizens, whereof the Lord
Mayor, for the time being should be one.

Shortly after the Independants chancing to be the major, made an Ordinance,
whereby it was put into hands more favorable to the Army. The best Cards the
Parliament had, were the City of London, and the person of the King. The
General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, was right Presbyterian, but in the hands of the
Army, and the Army in the hands of Cromwell, but which Party should prevail,
depending on playing of the Game. Cromwell protested still Obedience and
Fidelity to the Parliament, but meaning nothing less, bethought him, and
resolved on a way to excuse himself of all that he should do to the contrary
upon the Army; therefore he and his Son-in-law, Commissary General Ireton, as
good at contriving as himself, and at speaking and writing better, contrive how
to mutiny the Army against the Parliament. To this end they spread a whisper
through the Army, that the Parliament, now they had the King, intended to
disband them, to cheat them of their Arrears, and to send them into Ireland, to
be destroyed by the Irish.

The Army being herewith enraged, were taught by Ireton to crect a Council
among themselves of two Soldiers out of every Troop, and every Company to
consult for the good of the Army, and to assist at the Council of War, and to
advise for the Peace and Safety of the Kingdom. These were called Adjutators,
so that whatsoever Cromwell would have to be done, he needed nothing to make
them do it, but secretly to put it into the head of these Adjutators; the
effect of the first Consultation, was to take the King from Holmeby, and to
bring him to the Army.

The General hereupon, by Letters to the Parliament, excuses himself and
Cromwell, and the Body of the Army, as ignorant of the Fact; and that the King
came away willingly with those Soldiers that brought Him, assuring them withal,
That the whole Army intended nothing but Peace, nor opposed Presbytery, nor
affected Independency, nor did hold any licentious freedom in Religion.


B. It Is strange, that Sir Thomas Fairfax could be so abused by Cromwell, as to
believe this which he himself here writes.


A. I cannot believe that Cornet Joyce could go out of the Army with a 1000
Soldiers to fetch the King, and neither the General, nor the
Lieutenant General, nor the Body of the Army take notice of it; and that the
King went willingly, appears to be false by a Message sent on purpose from his
Majesty to the Parliament.


B. Here is Perfidy upon Perfidy; first the Perfidy of the Parliament against
the King, and then the Perfidy of the Army against the Parliament.


A. This was the first Trick Cromwell played, whereby he thought himself to have
gotten so great an advantage, that he said openly, That he had the Parliament
in his Pocket, (as indeed he had) and the City ^^o. For upon the news of it,
they were both the one and the other in very great disorder; and the more,
because there came with it a Rumor, that the Army was marching up to London.

The King in the mean time, till his residence was settled at Hampton Court, was
carried from place to place, not without some oftentasion; but with much more
Liberty, and with more Respect shown Him by far, then when He was in the hands
of the Parliaments Commissioners; for His own Chaplains were allowed Him, and
His Children, and some Friends permitted to see Him: besides, that He was much
Complimented by Cromwell, who promised Him in a serious and seeming passionate
manner, to restore Him to His Right against the Parliament.


B. How was he sure he could do that?


A. He was not sure, but he was resolved to march up to the City and
Parliament, to set up the King again, and be the second man; unless in the
attempt he found better hopes than yet he had, to make himself the first man,
by dispossessing the King.


B. What assistance against the Parliament and the City, could Cromwell expect
from the King?


A. By declaring directly for Him, he might have had all the King's Party,
which were many more now since His misfortune, than ever they were before; for
in the Parliament it self, there were many that had discovered the hypocrisy
and private aims of their Fellows. Many were converted to their Duty, by their
own natural Reason; and their Compassion for the King's Sufferings, had begot
generally an Indignation against the Parliament; so that if they had been by
the protection of the present Army brought together, and embodied, Cromwell
might have done what he pleased in the first place for the King, and in the
second for himself; but it seems he meant first to try what he could do without
the King, and if that proved enough, to rid his Hands of him.


B. What did the Parliament and City do, to oppose the Army?


A. First the Parliament sent to the General, to have the King re-deliver'd to
their Commissioners.

Instead of an Answer to this, the Army sent Articles to the Parliament, and
with them a Charge against eleven of their Members, all of them active
Presbyterians; of which Articles these are some: I. That the House may be
purged of those, who, by the Self-denying Ordinance, ought not to be there. II.
That such as abused, and endeavouted the Kingdom might be disabled, to do the
like hereafter. III. That a day might be appointed to determine this
Parliament. IV. That they would make an Account to the Kingdom of the vast Sums
of Money the had received. V. That the Eleven Members might presently be
suspended sitting in the House.


These were the Articles that put them to their Trumps, and they answered none
of them, but that of the Suspension of the Eleven Members, which they said they
could not do by Law, till the particulars of the Charge were produced.

But this was soon answered, with their own Proceedings against the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the Earl of Strafford.

The Parliament being thus somewhat awed, and the King made somewhat confident,
he undertakes the City, requiring the Parliament to put the Militia into other
hands.


B. What other hands? I do not well understand you.


A. I told you that the Militia of London was on the 4th of May, put into the
hands of the Lord Mayor; and other Citizens, and soon after put into the hands
of other Men more favorable unto the Army. And now I am to tell you, that on
July 26. the violence of certain Apprentices, and disbanded Soldiers, forced
the Parliament to re-settle it as it was in the Citizens; and hereupon the two
Speakers, and diverse of the Members ran away to the Army where they were
invited, and contented to sit and Vote in the Council of War, in the nature of
a Parliament; and out of these Citizens hands they would have the Militia taken
away, and put again into those hands out of which it was taken the 26th of July.


B. What said the City to this?


A. The Londoners manned their works, viz. the Line of Communication, raised an
Army of valiant Men within the Line, chose good Officers, all being desirous to
go out and fight, whenever the City should give them Order; and in that
posture stood, expecting the Enemy. The Soldiers in the mean time enter into an
Engagement to live and dye with Sir Thomas Fairfax, the Parliament, and the
Army.


B. That Is very fine; they imitate that which the Parliament did, when they
first took up Arms against the King, stiling themselves, The King and
Parliament; maintaining, That the King was always vertually in his Parliament:
So the Army now making War against the Parliament, called themselves, the
Parliament and the Army; but they might with more reason say, That the
Parliament (since it was in Cromwell's Pocket) was vertually in the Army.


A. Withal they send out a Declaration of the grounds of their March toward
London, wherein they take upon them to be Judges of the Parliament, and of who
are fit to be trusted with the business of the Kingdom, giving them the name,
not of the Parliament, but of the Gentlemen at Westminster; for since the
violence they were under July 26. the Army denied them to be a lawful
Parliament.

At the same time they sent a Letter to the Mayor and Aldermen of London,
reproaching them with those late Tumults, telling them, They were Enemies to
the Peace, Treacherous to the Parliament, Unable to defend either the
Parliament or themselves, and demanded to have the City delivered into their
hands, to which purpose (they said) they were now coming to them.

The General also sent out his Warrants to the Counties adjacent, summoning
their Trained Soldiers to join with them.


B. Were the Trained Soldiers part of the Generals Army?


A. No, not at all in Pay, nor could be, without an Order of Parliament. But
what might not an Army do, that had mastered all the Laws of the Land?

The Army being come to Hounsloe-heath, distant from London but ten Miles, the
Court of Aldermen was called, to consider what to do; the Captains and Soldiers
of the City were willing, and well-provided to go forth, and give them Battle;
but a Treacherous Officer, that had charge of a work on Southwark side, had let
in within the Line a small Party of the Enemies, who marched as far as to the
Gate of London Bridge, and then the Court of Aldermen (their Hearts failing
them) submitted on these Conditions.

To relinquish their Militia. To desert the eleven Members. To deliver up the
Forts and Line of Communication, together with the Tower of London, and all
Magazines and Arms therein to the Army. To disband their Forces, and turn out
all the Refarmadoes, i. e. all Essex's old Soldiers. To draw off their Guards
from the Parliament.


All which was done, and the Army marched Triumphantly through the principal'
Streets of the City.


A. It Is strange that the Mayor and Aldermen having such an Army, should so
quickly yield. Might they not have resisted the Party of the Enemies at the
Bridge, with a Party of their own, and the rest of the Enemies with the rest of
their own?


A. I cannot judge of that: but to me it would have been strange if: they had
done otherwise; for I consider the most part of rich Subjects, that have made
themselves so by Craft and Trade, as men that never look upon any thing but
their present profit, and who to every thing not lying in that way are in a
manner blind, being amazed at the very thought of Plundering: If they had
understood what virtue there is to preserve their Wealth in obedience to their
lawful Sovereign, they would never have sided with the Parliament; and so we
had had no need of arming: The Mayor and Aldermen therefore assured by this
submission to save their Goods, and not sure of the same by resisting, seem to
me to have taken the wisest course; Nor was the Parliament less tame than the
City, for presently, August 6. the General brought the Fugitive Speakers and
members to the House with a strong Guard of Soldiers, and re-placed the
Speakers in their Chairs; and for this they gave the General thanks, not only
there in the House, but appointed also a day for a holy Thanksgiving; and not
long aster made him Generali Jimo of all the Forces of England, and Constable
of the Towe^: But in effect, all this was the advancement of Cromwell, for he
was the Usufructuary, though the Property was in Sir T^o. Fairfax; for the
Independents immediately cast down the whole Line of Communication, divide the
Militia of London, Westminster, and Southwark, which were before united,
displaced such Governors of Towns and Forts as were not for their turn, though
placed there by Ordinance of Parliament, instead of whom they put in men of
their own party: they also made the Parliament to declare null all that had
passed in the Houses, from July the 26th to Aug. the 6th, and clapped in prison
some of the Lords, and some of the most Eminent Citizens, whereof the Lord
Mayor was one.


B. Cromwell had power enough now to restore the King, why did he not?


A. His main end was to set himself in his place; the restoring of the King was
but a reserve against the Parliament, which being in his pocket, he had no more
need of the King, who was now an Impediment to him: To keep him in the Army was
a trouble, to let him fall into the hands of the Presbyterians had been a stop
to his hopes, to murder him privately (besides the horror of the act) now
whilst he was no more than Lieutenant General. would have made him odious,
without farthering his design; there was nothing better for his purpose, than
to let him escape from Hampton Court) where he was too near the Parliament)
whither he pleased beyond Sea: For though Cromwell had a great Party in the
Parliament Houses, whilst they faw not his Ambition to be their Master, yet
they would have been his Enemies as soon as that had appeared. To make the King
attempt an escape, some of those that had him in Custody, by Cromwell's
direction told him, that the Adjutators meant to murder him; and withal, caused
a rumor of the same to be generally spread, to the end it might that way also
come to the Kings Ear, as it did.

The King therefore in a dark and rainy night (his Guards being retired, as it
was thought on purpose) left Hampton Court, and went to the Seaside, about
Sonthampton, where a Vessel had been bespoken to transport him, but failed; so
that the King was forced to trust himself with Colonel Hammond, then Governor
of the Isle of Wight, expecting perhaps some kindness from him for Doctor
Hammonds sake, Brother to the Colonel, and his Majesty's much-favour'd
Chaplain; but it proved otherwise, for the Colonel sent to his Masters of the
Parliament, to receive their Orders concerning him. This going into the Isle of
Wight was not likely to be any part of Cromwell's Design, who neither knew
whither, nor which way he would go, nor had Hammond known any more than other
men, if the Ship had come to the appointed place in due time.


B. If the King had escaped into France, might not the French have assisted him
with Forces to recover his Kingdom, and so frustrated the designs, both of
Cromwell, and all other the Kings Enemies?


A. Yes much, just as they assisted his Son, our present most gracious
Sovereign, who two years before fled thither out of Cornwall.


B. It Is methinks no great policy in Neighboring Princes, to favor, so often
as they do, one another Rebels, especially when they rebel against Monarchy it
self; they should rather first make a League against Rebellion, and afterward
(if there be no remedy) right one against another: Nor will that serve the turn
among Christian Sovereigns, till Preaching be better looked to, whereby the
Interpretation of a Verse in the Hebrew, Greek, or Latin Bible, is oftentimes
the cause of Civil War, and the deposing and assassinating of Gods Anointed;
and yet converie with those Divinity Disputers as long as you will, you will
hardly find one in a hundred discreet enough to be employed in any great
Affairs, either of War or Peace: It is not the Right of the Sovereign, though
granted to him by every man's consent expressly, that can enable a Subject to do
his Office, it is the obedience of the Subject; and then by and by to cry out
(as some Ministers did in the Pulpit) To your Tents, O Israel. Common people
know nothing of right or wrong by their own meditation; they must therefore be
taught the greunds of their Duty, and the reasons why Calamities ever follow
Disobedience to their lawful Sovereigns: But to the contrary, our Rebels were
publicly taught Rebellion in the Pulpits, and that there was no sin, but the
doing of what the Preachers forbad, or the ^mitting of what they advised: But
now the King was the Parliaments Prisoner, why did not the Presbyterians
advance their own Interest by restoring him?


A. The Parliament, in which there were more Presbyterians yet than
Independents, might have gotten what they would of the King, during his life,
if they had not by an unconscionable and sottish Ambition of structed the way
to their Ends: They sent him four Propesitions to be signed and past by him as
Acts of Parliament, telling him, when these were granted they would send
Commissioners to treat with him of any other Articles.

First, The Propositions are these: That the Parliament should have the
Militia, and power of levying Money to maintain it for twenty years; and after
that term, the exerciss thereof to return to the King, in case the Parliament
think the safety of the Kingdom concerned in it.


B. This first Article takes from the King the Militia, and consequently the
whole Sovereignty for ever.


A. The second was, That the King should justify the proceedings of the
Parliament against himself, and declare void all Oaths and Declarations made by
him against the Parliament.


B. This was to make him guilty of the War, and of all the Blood spilt therein.


A. The third was, To take away all Titles of Honor conferred by the King,
since the Great Seal was carried to him in May 1642.

The fourth was, That the Parliament should Adjourn themselves, when, and to
what place, and for what time they pleased.

These Propositions the King resus'd to grant, as he had reason, but sent
others of his own not much less advantageous to the Parliament, and desired a
Personal Treaty with the Parliament, for the settling of the Peace of the
Kingdom; but the Parliament denying them to be sufficient for that purpose,
voted, that there should be no more Addresses made to him, nor Messages
received from him, but they would settle the Kingdom without him: And this they
voted, partly upon the Speeches and Menaces of the Army-Faction then present in
the House of Commons, whereof one advised these three Points.

1. To secure the King in some Inland Castle with Guards. 2. To draw up
Articles of Impeachment against him. 3. To lay him by, and settle the Kingdom
without him.


Another said, that his denying the four Bills, was the denying Protection to
his Subjects; and that therefore they might deny him subjection; and added,
that till the Parliament forsook the Army, the Army would never soi sake the
Parliament: This was threatening. Last of all, Cromwell himself told them, it was
now expected that the Parliament should govern and defend the Kingdom, and not
any longer let the people expect their safety from a man whose heart God had
hardened; nor let those that had so well defended the Parliament, be left
afterward to the rage of an irreconcilable Enemy, lest they seek their safety
some other way. This again was threatening; as also laying his hand upon his
Sword when he spoke it.

And hereupon the Vote of Non-Addresses was made an Ordinance, which the House
would afterward have recalled, but were forced by Cromwell to keep their word.

The Scotch were displeased with it, partly because their Brethren the
Presbyterians had lost a great deal of their Power in England, and partly also,
because they had sold the King into their hands. The King now published a
passionate Complaint to his People of this hard dealing with him, which made
them pity him, but not yet rise in his behalf.


B. Was not this, think you, the true time for Cromwell to take possession?


A. By no means, there were yet many Obstacles to be removed; he was not
General of the Army; the Army was still for a Parliament; the City of London:
discontented about their Militia; the Scots expected with an Army to rescue the
King; his Adjutators were Levellers, and against Monarchy, who though they had
helped him to bring under the Parliament, yet like Dogs that are easily taught
to fetch, and nor easily taught to render, would not make him King; so that
Cromwell had these businesses following to overcome.

1. To be Generalissimo. 2. To remove the King. 3. To suppress all
Insurrections. 4. To oppose the Scots: And


Lastly, To dissolve the present Parliament: Mighty businesses, which he could
never promise himself to overcome; therefore I cannot believe he then thought
to be King, but only by serving the strongest Party (which was always his main
policy) to proceed as far as Fortune and that would carry him.


B. The Parliament were certainly no less foolish than wicked, in deserting
thus the King, before they had the Army at a better Command than they had.


A. In the beginning of 1648. the Parliament gave Commission to Philip Earl of
Pembroke (then made Chancellor of Oxford, together with some of the Doctors
there, as good Divines as he) to purge the University; by virtue whereof they
turned out all such as were not of their Faction, and all such as had approved
the use of the Common Prayer Book; as also diverse scandalous Ministers and
Scholars (that is, such as customarily and without need took the Name of God
into their mouths, or used to speak wantonly, or use the company of lewd Women)
and for this last I cannot ^ut commend them.


B. So shall not I; for it is just such another piece of Piety, as to turn Men
out of an Hospital because they are lame: Where can a man probably learn
Godliness, and how to correct his Vices better, than in the Universities
erected for that purpose?


A. It may be the Parliament thought otherwise; for I have often heard the
Complaints of Parents, that their Children were debauched there to Drunkenness,
Wantonness, Gaming, and other Vices, consequent to these: Nor is it a wonder
among so many. Youths, if they did not corrupt one another in despite of their
Tutors, who oftentimes were little Elder than themselves; And therefore (I
think) the Parliament did not much reverence the Institution of Universities,
as to the bringing up of young men to Virtue, though many of them learned there
to Preach, and became thereby capable of preferment and maintenance; and some
others were sent thither by their Parents, to save themselves the trouble of
governing them at home, during that time wherein Children are least governable.
Nor do I think the Parliament cared more for the Clergy than other men did: But
certainly an University is an Excellent Servant to the Clergy, and the Clergy
if it be not carefully looked too, (by their Dissenticus Doctrines, and by the
advantage to publish their Dissentions) is no extraordinary means to divide a
Kingdom into Faction.


B. But seeing there is no place in this part of the World, where Philosophy
and other Humane Sciences are not highly valued, where can they be learned
better, than in the Universities?


A. What other Sciences? Do not Divines comprehend all Civil and Moral
Philosophy within their Divinity? And as for Natural Philosophy, is it not
removed from Oxford and Cambridge, to Gresham-College in London, and to be
learned out of their Gazets? But we are gone from our Subject.


B. No, we are indeed gone from the great business of the Kingdom, to which, if
you please, let us return.


A. The first Insurrection, or rather Tumult, was of the Apprentices, on the
9th of April; but this was not upon the Kings Account, but arose from a
customary Assembly of them for recreation in Moor-fulds, whence some zealous
Officers of the Train'd-Bands would needs drive them away by force, but were
themselves routed with Stones, and had their Ensign taken away by the
Apprentices, which they carried about in the Streets, and frighted the Lord
Mayor into his House, where they took a Gun, called a Drake, and then they set
Guards at some of the Gates, and all the rest of the day Childishly swagger'd
up and down: but the next day the General himself marching into the City,
quickly dispersed them. This was but a small business, but enough to let them
see that the Parliament was ill-beloved of the people. Next, the Welsh took
Arms against them; there were three Colonels in Wales, Langhorn, Poyer, and
Powel, who had formerly done the Parliament good Services, but now were
commanded to disband, which they refused to do; and the better to strengthen
themselves, declared for the King, and were about Eight Thousand.

About the same time in Wales also was an another Insurrection, headed by Sir
Nicholas Keymish, and another under Sir John Owen; so that now all Wales was in
Rebellion against the Parliament: And yet all these were overcome in a Months
time by Cromwell, and his Officers, but not without store of Bloodshed on both
sides.


B. I do dot much pity the loss of those men, that impute to the King that
which they do upon their own quarrel.


A. Presently after this, some of the people of Surrey sent a Petition to the
Parliament for a Personal Treaty between the King and Parliament, but their
Messengers were beaten home again by the Soldiers that quartered about
Westminster; and then the Kentish men having a like Petition to deliver, and
seeing how it was like to be received, threw it away, and took up Arms; they
had many Gallant Officer, and for General, the Earl of Norwich, and increased
daily by Apprentices, and old disbanded Soldiers, insomuch as the Parliament
was glad to restore to the City their Militia, and to keep Guards upon the
Thames side; and then Fairfax marched toward the Enemy.


B. And then the Londoners, I think, might easily and suddenly have Mastered,
first the Parliament, and next Fairfax his eight thousand, and lastly Cromwels
Army, or at least have given the Scotch Army opportunity to march unfought to
London.


A. It Is true, but the City was never good at venturing; nor were they, or the
Scots, principled to have a King over them, but under them. Fairfax matching
with eight thousand against the Royalists, routed a part of them at Maidstone;
another part were taking in of places in Kent farther off, and the Earl of
Norwich, with the rest came to Black Heath, and then sent to the City to get
passage through it, to join with those which were risen in Essex, under Sir
Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle; which being denied, the greatest part of
his Kentish men deserted him; with the rest, not above five hundred, he crossed
the Thames unto the Isle of Dogs, and so to Bow, and thence to Colchester.
Fairfax having notice of this, crossed the Thames at Graves-End, and overtaking
them, besieged them in Colchester: The Town had no defense but a Bulwark, and
yet held out, upon hope of the Scotch Army to relieve them, the space of two
Months.

Upon the news of the defeat of the Scots, they were forced to yield; the Earl
of Norwich was sent Prisoner to London, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George
Lisle, two Loyal and Gallant Persons, were shot to Death. There was also
another little Insurrection headed by the Earl of Holland about Kingston, but
quickly suppressed, and he himself taken Prisoner.


B. How came the Scots to be so soon dispatched?


A. Merely, as it is said, for want of Conduct: The Army was led by Duke
Hamilton, who was thenset at liberty, when Pendennis Castle, where he was
Prisoner was taken by the Parliament: He enterd England with Horse and Foot
10000, to which came above 3000 English Royalists. Against these Cromwell
marched out of Wales, with Horse and Foot 11000, and near to Preston in
Lancashire, in less than two hours, defeated them; and the cause of it is said
to be that the Scotch Army was so ordered, as they could not all come to the
Fight, nor relieve their Fellows: After the Defeat they had no way to fly but
farther into England, so that in the pursuit they were almost all taken, and
lost all that an Army could lose, for the few that got home, did not all bring
home their Swords. Duke Hamilton was taken, and not long after sent to London,
but Cromwell marched to Edenburrough, and there, by the help of the Faction
which was contrary to Hamilton's, he made sure not to be hindered in his
Designs, the first whereof was to take away the King's life by the hand of the
Parliament: whilst these things passed in the North, the Parliament ( Cromwell
being away) came to it self, and recalling their Vote of Non-Addresses, sent to
the King new Propositions, somewhat, but not much easier than the former, and
upon the King's Answer to them, they sent Commissioners to treat with him at
Neaport in the Isle of Wight, where they so long dodged with him about Trisles,
that Cromwell was come to London before they had done, to the Kings destruction,
for the Army was now wholly at the Devotion of Cromwell, who set the Adjutators
on work to make a Remonstrance to the House of Commons; wherein they require:
1. That the King be brought to Justice. 2. That the Prince, and Duke of York,
be summoned to appear at a day appointed, and proceeded with, according as they
should give satisfaction. 3. That the Parliament settle the future Government,
and set a reasonable period to their own sitting, and make certain future
Parliaments Annual; or Biennial. 4. That a competent number of the Kings chief
Instruments be executed; and this to be done both by the House of Commons, and
by a General agreement of the people, testified by their Subscriptions: Nor did
they stay for an Answer, but presently set a Guard of Soldiers at the
Parliament House Door, and other Soldiers in Westminster-Hast, suffering none
to go into the House, but such as would serve their turns; all others were
frighted away, or made Prisoners, and some upon diverse Quarrels suspended.
About ninety of them, because they had refused to vote against the Scots; and
others because they had voted against the Vote of Non-Addresses; and the rest
were a House for Cromwell.
The Phanaticks also in the City being countenanced by the Army, pack a new
Common Council, whereof any forty was to be above the Mayor, and their first
work was to frame a Petition for Justice against the Xing; which Tichboures the
Mayor (involving the City in the Regicide) delivered to the Parliament.

At the same time, with like violence they took the King from Newport, in the
Isle of Wight, to Hurst Castle, till things were ready for His Trial; the
Parliament, in the mean time, to avoid Perjury, by an Ordinance declared void
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; and presently after made another to
bring the King to his Trial.


B. This is a piece of Law that I understood not before, that when many men
swear singly, they may when they are Assembled (if they please) absolve
themselves.


A. The Ordinance being drawn up, was brought into the House, where after three
several Readings, it was Voted, That the Lords and Commons of England Assembled
in Parliament, do declare, That by the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is
Treason in the King of England to levy War against the Parliament: And this
Vote was sent up to the Lords, and they denying their consent, the Commons in
Anger made another Vote, That all Members of Committees should proceed and act
in any Ordinance, whether the Lords concurred or no; and that the People, under
God, are the Original of all just Power; and that the House of Commons have the
Supreme-Power of the Nation; and that whatsoever the House of Commons Enacted,
is Law. All this passed nemine contradicente.


B. These Propositions fight not only against a King of England, but against
all the Kings of the World: It were good they thought on it; but yet I believe,
that, under God, the Original of all Laws was in the People.


A. But the People, for them and their heirs, by consent and Oaths, have long
ago put the Supreme Power of the Nation into the hands of their Kings, for them
and their Heirs; and consequently into the hands of this King, their known and
lawful heir.


B. But does not the Parliament represent the People?


A. Yes, to some purposes; as to put up Petitions to the King when they have
leave, and are grieved; but not to make a grievance of the Kings Power:
Besides, the Parliament never represents the People, but when the King calls
them: Is it to be imagined, that he calls a Parliament to depose himself? Put
the case every County and Borough should have given for a Benevolence a sum of
Money, and that every County meeting in their County Court, or elsewhere, and
that every Borough in their Town Hall, should have chosen certain men to carry
their several sums respectively to the Parliament, had not these men
represented the whole Nation?


B. Yes, no doubt.


A. Do you think the Parliament would have thought it reasonable to be called
to an account by this Representative?


B. No, sure; and yet, I must confess, the Case is the same.


A. This Ordinance contained; First, a Summary of the Charge against the King;
in substance this, That not content with the Encroachments of his Predecessors
upon the freedom of the People, he had designed to set up a Tyrannical Power;
and to that end, had raised and maintained in the Land a Civil War against the
Parliament, whereby the Country has been miserably wasted, the Public
Treasure exhausted, thousands of people murdered, and infinite other mischiefs
committed.

Secondly, A Constitution passed of a High Court of Justice; that is, of a
certain number of Commissioners, of whom any twenty had power to try the King,
and proceed to Sentence, according to the Merit of the Cause, and see it
speedily executed. The Commissioners met on Saturday; January 20. in
Westminster Hall, and the King was brought before them, sitting in a Chair: He
heard the Charge read, but denied to plead to it, either Guilty, or not Guilty,
till he should know by what lawful Authority he was brought thither: The
President told him, that the Parliament affirmed their own Authority; and the
King persevered in his refusal to plead: though many words passed between him
and the President; yet this is the sum of all: on Monday, January 22. the Court
met again, and the Solicitor moved, that if the King persisted in denying the
Authority of the Court, the Charge might be taken pro confesso; but the King
still denied their Authority.

They met again, January 23. and then the Solicitor moved the Court for
Judgment; whereupon the King was required to give his Final Answer, which was
again a denial of their Authority.

Lastly, They met again, January 27. where the King then desired to be heard
before the Lords and Commons in the Painted Chamber; and promising after that
to abide the Judgment of the Court; the Commissioners retired for half an hour
to consider of it; and then returning, caused the King again to be brought to
the Bar, and told him, that what he proposed, was. but another denial of the
Courts Jutisdiction; and that if he had no more to say, they would proceed to
Judgment: Then the King answering, that he had no more to say, the President
began a long Speech, in justification of the Parliaments Proceedings, producing
the Examples of many Kings killed or deposed by wicked Parliaments, Ancient and
Modern, in England, Scotland, and other parts of the World: All which he
endeavored to justify from this only Principle, that the People have the
Supreme Power, and the Parliament is the People. This Speech ended, the
Sentence of Death was read, and the same upon Tuesday after, January the 30.
executed at the Gate of his own Palace of White Hall. He that can delight in
reading how villanously he was used by the Soldiers, between the Sentence and
Execution, may go to the Chronicle it self, in which he shall see what courage,
patience, wisdom, and goodness was in this Prince, whom in their Charge the
Members of that wicked Parliament styled Traitor, Tyrant, and Murderer.

The King being dead, the same day they made an Act of Parliament, That whereas
several pretenses might be made to the Crown, etc. it is Enacted by this
present Parliament, and Authority of the same, that no Person shall presume to
declare, proclaim, or publish, or any way promote Charles Stuart, Son of
Charles late King of England, commonly called Prince of Wales, or any other
Person, to be King of England and Ireland, etc.


B. Seeing the King was dead, and his Successors barred, by what declared
Authority was the Peace maintained?


A. They had in their anger against the Lords formerly declared the Supreme
Power of the Nation to be in the House of Commons; and now, on February the
fifth, they Vote the House of Lords to be useless, and dangerous. And thus the
Kingdom was turned into a Democracy, or rather an Oligarchy; for presently they
made an Act, That none of those Members who were secluded for opposing the Vote
of Non-Addresses, should ever be readmitted: And these were commonly called
the Secluded Members, and the rest were by some styled a Parliament, and by
others a Rump.

I think you need not now have a Catalogue either of the Vices, or of the
Crimes, or of the Pollies of the greatest part of them that composed the
Long-Parliament, than which greater cannot be in the world: What greater Vices
than Irreligion, Hypocrisy, Avarice, and Cruelty, which have appeared so
eminently in the actions of Presbyterian Members, and Presbyterian Ministers?
What greater Crimes than Blasphemy, and killing Gods Anointed, which was done
by the hands of the Indipendents, but by the folly and first Treason of the
Presbyterians, who betrayed and sold him to his Murderers? Nor was it a little
folly in the Lords, not to see that by the taking away of the Kings Power, they
lost withal their own Privileges; or to think themselves either for number or
judgment any way a considerable assistance to the House of Commons: And for
those men who had skill in the Laws, it was no great sign of understanding, not
to perceive that the Laws of the Land were made by the King, to oblige his
Subjects to Peace and Justice, and not to oblige himself that made them:
Lastly, and generally, all men are Fools which pull down any thing which does
them good, before they have set up something better in its place: He that would
set up Democracy with an Army, should have an Army to maintain it; but these
men did it, when those men had the Army that were resolved to pull it down. To
these follies, I might add the follies of those five men, which out of their
reading of Tully, Seneca, and other Antimonarchicks, think themselves
sufficient Politics, and show their discontents when they are not called to
the management of the State, and turn from one side to the other upon every
neglect they fancy from the King, or his Enemies.


A. YOU have seen the Rump in possession (as they believed) of the Supreme
Power over the two Nations of England and Ireland, and the Army their Servant,
though Cromwell thought otherwise, serving them diligently for the advancement
of his own purpose; I am now therefore to show you their proceedings.


B. Tell me first, how this kind of Government, under the Rump or Relick of a
House of Commons, is to be called.


A. It Is doubtless an Oligarchy; for the Supreme Authority must needs be in one
man, or in more; if in one, it is Monarchy; the Rump therefore was no Monarchy;
if the Authority were in more than one, it was in all, or in sewer than all;
when in all, it is Democraty; for every man may enter into the Assembly which
makes the Sovereign Court, which they could not do here; It is therefore
manifest, the Authority was in a few, and consequently the State was an
Oligarchy.


B. Is it not impossible for a people to be well Governed, that are to obey
more Masters than one?


A. Both the Rump, and all other Sovereign Assemblies, if they have but one
Voice, though they be many Men, yet are they but one Person; for contrary
Commands cannot consist in one and the same Voice, which is the Voice of the
greatest part; and therefore they might govern well enough, if they had honesty
and wit enough.

The first Act of the Rump, was the Exclusion of those Members of the House of
Commons which had been formerly kept out by Violence, for the precuring of an
Ordinance for the King's Trial; for these men had appeared against the
Ordinance of Non-Addresses, and therefore to be excluded, because they might
else be an Impediment to their future Designs.


B. Was it not rather, because in the Authority of few, they thought the fewer
the better, both in regard of their shares, and also of a nearer approach in
every one of them to the Dignity of a King?


A. Yes certainly, what was their Principal End.


B. When these were put out, why did not the Counties and Buroughs choose
others in their Places?


A. They could not do that without Order from the House: After this, they
constituted a Council of forty persons, which they termed a Council of State,
whose Office was to execute what the Rump should command.


B. When there was neither King, nor House of Lords, they could not call
themselves a Parliament; for a Parliament is a meeting of the King. Lords and
Commons, to confer together about the Businesses of the Commonwealth: With
whom did the Rump confer?


A. Men may give to their Assembly what Name they please, what signification
soever such Name might formerly have had, and the Rump took the Name of
Parliament, as most suitable to their purpose; and such a Name, as being
Venerable among the people for many hundred years, had countenanced and
sweetened Subsidies, and other Levies of Money, otherwise very unpleasant to
the Subject: They took also afterward another name, which was, Custodes
Libertatis Angliae, which Title they used only in their Writs issuing out of
the Courts of Justice?


B. I do not see how a Subject that is tied to the Laws, can have more liberty
in one form of Government than another.


A. Howsoever to the people that understand by Liberty, nothing but leave to do
what they list, it was a Title not ungrateful.

Their next work was to set forth a public Declaration that they were fully
resolved to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Nation, as to the preservation
of the Lives, Liberties, and Proprieties of the people.


B. What did they mean by the Fundamental Laws of the Nation?


A. Nothing but to abuse the people; for the only Fur damental Law in every
Commonwealth, is to obey the Laws from time to time, which he shall make, to
whom the people have given the Supreme Power: How likely then are they to
uphold the Fundamental Laws, that had murdered him, who was by themselves so
often acknowledged their lawful Sovereign: Besides, at the same time that this
Declaration came forth, they were erecting the High Court of Justice, which
took away the lives of Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord Capel;
whatsoever they meant by a Fundamental Law, the Erecting of this Court was a
breach of it, as being warranted by no former Law, or Example in England.

At the same time also they levied Taxes by Soldiers, and permitted Free Qarter
to them; and did many other Actions which if the King had done, they would have
said had been done against the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject.


B. What silly things are the common sort of people, to be cozened as they were
so grossly?


A. What sort of people, as to this matter, are not of the common sort? the
crastiest Knaves of all the Rump were no wiser than the rest whom they cozened;
for the most of them did believe, that the same things which they imposed upon
the generality, were just and reasonable; and especially the great Haranguers,
and such as pretended to Learning: for who can be a good Subject in a Monarchy,
whose Principles are taken from the Enemies of Monarchy? such as were Cicoro,
Seneca, Cato, and other Politicians of Rome, and Aristotle of Athens, who spoke
of Kings but as Wolves, and other ravenous Beasts? You may perhap, think a man
has need of nothing else, to know the duty he owes to his Governor, and what
right he has to order him, but a good Natural Wit: But it is otherwise; for it
is a Science, and built upon sure and clear Principles, and to be learned by
deep and careful study, or from Masters that have deeply studied it: And who
was there in the Parliament, or in the Nation, that could find out those
evident Principles, and derive from thence the necessary Rules of Justice, and
the necessary Connection of Justice and Peace? The people have one day in seven
the leisure to hear Instructions and there are Ministers appointed to teach
them their duty: But how have these Ministers performed their Office? A great
part of them, namely, the Presbyterian Ministers, throughout all the whole War,
instigated the people against the King; so did also Independent, and other
Fanatic Ministers: There contented with their Livings, preached in their
Parishes points of Controversy, to Religion impertinent, but to the breach of
Charity, among themselves, very effectual; or else Eloquent things, which the
people either understood not, or thought themselves not concerned in: But this
sort of Preachers, as they did little good, so they did little hurt; the
mischief proceeded wholly from the Presbyterian Preachers, who by a long
practiced Histrionick Faculty, preached up the Rebellion powerfully.


B. To what end?


A. To the end, that the State becoming popular, the Church might be so too,
and governed by an Assembly; and consequently (as they thought) seeing
Politics are subservient to Religion, they might govern, and thereby satisfy
their covetous humor with Riches, and also their malice with Power to undo all
men that admired not their Wisdom. Your calling the people silly things,
obliged me by this digression to show you, that it is not want of Wit, but want
of the Science of Justice that brought them into these troubles. Persuade, if
you can, that man that has made his Fortune, or made it greater, or an Eloquent
Orator, or a ravishing Poet, or a subtle Lawyer, or but a good hunter, or a
cunning Gamester, that he has not a good Wit; and yet there were of all these a
great many so silly as to be deceived by the Rump. They wanted not wit, but the
knowledge of the Causes, and grounds upon which one person has a right to
govern, and the rest an obligation to obey; which grounds are necessary to be
taught the people, who without them cannot live long in peace among themselves.


B. Let us return, if you please, to the proceedings of the Rump.


A. In the rest of the year, they voted a new Stamp for the Coin of this
Nation: They considered also of Agents to be sent into Foreign Parts; and
having lately received Applause from the Army for their work done by the High
Court of Justice, and encouragement to extend the same farther, they perfected
the said High Court of Justice, in which were tried Duke Hamilton the Earl of
Holland, the Lord Capel, the Earl of Norwich, and Sir John Owen, whereof (as I
mentioned before) the first three were beheaded. This affrighted diverse of the
Kings Party out of the Land, for not only they, but all that had born Arms for
the King, were (...) that time in very great danger of their lives: for it wa^
put to the question by the Army at a Council of Wa^ whether they should be all
Massacred or no; where the No's carried it but by two Voices. Lastly, Mar^^ 24.
they put the Mayor of London out of his Office, fined him two thousand pound,
disfranchised him, and condemned him to two Months Imprisonment in the Tower,
for refusing to proclaim the Act for abolishing of the Kingly Power. And thus
ended the year 1648. and the Monthly Fast, God having granted that which they
fasted for, the death of the King, and the possession of his Inheritance. By
these their Proceedings, they had already lost the hearts of the generality of
the People, and had nothing to trust to but the Army, which was not in their
power, but in Cromwell's, who never failed, when there was occasion, to put them
upon all. Exploits that might make them odious to the people, in order to his
future dissolving them, whenever it should conduce to his ends. In the
beginning of 1649. the Scots discontented with the proceedings of the Rump
against the late King, began to levy Soldiers, in order to a new Invasion of
England. The Irish Rebels, for want of timely resistance from England, were
grown terrible; and the English Army at home, infected by the Adjutators, began
to cast about, how to share the Land among the Godly, meaning themselves, and
such others as they pleased, who were therefore called Levellers: Also the
Rump, for the present, were not very well provided of Money; and therefore the
first thing they did, was the laying of a Tax upon the people, of ninety
thousand pound a Month, for the maintenance of the Army.


B Was it not one of their Quarrels with the King, that he had levied Money
without the consent of the people in Parliament?


A. You may see by this what reason the Rump had to call it self a Parliament;
for the Taxes imposed by Parliament, were always understood to be by the
peoples consent, and consequently legal.

To appease the Scots, they sent Messengers with flattering Letters, to keep
them from engaging for the present King; but in vain, for they would hear
nothing from a House of Commons (as they called it) at Westminster, without a
King, and Lords: But they sent Commissioners to the King, to let him know what
they were doing for him, for they were resolved to raise an Army of seventeen
thousand Foot, and six thousand Horse for themselves. To relieve Ireland, the
Rump had resolved to send eleven Regiments thither out of the Army here in
England. This happened well for Cromwell, for the Levelling Soldiers, which were
in every Regiment many, and in some the major part. finding that instead of
dividing the Land at home, they were to venture their Lives in Ireland, flatly
denied to go; and one Regiment having cashiered their Colonel about Salisbury,
was marching to join with three Regiments more of the same resolution; but both
the General, and Cromwell, falling upon them at Burford, utterly defeated them,
and soon after reduced the whole Army to their obedience. And thus another of
the Impediments to Cromwell's Advancement was soon removed. Thus done, they came
to Oxford, and thence to London; and at Oxford, both the General, and Cromwell
were made Doctors of the Civil Law; and at London ^easted and presented by the
City.


B. Were they not first made Masters, then D^ctors?


A. They had made themselves Masters already, both of the Laws, and Parliament.
The Army being now obedient, the Rump sent over those eleven Regiments into
Ireland, under the Command of Doctor Cromwell, Entitled, Governor of that
Kingdom, the Lord Fairfax being still General of all the Forces, both here and
there.

The Marquess, now Duke of Ormond, was the Kings Lieutenant of Ireland; and the
Rebels had made a Confederacy among themselves, and those Confederates had made
a kind of League with the Lieutenant, wherein they agreed upon liberty given
them in the exercise of their Religion, to be faithful to, and assist the King.
To these also were joined some Forces raised by the Earls of Castlehaven, and
Clanriccard, and my Lord Inchequin, so that they were the greatest United
Strength in the Island; but there were among them a great many other Papists
that would by no means subject themselves to Protestants, and these were called
the Nuncio's Party, as the other were called the Confederate Party. These
Parties not agreeing, and the Confederate Party having broken their Articles,
the Lord Lieutenant seeing them ready to besiege him in Dublin, and not able to
defend it, to preserve the place for the Protestants, surrenders it to the
Parliament of England, and came over to the King, at this time when he was
carried from place to place by the Army. From England he went over to the
Prince, now King, residing then at Paris: But the Confederates affrighted with
the news that the Rump was sending over an Army thither, desired the Prince, by
Letters, to send back my Lord of Ormond, engaging themselves to submit
absolutely to the Kings Authority, and to obey my Lord of Ormond as his
Lieutenant: And thereupon he was sent back. This was about a year before the
going over of Cromwell; in which time, by the Dissentions in Ireland between the
Confederate Party, and the Nuncio's Party, and discontents about Command, this
otherwise sufficient Power effected nothing, and was at last defeated, August
the second, by a Salley out of Dublin, which they were besieging. Within a few
days after arrived Cromwell, who with extraordinary diligence, and horrid
Executions, in less than a Twelvemonth that he staid there, subdued, in a
manner, the whole Nation. having killed, or exterminated a great part of them,
and leaving his Son-in-law Ireton to subdue the rest: But Ireton died there
(before the business was quite done) of the Plague. This was one step more
toward Cromwell's Exaltation to the Throne.


B. What a miserable condition was Ireland reduced to by the Learning of the
Roman, as well as England was by the Learning of the Presbyterian Clergy?


A. In the latter end of the preceding year, the King was come from Paris to
the Hague, and shortly after came thither from the Rump, their Agent Doris^aus,
Doctor of the Civil Law, who had been employed in the drawing of the Charge
against the late King: But the first night he came, as he was at Supper, a
Company of Cavaliers, near a dozen, entered his Chamber, killed him, and got
away. Not long after also, their Agent at Madrid, one Ascham, that had written
in defense of his Masters, was killed in the same manner. About this tire came
out two Books; one written by Salmasius, a Presbyterian, against the Murder of
the King; another written by Milton, an Independent in England, in Answer to it


B. I have seen them both; they are very good La^i^^ both and hardly to be
judged which is better; and both very ill reasoning, and hardly to be judged
which is worst: like two Declamations Pro and Con, for Exercise only in a
Rhetoric School, by one and the same man: So like is a Presbyterian to an
Independent.


A. In this year the Rump did not much at home, save that in the beginning they
made England a Free State, by an Act that runs thus, Be it Enacted and Declared
by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, That the people of
England, and all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, are and
shall be, and are hereby constituted, made, and declared a Commonwealth, and
Free State, etc.


B. What did they mean by a Free State and Commonwealth? were the people no
longer to be subject to Laws? They could not mean that: for the Parliament
meant to Govern them by their own Laws, and punish such as broke them. Did they
mean that England should not be subject to any foreign Kingdom or
Commonwealth? That needed not be Enacted, seeing there was no King nor People
pretended to be their Masters. What did they mean then?


A. They meant that neither this King, nor any King, nor any single person, but
only that they themselves would be the Peoples Masters; and would have set it
down in those plain words, if the people could have been cozened with words
intelligible as easily as with words not intelligible.

After this they gave one another Money and Estates out of the Lands and Goods
of the Loyal Party. They Enacted also an Engagement to be taken by every man,
in these words, Tou shall promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth
of England, as it is now established, without King or House of Lords.

They banished also from within 20 Miles of London all the loyal Party,
forbidding every one of them to depart more than five miles from his dwelling
house.


B. They meant perhaps to have them ready, if need were, for a Massacre: But
what did the Scots in this time?


A. They were considering of the Officers of the Army which they were levying
for the King, how they might exclude from Command all such as had loyally
served his now Majesty's Father, and all Independents, and all such as
commanded in Duke Hamilton's Army: And these were the main things which passed
this year.

The Marquess of Montross, that had in the year 1645. with a few men, and in a
little time, done things almost incredible against the late King's Enemies in
Scotland, landed now again in the beginning of the year 1650. in the North of
Scotland, with Commission from the present King, hoping to do him as good
service as he had formerly done his Father; but the case was altered, for the
Scotch Forces were then in England, in the service of the Parliament; whereas
now they were in Scotland, and many more (for their intended Invasion) newly
raised: Besides, the Soldiers which the Marquess brought over were few, and
Foreigners; nor did the High-landers come in to him, as he expected, insomuch
as he was soon defeated, and shortly after taken; and (with more spightful
usage than revenge required) Executed by the Covenanters at Edinborough, May
the 2d.


B. What good could the King expect from joining with these men, who, during
the Treaty, discovered s^ much malice to him in one of his one of his best
Subjects?


A. No doubt (their Churchmen being then prevalent) they would have done as
much so this King, as the English Parliament had done to his Father, it they
could have gotten by it that which they foolishly aspired to, the Government of
the Nation: I do not believe that the Independents were worse than the
Presbyterians; both the one and the other were resolved to destroy whatsoever
should stand in the way to their Ambition: but necessity made the King pass
over both this and many other Indignities from them, rather than suffer the
pursuit of his right in England to cool, and be little better than extinguished.


B. Indeed, I believe the Kingdom, if suffered to become an old Debt, will
hardly ever be recovered: Besides, the King was sure, wherever the Victory
lighted, he could lose nothing in the War but Enemies.


A. About the time of Montrosses death, which was in May, Cromwell was yet in
Ireland, and his work unfinished; but finding, or by his Friends advertised,
that his presence in the Expedition now preparing against the Scots, would be
necessary to his Design, sent to the Rump, to know their pleasure, concerning
his return: But for all that, he knew, or thought it was not necessary to stay
for their Answer, but came away, and arrived at London the sixth of June
following, and was welcomed by the Rump. Now had General Fairfax (who was truly
what he pretended to be, a Presbyterian) been so Catechis'd by the Presbyterian
Ministers here, that he refused to fight against the Brethren in Scotland; nor
did the Rump, nor Cromwell, go about to rectify his Conscience in that point.
And thus Fairfax laying down his Commission, Cromwell was now made General of
all the Forces in England and Ireland, which was another step to the Sovereign
Power.


B. Where was the King?


A. In Scotland, newly come over, he landed in the North, and was honorably
conducted to Edinborough, though all things was not yet well agreed upon
between the Scots and him: for he had yielded to as hard Conditions, as the
late King had yielded to in the Isle of Wight; yet they had still somewhat to
add, till the King enduring no more, departed from them toward the North
again: But they sent Messengers after him, to pray him to return; but they
furnished these Messengers with strength enough to bring him back, if he should
have refused. In fine, they agreed, but would not suffer the King, or any
Royalist, to have Command in the Army.


B. The sum of all is, the King was their Prisoner.


A. Cromwell from Berwick sends a Declaration to the Scots, telling them, he had
no Quarrel against the people of Scotland, but against the malignant Party that
had brought in the King, to the disturbance of the Peace between the two
Nations; and that he was willing by Conference to give and receive
satisfaction, or to decide the Justice of the Cause by Battle: To which the
Scots answering, declare, That they will not prosecute the Kings Interest,
before and without his acknowledgment of the sins of his House, and his former
ways; and satisfaction given to Gods people in both Kingdoms. Judge by this,
whether the present King was not in as bad a condition here, as his Father was
in the hands of the Presbyterians of England.


B. Presbyterians are every where the same; they would fain be absolute
Governors of all they converse with, and have nothing to plead for it; but
that where they reign, it is God that reigns, and no where else. But I observe
one strange demand, that the King should acknowledge the sins of his House; for
I thought it had been certain from all Divines, that no man was bound to
acknowledge any man's sins but his own.


A. The King having yielded to all that the Church required, the Scots
proceeded in their intended War. Cromwell marched on to Edinborough, provoking
them all he could to Battle; which they declining, and provisions growing
scarce in the English Army, Cromwell retired to Dunbar, despairing of success,
and intending by Sea or Land to get back into England: And such was the
condition which this General Cromwell, so much magnified for Conduct, had
brought his Army to, that all his Glories had ended in shame and punishment, if
Fortune's, and the faults of his Enemies, had not relieved him: for as he
retired, the Scots followed him close all the way, till within a mile of
Dunbar. There is a ridge of Hills, that from beyond Edinborough goes winding to
the Sea, and crosses the Highway between Dunbar and Barwick, at a Village
called Copperspeith, where the passage is so difficult, that if the Scots had
sent timely thither a very few men to guard it, the English could never have
passed: for the Scots kept the Hills, and needed not have fought, but upon
great advantage, and were almost two to one. Cromwell's Army was at the Foot of
those Hills, on the North side; and there was a great Ditch, or Channel of a
Torrent, between the Hills and it; so that he could never have got home by
Land, nor without utter ruin of the Army attempted to ship it, nor have stayed
where he was for want of provisions. Now Cromwell knowing the Pass was free, and
commanding a good Party of Horse and Foot to possess it, it was necessary for
the Scots to let them go, whom they bragged they had impo^^ded, er else to
fight, and therefore with the best of their Horse charged the English, and made
them at first to shrink a little, but the English Foot coming on, the Scots
were put to flight, and the flight of their Horse hindered the Foot from
engaging, who therefore fled, as did also the rest of their Horse. Thus the
folly of the Scottish Commanders brought all these odds to an even lay between
two small and equal Parties, wherein Fortune gave the Victory to the English,
who were not many more in number than those that were killed and taken
Prisoners of the Scots, and the Church lost their Cannon, Bag and Baggage, with
10000 Arms, and almost their whole Army; the rest were got together by Lesby to
Sterling.


B. This Victory happened well for the King, for had the Scots been Victors, the
Presbyterians both there and here would have domineered again, and the King
been in the same condition his Father was in at Newcastle, in the hands of the
Scottish Army. For in pursuit of this Victory, the English at last brought the
Scots to a pretty good habit of obedience for the King, whenever he should
recover his Right.


A. In pursuit of this Victory the English marched to Edinborrough, quitted by
the Scots, fortified Leith, and took in all the strength and Castles they
thought sit on this side the Frith, which now was become the Bounds betwixt the
two Nations; and the Scotch Ecclesiastics began to know themselves better, and
resolved in their new Army, which they meant to raise, to admit some of the
Royalists into Command: Cromwell from Edinborrough marched toward Sterling to
provoke the Enemy to fight, but finding danger in it, returned to Edinborrough,
and besieged the Castle: In the mean time he sent a Party into the West of
Scotland to suppress Strangham and Kerr, two great presbyterians, that were
there levying of Forces for their new Army. And in the same time the Scots
Crowned the King at Schone.

The rest of this year was spent in Scotland, on Cromwell's part in taking of
Edinborrough Castle, and in attempts to pass the Frith, or any other ways to
get over to the Scottish Forces; and on the Scots part, in hastening their
Levies for the North.


B. What did the Rump at home during this time?


A. They voted Liberty of Conscience to the Sectaries; that is, they plucked out
the sting of Presbytery, which consisted in a severe imposing of odd Opinions
upon the people, impertinent to Religion, but conducing to the advancement of
the power of the Presbyterian Ministers. Also they levied more Soldiers, and
gave the Command of them to Harrison, now made Major General, a Fifth-Monarchy
man; and of those Soldiers, two Regiments of Horse and one of Foot were raised
by the Fifth-monarchy-men, and other Sectaries, in thankfulness for this their
Liberty from the Presbyterian Tyranny. Also they pulled down the late Kings
Statue in the Exchange, and in the place where it stood caused to be written
these words, Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, etc.


B. What good did that do them? and why did they not pull down the Statues of
all the rest of the Kings?


A. What account can be given of actions that proceed not from Reason, but
spite and such like passions? Besides this, they received Ambassadors from
Portugal and Spain, acknowledging their Power: And in the very end of the Year,
they prepared an Ambassador to the Netherlands, to offer them friendship: All
they did besides, was persecuting and executing of Royalists.

In the beginning of the Year 1651. General Dean arrived in Scotland; and on
the 11th of April the Scottish Parliament assembled, and made certain Acts in
order to a better uniting of themselves, and better obedience to the King, who
was now at Sterling with the Scottish Forces he had expecting more now in
levying. Cromwell from Edinborough went diverse times to Sterling, to provoke
them to fight: There was no Ford there to passover his men: At last, Boats
being come from London and Newcastle, Colonel Overton (though it were long
first, for it was now July) transported 1400 Foot of his own, besides another
Regiment of Foot and four Troops of Horse, and intrencht himself at North-Ferry
on the other side, and before any help could come from Sterling Major General
Lambert also was got over with as many more; by this time Sir John Brown was
come to oppose them with 4500 men, whom the English there defeated, killing
about 2000, and taking Prisoners 1600. This done, and as much more of the Army
transported as was thought fit, Cromwell comes before St. Johnston's (from
whence the Scottish Parliament, upon news of his passing the Iri^h, was removed
to Dundes) and summons it; and the same day had news brought him, that the King
was marching from Sterling toward England, which was true; but notwithstanding
the King was three days march before him, he resolved to have the Town before
he followed him, and accordingly had it the next day by surrender.


B. What hopes had the King in coming into England, having before and behind
him none, at least none armed, but his Enemies?


A. Yes there was before him the City of London, which generally hated the
Rump, and might easily be reckoned for 20000 well armed Soldiers; and most men
believed they would have taken his part had he come near the City.


B. What probability was there of that? Do you think the Rump was not sure of
the service of the Mayor, and those that Commanded the City Militia? And if
they had been really the Kings Friends, what need had they to stay his coming
up to London? They might have seized the Rump if they had pleased, which had no
possibility of defending themselves; at least, they might have turned them out
of the House.


A. This they did not, but on the contrary permitted the recruiting of
Cromwell's Army, and the raising of men to keep the Country from coming in to
the King. The King began his march from Sterling the last of July, and Aug. 22.
came to Worcester, by the way of Carlis^e, with a weary Army, of about 13000;
whom Cromwell followed, and joining with the new Levies, environed Worcester
with 40000, and on the third of September utterly defeated the Kings Army: Here
Duke Hamilton, brother of him that was beheaded, was slain.


B. What became of the King?


A. Night coming on before the City was quite taken, he left it, being dark,
and none of the Enemies Horse within the Town to follow him; the plundering
Foot having kept the Gates shut, lest the Horse should enter, and have a share
of the Booty: The King before morning got into Warwickshire, 25 Miles from
Worcester, and there lay disgused a while, and afterward went up and down in
great danger of being discovered, till at last he got over into France from
Brighthempstead in Sussex.


B. When Cromwell was gone what was farther done in Scotland?


A. Lieutenant Genesis M^nk whom Cromwell left there with 7000 took Sterling,
August the 14th, by surrender; and Dundes the third of September by Storm,
because it resisted; this the Soldiers plundered, and had good booty, because
the Scots for safety had sent thither their most precious Goods from
Edinborrough and St. Johnston's; he took likewise by surrender Aberdeen, and
the place where the Scottish Ministers first learned to play the Fools, St.
Andrews; Also in the Highlands Colonel Alured took a knot of Lords and
Gentlemen, viz. four Earls, and four Lords, and above twenty Knights and
Gentlemen, whom he sent Prisoners into England, so that there was nothing more
to be feared from Scotland: all the trouble of the Rump was to resolve what
they should do with it, at last they resolved to Unite and Incorporate it into
a Commonwealth with England and Ireland, and to that end sent thither St.
John's, Vane, and other Commissioners, to offer them this Union by public
Declaration, and to warn them to choose their Deputies of Shires, and Burgesses
of Towns, and send them to Westminster.


B. This was a great favor.


A. I think so; and yet it was by many of the Scots, especially by the
Ministers and other Presbyterians refused: the Ministers had given way to the
Levying of Money for the payment of the English Soldiers, but to comply with
the Declaration of English Commissioners they absolutely forbad.


B. Methinks this contributing to the pay of their Conquerors was some mark of
Servitude, where entering into the Union made them free, and gave them equal
Privilege with the English.


A. The cause why they refused the Union, rendered by the Presbyterians
themselves, was this, That it drew with it a subordination of the Church to the
Civil State in the things of Christ.


B. This is a downright Declaration to all Kings and Commonwealths in
general, that a Presbyterian Minister will be a true Subject to none of them in
the things of Christ, which things what they are they will be Judges
themselves: what then have we gotten by our Deliverance from the Popes Tyranny,
if these pretty men succeed in the place of it, that having nothing in them
that can be beneficial to the Public, except their silence? for their
Learning, it amounts to no more than an imperfect knowledge of Greek and Latin,
and acquired readiness in the Scripture Language, with a Gesture and Tone
suitable thereunto: but of Justice and Charity (the manners of Religion) they
have neither knowledge nor practice, as is manifest by the Stories I have
already told you: nor do they distinguish between the Godly and Ungodly, but by
Conformity of Design in men of Judgment: or by Repetition of their Sermons in
the Common sort of people.


A. But this sullenness of the Scots was to no purpose, for they at Westminster
Enacted the Union of the two Nations, and the Abolition of Monarchy in
Scotland, and ordained Punishment for those that should transgress the Act.


B. What other business did the Rump this year?


A. They sent St John's and Strickland Ambassadors to the to Hague, to offer
League to the United Provinces, who had Audiance March the third: St. John's in
a Speech showed those States what advantage they might have by this League, in
their Trade and Navigations, by the use of the English Ports and Harbors; the
Dutch, though they showed no great forwardness in the business, yet appointed
Commissioners to treat with them about it, but the people were generally
against it, calling the Ambassadors and their Followers (as they were) Traitors
and Murderers, and made such Tumults about their House, that their Followers
durst not go abroad till the ^tates had quieted them: the Rump advertised
hereof, presently recalled them; the Complement which St. John's gave to the
Commissioners, at their taking leave, is worth your hearing; You have (said he)
an Eye upon the Event of the Affairs of Scotland, and therefore do refuse the
Friendship we have offered now. I can assure you many in the Parliament were of
Opinion that we should not have sent any Ambassadors to you, till we expected
your Ambassadors to us: I now perceive our Error, and that those Gentlemen were
in the right: In a short time you shall see that business ended, when it shall
perplex you that you have refused our proffer.


B. S. John's was not sure that the Scottish business would end as it did; for
though the Scots were beaten at Dunbar, he could not be sure of the Event of
their entering of England, which happened afterward.


A. But he guessed well; for within a Month after the Battle at Worcester, an
Act passed, forbidding the importing of Merchandise in other than English
Ships: The English also molested their Fishing upon our Coast: They also many
times searched their Ships (upon occasion of our War with France) and made some
of them Prize: and then the Dutch sent their Ambassadors hither, to desire what
they before refused; but partly also to inform themselves what Naval Forces the
English had ready, and how the people were contented with the Government.


B. How sped they?


A. The Rump showed now as little desire of Agreement, as the Dutch did then,
standing upon terms never likely to be granted. First, For the Fishing on the
English Coast, that they should not have it without paying for it. Secondly,
That the English should have free Trade form Middleburgh to Antwerp, as they
had before their Rebellion against the King of Spain. Thirdly, They demanded
amends for the old (but never-to-be-forgotten) business of Amboyna; so that the
War was already certain, though the Season kept them from Action till the
Spring following The true Quarrel on the English part was, that their proffered
Friendship was scorned, and their Ambassadors affronted: On the Dutch part,
was their greediness to ingross all Traffic, and a false Estimate of our and
their own strength. Whilst these things were doing, the Relics of the War,
both in Ireland and Scotland, were not neglected, though these Nations were not
fully pacified till two years after: The Persecution of Royalits also still
continued, among whom was beheaded one M. Love, for holding Correspondence with
the King.


B. I had thought Presbyterian Ministers, whilst they were such, could not be
Royalists, because they think their Assembly have the Supreme Power in the
things of Christ; and by consequence they are in England by a Statute Traitors.


A. You may think so still; for though I called Mr. Love a Royalist, I meant it
only for that one act for which he was condemned. It was he, who, during the
treaty at Vxbridge, preaching before the Commissioners there, said It was as
possible for Heaven and Hell, as for the King and Parliament to agree. Both he
and the rest of the Presbyterians are and were Enemies to the Kings Enemies,
Cromwell and his Phanaticks, for their own, not for the King's sake: Their
Loyalty was like that of Sir John Hotham, that kept the King out of Hull, and
afterward would have betrayed the same to the Marquess of New Castle. These
Presbyterians therefore cannot be rightly called Loyal, but rather doubly
perfidious; unless you think that as two Negatives make an Affirmative, so two
Treasons make Loyalty.

This Year also were reduced to the obedience of the Rump, the Islands of
Scilly and Man, and the Barbado's, and St. Christophers. One thing fell out
that they liked not, which was that Cromwell gave them warning to determine
their sitting according to the Bill for Triennial Parliaments.


B. That I think was harsh.


A. In the year 1652. May 14. began the Dutch War in this manner, three Dutch
Men of War, with diverse Merchants from the Straights, being discovered by one
Captain Young, who commanded some English Frigates, the said Young sent to their
Admiral to bid him strike his Flag (a thing usually done in acknowledgment of
the English Dominion in the Narrow Seas) which accordingly he did. Then came up
the Vice Admiral, and being called so as the other was to take down his Flag,
he answered plainly he would not; but after the exchange of four or five
Broadsides, and mischief done on either part, he took it down; but Captain
Young demanded also either the Vice Admiral himself, or his Ship, to make
satisfaction for the damage already sustained. To which the Vice Admiral
answered, that he had taken in his Flag, but would defend himself and his Ship:
where-upon Captaiu Young consulting with the Captains of his other Ships, lest
the beginning of the War in this time of Treaty should be charged upon himself,
and night also coming on, thought sit to proceed no farther.


B. The War certainly began at this time; but who began it?


A. The Dominion of the Sea belonging to the English, there can be no question
but the Dutch began it; and that the said Dominion belonged to the English, it
was confessed at first by the Admiral himself peaceably, and at last by the
Vice Admiral, taking in their Flags.

About a Fortnight after there happened another Fight upon the like occasion,
upon Tromp with 42 Men of War, who came back to the back of Godwin-sands (
Major Bourn being then with a few of the Parliament's Ships in the Downs, and
Blake with the rest farther Westward) and sent two Captains of his to Bourn to
excuse his coming thither: To whom Bourn returned this answer, that the Message
was civil, but that it might appear real, he ought to depart. So Tromp
departed, meaning (now Bourn was satisfied) to sail toward Blake, and he did
so; but so did also Bourn, for fear of the worst: When Tromp and Blake were
near one another, Blake made a shot over Tromp's Ship, as a warning to him to
take in his Flag: This he did thrice, and then Tromp gave him a Broadside, and
so began the Fight (at the beginning whereof Bourn came in) and lasted from two
a Clock till night, the English having the better, and the Flag as before
making the Quarrel.


B. What need is there, when both Nations were heartily resolved to fight, to
stand so much upon this Complement of who should begin? For as to the gaining
of Friends and Confederates thereby, I think it is in vain; seeing Princes and
States on such occasions, look not much upon the Justice of their Neighbors,
but upon their own concernment in the Event.


A. It is commonly so: but in this case the Dutch knowing the Dominion of the
Narrow Seas to be a gallant Title, and envied by all the Nations that reach the
Shore, and consequently that they were likely to oppose it, did wisely enough
in making this point the state of the Quarrel.

After this Fight the Dutch Ambassadors residing in England, sent a Paper to
the Council of State, wherein they styled this last Encounter a rash action,
and affirmed it was done without the knowledge, and against the will of their
Lords, the States General, and desired them that nothing might be done upon it
in heat, which might become irreparable. The Parliament hereupon voted, First,
That the States General should pay the Charges they were at, and for the
Damages they sustained upon this occasion. Secondly, That this being paid,
there should be a Cessation of all Acts of Hostility, and a mutual Restitution
of all Ships and Goods taken. Thirdly, And both these agreed so, that there
should be made a League between the two Commonwealths. These Votes were sent
to the Dutch Ambassadors, in answer of the said Paper; but with a Preamble
setting f^rth the former kindnesses of England to the Netherlands, and taking
notice of their new Fleet of 150 Men of War, without any other apparent Design
than the Destruction of the English Fleet.


B. What answer made the Dutch to this?


A. None. Tromp sailed presently into Zealand, and Blake with 70 Men of War to
the Orkney-Islands, to seize their Busses, and to wait for five Dutch Ships
from the East Indies? and Sir George Ascue* newly returned from the Barbados,
came into the Downs with fifteen Men of War, where he was commanded to stay for
a Recruit out of the Thames. Tromp, being recruited to 120 Sail, made account
to get in between Sir George Ascue and the Mouth of the River, but was hindered
so long by contrary Winds* that the Merchants calling for his Convoy he could
stay no longer, and so he went back into Holland, and thence to Orkney, where
he met with the said five East India Ships, and sent them home: and then he
endeavored to engage with Blake; but a sudden Storm forced him to Sea, and so
dissipated his ^leet, that only forty two came home in one Body, the rest
singly as well as they could; Blake also came home, but went first to the Coast
of Holland, with 900 Prisoners and six Men of War taken, which were part of
twelve which he found and took Guarding their Busses. This was the first Bout
after the War declared.

In August following there happened a Fight between De Ruiter the Admiral of
Zeland, with fifty Men of War, and Sir George Ascue near Plymouth, with forty;
wherein Sir George had the better, and might have got an entire Victory, had
the whole Fleet engaged, Whatsoever was the matter, the Rump (though they
rewarded him) never more employed him, after his return, in their Service at
Sea: but Voted for the year to come three Generals, Blake that was one already,
and Dean, and Monk.

About this time Arch Duke ^eopold Besieging Dunkirk, and the French sending a
Fleet to relieve it, General Blake lighting on the French at Cala^s and taking
seven of their Ships was cause of the Towns Surrender.

In September they fought again, De Wit and R^iter commanding the Dutch, and
^l^ke the English; and the Dutch were again worsted.

Again, in the end of November V^n Tromp, with 80 Men of War showed himself at
the back of G^dwinsand^, where Bl^ke, though he had with him but 40, adventured
to fight with him, and had much the worst, and (night parting the ^ray) retired
into the River of Thames; whilst Van Tromp keeping the Sea, took some
inconsiderable Vessels from the English; and thereupon, (as it is said) with a
Childish Varity hung out a Broom from his Main Topmast, signifying he meant to
sweep the Sea of all English Shipping.

After this, in February, ^he Dutch with Van Tromp, were encountered by the
English under Blake and Dean, near Ports-mouth, and had the worst. And these
were all the Encounters between them this year in the narrow Seas: they fought
also once at Leghorn, where the Dutch had the better.


B. I see no great odds yet on either side, if there were any the English had
it.


A. Nor did either of them e're the more incline to Peace, for the Hollanders,
after they had sent Ambassadors into Denmark, Sweeden, Poland, and the Hans
Towns (whence Tar and Cordage are usually had) to signify the Declaration of
the War, and to get them to their Party, re-called their Ambassadors from
England, and the Rump without delay gave their parting audience, without
abating a Syllable of their former severe Propositions, and presently to
maintain the War for the next year, laid a Tax upon the People of 120000 l. per
M^nsem.


B. What was done in the mean time at home?


A. Cromwell was now quarrelling (the last and greatest Obstacle to his Design)
the Rump, and to that end there came out daily from the Army Petitions,
Addresses, Remonstrances, and other such Papers, some of them urging the Rump
to dissolve themselves, and make way for another Parliament; to which the Rump
unwilling to yield, and not daring to refuse, determined for the end of their
sitting the 5th of November, 1654. but Cromwell meant not to stay so long. In
the mean time the Army in Ireland was taking Submissions, and granting
Transportations of the Irish, and condemning who they pleased in a High Court
of Justice erected there for that purpose. Among those that were executed, was
hanged Sir Phelim Oneale, who first began the Rebellion in Scotland; the
English built some Citadels for the bridling that stubborn Nation, and thus
ended the year, 1652.


B. Come we then to the year, 1653.


A. Cromwell wanted now but one step to the end of his Ambition, and that was,
To set his Foot upon the Neck of this Long-Parliament, which he did April the
23th of this present year, 1653. a time very seasonable; for though the Dutch
were not mastered, yet they were much weakened, and what with Prizes from the
Enemy, and squeezing the Royal Party, the Treasury was pretty full, and the Tax
of 120000 l. a Month began to come in, all which was his own in right of the
Army: Therefore without any more ado attended by the Major Generals Lambert and
Harrison, and some other Officers, and as many Soldiers as he thought fit, he
went to the Parliament House and dissolved them, turned them out, and locked up
the Doors; and for this Action he was more applauded by the people, than for
any of his Victories in the War, and the Parliament men as much scorned and
derided.


B. Now that there was no Parliament, who had the Supreme Power?


A. If by Power you mean the right to Govern, no body had it; if you mean the
Supreme Strength, it was clearly in Cromwell, who was obeyed as General of all
the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland.


B. Did he pretend that for Title?


A. No, but presently after he intended a Title, which was this, That he was
necessitated for the defense of the Cause, for which at first the Parliament
had taken up Arms, (that is to say Rebelled) to have recourse to extraordinary
Actions; You know the pretense of the Long-Parliament's Rebellion was Salus
Populi, the safety of the Nation against a dangerous Conspiracy of Papists, and
a malignant Party at home; and that every man is bound, as far as his Power
extends, to procure the safety of the whole Nation, (which none but the Army
were able to do, and the Parliament had hitherto neglected) was it not then the
Generals duty to do it? had he not therefore right? for that Law of Salus
Populi is directed only to those that have Power enough to defend the People,
that is, to them that have the Supreme Power.


B. Yes certainly, he had as good a Title as the Long-Parliament, but the
Long-Parliament did represent the People, and it seems to me that the Sovereign
Power is essentially annexed to the Representative of the People.


A. Yes, if he that makes a Representative, that is (in the present case) the
King, do call them together to receive the Sovereign Power, and he divest
himself thereof, otherwise not; nor was ever the lower house of Parliament the
Representative of the whole Nation, but of the Commons only; nor had that House
the Power to oblige by their Acts, or Ordinances, any Lord or any Priest.


B. Did Cromwell come in upon the only Title of Salus Populi? For this is a
Title very few understand?


A. His way was to get the Supreme Power conferred upon him by Parliament,
therefore he called a Parliament, and gave it the Supreme Power, to the end
that they should give it to him again; was not this witty: First therefore he
published a Declaration of the Causes why he dissolved the Parliament; the sum
whereof was, That instead of endeavoring to promote the good of Gods people,
they endeavored (by a Bill then ready to pas) to recruit the House, and
perpetuate their own Power Next he constituted a Council of State of his own
Creatures to be the Supreme Authority of England, but no longer than till the
next Parliament should be called and met: Thi^dly he summoned 142 persons, such
as he himself or his trusty Officers made choice of, the greatest part of whom
were instructed what to do, obscure persons and most of them Phanaticks though
styled by Cromwell, Men of approved fidelity and hon^sty; to these the Council
of State surrendered the Supreme Authority; and not long after these men
surrendered it to Cromwell. July the fourth this Parliament met, and chose for
their Speaker one Mr. Rous, and called themselves from that time forward The
Parliament of England. But Cromwell, for the more surety, constituted also a
Council of State, not of such petty Fellows as most of these were, but of
himself and of his principal Officers. These did all the business both public
and private, making Ordinances, and giving Audience to Foreign Ambassadors. But
he had now more Enem^es than before: Harrison, who was the Head of the Fifth
monarchy-men, laying down his Commission, did nothing but an^mate his Party
against him, for which afterward he was Imprisoned. This little Parliament in
the mean time were making of Acts so ridiculous and displeasing to the People,
that it was thought he chose them on purpose to bring all ruling Parliaments
into contempt, and Monarchy again into credit?


B. What Acts were these?


A. One of them was, That all Marriages should be made by a Justice of Peace,
and the Banes asked three several days in the next Market. None were forbidden
to be Married by a Minister, but without a Justice of Peace the Marriage was to
be void: so diverse wary Couples (to be sure of one another, howsoever they
might repent it afterward) were Married both ways: Also they abrogated the
Engagement, whereby no man was admitted to sue in any Court of Law, that had
not taken it, that is, that had not acknowledged the late Rump.


B. Neither of these did any hurt to Cromwell.


A. They where also in hand with an Act to Cancel all the present Laws, and
Law Books, and to make a new Code more suitable to the Humor of the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, of whom there were many in this Parliament; their Tenet
being, That there ought none to be Sovereign but King Jesus, nor any to Govern
under him but the Saints; but their Authority ended before this Act passed.


B. What is this to Cromwell?


A. Nothing yet; but they were likewise upon an Act, now almost ready for the
Question; that Parliaments hence forward, one upon the end of another, should
be Perpetual.


B. I understand not this, unless Parliaments can beget one another like
Animals, or like the Ph^nix.


A. Why not like the Phoenix? Cannot a Parliament at the day of their
Expiration send out Writs for a new one?


B. Do you think they would not rather Summon themselves anew, and, to save the
labor of coming again to Westminster, fit still where they were? or if they
summon the Counties to make new Elections, and then Dissolve themselves, by
what Authority shall the People meet in their County Court, there being no
Supreme Authority standing?


A. All they did was absurd: though they knew not that, no nor this, whose
Design was upon the Sovereignty; the Contrivers of this Act it seems perceived
not, but Cromwell's Party in the House saw it well enough: and therefore as soon
as it was laid, there stood up one of the Members and made a Motion, that since
the Commonwealth was like to receive little benefit by their Sitting, they
should Dissolve themselves. Harrison and they of ^his Sect was troubled hereat,
and made Speeches against it: but Cromwell's party, of whom the Speaker was one,
left the House, and with the Mace before them went to White Hall, and
surrendered their Power to Cromwell that had given it them; and so he got the
Sovereignty by an Act of Parliament: and within four days after, (viz.)
December 16th. was Installed Protector, and took his Oath to observe certain
Rules of Governing engrossed in Parchment, and read before him, the writing was
called, The Instrument.


B. What were the Rules he swear to?


A. One was to call a Parliament every third year, of which the first was to
begin Sept. the third following.


B. I believe he was a little Superstitious in the Choice of September the
third, because it was lucky in 1650 and 1651, at Dunbar and Worcester, but he
knew not how lucky the same would be to the whole Nation, in 1658. at
White Hall.


A. Another was; That no Parliament should be Dissolved till it had sitten five
Months, and those Bills that they then presented to him should be passed within
twenty days by him, or else they should pass without him.

A third, That he should have a Council of State of not above twenty one nor
under thirteen, and that upon the Protectors Death this Council should meet,
and before they parted choose a new Protector. There were many more besides, but
not necessary to be inserted.


B. How went on the War against the Dutch?


A. The Generals for the English were Blake, and Dean, and Monk; and Van Trump
for the Dutch; between whom was a Battle fought the second of June (which was a
Month before the beginning of this little Parliament) wherein the English had
the Victory, and drove the Enemies into their Harbors, but with the loss of
General Dean, slain by a Cannon-shot. This Victory was great enough to make the
Dutch send over Ambassadors into England in order to a Treaty. But in the mean
time they prepared and put to Sea another Fleet, which likewise in the end of
July was defeated by General Monk, who got now a greater Victory than before:
And this made the Dutch descend so far, as to buy their Peace with the payment
of the Charge of the War, and with the acknowledgment, among other Articles,
that the English had the right of the Flag. This Peace was concluded in March,
being the end of this year, but not proclaimed till April; the Money it seems
being not paid till them.

The Dutch War being now ended, the Protector sent his youngest Son, Henry,
into Ireland, whom also some time after he made Lieutenant there; and sent Monk
Lieutenant General into Scotland; to keep those Nations in Obedience. Nothing
else worth remembering was done this year at home, saving the discovery of a
Plot of Royalists (as was said) upon the Life of the Protector, who all this
while had intelligence of the King's Designs from a Traitor in his Court, who
afterward was taken in the manner, and killed.


B. How came he into so much trust with the King?


A. He was the Son of a Colonel that was slain in the Wars on the late King's
side: Besides he pretended Employment from the King's loyal and loving Subjects
here, to convey to his Majesty Money, as they from time to time should send
him: And to make this credible, Cromwell himself caused Money to be sent him.
The following year, 1654. had nothing of War, but was spent in Civil
Ordinances, in appointing of Judges, preventing of Plots (for Usurpers are
jealous) and in executing of the Kings Friends, and selling their Lands. The
third of September, according to the Instrument, the Parliament met; in which
there was no House of Lords, and the House of Commons was made as formerly of
Knights and Burgesses, but not as formerly two Burgesses of a Borough, and two
Knights for a County; for Buroughs for the most part had but one Burgess, and
some Counties six or seven Knights; besides there were twenty Members for
Scotland, and as many for Ireland: So that now Cromwell had nothing to do, but
to show his Art of Government upon six Coach-Horses newly presented him, which
being as rebellious as himself, threw him out of the Coach-Box, and had almost
killed him.


B. This Parliament which had seen how Cromwell handled the two former, the long
and the short one, had surely learnt the wit to behave themselves better to him
than those had done.


A. Yes, especially now that Cromwell in his Speech at their first meeting, had
expressly forbidden them to meddle with the Government of a single Person and
Parliament, or with the Militia, or with perpetuating of Parliaments, or taking
away Liberty of Conscience. And he told them also, that every Member of the
House before they sat, must take a Recognition of his Power in diverse points;
whereupon, of above 400 there appeared not above 200 at first; though
afterward some relenting, there sat about 300 again. Just at their sitting
down, he published some Ordinances of his own, bearing date before their
meeting, that they might see he took his own Acts to be as valid as theirs. But
all this could not make them know themselves, for they proceeded to the debate
of every Article of the Recognition.


B. They should have debated that before they had taken it.


A. But then they had never been suffered to sit: Cromwell being informed of
their stubborn proceedings, and out of hope of any Supply from them, dissolved
them.

All that passed besides in this year, was the Exercise of the High-Court of
Justice upon some Royalists for Plots.

In the Year 1655. the English, to the number of near 10000, landed in
Hispaniola, in hope of the plunder of the Gold and Silver, whereof they thought
there was great abundance in the Town of Santo Domingo; but were well beaten by
a few Spaniards, and with the loss of near 1000 Men, went off to Jamaica, and
possessed it.

This year also the Royal Party made another Attempt in the West, and
proclaimed there King Charles the Second; but few joining with them, and some
falling off, they were soon suppressed, and many of the principal persons
Executed.


B. In these many Insurrections, the Royalists, tho they meant well, yet they
did but dis-service to the King by their impatience. What hope had they to
prevail against so great an Army as the Protector had ready? What cause was
there to despair of seeing the King's business better done by the Dissension
and Ambition of the great Commanders in that Army, whereof many had the favor
to be esteemed among them as well as Cromwell himself?


A. That was somewhat uncertain: The Protector being frustrate of his hope of
Money at Santo Domingo, resolved to take from the Royalists the tenth part
yearly of their Estates: And to this end chiefly, he divided England into
eleven Major-General-ships, with Commission to every Major General to make a
Roll of the Names of all suspected persons of the King's party, and to receive
the tenth part of their Estates within his Precinct: As also to take caution
from them not to act against the State, and to reveal all Plots that should
come to their knowledge, and to make them engage the like for their Servants:
They had Commission also to forbid Horse-races, and concourse of people, and to
receive and account for this Decimation.


B. By this the Usurper might easily inform himself of the value of all the
Estates in England, and of the Behavior and Affection of every person of
Quality, which has hitherto been taken for very great Tyranny.


A. The year 1656 was a Parliament-year, by the Instrument; between the
beginning of this year, and the day of the Parliaments sitting, these
Major-Generals resided in several Provinces, behaving themselves most
Tyrannically.

Amongst other of their Tyrannies was the awing of Elections, and making
themselves, and whom they pleased, to be returned Members for the Parliament,
which was also thought a part of Cromwell's Design in their Constitution; for he
had need of a giving Parliament, having lately upon a Peace made with the
French, drawn upon himself a War with Spain.

This year it was that Captain Stainer set upon the Spanish Plate-fleet, being
8 in number, near Cadiz, whereof he sunk two and took two, there being in one
of them two millions of pieces of 8, which amounts to 400000 l. sterling.

^. This year also it was that James Naylor appeared at Bristol, and would be
taken for Jesus Christ; he wore his Beard forked, and his Hair composed to the
likeness of that in the Volto Santo; and being questioned, would sometimes
answer, Thou say it. He had also his Disciples that would go by his
Horse-side to the mid-le; in dirt. Being sent for by the Parliament, he was
Sentenced to stand on the Pillory, to have his Tongue bored through, and to be
marked in the Forehead with the Letter B. for Blasphemy, and to remain in
Bridewell. Lambert, a great Favorite of the Army, endeavored to save him,
partly because he had been his Soldier, and partly to curry favor with the
Sectaries of the Army; for he was now no more in the Protector's Favor, but
meditating how he might succeed him in his Power.

About two years before this there appeared in Cromwell's time a Prophetess,
much famed for her Dreams and Visions, and hearkened to by many, whereof some
were Eminent Officers, but she and some of her Accomplices being imprisoned, we
heard no more of her.


B. I have heard of another, one Lilly, that Prophesied all the time of the
Long-Parliament, what did they to him?


A. His Prophesies were of another kind; he was a Writer of Almanacks, and a
pretender to a pretended Art of Judicial Astrology, a mere Cozener to get
maintenance from a multitude of ignorant people, and no doubt had been called
in question, if his Prophesies had been any ways disadvantageous to the
Parliament.


B. I understand not how the Dreams and Prognostications of mad men (for such I
take to be all those that foretell future Contingencies) can be of any great
disadvantage to the Commonwealth.


A. Yes, yes: know there is nothing that renders Humane Councils difficult, but
the incertainty of future time, nor that so well directs men in their
deliberations, as the foresight of the sequels of their Actions. Prophecy
being many times the principal Cause of the Event foretold. If upon some
prediction the people should have been made to believe confidently. That Oliver
Cromwell and his Army should be upon a day to come utterly defeated, would not
every one have endeavored to assist, and to deserve well of that Party should
give him the defeat? Upon this account it was that Fortune Tellers and
Astrologers were so often banished out of Rome,

The last memorable thing of this Year was a Motion made by a Member of the
House, an Alderman of London, That the Protector might be petitioned and
advised by the House to leave the Title of Protector, and take upon him that of
King.


B. That was indeed a bold Motion, and which would, if prosperous, have put an
end to many men's Ambition, and to the licentiousness of the whole Army. I think
the Motion was made on purpose to ruin both the Protector himself, and his
ambitious Officers.


A. It may be so. In the year 1657, the first thing the Parliament did was the
drawing up a Petition to the Protector, to take upon him the Title of King. As
of other Parliaments, so of this, the greatest part had been kept out of the
House by force, or else themselves had forborne to sit, and became guilty of
setting up this King Oliver, but those few that sat presented their Petition to
the Protector, April the 9th, in the Banqueting House at Whitehall.

Sir Thomas Widdrington, the Speaker, used the first Arguments, and the
Protector desired some time to seek God, the Business being weighty: The next
day they sent a Committee to him to receive his Answer, which Answer being not
very clear, they pressed him again for a Resolution, to which he made answer in
a long Speech that ended in a peremptory Refusal, and so retaining still the
Title of Protector, he took upon him the Government according to certain
Articles contained in the said Petition.


B. What made him refuse the Title of King?


A. Because he durst not take it at that time, the Army being addicted to their
great Officers, and among their great Officers many (hoping to succeed him, and
the Succession having been promised to Major General Lambert, would have
mutined against him;) he was therefore forced to stay for a more propitious
Conjuncture.


B. What were those Articles?


A. The most important of them were, first, That he would exercise the Office
of chief Magistrate of England, Scotland, and Ireland, under the Title of
Protector, and govern the same according to the said Petition and advice; and
that he would in his life time name his Successor.


B. I believe the Scots, when they first Rebelled, never thought of being
Governed absolutely as they were by Oliver Cromwell.


A. Secondly, That he should call a Parliament every three years at farthest.
Thirdly, That those persons which were legally chosen Members should not be
secluded without consent of the House. In allowing this Clause, the Protector
observed not that the secluded Members of this same Parliament are thereby
readmitted. Fourthly, The Members were qualified. Fifthly, The Power of the
other House was defined. Sixthly, That no Law should be made but by Act of
Parliament. Seventhly, That a constant yearly Revenue of a Million of pounds
should be settled for the maintenance of the Army and Navy, and 300000 l. for
the support of the Government; besides other temporary supplies, as the House
of Commons should think fit. Eighthly, That all the Officers of State should be
chosen by the Parliament. Ninthly, That the Protector should encourage the
Ministry. Lastly, That he should cause a profession of Religion to be agreed on
and published. There are diverse others of less importance. Having signed the
Articles, he was presently with great Ceremonies installed anew.


B. What needed that, seeing he was still but Protector?


A. But the Articles of this Petition were not all the same with those of his
former Instrument; for now there was to be another House; and whereas before
his Council was to name his Successors, he had Power now to do it himself; so
that he was an absolute Monarch, and might leave the Succession to his Son, If
he would, and so successively, or transfer it to whom he pleased. The Ceremony
being ended, the Parliament adjourned to the 20th of January following, and
then the other House also sat with their Fellows.

The House of Commons being now full, took little notice of the other House,
wherein there were not of 60 persons above nine Lords: but fell a questioning
all that their Fellows had done during the time of their Seclusion; whence had
followed the avoidance of the Power newly placed in the Protector. Therefore
going to the House, he made a Speech to them, ending in these words, By the
living God I must and do dissolve you.

In this year the English gave the Spaniard another great Blow at Santa Cruz,
not much less than that they had given him the year before at Cadiz.

About the time of the dissolution of this Parliament the Royalists had another
Design against the Protector, which was to make an Insurrection in England, the
King being then in Flanders ready to second them from thence with an Army: But
this also was discovered by Treachery, and came to nothing, but the ruin of
those that were engaged in it, whereof many in the beginning of the next year
were by a High Court of Justice imprisoned, and some executed. This year also
was Major General Lambert put out of all employment, a Man second to none but
Oliver in the favor of the Army: but because he expected by that favor, or by
promise from the Protector, to be his Successor in the Supreme Power, it would
have been dangerous to let him have Command in the Army, the Protector having
designed his Successor his Eldest Son Richard.

In the year 1658. September the third, the Protector died at Whitehall, having
ever since his last Establishment been perplexed with fear of being killed by
some desperate attempts of the Royalists.

Being importuned in his sickness by his Privy Council to name his Successor,
he named his Son Richard; who encouraged thereunto, not by his own Ambition,
but by Fleetwood, Desborough, Thurloe, and other of his Council, was content to
take it upon him; and presently Addresses were made to him from the Armies, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland: His first business was, the chargeable and
splendid Funeral of his Father.

Thus was Richard Cromwell seated in the Imperial Throne of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, Successor to his Father, lifted up to it by the Officers of the
Army then in Town, and congratulated by all the parts of the Army throughout
the three Nations, scarce any Garrison omitting their particular flattering
Addresses to him.


B. Seeing the Army approved of him, how came he so soon cast off?


A. The Army was inconstant, he himself irresolute, and without any Millitary
Glory; and though the two principal Officers had a near relation to him, yet
neither of them, but Lambert, was the great Favorite of the Army, and by
courting Fleetwood to take upon him the Protectorship, and by tampering with
the Soldiers, he had gotten again to be a Colonel; he and the rest of the
Officers had a Council at Wallingford-House (where Fleetwood dwelt) for the
dispossessing of Richard, though they had not yet considered how the Nations
should be governed afterward. For from the beginning of the Rebellion the
method of Ambition was constantly this, first to destroy, and then to consider
what they should set up.


B. Could not the Protector, who kept his Court at Whitehall, discover what the
business of the Officers was at Wallingford-House, so near him?


A. Yes: He was by diverse of his Friends informed of it, and counseled by some
of them, who would have done it, to kill the chief of them, but he had not
courage (...)first under his Hand engage himself never to interrupt any of the
Members, but that they might freely Meet and Debate in the House. And to please
the Soldiers, they Voted to take presently into their consideration the means
of paying them their Arrears: But whilst they where considering this, the
Protector (according to the first of those Acts) forbad the meeting of Officers
at Wallingford-House. This made the Government, which by the disagreement of
the Protector and Army, was already loose, to fall in pieces. For the Officers,
from Wallingford-House, with Soldiers enough, came to Whitehall, and brought with
them a Commission ready drawn (giving power to Desborough to Dissolve the
Parliament) for the Protector to sign, which also, his heart and his party
failing him, he signed. The Parliament nevertheless continued sitting; but at
the end of the week the House Adjourned, till the Monday after, being April the
25. At their coming on Monday morning they found the Door shut up, and the
passages to the House filled with Soldiers, who plainly told them they must sit
no longer. Richard's Authority and business in Town being thus at an end,
heretir'd into the Country, where within a few days (upon promise of the
payment of his Debts, which his Fathers Funeral had made great) he signed a
Resignation of his Protectorship.


B. To whom?


A. To no body. But, after ten days cessation of the Sovereignty, some of the
Rumpers that were in Town, together with the old Speaker Mr. William Lenihall,
resolved among themselves, and with Lambert, Haslerig, and other Officers, who
were also Rumpers, in all 42, to go into the House, which they did, and were by
the Army declared to be the Parliament. There were also in Westminster Hall at
that time about their private business some few of those whom the Army had
secluded in 1648. and were called the secluded Members. These knowing
themselves to have been Elected by the same Authority, and having the same
Right to sit, attempted to get into the House, but were kept out by the
Soldiers: The first Vote of the Rump, reseated, was, That such persons as were
heretofore Members of this Parliament, and have not ^^tten since the year 1648.
shall not sit in this House till farther order of the Parliament: And thus the
Rump recovered their Authority May the seventh 1659. which they lost in April
1653.


B. Seeing there have been so many shiftings of the Supreme Authority, I pray
you, for memories sake repeat them briefly in time and order.


A. First, From 1640 to 1648. when the King was murdered, the Sovereignty was
disputed between King Charles the First, and the Presbyterian Parliament. 2ly,
From 1648 to 1653. the Power was in that part of the Parliament which voted the
Trial of the King, and declared themselves, without King or House of Lords, to
have the Supreme Authority of England and Ireland. For there were in the
Long-Parliament two Factions, the Presbyterian and Independent. The former
whereof sought only the subjection of the King, not his destruction: and this
part is it which was called the Rump 3ly, From April the 20 to July the 4, the
Supreme Power was in the Hands of a Council of State constituted by Cromwell.
4ly, From July the 4 to December the 12 of the same year it was in the Hands of
Men called unto it by Cromwell, whom he termed men of Fidelity and Integrity,
and made them a Parliament, which was called in contempt of one of the Members,
Barebone's Parliament. 5ly, From December the 12, 1653, to September the 3.
1658, it was in the hands of Oliver Cromwell, with the Title of Protector. 6ly,
From September 1658 to April the twenty fifth 1659. Richard Cromwell had it as
Successor to his Father. 7ly, From April the twenty fifth 1659. to May the
seventh of the same year it was no where. 8ly. From May the 7th 1659. the Rump,
which was turned out of Door 1653. recovered it again, and did lose it again to
the Committee of Safety, and again recover it, and again lose it to the right
Owner.


B. By whom and by that Art came the Rump to be turned out the second time?


A. One would think them safe enough, the Army in Scotland, which when it was
in London, had helped Oliver to pull down the Rump, submitted now, begged
pardon, and promised Obedience. The Soldiers in Town had their pay mended, and
the Commanders every where took the old Engagement, whereby they had
acknowledged their Authority heretofore; they also received their Commissions
in the House it self from the Speaker, who was Generalissimo, Fleetwood was
made Lieutenant General, with such and so many limitations as were thought
necessary by the Rump, that remembered how they had been served by their General
Oliver: Also Henry Cromwell Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, having resigned his
Commission by Command, returned into England.

But Lambert, to whom (as was said) Oliver had promised the succession, and as
well as the Rump knew the way to the Protectorship by Oliver's own footsteps;
was resolved to proceed in it upon the first opportunity, which presented it
self presently after.

Besides some Plots of Royalists. whom after the old fashion they again
persecuted, there was an Insurrection made against them by Presbyterians in
Cheshire, headed by Sir G. Booth, one of the secluded Members, they were in
number about 3000, and their pretense was for a Free-Parliament: There was a
great talk of another Rising or endeavor to Rise in Devonshire and Co^^w^l at
the same time: To suppress Sir George Booth, the Rump sent down more than a
sufficient Army under Lambert, which quickly defeated the Cheshire party, and
recovered Chester, Leverpool, and all the other places they had seized; diverse
of their Commanders in and after the battle were taken Prisoners, whereof Sir
George Booth himself was one.

This exploit done, Lambert, before his return, caressed his Soldiers with an
entertainment, at his own house in Yorkshire, and got their consent to a
Petition to be made to the House; that a General might be set up in the Army,
as being unfit that the Army should be judged by any power extrinsick to it
self.


B. I do not see that unfitness.


A. Nor I. But it was (as I have heard) an action of Sir Henry Vane's: But it
so much displeased the Rump, that they Voted, that the having of more General's
in the Army, than were already settled, was unnecessary, burthensom, and
dangerous to the Commonwealth


B. This was not Oliver's method; for though this Cheshire Victory had been as
glorious as that of Oliver's at Dunbar, yet it was not the Victory that made
Oliver General, but the resignation of Fairfax, and the proffer of it to
Cromwell by the Parliament.


A. But Lambert thought so well of himself, as to expect it; therefore at his
return to London, he and other Officers assembling at Wallingford-house, drew
their Petition into form, and called it a representation, wherein the chief
point was to have a General; with many other of less importance that were
added: And this they represented to the House October the 4th, by Major General
Desborough. And this so far forth awed them, as to teach them so much good
manners, as to promise to take it presently into debate, which they did; and
October the 12th, having recovered their Spirits, Voted, That the Commissions
of Lambert, Desborough, and others of the Council at Wallingford-house, should
be void. Item, That the Army should be governed by a Commission to Fleet-wood,
Monk, Haslerig, Walton, Morley, and Overton, till Feb. the 12th following; and
to make this good against the Force they expected from Lambert, they ordered
Haslerig and Morley to issue Warrants to such Officers as they could trust, to
bring their Soldiers next Morning into Westminster, which was done somewhat too
late, for Lambert had first brought his Soldiers thither, and beset the House,
and turned back the Speaker, which was then coming to it; but Haslerig's Forces
marching about St. James's Park wall, came into St. Margaret's Churchyard, and
so both Parties looked all day one upon another like Enemies, but offered not
to fight; whereby the Rump was put out of possession of the House, and the
Officers continued their meeting as before, at Wallingford house; there they
chose from among themselves, with some few of the City, a Committee, which they
called The Committee of Safety, whereof the chief were Lambert and Vane, who,
with the advice of a General Council of Officers, had Power to call Delinquents
to Trial, to suppress Rebellions, to treat with Foreign States, etc. You see
now the Rump cut off, and the Supreme Power (which is charged with Salus
Populi) transferred to a Council of Officers, and yet Lambert hopes for it at
the end. But one of their Limitations was, That they should within six Weeks
present to the Army a new Model of the Government. If they had done so, do you
think they would have preser'd Lambert, or any other, to the Supreme Authority
rather than themselves?


B. I think not. When the Rump had put into Commission (among a few others) for
the Government of the Army, that is, for the Government of the three Nations,
General Monk, already Commander in chief of the Army in Scotland, and that had
done much greater things in this War than Lambert, how durst they leave him out
of this Committee of Safety? or how could Lambert think that General Monk would
forgive it and not endeavor to fasten the Rump again.


A. They thought not of him, his Gallantry had been shown on remote Stages,
Ireland and Scotland; his Ambition had not appeared here in their Contention
for the Government, but he had complied both with Richard and the Rump. After
General Monk had signified by Letter his dislike of the proceedings of Lambert
and his Fellows, they were much surpised, and began to think him more
considerable than they had done, but it was too late.


B. Why, was his Army not too small for so great an Enterprise?


A. The General knew very well his own and their Forces, both what they were
then, and how they were to be augmented, and what generally City and Country
wished for, which was the Restitution of the King; which to bring about, there
needed no more but to come with his Army (though not very great) to London, to
the doing whereof there was no obstacle but the Army with Lambert. What could
he do in this Case? If he had declared presently for the King, or for a free
Parliament, all the Armies in England would have joined against him, and,
assuming the Title of a Parliament, would have furnished themselves with Money.
G^neral Monk, after he had thus quarrelled by his Letter with the Council of
Officers, he secured first those Officers of his own Army which were
Anabaptists, and therefore not to be trusted, and put others into their places;
then drawing his Forces together, marched to Berwick. Being there he indicted a
Convention of the Scots, of whom he desired, That they would take order for the
security of the Nation in his absence and raise some maintenance for his Army
in their march. The Convention promised for the security of the Nation, their
best endeavor, and raised him a sum of money not great, but enough for his
purpose, excusing themselves upon their present wants. On the other side, the
Committee of Safety, with the greatest and best part of their Army, sent
Lambert to oppose him; but at the same time, by diverse Messages and Mediators,
urged him to a Treaty, which he consented to, and sent 3 Officers to London to
treat with as many of theirs. These six suddenly concluded, without power from
the General, upon these Articles, That the King be excluded, a free State
settled, the Ministry and Universities encouraged, with diverse which the General
liked not, and imprisoned one of his Commissioners for exceeding his
Commission; whereupon another Treaty was agreed on, of five to five. But whilst
these Treaties were in hand, Haslerig, a Member of the Rump, seized on
Portsmouth, and the Soldiers sent by the Committee of Safety to reduce it,
instead of that entered into the Town, and joined with Haslerig. Secondly, the
City renewed their Tumults for a free Parliament. Thirdly, the Lord Fair fax, a
Member also of the Rump, and greatly favored in Yorkshire, was raising Forces
there behind Lambert; who being now between two Armies, his Enemies, would
gladly have fought the General. Fourthly, there came news that Devon-shire and
Cornwall were listing of Soldiers. Lastly, Lambert's Army wanting Money, and
sure they should not be furnished from the Council of Officers, which had
neither Authority nor Strength to levy money, grew discontented and for their
Free Quarter were odious to the Northern Countries.


B. I wonder why the Scots were so ready to furnish General Monk with money,
for they were no Friends to the Rump.


A. I know not; but I believe the Scots would have parted with a greater Sum,
rather than the English should not have gone together by the Ears among
themselves. The Council of Officers being now beset with so many Enemies,
produced speedily their Model of Government, which was to have a free
Parliament, which should meet December 15, but with such Qualifications of no
King, no House of Lords, as made the City more angry than before. To send
Soldiers into the West, to suppress those that were rising there they durst
not, for fear of the City; nor could they raise any other, for want of money;
there remained nothing but to break, and quitting Wallingford-house, to shift
for themselves. This coming to the knowledge of their Army in the North, they
deserted Lambert, and the Rumpers, December 26, re-possessed the House.


B. Seeing the Rump was now reseated, the business, pretended by General Monk
for his marching to London, was at an end.


A. The Rump, though seated, was not well settled, but (in the midst of so many
Tumults for a free Parliament) had as much need of the General's coming up now,
as before. He therefore sent them word, that because he thought them not yet
secure enough, he would come up to London with his Army; which they not only
accepted of, but entreated him so to do, and voted him for his service 1000 l.
a year.

The General marching toward London, the Country every where Petitioned him
for a free Parliament. The Rump, to make room in London for his Army, dislodged
their own. The General, for all that, had not let fall a word in all this time,
that could be taken for a Declaration of his Final Design.


B. How did the Rump revenge themselves on Lambert?


A. They never troubled him; nor do I know any cause of their so gentle dealing
with him. But certainly Lambert was the ablest of any Officer they had to do
them service, when they should have means and need to employ him. After the
General was come to London, the Rump sent to the City for their part of a Tax
of 100000 l. a month for six months, according to an Act which the Rump had
made formerly before their Disseisin by the Committee of Safety. But the City,
who were averse to the Rump, and keen upon a free Parliament, could not be
brought to give their money to their Enemies, and to purposes repugnant to
their own; whereupon the Rump sent Order to the General to break down the City
Gates, and their Portcullices, and to imprison certain obstinate Citizens: This
he performed, and it was the last service he did them.

About this time the Commission, by which General Monk with others had the
Government of the Army put into their hands by the Rump, before the Usurpation
of the Council of Officers, came to expire, which the present Rump renewed.


B. He was thereby the sixth part of the General of the whole Forces of the
Commonwealth; if I had been as the Rump, he should have been sole General. In
such cases as this, there cannot be a greater Vice than pinching: Ambition
should be liberal.


A. After the pulling down of the City Gates, the General sent a Letter to the
Rump, to let them know that this service was much against his Nature; and to
put them in mind, how well the City had served the Parliament in the whole War.


B. Yes; but for the City the Parliament could never have made the War, nor the
Rump ever have murdered the King.


A. The Rump considered not the Merit of the City, nor the good nature of the
General, they were busy, they were giving out Commissions, making of Acts for
Abjuration of the King and his Line, and for the Ol^ Engagement, and conferring
with the City to get Money. The General also desired to hear a Conference
between some of the Rump, and some of the secluded Members, concerning the
Justice of their Seclusion, and of the hurt that could follow upon their
readmission, and it was granted. After long Conference, the General finding
the Rumps pretenses unreasonable and ambitious, declared himself with the City
for a free Parliament, and came to Westminster with the secluded Members, (whom
he had appointed to meet and stay for him at Whitehall) and re-placed them in
the House among the Rumpers; so that now the same Cattle that were in the House
of Commons in 1640. (except those that were dead, and those that went from them
to the late King at Oxford) are all there again.


B. But this methinks was no good service to the King, unless they had learnt
better Principles.


A. They had learnt nothing; the major part was now again Presbyterian. It Is
true, they were so grateful to General Monk, as to make him General of all the
Forces in the three Nations: They did well also to make void the Engagement;
but it was because those Acts were made to the prejudice of their Party, but
recalled none of their own Rebellious Ordinances, nor did any thing in order to
the good of the present King; but on the contrary, they declared by a Vote,
that the late King began the War against his two Houses.


B. The two Houses, considered as two Persons, were they not two of the King's
Subjects? If a King raise an Army against his Subject, is it lawful for the
Subject to resist with force, when (as in this case) he might have had Peace
upon his submission.


A. They knew they had acted vilely and sottishly; but because they had always
a greater than ordinary wisdom and godliness* they were loath to confess it: The
Presbyterians now saw their time to make a Confession of their Faith, and
presented it to the House of Commons, to show they had not changed their
Principles; which (after six Readings in the House) was voted to be printed,
and once a year to be read publicly in every Church.


B. I say again, this re-establishing of the Long Parliament was no good
service to the King.


A. Have a little patience: they were re-established with two Conditions; one
to determine their sitting before the end of March, another to send out Writs
before their rising for new Elections.


B. That qualifies.


A. That brought in the King; for few of the Long-Parliament (the Country
having felt the smart of their former service) could get themselves chosen
again. This new Parliament began to sit in April 25. 1660. How soon these
called in the King, with what Joy and triumph he was received, how earnestly
His Majesty pressed the Parliament for the Act of Oblivion, and how few were
excepted out of it, you know as well as I.


B. But I have not yet observed in Presbyterians any Oblivion of the former
principles, we are but returned to the state we were in at the beginning of the
Sedition.


A. Not so; for before that time, though the Kings of England had the right of
the Militia in virtue of the Sovereignty, and without dispute, and without any
particular Act of Parliament directly to the purpose; yet now after this bloody
dispute, the next, which is the present Parliament, in proper and express terms
has declared the same to be the right of the King only, without either of his
Houses of Parliament; which Act is more instructive to the people, than any
Arguments drawn from the Title of Sovereignty, and consequently fitter to
disarm the ambition of all seditious Haranguers for the time to come.


B. Pray God it be so; howsoever I must confess, that this Parliament has done
all that a Parliament can do for the security of our peace; which I think also
would be enough, if our Preachers would take heed of instilling evil Principles
into their Auditory. I have seen in this Revolution a circular motion of the
Sovereign Power, through two Usurpers, from the late King, to this his Son; for
(leaving out the power of the Council of Officers, which was but temporary, and
no otherwise owned by them, but in trust) it moved from King Charles the First,
to the Long-Parliament, from thence to the Rump, from the Rump to Oliver
Cromwell, and then back again from Richard Cromwell to the Rump, thence to the
Long-Parliament, and thence to King Charles the Second, where long may it
remain.

A. Amen. And may he have, as often as there shall be need, such a General.


B. You have told me little of the General, till now in the end; but truly, I
think, the bringing of his little Army entirely out of Scotland up to London,
was the greatest Stratagem that is extant in History.


FINIS.

