THE HISTORY OF THE Rook and Turkeys.
ROyalty and Dominion, and Fealty and Obedience, are those necessary
Institutions for the support and preservation of Order and Society in the
World, that they seem designed for the Economy of the whole Creation: And
Prerogative and Subjection are not only found among Birds and Beasts, but we
may trace down a Sovereign Head even to the Hive and the Honeycomb, in the very
Jurisdiction of a poor Plantation of Bees.

As Authority and Servitude, therefore, are those Universal Bonds of Communion;
our present small Treatise, though great Theme, is a Select and Compendious
Collection of the Ethics, Politi^ks, and Administration of some late Reigns,
within the Airy Principality, the Empire of the BIRDS.

In a certain rich and fat Northern Soil, long had there reigned a Succession
of Royal EAGLES; and so reigned, with such a Constitution of Monarchy, as best
aggrandiz'd the Sovereign, and best eased the Subject: For where Love and not
Fear obeys, is the Prince truly Greatest; and where the Links of Duty and
Submission are Bracelets, not Fetters, is Subjection truly lightest and
happiest.

To make this Aquilinary Sovereignty thus Great, and withal, thus easy; the
Grand Council of the STORKS, those ever pious Patriots, that carry their aged
Sires on their Backs, were always called in as Assistants to this Supreme
Administration: And thus joining in the common Sanction and Boundaries of
Command and Homage, the whole Precepts and Rules of their own Duty and
Obedience, nothing could more contribute to the general Felicity, than this
Union and Consort of Government.

The Eagles, whilst they thus governed, truly carried the Thunder in their
Talons, being the universal Darling Majesty at h^me, and no less universal
Terror abroad. But when any irregular mistaken Ambition of extending their
Power too far, put 'em upon too large a stretch of Wing, the Popular Jealousy
was always so wakeful and ever so dreadful to such Insults and Encroachments,
that the too aspiring Soarers still failed in their Hopes. For Instance of old,
when the Royal Aquilinaries fluttered too high, and preyed too sharp, how often
have the Insurrections of the whole Noble Faulconry made Head against them, to
many a torn Plume, bloody Beak, and broken Talons between 'em? Witness the
Purchase of their Great Forest Charter, and the rest of their ample and
spacious Rangeries, obtained at no less than the price of their Blood. For,
indeed, to sum up the whole Genius and Souls of this Northern Colony, they
could never brook either Cover or Cage-door to their Great Aviary. The free and
open Air were the Birthright they challenged, and even the poorest Rustic
Poultry claimed that asserted Property to chuck in their own Roofts, and crow
at their own Barn-door.

But of all our boasted Strength and Glory, the fair Effects of this great
Royal Union, nothing could equal the once Illustrious VIRGIN Eagle's Reign,
that Miracle of Imperial Sway, so linked in all her adoring Subjects Hearts,
that all the singing Quires, the universal Music of the Fields, on every Bough
chirp'd round her. 'Twas then, and by that influencing Ascendance, her bold
Commissioned DRAKE dealt forth her flaming Vengeance, and made that glorious
Conflagration, that blazing Pile of her crushed Foes, as rendered the trembling
Universe her Vassal. Could any fluttering Neighbor, round her, grow too Proud
or Insolent! No; the Great Virgin Terror soon clipped his Wings; more especially,
if any impudent Water-Fowle pretended to make the least Hover within her own
sole Sovereignty, the great Fence-Moat round her Aviary.

But, alas! this National Happiness was a Blessing too great to be Immortal:
During her long happy too short Reign, indeed, it lasted. But, oh, what sudden
Fall from all that Grandeur! Her too Hen-hearted Talonless Successor, so
dwindled all our Native Awe and Greatness, so poorly shed his Beak, so suffered
the whole crowing Neighborhood to grow upon us, as entayl'd that miserable
descending Patrimony to his too unhappy Heir. Unhappy indeed! for what betwixt
his natural Aversion to the great Storkery, his too passionate Fondness of some
bloated-feather'd Favorites, and the too deep Resentments of his over-jealous
Homagers, (the both sides too fatal Frailty) that violent and tremendous
Irruption broke forth, as ended not till it not only dismounted, but embrued
their barbarous sacriledgious Fury in the poor bleeding Eagles Veins, and drove
his young pitied Eaglets into a wretched wandering Exile; whilst a whole Nest
of croaking Ravens percht the Royal Cedar, and an usurping barbarous Griffon,
that party-compound Monster, filled the Throne. It Is true, to give even Treason
and Infidelity their due, he carried Terror, the dread of Nations, with him;
but Right and Justice, those Fairest Plumes of Power, were wanting. Till
Heaven, at last, in pity to our Sufferings, as he had reigned in Storms,
dislodged him in a Whirlwind; summoned the roaring Elements to his Exit, and
lowr'd the gaudy Pageant; his despised, now no longer formidable Relics,
reserved only to be hung up a Scarecrow on a Perch, and his Crest advanced to
a Pinnacle.

But now the too long mourning Aviary, with flagging Wings and murmuring Notes,
all drooping saw their too mistaken Folly, and watching the blessed occasion (a
too poor Expiation) of gathering up the Spoils of Majesty, and restoring the
too long borrowed Regale Plumes, assisted by aiding Miracles, recalled the
banished Eaglets. But, oh, what ecchoing Triumphs received them! The Dove and
the Olive Branch, the Swallow and the Spring, came 'ore with them. Now Royalty
and her great Eagle was once more remounted; and so remounted, so met, so
welcomed, those thousand thousand Chanticleers to greet him, that nothing was
thought too rich to deck his shining Nest, at this more than Phoenix
Resurrection; insomuch, that that profuseness of Joys carrest him, that upon
all Occasions our opening Hearts never thought the plucking of our own richest
golden Feathers too much to pleasure him.

With this general Harmony in the great Aviary, never was a fairer opportunity
presented, for the Royal Eagle to recover the ancient Renown and long lost
Glory of his Ancestry; and by following the famous Virgin-President, have
copied, if possible, beyond the Original. And, indeed, never was more Occasion
for pushing for that Recovery, or patterning from that Example. For it was in
this Reign that the neighboring Tyrant VVLTVRE began to feed his wild
Ambition, and gorge with that Spoil and Rapine as threatened the whole Western
World. The Imperial remoter Eagle already felt his Pounces; and all the weaker
Neighborhood, round him, were daily craven'd and dastarded before him. And
though the common foreseen Danger might possibly come last to his door, yet our
Weak-ey'd Royal Eagle, either not able to face the Rising Sun before him, or
disolv'd in his supiner Ease and Luxury, looked not so far beyond him as
tomorrow; instead of opposing and reducing this too formidable Incroacher,
rather animated and assisted his Ambition: And though elected the common
Arbiter General, so far derogated from that Trust and Character, as to promote
rather than check the spreading Desolation; whilst not only scarce a young
Noble Faulcon among us, but either flusht his Talons, and all our young
Cockeril sharpened their Spurs in the great Vultures Cause; or else by a more
shameful too spreading Degeneracy, our daily debasing Breed from the once Glory
of the Cockpit, now, R -- s ad Exemplum, were dwindled only to Heroes at a
Henroost.

But above all, for the full Consummation of our Calamities (Hinc illae
Lachrymae) our Royal Eagle himself moulted all his own Royalty to imp the
Vultures Wings; and all by an unaccountable Fondness and Servility to that very
unhospitable Nest that once most shamefully refused his own Exiled Foot and
wearied Wing a Resting Place.

But if all these Infelicities attended this Darling Administration, what
melancholy face of Confusion must the following Reign produce? Here, (meminisse
horret) what too just Fears surrounded us. Now all the old Church-Daws were all
upon the Flutter and the Wing for the re-building their ancient Nests again.
The Owl-light Sculkers and Night-bats flew in open day; nay, Legates and
Embassies were posted over to the Tripple-comb'd Peter's Cock, to invite him to
his old Roost again among us; and already he began so to crow upon us, and his
Maudlin-Harpyes Claws had fixed so fast; and a hundred other of his
Porcupine-quill'd Sharpers were so brooding, as gave us a fair Sample of what
we must expect. And all these extravagant Irregularities acted with that hardy
Crest and strutting Tail, that with a perfect Estridge Stomach we digested even
Vows, Oaths and Honor, as easy as Nails and Pebbles. And what between a
Henpeckt Ascendance over him, and his own natural Infatuation, to what poor
Shifts did our descending Eagle stoop? Nay, it was shrewdly to be suspected,
that even a false Egg was hatched for an Inheriting Eaglet.

But not to dwell too long on so ungrateful a Theme. 'Twas enough, that the
inevitable approaching Danger so frighted the whole Aviary, that for their own
Preservation they implored the Succor of a new generous CHAMPION Eagle to take
Wing, and speed over for our Protection. How the whole Choristers of the Grove
saluted their welcome Deliverer, is so fresh in Memory, as not to want a
Repetition. Let it suffice, that what betwixt a Crest-fall and a Crop-sick
shame and confusion, our great Despairer poorly wheeled off for Shelter under
his too long darling Vultures Wing, and left the great abandoned Cedar, the
Meed and Reward from the unanimous grateful Storkery, to our young bold Eagle
and his fair Royal Mate. Now all our Frights soon vanished, whilst the whole
Grove were all secure of singing their own native Ayrs, past all the threatening
Danger of being either Peter-cock'd-claw'd or Vulture-co^pt Cage-birds, or
having false Whistlers over us, or false Notes taught us. Liberty and Safety in
their new Halcyon Flight, those now unravisht Philomels, could sing without the
Thorn at their Breast. In short, the whole old Nest was all dismantled, and the
great Cockatrice-Egg all addled.

And now the whole Face of Empire changed. The too lately and too long idoll'd
Vulture, now grown the universal Odium; with a Defiance worthy the great
Aviary, from Cooing and Billing, and all our former Galless Turtle-play,
reviving Glory begun to sharpen up her old rusty Gafflets, and whet her blunted
Beak. Our now truly Royal and only Long-wing'd Eagle, led forth to foreign
Fields of Honor: And though flying at a too headstrong Game, (our own only
Fault, the Flight begun no sooner, and the Quarry so overgrown) yet despising
Dangers, Odds and Inequality, made those impetuous Flights at the bold Vulture,
that never was Clash more fierce or Grapples more terrible. Nay, there was once
a Day, when had our shrinking Rear but seconded our bolder leading Front, their
whole Glory had been struck down before us, and the whole Field of Prey been
all our own.

And 'twas now our Royal Eagle, by the great Virgin Example, set forth our
second great Ocean DRAKE, his bold deputed Thunderer, who in that memorable
Scene of deathless Glory, drove their whole flying Craven-Flock like so many
dared Larks before him, shamefully sculking home, with all the Wing that Fear
could make, for Covert for their Coward Heads; where in the face of the whole
trembling Vultury, he put fire to the Coop, and set 'em a blazing.

Such was the Glory of that Illustrious Day, and such the Worth and Honor that
achieved it. Yet even such Worth, though solemnly congratuled by the
acknowledging Storkery, however not able to tune his Ayrs with the Great
Bull-Fi -- h, was laid by: And his divested Power lodged in a Tripple
Succession of new chosen Favorites. These promising new Darlings, resolved to
out-fly their ^redecessor, were for carrying their Thunder even to the
Vultury's own Door. But oh the sad Fatality of defeated Hopes! Alas! fallen
short of all those towering Wonders, they came too late; for the Penn was empty,
and the Birds were flown. But Miscarriage never wants Misfortune for a Plea;
some pretended to prattle, that want of Provant might possibly retard their
otherwise nimbler speed; some stickt not to say, that possibly some Canary
Birds might perhaps have too much Rape in their Troughs, and yet want a little
Hempseed, or so: but that Shadow vanished, and that Calumny was cleared.
However, whatever impeding Obstacle hindered, as whether not unhoo^ed in good
time, or not whistled off soon off, or what else, etc. so it was, that they
only took a long Rovers to no purpose, only shook their wanton Bells a little,
and so home again: For as we said before, the Birds were flown.

Flown! did I say! and good reason too. For instead of dry Buffets and hard
Beaks at home, they had a fatter Prey and an easier Game a little farther
abroad. For about this time from our Aviary was a great Turkey Drove designed
to travel that way; head^d by a Leading ROOK and a small attending Rookery, (a
too slender Guard against such potent Talons) that at that very Pass, with
their unweildy Bulks and wealthy Feathers must run full into their Months; For
whose waited Reception these keen Expectants lay hovering. I confess, this
traveling Rookery and his Rich Charge, had several Months before been prepared
for their Movement; but some Stop or other still kept them in their Coops, and
this was the only Hour of Departure.

No sooner were they set out and past Recall, but the whole public Outcry was
wakened, and alarmed at their Danger. The affrighting dread of a Decoy raised a
hundred untuneable Murmurs, even to blame both the Gosselin-poll-Coop masters
and Aviary-keepers; and the modestest Reproach was, to call it a Buzardism.
Their Fears, alas, were but too just. For the poor unwary Rook and his long
heavy-pinion'd Train fell into the Snare. It Is true, in this dismal Surprise,
and seemingly total Prospect of Ruin, just ready for the Cormorant Gorge before
us, we had a little more than Ordinary (I might say) almost miraculous
Deliverance. For unless a few of our Neighbors Fellow-travelling Flock, that,
by moving in the Van, were a little too near their Reach and Gripe, and so fell
into their Talons, 'twas our more especial Happiness so to amuse by a false
Appearance of our Strength well ranged and well managed (our Rookeries prudent
Aftergame) that under the umbrage of that Amusement, and the Terror it raised,
we secured our Retreat. In short, we made all that nimble Wing as to slip home;
only 3 or 4 Stragglers that run into a Friends Coop too weak for shelter, were
under those hard Apprehensions, as to be forced to play the Dop-chicks, and
duck under Water for their Safety: And one or two of them had the Misfortune to
have some of their Upper-tire Feathers singed; and a good shift they got off so.

But had the Vulture made a Home-swoop, and seized the whole Quarry, (as God
knows he was little less than Cock-sure of us) good Heaven, what a swinging
High-Tory Feast would he have furnished, with so many fat well plumed Pouts, for
the Great Bird of his own Feather, his own dear Brother of Prey at the
Turkey-Port! Nay, the JAC-Daws round us fell a chattring at no small rate, and
so tickled their Gizzards and Merry-thoughts, and hooted our Success, as is
past Imagination. Nay, a more fatal Consequence attended us (for those Cacklers
at home we did not so much value:) How did the Parraquets abroad, and all the
tatling Gallick Magpyes buz this defeat to Mahomet's Pidgeon, to the scandal of
the Royal, and the prejudice of the Imperial Eagle; by boasting the only Vanity
they wanted, viz. The Length and Strength of Their Pounces and Talons, and the
Shortness and Weakness of Ours.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1694.


