THE HISTORY OF THE AMORS OF THE Marshal de Boufflers: Or, a true Account of
the LOVE-INTRIEGUES AND Gallant Adventures, WHICH Have been privately carried
on by Him, ever since He first obtained a Command in the French King's Armies,
till His Marriage with Mademoiselle de Grammont.

The whole Relation being faithfully Translated into English, out of the French
Original lately Published at Paris.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Mory, at the Three Bibles in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1697.

TO THE MARCHIONESS OF Maintenon.
MADAM,
IT IS to be hoped that your Honor will not take it ill, that a Soldier of
Fortune here presumes to appear before you; one who, with the Hero of the
ensuing History, has been Partaker of the Toils and Fatigues, which are
inseparable from the Art of War; and who consequently, has had an opportunity
to be an Eyewitness as well of the Amorous Exploits, as Military Atchievments,
performed by him in several Countries; where either the King's Service, or the
Glory of Arms, have called for his Presence. I have considered with my self,
MADAM, for a long time, about the choice of an Eminent Person, to whom I might
properly Dedicate this Historical Commentary, without being able to come to a
final Resolution, as to that Particular: And indeed, there are different
Motives, which induce Authors to act on the like Occasions: For some do it,
with a design to procure for themselves some powerful Patrons at Court; others,
by way of acknowledgment for Favors already received; others, only to get the
Name of an illustrious Personage prefixed before their Works; and lastly,
others, purely out of a Principle of Candor and Generosity, without any manner
of Affectation.

MADAM, I have reason to boas^t, even without Vanity or Ostentation, that I am
of the number of these last; since it is not to insinuate my self into your
Favor, nor to solicit you to make use of your Interest with the King in my
behalf, that I have at last determined to make you a Present of these
Gallantries of the Marshal de Boufflers. I do not (Thanks be to Heaven) stand
in need of any of these, or the like Advantages; but rather, on the contrary,
am in a condition to slight the Court-Favours, and to look upon the capricious
Events of Fortune with Contempt. The true Motive, that has excited me to
Dedicate this History to your Honor, is the dis-interessed Desire I have, to
give you some sort of Satisfaction, and to afford you in some measure, an
agreeable Diversion for a few moments, in your Retirement at St. Cyr; by the
Reading of a considerable number of very remarkable Adventures relating to a
Hero, for whom you have a most cordial Affection, and whose Fortune you have
taken care to advance, by causing him to be promoted to the principal
Preferments in the Army, and very near, to the highest pitch of military Glory.
Here your Honor may observe your Darling-Favourite, ever since he was able to
trail a Pike in the King's Service, till his advancement to the Dignity of
Marshal of France, and even till his Marriage with Mademoiselle de Grammont;
sometimes exposed to the greatest Misfortunes that can be imagined; and
sometimes appearing Triumphant, as it were the most fortunate of all Mortals;
according to the variety of Accidents caused by the capricious Humors of the
God of Love. Indeed the strangeness of the surprising Events, of which we are
informed by this not able History, might at first sight, give occasion to
suspect it to be a kind of Romance made at pleasure, much rather than a
Narrative of Matters of Fact; were it not that your Honor has diverse faithful
Witnesses to assert the Truth of the various Occurrences related in it. For you
have received an Account of a considerable part of these Adventures, from
Monsieur Bouffler's own Mouth, although they are such as have been hither to
unknown to the World, and the Discovery of which, as I presume, cannot but be
very acceptable: Neither will it be any difficult Task to justify some other
particular Circumstances, of which you may possibly doubt; since the Hero
himself of our present History, will make no scruple to be my Voucher as to the
reality of those Events.

However it may be taken, it is evident, that Truth may be discovered by certain
Lineaments, which cannot be hid from the sight of the more judicious part of
Mankind; not with standing the Endeavors that some Authors have used of late,
to conceal from the public View, such precious Fragments, which give us an
Idea of the good and ill Fate that attends mortal Men in this sublunary World.
It Is well known, MADAM, that you are the most sagacious, and most accomplished
Lady in the Court of France, and therefore you may easily discern that this
History does not contain any thing that is fabulous or fictitious:
Nevertheless, your Honor's Approbation will be of very great moment to
recommend it to the World, and will not a little contribute to cause it to be
sought for, by all ingenious Personages; especially by those Honorable Ladies,
who have a great Esteem for Monsieur de Boufflers, and will not be displeased
at the care I have taken to communicate to 'em a considerable number of private
Love-Intriegues, managed by a Hero, who is at present the Adonis of France, and
the greatest Warrior that that Nation can boast of, since the Death of the
famous Duke of Luxemburg. I shall no longer trespass upon your Honor's
Patience; only while I beg leave to style my self, with all possible Respect
and Submission,

MADAM, Your most humble and most obedient Servant, D. P. E.

THE HISTORY Of the AMORS Of the Marshal de Boufflers.
SOME Persons who esteem LOVE as the Sweetest and most tender of all other
Passions, have imagined it to be more especially appropriated to the Female
Sex: But whoever will take the pains to look back into the ancient Records, may
be soon convinced that it has extended its Conquests, not only over the Fair
Sex, but also over the greatest Men in all Ages; and that even the most Famous
Warriors amidst their dangerous Enterprises, have too often felt its effects,
and been forced to submit to its Irresistible Power. Let us but look backwards
upon those great Heroes, Alexander, Caesar and Pompey; could the greatness of
their Designs ever make 'em abandon their amourous Intrigues? They scarce ever
drew their Swords, but with an intent to please their Mistresses, and to make
them to be sharers in their most glorious Victories. Has not Love been too
often the occasion of Bloody Wars, and of the Destruction of whole Countries?
Has it not undermined and over-thrown the Strongest Towers? Why then should it
be denied that it Sympathises in a most extraordinary manner with Mars the God
of War. I am apt to believe it to be an unquestionable Truth, that all Mankind
feel the effects of Cupid's Arrows; who does not spare a Throne, making even
Scepters and Crowns submit to his Empire. When the Glory of Martial Exploits
and a well proportioned Body meet in one Person, they are such Powerful, or
rather irresistible Charms to a tender Heart, that nothing is able to hold out
against 'em. The Histories of all Ages are full of such instances to convince
us, that even the most Illustrious Heroes in former Ages, as well as ours, have
been carried beyond their Bounds by this Passion, even to that degree, that by
the Enchantment of their Mistreses charms, they often become forgetful of their
Duty, having Sacrifis'd to their so much adored Deities all their Glory and
Renown, which with a Thousand hazards and the loss of their Blood, they had
before accquir'd, under Mars's Standard. There are never theless not wanting
Examples of others, who having made it their chief aim to fight, and to
Sacrifice their Lives for their Prince, have been able at least for some time
to despise and withstand the Force of Love.

The Marshal de Boufflers, whose amourous Adventures I am about to relate, is
of this number: For though he had always a strong Inclination to Pleasure, and
especially to such Love-intrigues as are usual among Gentlemen, he has
notwithstanding all this, always kept such a balance between Love and Glory,
that the first of these two Passions, though otherwise the most powerful, has
never been able to fully his Martial Glory; our General having ever showed
himself as much a Soldier as a Gallant, as will more plainly appear from the
following Relation.

Love leads Mankind, even from their Youth through so many capricious Adventures,
that it is always impossible to avoid its enchanting snares: Let us but
consider that we are all made of the same Clay, of which our fore-Father, Adam
was created, who was not strong enough to resist the enticements of a Woman
made either for his Destruction, or pathaps for his comfort, why then should we
expect to excel him in this particular? But to return to our History, Monsieur
de Boufflers had in his younger Years altogether addicted himself to Hunting,
and Amourous divertisements, the latter being never theless for the most part
predominant; when after some time thus spent in amourous Delights, one of his
Friends advised him to enter into the King's Service. He having for some time
entertained this noble Design, his Mind was wholly empoly'd in finding out
means how to make a Figure in the Court of France, which could not be done
without very great expense: The Marshal, who was born a Gentleman in the
Province of Picardie, (where Gold is a pretty scarce Commodity) was put to a
great non plus as to this Affair; when one Day walking all alone in his Garden,
and musing upon his present Circumstances, the same Friend very seasonably
surprised him; and by offering him his Purse and all his Credit, freed him from
his present trouble; adding withal, that by this means he might purchase the
Royal Regiment of Dragoons, which was then to be sold by the King's Order. The
Marshal received the Courtesy of his Kinsman with a great deal of Joy and
thankfulness, and having by his assistance completed his Design, he saw
himself in a little while after at the Head of a Regiment, which carries along
with it Terror and Admiration, wherever it comes. The poor Protestants of
France have been sufficiently sensible of it to their cost: But let us leave
this doleful Subject, and return to Monsieur Boufflers, whom for the Reader's
Diversion I will draw to the Life, before I proceed: To speak without vanity
there is scarce any one that is better able to perform it than my self, having
had the Honor to know him, and to have been his Companion even from his
Infancy, and having followed him in all his Martial Exploits, as well as
Love-Intrigues. If any fault is to be found in the Picture, which I am about to
draw, those that epsy it, I hope, will rather attribute it to the defect of my
Pencil and Colors, than to any other imperfection. But let us see him as
naturally drawn as can be, without any Disguise. Our General, who was formerly
a Marquess of the Marquisate of Boufflers, is a Person of a mean Stature, but
very well set, strong and vigourous in all his Actions, even to excess at
certain times. His Eyes are black, sprightly and full of Fire, his looks fierce
and somewhat stern among Men; but very sweet and charming, when he ly's
prostrate at the Feet of a beautiful Woman; where I have seen him making his
Courtship a thousand times, with all the Sweetness imaginable. He has
something, I know not what extraordinary in his Countenance and Behavior,
which begets him Respect and Veneration. His Face is smooth, of an oval Figure,
his Forehead high, and his whole Physiognomy the best composed that ever I
saw; these are the advantages which bounteous Nature has bestowed upon him, let
us observe those for which he is beholding to his Sword, and whereby he has
raised himself to the greatest Preferments in France. During his abode in
Paris, he knew so well by what means to insinuate himself into the favor of
the chief Generals, who at that time commanded the Kings Armies, that they
received him among the number of their most intimate Friends; On the other
hand, he made his Court with so much Address to those Ladies who were then most
beloved by that Monarch, that by their favor he easily obtained whatever he
wished for at Court; among the rest he paid the most respect and most assiduous
Visits, to the two Marchionesses of Montespan and Maintenon, but the later, who
at that time began to have the most Sovereign Ascendant over the King, did
recommend him so effectually, and in terms so obliging to that Prince, that
thereby he made his Fortune with the King. The Prince of Conde, first Prince of
the Blood, and the Marshal Schomberg, were not behind hand in advancing his
Fortune, those two great Warriors having procured him the Advantage of being
employed in the next Campaigne, which was in the Year 1678, where he signalis'd
himself by his Valor at the Siege of Puicerda, which is one of the best Cities
in Catalonia, situated in a fair Plain, on the River Segre. The Marshal and
Duke de Navaille who commanded in chief before the Place, was so taken with his
Bravery, that he loved him no otherwise than a Brother, and commended his great
Actions to all his Friends; for he never feared any Fatigue, being frequently
accustomed during the Campaign to sleep in his Boots and Accoutrements, showing
by his example to the Dragoons, whose General he was, that by hardship and
Toils, as by so many steps they must ascend to the Pinnacle of Glory: He was
always the last that dismounted, and the first that mounted his Horse. If his
Troops rested in any place, he himself was wont to go the rounds, and visit the
advanced Guards; if any Attack were to be made, you would certainly find him at the
Head of his Troops, with an undaunted Courage, animating them by his Example.
These are those extraordinary Endowments befitting so great a Captain, that
have raised him to that Advantageous Post, in which we now see him; The King
his Master having since the Siege of Namur, where he defended that City, like a
great Warrior, made him a Duke and Peer of France, not without hopes that his
Majesty will in time be pleased to make him Constable. Now let us take a view
of his Amorous Exploits, these being the chief Subject of our present Relation.
It Is not to be thought strange that so famous a Soldier as the Marshal de
Boufflers, has often languish'd in the Arms of some Beauty or another, For he
has been as Victorious in his Conquests of Love as in his Martial feats, and
one may affirm, that he has been crowned with Roses and Laurels as frequently
in the Field of Venus, as in that of Mars. Part of the French Frontiers have
been the Theater, where both his Amourous and Military Expeditions have been
represented: The City of Puicerda, of which I have spoken before, will furnish
us with a Subject of this Nature.

The Prince de Conti and the Duke de Navaille having made themselves Masters of
this Placeby Capitulation, the Troops were for some time sent into Quarters of
refreshment. At this time it was, that Love which seldom lets slip any
Opportunity, did pierce the Heart of the Marshal de Boufflers: The God of Love,
who displays his Standard in the Field of Peace and Tranquillity, having found
it not impenetrable. In short, the Marshal was desperately Wounded by the
bright Eyes of a Spanish Widow, whom he accidentally met in a Boat passing the
River Segre. The name of this fair Lady was Donna Olympia, who besides that she
was very amiable in her Person, by her courteous Deportment to our General, and
her charming and engaging Air conquered his Heart: As she spoke very good
French, so he offered her his Service in leading her out of the Boat with an
intention to have accompanied her to her own House; but she notwithstanding her
Heart began to feel some emotions for him, did refuse his offer, telling him
that the Custom of her Country did not allow of such a Civility; that it would
be thought very strange if such a Gentleman as he should Conduct a Lady home to
her own Appartment; that such a thing would be sufficient to ruin her
Reputation for ever. A certain grave old Matron, whose name was Tressa Alleva,
(such a one as they call in Spain the Guardians of Young Women,) taking notice
of what passed between 'em, began to urge her to go home, telling her with a
very sour Countenance, with her great Spectacles upon her Nose, that her
Discourse was too long with a Stranger, Alas! my dearest cried Olympia, (who
already began to feel some effects of Love toward the Marshal) my Heart does
even now too much foretell me my Destiny of Loving one day this Stranger.
Madam, replied the old Woman Smiling, you are soon intangl'd in the Snares of
Love, without making a due Reflection upon what you are going about to do: Your
Love toward a Frenchman is too foreward; if your Relations should be informed
of this matter you' -- The Marshal, who understood the threats of Tressa
Alleva, thought it time to quit his Mistress, and having squeezed her fair
hand, he whispered her in the Ear, where he might see her again, if it were
possible for him to live without her till after to morrow? Just by that Seat,
which you see built at the Foot of that Rock, said she, with a very passionate
Air, I hope to have the good Fortune to talk with you to morrow about ten a
Clock at night, if my Passion do not deprive me of this Life before that time.
This was enough for the Marshal, who did now fancy himself the happiest Man in
the whole World; so that the rest of that day and the next following, seemed to
him a Year, or (according to the Hyperbolical expressions of Lovers) an Age,
which he spent in making reflections upon his approaching Felicity and
Pleasures.

Which way, would he say to himself, shall I begin to Court my Mistress? What
Favors shall I ask first? It must not said he, Smiling, be tosee her Feet, for
the Spanish Lady's would dye as soon as let any one see or touch them, they
being commonly so very small, that they appear like a Puppet's, in comparison
of those of Men. Their own Husbands must not pretend to such a favor. Our
General, who does not admire delays in Love, was extremely disturbed at first
with his growing Passion; but whilst he was ruminating upon the strangeness of
this Adventure, and by his amourous conceits, had set himself all over in a
Flame. The appointed hour of the Rendez-vous drew near; he went to the place
nominated by his Mistress, and having passed several times by the House, he
perceived no Body, which almost drove him to despair, having lost all hopes of
ever seeing again the Object which Tormented him with so much Violence. The
Marshal waited almost an Hour, expecting what would be the issue of this
Adventure; when he by the help of the Moonlight perceived a Woman at a Window,
playing with her Fingers after a strange manner: This is a certain way used in
Spain, for Lover thus to speak to one another; in a mute Language, the Marshal
who was unacquainted with this odd way of Courtship, did not understand the
meaning of it; but being come nearer to the Window, which was pretty low, and
having perceived that it was his new Mistress who called to him, he at that
Moment made use of all the most tender Expressions, which are usual with Men at
the beginning of a most violent Passion. Donna Olympia was thereby touched to
the very Heart; and told him in a languishing Tone: Sir, pray don't speak so
loud, we dare not make use in this Country of our Liberty as we could wish; and
turning all what the General had said into Raillery; is it possible, said she,
that so lovely a Gentleman as you should have left France, the very dwelling
place of Love, without some very strong praeengagement? Alas! without
Flattering my self, I can scarce be persuaded that you are come hither, without
having lost some part of your Liberty. My case would be desperate, Madam,
replied the Marshal gallantly, to have lost it before I had the opportunity to
lay it at your Feet: The most miserable Estate unto which you have reduced me,
is a convincing Proof of it; you having deprived me of my own self. I was not
able to resist such dangerous blows as Yours; you have Wounded me in the most
sensible Part; I did Love or rather adore you from the very first Moment I saw
you. There is none but you, that can make me Fortunate or unfortunate;
Pronounce therefore with your own charming Lips my Sentence of Life or Death.

Donna Olympia looked upon her Lover with Eyes which sufficiently declared her
Passion, and finding that Love began to overcome her Reason, she replied not
without some confusion: O Heavens! How weak do I find my self at this Instant?
What crime am I going to commit against my Duty? Sir, Sir pray have pity upon
me. The Marshal was vexed to the very Soul, that he could not make use of so
Favorable an Opportunity as presented it self; he could have wished that the
Wall which parted his Beloved and him, had been of Paper or Cloth, that he
might have made his way through it: He struck with his Sword several times
against the Window, the Enemy of his happiness, but alas! in vain, for he
found her so barricado'd up with Iron Grates, that he could scarce put a Finger
through it. His beloved Angel, who was not insensible of his disquiet, and would
very willingly have had a more secret interview with him, cried out to him,
take Courage, Sir, Fortune has always a kind chance for Lovers. The Marshal was
so Transported with this charming Expression, that he could not forebear
telling her: Divine Creature, I dye a thousand times a day by a most violent
Death, being uncertain of my destiny; if you be so Inhumane and Cruel as to
deny me your pity, and prohibit me to enjoy the Pleasure of seeing you in
Private. Rather suffer, that after having declared my Passion and what Pains
you have made me undergo, I may dye for grief at your Feet: But continued he, I
am resolved to do it without delay, and drawing his Sword, and putting the
Point toward his Breast, I will said he, dye in your Sight: He swore these
Words in so Melancholy a Tone, that Donna Olympia fearing he was in earnest,
cried out all in Tears, hold, hold, for Heaven's sake, don't let your Passion
drive you into despair, don't make your self the most Criminal of all Mankind;
why will you make an attempt against your own self, for want of a little
Patience? Preserve your self for my sake, and I promise that I will find out a
more favorable Opportunity. The Marshal seemed extremely pleased with the
assurances he had received from his Mistress, and glad that his feigned attempt
had made her believe that his intent of killing himself in her presence was
real; though God knows, it was the least of his Thoughts, being not so much a
Fool as to dye for her sake. Nevertheless looking upon her with a very
Passionate Eye, Madam, said he, I am infinitely obliged to your Goodness, for
saving my Life, which was ready to be Sacrificed before you, if you had not
stopped my Hand, and thereby prevented the fatal Stroke, I should have certainly
executed it without delay; but now since you flatter me with hopes of seeing
you again in private; I will leave my most adorable Olympia, to convince you of
the greatness of that Passion, which I have for you, and to show you that an
Age will not be long enough to satisfy my Desires. The fair Spaniard perceiving
some of her Women to come that way, retired into another Chamber; and the Mar.
who surmis'd that some body had surprised her whilst she was talking with him,
retired somewhat backward from the Window, with a resolution nevertheless to
stay all Night to watch an opportunity of entertaining his Mistress a second
time. Having thus walked up and down near the Ditch of an adjacent Castle, he
saw at the very break of day, a Black-Moor coming from under the Ground out of
a Vault, and making up toward him, who presented to him the following Letter:
SIR,
I should think my self over happy if I could find Words suitable to that
Passion which I have for you. But alas! I find my self quite at a loss in this
point of extremity, and if I may judge of your Love by my own; both are beyond
Expression. If Absence were able to cure it, I would make use of that Remedy,
but I am too well convinced to the contrary. Wherefore let nothing disturb your
quiet, but rest satisfied, that you shall see me very shortly, that is to say
to Morrow at the same Hour. The same Page who has delivered this Letter to you,
is to conduct you into my Chamber, by the same way that he came out to you: In
the mean time be not Impatient; and remember that you are answerable to me for
a Heart, which you have Robbed me of in spite of all my resistance; This shall
be the reward of your Sufferings, if you continue to Love me.




The Marshal who had not without some fear taken the Letter from the
Black-moor, did imagine that perhaps it might be the Devil who was come from
the infernal Regions, on purpose do him some mischief, and being at some
uncertainty what to resolve upon; he went back to his Lodgings, and inquired of
his Land-Lady, as well as he could in the Spanish Tongue (which she understood
very well) whether she knew that Lady who lived at the Foot of that Rocky
Castle, which he named to her. Yes, very well, said she, she is the Relict of a
certain honest Gentleman, who is lately dead, his Name was that of the Marquess
of Toledo; but good God! continued she, how unhappy is that pretty Creature
since the Death of her Husband, who loved her even to a degree of Folly? She is
at present under the Government of a Brother, who Tyrannises over her like his
Slave, not allowing her the Liberty of speaking one word to any Man. His name
is Don Bilboano; he is Jealous even to a degree of Madness, and it is the common
discourse of the Town, that he is in Love with his Sister. At that rate,
replied the Marshal carelessly, as if he had not known her; a Man must expose
himself to no small danger, if he should go about to Court her for a Wife. O
Lord! cried the good Woman, being much surprised, this cruel Man threatens to
Sheath his Sword in the Breast of any Gentleman that shall have the boldness,
so much as to think of his Sister; he intending to be her only absolute Master.
Here the Marshal interrupting her said, but for God's sake do you believe that
Donna Olympia entertains her Brother's Passion? I don't believe she does,
replied the Woman; for how can so charming a Creature as she Love the most ill
shaped of all Men? for besides that, he is as ugly as the Devil; he has a hunch
Back, enough to frighten Children withal, and his Legs are as crooked as a
Hoop; though as to his internal Qualities, he is not inferior to any Man, having
accomplished himself in all manner of Arts and Sciences. Monsieur Boufflers
being extremely well pleased with the Woman's Answer, which he found very
agreeable; and pursuing the former Discourse, asked her what was the reason
that this Marchioness had changed her Name from Donna Toleda to Donna Olympia.
Oh! replied she, that is the contrivance of that ill favored piece her
Brother, who will have it so. This evil Spirit cannot endure the name of his
Brother in Law, his Head being filled with a fancy, that his Sister is a Maid
still, and that he may enjoy her as such. This is an extravagant piece of
Folly, replied the Marshal, such a Fellow as this, if he lived in France, would
be sent to the House of Correction. It is not the Spanish fashion, answered the
Woman, to imprison Gentlemen for being in Love with their Sisters; there are so
many examples of this nature, that nothing is more common: Every one loves here
what he likes best, without making any further Reflection upon the matter.

The Marshal de Boufflers having ended this Discourse with his Land-Lady,
retired to his Chamber, ruminating with himself concerning what he had
understood from her. His Thoughts were much distracted the whole Night, and the
Day following: He began to consider with himself to what danger he was about to
expose himself, if Donna Olympia's Brother should find him with her; if this
ugly Devil, this Aesop should, said he discover our Intrigue, we are both
undone without Remedy; Plague on him! that this Monster should have so good a
Headpiece; but let it be as it will, the hopes of possessing so charming a
Creature is a sufficient Recompense for a little danger. Having taken this
Resolution, he went toward the Rendez-vous, dressed like an Adonis, and was no
sooner come near the Gate of the Vault, when he saw the same Black-Moor with a
Pike in his Hand, ready to attend him.

The first thing he did, was to demand the Marshal's Sword, and what other Arms
he had about him, which so surprised the Marshal, that he made some difficulty
of granting it. But the Black-Moor, who spoke good French, informed him that it
was the Custom of the Country, for any Gentleman to leave his Sword at the
Door, before he entered a Lady's Appartment. I know very well, replied the
General, that this is practiced in your common Houses, but the Case is
otherwise here, where I believe my self to be in a Person of Qualities
Lodgings. No matter for that answered the Moor with a Smile, give us your
Sword, Sir, give us your Sword; Love having by this time overcome his Reason;
he delivered up his Sword to the Moor, with some Lovis's d'or, at which the
Black-Moor being overjoyed, assured our General of his Fidelity, telling him
that he needed fear nothing, since he was left to his care; for said he, Don
Bilboaono the Brother of this Lady, is such a Devil of a Man, that there is not
one in the whole House, that has not wished him to the Devil these ten Years:
Well it is enough my Friend, replied Monsieur de Boufflers, come lead me to your
Mistresses Chamber. Donna Olympia having overheard these last words, opened
the Door of her Closet, and the Marshal being entered, found her almost half
undressed, leaning upon a Couch embroidered with very fine Flowers. Her
Complexion being very fair, and the Room where she was, beautified with Black
Marble, and illuminated with a great many Wax-tapers; she appeared to him more
beautiful than an Angel.

He did not approach without bearing the marks of a profound respect in his
Countenance, and having set one of his Knees before her on the Ground. It Is
none but you said he, Divine Creature, that has the Power of Captivating my
Reason. Your beauty has so far astonished me, that I am Transported even beyond
my self. Then a charming blush covered her Face and Breasts, which made our
Spanish Lady appear without comparison, the fairest in the World. After she
rise from her Couch, she went to the Looking Glass, where she pretended to set
in order some of the puffs of her Hair; which were interwoven with the finest
Diamonds that ever were seen: The Marshal then espying one of her little Hands
whiter than the very Snow, he kissed it for the space of half an Hour without
intermisssion. This his passionate Behavior made Donna Olympia blush; and
casting a very amourous look at him; Pray Sir said she, either moderate your
Passion, or I am undone; Good God assist me! Where shall I find strength enough
to ressist you? Ah! Madam, replied he, how is it possible for me, not to be
sensible of your powerful Charms? It is you that inspire me alone at this
Moment, and I can swear and protest to you, that in all my Lifetime I never
was so much enamored as now, having never met with any Object, which appeared
to me so adorable as your self, not only in point of Beauty, but also with
respect to all other Perfections, which are able to charm a Mortal Man. Sir,
answered the Lady with a languishing Air, is it possible that a Frenchman can
be sincere? It is the general Opinion among us here, that their Amors are
never real, but mere Compliments and satteries. By Heaven Sir, such a sort of
Love would not very well agree with my Constitution: And shall never receive
any Encouragement from me.

Here the Marshal interrupted her with a Kiss, I know very well said he,
Madam, that I ought to offer you something more Substantial than bare Words;
but it is not always advisable to be too forward; don't you know that when a
Fort is to be Attackt, we first take a view of its Avenues and Outworks. Donna
Olympia, who would fain have persuaded the Marshal that she did not understand
his meaning, began to play with her little sucking Pig, which was adorned with
red Ribands. This Creature had also Silver-Bells in his Ears and about his
Neck; nay, even at the Tail, which made a strange kind of Harmony: This is the
Fashion among the Spanish Lady's, who choose rather to carry a little sucking
Pig under their Arm, than the finest Lap-dog; It Is their Custom to make it
squeek, when their Gallants ask 'em a Favor. Our Marshal, who perceived her
intent, took it from her, and put it into a little Hutch, made for that
purpose. Then renewing his Courtship with a Thousand amourous Sighs: He at last
forced these words from her fair Lips, Oh! I Love you with a most violent
Passion. And what Proof, replied the Marshal (embracing her) will you give me
of your Passion? You will not grant me the least Favor; Ay, don't you know
that Love is a Child, which pines after the utmost Favor? And what Sir,
replied she, must a Woman keep nothing to her self, when she is to prove that
she Loves? Are not Oaths strong and convincing enough to Lovers? Then laying
her Thumb a cross one of her other Fingers, and kissing it a thousand times,
according to the Spanish Fashion, she told him, I Love you above my Life; It Is
impossible for me to believe you, Madam, replied the Marshal in stealing some
Kisses from her fair Lips, its merely impossible to believe it, except you
grant me that which is the only Pledge required by Lovers, Surely replied she,
with a very serious Countenance, I can scarce persuade my self that your Words
are answerable to your Intentions, for should I grant your desire, you would
cease to Love me as soon as you had enjoyed me; don't you know that that Favor
which you seek for with so much Heat, is the Grave of Love. How many gallant
Heroes have we known who have been Buried under its ruins; and who have been
lost when they thought themselves at the very Port of Felicity? The expectation
of the Pleasure, will far exceed the enjoyment it self.

These Obstacles made by Olympia against the Marshal's Passion, did only serve
to inflame it and to quicken his desire of making himself Master of that piece
of Ground, which she so Valiantly defended; and his Passion growing more
violent every moment, he could not forbear telling her, that if she let him
languish thus any longer, he should dye instantly at her Feet, Donna Olympia
then finding her strength to fail her, and fearing that she should not be able
to hold out much longer against her charming Conqueror (as she was wont to call
him,) very courteously desired him to withdraw for that time, because the day
began to appear, and that her Brother was accustomed to walk the Rounds in the
House every Morning early, who if he should find a Man in her Chamber, they
both would be in great danger of their Lives. The Marshal having understood her
meaning, with a profound reverence quitted the Room, promising to renew his
Visit in a short time, Yes, Sir said she, giving him her Hand (which he kissed
very Passionately) I promise it shall be so, my Heart is only too forward to
give its consent to so agreeable an Entertainment; don't fail to see me to
morrow at the same Hour in my Chamber. You may believe Madam, replied the
Marshal, that I shall be overjoyed to Execute your Commands, in which my Love
is so nearly concerned, and that every Hour; nay, every Moment, will seem an
Age to me, till such time that -- Medina a Relation of this Lady coming toward
her Chamber, and having made some noise in opening a door, she obliged our
General to Decamp, with his whole Army of Sighs and Languishing Expressions: He
returned to his ordinary Post: I mean to his own Lodgings where instead of
Sleep, he was overwhelmed with a Thousand amourous Fancies: Donna Olympia
flattered her self with having gained a great Point, since by breaking off the
Conference, she had preserved that which indeed she was ready to part with. Her
Heart was torn in pieces by two different Passions, for if her Virtue induced
her strongly to its preservation, on the other hand she was apt to reproach her
self for not having been more favorable to her Lover. Medina having perceived
the Confusion she was in, and drawing nearer to her, asked her in very
affectionate terms the cause of her disquiet. Alas! cried she, my Dearest, I
am the most unfortunate of all living Creatures. Nothing but Death can expiate
a crime which I have committed against my own self; Virtue strongly opposes my
Inclinations; but Alas! I am in Love, to my eternal Confusion, with the most
dangerous of all Men, who from the first Moment, I saw him, has overruled my
Reason. I have resisted this Passion with all my Strength, endeavoring to
stifle it in its Birth, but this too tender, too Passionate Heart, has at last
been forced to yield to its Conqueror. I am now no longer Mistress of it; he
triumphs over it in spite of all my resistance. Madam, replied Medina, (she
being a Lady of a very subtle Wit) Who is that happy Mortal, that has such
powerful Charms? What is become of that graceful haughtiness which never left
you till this time? Oh! replied the Marchioness Sighing, I do not know my self
my Dearest, there is something fatal in the matter, I am constrained to submit
to the present influences of my Stars. Madam, replied the young Lady, take
courage, I don't believe that Love is so dangerous and terrible as you describe
it. If Love be a crime, it is one of the most Innocent, and very few Mortals
are exempted from it. Who can without injustice condemn a Passion taught us by
Nature it self? Especially since we our selves are not the cause of those
Effects which she produces; it is she her self who is the Cause of that Sin,
which appears so hanious in your Sight.

He whom I love replied Donna Olympiae briskly, is rather the cause of it. My
Passion has quite overcome my Reason. Oh! Madam replied Medina with a Smile,
this is the way to spoil all the pleasures of Love; but pray tell me who is
this happy Man? He is a Frenchman my Dearest, answered the fair Spaniard with a
blush; he is a French Gentleman the most charming of all Men, who has robbed me
of my Heart, without the least hopes of recovering it, this only way being left
me to revenge my self upon him to robb him of his again.

It Is very odd, replied the young Lady, and pray Madam, what is his Name, it
may be I may know him? Well my dear Medina, answered Donna Olympia, covering
her Face with a veil, since you are resolved to make me confess the truth to my
own Confusion; know that it is the Marquess de Boufflers, Colonel of a Regiment
of Dragoons, which are quartered hereabouts, and have lately served in the
Siege of Puicerda; his Courage and Bravery is very well known in these Parts.
The Marquess de Boufflers Madam, replied Medina, as being surprised, Oh! I know
him very well, I have seen him often at Paris, when I belonged to the Queen's
Retinue. And what Queen do you mean, said Donna Olympia? (her Head running
upon other matters.) How Madam, replied Medina (who could not forbear laughing)
sure you have not forgot that the French King has Married the Sister of the
King of Spain our Monarch, the Infanta Maria Theresia. Oh! you are in the
right, replied the Marchioness, embracing her at the same time; I had quite
forgot it; then you know that fair Thyrsis who has charmed me, and what do you
think of him? I Madam, answered the young Lady very modestly, I think him to be
a very accomplished Gentleman; but otherwise, I take him to be as fickle in his
Amors as the rest of the French are, who make it their business to Court one
Beauty after another, to tell 'em of their Sufferings, of their Sighs and
Pains, which seldom are any where to be found but in their Compliments and
Bilets Douces, which they are continually sending to their Mistresses, and
those are foolish enough to believe that they are in Love with 'em. I had not
long ago a Letter by me, the most passionate in the World, which this General
wrote to the Marchioness de Segnelay, Lady to one of the Secretaries of State,
in which he had so lively painted the excess of his Passion, that one would
have believed a Man could not live long under such an Agony. He told her, that
her Eyes did every day commit a great many Murders, for which she must be
accountable to God, and that it was Inhuman in her to dispeople in such a
manner the whole Kingdom of France. Could any thing be more Hyperbolical, could
any thing be more Nicely contrived, to cajole a Poor Lady, who loved him in
good earnest? Alas! my Dearest, said Donna Olympia, don't draw the Picture of
him, who has robbed me of my Liberty, so much to his disadvantage; if thou were
convinced as well as I that it is to late for me to resist his power, thou
would pity me. To be short, I Love him, and it is? not in my power to avoid
it. She had no sooner spoke these Words, but she flew out of the Chamber and
locked her self up in her Closet, where amidst a Flood of Tears: Alafs, cried
she; Cruel Love, thou have assailed my Heart at a time when it was least a ware
of thy most dangerous Snares. Heaven that knows the secrets of my Heart, is my
Witness that my Passion is such that its impossible for Female power to resist
it. Am not I the most unhappy of all Women, to wish at this very instant for
the sight of him, who is the greatest Enemy of my repose: I would fain banish
these Thoughts, which only serve to feed my Passion, instead of checking it,
which I am sensible would be much more to my Advantage. But good God! How hard
it is for a Woman of my Age to take a firm Resolution upon such a Critical
Conjuncture; and how much more difficult it is to put it in Execution! I can
only say thus much, that I wish I could do that which I am confident is not in
my Power.

Thus the Lady having spent the greater part of the Day, and the next following
Night, the Marshal found her taken up with these Tormenting Fancies. As soon as
he entered the Room, he renewed his former Courtships; assuring her, (as he was
always accustomed to do) of the violence of his Passion. Donna Olympia received
him somewhat coldly, and Monsieur Boufflers being surprised at this sudden
change, broke out into these Words, Divine Creature; unto what must I attribute
this indifferency, which I meet with in you at this time? What crime have I
committed that could deserve this Cruel Treatment from your Hands? He had no
sooner spoke these Words, but he fell instantly into a Swoon at the Feet of the
Marchioness, who being extremely concerned at this sight, threw her self upon
him, embracing him very Passionately; for she was afraid that as soon as he
should recover himself, he would have recourse to his Sword, against his own
Life, (as he had several times threatened he would) but not finding his Sword at
his side, she was excessively Transported with joy, not doubting but that her
Black-moor had taken it from him before he came into her Chamber. In the mean
time, she was not spareing of her Caresses nor Kisses, in hopes by that means
to recover him out of his Swoon, which indeed was only feigned; nevertheless he
held it out thus, as long as ever he was able, having since protested to me,
that in all his Lifetime, he never received so much Satisfaction and Pleasure,
as at that time, when he was thus entangl'd in the embraces of this fair Lady,
whose Passion being then without disguise, did sufficiently testify that she
Loved him in good earnest. He continued for some Moments in this charming
Ecstasy, ere the fair Spaniard could make him come out of his voluntary Trance,
and that not without a Thousand Amourous Kisses, when she begged of him to sit
down by her, upon a Turky-work Carpet; where he perceived a flood of Tears
trickling down the Cheeks of his fair Mistress: Being now very well recovered;
he began to renew his former Addresses, and to give the most lively
representation of his Sufferings and Pains. You say you Love me, Madam, added
he, looking upon her with a very Passionate Eye, and why will you then deny me
that Favor which I have so often Su'd for? If you will not any longer delay to
grant me the utmost Favor, I here Swear and protest to you, that nothing shall
be able to separate me from you, and that I will not Love any thing besides you
in the World.

Those that know the Marshal de Boufflers, to be one of the most inconstant
Lovers in the World, who esteems it the greatest misfortune that can befall a
Gentleman, to Love one Object longer than a Month or two at the most; will
easily imagine, that he did strain the Point to the utmost, when he made this
Oath. Donna Olympia on the other side, who had not forgot what her Kinswoman
had told her concerning his inconstancy, proposed a Match between 'em, which
exceedingly surprised him, his Thoughts being very far from Marriage at that
time, especially in a Foreign Country. As soon as he had recovered himself from
this Surprise he endeavored to conceal his sentiments, and to appear as gay in
his Humor as before. He was not Ignorant, that if a Gentleman does expect the
last Favor from a fair Lady in Spain, he must not deny her any thing;
wherefore turning the Discourse another way, he promised to send her some of
the best Pearls and Diamonds, and such other valuable things, as he could
procure in the City. This Generous offer insensibly overcame the rigor of the
Fair Spaniard, and though her lover had not at this time mentioned what she most
wished for, she imputed it to the profound respect she believed he had for her.

The Marshal, who is as great a Master in the Art of Love as in that of War,
did not cease to advance his approaches with vigor, and to lay a formal Siege
to that place, which he was resolved to Conquer; it must be confessed, the
access to it was very difficult; but he besieged it so closely, and Attck'd it
so vigourously, that at last the White Flagg was put up, though Donna Olympia for
this time deferred to sign the Capitulation. She told him that she was not as
yet sufficiently prepared for a total surrender; that she expected to receive
the Marks of his Generosity, as to those Presents, which he had spoke of
before; and that in the mean time she would present to him a very fine Scarff,
which formerly belonged to her deceased Husband, and which was curiously
Embroidered, by her own Hands. The Marshal having received the Present,
departed very well satisfied for that time. After he had Dined, he went into
the City, where he bought some of the finest Amethysts and alds that he could
meet with, and having intermixed 'em with some Diamonds of good value, sent 'em
a little after, by one of his Dragoons, who presented 'em together with a
Billet Doux from his Master to Donna Olympia; which she having Kissed a
Thousand times, the Dragoon had much a do to forbear Laughing out, at the
Fantastic Actions of this amourous Lady. But she having opened the Letter,
found these following Lines: Madam:
OR rather my bright shining Sun: It cannot be expressed with how much
impatience I wait for that Hour, when I may give you new Proofs of my Love. I
was not able to stay till Night to assure you of it, by my own Mouth: You your
self shall judge whether I don't lead the most disconsolate Life in the World;
being deprived of your Presence. The Scarff which you have bestowed upon me, is
of so great value to me, that I cannot be a Moment without looking upon it:
This precious Pledge of your Love replenishes my Heart with joy, as the
forerunner of those Pleasures, which I am to taste at that time when you shall
vouchsafe to grant me that Favor, which I desire so earnestly. But alas! I
dare not reflect too much upon 'em, for fear of a Relapse into that Swooning
Distemper, which I have been Subject to ever since I first saw you; If this
should happen to befall me in your Absence, I should be in great danger of
Death, for want of your presence, you being the only Person in the World, that
is able to recover my fainting Spirits. Adieu my incomparable Creature; let me
beg of you not to be foregetful of him, who is the most Passionate Lover in the
World. I have sent you by one of my Dragoons some Jewels, the best I could meet
with; Expecting in the mean time your Commands. Let not that Demi-Devel, who
haunts you at home, put you out of Order. If the violence of my Passion will
let me Live till ten a Clock at Night, I will not fail to run to your Embraces,
and to renew my former Protestations, that I am without reserve,

Madam, Entirely Yours, etc.




The Lady was at first resolved to have sent an Answer to the Marshal's Letter,
but considering with her self, that Secrets of this nature ought not to be
committed to the discretion of a private Sentinel; she forbore for that time.
Not long after, Night beginning to approach, the Marshal did not fail to meet
his Beloved at the appointed Hour. He had dressed himself that Day as fine as
could be, and the better to please his Spanish Mistress, he wore that same
Scarff, which he had received as a present from her. The Lady, on the other
Hand, had strove to out do him in the Richness of her Apparel. Her Suit was all
made of Cloth of Silver, trimmed with a vast quantity of Green Ribands, and a
very rich Gold-Galloon all after the French Mode. Upon her Head she wore green
Feathers, which made a great Addition to her Face, which was extremely
Beautiful. The Tresses of her fair Hair, which hung down to her bare Neck,
whiter than Snow; appeared the most charming in the World.

The Marshal at the sight of her, was so overcome by his Passion, that he was
not able to utter one Word; and she seeing him so silent at a time when she
least expected it, could not forbear asking him the Reason of it; Monsieur
Boufflers, answered with a heavy Sigh, Madam, Your Charms are the cause of my
silence, they having taken from me the use both of my Tongue and my Reason. I
am not the same Man I was, when I first saw you. Here the Marchioness
interrupting, and embracing him; For God's sake, said she, My Lord, awake out
of this slumber; I love you more than my own Life, and if you don't answer my
Passion, I assure you that I shall not live any longer than your self: so that
if your Words be true, we shall be the Occasion of one another Death. Oh! my
most adorable Deity, replied the Marshal, fixing his lips upon here is, let us
dye for one Moment both together. For God's sake, Sir, answered she very
charmingly, don't put things so far, I am but too much afraid of that Death you
speak of, which often proves the spring of whole Rivulets of Tears. What fear
is it replied the Marshal, all upon a sudden, that has seized you, don't you
look upon me as a Man of Honor? I assure you that I would rather dye a
thousand times if it were possible, than be in the least guilty of any Crime
toward my adored Mistress. Oh Heavens! cried she, can you ask, Sir What I
fear? I fear your fickle Humor, your inconstancy, which I believe to be an
Hereditary Evil, incident to Gentlemen of your Nation, who think it a Crime to
love any Woman long; Unfaithfulness and Inconstancy being their chief Delight.
And Madam, replied the Marshal briskly certainly you speak by your own
experience, that you can talk with so much assurance concerning their
Inconstancy; No Sir, answered Donna Olympia, as briskly as he; I never was so
unfortunate as to fall under their clutches till now you being the first, who
has made me sensible of Love. The Marshal perceiving with what Resolution this
Lady held out against all his Attacks, and being resolved to bring the matter
to a conclusion, told her with a great deal of seeming indifferency Madam I
would advise you to break off with me, whilst occasion serves; to tell the
Truth, the French are great Dessemblers, and especially the Officers, who
seldom make a farther account than for one Day, leaving all the rest to Chance
and Fortune: Nevertheless I hope you will not deny but that the Spaniards are not
behind hand with the French, as to the Point of Inconstancy in Love. And to
speak sincerely, that Variety which is so delightful in Love, is agreeable to
all Men without exception. As to my part, I will not be so Presumptuous as to
be answerable for my own Heart, it is your part to preserve it by the Force of
your Charms. If by Chance, Time (which unties the hardest Knots, and breaks the
strongest Chains) should make me shake off your Fetters; impute it to your own
want of Strength and Deserts, which were not sufficient to keep me long under
your Obedience; This indeed is a Supposition, which perhaps will never come to
pass, and you may well tell me, that I am not very Complaisant at this time;
but to confess the Truth, I will rather choose to shewless Complaisance, and
more Sincerity, than to be accounted a Dissembler and a Perfidious Wretch:
These being the Titles which your Sex usually bestow upon us, when for want of
their own merit, they are no longer able to keep their Lovers under Subjection.

It Is impossible to find words suitable to the Surprise, which this Harangue of
the Marshal caused in Donna Olympia; she took it so hainously, that immediately
without speaking one Word, she flew out of the Chamber into another. The
Marshal seeing himself thus left alone, was just ready to leave the Chamber,
when espying the Picture of his lovely Spaniard lying upon the Table, he could
not forbear to take it up, and to put it in his Pocket. He was no sooner
returned to his own Lodgings, and having ordered Candles to be brought up, but
he began to look very earnestly upon the Picture; which was the finest drawn
that ever was seen, the Marchioness being painted in the Habit and Posture of
Diana, with a Quiver hanging over her Shoulders, and a Bow in her Hand. The
Marshal finding this Picture so lovely, What new Charm, do I discover, said he
to himself, now I begin to repent of those Words, which the refusal of her last
Favor made me utter. He reproached himself thus for a long time; and so
tormented himself both that Night and the next Day, that his grief seemed to be
pas'st Remedy. At last after a Thousand Reflections, which distracted his Mind,
he resolved to go and renew his Visits to the Marchioness, at the accustomed
time. Donna Olympia in the the mean while, who had not left the Marshal,
without a great constraint, was altogether overwhelmed with Grief and Tears.
Medina her dear Confident, found her in this Posture; and she happened to come
in, very Opportunely, for Donna Olympia was just ready to Kill her self with
the Marshal's Sword, which he had left with the Moor, who had given it to his
Lady as somewhat very precious, belonging to the Marshal de Boufflers; whereas
it would have proved fatal to this Poor Lady, if her Kinswoman had not stopped
her Hands, crying out to her, For God's sake what are you going about to do?
Consider that you are a Christian, and that you must be answerable for a Soul
which you have received, from Almighty God. What is it that could put you upon
such a desperate Resolution? Can the ill usage of a Lover be a Motive strong
enough to incite you to Murder your self? Oh! consider and dread God's Justice,
which never lets Crimes of this nature go unpunished. Donna Olympia was not
able to speak one Word in answer to Medina, but all her strength sailing her,
she fell into a Swoon at the Feet of her Kinswoman. This young Lady having
lifted her up, and laid her upon a Couch; by the help of some strong Waters,
which she held to her Nose, brought her to her self again. My Dearest Cousin,
said she, tenderly embracing her, what was it that could induce you to take
this rash Resolution of Destroying your self? Alas! my Dearest, replied the
Marchioness, in a languishing Tone, What would you have me tell you? That
ungrateful Man, of whom I have spoke to you, has already made me feel the
effects of his Inconstancy; This Perfidious Creature has abandoned me before he
has enjoyed the sweet Fruits of our Love. Oh! you only spoke too true Medina,
when you told me, that the French were Fickle and Capricious in Love. I am only
too sensible that I ought to fly from him, but I cannot; my Passion forces me
to set aside all other considerations, which would banish me from his Sight.
Medina was about to make Answer, when Don Bilboano the Marchioness's Brother,
having heard the outcries of the Women in her Chamber, when she Swoon'd away
entr'd the Room with his Sword ready drawn. Donna Olympia having a quick Wit,
immediately hid the Marshal's Sword under her Bed, to take away all manner of
Suspicion from her Brother, whom she knew to be almost mad with Jealousy. She
gave him to understand how all upon a sudden she felt her self so ill, that she
Swoon'd away, but that thanks to Heaven, she was now very well recovered. Don
Bilboano told his Sister that he was overjoyed to see her so well, and having
Caressed her in a more Passionate manner, than became a Brother, he left the
Room. Night now began to approach, and our Lady, who was very impatient to see
her Lover again, made her Black-Moor stand Centry at the same door, through which
the Marshal was wont to be conducted into her Appartment; having desired Medina
to stay with her, till such time that he should come in, whom she expected with
so much Impatience. Our General did not fail to be there at the accustomed
Hour; but under the disguise of a Dragoon, for fear of being taken too much
notice of, if he always appeared as an Officer. He presented his Sword to the
Moor, who refused to take it, not knowing him in this Disguise. The Marshal
having convinced the Moor by putting some Lovis's d'or into his Hand, that it
was himself; he by that means saved his Life, which he had else put in jeopardy
for his Mistress's sake. Having entered his Mistress's Chamber, he threw
himself immediately at her Feet, begging of her to pardon all what he had told
her, protesting that he was very sensible of his Fault, and that if she thought
fit, he would expiate it, by making himself a Sacrifice at her Feet: He
expressed these words to naturally, and with an Air so engaging, that the
Marchioness's anger was wholly appeased; she reproachi'd him with his
Inconstancy and want of Love; She called him Capricious fickle and Inconstant
Frenchman; and added many other Taunts, which she imagined might affect him
most sensibly. The Marshal bore every thing, not with the patience of a Dragoon
(for this is a quality not peculiar to 'em;) but like Job, for he did not so
much as utter one word in answer to her Reproaches; On the contrary, to make
some amends for his Fault, he did nothing but kiss, sometimes her Hand, and
sometimes the Hemm of her Garment; she being that day Dressed all in Black; it
being the Custom in Spain, if a Lady looses her Gallant, or believes she has
lost him, to dress herself in Mourning Clothes: 'Twas for this same reason that
Donna Olympia had put her self in Mourning, imagining that she should never see
the Marshal again; who was as yet resolved not to quit her so, before he was
come a little nearer to the Point. Conformably to this Resolution, he pressed
her very hard, not to let him suffer any longer, adding, that the Pains which
she made him endure, were beyond Expression, nay, that they could not be
imagined by any Person but one who loved so Passionately as himself. Donna
Olympia seeing what pains the Marshal took to represent to her, his Love, could
not forbear laughing at it, when the Marshal with a Smile told her, Madam,
indeed you are very Cruel, thus to divert your self at the expense of your
unfortunate Lovers, whom you make to languish at your Feet, without showing the
least Compassion to 'em; when you go to Confession I hope you will not forget to
tell your Father Confessor among other Sins, how you make it your diversion to
cause Mankind to dye a languishing Death, and how many Murders have been
committed by those fair Eyes. I don't know Sir, replied the Marchioness,
laughing outright, I never took any account of their number. But continued she,
looking upon the Marshal, who feigned himself Ill, Pray tell me whether you are
Sick in good earnest; Pray let me feel your Pulse, truly it beats very quick.
Alas! my dearest Creature, replied the Marshal de Boufflers, embracing her how
should it be possible to be so near so lovely and charming an Object as you
are, without the greatest emotion of all my Vital Spirits; certainly if you
don't soon take pity of me, I cannot live much longer, Oh Heavens! replied the
Lady, keeping him at a little distance; how you put me into a fright, in this
habit of a Dragoon. How could it enter your Thoughts, thus to disguise your
self, that I am not able to endure the sight of it. Madam answered the
Marquess, you know the Reason why I did it, 'twas because I shall not be so
much observed, as if I should appear every day in the same Equipage. Besides
this disguise may prove very convenient upon another account; for I would not
for all the World that our Generals should get the least notice of our amourous
Intreague. I am the greatest admirer of secrecy that can be, but especially in
Love-concerns, where evenmatters of the least moment ought to be kept secret.
Here the fair Spaniard interrupting him, then pray Sir, said she, give me leave
to dress you in Women's Apparel; thus we shall have the convenience of enjoying
one another with more freedom. O Lord! Madam, replied he, don't contrive a
thing which cannot but be very much to my disadvantage; I am so hard favored
that in a Woman's Head-dress I shall be only fit to frighten Children. Let me
for this time pass as I am, and I promise you that I will return to morrow in
another Equipage, which shall have nothing terrible in it. In the mean while
let us not loose the enjoyment of a happy Minute. To Morrow, to Morrow cried
she, Mr. Dragoon. Oh! Madam, replied the Marshal, it is not without great
violence, that I can deferr it till then. The Heat and vigor of Love slackens
by delays; the Cannon is ready mounted, let us make a breach in the Walls, and
enter with our Swords drawn. Sir, replied the Lady, the Duke de Navaille at the
head of the French King's Army, could have said no more. If terms of War are
the same with those of Love, I don't as yet understand the Language, therefore
I hope you will give me some time to learn 'em.

It was not without very weighty Reasons that the Marshal was so eager, to come
to the Conclusion of the whole Story; for he had but a little time to stay at
Puicerda, having received Orders to March toward the Rhine Where: The Counts
of Schomberg and Choiseul, and the Marshal de Crequi; threatened to Besiege
Rheinsfeld, a Place Situated in a Plain. These considerations caused no small
commotions in his Mind: Which was divided between the glory of Arms and the
delights of Love. But at the present, being obliged by his Mistresses command,
to retire, he did it with so much indifferency, that he not so much as afforded
her one parting Kiss, which she earnestly wished for, as I have understood
since. Being returned to his Lodgings, he took a Resolution not to visit her in
two or three days, in hopes that by this device he should bring her over the
sooner, to grant his Request. During the time of his absence, he employed all
his Wits in finding out something or another, which might oblige her to cry for
fair Quarter; and at last he obtained his aim, as will appear from the sequel
of the History.

Having considered with himself that all the Spanish Lady's are extremely taken
with the vanity of rich Clothes, though they themselves are not very extravagant
that way. He ordered a Suit to be made, the richest that could be contrived; it
was trimmed with Amarant and Gold Colored Ribbands (this being the favorite
Color of his Mistress) his Waste-coat was of the same Color, finely
embroidered by a certain Mooress, who was very famous for that sort of Work in
those Parts. He wore a green Feather in his Hat; his Legs being extraordinarily
well shaped, he put on that day a pair of black Silk Stockings, and a pair of
very small neat Shoe's, lined with Crimson-Velvet, which was at that time the
Mode at Puicerda. Whilst he was dressing himself, he said to his Valet du
Chamber, whose Name was Champonniere, and who knew the whole Intrigue, See what
a Man is fain to do for a Mistress, would thou do the same for thine? O Yes,
replied he, If I thought she deserved it. Thou art in the right on it, said
Monsieur de Boufflers, he that will please the Women must take care to appear
in a very fine Equipage. When he was dressed, he thought it an Age ere the
appointed Hour was come, which was ten a Clock at Night. He walked hastily up
and down his Chamber, being in a continual Study concerning his amourous
Adventure. At last the wished for Hour drew near, when with all the speed
imaginable he hastn'd to his Mistress.

Medina by order from Donna Olympia conducted him into a certain Appartment,
where he had never been before. This Room being adorned with very rich
Tapestry, great Crystallin Looking Glasses, and good store of Wax-tapers; so
that any Persons might view themselves all over from Head to Foot. The Marshal
being for some time entertained by Medina, whom he did not know, though he had
seen her before at Paris; looked upon the Tapestry-work with a very discerning
Eye, asking her several times the meaning of diverse Figures which he saw, and
particularly, concerning that of a certain Princess, represented there with a
naked Sword which she was about to deliver to her Lover, for him to Sheath it
in her Breast What extravagancy is this, cried the Marshal, Could any thing be
so barbarous, as to run a Sword into the Breast, of so lovely a Woman? Oh! Sir,
replied the young Lady, If you were acquainted with the whole Adventure, it
would not seem so strange to you. This unfaithful Lady having at several times
proved Treacherous in her Love; and being one day all overcome with shame and
Confusion, when he reproached her with her perfidiousness, at last snatched his
Sword from his side, which she presented to him, begging of him to sheath it in
her Breast, to expiate her former inconstancy. But the Prince who detested so
Villainous an Act, would by no means comply with her demands. This is somewhat
surprising to me Madam, replied the Marshal, I could scarce have believed that
a Woman could be so Treacherous to her Lover. He would have continued his
Discourse, if he had not been interrupted by the coming in of Donna Olympia,
who appeared to him as fair as an Angel. She had dressed her self, that day so
advantageously, that she quite amazed the Marshal by her charms; he for some
time not being able to do any thing but to gaze upon her. Certain Tresses of
Hair which hung down to her Neck, were no small addition to her charming
Beauty. Her Gown and Petty-coat were of an Amarant and blew Color, and her
Girdle all covered with Diamonds of great value. Monsieur de Boufflers being at
that instant more inflamed than ever, told her very tenderly that at this
moment she had quite subdued his Heart; and that she appeared to him so
charming, that he could not look upon her otherwise than his adorable Deity.
Sir, replied she; you are pleased to make sport with me, it is you that appear
more bright than a Star, and more charming than ever Adonis was. You have this
day taken particular care to set your self off to the best advantage; it is
possible you have some great design in hand. Yes Madam, replied the Marshal,
kissing her Snow white Hand, my design is to please you, and effectually to
make you sensible of my Passion, all naked as it is. Oh! no Sir, said the Lady,
it is possible you may frighten me, you had better cover it with somewhat or
another. Medina who was unwilling to disturb these two Lovers, retired out of
respect to her Kinswoman. The Marshal being now left in Company only with his
Mistress, did so lively represent the vehemence of his Passion, in Terms so
affectionate and obliging, confirmed by a thousand Oaths and Imprecations, that
he would Love her as long as he lived; that at last the fair Spaniard was
vanquished, and having asked him with a very tender and Passionate Air; Will
you never cease to Love me? Will you never forsake me? She surrendered the
Place which had held out so long against the Marshal's most vigourous Attacks.
The Marshal had no sooner taken possession of this strong Hold, but he repented
of the Bargain; having found her nothing near so amiable as he had imagined
before.

The Spanish Lady's are generally Subject to a great Infirmity; for as soon as
they have passed the Age of Eighteen or Twenty Years, they are seized with a
continual Flux, which is not fit to be touched nor so much as named, and the
worst is, that no Remedy can be found against it: This was more than sufficient
to put our General out of conceit with his Mistress; he being the Nicest Man in
the World, as to Women. Indeed he was so dismayed at this Bloody Encounter,
that he could scarce conceal his displeasure. The Lady was for having him renew
the amourous Engagement, but he excused himself as well as he could, telling
her that on a sudden he was seized with a most violent Headache: The Lady was
therefore obliged to expect the second Rencounter the next time; which is as
yet to come, for he never came near her since that Day. He was nevertheless so
generous, as to make her a Present of some Jewels, which he had brought along
with him for that purpose, as a reward of that Favor, which he had received
from this fair Spaniard. Donna Olympia with a profound reverence Kissed her own
Hands; which according to the Custom of that Country, is as much as to say, I
accept the Present: Nay she appeared extremely well satisfied at first with it,
looking upon it as a Pledge of her Lover's Passion; but she was most grossly
mistaken in her aim, for the Marshal's Passsion was grown so cool by this time,
that he wished himself at a great distance from the Place where he was. Donna
Olympia in the mean while began to be more and more sensible of the
indifferency of her Lover, which made her break out into these Words: Did not I
tell you before, Sir, that as soon as you had obtained what you so Passionately
wished for, you would not continue to Love me with the same Ardour as before;
all Men usually loose a great part of their eager Desires, as soon as they have
tasted the purest and most delicious Pleasures of Love. Oh! how much are you
changed already, what is become of that Passion, which the Universe was not
able to contain? What is become of all your most sincere Protestaions; what of
all your Passionate Expressions? The Marshal, who began to be afraid that the
Lady might play him some scurvy trick or another, or perhaps cause him to be
Poiniarded, before he could get out of the House, was fain to set on the best
countenance he could; and to Caress her with a thousand fair Promises, of which
he did not intend to keep the least. By this Artifice he at last got clear of
his Mistress, having first made a solemn Promise to visit her as often as she
should think convenient. Promises, made in the Air, without the least Prospect
of accomplishment, except he had liked the Game better than he did; but what
would not a Man say to a Woman, when she has lost her charms, and is become
Burdensome? The Marshal being returned to his Lodgings, had now all his
Thoughts employed how to Decamp with privacy from Puicerda, which he now began
to nauseate as much as he hadadmir'd it before. Have not I done very finely,
sai'd he to himself, to have spent so much time i'dly in an Amourous Adventure,
which was not worth the pains I took in looking after it? Madam Olympia, 'twas
not in your power to retain me long in your Service; I was very much mistaken
in your Charms. You are not engaging enough for a Man of my Humor, who hates
to Swim in -- But away with it, let us not think of it any more, for I begin to
be Heart-sick. Then calling his Valet du Chamber, Champonniere, said he, had
thou ever a Spanish Mistress? Pray tell me your Adventures. The Marshal's
Gentleman finding his Master in a Humor to divert himself with him, some part
of the Night, burst out into laughter; having soon perceived, how he had been
treated by this Spanish Lady. How now, Rascal! said the General, is this your
way, to laugh at me as fast as you can? Oh! Sir, replied the Servant laughing
as heartily as he did before; You have ordered me to make a recital of my
amourous Adventures, and when I reflect upon some passages of 'em, it is
impossible for me to forbear laughing. If thy Mistress were a Spaniard, said
Monsieur de Boufflers, without question she gave thee great satisfaction. Yes
Sir, answered his Genteleman, I have had a touch with most Nations How, said
the Marshal; then thou have dipped thy Sword in that Current of the Spanish
Women. What do thou think of these running Rivulets? Truly Sir, said he, I
don't know what to say of 'em, but that they are not very Savoury. Thou art in
the right on it, replied the General, Let us have no more of 'em, or else I
shall Spew my Heart out. Go bring me up some Wine, to recruit my Spirits, or
else I shall Swoon in good Earnest. The Gentleman thought that his Master had
only been in jest, but he was extremely surprised when he saw him instantly
fall from his Chair upon the Ground. Being in a great Consternation, he called
up the Land-lady, who having washed his Face very well with fair Water, soon
brought him to himself again, and having caused him to be laid in his Bed he
rested pretty well for the remainder of the Night.

Some days after, Monsieur Boufflers quitted Catalonia, and marched with the
French Army toward the Rhine, where he signalis'd himself in several
advantageous Rencounters with the Imperialists. The two Marshals de Crequi and
de Navaille pursued their Victories against the Imperial Forces, having
defeated a considerable Party of their Dragoons; and the Marshal de Boufflers
gave great Proofs of his Valor in this Engagement, which was followed by the
surrender of the Castle of Dortamburg and that of Fort Kell. Amidst these
Martial Exploits, the Marshal de Boufflers did not lay aside his tender
inclinations for the fair Sex, being as soon as he was a little at leisure, as
indefatigable in his amourous Engagements, as he had been before in his Warlike
Enterprises; as it will appear in the sequel of our Story: But before we
proceed, let us return to the unfortunate Donna Olympia, who being quite rased
out of his Memory, showed all the marks of a despairing Person, in tearing off
her Hair, and committing all sorts of Extravagancies, without suffering any one
so much as to Speak to her of Consolation. Medina endeavored to persuade her,
that it was the common chance of Women in Love to be forgot and Slighted by
their Gallants. But all in vain; for she continually Exclaimed against her ill
Fortune, calling him at the same Moment ungrateful and perjured Wretch. Where
art thou now, said she, with all thy Oaths and deceitful Promises? Oh good
Heavens! can you suffer that such a Monster as this, should walk upon the Face
of the Earth after having violated all that is Sacred to me? What ill Fate did
over rule my Inclinations, when I granted him that, which ought to have been
more dear to me than my own Life. This inconstant, Perfidious Wretch triumphs
over my Honor. Ah! I am resolved to Travel all over the World in quest of him,
on purpose to reproach him with his infidelity, and if he refuse to hearken to
my just Complaints, I will, said she, (taking up a Dagger which lay upon the
Table) Stabb him to the Heart. Yes, said she, I don't doubt but this Arm of
mine shall have strength enough to dispatch this faithless Wretch, who ought
not to live any longer, since he has deceived me. She had no sooner spoke these
Words, and being altogether animated with Revenge, but she begged of Medina to
be her Companion in this Enterprise, saying that they would both disguise
themselves in Men's Habit, and find out the Marshal in whatever part of the
World he might be. But her Kinswoman, who was more prudent in weighing the
matter, utterly rejected her Proposal, as being so little agreeable to their
Sex, representing to her all the dangers, which must be the necessary
Consequences of such an attempt, to Women of their Quality.

Will you Madam, said she, very wittily act the Heroine Musqueteer, will you be
ambitious to imitate your Romantic Heroes, what gainer will you be by all
this? But to make your self a Laughing Stock to the World. Let your ungrateful
Lover enjoy his own Peace, it is possible his Conscience does already
sufficiently accuse him of his Treachery. Your French Gentlemen, as I have
often told you, seldom do otherwise than he has done; and I pity those poor
Women who are so unfortunate as to believe 'em. Endeavor therefore to compose
your Mind; that is the only way left you to be even with him, for I don't
question that but he is vain enough to believe that you are extremely concerned
at his Absence: But if I were in your case, he should never boast of that
satisfaction. Oh! my Dearest, replied Donna Olympia all in Tears, he has now
very little regard to me; yet he has gained what he aimed at, and it is that
which almost put's me into Despair. I shall never see again that Conqueror,
who has triumphed over my weakness in spite of all the Resistance I was able to
make; I was too too soon overcome by his flattering Promises. Good Heavens! you
that know my disgrace, Revenge me upon this perfidious Man. Madam, replied
Medina, if I should tell you, that these things ought to have been considered
before you entertained the Marshal so far, I shall perhaps loose some part of
the advantage of comforting you, wherefore I think the best Office I can do you
at this time, is to desire you to take comfort, to forget what is passed, and
to be more Circumspect for the future. Donna Olympia so well approved the
Advice given her by her Kinswoman, that some time after, as we have been since
informed, she threw her self into a Nunnery of the Female Converts, where she
spends the remainder of her Lifetime in doing of Penance; eating of nothing
but wild Roots, and Drinking nothing but fair Water, in Atonement of her former
sensual Pleasures: And Medina followed her Example, to mortify herself, for
some former Love-Intreagues in France and Spain. Thus we are come to the
conclusion of the History of our two Spanish Lady's.

It Is now time to return to our Marshal, who has not been Idle in Germany;
having already found out a new Mistress, whose Charms have rendered him her
Captive. Here you must not imagine that 'twas a native of that Country, who was
so dexterous in engaging his Heart: no, they are very rarely so ingenious at
Love-Intreagues in those Parts, being somewhat unacquainted with such
languishing desires, which are the constant attendants of Lovers. The Beauty
which Captivated him, was a certain English Gentlewoman, whom chance had
brought to the same Inn where he Lodged. This Lady whom we will call my Lady
Stone, was the Wife of a certain Irish Gentleman, who being accused of
High Treason, was forced to quit England, and finding no redress in his
Affairs, had sought for a Sanctuary in Germany, as his Wife was informed; who
had undertaken this Journey, in hopes to find him out there; but not having got
any farther Information concerning him, notwithstanding her utmost endeavors,
was extremely uneasy in the Inn where she Lodged, for fear that she should not
be able to learn any news relating to her ungrateful Husband, who had left her
without giving her the least notice, since his departure, of the place of his
Abode. The Marshal, who was informed before hand of her Circumstances, showed
her all the respect due to a Lady of her Quality and Merits, who labored under
great afflictions. It will not be a-miss here to give you a Character of this
English Lady. She was most delicately shaped, very courteous and affable in all
her Behavior. Her Hair was Black, her Complexion very fair, and her Skin very
smooth; her Eyes very bright and sparkling; she had the prettiest Mouth in the
World, and she laughed most charmingly: As for her Teeth, they were none of the
best; this being a general defect among the Lady's of this Country, who
commonly spoil 'em with eating Sweetmeats too plentifully. She had besides
thisa, certain Majestic Air, which was surprising at first sight, though she was
extremely Obliging and Courteous in Conversation. Her Neck and Hands were very
fair and plump, and to comprehend all in a few words, she appeared so adoreable
to our Marshal, that he became strongly enamored with her Beauty. The first
Proof he gave her of his Love, was one Morning, when he found her all in
despair in her Chamber; she had torn her Hair, and was just ready to make a way
with her self. If in any other Country but England a Woman should commit these
extravagancies, she would be thought only fit for a Mad-House. But it is to be
considered that in no other place in the World these violent attempts are so
frequently put in Execution as there. I don't know what hard sentiments they
have concerning themselves, but this is certain, that for a small
disappointment, it is often known that they Hang, Poison, or Pistol themselves
without any sense of their crime. Our General being touched as much with
compassion as with Love, threw himself ather Feet, entreating her to tell him
the truecauseof that affliction, which had inspired her with so desperate a
Resolution, the mark's of which plainly appeared in her Countenance. The
English Lady being somewhat of a haughty temper, could at first scarce resolve
to discover the Circumstances of her Affairs to Monsieur de Bouffflers, looking
upon it as a thing very unbecoming herself, and as somewhat which could not but
most sensibly affect her Honor: Nevertheless, considering with her self in
what a generous and obliging manner she was treated by the Marshal, she at last
determined to make an ingenuous Confession in these Words: Is it possible, Sir,
that my ill Fortune should drive me to this point of Extremity, in which you
see me at present: My Husband, who scarce deserves that name, having left me
without Money, and without any prospect of receiving assistance from any Person?
I have been for some time in this Inn, with my Valet du Chamber, and my waiting
Woman; and besides other Necessaries requisite for a Person of my Quality; I
have not wherewithal to satisfy my Host, whom I cannot expect to entertain me
Gratis, I am quite beyond all Patience, to see my self reduced to this
extremity, by the neglect of an ill Husband, who -- She could not proceed, the
Tears which trickl'd down her Beautiful Cheeks, having quite stopped her Speech.
The Marshal was so touched with compassion, that immediately he offered her his
Purse, desiring her to make use of it, as if it were her own; and to show her
that his Words were not bare Compliments, as it is the common Custom of a great
many, but that his Offers were real, he went immediately down to the Host, whom
he asked how much that English Lady who with her Servants Lodged in his House,
was indebted to him. The Inn-holder having brought him her Bill, he immediately
paid him what he demanded; telling him, that he had received Orders from her
Husband Mr. Stone, to pay him his Money, and to engage his Word for what ever
she should have occasion for in his House, for the future. In a few Moments
after, Monsieur de Boufflers sent to his new Mistress a Purse full of Lovis's
d'or, Embroidered with fine Pearls on both sides, and trimmed with Ribonds of
all sorts of Colors, to supply her self with such little Necessaries as she
might have occasion for at that time. The Marshal discovering in this fair Lady
every day new charms, was extremely glad of this Opportunity, hoping that his
Liberality would be repaid him in another Coin, that is to say, by his
Mistresses Favors. Is it possible, said he to himself, that any Husband can be
so unworthy, thus to abandon a Person of her merit, and who is so Charming and
Amiable in outward appearance? Truly I don't know what may be in the bottom of
this matter, which perhaps is past my finding out; if she should perhaps,
continued he with a Smile, have some resemblance to my Spanish Mistress, what a
disappointment would that be? but let it be as it will, I don't repent of
having given her some assistance, at a time when she was just at the point of
Despair; I have at least done a work of Charity, if her Charms should not prove
answerable to my expectation. If Monsieur de Boufflers was thus employed in
reasoning with himself, my Lady Stone did make no less Reflections upon the
Liberality, which she had received from an Officer, whom she did not know,
before she had seen him in the same Place where she Lodged. Oh! cried she,
being all alone in her Chamber. I insensibly engage my self to I know not whom:
Perhaps this Stranger will scarce be contented with a bare Acknowledgement; he
appears to me so Passionate, that I have all the reason to believe he aims at
no less than my Heart. Without this prospect, which is natural to all Men; what
could have induced him to show his Generosity to me? Oh cruel Husband, cried
this Lady sighing; If I part with something which only belongs to you alone,
remember that you your self are the cause of it: For when I reflect upon your
Behavior toward me, I find a strong Inclination in me to grant it. I beseech
thee good God, to give me Virtue and Strength enough to resist so powerful a
Temptation. I foresee by some secret Instinct, that I shall not be able to come
off a Conqueror in this Engagement. My Lady Stone was thus Tormenting her
self, when the Marshal came into the same Room, where she was, and after having
paid his respects and Saluted her, he set himself down by her; What is it
Madam said he, that occasions all these troubles: Why do you strive to render
your self unfortunate in Reflecting too much upon your present Condition? Don't
let the Spring-season of your Life pass away without Pleasure, so charming a
Person as you ought to be made sensible of the satisfaction, which attends the
full enjoyment of the happy Minute. If you have the least inclination to Love,
I know a certain Gentleman so violently charmed with your engaging Air, that he
declares he loves you more than his own Life. And how come you to know this,
answered the Lady, in a Melancholy Tone, are you the Guardian of this
Gentleman's Heart? Yes Madam, replied the Marshal with a very Passionate look,
I know him as well as my own self, and I will be answerable for his Passion and
Constancy, and that he shall protest to you that he will Love you as long as he
lives. You surprise me Sir, replied the fair Lady, pray tell me who is this
Gentleman, that has such advantageous Thoughts of me, do I not know him? Madam,
replied the Marshal, casting on her a very amourous look; He is not unknown to
you, it is the same whom you see before you.

This Declaration of the Marshal's, having put our English Lady to the blush,
he continued to make to her all the most sincere Protestations of a violent
Passion, according to the Custom of most Men, at the first rise of their Love.
The Marshal was so extremely delighted with his growing Passion, that he
protested with a Thousand Oaths at the Feet of his Mistress, that he
Passionately loved her; that he adored her; that he was Enchanted by her
powerful Charms, and a Thousand such like extravagant Expressions. Is it
posible, replied my Lady Stone coldly, that you should Love me so much as you
pretend you do? May one rely upon your Words? Commonly Persons of your
Character are in Love with most Women, more out of a Principle of Civility than
Love. But, continued she, what is it that I say, I cannot but be persuaded that
you have some kindness for me, since you have dealt so generously with me; I
will take it then for granted, it will serve at least to please my Fancy; What
advantage could you purpose to your self in deceiving an unfortunate and
afflicted Person, who desires nothing but Compassion. Oh Madam! replied the
Marshal, squeezing her fair Hands between his own. It Is I that rather stand in
need of Compassion; my Love increases every Moment, and if you don't find out a
Remedy to appease my pain, I am infallibly undone. Sir, replied the Lady
Smiling, I have a certain Chambermaid belonging to me, who has a Sovereign
Antidote against Love; I Will engage as soon as you do but look upon her you will
be cured of your Distemper. O Madam! cried the Marshal being impatient to see
her, pray let her come, that she may apply somewhat to assuage my Pain. The
Plaster which she uses replied the English Lady, facetiously, is very large,
it will cover your whole Body. This is a Plaster for the Devil, said he, but
pray let us see it, he had no sooner spoke these Words, but the Lady called
Betty, which was the name of her Chambermaid, who was so ugly that she was
only fit to make a Bugg-bear to frighten Children withal. Her Mouth was so big
that it reached from one Ear to the other; her Nose was very small; her
Forehead very low and flat; her Eyes vastly large; her Hair and the grain of
her Skin very course, if you touched her she felt like a Nutmeg grater; besides
that she was as Black as a Tawny-moor, and her shape was all awry: But
notwithstanding all this, she had a most admirable Headpiece, having a ready
and well refined Wit, and was most excellent at Repartees. When one heard her
talk, she made an ample amends for the Deformity of her Body and Face; and
'twas by this means that she insinuated herself into the favor of her
Mistress, who had a particular kindness for her. The Marshal, at first sight of
her, went two or three steps backwards, on purpose to show his surprise. This
young Woman, who as we have already intimated, had a very ready Wit, and was
well acquainted with this sort of Divertisements, was not at all balk'd at it,
but on the contrary, told the Marshal very briskly; that this was a certain
Proof of her Merit, because she had been powerful enough to cause so sudden an
Emotion in a Person so brave and Galiant as the Marshal. It Is very true
Mistress, replied Monsieur de Boufflers, pray come nearer to me, and make me
sensible of your Remedy against Love, which your Lady has told me, that you
always carry about you. Alas! replied Betty with a Smile, Sir my charms are
not powerful enough to cure you of your Love, I want that advantage, except in
seeing me so ill shaped and so ugly, you might take a general antipathy against
Women: They are not all of 'em so ugly nor so ill shaped, replied her Mistress,
as thou art Betty, wherefore I don't believe that the Marshal is resolved as
yet to renounce his Passion for the fair Sex. I conjecture I know a certain
Person in the World, whom he does not altogether look upon with an indifferent
Eye. And so do I, replied Betty laughing: For that I know it may be your own
self, it being very likely that the Marshal is not insensible of your Charms.
You jeer me, replied Madam Stone pleasantly; what do you say to the cajoleing
Language of my Maid, said she to the Marshal, I say Madam, replied he, that she
is absolutely in the right on it, and that she has spoke nothing but what is due
to so adorable and so amiable a Person as your self. Alas! I am only too well
convinced of the truth of it, my Heart having been Wounded by your irresistible
Charms. O Sir, replied Madam Stone carelessly, why then don't you wear it in a
Scarff? I am afraid this poor Heart of yours is so mangled ever since you first
saw me, that it will not hold long together. How can it be otherwise, Madam,
answered Betty, who was very smart upon the Marshal, so that he was extremely
taken with her Conversation.

They were about to continue their discourse, when Dame Helenemberg the
Mistress of the House came in to tell her Guests that in the Evening there
would be a Ball at the House of the Bailiff of the Town. The Marshal knew so
well how to persuade my Lady Stone to go thither with him, that she easily
granted his Request, according to the Inclinations of the English Women, who
are naturally addicted to Pleasure. This German Ball was composed of the chief
Magistrates of the Place, who after they had Eat and Drunk very plentifully,
and their Music, (which was rather confused Noise, than any thing relating to
Harmony) having begun to Play, they danced according to their own
Country-Fashion, with their Wives and Daughters. The Marshal being somewhat
concerned, immediately departed, and at his return brought along with him some
Haut-bois and Pipers belonging to the French Regiments thereabouts, who played
very sweetly, and conducted him and his Mistress to the Ball, where they danced
with so admirable an Air, that the whole Company stood amazed at the graceful
performance of these two unknown Persons. Dame Helenemberg, who had squeezed
her self up in some corner, for fear of being known, did rub her Hands for joy,
being not a little Proud, that she had the good Fortune to entertain such
Guests in her House. At last the Ball being ended the Turn-Spits, as I suppose,
all on a sudden made such a clattering noise amidst the Kettles and
Frying-Pans, and with the Fire Shovels, Tongs and other Kitchen-Instruments,
that the Marshal and his Lady being frighted at it, got away as fast as they
could to their own Lodgings. It was about four a Clock in the Morning, when
they returned from the Ball; and our Lovers beginning now by degrees to be more
and more sensible of the Pleasures of their growing Love, resolved not to go to
Bed that Night, but to pass it away in those amourous Protestations, which are
usually the effects of a most tender Passion. The Marshal, who would fain in
some measure have moderated the Vehemence of his Love, found his endeavors so
weak, and his Mistress's Charms so engaging and powerful, that he was
constrained absolutely to give way to his Passion. He thought her at that time
more charming than ever, which served for nothing else but to render him more
unfortunate, and to entangle him the more in a Passion, which it would not be
easy for him to shake off so soon. He grew at last Melancholy to that degree,
that he avoided all manner of civil Society and Conversation.

One day the Lady having reprehended him for his ill Humor, telling him that
he was strangely altered in his Temper, from what she had known him before:
Alas! Madam, said he, what good can you expect from the presence of a
Man-hater, who thinks the World too little for him to range in? The Marshals de
Crequi and de Navaille did also several times check him upon account of his
cloudy Temper, without knowing the true cause of it, so that the Marshal de
Boufflers at last beginning to grow weary of leading such a disconsolate course
of Life, and having communicated his Thoughts to the Count de Choiseul, he was
soon relieved by his good Advice. How, said he, my Friend, is it come to that
pass with you, that you cannot make a Woman Love you, for whom you have a
Passion? You may now esteem your self a sorry Fellow indeed. For my part,
replied the Marshal, striking with his Hat upon the Table, I know not what I am
my self, yet I am sure I am not the same I used to be: I durst not so much as
sue for a Favor from the Lady I Love. I cannot believe but that she has
bewitched me to be silent, and to bear every thing with an awful Respect. These
are the true marks, replied the Count, of a Man in Love: But why should you
complain, since you have asked nothing of your Mistress, and that you have no
reason to accuse her of being Insensible, Cruel or Indifferent. Go, go, take my
advice, lay aside this dull way of Courtship, and push on your Point as close
as you can: The English Ladies are not so averse to the French as you imagine.
The Marshal could not forbear laughing at the Count's jolly Humor, who advised
him to make use of his middle Point to advance his Amourous Design, Courage,
Courage my dear Friend, cried the Count, clapping him upon the Shoulder; it is a
very good sign when a Love Sick Person begins to laugh; I Will engage, that
before you are a Weak older, you will be cured of your Distemper: It seems, that
when we disclose our Heart to a Friend, we share with him one half of our
troubles. This was very observable in the Marshal, who after having freely
delivered his Mind to the Count his Friend, found himself half cured of his
Pain; having therefore embraced and returned him a thousand thanks for his good
Counsel he went to renew his Visit at my Lady Stone's, who had been very
uneasy during his absence.

What have I done to you my dear Marshal, said she, that you thus fly from me
as you do; it seems as if I were become your Enemy? Truly Madam, answered he,
looking upon her with a languishing Eye, in some measure you are so, having
bereaved my Heart of all its Repose and Tranquillity; ever since I had the
first sight of you, I am not the same Person I was wont to be; I have given you
some hints of my Passion, but I am apt to believe you scarce ever thought of it
since. More than you think for, Sir, replied she, I love you better than you
can imagine. 'Twas not without some Confusion that she spoke these Words, but
imagining that he had not very well apprehended her meaning, she repeated 'em
several times very pleasantly. The Marshal, who understands a little of most
Languages, especially as to Love-Terms, fell into an Ecstasy of Joy upon hearing
these charming Words, which sounded very prettily in English from his fair
Lady's Mouth. She having several times after repeated these Words, I Love you,
I Love you; the Marshal did no longer question his own happiness, and having
embraced his charming Mistress, he gave her fresh assurances of the violence of
his Passion, which he told her was raised to that height that it must prove
mortal to him, except she would vouchsase to prevent it. Is it possible, Divine
Creature, said he, that at that moment, when I look upon you, there should be
any thing wanting to accomplish my Felicity? Alas! flattering Fancies!
deceitful Imaginations! I am very sensible what it is that is wanting to
complete my happiness, it is that you my incomparable Fair, would Love me as
well as I do you. I will Sir, I will from the very bottom of my Heart, answered
she. Now I leave it to the Reader's Judgment, to imagine what effects these
Words proceeding from the Mouth of his most adored Mistress, had upon the
Marshal: Indeed he was quite transported beyond himself, he Kissed her a
thousand times, and that so close as if he were in a Trance. The English Lady
giving him some weak Repulses; they served only to add Fuel to his Fire, and to
inflame his Passion, and not being able to contain himself any longer; he with
the consent of his Fair One, who was as hard put to it as himself to preserve
her Honor, took a walk in an adjacent Wood. When she found her self alone, I
expose my self to no small danger, said she, in entertaining a Person who
appears very dangerous to a tender Heart. Alas Heavens! I am only too sensible
of his lovely Accomplishments, he has somewhat so charming in him, that my
Liberty is in great danger of suffering Shipwreck. This Conqueror will in
time Triumph over my Weakness, if I don't oppose him with all my Strength.
Having made these Reflections, which her almost dying Virtue did inspire her
withal; she took her Pen, and having understood by a certain Friend, who^ was
going into Swisserland, that her Husband had been seen in that Country, she
wrote him these following Lines: Cruel, Ungrateful,
YOU appear so despicable to me at this time, that your neglect shall not cost
me so much as one Sigh. What could induce. you to leave your faithful Spouse
without Remorse? There need no great question to be made concerning the
difference of our Sentiments, they are so opposite to one another, that they
are passed all Reconciliation on my side. Oh! had it pleased Heaven, which has
punished me for loving you too much, to let me know you as well long ago, as I
do at present: This Knowledge would have saved me many a torrent of Tears and
Sighs, which I have so lavishly bestowed upon an ungrateful Man, who is not in
the least worthy of 'em: When you seriously consider with your self unto what
danger you have exposed a Woman of my Age, and if I may say so my self, who may
also pretend to some merit, you ought to blush for shame. My Virtue has
hitherto defended it self against those Temptations which daily present
themselves before my Eyes; But alas! How difficult it is to be assured of an
entire Victory over ones own Inclinations. How do you know but that when
matters come to the utmost extremity, my strength may fail me? Make haste
therefore to help me before I am utterly lost, which I shall certainly be
without your Presence. You have left me destitute of Money and all other
comforts. What would you have me resolve upon in this miserable Condition? If
it had not been for a certain Friend of mine, who in time may also be Yours, I
must have perished unavoidably for want of necessary Subsistence. I leave it to
your own consideration, what acknowledgement is due to his Generosity. I cannot
without some Confusion recite to you the ill Circumstances of our Affairs: Let
me hear of you, if you are still among the Living, and to be sure inform me
where you are at present, that I may come to see you. I shall be impatient to
understand where you are, at the same House, where this Friend the Bearer of
this Letter has left me, and whither he will direct you. Adieu, I remain in
spite of all your unkindnesses

Your Faithful Spouse.




No sooner had she dispatched this Letter, but she went to take the Air in an
adjacent Forest, where she knew that the Marshal was gone before accompanied
only with his Gentleman. Sympathy, which so strangely guides Lovers in their
Actions, had soon drawn the Marshal to the same Place where she had set herself
down; thus musing upon her amourous Adventure; and espying a Flock of Sheep
feeding not far off, she could not forbear saying, (as if she envied their
happiness) O you innocent Creatures, how happy are you! You feed here without
care and Anxiety; those Passions which continually afflict us Rational
Creatures, never disturb your Tranquillity; you follow the instincts of Nature,
without either Crime or Punishment: Your desires never exceed the bounds
prescribed by Nature: Love, which never disturbs your contented Mind, follows
among you its own Laws, O you Peaceable Creatures! You are more happy than we
Mortals. Monsieur de Boufflers, who had hid himself behind some Trees,
overheard all that she said, agreeably surprising her. Oh! Sir, cried she
blushing, who thought to have found you here? You are so dextrous at a Surprise
when least expected, and especially when one is employed in such matters as
ought to be kept from your Knowledge. I was just admiring the Sweetness and
Tranquillity which these Creatures enjoy, nothing vexes 'em, nothing disturbs
'em. Alas! why was not I made like them? Madam, said the Marshal, it lies in
your own Power to enjoy the same Tranquillity; you may make your self happy
whenever you please, and all such of your Friends, upon whom you shall vouch
safe to bestow your Favors. Do but Love, do but Love, continued he, this is
the only Happiness of Life. He would have proceeded in his discourse, but our
English Lady having made signs to him, that her Gentleman, who followed her
close, understood a little French, the Marshal did not enlarge any further upon
this Subject; and though their Conference lasted somewhat longer, they where
wholly employed in discoursing about indifferent matters. Thus as the Marshal
and the Lady were walking along with a slow Pace, they found themselves
insensibly got very far into the Wood, when they espied asar off a kind of
Cottage thatched with Straw and very neatly Built; insomuch that their
Curiosity inspired 'em with a desire to know who it should be that dwelt in so
solitary a Place, therefore my Lady Stone sent Mr. Game, her Gentleman to
inform himself of it: Upon his Return, he told our Lovers that this little
House belonged to a certain honest old Man, aged above a Hundred and Twelve
Years, and that he had with him one of the most Beautiful Creatures in the
World, which he said was his Daughter. This News seeming somewhat surprising
the English Lady, she enjoined her Gentleman to return to the same Place, on
purpose to ask him how old he might be when he begot this Daughter, and to make
some other particular Enquiries concerning the whole course of his Life. While
the Gentleman was gone to execute his Mistresses Commands, she had set her self
under a Tree, where she expected his return: The Marshal having here Prostrated
himself at the Feet of his Goddess, began to renew his former Protestations.
Hold your Tongue you prattling Fool, said she, giving him a gentle blow upon one
Cheek; which being done with a very gallant Air, it so sensibly touched the
Marshal, that he was ready to expire for Joy. In the mean time Mr. Game being
returned drew near and told 'em, that the Countryman refused to answer his
Questions, imagining that he was come to play upon him, and that he had shut
himself up in his Hutch. Let us go Madam, said the Marshal rising from his
Seat, and make him open the Door, that we may have the Satisfaction to see that
handsome Damsel, whose Beauty has surprised Mr. Game. What reason is there
replied my Lady Stone, (being jealous that this Damsel might surpass her in
Beauty) to disturb these poor People in their peaceable Enjoyment? come let us
go Home to our own Lodgings. The Marshal, who always shows the utmost
Complaisance to Lady's, was unwilling to contradict his Mistress, though he had a
great mind to see this Country-Beauty, therefore he thought it most convenient
to deferr his Curiosity till a more favorable Opportunity, when he should be
alone. Having reconducted the Lady to her Lodgings, the remainder of the Day
was spent in playing at Cards, and such sort of Sports. Neither was Love laid
aside, but had a share in the Pastime, and our Marshal would have been very
willing to play another Game, but he could not prevail at that time.

It is scarce to be imagined how this English Lady, who saw herself reduced to
the utmost extremity, could defend her Honor with so much bravery. She
endeavored to detain her Lover with fair Words from one Day to another, in
hopes that her Husband in the mean time might come to assist her in this
Critical Conjuncture: Not but that she had a very favorable Opinion of the
Marshal, whom she loved extremely, nay, even to that degree, that she herself
despaired of resisting his Charms much longer. For he that is once Master of
the Heart of a Lady, need not much question all the rest Our present Narrative
will furnish us with Examples of this nature. But let us return to our General,
who notwithstanding this praeengagement, went in search of a new Passion. He
could not forget what he had heard the other day in the Wood concerning the
Country-Damsel, whom he had not as yet seen, except it were in the Idea of his
own Fancy, which appeared to him very pleasing; therefore he arose one Morning
early with the Sun, and repaired to the Wood, without letting any one know his
Design, steering his Course directly toward the Cottage, where he found the
old Man and his Daughter busy in making your Basket-work Umbrello's, by which
they got their Livelihood; who seemed to be much surprised at the sight of
him. The Marshal was no less amazed at them; for he protested some hours after,
that though he had Traveled over a great part of the World, he had never in all
his Lifetime met with any thing comparable to this Country-Beauty. He took
particular notice of the exact features of her Face, her delicate shape, very
proportionable to the size of her Limbs, which were not as yet come to their
full growth and perfection; she then not having attained to above Sixteen or
Eighteen years of Age: The whole Ornament of her Body being a small Jacket of
pure white Linen. The Marshal would have entered into discourse with her, but
he found her so Savage and ill Humored, that she flew away from him directly
into her Cottage. In the mean while her Father took the Liberty to tell him in
the German Tongue, that he had best go about his business, or else he would not
long be pleased with his Entertainment. The Marshal seeing himself threatened by
a plain Country-Fellow (who by reason of his Skill in Magical Arts, was not so
ignorant as he imagined) despising his threats drew his Sword at him, telling
him, you old Sorcerer, I Will make you know, at least to let me see your fair
Daughter: He did not believe that he had called him by his right Name, but was
soon convinced of the Truth of it; for in an instant, he saw three or four
great black Fellows, like so many Infernal Fiends fall upon him, sometimes
pulling him by the Nose, which they Pinched soundly, sometimes by the Ears,
which they stretched with such a force, as if they would have pulled 'em off.
This Game being over, which was nothing to what was to come, they drew him up
into the Air, and with his own Sword gave him innumerable Blows; from hence
they conveyed him quite to the other end of the Forest, upon a precipice
surrounded with Water: The Marshal as brave as he is, was heartily afraid that
these Devils would have thrown him down headlong from thence into the Pond,
but it seems it was not his fate to be Drowned. At last, after he had been well
drub'd again, they threw his Sword at his Head and so left him. The Marshal
returned as fast as he was able to his Lodgings, where he did not speak so much
as one Word of his Adventure, but he was forced to keep his Bed for several
Days, and Champonniere his Valet du Chamber was fain to bath his Limbs, (which
were extremely battered) with Spirit of Wine, and Spanish Soap. My Lady Stone
not being able to guess at the cause of this sudden Distemper of her Lover, was
almost out of her Wits; she came every Day to his Bedside, to show him her
Affection, and how much concerned she was for his Ilness: The Marshal on the
other hand, acknowledged her Civilities in the most Obliging manner in the
World. As soon as he was recovered, he did not fail to give her the same
Demonstrations of his Love as before, nevertheless she soon perceived that the
vehemence of his Passion was somewhat abated. The Beautiful Country-Damsel whom
he had seen in the Wood, notwithstanding the ill Treatment he had received, had
so enchanted him, that his Thoughts could not be employed any where else, My
Lady Stone appeared much dissatisfied at his Shyness, not knowing unto what
cause to attribute this indifferency. Should it not perhaps be, said she to her
self, because I have denied him those Favors which he su'd for so earnestly?
But how could I do otherwise? Why should I at once betray my Virtue and my
Husband, to satisfy the Brutish inclinations of a Man, who perhaps when he has
obtained his aim, will make me a Laughing Stock to his Companions? No, No, I Will
never consent to it. Not but that my Husband, who has played me such a prank so
lately, deserves it very well; but I am resolved to subdue my Passion, for my
own satisfaction's sake, and not to loose the pleasure of Triumphing over all
those flattering Temptations which daily lie in my way. Nevertheless I must
own, that I have vast Obligations to the Marshal, who did so generously assist
me when I was in extremity: a bare acknowledgment will be scarce a sufficient
Recompense for his Liberality. neither am I ignorant that all Men are guided by
Interest, and that they never oblige a Woman without a Prospect of Reward. Thus
our beautiful English Lady was reasoning with her self, when Monsieur de
Boufflers (who was by this time pretty well tired with the thoughts of his
Country-Beauty) surprised her upon a sudden: What is it Madam, said he, that
disturbs your Mind, what is it that makes you so pensive? Truly Sir, replied
the Lady not without some disturbance, I am so, and that too upon very good
Grounds: For is it not cause enough of trouble to see my self looked upon by
you with all the indifferency imaginable, even at the same time when I can hear
no News from my Husband? Don't you think that all this is sufficient to
overwhelm me with Grief. Alas! Sir, to my Misfortune I have placed you too
near my Heart. She could not proceed without shedding some Tears, which very
sensibly affected the Marshal, who very dexterously attributed the effects of
his Discontent and Indifferency to her Shyness; telling her that it was because
she had set light by his Passion. Indeed, replied she, I might easily
Conjecture this to be the true cause of your indifferency; but can you imagine
Sir, that without a great deal of trouble we can resolve to grant your Sex
those Favors, which you aim at. I am apt to believe you say right, Madam,
answered the Marshal, but if a Woman meets with one whom she knows to be a
Person of Honor and Discretion, what has she to fear? As for my own part,
continued she, I would rather a Thousand times fall upon the point of my own
Sword, than brag of a Favor received from a Lady. He must needs be destitute
both of Honor and Integrity that does it. If this be the only Scruple
remaining, which troubles you, I can quickly free you from it, by assuring you
that as to this particular I am invincible: Love me therefore my Dearest, and
don't any longer refuse to give me that most precious Pledge of your Love,
which I beg of you. The Marshal expressed these words in so Passionate a
manner, that even at that very Moment the Lady was overcome. I have understood
since, that our General, who never attacks any Place without success; luckily
hit at that time on the very Critical Minute, and he made use of it with
discretion, like a Man of Honor, this is to say, without boasting of it, as a
great many Gentlemen do, when they meet with a good chance. The satisfaction
which the Marshal received in the enjoyment of this English Lady, far surpassed
what he had from his Spanish Mistress at Puicerda. He continued his amourous
Engagements for some time with the latter, as a Person of much Honor and
Bravery; till being ordered to some Warlike Expedition, he was fain to resolve
to quit his Mistress. While these two Lovers were lamenting that cruel
separation which was so near at Hand; the Husband of this fair English Lady,
having received her Letter, and fearing not without Reason, that a Coronet was
preparing for his Head, had made all the speed he could to come into Germany.
The Marshal was overjoyed at the News, finding his Mistress to grow somewhat
burdensome to his Purse, be. sides that he was obliged to pay her more than
ordinary respect, in regard of her Quality.

Mr. Stone was extremely well satisfied to meet his Wife, whom he believed to
have been very faithful to him; but poor Man, he was very much mistaken, he
must have come a little sooner, if he would have prevented her from entering him
in the Cuckold's Order. However, matters passed between 'em with a great deal
of Love and Amity. The Marshal treated the English Gentleman no otherwise than
his Friend, assuring him by several Oaths that he would be ready to serve him,
whenever any Occasion should present it self. But the Lady was greatly
afflicted at the Approaching departure of her Lover, who was so complaisant to
stay with her as long as possibly he could, even some time beyond his Orders,
during which, they let slip no opportunity to strengthen the good Husband's
Horns, who was not sensible of what pains they took for him, or if he was, did
conceal his Resentment. However, one Evening, after the Marshal was just gone
out of her Appartment, he could not forbear telling her, that he thought she
had a little too much kindness for the Marshal. What wou'd'st thou have me do
my Dear, replied she, you know what vast Obligations I have received from him;
he has dealt so generously with me, that it is impossible for me to forget it as
long as I live. Alas! if it had not been for him, I had not been now among the
Living. This was sufficient to persuade the poor English Gentleman, that all
the kindnesses which she had shown him, were the bare effects of Gratitude. At
last Monsieur Boufflers was forced to leave his Post, and to depart conformably
to the positive Orders of the Count de Montal. I will not undertake here to
give you a Relation of what passed in the Field during the rest of the
Campaign, this not being my present design, but I shall rather follow the
natural course of our History, which will lead us to some new Love-Intreagues
of our General; who being returned after the Campaign was finished, to Paris,
soon provided for himself a new Mistress: This was a young Damsel, the Daughter
of a certain rich Merchant, whom he saw one Morning going to Mass at Clermont,
where he went to hear a Sermon preached by a Jesuit, who contrary to the Custom
of his Society, was at that time to treat of pure Morality. Though the Marshal
seemed to be very attentive to the Doctrine preached by this Jesuit, who
discoursed like a very good Christian, yet Love did not cease to insinuate it
self into his Heart, and to make him sensible of its Force. Mademoiselle Landy
was the name of this Beauty, that had charmed him at Church: She wore that day
upon her Head one of your little black Feather-Caps, that were then in Fashion,
which was so becoming to her, that though she was otherwise but an indifferent
Beauty, yet the Marshal could scarce keep his Eyes from her. She soon perceived
it, and knowing her self to be in a Place, where every thing ought to be done
with a great deal of Modesty, she pulled her Hood somewhat lower over her Face.
Sermon being ended, the Marshal took care to go out with her, and with a very
gallant Air to ask her, if she would not allow him the Honor to wait upon her
to her House. This young Gentlewoman who was very well bred, and did not want
Wit, quickly perceiving by his Behavior that he was not a Man to be despised,
accepted of his Civility; nay, seemed well pleased to be Conducted home by so
gallant a Gentleman.

The next day, the Marshal made her a Visit; he found her in her Chamber, where
she was playing very Sweetly and Charmingly upon the Lute. The sweetness of her
Voice and the skill with which she expressed her Words to Admiration, were such
Powerful Charms to him, that he seemed to be quite Enchanted. But he was forced
to carry on this Love-intreague with a great deal of Precaution; for her Father
and Mother were Persons of good Repute, whose chief aim was to prefer their
only Daughter to some good Match or another. They flattered themselves for some
time with the hopes that Monsieur de Boufflers visited their Daughter upon this
account, but they were much mistaken, for his only business was to divert
himself, and to spend his leisure-time in amourous Adventures. Monsieur Landy
began at last to discover his Design, and coming one day from the Exchange, met
with the Marshal de Boufflers upon his Knees before his Daughter, Kissing her
Hands: Upon his departure, he checked her very severely, and in a Week after
sent her to a Nunnery. The Marshal having perceived that he was the cause that
the Father had so unkindly treated his Daughter, gave him a Visit on purpose to
upbraid him with his severity. Will you marry her Sir, said the Merchant
briskly to Monsieur Boufflers, if you will, I Will give her Thirty or Forty
Thousand Crowns, ready Money for her Portion. No Sir, replied Monsieur
Boufflers, my intent is not as yet to entangle my self in Wedlock; all that I
did, was only to pass away some Melancholy hours in admiring those perfections,
which I found in her. You speak like a Gentleman, said Monsieur Landy smiling,
You have tht Opera and Playhouse in this Town, which I should think might be
sufficient to divert you, without haunting our Houses, on purpose to Debauch
our Daughters. I have found my Daughter Madelon quite altered from what she was
wont to be, since she has conversed with you. Gentlemen of your Kidney have a
strange Influence over such young Maidens, which is not much admired among us
Citizens: We are not very ambitious of having 'em turn Wanton or Impudent
House-wives: We willingly leave these Qualifications to your Lady's of
Pleasure, who don't think it any considerable Crime to Cuckold their Husband's.
You are not in the wrong of it, Sir, replied the Marshal with a Smile, to take
care of your Pullets, lest such Game-Cock's as we should Sport with 'em; I do
believe we should be apt to teach 'em another sort of Game; but at the same
time you treat your Daughter with too much Rigor, thus to thrust her into a
Nunnery: As for my own part, I Will swear to you by St. Urbot, that I never spoke
twice of Love to her. Don't you know Sir, replied the Merchant, that St. Urbot
is the Patron of all Treacherous and Perjured Persons, and what wonder is it,
if you Soldiers choose him to be your Protector? You take us Soldiers then to be
Devilish strange Creatures, my Friend, answered the Marshal, but I would have
you know, that if it were not for us, our Enemies would have cropped your Ears
long ago. No, no, Sir, you are mistaken, replied the Merchant, if matters were
come to the utmost extremity, I believe we might be able to defend our selves
as well as you. And continued he, Swearing a great Oath, and pointing at an old
Cimetar that hung up in the Hall, with this very Weapon I dare undertake my
self to dispatch Thirty Soldiers at one stroke. O brave Merchant, replied
Monsieur de Boufflers, taking him by the Hand; I find now that you are a Man of
Courage, if our Enemies should ever come to enter France, we shall be sure not
to want brave Soldiers to assist us upon all Occasions. I Will take care that his
most Christian Majesty shall be informed of your Bravery. O good Sir, answered
Monsieur Landy, I hope you will not play me such a scurvy trick; to tell you
the truth, I am the greatest Coward in the World; if any one takes me at a
word; my Courage and Riches both are only in Conceit. Indeed, replied the
Marshal, you have done very well to undeceive me, for else I should have
certainly made you pass with the King both for a Croesus and a Caesar: See now,
said the Merchant, how dangerous it is to have more Reputation than is
convenient. It Is very probable that for this Opinion which the World would
have conceived both of my Wealth and Bravery (though far from Truth) I might
have paid dearly one time or another. Well Sir, replied the Marshal, you are
the best Judge of both; Adieu, I leave you to your selves, but I would have you
show your self more kind to your Daughter, who does not deserve this ill
treatment from your Hands.

Monsieur de Boufflers, after having left the Merchant, returned to his own
House, to reflect upon his amourous Widow hood which indeed was so burdensome
to him, that he was not able to endure it long: He wanted some new
Love-engagement, let it cost what it would. Opportunity, which always was
favorable to him, soon presented a Paramour to his view. This was the Wife of
a certain Counselor of Paris, one of the most beautiful Women in this famous
City. Their first Acquaintance happened at the Playhouse: He being then placed
in one of the Boxes, this Lady who was in the Pit, cast such killing looks at
him, that he could not forbear going in, and to set himself down by her. Being
desirous to be further acquainted with her, he sent his Servant for some dry
Sweetmeats, China-Oranges and some Lemonade, which he presented to her: The
fair Lady, who was accustomed to receive great Presents, did nevertheless not
refuse the small ones; She accepted 'em very cheerfully, returning a thousand
thanks to the Marshal, who told her at the same time; Madam, I am overjoyed at
this happy Hour, which has procured me the advantage of your Acquaintance, It
is a considerable time since I have been ambitious of this Honor. How Sir,
replied the Gentlewoman very Merrily, could you know me before I ever had an
Opportunity of seeing you. Yes, Madam, replied he very seriously, it is certain
that a great while ago I had the advantage of knowing you, but looking upon you
as a Person of extraordinary Beauty and Merits, I never had the boldness to
approach you. The Lady finding her self outdone in Compliments, turned the
Discourse upon the Players, who Acted their part very well, so that she would
fain have made these the only Subject of the present Conference, but Monsieur
Boufflers interrupted her. This is not, said he, the Point in Question, you
don't answer me to what I spoke to you of, concerning the Honor I have
obtained of your Acquaintance. Truly Sir, replied she very smartly, I know not
well what answer to make, you tell me that you have known me for some time, and
I was born in a Province which I believe you scarce ever saw in your Lifetime,
that is to say, Normandy; and having not been above two Months in Paris, I
cannot take it any otherwise than that you are pleased to Jest with me. Oh!
Madam, answered the Marshal, I rather would be my own Executioner, than to
conceal my sentiments on purpose to divert my self at the expense of so lovely
a Creature. I should be ashamed of such sinister Proceedings, neither can my
Heart consent to so base an Action: Indeed it is not accustomed to deal
perfidiously with any Person, and much less with one who is so beautiful as
you; it would be easy for you to reduce its Inclinations to its Duty, if it
were not in its own self capable to Act with sincerity, even in matters of the
least Moment. Oh! that pretty loving Heart, cried the Lady, as if she had been
surprised, I believe this to be the only one in the World. How! always true,
always sincere, and without disguise; this is the first of this kind, that ever
I heard of, and especially of so brave a Cavalier as you, who esteems it
commonly no Sin to say to a Woman whatever you think fit, though you scarce ever
retain any thought about it afterward; much less that you should have an
inclination to perform it. Then you take me, Madam, said the Marshal looking
earnestly upon her, for a Dissembler and one that pretends to quite different
things from what he thinks. Is this the Honor you are pleased to bestow upon
me at first Sight? At this rate I have but little hopes of insinuating my self
into your Favor; it is not likely that you will set much value upon a Man of
such a Character. Notwithstanding all these infirmities, replied she, it is not
impossible but that I might Love you, provided that -- Oh! Madam, said the
Marshal, being impatient to hear the rest, don't stop here, else you will leave
me in the greatest Distraction imaginable.

The Play being just ended, every one departed out of the House, and our
Marshal, who had found this Lady's Conversation very agreeable, would needs
conduct her Home, though she had in her Company one of her Brothers, who being a
Student in the Jesuits College, was not very well acquainted with such amourous
Repartees. He when he had his Sister alone, began to argue the Case very
handsomely with her, telling her, that she was now Married, and therefore did
not stand in need of a Gallant, and that if her Husband should get the least
knowledge of it, he would be very angry with her; he told her besides, that
your Soldiers of all Men ought not to be regarded, since their only aim was to
impose upon the poor Women, and afterward to laugh at 'em. Go, go, Brother,
answered the Lady, with your Advice another way, you have too much Sense for
your Age. They that will taste the pleasures of Love, must not argue so closely
as you do. Monsieur Niguese my Husband is not likely to know any thing of our
Intrigue; it would be a hard Fate upon us poor Women, if we were to employ all
our time and pains only to please a Husband: For my part, this does not at all
suit with my Humor. The more pity for you Sister, replied Monsieur
Landrirette, (which was the name of the fair Lady's Brother) you will make but a
very indifferent House-Wife if you don't intend to make that your chief
business, as becomes an honest Gentlewoman, such a one as you have been
Educated at home; what can, continued he, be more Reproachful to a Woman that
values her Reputation, than to hornify a poor harmless Man, who has not
deserved it? And how do thou know Landrirette, answered his Sister briskly
that he does not deserve it, his Brotherin-Law I am sure has great Occasion for
a lusty Pair to rouse up his dull Spirits, and to clear his cloudy Brains.

Truly Sister, replied Landrirette, you either intend to make sport with me, or
else I believe you are not in your right Wits; if I thought you were in good
earnest, I would be the first that should give notice of it to your Husband,
who I don't question, would find out a way to prevent his being dignified with
Horns by you. Indeed, replied his Sister scoffingly, I don't know whether he
could or not; a Woman is a strange sort of Creature to deal with, when she has
once set her Resolution upon such a thing. I am only too apt to believe it,
answered Landrirette, as he was going away, but pray Sister be mindful of your
Duty, and consider that you have a Husband, unto whom you are accountable for
your Actions. Come hither you Block-head, replied Madam Niguese, calling back
her Brother, can thou believe me to be such a Fool, as not to tread in my
Mother's Footsteps. I have heard my Parents say that when I was born, my
Mother persuaded my Father, who is as thou know a good honest Man, (I suppose
thou do apprehend my meaning) that she was big with me Ten or Eleven Months,
which is contrary to the course of Nature: My Father, who was willing to be
absolutely satisfied in this matter, having been absent these Eleven Months,
took Counsel of a Physician, who had had more than half a share in the
begetting me, whether it were possible for any Woman to go so long with Child:
You may easily imagine that the Doctor told him it might very well be, partly
out of self-interest, and partly moved by the entreaties of my Mother, who was
sorely afraid that the Plot might be discovered. If any Sinister Accident
should happen to me, I warrant you we shall go near to find out means to clear
that mistake. Is this your way to rectify your Errors, replied her Brother, for
shame blush at these Reproachful Designs; Adieu I cannot endure to hear you
talk at this rate any longer.

Her Brother having thus left her, she entered her Closet, where she began to
Reflect upon her Passion, which she felt for Monsieur de Boufflers, who had
appeared in her Eyes the most charming and most accomplished Man in the World,
and as she said to herself, who deserved to possess the Heart of a Beautiful
Woman, Oh! what a Satisfaction is it, said she, to make such a Conquest: His
whole Air is charming, and I have observed that all his Actions tend to
honorable Designs; but supposing he should not be so nice in his Honor, as I
could wish for, what hazard can I run in the Case? I am a Married Woman; if I
were a young Maid, he might (after he had deceived me) expose me to his Scorn,
but as I am, I need not insist upon these Trifles, I shall enjoy a Thousand
happy Minutes, without any farther charge to my self than a little
Complaisance: As to the Horns, which my Husband is likely to get by the
Bargain, I matter it not, knowing that he well deserves 'em; besides, that
there are a great many others who think themselves fine Fellows, because they
have the Honor to be admitted into that Order. It Is at present the grand Mode
of Paris, a fine business indeed, to make so many Scruples about; is there not
such a Multitude of Persons who are content to wear 'em, that their number is
not to be expressed? Monsieur Niguese her Husband coming into the Closet,
prevented her from making any farther Reflections for that time, being come to
lead her to Supper.

The next Day the Marshal de Boufflers, who seldom looses a prize, gave a visit
to this Lady, who very joyfully bid him welcome to her House, and her Husband,
who as I have told you before, was a Counselor, desired our General to come
into his Study, which was furnished all over with Baggs of Writings. Monsieur
Boufflers was at that time actually engaged in a Law suit, and having occasion
for the advice of a Lawyer, he delivered his Writings to our Counselor, who
returned him a Thousand Compliments for the Honor he did him, in making use of
him in this Law Suit: He promised that he would peruse 'em all over, and not be
wanting in his endeavors to gain him the Cause. I shall think my self very
much obliged to you, Sir, answered Monsieur de Boufflers, putting two or three
Golden Lovises into his Hand: I will desire your Lady to put you in Mind of my
business. She is your Servant Sir, replied the Counselor, leading him into his
Wifes Chamber, who had left 'em by themselves, not questioning but that the
Marshal would give her a Visit in private before he departed. Pray observe Sir,
said the good Man, peeping his Wife in the Face, she has more Interest in the
Courts of Justice than my self. When my Lord chief President comes to our
House, Come hither my Dearest, will he say, take you my Robe and Cap, and do
you give Sentence as you think Convenient. O dear Sir, said the Marshal
Smiling, I hope this may turn to my great Advantage, Come Madam, Come, said he,
making a show as if he would embrace her, if you will but take my business in
Hand, I don't question but we shall manage the Cause to very good purpose. But
Sir, continued he, ere I forget it, are not you a Native of Normandy; if I
don't mistake, I have heard 'em say that you have great skill in the tricking
part of the Law, as most of your best Gentlemen of that Country have. No, Sir,
replied Monsieur Niguese, I was born near Paris, but Normandy is the Native
Country of my Wife. O you then are the Person who is best skilled in that part,
replied the General in a Familiar manner, it is to you that I must make my
application, and give you Instructions concerning my whole Business. No
question Sir, replied the Counselor, but that we shall find it out in time, I
will leave you with my Wife to open the Cause; whilst I go to a certain Abbot
one of my old Friends, to draw up a Petition for him of great Consequence. I
cannot but tell you before I go, that this Abbot having got a young Wench with
Child, she now Sues him for a Maintenance both for her self and the Child, for
their Lives. My Dearest, do you relate the rest of the Story to Monsieur
Boufflers. O yes, yes, said the Lady, being very uneasy that he was not gone
before, my dear sweet Husband, I will notfail to do it, do but yno go to the
Abbot du Great, it is possible he may else employ another Lawyer. O Plague! said
he, putting on his Cloak, I should not like that, for he is a pleasant sort of
a Fellow; besides, he has always some Law-business or another, especially
relating to Women, being a particular admirer of the fair Sex, and is always
busy in grafting in their Gardens. For that I understand said Monsieur
Boufflers, this is a dangerous Spark: Adieu replied Monsieur Niguese, my Wife
knows him better than I.

The Counsellor's Lady being thus rid of the troublesome Company of her
Husband, immediately entered upon her Love-concerns, which was what the Marshal
wished for. The Parley was soon over, and in a little time they began to examine
matters, piece by piece, but especially those of the Marshal de Boufflers;
which this fair Lady handled almost without Intermission, confessing to him
ingenuously, that she had never touched any thing so well proportioned in her
Lifetime. But Madam replied he, perceiving that she was no novice at the
Trade, you have forgot my Lord President's, are not his Parts superior to
mine? Oh! there is a great deal of difference my Dear, replied she with a
little Confusion, I never met with a more disagreeable Man in the whole course
of my Life, than he is from Head to Foot; for his Natural Parts both above and
below, are so inconsiderable, that one would swear he had been clipped on all
sides. This was enough for our Marshal to satisfy himself in what he was
desirous to know, concerning this Lady, with whom he had been so lately
engaged, and whom he had found also very defective as to what he had imagined
her to be at first Sight: Wherefore after some farther Conversation altogether
relating to Love Affairs, he was for taking his leave, but the Lady, who was
not so soon cooled as he entreated him to stay a little longer, which the
Marshal excused, under pretense that a violent Fit of the Colic had seized
him; so that without any farther delay he departed from thence, to give a visit
to one of his Relations, who lived in the Suburbs of St. Germain, to whom he
gave an account of this whole Adventure, without mincing the matter.

O brave! cried this Lady, laughing at him, now you have caught a Tortois
indeed, you have bestowed your Love upon a very deserving Creature, whose chief
Reputation is, that she prostitutes herself to all sorts of Men, viz, Priests,
Monks, Hostlers, etc. nothing comes amiss to her, even to the Curate of Meudon,
and he you must know is a brave Fellow indeed. And what is this terrible Fellow
pray, replied the Marshal de Boufflers desiring her to continue her discourse.
What he is, replied Madam Garenne, Ill tell you my Dear Kinsman, he bespatters
the reputation of all the Women and Maids in his Parish, except such as he
knows to be willing to comply with his Brutish Lust. That Impudent Rascal,
replied the Marshal laughing ought to be sous'd, as well as all the rest of the
Religious Orders, that cannot keep within their bounds. I know one my self,
whom I make use of sometimes for a Father Confessor, who oftener talks of Love,
than of Penance to those Ladies, who come to him to Confession.

One of the Lady's Gentlewomen coming into the Room, broke off the Discourse,
telling her that the Countess of -- was come to pay her Honor a Visit. The
Marshal very earnestly looking in the Face of of this Gentlewoman, found her as
fair as an Angel, besides that she had a most Charming sweetness in her Speech
and whole Deportment; Monsieur de Boufflers having been instantly touched with
her Charms, told his Cousin, that for certain Reasons he would not be present
while the Countess paid her Visit, but that in the mean while he would stay in
her Chamber. Madam Garenne, who had always a great deal of Complaisance for
him, said to her waiting Woman, Janneton, do you in the mean time entertain my
Cousin with the pleasant Adventures of the unfortunate She Lover, which was at
that time a new Novel much in Vogue, and which her Gentlewoman had got by
Heart. She had no sooner begun to relate the first Intrigue, when the Marshal
Squeezing her Hands between his: told her with a very Passionate look. I wish
you would rather tell me somewhat concerning your own Love-concerns, than of
others, In which I have not the least share. How Sir, replied Janneton with a
blush, should I relate to you my own Love-Adventures, who never Loved in my
Lifetime? Is it possible my fairest, answered the Marshal, that so charming a
Creature as you should not have been made sensible of the force of Love. You
would Madam, said he, give, but will not take. I don't in the least believe
replied she, with a very becoming Modesty, that it is in my Power to engage any
one in Love. Oh! Madam, replied the Marshal smiling, you are but only too
powerful, for at this very Moment you, have made me your Slave. Janneton who
was unacquainted with such Passionate Expressions, especially coming from the
Mouth of such a Gentleman as the Marquess de Boufflers; returned no answer to
what he said, but rising from her seat, was about to leave the Marshal alone
notwithstanding her Mistresses orders, to entertain him during her Absence.

But the Marshal stopping her Passage, whether will you fly, said he, my dear
Child, pray don't deny to hear my sufferings. What would you have me say Sir,
replied the young Gentlewoman with a blush which had spread it self all over
her Face I don't understand your Language, and I am much surprised that you will
stoop so low as to make it your business to wheedle so inconsiderable a Person
as I am, who am altogether ignorant in the Love Cards, as in the Art of
Algebra. Thou art in Jest sure my Dearest, replied the Marshal, going to Kiss
her Mouth which was very small, and as red as Coral; Love, is Natural to both
Sexes, and I can read it in thy fair Eyes, that thou art not insensible of it.
Oh! thou pretty Rogue, let me embrace thee, else I dye without delay, Dye if
you please Sir, replied Janneton, pushing him from her, you are full of your
Transports and Familiarities, which are in no wise agreeable to my Humor; how
long have you known me, thus to call me, thou at every turn, you may call your
Servant-Maids so if you please: As for me, I was born the Daughter of the
Marquess de la Fleur, who is descended of a noble and ancient Family in
Bretaigne, though somewhat decayed and under a Cloud at this time. Madam Garenne
has been pleased to take me into her House and does not treat me like a Servant
but as a Friend. The Marshal having considered with himself, that his Cousin at
her going out of the Room had desired her to entertain him; which Office does
not belong to Chamber-maids, he told her, throwing himself at her Feet; Madam I
beg your Pardon, I was not so happy as to know you before, besides 'twas the
excess of my Passion that made me take too much liberty; but I find you Cruel
and Inexorable to the highest degree. As far I can see, you would let whole
Troops of Lovers dye at your Feet, without the least Compassion on your side;
certainly Madam this is a crime of the highest Nature, to be so Inhuman. I take
it to be a greater Crime in you Sir, replied Janneton, laughing at his being in
this Posture, to endeavor to persuade us, if we were so Foolish as to believe
it, that you are most Passionately in Love with all such Persons, to whom you
address your Courtships; but as for my part, you must excuse me, if I cannot
give Credit to your Asseverations, I know a little too well the true Character
of you Courtiers, not by Experience, but by the Relations of others, who have
had the Opportunity to try 'em. And what do those pretty incredulous Creatures
say of us, replied the Marshal carelessly. O Sir, said Janneton, they will tell
you of a thousand Dissembling and Perfidious tricks, such as are altogether
unbecoming a great Soul: I wonder how Gentlemen of Quality can condescend to
make use of such mean ways to deceive our Sex; I should think that Love, being
the most innocent Commerce among us Mortals, should be founded upon honorable
Principles. You have spoke very well, my most adorable Janneton, cried the
Marshal Transported with Passion; but you must consider that these Lady's of
whom you speak, deal somewhat unjustly with us, in representing all Men of one
and the same Temper: There are some that are Lovers of Honor and Integrity,
and would scorn to deal upon other Terms with your Sex; thanks to my Stars, I
am of the number of these, and I would sooner, added he, drawing his Sword out
of the Scabbard, thrust this through my Heart than deceive a Lady that Loves me.
Then Sir, replied the young Lady smiling, one must Love you, if one would make
sure of your Heart. Yes Divine Creature, said Monsieur de Boufflers, that is
the only way to Conquer it and to make it your Vassal.

Madam Garenne, who had re-conducted the Countess to her Coach, coming in,
interrupted 'em, otherwise our General would not have broke off so soon; But
this Lady as soon as she was entered well Cousin said She, has Mademoiselle de
la Fleur entertained you with some satisfaction concerning the unfortunate
She-Lover? Yes Madam, replied the Marshal, casting a tender look upon Janneton,
but I have in my turn, entertained her with that of the Unfortunate He Lover,
who could not persuade his Mistress of his sincerity, upon which subject I have
enlarged to the utmost of my Ability. Your Mademoiselle there, is the most
unlucky, unbelieving Creature in the World, she will not believe a Word one
says; except you forswear your self to the Devil, you cannot persuade her of
the least thing that can be. O dear Cousin, said Madam Garenne, don't Swear;
you are not ignorant that the fair Sex is always incredulous, and that they
take a particular Pride in making their Gallants languish for 'em. Plague! on
this way of making Love; replied the Marquess pleasantly, I would have 'em take
my Word at first. Oh! my dear Kinsman, answered the Lady, this would abate a
great deal of the pleasure; you know that every thing that is bought dear
pleases best: If a Woman should at first sight surrender her Heart, you would
be deprivd of the most charming part of your Passion: What is easily obtained,
soon looses its Vigor, and fades as fast as it grows. But come, let us talk of
other more substantial matters; one cannot live upon Love, and in my mind, Love
is but a slender Diet.

No sooner had the Lady broke off this Discourse, but she ordered that a good
Collation should be got ready; in the mean time, the Marshal who appeared very
pensive, retired into another Room, where having fixed his Eyes upon several
Pictures representing some Rural Nymphs, he diverted himself with some Pastoral
Songs; which his Kinswoman having taken notice of; Come, Come, Cousin, cried
she, awake out of your Amourous slumber, come taste whether my Wine be good. By
my Faith Madam, answered the Marshal, I am so drunk with Love, that all other
Food is insipid, every thing else is indifferent to me: Not very long ago,
continued he, being at Supper with the two Marshals, de Crequi and de Navaille,
and my Thoughts being taken up with a certain amourous Assignation at a place
where I had been entertained some time before, with a great deal of Delight and
Satisfaction; these Gentlemen finding me thus pensive, were so spiteful as to
slip upon my Plate a great piece of a Candle, which I swallowed ere I was aware
of it, and when this was done, you may imagine they jeered me very handsomely.
What a Fool do thou make thy self, Boufflers, said Madam Garenne, thus to put
thy self into Amourous Raptures; if a complete History of thy Love-adventures
were to be committed to Writing, it would undoubtedly make a very large Volume.
When you have drunk this Glass of Wine, (which she presented to him,) be so
Complaisant, said she to him, as to tell me who it is that at present has
Captivated your Heart. And would you have me tell you sincerely my dear
Kinswoman, replied the Marshal, it is Mademoiselle de la Fleur, who has chained
me so closely, that I shall scarce be able to bear it long, except this lovely
Child will take some pity on me: She appears to me the most amiable Person in
the World; her pretty little Mouth, her roguish Eyes, which send forth their
Rays like so many Darts every moment: Lord! I shall run Mad, if I think any
longer of 'em: Come, Truce in Love for some time; Come let us drink once,
continued he, Drinking a hearty draught of Wine, which was extraordinary good:
Here is to your best Inclinations; here is to your charming Eyes, said he, to
Mademoiselle de la Fleur, who was just coming into the Room. Come Janneton,
said Madam Garenne laughing, Pledge the Marshal that same Health. Madam,
replied the young Gentlewoman very modestly, I have business of greater moment
than to pledge the Marshal's Health to my Inclinations, which as I am apt to
believe are not agreeable to his sentiments, who admires good natured and
pliable Lady's. and those too must be as sweet and tender as young Mutton. Thus
I would wish it to be Mademoiselle, replied the Marshal, taking her by the
Hand. Pray Sir, said Janneton very gravely, let me go, I am just now about to
paint you one, which I am sure will please you. Provided she be like you,
replied Monsieur de Boufflers, I am sure I shall like her.

Mademoiselle de la Fleur being gone out of the Room, our General, who was
really in Love both with her Wit and engaging Air, spoke concerning her with a
great deal of earnestness to his Cousin, who gave him to understand that she
was a Gentlewoman of good Quality, and that out of Respect, she had made her
her Companion. Indeed she told me so, answered the Marshal, and she did not
forget to mention the great Obligations she had to you: I have a great deal of
Compassion for her upon that score, replied the Lady; truly I know her to be a
young Woman of a good Reputation, and I hope she has Wit enough to keep it. And
so do I Madam, replied the Marshal, if she will take my Word for it, I assure
you I Love her as much -- The Lady having soon understood the Marshal's
meaning, Pray Cousin, said she, don't you go about to Debauch this young
Gentlewoman, for whom I have a particular kindness; it is a strange thing that
you Gentlemen cannot employ your time better, than to put Love-tricks into the
young Women's Heads, who of a sudden turn Fools, and are undone by it. Your
Amourous Intreagues are as dangerous as your Martial Exploits: You talk of
nothing when you are together, but of consuming of Hearts as well as Villages
by Fire, and by your good will you would reduce every thing to Ashes: Come
employ you Firelocks in another Place, than in my House which you ought to
Honor and Respect. But Madam, replied the Marshal briskly, supposing this Fire
you speak of should first break out in your House, may not a Man complain of
'it, or make himself satisfaction? Ay, Ay, you are never unprovided for a
Repartee, replied the Lady, but let me desire you, if you will oblige me, not
to talk of Love to Janneton, whenever you see her. Then the Devil take me my
dear Cousin, said Monsieur de Boufflers hastily, if any thing in the World can
make me do that; at that rate I must go and cut out my -- I dare not name it.
Oh! cried the Lady laughing, you are not half so desperate as you would make us
believe. Farewell, you are only sick in Fancy, I leave you to your self. But
Madam, replied the Marshal pleasantly, and shall I not have the liberty to love
Mademoiselle de la Fleur, and to tell her -- No, No, not her, cried the Lady,
Declare your Passion to some Body else, where it will turn to better Account:
Janneton was not made for such Sparks as you. You may say what you please my
dear Cousin, said the Marshal, just as he was going, but this I am sure of, I
am resolved to adore her.

No sooner was the Marshal gone, but Madam Garenne called for Janneton, who was
at that time making a piece of Embroidery-work, which was the Figure of Diana,
wrought with Silk and Gold; she had represented this Goddess so lively, sitting
just upon the Banks of a small Current, that it was charming to behold, and one
could not choose but extremely admire both the skill of the Work-Woman, and the
exactness of the Work. When she was come down to Madam Garanna, she began to
give her a very sober Lesson concerning the Marshal de Boufflers, whom she told
her, she must by no means hearken to, but fly from his presence, as that of her
greatest Enemy; if you did but know my Dearest, said she, unto what danger a
young Woman exposes her self, whenever she lends an Ear to the flattering
Courtships of your Soldiers, it would make you stand amazed; nothing but what
is terrible and frightful belongs to 'em, and a virtuous Woman must inevitably
loose her Reputation, if she be conversant with 'em; if they happen to meet
with any one that is so foolish as to be caught in the Snare, she will be sure
to be rewarded with a certain loathsome Distemper, which is not fit to be
named, and makes a great many Women undergo the Martrydom of Love. Young Women,
who design to make their Fortune in the World, must not set up for light
House-Wives, but fly from the Company of Men, as it were so many evil Spirits;
this is the ready way to advance themselves the sooner by a good Match. I
remember that the first time that I saw my Husband, I had not till then spoke
to any other Man; in so much that he was more taken with my innocent Behavior
than with my Beauty and Portion, though both of 'em (if I may say it without
Vanity) were not despiseable. I having at that time the Reputation of being one
of the most beautiful Women in Paris. You have still a great share of it,
replied Janneton smiling, you are still worthy of the same Character. Let us
set jesting a side, replied the Lady, and let us return to Boufflers, who is
one of the most dangerous Men in the World; to hear him talk of his Passion,
you would imagine that the whole Universe was not able to contain it, which
often comes to no more than a Visit. I don't know Madam, replied Mademoiselle
de la Fleur, with a very serious Countenance, why you should give such a Lesson
to me, who never knew any thing of the General, but what I heard you speak, and
to whom I never spoke in my Life before, till now. Well, Well, Janneton, said
Madam Garenne, that advantage is not very great on your side: For to tell you
the true motive, which makes me talk thus to you; you must know that he has
declared to me, that he is fallen in Love with you: Jesus Maria, replied
Janneton, much surprised is it possible that he should be so Silly, as to tell
you a thing of this nature, which I am apt to believe he scarce ever dreamed
of? Madam if you will take my opinion in the matter, it was only to divert
himself; don't you observe what delight he takes to banter the Women. He
banters 'em often to some purpose, said the Lady laughing, he has by these
bant'ring Tricks got many a young Soldier to defend our Frontiers. It Is not
above two Months ago that a young Country-Damsel brought forth at one Birth two
lusty Boys of his begetting which I believe lie a little hard upon him at
present, because he is obliged to take care as well of the Mother, as of the
Children, whom he says, he will make his Footmen, as soon as they are able to
wear a Lavery-Coat. He does very well, replied Mademoiselle de la Fleur, to
find out so honorable an Employment for 'em in time, Madam, I would have you
be at rest as to this Point, for I assure you that I never shall love Monsieur
de Boufflers.

But Alas! how difficult a task it is for a young tender Heart to forswear
Love, which by degrees Triumphs over all the World. This fair One was no sooner
gotup into her Chamber again, but she began to feel some extraordinary Emotions
for the Marshal, whose Idea was firmly fixed in her Mind, though she had spoke of
him with so much indifferency to her Lady: It seemed as if the Lesson which she
had received from her Mouth, had only served to raise some kind of tenderness
in her Heart, of which she was not so sensible before. I Love him in spite of
what resistance I can make, said Janneton, while she was ruminating upon the
matter; the Idea I have conceived of him, begins to be very delectable to me;
if I had not been so much Tutored about it, perhaps I should never have loved
him: What strange Fatality! They describe him to me as a Man equally terrible
both in Love and War, but good God! notwithstanding all this, I am not able to
control my growing Passion, I am sensible I should stifle that secret Voice
which calls to me, Love, Love, and I should not make the least return to the
Marshal's Protestations, which like Thunderclaps soon strike down to the Ground
a Heart so feeble as mine.

She was making these Reflections with herself, when Madam Garenne, who began
to repent of having said so much to her upon that Subject, coming up into her
Chamber, asked her, whether her Work went on a pace? Yes Madam, replied the
young Gentlewoman, in a very Melancholy Tone, I do what I can to bring it
forward! What is the matter with you Janneton, said the Lady, looking in her
Face, you seem to be much discomposed; what is it that disturbs you? Nothing
Madam, replied she, it is impossible for any Person always to retain an even
Temper; there is none that is not out of Humor at certain times. I don't deny
that my Dear, answered the Lady, but at the same time, a young Woman as you
are, must not give way to Melancholy Fancies, What can be the cause of it?
Janneton made no further answer, but under pretense of looking about for
something that she had mis-laid, she got free of her Lady, who began to be
troublesome to her at that time; for the Lady imagining that her silence
proceeded from being to over diligent at her Work, left her to her self in her
Chamber, and went down into her own, where she spent her time in reading a Book
of Devotion, which bears the Title of Moral Reflections upon the Lives of the
Saints.

But let us leave these two Lady's for a little while, and see what is become
of our Marshal, who went to his Lodgings as enamored as ever he was in
Lifetime: He represented to his Imagination the perfections of Mademoiselle de
la Fleur, which had such an influence over his Spirits, that he did neither
Sleep nor Eat, as he used to do, because he never went either to Bed or Table,
without being disturbed by his amourous Disorders: He appeared always pensive,
being overwhelmed with a thousand distracting Cares, which almost reduced him
to the extremity of Despair, when he considered with himself all the obstacles
which he was to surmount before he could have the least hopes of obtaining his
aim; for Madam Garenne his Cousin had peremtorily declared that she would not
allow of the least Intercourse between him and his Mistress, from whom he as
yet had received but very small encouragement; -- but that which afforded him
most Consolation was, that he had observed in her whole deportment a natural
inclination to tenderness, though she feigned in some of her Actions a great deal
of haughtiness and cruelty. This hope (the common attendant of Love) made him
ruminate a long time what means might be most expedient for the accomplishing
of his Design, which was contrary to the Will of his Friend; to whom he owed
infinite obligations, because it was her Husband who had lent him the Money,
with which he had purchased the Royal Regiment of Dragoons, which he commanded
as Colonel at that time. However, all these considerations were not strong
enough to divert him from pursuing his former Intentions.

But before he went again to his Cousin's, he took a Resolution first to go and
give a Visit to his Counselor, Monsicur Niguese, being now resolved to break
quite off with his Wife, for whom he could not any longer have either Love or
esteem: When he came to the Counsellor's House, he asked him for his Writings,
at which the Lawyer being much surprised, told him that he scarce had time
enough to peruse'em, desiring him to let him know the reason of his calling for
'em so suddenly. No other Reason Sir, replied the Marshal, but that both
Parties have agreed the matter; pray let me know how much I am indebted to you
for your trouble. Monsieur Niguese who was a Master at his Trade, as most of
that Profession are, made him a Bill; which amounted to as much as if he had
managed the whole Cause from the beginning to the end. What the Devil, said the
Marshal de Boufflers, whilst he was paying the Money; Do you thus manage all
your Clients Purses? I think he was in the right on it that was wont to compare
you Counselors and Sollicitors to Familiar Spirits, who usually get all the
Money they can, to carry it along with 'em to Hell into Lucifer's Treasury. The
Lawyer perceiving an Affront to be put upon him by this Expression, told him
that he could find a way to make him hold his Tongue, and taking him by one
Arm, was ready to thrust him out of the doors. How now Block-head, answered
Monsieur Boufflers, I Will make you know whom you have to do withal, and no
sooner had he spoke these Words, but he seconded 'em with his Sword, which he
very smartly laid over the Counsellor's Head; take this for your Pains, said
our General, Mr. Cuckold, take this, it may serve to polish your Horns a
little, which as yet are somewhat rugged.

Madam Niguese the Counsellor's Wife having heard a sudden noise in the Entry,
came running out with all speed to see waht might be the matter: She happened
just at that time to be in Company with a Friar, who as 'twas supposed, was
accustomed to kiss her in Private, and being surprised at the Scuffle, had
forgot to put down her Petty-coats, which were still up as high as to her
Knees: When she saw her Husband and Gallant thus engaged, she was so extremely
amazed, that she was not able to speak one Word, but seeing the Marshal lay his
Sword over her Husband's Horn's without intermission, she could do nothing else
but make a most lamentable outcry, which soon brought the Friar out to her
assistance, but in as bad a Condition as her self: For the good Father had
forgot in the fright to put up his Business in its right place, which was all
exposed to the view of the Spectators; Monsieur Boufflers as angry as he was
(having received some blows from the Counselor) could not forbear laughing out
aloud; How now, said he, Religious Father, if a Man may call you so, are you
not ashamed to act thus above board? You pretend to teach us Chastity, and you
appear in our sight just recking from your unchaste Embraces; fie! what a
shameless sight is this! And pulling him by the Sleeve, at least Sir, said he,
put up your Concerns. The Friar and the Lady being in the mean while recovered
from their first surprise, began now to be sensible of their mistake, but being
put all into confusion, they run away as fast as they could, without making the
least answer. The poor Counselor was no less surprised than the other two,
because he had seen his Horns in their Natural shape, without disguise, which
made him retreat as fast as he could to his Study, after he had been soundly
drub'd by the Marshal, who thus remaining Master of the Field of Battle,
decamped immediately from thence with his Writings in his Possession.

A few days after, being now pretty well recovered of his Passion, which he had
had for the Counsellor's Wife, he intended to make a visit to Madam Garenne, to
give her an account of this last Adventure, but considering with himself, that
she would only laugh at him, he deferred it till a more convenient Opportunity.
The next day, passing by chance by her House, about four a Clock in the
Afternoon, and the Door being just open, he espied Janneton, who was conducting
out one of her Acquaintance: The Marshal perceived her to blush at the sight of
him, and as he was drawing nearer to accost her, she made away with all the
haste she could. Boufflers, who never wants presence of Mind, upon such an
occasion as this, followed her close, and why, said he, Mademoiselle do you
shun me, what is it that is so frightful about me? Yes Sir, replied Janneton
not with out some disturbance, I dread you in a most terrible manner, and that
too not without a great many weighty Reasons; but for Heaven's sake don't force
me to declare 'em to you; if your Kinswoman should happen to see us together,
she would not think very well of it. I am not ignorant of that matter, my dear
Child, replied the Marshal, but for God's sake stay but one Moment: Never any
Mortal suffered so much as I have done, neither Loved to that degree as I do.
All those pathetical Expressions commonly used by Lovers to make their
Mistresses sensible of the Vehemence of their Passion, fall far short of what I
can say of mine. You have robbed me of my Liberty my fair Angel, and I must be
the most unfortunate of all Men living, except you take compassion of my
Sufferings.

He could not utter these last Words without shedding some Tears, which wrought
no ill effect upon the the fair One, that was the occasion of 'em, and who
answered in Terms so obliging, and with so charming an Air, to what he had said
to her, that the Marshal was no longer Master of himself, but resolved to
prosecute his Design in spite of his Kins-woman's endeavors to the contrary,
But Janneton who considered that if this Lady should return sooner from
Visiting than she expected, she would be chid severely, and be in danger of
utterly losing her Favor, begged with all the Civility imaginable, her Lover
to leave her for that time which he did, not thinking it reasonable to
disoblige her, who run so much hazard for his sake. Among the rest of the
Servants of the House, there was an old Maid, whose name was Toinette, she was
the Governess of the Kitchen, and having observed our two Lovers prattling
together, she advertised Madam Garenne of it as soon as she came Home, who
being transported with Anger, chid Janneton most severely, which she would have
endured patiently enough if this Lady had not seconded her Words with such a
sound Box on the Ear, that she tumbled down upon one side; calling her at the
same time wanton Slut, an impudent and dissembling Wretch, etc. You will e're
long find the effects of his Courtship, said she, if you are Fool enough to
hearken to 'em: He is the most fickle Man in the World; he never loves above
one Moment; he has as many Mistresses as he has Shirts to his Back, and he
changes 'em twice or thrice a Week. Is this your modesty? Is this your Conduct,
which made you to be so much respected among People of virtuous Principles?

Mademoiselle de la Fleur who could not well digest the box of the Ear, did not
return one Word, but pretending that she would go up into her Chamber, she
privately packed up all her Goods and Chattels, and passed immediately through
the Garden; from whence she got out at a Backdoor, which opened directly into
the same Street where the Marshal lodged, who saw her come forth as he was
looking out of the Window. He was never more surprised in his Life time, than
when he perceived her Eyes all Red and Swelled with Tears. What can be the
matter Mademoiselle, said he, coming toward her; dare I be so bold as to ask
you, what makes you weep thus? Alas! Sir Said she, I am undone. The Marshal,
who was just by his Lodgings, made her a sign to follow him, not thinking it a
proper place there, to talk of matters of Moment. It is not very Convenient,
replied she with a blush, to go with you into your Lodgings, but what matter is
it, I am desperate and care not what becomes of me? That is all but a Jest,
answered the Marshal, taking her by the Hand, I will tell my Land-Lady you are
my Sister, which he did, and the good Woman believed it for a considerable
time. Our fair one being gone up with the Marshal into his Chamber, burst out
all in Tears, giving him an account of what had passed between the Lady and
her: To give a box on the Ear to a Gentlewoman of my Quality, said she, and
that too, for no other reason but because I had discoursed with a Gentleman of
Honor, certainly is the most unbecoming Action that ever could be done by a
sensible Woman. I am quite out of all Patience, replied Boufflers, if I were to
follow my Inclination, I should go and stick that old Witch, who informed her
of it to the Wall; she often passes by here, and I Will have her Bastonado'd by
one of my Servants, she shall have the Strapado till the Blood follows. Have a
care of that, replied Janneton, for that would be the way to undo me without
Redress. And what my Dearest, said the Marshal embracing her, would you not
have me revenge your Quarrel, I assure you that I shall always be ready to
hazard my Life for your sake. It Is I who am the cause of these extravagancies
which my Cousin has committed against you, and I ask your Pardon a thousand
times upon that account.

These his amourous Protestations were accompanied with such Passionate
Transports, and intermingl'd with so many sweet Kisses, which he stole from his
fair Angel, that six or seven Hours passed thus away no otherwise than if it
had been one Moment; in the mean while Night began to approach, and
Mademoiselle de la Fleur reflecting upon the matter, how unbecoming it was for
a modest Gentlewoman to be thus late in an Officer's Chamber, who was one of
the greatest Gallants about the Town, and ruminating how she should best
dispose of her self; because her Lover had not in the least taken notice of it,
she was not a little surprised to see the Land-Lady come in, who immediately
told her that if she pleased there was a Chamber ready for her in the House,
not far from the Marshal's, which he had caused to be furnished very handsomely
for her use. You need say no more Mrs. Borgne, said the Marshal, my Sister whom
I have not seen a great while, will stay here for some time; Pray let Supper be
got ready. The Land-Lady went down to look after Supper, leaving the Brother
and Sister at their own Liberty, who did not live long together in the same
condition; as you will find by the sequel of the Story: Supper being ready,
Monsieur Boufflers ordered it to be brought up into his Chamber, because he
intended to Sup in private, and poor Janneton sat there like a Carthusian
Friar, that is to say, without speaking one Word, being shy of the Marshal's
Servants who waited at Table, and looked upon her as a chance-Lady, the Marshal
observed it as well as she, but there was no Remedy for it.

Having Supped and dismissed the Servants, he conducted her into the Chamber
which was prepared for her, where she stayed a good part of the Night, which
was spent at the Feet of his Mistress, and in reiterated assurances of the
sincerity of his Passion. It Is easy to be imagined, what sort of Language two
Persons, that loved one another did make use of, at a time when all the World
was at rest. Janneton being now somewhat wearied with the Caresses received
from her Lover, was willing to go to sleep, notwithstanding the continual
entreaties of the Marshal, who has since protested to me, with all the
sincerity imaginable, that he never met with any young Lady so Lovely, so
Modest, and so worthy of his Heart as she was: Having at her desire quitted her
Room, he went likewise to his own Chamber, to take some rest after his
Love-toils, which by this time had caused him to endure no small Fatigues.

Let us leave these two Lovers for a little while, to enjoy their Rest, whilst
we go and observe how Madam Garenne takes the Elopement of her Companion: This
Lady having missed her, caused Candles to be lighted immediately, and ordered
the House to be searched from top to bottom. What is become of this Impudent
Baggage, would she cry, being sometimes in the Garret, and anon in the Cellar,
after she had looked long enough for her in all the Chambers of the House; I
hope, said she, she has thrown herself into the River or some Pond, what an
unfortunate Woman was I, when I took upon me the charge of this wanton Slut,
who has played me a trick that I did not in the least dream of? What can become
of her? If the Marshal de Boufflers should get the least scent of this
mischance, he will quickly be with her. I believe Madam, said Toinette, that
that is not to be done now, for I am almost sure that she is with him already:
If you had been an Eyewitness of those Caresses which he so Liberally bestowed
upon her, you would not question it any more than I do. Alas! a perfidious Man
as he is, replied the Lady, he loves all handsome Women; but God is my Witness,
that it is seldom for above two or three Weeks, to obtain his aim, and then he
wishes 'em in another part of the World. Don't let us talk any more of the
Passion of a Man whose inclinations are so fickle and inconstant; it is
impossible that he can have any real Friendship for any one living; I am
convinced of it by the treatment I have received from him: After my Husband has
done for him what he has, he was so much indebted to me; that he ought to have
Sacrifis'd every thing in acknowledgment of such a Friendship, instead of
which, he causes me these Vexations.

But pray, said she, tell me, in what manner did he caress her, who never
understood any thing of these matters, having scarce ever seen a Man in private
since she was a Child, when her Father gave her into my Charge? Sure Madam you
are not in earnest, answered the old Maid laughing, these things are natural to
us, they are learned without much exercise. But pray tell me, said Madam
Garenne, what did he do to her? What should he do to her Madam? replied
Toinette, he kissed sometimes her Hands, and sometimes her Lips; he lay down at
her Feet just like a Fool; he embraced her, calling her at the same time his
Deity, his Angel, and a thousand such like extravagancies. Oh! that idle
Baggage! said the Lady, she will like this sport mightily for some time, till
she be put out of taste with it. Madam Garenne would have continued her
discourse, if her Domestic Affairs had not called for her presence another
way, where we will leave her, and return to our two Lovers.

The Marshal de Boufflers now in full possession of his Mistress, was not
waning to give her every day new Proofs of his Love; assuring her that it
should always be inviolable, which promise; he made a shift to keep for some
time, beng very generous to her in all respects: But as all things are subject
to change, so it happened here; for our General being ordered to march into the
Field, he was soon forced to quitt his Mistress; There it was that he provided
a Husband for her, having found out a certain Gentleman of his Acquaintance,
who was willing to wear that Coat of Arms, which the Marshal had prepared for
him, provided he would encourage him with his Favor.

Madam de la Garenne his Kinswoman, who not having had the opportunity to speak
to him before his departure, and therefore had writ several smart Letters to
him, was overjoyed at this Match, but poor Janneton, as I am to believe, was of
a quite contrary Opinion, who now was to be made sensible that the Promises of
Lovers are as wavering as the Billows of the Sea. It is to be known that the
Marshal in the height of his Passion, had promised to marry her, and to
confirm it the more, had signed this Engagement with his own Blood: I have
also been credibly informed that when he was upon concluding the intended March
in the Camp, he rode Post from thence to Paris, where having found out his
Mistress at her Lodgings, my Dearest, said he, let me see the Contract which I
signed, I am come on purpose to alter some particulars in it, which are not
done as they ought to have been; He had no sooner spoke these Words and having
received the Paper from her Hands, who took him upon his Honor, but he tore it
in a thousand pieces; Mademoiselle de la Fleur being horribly surprised at
these Proceedings, asked him all overwhelmed with Grief and Tears, what was the
reason of his so doing? Only for that reason which I told you before, my
Dearest, said he, giving her a Kiss; and finding her to take the matter so much
to Heart, the better to cover his design, he put the point of his naked Sword
to his Breast, feigning a Resolution to kill himself, though he had not the least
thought of it: The poor silly Gentlewoman, who doted upon him, snatched his
Sword from him, declaring that she would rely upon his Word, which soon after
was transmuted into that Marriage we spoke of before.

Some Years after, which was A. D. 1683. His most Christian Majesty upon some
Complaints received of several Hostilities committed by the Spaniards against
his Subjects, ordered the Marshal de Humieres to besiege Courtray, where also
were present the Princes de Conti and De la Roche sur yon, the Count de
Vermandois Admiral of France, and several other Persons of Quality: I have not
been able to learn whether the Marshal de Boufflers at his return into the
Dominions of his most Catholic Majesty, was for making another Conquest among
the Spanish Lady's, who are only charming to the Eye. We will let this Year
pass by in silence, and proceed to the next, when the Spaniards by several Acts
of Hostility forced the French to a total rupture with Spain: But Monsieur de
Boufflers soon made 'em sensible of their Error by ravaging through all the
Villages between the Fort of St. Margreat and the City of Mons, where having
espied a certain Gentlewoman, the Widow of a Dutch Officer, who had been killed
in a late Engagement; she alone was able to move him with Compassion.

This Lady was wont to go every Morning and Evening to visit the Place where
her Husband was buried, which she bedewed very frequently with her Tears. The
Marshal, who had taken some liking to her before, going one Morning the Rounds
according to his usual Custom every Day, found her at her Husband's Grave, at
three a Clock in the Morning, and asked her whether she had seen that Ghost she
looked for. Alas! no Sir, said she, my dearly Beloved has not as yet appeared
to me, but I very impatiently desire to see him. Sure Madam, replied the
General, you cannot be so simple as to expect the Dead to come back into this
World; and though it be the general Opinion, for my part I cannot believe it:
Wherefore young Lady, I would not have you thus bestow your time in running
after a shadow, which has nothing Solid in it: I would have you look after the
Living; you ought much rather to consider of one who may be able to comfort you
for your loss. The Lady not disliking the Marshal's Proposal, began to hearken
to his discourse, and Sir, said she very briskly, do you know one that is
willing to supply the Vacant place? Yes, said Monsieur Boufflers, (who meant
otherwise than she) I know a certain Cavalier, who perhaps may give you more
satisfaction than he, whose loss you so much bewail.

Madam Backenbroodt, (this was the Name of the Lady) having soon understood the
Marshal's meaning gave him no answer, at all, either out out of Modesty or
Fear, the latter being a common infirmity among Women of that Country.
Boufflers, who at first sight judged very right of her natural disposition, did
in very obliging Terms ask her where she Lodged, which she told him. The
Marshal who is never backward in paying his visits to Lady's for whom he has
some kindness, went to see her, and represented to her his Passion so
sincerely, that she received his Addresses without much reluctance, believing
that she had now got another Husband; but poor Creature she was not well enough
acquainted with the French Fashion. They continued their amourous Commerce thus
for some time, till one Evening, when the Marshal being in a very good Humor,
after having drunk plentifully with some of the Generals in their Tents, was
resolved to have some relish as well of the sweets of Venus, as he had had of
those of Bacchus.

In order to prosecute his Design, he went to visit Madam Backenbroodt, who
received him very Courteously, and after some little time spent in amourous
Protestations and passionate Expressions, he at last begged of her the utmost
Favor. The Gentlewoman (according to the practice of a great many Women of
that Country, who think they have made a fair step toward Marriage, if they
refuse not to bestow every thing upon their Lovers) made no great resistance,
but upon that Condition, granted him all what he desired This was enough to put
our General out of Conceit with his Amor, he not being in the humor to Marry
at that time But to come to the Conclusion of the matter, he found no great
satisfaction in the enjoyment of this Stranger; for though after he had done this
gallant Exploit, he continued to pay her some few visits out of Complisance and
in acknowledgment of the favor received, yet they did not turn to that account
which the Lady did propose to her self: she would sometimes upbraid him with
his indifferency, but he excused himself as well as he could, laying all the
fault upon his Military Employments, which as he said, took up so much of his
time that he had not leisure to see his Friends. No other Lady besides her,
would have been so easily satisfied with these Reasons, but as good luck would
have it for her, she had been engaged with a Person who seldom leaves any
Proofs of his Love behind him, so that in consideration of that, she had the
more reason to comfort her self for the loss.

Monsieur de Boufflers went soon after to be present at the Siege of Luxemberg,
which was undertaken in the same Year; the Marshal de Crequi who commanded that
Army in chief, having invested it in the Month of April, A. D. 1684. Here the
Marshal again signalis'd himself by his Valor, as well as the Counts du
Plessis and St. Geron, as did also a great many other brave Captains, who gave
very remarkable Proofs of their undaunted Courage, nevertheless a great number
of excellent Officers were lost during that Siege; among whom was the Marquess
de Humieres, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, only Son to the Marshal de
Humieres, who was killed at the very beginning, in a Sally made by the
Besieged. The Marshal de Boufflers was so grieved at the Death of his Friend,
whom he always loved extremely, that he scarce could enjoy himself all the
remainder of that Year. He would needs put himself in Mourning Apparel, which
proved a means to insinuate himself into the Favor of his deceased Friend's
Father, who was in great esteem at Court.

Winter drawing near, some of the Officers repaired to their respective
Garrisons, the rest to Paris or some other Prices. I cannot say any thing here
to our Marshal's amourous Adventures, for some time after, because I know that
he then made a resolution to take some rest, and instead of pursuing the sports
of Venus, to apply himself entirely to the Art of War, and the study of some
other Sciences, for two or three Years; during which time, he became such a
Proficient in every one of 'em, that he attained to the highest perfections,
surpassing even his Masters, especially in the Mathematics, to which his
Genius was naturally inclined. The King having made him soon after, a Knight of
the Order of the Holy Ghost, he was all of a sudden inspired with so much
Devotion, that he went every day to Mass, and to hear Sermons, of which he
never missed one. He was wont also frequently at that time, to pay his visits
to the Jesuits in the Professed House of Paris, who by that means became his
particular Friends, and they prevailed with him to make a Vow to St. Amable,
who is in great esteem in the City of Rion in Auvergne, both for his antiquity,
and the great number of miracles which he is said to have wrought. This Saint
is to be seen in the great Church of that City, and it is reported of him, that
if any one does but touch, (with a true faith) a certain great Tooth which he
has, it secures him from ever dying of his Wounds received in the Wars, or
otherwise, as well as from any others, got by the biting of mad Dogs or
Venomous Beast.

The Reader may easily judge from thence, that the Marshal had raised his mind
to the highest pitch of Devotion, and some began to be of Opinion, that he was
in a fair way of turning an absolute Bigot, if Love, which is not a fit
Companion for such sort of People, and which had always the chief Ascendant
over his Heart, had not quickly made him change his Inclination, and obliged
him to reassume his former Liberty. Let us now see him go to the Battle of
Fleurus, which happened in the Year 1690 in the Month of June, under the
Command of the Duke of Luxemburg, who. was then General over the King's Forces
in Flanders. No sooner were the Enemies beaten out of the Field, but Monsieur
Boufflers, who had had an ample share in the Victory, took his rest in the Arms
of a new Mistress, who possessed all his thoughts for some time. This was one
Mrs. Montberg the Daughter of a certain Flemmish Officer, who had been killed
in the same Battle. It must be said to her advantage, that never was seen a
more beautiful Woman of a brown Complexion in the World, and who had a more
graceful haughtiness in her whole Behavior than she; and it was not without a
great deal of trouble that the Marshal could find an opportunity to address his
Courtship to her. The loss of her Father, who was one of the best Officers the
Allies had in the whole Army, had afflicted her to that degree that she refused
to admit of any Consolation, having by his Death been bereaved of all, what she
could call her own, as having no other Subsistence but what depended absolutely
upon her Father's Fortune.

Monsieur de Boufflers having been informed concerning her present Condition by
one of her Acquaintance, according to his generous inclination, which extended
it self more particularly toward the fair Sex, offered her his Purse. It was
not without great reluctance that she accepted the offer of a Man, whom she
suspected did not make his Presents for nothing; and the truth is, why should
any Man, show so much kindness toward a Woman, unless with a prospect of
receiving some favors? They ought not to take the Liberality of their Gallants
in any other sense, because they very often pay dearly for 'em. Our Marshal has
often found it so, by his own experience, and to his Cost. But let us return to
Mrs. Montberg, who by her passionate and Engaging Air had so Captivated the
Heart of our General, that he has protested to me since, that he never was so
much in Love in all his Lifetime before; she appeared to him so full of charms
and sweetness in her whole Deportment; besides her Beauty, which though it was
always extraordinary, yet appeared at certain times with such a luster, that it
quite dazzl'd his Reason; so that in a little time he turned stark Fool, and
her perfect Idolater, as he one day, when he lay at her Feet, was pleased to
tell her himself.

You then Love me indeed, my dear Boufflers, said she very pleasantly. Yes my
incomparable, replied the Marshal embracing her, but I intend to discount with
your Heart for all the sufferings it makes me endure. You have Complaisance
enough to make me a return of some small Favors, but you will not grant me --
What is it you would have me grant you, my dearly Beloved, answered the young
Lady laughing, and interrupting his discourse, If I had in my gift the most
eminent Offices in the State, or any thing else that is worth your acceptance;
nay, if it lay in my power, continued she with a charming Air, to put a Crown
upon your Head, I protest to you, that you should not stay for it till to
morrow. The weight of that Madam, replied the Marshal modestly, would be too
heavy and troublesome for me. It is in your power to make me, a Present no less
precious than that: That agreeable Throne environed with Purple, the sweetest
seat of Love, added he all transported with Passion, is that to which my
Ambition leads me. This is that Sovereignty which is in your possession, and
which if you will put into my Hands, I Will make you my Queen, and all my desires
shall center in you: My Scepter shall only be touched by your fair Hands, and
you alone shall have the whole sway and management of all the Affairs of State.

Mrs. Montberg could not forbear laughing out as loud as she could, at the
ingenious interpretation which her Lover had made of her Words, to whom she
answered with a smile; Sir it is a Talent peculiar only to the French Gentle
men to express themselves in so extraordinary a manner; other Nations cannot
pretend to that subtilty of Wit. And pray Madam, replied the Marshal with a
great deal of feigned sincerity, what great Subtilty can there be in Expressing
things naturally as they are. Is there any thing more common among Men than to
endeavor to be happy? And as it is in your power my Divine Creature, to make
me the most Fortunate of all Mortals; I come here to embrace your Feet, and to
pray you not to delay any longer my Happiness. There is another Thought,
replied the young Lady, no less witty and pleasant than the former, I could
wish my self now a larger share of Wit than I have, that I might have the
satisfaction of giving you a suitable return to these excellent Expressions.
Madam, answered the Marshal, you will certainly make me a suitable return, when
you shall vouchsafe to grant my Request. And what is it then Sir, replied the
Lady abruptly, that you desire, for that I see, you are not very easily
satisfied. Yes my lovely Creature, pretty easily, said the Marshal kissing her
fair Hands, you are not ignorant what it is that will content me. I don't know,
replied Mrs. Montberg with a blush all over her Cheeks, you Cavaliers have a
very nice taste and -- here she stopped, which made her Lover press her very
earnestly to proceed in her Discourse, and to let him know his doom, how long
he was to live in this languishing Condition, before she would let him enjoy
those transcendent Delights which he so earnestly longed for.

The Lady having for a considerable time in most obliging Terms opposs'd his
amourous insinuations, was at last constrained to tell him in a languishing
tone, that as soon as that piece of Work, which she showed him, was completed
she would do what she could do to make him less unfortunate. Then make haste my
Dearest, cried the Marshal squeezing her closely between his Arms, give me one
half of it to finish. The young Lady taking him at his word, gave him the
hinder part of a Cornet of Point la Reine which she had begun to work upon, No,
No, answered the General smiling, and feigning as if he were about to throw it
away I must have the fore part, there I can work to some purpose. Well, well,
Sir, replied she as pleasantly, you shall have it, when I have gone on a little
further with it, then you shall have it to finish. Madam, replied Boufflers, I
believe I shall do more work there with my Needle in one moment, than all your
Work-women can in a very considerable space of time: I am very expeditions in
all my business, but especially in the service of the fair Sex. Well, well,
Sir, since you are such a nimble Work man, replied the young Lady, giving him a
Needle and Thread, and all the other Implements belonging to the Work, take
notice that you are to have nothing for your pains before it be quite finished;
and likewise that you are to have no pay till mine be brought to perfection as
well as yours: Thus having kept the hinder part of the Cornet to work upon
herself, she gave the fore part to the General according to his desire, which
he got finished in eight days.

But the Lady, who was resolved to let him languish for some time longer, was
so malicious as to unrip at night (as formerly Penelope did) what she had done
by Day; so that when our Marshal thought himself almost sure of his pay,
according to her promise, he was as far off as ever. O Cruel Destiny! O
unaccountable Fatality! cried he one day prostrating himself at her Feet;
Alas! when I think that I am arrived at the very Goal of Felicity, I find my
self at the greatest distance from it. He had scarce uttered these words but a
paleness overspreading his Face, he fell into a Swoon. Mrs. Montberg being
startled at the suddenness of the thing threw cold Water in his Face, which
proving frutless, she rubbed his Hands and Temples with the Queen of Sweden's
Balsam, which is accounted most powerful against such Love-Fits. But neither
was all this efficacious enough to cure him of his Distemper, he wanted another
sort of Remedy to be applied to him, which Lovers term in their Language, the
extreme Unction of Love, or the charming Viaticum, which makes 'em dye the most
pleasant Death that can be.

Our fair Lady, who did not know which way to turn her self, having no body to
assist her, at last resolved to unbutton his Coat and Waste-coat, and to lay
her Hand upon his Stomach, which felt somewhat cold; and having backed her
tender Caresses with a douzen or more hearty and sweet Kisses, these had the
wished for effect, having soon awakened our General out of his Love-trance, so
that now he began to open his Eyes, which were half shut before. Then you are
returned from the other World, cried his Mistress, looking in his Face, if you
were sensible how you have frighted me, you would have prevented your Swooning
thus: I did verily believe that you were gone to the Elysian Fields, but I now
perceive your Hour was not yet come. Alas! my fair Angel, replied the Marshal
with a very deep sigh, I am just ready to expire at your Feet, except you take
pity of me. While he was speaking these last Words, he drew out a Knife all
Bloody, which he had put in his Pocket on purpose, feigning that he was about
to thrust it into his Heart. The Lady having snatched the Knife out of his
Hands, and perceiving it all Bloody, was so extremely terrified at the sight of
it, that she actually fell into a Swoon, out of which she did not recover till
some considerable time after; she turned as pale as Death, not having the least
sense left her, so that the Marshal, who was only in jest, had now made work
enough for himself in good earnest. Having first tried all possible means to
recover her, which proved ineffectual, he was forced to call for assistance,
and while they were coming, he did not let slip the opportunity of taking more
freedom than her haughty temper would have let him so much as sue for, at
another time.

The Lady having been obliged to keep her Bed for some time, by reason of the
weakness it caused in her, inquired after her Gallant, who being come, she
entertained him with the most tender Expressions in the World: He who had now
the Opportunity to rove about his Mistresses Bosom, to play with her two lovely
plump Bubbies, and whiter than the very Snow, and to advance even as far as to
the little Mount of Venus, where Love keeps its Throne, did answer to her
obliging Expressions in so Passionate a manner; that should any one have been
an Eyewitness to 'em, they would have believed him bewitched or turned Fool;
and this was as I take it, the occasion of a rumor then spread all about
Paris, that the Marshal de Boufflers, after the Battle of Fleurus, was so
desperately fallen in Love with a certain young Lady in Brabant, that he was
quite Distracted; It Is probable that the General in one of his amourous
Transports, had been the Occasion of having this jest put upon him, it being
then the common discourse of the Town.

But to return to our charming young Lady, who being now recovered pretty well
from her ilness, did receive every day more evident Proofs of the Marshal's
Love. One Afternoon having been obliged to leave her sooner than ordinary,
because he was to assist at a Council of War, he was so distracted in his Mind,
that when the Duke of Luxemburg asked his Advice concerning the business in
hand; he answered him as if he had not been in his right Wits, at which the
Duke having laughed heartily, Sir, said he, sure your Thoughts are so taken up
with some Amourous Intreague, that it disturbs your Brains. By my Faith Sir,
replied the Marshal de Boufflers, being much ashamed that they had discovered
his Distraction, and taking the Duke by the Hand, you speak truth, I am in Love
with the most amiable Person in the World, who has robbed me of my Liberty.
And who for God's sake, replied the Duke of Luxemburg, is this fair Lady,
smiling. It is, -- It is -- It is -- said Monsieur de Boufflers jesting, it is
one Mistress Pretty Mount, some Spies coming into the Tent at the same time,
broke off their further discourse.

The next day, the Marshal de Luxemburg, and some other Officers came to give
him a Visit in his Tent, where they began to jeer him about his new Mistress,
whose true Name he was unwilling to declare to 'em. But Monsieur de Luxemburg
told 'em, Let me alone Gentlemen, I Will engage that to Morrow you shall see that
Beauty, whose Name you are so desirous to know. And he was as good as his word,
for I know not by what sort of Magic, Mrs. Montberg appeared there, asking for
the Marshal de Boufflers. The dress she was in that day, made no small addition
to the luster of her Beauty, so that all the Generals were as much dazzl'd at
the sight of her, as if she had been an Angel. This poor young Lady being
incited by something she knew not what, to go and seek after her Gallant; at
the sight of the Company, blushed for shame; which having raised her Color to
its utmost perfection, it was so great an addition to her natural Complexion,
that they were all strangely surprised at it. The Marshal de Boufflers being
not insensible of the Confusion she was in, and much vexed that she should have
committed such a fault, told her, as he was Conducting her home; What was it
my Dearest, that could induce you to come and enquire for me in this crow'd?
They are a Company of unlucky Birds, that always make it their business to
banter me, about those little Favors you are pleased to bestow upon me.

For GOD'S sake Sir, replied Mrs. Montberg, being vexed to the very Soul, talk
no more of this fatal moment. Some unknown evil Spirit did hurrye me on; I
fansy'd that some Ghost or another did drive me to the place where you were,
and I cannot devise what should be the Original cause of this Enchantment; I
may very well call it so, for I am sure I was forced to act contrary to my own
Inclination. Good God! said she, shedding some Tears, that I should go after a
Man, and especially in that place where you were. Certainly I could never be
guilty of such indiscretion if I might gain the World by the Bargain, and though
I love you very affectionately, yet my Passion could never have made me commit
so irreparable, a fault. Now I think on it, there was the Duke of Luxemburg in
your Company, who has the name of being the greatest Sorcerer in the World,
should it not perhaps be that old Necromancer, who has played you this Game, on
purpose to divert his Friends. Boufflers having ruminated for some time upon
what his Mistress had said, and being convinced that she had hit the Nail upon
the Head, the Duke being taken for such a one, throughout the whole Army; did
not think it convenient to put her any further into a fright; on the contrary,
he endeavored to resettle her Mind, which was quite discomposed by this
unlucky Accident.

I am apt to believe my Child, continued the Marshal Caressing her, what you
did was only out of an ardent desire to see me. No indeed my Dear, replied she
smiling, I told you before, that my Passion should never be capable of carrying
me so much out of the way of my Duty. If you are an Admirer of Secrecy in
Love-concerns, so am I in no less a degree. What in the name of God, will these
Gentlemen be apt to say about my enquiring after you with so much earnestness?
Let 'em say what they please, replied Boufflers much vexed, one thing is, they
don't know you. But for that reason I would not have you do so again another
time. Oh! great God! cried the young Lady much disturbed, I wish rather that I
may dye the most cruel Death that can be invented, than to commit a second time
such an horrible Fault; for God's sake, don't tell me any more of this fatal
Accident, or I must leave you.

The Marshal perceiving the great disturbance his Mistress was in, changed his
discourse into a Thousand amourous Protestations, and having again assured her
of the Vehemence of his Passion, he left her and returned to his Company. O
brave Boufflers, said they laughing, thou art the happiest Man living, to enjoy
so charming an object as this. I never saw, added Luxemburg, so Beautiful and
engaging a Creature in my Lifetime, and who deserves better to be adored by
Men. The Marshal de Boufflers made no answer to what they said, on the
contrary, he appeared very Pensive and Melancholy; his Thoughts being wholly
taken up with this spiteful trick of that old Devil the Duke of Luxemburg, unto
whom he had hitherto bid defiance with all his Works. This General was so
overjoyed at the Victory obtained in the Plains of Fleurus, against the Prince
of Waldeck, General of the Consederate Army, who had been forced to quit the
Field of Battle; that he played a great many of these tricks, which were
surprising to all that saw 'em; but they not having any relation to our present
Subject, I will pass 'em by in silence: I shall only mention this by the by,
that he was so confident of his ARt, that he attempted to restore to Life some
of the chief Officers, who were Slain in the Battle, and among the rest the
Marquess de Verderonne, whom he loved as dearly as his own Soul; but all his
Magic was not powerful enough to reach so far, Almighty God having reserved to
himself that power of raising the Dead.

But it is time to return to our Marshal, who being extremely afraid lest the
old Duke should play him some other Game about his Mistress, was fain to carry
matters very swimmingly with him; which the Duke having taken notice of, told
him one Day, That he was sensible that he stood in awe of him, but that he
needed fear nothing farther; for he was ready to give him his parole of Honor,
that he would never be an Obstacle to his Amors, or engage in any thing else,
which he thought might be troublesome to him. The Marshal de Boufflers being
very well satisfied with these assurances received from the Duke, afterward
paid his Visits to his Mistress, without any disturbance, in the same manner
as he had done before.

But as all Human Affairs are Subject to perpetual change, so things did not
remain between these two Lovers long in the same Station. Winter began to
approach and Bou. could no more than the rest of the Generals, avoid going to
Paris; being therefore obliged to part from his dearly Beloved Mrs. Montberg,
he took his leave of her with the greatest marks of grief imagnable; he would
fain have persuaded her to have passed five or six months away in Paris, but
she would by no means consent to it, pretending that she was obliged to visit
that Winter, an Aunt of hers at Brussels, who was very desirous to see her. Our
Lover was so sensibly afflicted at his approaching Separation, from a Person
whom he loved with so much Passion, that he fell Sick; but being by the care
and assiudous Visits of his beloved Mistress, soon restored to Health, he could
not think of parting so soon; it being a common Principle among Lovers, who
Passionately Love one another, not to be able to endure a long Separation: But
alas! within a few Weeks after, this young Lady, who had given such
extraordinary Proofs of her Love to our General, fell Sick of a violent Fever,
of which she died not long after. Never did any Man show so much concern for a
Mistress, as the Marshal de Boufflers: He did not stir from her one moment, and
though her Distemper was not without some infection, nevertheless, as if he had
been chained to her Bedside, he was continually giving her what Comfort he
could, and taking care that she took every thing exactly, according to the
prescription of two or three Physicians, who came to Visit her every day:
Finding her at last, passed all hopes of recovery, he had so much influence
over her, that he prevailed with her so far as to renounce the Protestant
Religion, and to embrace the Roman Catholic; when she was just ready to expire
in his Arms, recommending her Body to his disposal after Death. But the
Marshal, who was unwilling to take upon himself a charge of that Nature, gave
orders to the Ghostly Fathers who attended upon her, to take care that her
Funeral Rites should be decently Solemnis'd as soon as her Friends could be
present. In the meanwhile, not being able to see the Interrment of a Person
whom he had so dearly loved: He set forward on his Journey the very next
Morning early: The only thing he asked for, before his departure, from a
Jacobine Father, whom he had entrusted with all her Movables, was a little
Picture of here is, enameled very finely, which he did not part with, for a long
time after.

Upon his arrival at Paris, every one was for putting hard upon the Marshal,
with respect to his late Gallant Adventures, but he not being of a humor to be
much disturbed at a Jest, was forced to join issue with 'em in their Raillery;
so that finding him insensible as to that point, they quickly grew weary of the
Sport. He wore for some time, a second Mourning Suit, very neatly trimmed in
remembrance of his Mistress, which purchased him the Favor of all the fine
Lady's at Court, who were extreme'y well satisfied to see him show so much
esteem to the Memory of one of their Sex. For a considerable time after, if
Madam de Maintenon, and Madam de Guise did but mention her, he would sigh and
burst out into Tears like a Child; so that 'twas not without great persuasions
that at last they made him stop the Current of his Tears. The Winter passed
thus without any further disturbance on the Marshal's side, his Heart still
keeping the impression of his late beloved Mistress, as something precious, and
not to be rac'd out in so small a space of time: For though there were several
Lady's of Quality in Paris, who endeavored to make him wear their Chains, yet
he so vigourously opposed their Designs, that he gained the Victory over those,
who would willingly have conquered him, to make him their humble Adorer.

At the beginning of the next Spring, his most Christian Majesty having given
Orders to his Generals for the besieging of Mons; the Capital City of the
Province of Hainault: And being to go thither in Person, most of the Nobility
at Court were to follow him: The Marshals and Dukes de Duras, de la Feuillade,
de Luxemburg; the Princes de Soubise, and de Conti; the Dukes de Vendome and de
Bourbon, the Marquesses de Joyeeuse, de Villars, and de Boufflers opened the
Campaign before the season the Year, was scarce fit for Traveling; the most
Lady's of note would not stay behind, but followed the Court. Then it was, that
the Marshal de Boufflers was enamored with the Countess de -- I hope the
Reader will excuse me for not mentioning her name, for very weighty Reasons:
This Lady having showed so much assiduity in her Love engagements with the
Marshal, that sometimes they scarce gave themselves leisure to eat or to drink.
In the mean time Monsieur de Buofflers, whom nothing ever was able to withdraw
from his Prince's service, was obliged to go where Honor called him; he
shunned neither Dangers nor Fatigues, to signalise himself upon all occasions,
where Glory was to be purchased at the expense of his Blood. It was in one of
those Engagements which was fought with a great deal of obstinacy on both
sides, that he was Wounded with a Musquet-Ball in his Thigh, as well as the
Duke de Montfort, who having secretly given notice of it to the Countess his
Cousin, she took it so to Heart, that it seemed as if she would not have lived
one Moment longer: But being a little recovered from her first surprise, she
was for revenging (with Sword in Hand) her Gallant's Quarrel; and as she was as
dextrous at handling a Pistol and Sword, as one of the best Officers; she
disguised her self in the Habit of an Officer, to come and visit the Marshal in
his Tent: She was there three or four Days, before he had the least Suspicion
of it, imagining that it was some young Officer, who upon this Occasion, was
willing to purchase his Favor by his Services

One Day, our General's Wound being in pretty good Condition, he took a
resolution to write two or three Lines to his new Mistress, whom he supposed to
be at her own Lodgings near Mons, with the rest of the Lady's of her
Acquaintance: When he had writ the Billet doux, he cast his Eyes upon that
young Officer, who had been so ready about him, to carry it to this fair Lady:
While he was writing, he could not forbear to look upon him from time to time,
speaking with himself: Can any thing be more like my Countess than this young
Gentleman? He has the same charming Eyes, the same Features, and the very same
Beautiful Complexion. Having made these Reflections to himself, he asked him,
whether he knew Madam de --. Yes, replied the Countess, who was so well
disguised as not to be known by any one. I know her as well as my self, and I
can assure you in her behalf, that she Loves you as well as her own Life. This
Answer savouring of so much Familiarity, somewhat startled our General, who
told him, whom he took to be a Man, and pray Sir, who could tell you this, has
she made you her Confident? She has not told me in so plain Terms as I speak
Sir, replied the Countess, but I might easily perceive by the trouble which
your wound occasioned in her Mind, that she was as deeply Wounded as your self;
and though her wound appears to be but slight outwardly, her Heart is
nevertheless most sensibly touched by a more dangerous Weapon, and --. Here the
Marshal interrupting the young Officer, (according to outward appearance) since
you know, said he, the Countess so well, pray deliver to her this Letter, which
I give you; and tell her from me, that I most impatiently desire to see her.

The Lady, who admired her own dexterity in Personating herself so well as she
did; took the Letter with a great of Respect, to carry it to his Mistress. But
she was not gone far from the place, where she had left the Marshal de
Boufflers, ever she retired into an adjacent Wood, where having unfolded the
Mystery of Love, with which she was entrusted; she read these following Words:
Dear Countess,
IF the rigor of my Destiny keeps me one day longer from your sight, I must
resolve to embrace death, but a death a thousand times more cruel to me, than
that which my Wounds could have procured to me Heaven has against my will
restored me a Life, that I might love you more now than ever before: But alas!
how can I be sure whether you Heart continues still the same as to me? It Is
possible it has changed it is inclinations, and parhaps some fortunate Rival
possesses -- But oh! I dare not enlarge farther upon that Subject, lest the
very thoughts of it should Kill me in an instant; I will rather flatter myself
with some sweet hopes, which may prolong my Life at least for some time. Don't
therefore put me out of your Remembrance, my most incomparable Queen; consider
with your self, that you have Captivated a Heart which adores and loves you,
even to an excess of Passion: When I received my Wound in the Heat of the
Engagement, I than believed I should never have seen you again; but since I
begin to grow better, and that I am likely to stay some time longer in this
World, on purpose to serve my Prince and you, I will employ the precious
remainder of my days, in making you sensible of the sincerity of my Affection.
Farewell, my incomparable, and believe that my Love is far surpassing what can
be conceived in that kind, by any Mortal. I remain if I live till to Morrow;

The most tender and Affectionate of all your Lovers.




After the Countess had read this Letter, which was altogether agreeable to her
wishes; Is it possible, said she to her self, that thou my Dearest shoud'st not
know me? It is four or five days, since I have been with thee in the same Tent;
and does not thy Heart tell thee, that it is she that Loves thee? Alas! I have
a great deal of Compassion for thee, and I attribute this want of knowing me,
wholly to thy Distemper, which appears to me very violent, although it seems as
if thou would insinuate the contrary. And notwithstanding all the pains thou
endurest, thou still keep me in Remembrance; nay, thy Remembrance is founded
upon sincerity, I am my self an Eyewitness of this secret, which nevertheless,
thou have put into the Hands of an unknown Person. Thy Integrity and eager
desire of hearing news from me, have made thee hazard all; but do thou not O
Sovereign King of my Heart, consider unto what dangers thou have exposed me,
and that if my Husband should discover the least of this Passion, that I have
for thee, I am infallibly undone: Thou know that he abominates Horns, and
that nothing in the World could touch him so sensibly, as to find himself a
Cuckold, and especially to be so dignified by the means of such a one as thee,
whose singular merits and charms he ought most to dread.

The Countess was making these and such like other Reflections, when the
Marshal, who had taken a walk into the Wood for alittle Air, and being come by
chance near the place where she had seated herself, understood some part of
what she had said. Never was any agreeable Surprise greater than this, he
having immediately known her Voice, which was then without disguise. Having
embraced her several times, Is it you said he, is it you my adorable Angel?
Unto what dangers do you expose your self for my sake? Alas! I am at present
in an unspeakable pain for you. You see my Dearest, replied she with a
languishing tone, what one is willing to do to enjoy the sight of an Object one
Loves, and how a genuine Passion triumphs over all the most frightful
Obstacles. I have hazarded all to see you, and I have Sacrifis'd even my Honor
for your sake: I am ready to own it Madam, said the General kissing one of her
pretty Hands, which she had given him without a Glove; And I protest to you,
that I at the same time acknowledge my self unworthy of these Favors you
bestow upon me. I Will endeavor to give you the most sensible and livevely
Marks of my Gratitude. Some Officers, who were at the same time walking in the
Wood, and knew Monsieur de Boufflers, coming up toward 'em, broke off the
Intercourse of our Lovers for that Time. The Countess, who was afraid of being
discovered, made the best of her way to her own Lodgings, being well satisfied
that she had seen and spoke to her Gallant, who was not long without repaying
her Visit. When this Lady went first from her Lodgings, she told her
Gentlewomen and the rest of her Domestic Servants, That she was going to see
one of her Acquaintance, who was in a Monastery near Mons; which was the
Reason, that during her Stay with our General, which was about Five or six
Days, they were not disturbed at her Absence. She had made one of her Waiting
Gentlewomen, whose Name was Gvisson, and one whom she had a more particular
Respect for than all the rest, her Confident in the Business; she waited upon
her in one Corner of the Wood, with her Woman's Apparel, which she had there
changed for the Man's Clothes he had worn before. Thus our Heroine Lady
returned Home to her Lodgings, accompanied only by this Damsel, leaning upon
her Arm as if she had been the most harmless Creature in the World, and as if,
during her Stay, she had employed her Time in nothing else but praying with
those Religious Sisters for the Preservation of her Husband, from the imminent
Dangers of War.

The Marshal de Boufflers, after he had got clear from the other Officers that
met him in the Wood, spent all that Night under most terrible Agonies, not
knowing what was become of his Mistress, whom he had searched for all over the
Forest; but no sooner did the next Morning appear, but to ease himself of the
Trouble which distracted his Mind, he mounted on Horseback, steering his
Course directly to the Place where he knew his Beloved lodged all that Time. He
found his lovely Countess as yet in Bed, who having received him with
incredible Joy, and closed him between her Arms, told him a thousand passionate
things, in Terms so engaging and charming, that they are past all Expression,
except by him who had the good Fortune to be made sensible of 'em. Nothing
could appear more Charming than she did, as she lay in Bed: A careless
Head-dress, tied behind with a Carnation Ribbon, in the nature of a single
Top-knot, together with a sweet engaging Air, which was natural to her, made
her appear the most lovely Woman in the Universe. The Marshal having now met
with a favorable Opportunity to enjoy the happy Minute, told Guisson, who had
introduced him that Morning to the Countess, Mademoiselle, Let me be with your
Lady for two or three Hours in private, because I have some Matters of Moment
to impart to her. This young Damsel, who very well understood his Meaning,
asked her Mistress, Whether she would have her withdraw? Yes, said the Lady,
and if any should come to enquire for me this Morning, tell 'em, That I am
indisposed and not to be spoke with at present.

The Young Woman, having received her Lady's Orders, left the Room, and our
Marshal finding himself now at liberty, threw himself upon the Bed, by his fair
Lady, kissing and embracing her without Intermission; and finding nothing that
was likely to obstruct his Passage, if he advanced farther, he, in very
passionate Terms, begged of her, to grant him the last Favor. Alas! cried she,
half vanquished, and entangl'd in his Embraces, Who can deny you any thing, my
Dear? Alas! I am ready to faint, pray pity my Weakness! Oh! what ravishing
joys, my Soul, my Sovereign! The Marshal, now in the midst of his Enjoyments,
thought himself the happiest Man in the World, and keeping her still in his
Arms, protested to her with a great many Oaths, That he never in all his
Lifetime had received so much Satisfaction as with her. He desired her, after
having by a thousand Oaths assured her of his Fidelity, and that he would love
her for ever, To keep their Intriegue secret, and to let no Body in the World
know of it, lest that if the Count de -- should get the least scent of it, it
might prove of dangerous consequence both to her and himself, who could not
suffer her to be misused by a Jealous Husband. The Countess told him, with a
Kiss, That he needed not in the least fear her; that she did not admire
Confidents in Love,; that she was so tender as to this Point, that she scarce
trusted her own Heart, lest it should betray her.

These Assurances were signed by both Parties several times over, and the poor
Countess, who was of a very tender Constitution, sealed 'em with some Drops of
her Blood, in hopes that their mutual Promises should outlast their Lives.

The Marshal, now more contented than a Prince, left his Beloved in Bed, having
reiterated his Promise, to come and see her often. But before a few Days were
passed, the King being dissatisfied with the Inhabitants of Liege, who had by
some Acts of Hostility incurred his utmost Displeasure, ordered, That some
Batteries should be raised against that City, and the whole Management of this
Affair being left to the Conduct of the Marshal de Boufflers, he prepared
himself to put his Orders in execution against Whitsontide. Our General having
therefore taken Leave of his Countess, and repeated his former Assurances of an
everlasting Love, Bombarded the City of Liege for Two or three Days, causing a
great Consternation among the Inhabitants, very many of whom were ruined by it.
But, while he was taken up in this Expedition, the Count -- carried his Lady
back to Paris, and though he showed her all the Complaisance imaginable, yet she,
who could not think upon, nor be pleased with any thing but her Gallant,
received all her Husband's Caresses very coldly. The Count, who was not
insensible of her Indifferency, and loved her extremely, was ready to dye with
Vexation, not imagining that she could love any one but himself, after he had
so much advanced her Fortune; he having married her not for her Portion or
extraordinary Quality, but merely for her Beauty; she being, by Birth, the
Daughter only of a Private Gentleman in Poictou.

But, to return to our Lady, who never having had any great Love for her
Husband, was easily comforted for his Death, which happened soon after;
pleasing her self with a Fancy, That the Marshal de Boufflers would marry her,
conformably to those passionate Protestations he had often made to her: But she
was much deceived in her Aim; for having notify'd to him the Death of her
Husband, in such Terms as were convincing enough to the Marshal, That she loved
him sufficiently to invest him with the same Quality; he turned the whole into
Raillery, and answered her in Terms full of Equivocations; which most sensibly
afflicted her: And the Marshal, who after the Campaign was ended, returned to
Paris, told her with his own Mouth, That he could not as yet resolve to Marry;
but that this should not hinder him from loving her as well as if she were his
Wife, and more; for, said he, Marriage often suppresses the vehemence of Love,
and sometimes quite extinguishes its Flame. But these Reasons were not cogent
enough to make her lay aside the Thoughts she had of Marrying him. On the
contrary, she conceived such an Aversion toward him, perceiving her self thus
despised, after she had done so much for him, that Hatred succeeded in her
Heart instead of Love, to that degree, that she refused to see him; nay, she
would not so much as hear him spoke of, as if his very Name were terrible to
her: Which vexed the Marshal to the very Heart, who loved her to the highest
degree, notwithstanding he could not resolve to make her his Spouse.

One Day, as he was walking in the King's Gardens at Versailles, it being a
very fair Day, he espied from far his Countess's Coach; and drawing nearer, and
finding no Body in it but one of her Footmen, he asked him where his Lady was;
who having told him, That she was taking a Turn in one of the Walks of the
Gardens, with the Marchioness de lae Mothe, the Marshal, with all possible
haste, made up to the Place where his fair Lady was: But being willing to
overhear their Discourse, he hid himself behind some Trees, hard by where they
were walking, and heard the Countess de -- who was wiping her Tears away with
her Handkerchief, say thus to the Marchioness: My dearest, let us bury my
Misfortune in Oblivion; it is passed Expression, when I consider what I have
done for that ungrateful Man; the very Thoughts of whom now are frightful to
me. This perfidious Wretch has not only given me his Word, but sworn a thousand
Oaths; That, if the Chance of War should happen to take off my Husband, I
should alone dispose of his Destiny. But, good God! continued she, what is
become of all those Oaths? He says he loves me more than ever, and yet refuses
to keep his Promise.

You are a very good-natured Lady indeed, replied the Marchioness de la Mothe,
laughing, are you to learn yet, that Promises made by Lovers have nothing of
Reality in 'em, they being founded upon a Passion which goes as fast as it
comes; and consequently all the Oaths they make return to their first
Principle; which is next to nothing, being only a Fancy, and what Woman of any
Sense would lay the least stress upon 'em? As for my part, continued she, I
should make no more of losing a Gallant, than to part with one of my Ribbons. I
hope you are not in earnest thus to torment your self for a Loss, which is not
worth taking notice of. Come, come, Madam, so beautiful a Lady as you need not
want Gallants, if you have a Mind to be troubled with 'em. This is not enough,
Madam, replied the Countess, sighing, but all Men don't please us alike. I am
sensible what a difficult Task it was for me to show so much Complaisance as I
did, to my deceased Husband, whom I loved but indifferently; and therefore I
would fain, if I could, avoid to undergo the same Trouble. But how ingenious I
am at tormenting my self, cried she, looking toward the Place where the
Marshal had hid himself, Let us strive, my Heart, to do Violence to our own
Inclination, let us not think any more of the Ravisher of our Liberty. Oh
Heavens! what do I see? said the Lady all on a sudden, Is not that this
faithless Man, whose Love hss cost me so many Sighs? The Marchioness perceiving
the Marshal coming up toward her, followed the Countess, who run with all
Speed toward her Coach, and having ordered the Coachman to drive as fast as he
could to Paris, she with a disdainful Frown drew up the Glass, and away they
went.

The Marshal thinking himself above her Scorn, and being by this time got on
Horseback, rode close after the Coach, and having presented one of his Pistols
at the Coachman, Stop, said he, stop you Dog, or else I Will shoot you through the
Head. The Poor Fellow, being extremely terrified, leapt out of the Coach-box,
leaving the Coach to the Marshal's Disposal; who having put one of his
Servants, who had been with him at Boulogne, (a small Village near Paris,) in
his Place, made him stop at the next Inn. The Ladies, that hitherto had not
seen who it was that pursued 'em, and had made most lamentable Outcries, all
a-long the Road, were much surprised when they saw the Marshal de Boufflers;
for imagining that it was some of their Gallants, who intended to carry 'em
away, they had not had the Courage till now to lift up their Eyes. At that same
instant, all the Countess's Hatred suddenly vanished; she gave her Hand to the
Marshal, who led her out of the Coach into one of the best Appartments of the
House. The Marchioness perceiving this sudden Change in her Friend, did not say
one Word, but prayed one of the Footmen, who had been all-a-long behind the
Coach, to drive her away to Paris, and that he might return immediately
afterward to fetch his Lady.

Thus the Marshal having got his Mistress by himself, could not forbear
laughing at this bold stroke he had made, knowing that it had often stood him
in good stead before, upon the like Occasions: Well, Madam, said he, looking
upon her steadfastly, you are now in my Power; could you imagine that after we
have been so closely acquainted you might disintangle your self with so much
Ease? Ladies that love Gallantry as well as you do, ought not to carry Matters
so haughtily; your manner of Proceeding appears very unseasonable. And, after
all, what is it I have done to you? continued he, with a somewhat more composed
Countenance; I have loved you very tenderly, and love you still, in spite of
all your Scorn. You have proposed Marriage to me, and you don't know the
Reasons why it was not in my Power to comply with your Desires in that
particular. You may possibly tell me, That where there is a great deal of Love,
Reason seldom takes Place, but as my Circumstances are at present, I am obliged
to consult Reason, and to tell you, That I cannot Marry at this Time. If you
have the least Kindness for me, you will easily persuade your self, That all that
was in my Power to do for you, I have done already.

The Countess was not capable of giving him one Word in answer, her Speech
being stopped by a Torrent of Tears, which she shed: Notwithstanding all these
disadvantages, she still appeared to the Marshal one of the most lovely Women
in the World, And as he has always a great Tenderness for the fair Sex, so he
could not but endeavor to allay her Grief. He threw himself at her Feet, and
embracing 'em, My Angel, my Dearest, said he, it is impossible for me to see you
thus torment your self, let us pardon one another all those Crimes which have
made us both culpable. Grant me your Pardon, and I will grant you mine, and
freely forgive those charming Eyes of yours which have set me all in a Flame,
and do you forgive these tender Expressions, which were the true Interpreters
of my Heart; it did not address it self to you, most charming Creature, added
he, in a very passionate Tone, before it had consulted yours, which it found so
worthy of its Choice and Affection.

The Lady, whom the great Surprise she was in, had kept silent till now, was
not able to hold out any longer against the Power of such Charms and tender
Caresses of a Lover, who was beloved by her, but was forced to yield, in spite
of all her Indifferency, which she had shown to him in outward Appearance. It Is
in vain, my Dear, replied she at last, that I endeavor to hate thee; thou
know how to disarm me by thy most engaging Charms, and my Heart, as soon as
it sees thee, loses all its Force, which it should make use of against thee.
Away, away, said she, with all my Haughtiness and Scorn, you only serve to add
Fuel to my Flame, and to render my Passion more violent than before. To be
short, my illustrious Lover, added she, throwing her self about his Neck, and
squeesing him between her Arms, I love thee, and all the Considerations in the
World shall not be powerful enough to separate us for the future, and not so
much as for one Moment. I will leave it to your Judgment to guess what past
afterward between two Persons who loved one another with so much Passion.

By this time, Night beginning to approach, the Countess began to be uneasy,
not because she was with her Gallant, who entertained her with so much
sweetness, but because she heard no News of her Coach, and that she thought it
would look very ill in her, not to return to Paris that Night; she was just a
talking of it, as much as she thought convenient to the Marshal, when putting
her Head out of the Window, by chance, she saw one of her Footmen coming, who
told her, That the Coach was ready at the Door; And what is become of
Adventure? (which was the Coachman's Name who run away out of the Box before)
cried the Lady very angry, What is become of that Coxcomb? I cannot tell, Madam,
replied the Footman, we have heard nothing of him since his overhasty Flight.
Certainly, replied the Countess with a Smile, he did not act very discreetly,
in leaving me thus; but it is you, Marshal, said she, that is the occasion of
all. By my Faith, Madam, replied Bousflers, if your Coachman has no more
Courage than he has shown to Day, he is a most damnable Coward; is it possible
that a single Pistol should frighten a Man out of his Wits? If I saw an hundred
Fire locks discharged at me at once, they should never make me shrink. All the
World has not such a warlike Soul as you, my Dearest, said the Countess; you
were born to conquer the Universe, and to make every thing submit to you; your
Power even extends it self over me and -- Here she stopped, not thinking it
convenient to proceed in her Discourse, by reason of the Footman, who stood by,
and heard what they said; but having ordered him to withdraw, she renewed her
Love-Protestations, and began to prepare for going; but the Marshal, who did
not intend to part with her as yet, detayn'd her for some time longer, telling
her, That since he had frighted her Coachman away, he would supply his Place
himself; which he accordingly did: For having paid the Reckoning, he wrapped
himself up in his Scarlet-Cloak, and drove the Coach to Paris, as well as if
the Coachman himself had been in the Box; it being dark Night she was not
disturbed at the Frolic, but being come to her Lodgings, she entreated the
Marshal to stay with her at Supper. All her domestic Servants were extremely
surprised at this sudden Change: What an alteration is this, said they to one
another; our Lady, not long ago would not so much as hear him named in her
presence, nor would allow us to speak of him, and now he seems to be as much in
her savor as ever. But Mrs. Guisson, her Lady's Confident, guessed without
much difficulty at the true reason of it, not questioning but that there had
been a reconciliation between 'em.

After Supper, the Marshal stayed for a considerable time with his Mistress, in
her Bedchamber; where they began afresh to argue the true Reason of their
Quarrel; they being now at Liberty to talk with more freedom, than they could
do at Boulogne, where they were in danger of being overheard by every one
belonging to the House. The Lady then, no longer making any difficulty of
disclosing her Heart to the Marshal, and their mutual Reconciliation, having
been Sealed by some Kisses, he left her to her Repose. But, alas! in vain; the
poor Lady was not capable of enjoying one moments Rest. The surprise of this
last Adventure, and that too by a Man whom she had resolved to Banish from her
Heart for ever; together with the behavior of the Marchioness de la Mothe, who
had left her to the Mercy of a Gentleman, whom she could not but know to be
very dangerous to her Repose, had most horribly distracted her Mind: She made a
thousand Reflections upon the strangeness of the Accident, and not being able
to be at rest at home, she went the next day to pay the Marchioness a Visit,
who did not fail to upbraid her with her wanton Humor. How, said the
Marchioness, in a most scornful manner, are not you that same Lady, who would
never see Monsieur Boufflers any more; nay, that would not so much as hear any
one speak of him; and scarce had you cast one Eye at him, but without any
further consideration, you threw your self into his Embraces? I cannot deny it,
Madam, replied the Countess, not without some Confusion; but what is it one
will not do when one is in Love; alas! Love makes us all subject to Frailties,
and that to such a degree, that we scarce know what we do. Alas! good Heavens!
the Marshal, at his first sight, disarms me entirely and makes me, in spite of
all my anger, recall all my former Resolutions, which immediately vanish in his
presence. I know, Madam, replied the Marchioness, that he will prove very
dangerous to your repose, and therefore you ought to force your tender
Inclinations; you ought not to surrender your Heart upon so easy Terms, after
he has had the boldness to carry you away along with me, who did not know him
any farther than by sight. His manner of proceeding savours of too much
familiarity, and a Person of his Character ought to have treated us with more
Respect. My greatest trouble, my Dearest, said the Countess, interrupting her,
was, that you should leave me to the management of a Man of his Humor. Come,
come, Madam, replied the Marchioness maliciously, I was well enough satisfied
that you were very well acquainted with him before; and that his Courtships
were not disagreeable to your Inclinations: It Is not since Yesterday, that you
have perceived his Amourous motions: You are not ignorant of his intentions;
you are not insensible how far he is likely to carry it; and whatever you may
pretend to the contrary, I am not bound to take your word as to this
particular. When any Persons are in Love, they seldom think themselves obliged
to speak truth; they take delight in disguising the matter, and upon the whole,
I am of opinion, that no account ought to be made of any thing that they
assert. The Marchioness de la Mothe would not have stopped here, but that one of
her Acquaintance coming in, very earnestly entreated her to go with her to hear
a Sermon at Versailles. The Countess, who would rather have staid at home, went
along with her more out of Policy than Devotion, and in the evening, being
returned to her Lodgings, the Marshal de Boufflers, after he had for some time
entertained her with his Passion; told her, that his most Christian Majesty
designed to besiege Namur (the Capital City of the Province of that Name) this
Year, which was that of 1692. and that, to facilitate this Design; his Majesty
intended to go thither in Person, with the Dauphin and the rest of the
principal Officers of his Court.

You will, without doubt, my Dear, replied she very Sorrowfully, have your
share in this glorious Enterprise; and perhaps I may be so unfortunate as to
hear of your Death, which will unavoidably hasten my own: What would you have
me do, Madam, replied the General, with a serious Countenance, I am obliged to
obey my King's Orders; If it should be my fortune to perish in this Campaign,
continued he, I shall dye your Lover; and I hope you will take care that
Prayers may not be wanting for my poor Soul, which perhaps will be fluttering
about in the airy Regions, without finding any repose: O good Sir, replied the
Lady, don't be prepossessed with any such thoughts, that cannot but be
destructive to your own welfare. We Religious Sisters will take care of you,
we'll prepare your Soul for Paradise: O Lord! Madam, said he, I hope you will
pardon me, If I can scarce believe it; how is it possible that such a Devil as
I, whose whole practice has been the destruction of Mankind by Fire and Sword,
should be saved from Hell; though I have heard some say, that there is a
particular place of Rest appointed for us Soldiers, but who can rely upon such
fantastic Notions? I am afraid I shall be leisurely Roasted by the heat of
Purgatory, the Flames of which as they tell me, surpass in fierceness all the
artificial Fires in the World. How foolish you are, Boufflers, answered the
Countess, thus to fill your head with such Melancholy Thoughts: Don't you know
that our good Works will deliver us both from the Fire of Purgatory, and of
Hell? And as you have done more good than bad Deeds, I don't question, but that
you will pass directly to Paradise. But let us have no more of this; pray who are
to be the General Officers, that are to Command this Year under the King and
Dauphin?

Madam, replied the Marshal, these are to be; the Count d' Auvergne, the
Marshal de Humieres, the Princes de Soubise and Conde, and his eldest Son, the
Duke de Villeroy, and a great many more, whom it would be superfluous to name
to you, in regard that you have not the least concern with 'em. It Is true, my
Dear, replied the Countess sighing, I don't pretend to any interest, but what I
have in you, and good God! what a trouble would it be to me, if I should chance
to lose you? Are not you a very pretty Gentlewoman? said the Marshal smiling,
I Am sure I know the time, when you would not have said so: How often have you,
when you were in your freekish humors, wished that the Earth might open to
swallow me up; how often have you called me ungrateful Wretch, Monster,
Villain, and such like fine Names? These are the Weapons of an angry Woman. Oh!
how extremely does your Sex take delight in Revenge? If you had the same
strength in your Arms, that you have in your Tongue, you would defeat an Army
of ten Thousand Men, in an hours time. I take it to be a very great misfortune
for a Man to have a Woman for his Enemy; as for my own part, I would rather be
obliged to fight against a whole Battalion of Enemies, than to stand the brunt
of so Beauful a Lady as you, when put into a Passion. Do but see how cruelly
you deal with us; you are not content to overthrow us by the force of your
Charms, but you would also trample upon us by your Threats, and drive us to the
utmost Extremity of Despair. But e're I leave Paris, I Am resolved to make you
lower your Topsail, and to bring you to more reasonable terms.

Your presence alone, said the fair Lady with a charming Air, is capable of
making me do whatever you shall think fit. I can compare it to nothing so
appositely, as to that Head of Medusa, which Metamorphos'd every thing, and
changed its Situation: I have often taken a resolution to hate you as long as I
should live, and no sooner had I seen you, but all my Aversion to your Person,
and my seemingly firm Resolutions immediately vanished. It Is not long ago,
since the Marchioness de la Mothe upbraided me with this frailty: How, Madam,
replied the Marshal briskly, that remedy aaginst Love, durst she talk thus to
you? Certainly, continued he laughing, a Man must be very hard put to it for a
dainty Bit, that would venture to thrust his Dagger into her Scabbard, Vah!
that nasty hole, if I may believe the description which the Abbot de la Trape
has given me of it. This Prior has sworn to me, that he never met with so ugly,
black and deep a Gap in his Lifetime. Fie, Boufflers, said the Countess, as if
she had been displeased at his Discourse; are not you ashamed thus to represent
that pretty retiring Place of the Marchioness, as she her self usually calls it
when she is in a good humor; and truly, if she knew you thought otherwise of
it, I can assure you, you would be but a very unwelcome Guest to her. She told
me one day, that the Abbot de la Trape, of whom you spoke just now, had indeed
once set up his Candle before her Altar, and had Sacrifis'd upon his Knees in
her presence. Then Monsieur Boufflers interrupting her; it is a pleasant subject
to insist upon, said he, the Devil take me, if this Lady would let me -- I
would rather choose a Cow for a Play-fellow: But away with it, let us talk no
more of it, for I begin to be sick at the very Heart. It is you, said he, my
lovely Creature, embracing her, that carry about you that sweet retiring Place,
which is the very Seat of Delight and Pleasure: I am very sensible of the
tenderness of your Heart, which rewards it is Friends with plenary satisfaction.
It Is true what you say, answered she, this is the chiefest Ambition which I
ever pretended to.

This Conference would have lasted longer, if one of the Marshal's Servants had
not come to tell him, that Madam de Maintenon was desirous to speak with him,
as 'twas supposed by the King's Order, he having been wholly employed for
several days after, in assisting at the frequent Councils of War, that were
then held at Versailles. A few Weeks after, he was obliged to enter upon the
Campaign, which began very early this Year. The King to encourage his Generals,
marched in Person at the head of his Army; and Namur was Besieged in the Month
of May, in the Year 1692. as it has been already intimated; and the Trenches
being opened before it, between the Twenty ninth and Thirtieth, the Place was
carried by Capitulation. The Marshal did signalise himself there at several
Times, as did also the Marquess de la Valette and de Gasse, Marshals de Camp;
after the surrender of the Town, both the Armies remained for some Time without
Action; during which Interval, the Marshal de Boufflers was captivated by the
Beauty of a certain young Gentlewoman, who was retiring, with her Mother, into
a Nunnery, and by the King's express Command passed through the Camp, in order
to go to a certain Abbey of Religious Sisters. At the very first Sight of this
young Lady, who was of good Quality and extraordinary Beautiful, he was touched
with so tender Love and Respect for her, that for a considerable Time he could
not be at rest; and that which vexed him most was, that she was in a Place
where he had not the Opportunity to see her, when he had a Mind to it. At last,
being grown impatient, at the Absence of his Beloved Mistress, and consulting
more his Passion than his Reason, he resolved to disguise himself in Woman's
Apparel, on purpose to give her a visit.

Having in this Disguise met her in the Parlour of the Nunnery, he did not
delay to declare his Passion to her; unto which she answered with so much
Modesty, that he was extremely charmed with it. After his Departure, his
Mistress thought it most advisable not to speak any thing of her disguised
Lover, either to her Mother, or the rest of the Religious Sisters, for fear of
putting some Jealousy into their Brains, by which means she might lose the
Advantage of entertaining him another Time. The next Day our General, being
advertised that her Mother would be abroad, had the Satisfaction to visit his
Mistress in her Chamber, which was just at the Entrance of the Abbey; and the
rest of the Nuns believing it to be some particular Acquaintance of here is, did
not concern themselves any farther, allowing him the Freedom of enjoying the
Presence of his Beloved for the space of Two Hours. I leave it to the Judgment
of the Reader to determine, whether he did not make use of all the affectionate
Expressions, which his Passion could suggest to him; but this I have understood
since, That one of the Religious Sisters, whose Name was Coline, and who
supplied the place of an Apothecary in the Abbey, had espied (in passing by her
Chamber into the Garden, where she was going to gather some Herbs) the Marshal
kneeling down before her, and kissing her Hands. For this Reason it was that
this Bigot, suspecting somewhat of the Matter, let the Marshal, who in two or
three Days returned to renew his Visit, stand at the Door almost an Hour,
without opening it; the Marshal, suspecting the Truth, made such a Noise, with
the Bell, at the Abbey-Gate, that all the Religious Sisters came running down
Stairs, and peremptorily demanded what his Business was? I would willingly
replied he, counterfeiting his Voice, speak to Mademoiselle Orton (which was
the Name of his Mistress.) The young Lady, being then called for, received him
very courteously, but with some Restraint, her Mother, and Sister Coline being
present. The Marshal, after a little Stay, finding himself so narrowly watched,
thought it best to decamp for that Time, and to defer his Courtship till a more
favorable opportunity.

No sooner was he gone, but Madam Orton asked her Daughter, How she came
acquainted with this Gentlewoman? Mother, replied she, she is a certain young
Lady of a very good Family of Namur, who has a great Affection for me. Sister
Coline standing by, began to smile at her Answer, which made her Mother ask the
Name of this Lady. This Question put her to a great Non plus, because the
Marshal and she had not agreed upon any certain Name; yet having a good
presence of Mind, she told her Mother, not without blushing, That her Name was
Mademoiselle de Bouffline, being a Kinswoman of the Marshal de Boufflers, of
whom they had received so many Courtesies, during the Siege of Namur. Her
Mother having as yet in fresh Remembrance the great Obligations received from
the Marshal, asked no further Questions, being well satisfied with this Answer.
If Sister Coline, that spiteful Baggage, would have been as much contented,
Matters were likely to go very well upon Mademoiselle Orton's Side. But that
Demi-Devil, having taken notice that he was a Man in Woman's Apparel,
communicated her Thoughts to two or three more of the Religious Sisters, who
unanimously resolved at his next approach to have him searched, by a certain
ancient Matron belonging to the Nunnery, who should watch his coming to adore
his Goodess; and indeed, they were no worse than their Words, for he had not
long been there, but he saw a grave old Woman entering the Room, with a great
pair of Spectacles upon her Nose, and a large pair of Scissors in her Hand,
followed by a goodly Train of Nuns of the same Abbey. The Marshal seeing
himself destitute of all Arms, even so much as a Stick, began to be afraid of
their Motion, and made what haste he could to get to the Door. Being got pretty
well clear of 'em, No, no, good Matrons, said he to himself, I am not as yet
fond of being gelt. I know what your Design was, you would have cut off what
you found did not belong to the Female Sex, because I had been so bold as to
come in without your Leave: Otherwise, I Am sure, if a Gentleman gives you a
private Visit, with your own Consent, you would not upon any account treat him
so unkindly.

Mademoiselle Orton seeing her self, by this Contrivance, bereaved of the Sight
of her Gallant, appeared much discontented at his Absence, and having no other
means left her, she went one Morning to Mass to another Abbey, where she had the
good Fortune to meet with him: She told him all that she had endured ever since
she saw him last; advising him to come and see her in the Nunnery, without a
Disguise: Adding, That her Mother would be extremely glad to see him, to pay
her Acknowledgments for the great Obligations she had received from him. You
must be sure, said she, to talk of Love to the rest of the Sisters, for they
take great Delight in having a Man touch upon that String. The Marshal, after
having parted with his Beloved, began to consider with himself, for some time,
whether it were expedient for him to return to the same Place, where he had
been so lately in danger of suffering an irreparable Loss; but Love soon
prevailed o'r all other Considerations, especially being animated by the Hopes
of obtaining his Aim, if he went without Disguise, insomuch that besides his
Sword, he took care to provide a Pair of Pocket-Pistols, and having taken along
with him a lusty Fellow, his Servant, armed Capapee, he entered the Abbey with
an undaunted Courage. The Nuns quickly taking notice of a Man of so gallant and
engaging an Air, came all to receive him, making him Presents of diverse
Relics and Agnus Dei's, and among the rest one of the Religious Sisters, as
fair and bright as the Day, presented to him, a Heart made of her own Hair,
which was all over pierced with Darts.

The Marshal having discovered the Advantages of this Charming Beauty, which
had enchanted him even at the very first Sight, soon became forgetful of
Mademoiselle Orton. He frequently repaired to the Nunnery, where he would
entertain sometimes one, sometimes another, but his Fransson (which was the
beautiful Nun I spoke of before) was all his Delight and Comfort. Her
Companions were so transported with Jealousy, that one Day they threw an Ink
horn full of Ink in her Face, on purpose to disguise it; which being told to
the Mother Abbess, she made 'em do Penance for their Trespass, enjoining 'em
for Eight Days together to dig the Ground, and to manure it with their bare
Hands till it should be as fine as Ashes. Besides this, they were to draw out
of a deep Pit ten Tuns of Water into a leaky Vessel, which run out as fast as
they poured it in. The Marshal was overjoyed to see what Satisfaction his
Mistress had received for the Affront put upon her, but to counterballance his
Joy, he was much surprised to hear the Mother Abbess (who was above Threescore
Years of Age) tell him, That she was fallen desperately in Love with him.
Indeed he was so amazed at it, that he stepped two or three Paces backward, and
if he had not been upheld by a Table that stood behind him, he would have
scarce been able to keep himself upright. The good Woman took so much Pains to
represent to him the vehemence of her Passion, in Terms so lively and natural,
that he stood quite astonished at it. Perhaps it will not be improper to give
you a Character of this old Hag. She was of a very small Stature, and crooked;
her Nose very short; her Eyes and Mouth bigger than all the rest of her Face;
her Forehead about the Bigness of a Finger's Breadth, and two great Teeth
stuck out of her Mouth before; but for the rest, she was very ingenious, and
had an extraordinary Wit. She made a very fine Sonnata concerning her Passion
for the General, which begins thus, I having forgot the rest.

Incomparable Boufflers! let me sing
Thy Praise, thou greatest Herce of the Age:
All things on Earth and Sea do dread thy Rage,
And still new Laurels to thy Triumphs bring.
The Marshal was very hardly put to it how to manage so unusual a Love-concern
with this old Beldam, whom he was unwilling to disoblige, in regard that she
was the supreme Governess of the Nunnery; when one Day, not being able to have
any longer Patience to expect his Resolution, she laid hold of him in a Corner,
as he was going to a Chamber of one of the Nuns, where she hugged him so
closely with her two rawbon'd Arms, which were as tough as Sticks, that 'twas
impossible for him to get loose from her Embraces. The Marshal being afraid
that some of the Sisters might surprise 'em told her, Pray, good Mother, do
your Matters a little more in private, for fear of giving Scandal. You are in
the right on it, my Son, cried she, drawing him by main Force into a Closet,
hard by, where she begged him, Not to deny her any longer that Favor which she
so much wished for. And what Favor is that? said the Marshal de Boufflers,
laughing. That is my Son, continued she, shaking her Head, to put your Sword
here, after I have besprinkl'd it with Holy Water, to drive away the Evil
Spirit (for so the Nuns of Namur usually call Love) that thus torments me. The
Marshal, who could not but understand her Meaning, and being uncertain what to
resolve upon. You strangle me! don't strangle me! and so having shut his Eyes,
Come, said he, let us enter the Breach, in the Dark; all Cats are Gray. The
Mother Abbess, who was extremely well satisfied, desired him to renew the
Attack the next Day; but he was not so well pleased with the first, and
therefore having made the Sign of the Cross all over him, he said, in a
Language unknown to her, Away from me Satan. The good Woman being exasperated
at this Repulse, flung her self about his Neck, laying her Fists about his
Ears: All which he took very patiently, but perceiving that she was about to
vent her Anger upon his Perriwig and Ruffles, he turned up her Backside, and
having soundly clapped her Buttocks, which were as red and lean as an Ape's;
the whole Nunnery was alarmed at the Outcries: The Nuns came running, with all
possible speed, to the Chamber of their Abbess, whom they found crying like a
Child, whilst the Marshal was not able to forbear laughing, and to save himself
was obliged to tell the whole Story. Whereupon the Old Beldam took it so
heinously, that not being able any longer to bear the Confusion she was in, and
the Reproaches which must needs attend such a Discovery, she hanged her self
for Grief the next following Night. The Marshal taking the advantage of these
Disorders, hunted about the Nunnery till he met with his beloved Fransson whom
he had debauched; and having afterward caused her to be disguised in the Habit
of a Page, she followed him in the Camp, and was present at the Battle of
Steenkirk, which was fought in August. Under this disguise she waited upon him
in his Tent, and in all other places, without the least suspicion of her being
a Woman, except that the Prince de Turenne some few hours before he was slain,
began to suspect the Truth, who without doub't would have discovered the whole
Intrigue, if Death had not prevented him. Monsieur Boufflers was so careful of
his Page, that he went no where without him, and he was called by no other name
in the Army, than The handsome Page.

During these intrigues, the Marshal received Letters from the Countess of --
whom he had left at Paris, and from Mademoiselle Orton, who was as yet in the
Nunnery near Namur. These two fair Ladies were not sparing in upbraiding him
with his Indifferency and Fickleness. But, alas! these are weak Efforts
against Men of so changable a Temper as our General then was, who seldom are
concerned at the Reproaches of an abandoned Mistress. He received very frequent
Letters from both, which were immediately sacrifis'd to the Flames without so
much as reading 'em. Fransson, was generally a Spectatrix of it, and had the
satisfaction to hear him say, that it was done for her sake. Winter
approaching, the Army was divided and sent to the Garrisons, the Marshal taking
his way (incognito) directly to Paris, attended by his Page: The Countess, who
had got Intelligence that he had been six or eight Weeks in Town, without
seeing her, at last came to find him out at his Lodgings; where she upbraided
him in a most outrageous manner: But he did not answer her one Word, and having
ordered one of his Servants to shut the Door upon her, he looked above to see
her depart, without being in the least discerned by her. This Lady having
somewhere or another got notice that he was in love with a young Woman who
lived with him under the disguise of a Page, happened just to meet her upon the
stairs as she was going down, playing with a little Dog, one of the finest that
ever was seen, which the Marshal had brought along with him from the Campaign.
This Dog, after she had first had several slices with a Knife at the beautiful
Page's Face, she threw out at Window, which was next to her, and so made the
best of her way. The poor young Gentlewoman, being thus miserably handled and
calling to mind what befell her not long ago, as to the Ink-horn in the Nunnery,
Alas Heavens! cried she, am I not very unfortunate, that every one has a design
against that little Beauty which Nature has bestowed upon me. The Marshal, who
soon knew the Voice of his female Page, opening the Chamber Door, run out with
all imaginable speed to see what accident had happened, and found her all over
covered with Blood. He had never been more heartily vexed in all his Lifetime,
but all that could be done at that instant, was to send for an able Surgeon who
healed her Wounds in a little time, with so much Skill, that not the least
Scarr appeared.

However, the Marshal conceived so great an Aversion toward the Countess, that
all the World was extremely surpised at it, considering to what a degree he
had Loved her before. One evening during the Carnaval, the Marquess de
Boufflers came in Masquerade, to a Ball, made by the Order of the Duke de
Villeroy; of which the Countess having had some notice, she also went thither
in a disguise, and took out our General to Dance with her; but he by some
secret instinct, supposing it to be her, excused himself, and to avoid any
further confusion, immediately left the Company. The next Night was wholly
spent by him in running through the Ball disguised in the Habit of a Satyr, with
his Page, who with her fair Hair spread all over her shoulders, Danced to the
admiration of all the Spectators; every one being amazed at the becoming Air
and Mien of Fransson, who passed for a young Man among those that did not know
her; to the great satisfaction of our General, who could not forbear laughing
at it.

Not long after, Madam de Chatillon, Sister, of the Marshal de Luxemburg fell
desperately in Love with her, which was a most pleasant Scene to Boufflers, and
served as an agreeable Diversion to him for a long time after. She never made
him a Visit, but all her Discourse run upon the excellency of this Page, whom
she thought as fair as an Angel; besides said she, that there is somewhat so
uncommon and so amiable in his Air, that it is impossible for a tender Heart to
resist such engaging Charms; it is very well for you Men that he was not born a
Woman, for he would certainly have set you all in a flame, and burnt you to
ashes; I must confess, Madam, replied the Marshal with a smile, a Beauty so
fair as my Page, might cause great disorders in the World, and therefore
prudent Nature having foreseen this evil, judged it most expedient to make him
a Man, as he appears to be: But Sir, said Madam de Chatillon, interrupting him,
and casting a very Passionate look upon Fransson, Don't you believe that a Man
who is endowed with extraordinary perfections, may cause as many Commotions
among our Sex, as a fair Lady does among yours? Yes very well Madam, said our
General, I am thoroughly convinced that your Hearts are as tender as ours, nay
that you out do us in certain respects. You Love with more constancy and
reality, whilst we Men are continually upbraided with Levity in changing our
Mistresses as often as we please: For my part, if I were obliged to speak
sincerely, I must confess that I have seen great variety of Countries in the
Empire of Venus, and have made those Ladies sufficiently sensible of it, with
whom I have had any Love-concerns for some time. For I never set up for much
Constancy, it being a thing I never was ambitious of. An Engagement which lasts
above two or three Months becomes burdensome; and variety is most agreeable to
my Humor, especially in matters of Love; which, nevertheless, seldom suits
with the Temper of the Female Sex, who take a particular Delight, and make it a
point of Honor to preserve the remainders of an old Passion, almost quite worn
out, merely to have the satisfaction to say, Such and such a one still
continues to Love me, a convincing proof, that my Charms have been so powerful
as to keep him in Chains even to this very Day.

Truly Sir, replied the Lady, you speak very favorably of our Sex, when you
tell us, That you take 'em to be more Constant than yours. We are at least as
fickle as you; and if it were not for a certain kind of Modesty, inseparable
from our Sex, believe me, we should be as forward to seek for new Gallants, as
you are to find out fresh Beauties. I know not what to say to it, Madam, said
the Marshal, laughing; this I see plainly, that none in this World can be free
from Faults, if Changeableness is to be counted so. Fransson, who was almost
tired with hearing her thus Prattle without intermission, and knowing that
Monsieur de Boufflers paid her a great deal of Respect, more out of Policy,
than any thing else, went into a Room over head, from whence, through the
Clefts of the Planks, she poured some dirty Water upon her Head-Dress, of which
she was the nicest Woman in the World, and which was always exactly set in the
Quills, whilst she affected to imitate the motions of a Puppet.

Monsieur de Boufflers seemed to be very angry with his Page, chiding him, and
calling him an awkward Fool. But the Lady immediately took Fransson's part,
telling the Marshal, That 'twas of so little consequence, that he ought not to
chide so pretty a Creature as that, about it; especially since it was done by
mischance, without any malicious Intent. No, Madam, replied the Page with a
great deal of affected Simplicity, It was my Master's Ape, that in running
after me, overthrew the Water-bowl: We are Play-fellows together, and I often
suffer for his Tricks, of which it is impossible to break him. She spoke all
this, with so much seeming Innocence, that she charmed Madam Chatillon to the
highest degree, who went home more amorous than ever. She had no sooner entered
her own House, but having first changed her Head-cloaths and Linen, she locked
her self up in her Closet, to make Reflections upon her growing Passion.

The Marshal, after she was gone, asked Fransson, Whether she had spilt the
Water upon the Duke of Luxemburg's Sister on purpose? Yes, my Dearest, replied
she, embracing him, I had only a mind to be rid of this prattling Creature, who
is continually Talking without intermission. You are an unlucky Baggage,
replied the General with a Smile, thus to abuse a poor Gentlewoman, who shows
so much Affection toward you. O, replied Fransson, that is, because she verily
believes me to be a Man; but if she should go about to search me, she would
soon be convinced to the contrary, so that is behooves me to take a great deal
of care not to let her come thereabouts; for in regard that she has no great
share of Discretion, it would not be long e're she would divulge the Matter to
all the World. I only wonder that the Marshal, her Brother, has not found out
the Mystery before this time, by the help of his Magical Art: Indeed I am
sorely afraid of that old Devil, as often as I see him. My pretty little
Creature, said the Marshal, he has the misfortune to be a Scarecrow to the
handsome Ladies; he never has had any success in Love concerns. I don't know by
what means he insinuated himself into the favor of the Countess de Soissons,
she being the only Woman that ever loved him in his Lifetime; as he has often
told me with his own Mouth, not without much regret, he being a great admirer
of the Fair Sex. But my dear Boufflers, answered Fransson, with a languishing
Air, I have been told that the Duke de Montmorency and the Count de Luce are
very accomplished Gentlemen, and very dextrous in the Art of Courtship. That is
true enough, replied the Marshal, but they have not such a dangerous Head piece
as their Father, they are of a sweet and agreeable Temper; they are not for
ransacking Heaven and Earth to find out their depth, and to dive into the most
abstruse Secrets of Love; neither is there any need of all that stir, since the
Charms of this Passion are altogether founded upon Innocence.

Fransson was accustomed frequently to dispute thus with her Gallant, and that
too in so charming a manner, that she for some time was the absolute Mistress
of his Heart; when, upon a sudden, he took a Resolution, either to Marry her,
or else to put her into some Nunnery for the remainder of her Life. The last of
these two Means was more easy to be accomplished than the former, wherefore he
proposed to her this Retirement, as the most honorable and most advantageous
in her present Circumstances. The Gentlewoman was in the greatest Agony in the
World e're she could resolve upon it, because she loved him so affectionately,
that she could rather have died than live without him. But notwithstanding all
her Sighs and Tears, Monsieur Boufflers, who was resolved to be rid of her,
having in view a most advantageous Match for himself, of which we shall have
occasion to speak hereafter, put her into a Nunnery in the Suburbs of S.
Marcellus, without having made any one privy to the Business, except the
Abbess, whom he had persuaded that she was his Kinswoman; having presented her
besides this, with a considerable Sum of Money, in recompense of her former good
Services. Thus this fair Lady once more put on the Habit of a Nun. But before
she did it, she was desirous to be upon trial for some time, under pretense
that it was expedient for her to observe whether that course of Life would
agree with her Constitution. But this was not the true reason of her delay; she
was in hopes still that her Lover, before this time was expired, might repent
of having shut her up in a Nunnery, and that he might be prevailed upon to
Marry her, conformably to some slight Promises which he had made her to that
effect, during the height of his Passion. But Words spoken by a Lover to a
Woman, when they are in the heat of their Passion, cannot be compared to any
thing more appositely than to the floating of the Sea, which depends upon the
variableness of the Winds.

Our General, finding himself now disengaged from all his Mistresses, began to
lead a very regular and solitary course of Life, so that Madam de Maintenon
having observed him so much altered from what he had been before, made no
difficulty to speak in his behalf to Mademoiselle de Grammont, Daughter of the
Marshal of the same Name, who, having formerly commanded the King's Armies, had
signalized himself on several Occasions. The Abbess of St. Cyr did not forget
to give her an Account of all his rare Accomplishments, unto which the young
Lady replied but very little, being not unacquainted with some of his amorous
Inrigues, and believing him only to act the Hypocrite like a Jesuit. But our
General, being a great Favorite of Madam Maintenon's, had often an opportunity
to see her there; and having always showed her a more than ordinary deference
and respect, she began by degrees to have a better Opinion of him and his
Actions. One Day being left alone with her, he began to declare his Passion to
her by halves, but was so extremely over-awed by her Presence, that he was not
able to proceed in his Discourse; the excess of his Love made him stammer
almost at every Word; which caused Mademoiselle to laugh at his Transports. He
soon after, had a Quartan Ague for three Months, which was commonly called the
Intervals of his Love; insomuch that he was obliged to take a good Quantity of
Quinquina, or Jesuit's Powder, which cured him of his Ague, but occasioned a
most violent Headache, for which he was advised to have recourse to the Waters
of Bourbon, as he did. He was just upon the point of getting a new Mistress
upon the Road, but having recollected himself, how prejudicial such an Intrigue
might prove to his present Design, he thought it more advisable in this
juncture, to keep a strong guard over his Heart, which would willingly have
made an Elopement; and to fortify it so well, as not to fear any Attack,
except from Mademoiselle de Grammont, unto whom all its Avenues and Passes were
to be opened.

Thus he spent some time in this Solitude, but he could not hold out long, for
he soon after, began to fix his Eyes on a young Laundress, who was wont to
bring his Linen every Day to his Chamber; and imagining that such an Intrigue
might be carried on privately, without any noise, he was resolved to try his
Fortune; which proved very favorable to him, she having, without much
reluctance, hearkened to his first Proposal. His Valet du Chamber, who always
found his Bed tumbled after he had made it, not in the least suspecting that
his Master had any concerns in it, made a Complaint to the Landlady. I have
observed, said the good Woman of the House, that as often as Judith comes, I
find the Bed in this condition; God forgive me, if I wrong her. You are not in
earnest, Dame Roux, said the Valet du Chamber, laughing: Do you imagine that my
Master would meddle with such a Drab as this, who has kissed so many fine
Ladies? Thou art a good honest Blockhead, Champonniere, said the Landlady,
laughing as hard as she could, Do thou not know, that a mad Dog falls upon
every Thing that lies in his Way? Well, replied the Servant, joking, when all
is done, no Body shall e're persuade me, That it is not a much greater Pleasure
to kiss a fair Lady of Quality than a dirty Drab. Oh! when I think of those
pretty Buttocks, those Hands, those white and delicate Bubbies, which I have
taken notice of in my Master's Ladies, it tickles me all over the whole Body,
but especially here about the Middle -- Oh! I am quite besides my self, I shall
run stark mad, if I think on it any longer. As far as I see, answered the Dame
of the House scoffingly, your Skin is mightily tickled with this Fancy, which
has set you all on a Flame. But, prithee, tell me, thou great Fool, Do thou
believe me so simple as to imagine that thy Master would make thee privy to his
Mistresses Beauties? May the Devil take me, answered he, if I have not often
seen 'em, in going and coming, in and out of the Chamber, when he was busy in
-- and was not at Leisure to take notice of me. Plague! on thee for a Beast,
cried the Landlady, laughing as loud as she could; Come Spark, I Will acquaint
the Marshal de Boufflers with it, who I believe, will give thee a good Reward
for the Pains thou take to divulge his Amors. You Will have a care of that,
Dame Roux, replied Champonniere, blowing the Smoke of Tobacco in her Face, or
else I shall go near to have your white Top knot died Black, as Apollo served
the Sexton, who was officious in relating to him, what he had heard others say
concerning him. Boufflers having called his Servant, the Dialogue was broke
off; and having sent him with some Letters to the Posthouse, he went into his
Closet, where he wrote this following Billet Doux to Mademmoiselle de Grammont.
Mademoiselle.
AMong all the Mortals who have adored you, none e're loved you with so
transcendent a Passion as my self, beyond all that ever can be conceived
tender, for so adorable a Person as your self. I am at present reduced to such
a Condition, as I never knew before; that is to say, I am the most unfortunate
of all Men that ever were made for Love, except yon take Compassion of my
Sufferings. I am to treat with you upon Terms altogether different from what I
was wont to do with my former Mistresses, looking upon you, with a quite
different Eye. All the Favors I sue for at your Hands (most Charming Lady) is
only to afford me one favorable Glance of your Goodness, and to lend an Ear to
some of my Sighs, which are roving about in the Air, because they cannot find a
Reception from you. But if I could once see that happy Day when I might fix but
one of 'em close to your Heart; then, then I should have the Satisfaction of
seeing you repent of all those Evils which you have made me suffer. As I know
you to be a very good Christian, so I cannot but persuade my self that you will
reflect seriously, that it is not a Venial Sin, thus to make a poor Mortal
suffer and languish, who loves you better than his own Life: Heaven that hears
me is my Witness, that what I have said falls very short of what I feell, and
that if it continues long I must dye: This will be the first News, Madam, which
you will hear, if you don't alter your Mind, of being so inhuman as before. I
remain even to the very last Gasp of my Life, the most sincere and passionate
of all Mortal Lovers.




Mademoiselle de Grammont happened to be at Madam Maintenon's, when she
received this Letter, and after having perused it, she fell a laughing, and
told Madam Maintenon; I must acknowledge that the Marshal de Boufflers has a
very pretty way of writing. I could scarce have believed that a Soldier could
be endu'd with so much Gallantry. Sure Mademoiselle, replied Madam de
Maintenon, you are not in Earnest; does not Love take its Rise even in the very
midst of Arms, and is not Gallantry the most essential Character of a Warrior?
Don't we see your Alexanders, Caesar's and Pompeys inclined to this tender
Passion in the midst of their Conquests, despising to reap the Fruits of their
most glorious Victories, without the soft Embraces of their beloved Mistresses?
Love has been in all Ages the Delight of Great Men, and is of all other
Passions the most innocent, provided it be used with Moderation and Discretion,
which indeed, are the Two Foundation-Pillars of Human Felicity. What is more
natural than to love that which is amiable? The very irrational Creatures
themselves, if they see any thing surprising, cannot avoid looking upon it; and
can it appear strange to you, Mademoiselle, said the Lady very pleasantly, that
our Marshal de Boufflers, who has a very discerning Judgment, should stand
amazed at your Beauty, and a thousand other engaging Qualities, too too
powerful for him to resist? Madam, answered Mademoiselle de Grammont, you show
as much Generosity as the Gentleman himself of whom you speak, thus to conceal
my Faults. I could wish my self Mistress of those Perfections, which you are
pleased so freely to attribute to me. Ah! fair Creature, replied the Lady,
don't oppose a Truth which is really due to your Merits, Poor Boufflers is only
too sensible of it, it is that which has touched his Heart to the Quick. And do
you really believe it, Madam, replied the young Lady coldly, Is it possible
that the Heart of so genteel and so gallant a Man as he is, can be wounded at
this time? Oh! I much doubt it. And why so, 'pray? replied Madam de Maintenon;
those that have so many Mistresses don't always part with their Liberty, but
commonly keep their Heart to their own Disposal. There is a vast difference
between that sort of Love which is bestowed upon a Mistress, and that which
belongs to a Wife. An unmarry'd Person, without some little Love-Exercise,
grows dull and good for nothing. It seems as if some little Love-Intrigue
serves to animate his Vital Spirits, and renders him more acceptable among
Women. I will allow it you, Madam, said Mademoiselle, provided these Intrigues
are not carried on to that height as the Marshal de Boufflers has been
accustomed to do; there is none that can be ignorant of his Love. Adventures.
And what extraordinary Matter is there in all this, Mademoiselle, replied the
Lady, smiling, he will be the better able to find the way that leads him to the
Glory of pleasing you, a Man cannot be too well skilled in the Art of Love.
But, Madam, said she, sometimes these conquering Gentlemen pay dear for their
Knowledge. Soft, soft, my Darling, cried Madam de Maintenon, don't you believe
that the Marshal has very good Skill in Women? Indeed I know him to be so nice
in this point, that I dare engage for him. Madam, your Surety is without
Exception, answered Mademoiselle, and I will rely upon all that you have said,
and hope you will give me Leave to depart for this Time, that I may be at Leisure
to give him a suitable Answer to his Civilities. In short, Mademoiselle, said
Madam Maintenon, rising from her Seat, you will do very well; for he is a very
worthy Gentleman, who does not deserve to be slighted. You do not know what
Time may bring to pass, perhaps he may one Day become your Husband.
Mademoiselle de Grammont had no sooner left the Abbess of St. Cyr, but retiring
into her Chamber, she wrote the Marshal these following Lines. SIR,
IS it possible to believe, that you should be so much in Love, as you pretend,
after you have Traveled through so many Countries? Perhaps, all those Ladies
whom you have hitherto met with, wanted sufficient Charms to engage your Heart:
Besides this, you would induce one to believe, to your Advantage, that you have
an inexhaustible Stock of Affection for those, whom you would persuade they
deserve it. But, if one may take the boldness to tell you, that since that Fire
you speak of, as often as it is transplanted, loses every time somewhat of its
innate Vigor, it must of necessity follow, that (according to your own
description) it cannot be so vehement, except it be upon the Paper, where, in
my Opinion, it acts with its utmost Energy. I am willing, nevertheless, to
believe thus much for your sake, that there may be left some small remainders
of your Heart, which you are ready to offer me as a second-Hand Sacrifice. In
return of this your fine Present, I will also promise to you so much of my
Inclination as is suitable to it; I mean so far as to accept it: This ought to
be taken as something not fit to be despised; for you know, Sir, that even the
least Boon that a Lady grants to a Gentleman, immediately is dignified with the
Title of a Favor, which is commonly represented through a magnifying Glass,
much bigger than it is really intended: But let it be as it will, I am willing
to bestow somewhat upon it, to have the satisfaction of hearing it said, that
you have some Affection for me, and that at present I am the sole Mistress of a
Heart, which formerly was shared among so many Beauties.




The Marshal having read and kissed the Letter a thousand times over, found it
very witty, and extremely well writ. How! cried he, laughing, who has made you
so well acquainted with my former Amors? You have a very pretty way of
upbraiding me very wittily with all my former Mistresses. Ha! I don't dislike
this Humor of yours, for out of what you say, I am sufficiently convinced,
that you don't hate me: And the last Reserve which you offer me of some part of
your Inclinations, though but very small at present, is nevertheless very
acceptable to me; Time, I don't question, will provide for the rest, and abate
much of your Cruelty. While the Marshal was thus talking, Judith came into his
Chamber with a pair of Point de Venice Ruffles, which were some Days before
torn in pieces in one of their amorous Skirmishes. Here, Mr. Dragoon, said she,
throwing 'em at his Face, these are the Remnants of your fine Ruffles, which I
have sticht together as well as I could. How now, you little saucy Baggage,
answered Boufflers, where are you Manners? Is this your way of speaking to a
Gentleman? I will promise thee, that to break thee of this familiarity, I Will
make use of a good Birch-broom: I am not ignorant that when a Man and a Woman
have been so closely acquainted as we, Love knows no inequality; nevertheless,
I would have you keep your self at some distance, for very good Reasons. And I
Sir, replied the young Wench, would have you do the same thing with respect to
me: Pray have a care, another time, not to make me Dance stark naked, without a
Shift, round your Chamber, and then to pretend to put in backwards something
which I did not care should -- O what a pretty sort of Clyster you were about
to apply to me! And what great matter is there in all this, you wanton Slut,
cried the General, I was applying it in the right place, and where it does most
good: I know very well whereabouts thou art now, thou would have me put it in
another place: No question, replied Judith, because that is the proper place
where such Applications ought to be made. Well, well then, said the Marshal,
throwing her upon his Bed, let us try whether I can Syringe you right there or
not. Hold, hold, a little, Sir, said Judith, giving him three or four good
Poults with her double Fist upon his Back, What the Devil are you going to do?
Your Tools are soon ready; you might have asked first whether mine were so too.
You Gentlemen of the Province of Picardy, are so brisk and forward; but I would
have you not be so over-eager.

The Marshal, in the mean while, little minding what she said, advanced a-pace,
and that so furiously, that he drew Blood from the poor Girl, who then began to
cry for her Maiden head, which, as she said, she had kept entire till that
time. The Land-lady coming some Hours after, into the Chamber to make the Bed,
found upon the Sheets some few Drops, or Spots, the Marks of a lost Virginity,
which made her not doubt any longer but that Monsieur Boufflers was wont to
kiss his Laundress. The Woman, being acquainted with Judith's Mother, told her
all that she knew concerning the Matter, and that she believed the General had
debauched the silly Wench. Her Mother, who was a Herb-woman in the lesser
Green-Market, and who pretended to be very careful of her Daughters Honor,
left all her Herbs and Seeds, running the same Evening directly to the
Marshal's Lodgings, with one Hand on her side, and a great Stick in the other,
where she thus began to accost him: I would fain know, good Sir, with what
Impudence you could attempt to debauch my Daughter, whom I have brought up with
so much care. I wish that S. Martin, who hears me, may punish me severely for
all my Sins, if I don't tickle your Codpiece, except you restore my Daughter's
Honor; a Pox! on your damned Tricks. The Marshal burst out a Laughing very
heartily; And Mother Gobille (this was the Herb-woman's Name) said he, which
way would you have me restore your Daughter's Honor, whom you believe I have
-- Truly these sorts of Breaches are never to be repaired. I know that as well
as you, good Sir, said she, raving for Madness, but then I Will make your Purse
pay for it. What! shall I see my Child turn Strumpet, and get nothing by the
Bargain? No, before George, added she, lifting up her Stick, be you never so
much a Marshal over the King's Armies, I Will lay this over your Head, except --
Hold, hold, Dame Gobille, cried the Marshal, taking hold of her Arm, don't be
so furious; how much do you demand for your Daughter's Maidenhead? You must
let me have a Pennyworth, because perhaps I had it not all entirely. Then you
own you had it, my good natured Friend, replied the Woman with her Eyes rolling
in her Head, I Will swear you shall pay for it, or else I shall seize on your
Field-Equippage, which is all you are worth in the World. And how do thou
know, my dear Bird, answered Boufflers, that that is all what I am worth? Who
has given thee an account of my Circumstances? Thou art very impudent to treat
a Gentleman of my Quality so rudely. Get thee gone for an impertinent Piece as
thou art, thou deserve to be soundly cudgelled with the same Stick thou have
the Impudence to lift up against me. Pay me, ery'd the Herb-woman as loud as
she could, pay me for my Daughter's Maidenhead, or else I Will go to my Lord
Archbishop, who will make you pay dearly for it. This Holy Man knows the true
value of a Virginity. You, Soldiers, are so inured to pillaging and ravishing
whilst you are in the Army, that you make no Conscience of it at home. She
could not utter these last Words without a whole Flood of Tears, so that our
Marshal taking some Compassion of her, threw her a golden Louis, telling her,
That he thought he had paid dear enough for such a Bit. But she threw the Piece
at his Head, saying, Is not this a very fine sort of Payment for so dainty a
Morsel? You shall not come off thus, for I expect above Thirty of these, and
you may be glad if I am contented so. You that pretend to be so fine a
Gentleman, are you not ashamed to offer a Pistole for a Maidenhead? Fie for
shame! let no body hear of it. If all the Ladies of Pleasure in this Town have
no better Pay, it will scarce afford 'em Water to wash their Hands. And truly
that is the reason why I was so careful of my Daughter's Maidenhead, till now;
but since she has let the Cat taste of the Cheese, I suppose she will be no
more at my disposal There, Dame, said Boufflers, who was quite tired with her
Impertinencies, there are four Pistoles for you; Decamp immediately, or else I
will order the Cannon, which I have sent for, to be discharged upon you. The
poor Woman, being frighted at these Words, was about to pack up her Awls; but
the Marshal repenting that he had not given her something more for her
Daughter's Virginity, threw her down two other Pistoles, bidding her to be
gone, without any further delay, which she did.

Our General being left alone in his Chamber, and having recollected in his
Mind all that had happened concerning Judith; he began to accuse her of
Indiscretion in teling her Mother, of what had passed between 'em; not dreaming
that it was his Landlady that had made this Discovery. When therefore she came
the next Day to see him, according to her usual custom, he upbraided her with
her Foolishness: But the young Wench swore that it never entered her Thoughts;
telling him, That he ought not to take her to be so sottish, as to let her
Mother know her Love-concerns, from whom she could not expect any encouragement
upon such an Account. And who could speak of it else but you? replied Boufflers
briskly. This Adventure will shortly be the whole Town-talk, and I should be
vexed to the very Heart, if some of my Friends should come to hear of it,
partly for your own sake, it being certain that it cannot be but to your great
disadvantage. I fancy, my Lord, replied Judith, having mused for some time
upon the matter, that this News came first out of your own Lodgings, and it is
your Land lady whom I most suspect; she having observed me frequently to go to
your Chamber, and that too sometimes at unseasonable hours: I know her to be an
old Makebate that is always ready to thrust her Nose every where. Besides, she
is a particular Acquaintance of my Mother's, who serves her with Sallets and
Herbs at a cheap rate. I believe it to be true, said the Marshal, much vexed;
but it is absolutely necessary to break off our Intercourse even at this very
instant, and therefore I charge you to forbear coming to me any longer for very
weighty reasons. Not that I ever shall have the least aversion to you, but on
the contrary, I shall Love you better for the future than ever I did before,
and I will continue to see you from time to time incognito; but so, that no
body shall have the least knowledge of it; in the mean while take this, said
he, (putting some Money into her hands) make the best use of it you can till we
meet again. But above all things I expect you should make me a solemn promise,
that you will carry matters on with discretion, and that you will not speak a
word of it to any Person living, but let all be buried in silence, otherwise
you will have cause to repent it.

The Laundress having given her consent to every Article which the Marshal
proposed, was just ready to leave the Room, but before she was well got out of
the door, she turned back again saying: But, Sir, if I should prove with Child,
what must I do then? Who will Father it? Who knows but such a thing may happen?
Go, go, my Child, answered the General laughing, that fear is is needless, as
for what I have done to thee; if some body else has got thee one, thou must lay
it to his charge; for my part, I wash my hands, knowing my self innocent as to
that particular. Certainly, Sir, you are in a very pleasant Humor, replied the
young Laundress, have not you taken true pains for it, that you are so willing
to excuse your self? Yes, my Dear, said the Marshal, but I am sure of what I
have done. You have done as much as others can do, replied she, going out of
the Room; Adieu, till the next merry meeting. And art thou sure of that, said
the Marshal? O, cried she, making a sign with her hands, I must take my chance
for that.

Monsieur de Boufflers having thus got rid of his Laundress, he pretended to
his Landlady that he was obliged to stay away from his Lodgings for some small
time, but in effect to have another hard by Mademoiselle de Grammont: He gave
orders to all his Servants, that if Judith should come to enquire for him, they
should tell her, that he was gone out of the Town. His next business was, to
pursue with all possible care his Courtship to Mademoiselle de Grammont, Who,
by one of her Gentlewomen who was related to the Marshal's Landlady, had got
some notice of his last Adventure? How, said she very wittily, Monsieur
Boufflers, are you so hard put to it, as to be forced to take up with your
Laundresses, who publicly proclaim your Feats, and boast of such a Gallant as
you? If I were to advise you, provided you will give me leave to be so much
your Friend, I would have you break off this Intrigue as speedily as possibly
you can. Madam, answered the Marshal with some Confusion, You are every thing
what you please to me: I am entirely at your disposal; I confess my Crime,
which is no longer to be hid, since it is come to your Knowledge. I must own I
had some engagement with my Laundress, who was not worthy of it; But what would
you have me say, my incomparable Lady, but that a Man is a Man in spite of all
his endeavors to the contrary. If I were so happy as to have a Spouse, my
Flesh would not be so Rebellious, and I should not want means to appease its
fury. But now I am troubled with a continual itching which -- Here Mademoiselle
interupting him with a smile: But said she Monsieur Boufflers, you know what
our Holy Fathers teach us, that it is better to Marry, than to do worse. And
since it is a Sin to have an amourous Commerce with other Men's Daughters or
Wives, why don't you provide one for your own self, that may be able to bridle
the Lust of your Flesh, and take away the cause of such frequent Insurrections?
What advice I give you is both for your own and the public Good. It Is very
true, my adorable Lady, said the Marshal kneeling before her, But if I durst
take the boldness to tell you, that if -- Go on, go on, Sir in what you were
about to say, cried the young fair Lady, I give you free leave to speak; What
are your Words stopped in their very passage? I will take courage then, replied
he with a loud Voice, Since you give me leave to explain my Thoughts. Yes very
well, Sir, replied Mademoiselle with a serious Countenance, I have not laid my
Hand upon your Mouth, as the Pope does to his Cardinals; you have full liberty
to deliver your mind.

Having received assurance from your own Mouth Mademoiselle, replied the
Marshal, that I shall not offend you in freely disclosing the Sentiments of my
Heart, I must tell you that I should certainly believe my self the most happy
of all Mortals upon Earth, if Heaven had designed me for a Spouse so
accomplished as your self; but being always mistrustful of my good Fortune, I
am afraid that this so much wished for happiness, will not fall to my share. It
is a considerable time, since I first stiffl'd this thought in my Heart,
without daring to let it come to light, for fear it might be in any wise
displeasing to you. Pardon therefore at this time the boldness I take thus to
lay open to your view, even the inmost recesses of my Heart, which will at
least ease it of some part of its pain, and don't refuse to give one word in
answer, which shall be always most dear and acceptable to me, provided it
proceeds from your own Sweet Lips.

Mademoiselle de Grammont, being somewhat surprised at the ingenuous Confession
of her Lover, and being willing at the same time to satisfy him that she had no
aversion toward his Person, made no difficulty to tell the Marshal with a most
charming Air; Sir If I were at my own Disposal, I would consult my own Heart as
to what might be expedient for me to do in this Case; But, you are not
ignorant, that I am to be guided by my Kindred, especially by my Brother the
Abbot, who, without doubt will provide such a Match for me, as he shall find
suitable to his Inclinations. Besides, you know very well, that it would be
very unbecoming a young Virgin in my condition, to do any thing of this nature
disagreeable to the sentiments of my Relations. I will not contradict you in
this particular, Mademoiselle, replied the Marshal, but at the same time I hope
you will grant me, that your Kindred ought not to pretend to the disposal of your
Heart; You being the sole Mistress of it, as well as of the rest of your
inclinations. Pray Sir, let us talk no more on this Subject, replied she not
without some disturbance; I have given you sufficient Reasons. I am then a very
unfortunate Creature, replied Boufflers full of despair, in regard that I
cannot obtain the favor to be heard so much as for one moment, by the Person I
adore, who ever refuses me the Liberty of declaring the real Sentiments of my
Heart. I call all you Saints to witness, whether ever any Sufferings were
comparable to mine. I perceive very well, cried Mademoiselle de Grammont
laughing, that you are very much out of Order, good Sir, I believe it will be
best to send for a Physician, Alas! cruel fair one, cried the Marshal smiling,
you are the Physician, if you please, that can alone resto^e me to health, but
at the present you only apply Corrosives to my Wounds instead of Balsamicks. Is
there any Conscience in your Proceedings? Don't you believe that you must be
answerable for this cruel Usage, and give account for all those Pains you have
caused me to endure? If you should make a real Confession of it to your
Father-Confessor, I cannot be persuaded that he would grant you Absolution for
so heinous a Crime. Nay, replied Medemoiselle, if we should acquaint our
Father-Confessor with the flattering Expressions and Lies, which you Gentlemen
are pleased to tell us, we should e'n make a pretty Story of it: What Answer
would these Religious Men make us, but to say, That these, being Venial Sins of
small consequence, we may easily be pardoned in not believing you, who so
seldom or never speak truth, when you pretend to make Love? For sometimes you
shall meet with one, who immediately runs desperate or mad; whilst another is
just at the point of Death, and talks of nothing but Daggers which are to
pierce his Heart: Others are continually Whining and Pineing all in Tears, so
that they can do nothing but sigh and talk of their Sufferings and Pains, which
(as they give out) can never cease but with their last Breath. This is a short
Panegyric upon your Love-Passion, which is always Languishing, and is
Variously represented by you to serve your turn, accordingly as you shall find
a fit opportunity.

Very well then, Mademoiselle, said the Marshal, feigning to be surprised at
the Learned words of his Mistress, That the Pains of Love did not cease till
Death; And who can pretend to procure the Death of so Powerful a Deity?
Marriage, Marraige, Sir, replied the fair Lady: I say, the Conjugal Union will
quench the most violent Flames of Concupiscence, and annihilate their force.
What is become of those most violent Passions, what of those great efforts of
Love, which once appeared in our great Monarch Lewis XIV. toward a la Valiere,
a Montespan, and several others, whom he has quite abandoned since, as if he
never had had any knowledge of 'em. Madam de Maintenon told me the other Day,
that the King would not so much as suffer 'em to be spoken of in his presence.
Alas! take my Word for it, there is nothing in this Sublunary World, but what
is continually subject to change. You ought not, Madam, answered the Marshal,
to reflect upon these matters at your Age; this part of Morality is too solid
for you at this time, to take up your Thoughts: You ought rather, to endeavor
to make use of the advantage of your blooming Years, in making one of your
Adorers happy by the sweet enjoyments of the Matrimonial State, to your mutual
Comfort and Satisfaction. This is that which you ought to apply your self to,
without loseing one Moment longer.

Fair CLYMENE, improve your lucky Day;
[continu'd he singing.]

For Time flies fast, and Pleasures glide away.
No matter for that, Sir replied Mademoiselle de Grammont, we seldom have
occasion to repent of having been too Wise or Discreet. Do you believe that
there is any real Felicity in the enjoyment of the Pleasures of this World? I
can assure you, that I never thought my self less happy, than since the time I
left the Nunnery, where I was before, and where I enjoyed a most delightful
Tranquillity both in Body and Mind, which in the management of Worldly Affairs,
is continually distracted by a thousand troublesome Contingences, which are
daily incident to us poor Mortals, during our abode in these Terrestrial
Mansions. If my Brothers had not engaged me to come and live with an Aunt of
mine, who upon her Deathbed made me promise her to Marry, I would never have
left it, O cried the Marshal embracing her, I am overjoyed my most lovely
Creature, to understand from your own Mouth, that you are resolved to Marry.
What a happy Man will he be, added our General transported with passion, who
shall be the possessor of so incomparable a Lady? Therefore I must go to
consult the Oracle at Versailles (Madam Maintenon) to know whether this shall
be my Destiny.

Mademoiselle de Grammont, who very well understood his meaning as to this
familiar Oracle which is very advantageous to its Favorites, could not forbear
laughing, and said she to her Lover, You have free access to this Sibyl without
the assistance of any Mediator; you are more in her favor than any one at
Court; and no Question, she will tell you your Destiny without dissimulation.
May Heaven be propitious to me, I will go to consult her to morrow, Madam,
answered the Marshal de Boufflers, but it must not be without your good
Company, you shall also learn your Destiny from this Oracle. That is the least
of my Concerns, replied Mademoiselle de Grammont, carelessly, let Heaven
dispose of me as it thinks fit. O what a good Christian! O what a pretty Child
is this! said the General, who leaves her self altogether to the disposal of
Providence; there are but very few Persons in our Age, who are so careful of
the Welfare of their Souls, and are disposed to take so good a Resolution. I
must attribute it in some part to your Holy Mothers, the Vrselines, among whom
you have been educated, and who have inspired you with these noble Sentiments.
When I see the Abbot de Bonne Avanture, I will not forget to acquaint him, how
prudent and devout you are. I suppose he will not be displeased at it, Sir,
replied the young Lady, as she was just arising to meet Mademoiselle de
Pontriant, one of her Acquaintance, who was come to give her a Visit.

The manner of Conversation being in an instant changed with the Company, they
began to be much more Jovial than before: For this Young Lady, being of a very
frolicksome Humor, would needs divert 'em with a Story of a Servant-maid of
hers, who being Heart-sick for a Sweetheart, the young Lady told her, Yes,
yes, Echalotte, he will shortly come to see thee: For I have been told, that he
is already upon the Road, coming on purpose to give thee a Visit. I pray God
that the Holy S. Miclotie may safely conduct him hither. Do you say so, Madam,
replied the poor Wench, and holding up her Hands, I will, said she, say a Pater
Noster and an Ave Mary for him; which she actually did, and that too, with so
much Innocence and Devotion, that every one was amazed at it. A little after
she came to her self, I left her, and they tell me since, that she is pretty
well recovered.

The Marshal de Boufflers and Mademoiselle de Grammont, looking at one another,
laughed heartily at the Story of Mademoiselle de Pontriant, who having diverted
'em for some time longer, with such like Adventures, took her Leave of our
Lovers, whom she left at liberty to renew their former Discourse. But the
Marshal having soon after, recalled to memory his intended Journey to S. Cyr,
left his Mistress, and went directly from thence to pay a Visit to Madam
Maintenon: No sooner had he entered this Lady's Closet, introduced by Sister
Nicolle, but, said he, Madam, I am come hither to consult you, no otherwise
than an Oracle or some great Deity, whose Power it is to dispose of me, my
whole Destiny being solely put into your Hands. Pray, tell me, whether I shall
be happy or unhappy, and whether I shall obtain for my Spouse a certain
charming Lady of your Acquaintance, who relies upon your Decision of her
Fortune, looking upon you as her Governing Planet, from whence she expects
nothing but a favorable Aspect and benign Influences. And, pray Sir, replied
Madam Maintenon, who is this Person, who puts so much Confidence in me? I Am
extremely obliged to her for the good Esteem she has of that mean Ability I
have to serve her, but I am not so skilful as you imagine, I did not at my
Birth receive that Gift of Prophecy. How, Madam, replied the Marshal, can you
be ignorant of that Beauty, over which you have so powerful an Ascendant? she
does nothing without your prudent Counsels, and you are the very Soul that
guides her Inclinations. Don't you know Mademoiselle de Grammont? Yes, Sir,
said the Lady, she is a very charming Person, for whom I have a most singular
Respect, and whom I should be ready to serve upon all occasions. Is it her
then, continued she, my dear Child, whom you are desirous to have for your
Spouse. Truly I see you are endu'd with a discerning Judgment; I can assure
you, that you have made a Choice not unbecoming your self, for, besides that
she is vastly rich, she is very well looked upon at Court, for her
extraordinary Endowments, which make her to be admired by every one. Madam,
said Boufflers, with somewhat of Impatience, all my Felicity depends upon your
Favor, in regard that she has sent me to you to know whether this Match is
like to be prosperous on my side. She referrs her self entirely to your
Determination. You are in Jest, Sir, replied Madam de Maintenon, with a smile,
you speak thus to satisfy your own Inclinations, which are wholly bent upon
this Lady. Mademoiselle de Grammont is a young Lady, who has a great deal of
Wit, and perhaps told you this, to free her self from your amorous
Importunities. Believe me, Sir, she her self is not destitute of Subtilty, she
knows very well what she has to do, without consulting me as her Oracle If,
nevertheless, it lies in my Power to do you any Service with her, I am ready to
do it with all my Heart, for several Reasons. You must manage her softly and by
degrees, she being of a sweet and quiet Disposition, don't overload her with
Complements, as it is natural for you Gentlemen to do when you make Love to
Women, without considering, whether it be suitable to their Humor or not. I
give you this Advice, as to a Friend, for whom I have some concern. You know
that you have the Repute to have played the Gallant a little too much, in your
younger Years, and perhaps something of it may be come to her Ears, as well as
your late Adventure with the Laundress. She has given me once already a Touch
as to that, replied the Marshal, but I am in good Hopes, that this unfortunate
Accident will not make any great Impression upon her Mind, and that she will
bury in Oblivion the rest of my Amorous Trespasses, which I have unluckily
committed in former Time. I much question it, Sir, replied the Lady, for she
has always been educated among the Religious Vrselines, the strictest Order in
all France, especially as to sensual Pleasures, upon which they look as so many
Monsters, that strive to devour Mankind, and to exclude 'em from Paradise. If
you are dextrous enough to insinuate your self into her affection, you are a
happy Man; but you will find the Conquest not very easy. Above all things, I
would advise you, to deal sincerely with her, she being a great Lover of that
Virtue. I will endeavor, Madam, replied the General (having made first a
profound Reverence to her) to follow your wise Counsel, and I will strive to
gain the Affections of this Beauty, by all the most sincere and honorable
means that can be found out. Madam de Maintenon having given some further
Advice to the Marshal, concerning his Marriage, and received his humble Thanks;
he returned to his Lodgings, where he began to meditate upon the event of his
intended Marriage.

The next Day, after Dinner, he gave a Visit to Mademoiselle de Grammont, who
being just a little before, gone to S. Cyr, and he not thinking it convenient
to interrupt the Discourse that might pass between this fair Lady and the
Abbess, staid at some distance from the Abbey. But she making a longer stay than
he expected, and being on Horseback, followed only by one Footman, (...) took
a turn in the Wood of Vincennes, He had not been there long, e're he espied the
Livery of Madam de Maintenon afar off; and not questioning but that his
Mistress was with her in the same Coach, which went on with a very slow pace,
he, with a Hand-gallop, advanced nearer to 'em. Mademoiselle de Grammont being
placed at the same side where he came, let the Glasses down, and saluted him
not without Blushing; which Madam de Maintenon having immediately taken notice
of, she made a Sign to our Marshal, to make him sensible, that this sudden
Emotion could not be interpreted otherwise, than to his advantage. He soon
understood the meaning of the Sibyl of Versailles, and being unwilling to
surprise his Mistress, he looked another way, as if he had not observed this
change of her Color.

Madam de Maintenon, who was ready upon all occasions to second his Love, told
him; And what, Sir, makes you come hither? What is it that enforces you thus to
wander so far in this Solitude? Perhaps it is some amorous Melancholy, which has
carried you into this Wood. You have guessed it to a Hair's Breadth, Madam,
cried he, and I protest to you upon my Faith, That nothing else has brought me
into this solitary and delightful Place. The Marshal, said Mademoiselle de
Grammont, interrupting their Discourse, is always employed in some new
Love-Intriegue or another, in which he seeks his Diversion. It Is true,
Mademoiselle, replied Madam de Maintenon, he was made both for Love and Wars,
and his noble Heart, Hero like, triumphs over both. Madam, replied Boufflers,
in a very submissive and respectful manner, you that determine all Matters
before you, with equal Skill and Goodness, pray don't deny me Justice: My Heart
is like a Slave, that is accustomed to wear Chains without regret. It Is no hard
matter to conquer it, provided the Person who attacks it, be like Mademoiselle,
whose force it is not able to resist. You always are very gallant, Sir, said
Madam de Maintenon; and what do you think of him, my Dear? Madam, replied the
fair Lady, I cannot think otherwise than that you judge in favor of the
Marshal: It Is a Character peculiar to a gallant Man, to be always tender and
complaisant in Lady's Company; and though he should not be so in good earnest,
yet he ought at least out of a Principle of Gallantry, to make 'em believe so.
But, as to flatter my self so far, as to believe that it is in my power, by any
means, to disturb the Repose of Monsieur Bousflers, I am well satisfied it is
much beyond what I can pretend to. Ha! what do you say, Mademoislle, cried the
Marshal transported to that degree, that Madam de Maintenon could not forbear
laughing, there never was any Person living upon the Face of the Earth, who
could be more capable of making me unfortunate, than your self? Pray look,
Mademoiselle, replied the Abbess of St. Cyr, in a very obliging manner, what
effects your Charms have produced upon the Marshal: Alas! how much altered he
is since the time that -- It Is very true, replied the Marshal de Boufflers, I
don't rest Day or Night; and from that very moment that I began to be in Love,
I found my Heart so continually distracted and tormented, that all whatever I
felt before in my Lifetime, is not comparable to it. I know who is the cause
of it, and it is for this reason that I cherish those Evils, which, when I
rightly consider 'em, cannot but be very charming to me. As far as I see, said
Madam de Maintenon, you are both happy and unhappy at the same time, and I
don't question but that Mademoiselle, who is all Goodness, will take some care
not to let you suffer so much for the future: She will undoubtedly take some
Method or another to make you more fortunate. Do you not give your Consent to
what I say, incomparable Lady, added Madam de Maintenon, taking our young Lady
by the Hand? I Will see, I Will see, Madam, replied she with a Smile, I believe the
Pain which the Marshal talks of, not to be so violent, but that he may have a
little patience, till some body else apply a Remedy to appease it; I am not so
skilful in giving Relief to such Gentlemen as he, who are continually in want
of the Assistance of fair Ladies.

The Marshal would certainly have made some gallant and agreeable Reply to his
Mistress, if Madam de Maintenon and Mademoiselle de Grammont, had not both
stepped out of the Coach, on purpose to take a Walk upon the Grass, which was
very green and pleasant at that Season of the Year. Boufflers walked constantly
by his fair Mistresses side, to whom he told a thousand tender and passionate
Things. At last he entreated 'em to go and refresh themselves at a fine
Country-Seat hard by, belonging to a particular Friend of his, which he made
use of his own. But Madam de Maintenon not being willing to go, they agreed to
defer it till another Opportunity. The care of the Abbey, which lies altogether
upon me, said she, after a very devout manner, (not to speak now of the
Engagements I have to use a great deal of Complaisance to the King, who has his
particular Humors) does not allow me so much time, as to think of Pleasures:
Not but that he is a very good natured Prince, but his Majesty very often
insists upon doing Things which I should not approve of, if I had the liberty
to explain my felf; so that being frequently obliged to pass a great many
things by in silence, it causes me many a vexatious Hour. I cannot but admire
at what you say, Madam, replied Mademoiselle de Grammont, the whole World
looking upon you as the most fortunate Lady in Europe. You are beloved by a
great Monarch, who does nothing without your Advice, and who does every thing
to please you: In saying thus, I avouch nothing but what is allowed of by all
the World. O Mademoiselle, said this Lady, consider, that all that glisters is
not Gold. I often think of a certain Proverb, which was in use a long time
before I was born, and which I find to hold true still, That no Condition of
Men is free from Troubles and Anxieties. It is very true, what the Princess de
Conde told me the other Day, That a mean Shepherdess, often receives more
satisfaction in the enjoyment of her innocent Pleasures, than the greatest Lady
in the Kingdom. It is not always Worldly Grandeur and Luster, that makes us
happy in this Life; or that we ought to look upon as our Sovereign Good. I
don't disagree with you, Madam, answered the young Lady, but I hope you will
not also deny, but that an eminent Station in this World, is very agreeable to
Mankind. And I tell you, Mademoiselle, said the Marshal abruptly, to put an end
to your moral Doctrine, which carries us too far from our purpose, that of all
the Pleasures that this Life affords, Love is the sweetest; I mean when one
Loves sincerely, and is beloved again; for if Love be not reciprocal, I am not
for it, as knowing that it is so far from being delightful, that it is nothing
else but a continual Misery. All the World is for Pleasure, replied Madam de
Maintenon; we Mortals scarce think of any thing else, not considering that both
they and we pass away like a Dream, and that one day we must all be accountable
for our Actions; and you Gentlemen of the Blade, don't think that you will be
exempted from it. Good faith! answered the Marshal with a great deal of
indifferency, I don't overload my self with those things, I lay 'em all, as
often as I go to Confession, upon my Father-Confessor's Back, and that is broad
enough to bear 'em. This good Religious Father, as soon as he finds the Pence
come in, tells me always, that he will find out means to cleanse me from my
Sins, that I shall appear as white as Snow, though I were as black as a
Chimney-stock before.

You are very happy in your Father-Confessor, replied the Lady, for our Father
la Chaise does not tell us so: He talks of nothing else to us but Penances and
Mortifications, and at last of all perhaps he will tell you, We are uncertain
what will become of us. But pray where could you find out such a
Father-Confessor, who is so favorable to you Soldiers, who seldom believe
Heaven or Hell? Madam, replied Boufflers, I found him out by good chance; yet
he belongs to the Professed House of Jesuits in Paris, and for my part, I was
never so curious as to enquire after his Name, provided he does but grant me
Absolution of what they call Sin, I don't trouble my Head any farther. This is
truly living like a Cavalier, answered Mademoiselle de Grammont, laughing
outright; Madam may very well say, that you Officers of the Army, believe
neither Heaven nor Hell. O Lord! Sir, into what Errors do you run headlong;
the very thought of it makes me tremble: O Mademoiselle, said Boufflers, we are
not so irreligious as you imagine; it is a sort of vulgar Error which has
prevailed throughout the World to our disadvantage. I hope to see Heaven as
soon as one of your most Religious Zealots. I have a good stock of Indulgences,
which I have picked up in all Parts of Europe, enough to serve my self and all
my Dragoons. Make much of 'em Sir, answered Madam de Maintenon, for they may
stand you in good stead, when you are in Purgatory, where you may be in danger
to burn all your lifetime, without a good Preservative. I mean your Soul,
which will never perish. By my Faith! Madam, you frighten me, said the
Marshall, steping some paces backward, pray let us talk no more of these
everlasting Flames, they put me in a fright: These little pretty Devils that
possess our Hearts, are far more agreeable. I acknowledge it, Sir, replied the
Lady, but these are often the occasion of our eternal Sufferings. In the mean
while let us implore Heaven to preserve us from them, and let us alter the
Scene, for I perceive that this too much disturbs you.

Our Ladies then being again gone into their Coach, and our Marshal having
remounted his Horse, they returned to St Cyr; from whence Monsieur Boufflers
accompanied his Mistress to her own House, where having taken his leave of her,
he went to sup that evening with some of his Brother-Generals. They having
observed a certain paleness in his countenance ever since he courted
Mademoiselle de Grammont; the Count de Montal, who was among the rest at the
Table, began thus to address himself to the Company. If Men were subject to the
Green Sickness, I should be apt to believe, that the Marshal de Boufflers was
troubled with it. But since this Distemper is not incident to us Men, I will
speak no more of that. I am rather inclined to believe, said the Duke de
Villeroy, that it is his Maidenhead, which sending up some Vapors to his
Brain causes this paleness in his Face: It Is high time to marry him, lest his
Distemper should prove mortal. It is a great while, Gentlemen, replied the
Marquess de Boufflers, since my Maidenhead is flown up into the Air, and if it
be there still, I believe it to be a good way off. The Devil take me if that be
the cause of my paleness; or else I am strangely deceived in my self, for I am
sure I have given it over and over a thousand times: if I should show you a
List of all my Mistresses, you would be convinced of the truth of it. O the
very thoughts of it tickle my fancy at this very moment, continued he with a
passionate Air. I am transported with the very conceit of it, Sir, Sir, said
the Count de Montal, addressing himself to the Duke de Villeroy, and pulling
him by the sleeve, let us deal a little more charitably with our friend, I see
his color change, our discourse may put his Animal Spirits into such a
ferment, as to make him faint away: Some Wine here, said he to one of his
Footmen, some Wine here for the Marshal de Boufflers: come, Sir, drink to your
own inclinations. Well then, reply d the General, pulling off his Hat; Here is
a Health to that charming Beauty which I admire. You should rather have said,
reply d Valleroy laughing, a Health to all those fair Ladies you love, for I am
of opinion, that you have a good many of them in all Parts; and I am also apt
to believe, that since you have served the King, you have never been present at
the besieging of any Town, but that at the same time you have conquered a Heart
and forced it to pay you Hommage.

Sir, replied the Marshal, you are pleased to honor me beyond my deserts, in
enrolling my Name among those of your great Conquerors: My amorous and warlike
Expeditions are neither of them so considerable as you think fit to represent
'em, and my most glorious Love-exploits have terminated in the Conquests of
certain pretty young Damsels, who were not undeserving of what pains I took for
'em. But I have now laid aside all these former slight Engagements; I am
resolved to be wiser for the future, and wholly to devote my self to one
Mistress, whom I intend for my Spouse, if I can attain to that good fortune. I
know that the sighs of an old Lover seldom find good reception among Ladies.
They are commonly look d upon as your ancient Slaves, who have nothing to do
but to wear their Fetters, rarely meeting with the lucky minute.

Ha! Now you speak of the critical minute, said the Duke de Villeroy; if I had
been inclined to make use if it, a very fair opportunity presented it sels
three or four days ago, when walking over the new Bridge, a pretty young.
Fan-flap, pulling me by the Sleeve, whisper d me, Have you a mind to be merry
to night, my Lord: I had a great mind to do it, but -- That But, Sir, said the
Marquess de Boufflers, laughing, stopped your passage. Yes indeed so it did,
reply d the Duke, I was afraid I should be pepper d off for all my Lifetime:
We often pay at too dear a rate for such sorts of Commodities. Nevertheless,
she was the best humor d Wench that ever I saw. Surely, answered the Count de
Montal, if she were so charming a Creature, I wonder how you could forbear; I
believe you were fain to put a great force upon your inclination: I ll lay you
a Wager, if the Marshal de Boufflers had been in your place, he would not have
been so cautious as you; and I am apt to believe, that this perhaps may be the
cause of his pale countenance. No, indeed, Sir, replied he very seriously, it
was never my humor to meddle with such sort of Cattle, I had always an
aversion to them because I cannot endure to go into the Country upon that
account. If all Men's stomachs were turned against 'em as much as mine is, they
would be all thrown over the Bridge into the Seine, without taking the trouble
to send them to the Plantations in Canada, and other places, where they
communicate their pestilent Distemper to those poor Wretches who have the
misfortune to deal with 'em.

By this time the intended Match between the Marshal de Bouflers and
Mademoiselle de Grammont, began to make a great noise among the peeple of the
greatest quality at Court. Our two Lovers frequently received Visits of the
Ladies, where the chief entertainment was of nothing but Gayety and gallant
Diversions: Repartees, one of the best exercises of Wit, were not wanting in
those Intercourses, which sometimes were put so close, that it turned to
ridiculing one or another of the Company; and tho some of them were very smart,
yet were they so well managed, that none could take any exception. One day,
among the rest, the Count de Surlaube had his share of it. He had married
Mademoiselle de... Daughter to the Marchioness de Brese, who was not above 12
years of age when she was engaged to her Husband: A very tender age indeed, to
endure the fatigues (especially the first night) of a Husband of such a bulk as
the Count was, he being one of the fattest and most robust Gentlemen in France.
The Marshal de Boufflers, having a mind to divert the Company, and addressing
himself to the Count asked him: How he could possibly overcome so difficult an
enterprise? Sir, answered the Count, As great a General as you are, I am very
well convinced, that if you had been in my place, you would have sooner chose
to undertake the Conquest of one of the most considerable Forts in Flanders.

At these words all the Ladies that were present, burst out aloud into
a'laughter. But the Count, who is a very pleasant Companion, thus continued his
Discourse; Monsieur Boufflers, we shall have shortly the opportunity to see
which way you will go about it; if you will permit me to teach you some Lessons, as
to this particular, I only desire your leave to hold the Candle, whilst you
perform the operation. If you should perhaps be deficient in some formalities,
I promise you I will be your Assistant, if it may be without offense to
Mademoiselle de Grammont, who could not forbear smiling at it. Signior Count,
replied Monsieur Boufflers, You are come to that age that you cannot but be
sensible, that all you are able to do in such a case as this, is only to assist
me with your good Counsel. And if we may give credit to the common report, you
could not at that time pass the Ditch without a great deal of difficulty; Nay,
I have heard it affirmed for truth, that you were not able to make your self
Master of the Counter scarp till six months after the Trenches were opened. If
this be true, I must confess it is one of the most famous Sieges that we have
known of; and if you had not received Succors from the Relations of the
Countess your Lady, it is a great question to me, whether you would not have
been obliged to raise the Siege. The Countess, who was present during the
Contest, blushed at this Discourse, but this Color (which is so natural to all
civil Women) being a little gone, she did like the rest, who laughed all as
heartily as they could.

The Count then resuming the Discourse: To complete your Diversion, Ladies,
said he, I will give you an exact History of what past between my Spouse and me
the first night after our Wedding. The Marchioness de Choisi a very grave
Matron, told him, That the Ladies would not be against it, provided he would be
cautious in offering any thing that might be offensive to the fair Sex. Ladies,
said the Count, In case I tell you nothing but what is true, and that I give
you a faithful Relation of the whole History, I don't question but you will
pardon the rest. The Countess, my Spouse, who is here present shall engage for
me as to that particular; and I give her free leave to silence me, if I speak
one word of untruth. Well, well, let us have it then, unanimously cried the
Ladies, except Mademoiselle de Grammont, who being the only Maiden Gentlewoman
in the Company, whispered her Lover the Marshal de Boufflers, in the Ear, That
she was afraid that this story would make her uneasy; that she foresaw the
Count was preparing to give a relation so circumstantial as to those matters,
as would make her color rise in her Face, because she was upon the point of
being married her self, and might perhaps be subject to the same frailties. But
Monsieur de Boufflers bid her have a good Heart, telling her, My dearest Child,
you must be inured by degrees to the hardships and toils of War, your time
draws near when you must begin to carry Arms, wherefore I would be glad to see
you undertake the task with constancy and brave resolution; that when you see
the Enemy making an Assault, nothing may terrify you. Let us hear, continued
he, what the Count will say: the good Counsels of a valiant Captain who has
undergone the toils of Cupid, Wars, often furnish us with a piece of Morality,
which may have more influence as to the conversion of a fair Lady, than all the
insipid moral Doctrine of a Sermon preached by Father Crasset.

Monsieur de Boufflers is much in tke right on it, said the Count, he has not
bestow d all his time in burning of Villages: he has learnt by experience, as
well as my self, how to give good doctrine to young people. I am of opinion,
added he, speaking to Mademoiselle de Grammont, that when you have made one
Campaign under him, you will be skilful enough not to stand in need of my
Instructions: Mademoiselle de Grammont gave no other answer to the Count, but
by a Smile, which appeared more eloquent at that time than all the Sermons of
Father Bourdalou. The Marshal, her Lover, was so charmed with her Modesty, that
he could not forbear to rob her of a Kiss. Soft, soft, said Madam de Tilladet,
you will have playing time enough; a Fire that burns too fierce is not lasting;
a moderate passion is always the most constant and durable. By my faith, Madam,
said Monsieur Bouffiers, we are only making Matches now, that when the day
appointed for bombarding the Place comes, every thing may be in a readiness.
Don't you know that I love Expedition; if I should march into the Field, and
should find but one Nail wanting in my Train of Artillery, I should be stark
mad: Then turning himself to Mademoiselle de Grammont, his beloved Mistress,
whom he embraced; and said he, I only desire this one thing of you, that you be
willing to receive the directions of your General. The first Attack is commonly
fierce, but let not the sight of a little blood dismay you; every small wound
we receive in the Wars is not mortal. If Love does wound us sometimes she is as
careful in healing of us; and it was not without great reason, that Moliere
named one of his Plays, Love the Physician. The Ladies, who were disposed to
laughing, having silenced Monsieur Boufflers, that they might be diverted with
the Story the Count had promised to tell 'em: I am content, my Ladies, said he;
and as for Mademoiselle de Grammont and I, we will endeavor to profit by it as
much as possibly we can.

The Countess, my Wife, was but twelve years of Age, said the Count, when I
married her. She being so very young had not the opportunity to learn those
things which she has been taught since, and which she has now at her fingers
ends, tho she be not now above eighteen. Our Nuptial Feast was celebrated at
the Marchioness de Brese's, my Wife's Mother. About an hour before we were to
go to Bed, I went up into the Chamber where we were to lie that night, to
inspect the Nuptial Bed which was prepared for us, and after I had carefully
examined every thing, with all the Circumspection imaginable, I returned to my
Spouse, whom I had left in the Hall among our Guests. The hour being come, when
we were to go to bed, Wax-tapers were lighted, and the Gentlemen and Ladies
having taken their leave, went every one to their respective Lodgings. Some of
the Ladies at their departure, whispered something, I know not what, in my
Spouses Ear, which I never have been able to learn since, neither from them,
nor her own Mouth. I confess that this put me into some study for a few
moments, considering with my self what small progress I had made over the
inclinations of this young Beauty, which seemed to be born with a general
aversion to all Men. Her early years nevertheless gave me some hopes to
believe, that time, which ripens every thing, would overcome her stubborn
Heart, and render it more flexible toward me, who omitted nothing to insinuate
my self into her good Will, but all in vain. At last, my Spouse being undrest,
and laid in Bed first, according to the usual Custom, and I having put on my
Nightcap and Wedding Shirt, I ordered my Valet du Chamber to withdraw, and to
shut the door after him, which he did. When I came nearer to the Bed, I heard
something stir underneath it, which made me suspect, that some body was not far
off ready to play me a scurvy trick; my Wife being as much surprised at it, as
my self, I run all in a fury toward the Table where my Sword lay, which having
drawn out of the Scabbard, I push d with it under the Bed, with a design to
kill any one that should have hid himself there. I was much startled to see the
Cavalier du Blese come out from under the Bed, begging my pardon a thousand
times for his unseasonable curiosity, and telling me, That he would willingly
have given 100 Pistoles, if he might have remained in the Post where he had
plac d himself, if he could have done it without being discovered. I confess I
stood quite amazed, yet it was impossible for me to forbear laughing heartily,
when I saw the Cavalier creeping out from under the Bed, as black as a Devil,
without a Perriwig, and covered all over with dust. By my Faith, Sir, said the
Cavalier, you have a very good Nose that you could so soon smell out a Rat.
Indeed I should have been mightily pleased to have been a Spectator of the
Engagement, and a Witness of your Victory, if it had not been for this unlucky
accident, which has spoiled all. You must know, said the Count, that the
Chamber Pot which stood under the Bed being overturned, I was about to take it
up, when I espied the Cavaliers Foot, whom I told, That I did not want either a
Second or an Umpire in the Duel I was going to fight; and, said I to him, the
Devil take me, if I had not run you through and through, if you had stayed one moment
longer without discovering your self: And so, continued the Count, I took my
Gentleman by the Arm, and led him out of the Chamber Door.

This Adventure being over, which I then looked upon no otherwise than fatal to
a Man in my circumstances, who was amorous even to a degree of Frenzy; the only
comfort I had left, was the hopes of having now surmounted all the obstacles
which could by any means obstruct my Happiness in enjoying that young Beauty,
which I had hitherto esteemed as the most difficult Conquest in the world.
Being boy'd up with this assurance, I put out the Candles, I pulled off my
Breeches, and so into Bed I went, like a triumphant Hercules, who had defeated
all his Enemies. But no sooner was I laid down, but I found my self alone, and
thinking to take my Spouse in my Arms, I found nothing but the Sheets. I might
call as long as I pleased, My Dearest where art thou? No body would answer me
so much as one word. Now you must know that my Spouse had a certain
Chambermaid, who was her Confident, unto whom she had represented the aversion
she had to Men, adding withal, That if she did not find out some way or another
to prevent her being overcome by her Husband that night, she would take a
Resolution against her own Life. This Chambermaid was at last moved with
Compassion by the Tears of her Mistress, whom, like a young Chicken, she saw in
the Claws of a Bird of Prey, in danger of loosing her most precious Jewel,
which was her Virginity: her Name was Pasquette, and being very ingenious at
such like Inventions, and willing to favor her Mistresses frailties, or rather
fantastic humor, because she loved her very tenderly even from her Cradle, at
last discovered a private door which she found means to open at pleasure, and
through which our new married Lady, under favor of the darkness, was conveyed out
of the Chamber, and hid her self in a Hayloft, with a resolution, rather to dye
than to suffer a Man to touch her.

Ladies, continued the Count, I leave it to your own consideration, to judge in
what a condition I found my self at that time. No Enchantment that ever I heard
of, seemed to me so surprising as this, not knowing in the least that there was
a Sally-port behind my Bed, because the Chamber was all hung with Tapestry, and
having taken all the precaution imaginable to look before hand with a Candle in
all the corners of the Room. I was stark raving mad, my Reason having quite
left me, It can never be so, said I, except the Devil plays his Pranks here. I
cried out, and made a hideous noise like one in Bedlam. I called her a thousand
times by her Name, but I might call long enough there was no body that answered
me. After I had made a sufficient Outcry, I rose at last out of my Bed,
imagining that she might perhaps have hid her self underneath it, as the
Cavalier had done before, whom I had hunted from thence. The Love and tender
Affection which I had for her, were motives sufficiently strong to hinder me
from taking up my Sword to fetch her out from thence, as I had done before to
the Cavalier; besides, I was sensible, that I ought to make use of more gentle
Arms against a young Virgin. Wherefore, after a great many vain Reflections,
which almost distracted my Brains, I got under the Bed my self, where I crawled
up and down for a considerable time, without being able to find any thing, so
that now I began tobelieve in good earnest, that there must needs be Witchcraft
in the case. No sooner had the Count spoke these last words, but his Spouse,
and all the rest of the Ladies laughed very heartily. The Count perceiving how
overjoyed they were at the recital of this Adventure, which had cost him so
much vexation, and had almost put him quite besides himself, if he had not had
courage enough to bear up against that Demon, the Enemy of his Repose, could
not forbear to give 'em this Lesson: Ladies, said he, you are those familiar
Spirits, which are sent from the other world on purpose to damn and torment
Mankind, and to make them dye a lingering Death. Whereupon the Ladies laughed
as if they had been out of their Wits, and desired him to proceed in his Story.
Ladies, replied Monsieur de Surlaube, we are far yet from the end of our
Adventures. My unhappy Destiny which persecuted me, or rather that detestable
Demon, that would make me dye the most cruel and violent Death that can be
imagined, did not stop here. He had prepared for me these sufferings, which
were sufficient to send the most constant and bravest Lover that ever was heard
of in any amorous History, to his Grave. The Marchioness de Brese, the Mother
of my new married Spouse, being at last awakened with the noise I made, came
running all undrest into my Chamber, asking me, Where her Daughter was? I
answered her, all overwhelmed with Grief, That I did not know what was become
of her; that she had disappeared like a familiar Spirit, without knowing which
way she went, except she were gone out through the Chimney, because the Windows
were very closely shut up. This good Lady having understood what I told her,
was in an incredible Agony about her Daughter, verily believing, that the same
Chavalier, who had hid himself under the Bed, had stolen her away: She was so
much troubled at it, that she would certainly have run distracted, if
Pasquette, the Chambermaid, had not whispered her in the Ear, that she knew
where she was. And where is she then? said the Marchioness, taking the Candle
up her self, Let us look in all corners. Pasquette having told her Mother, that
she believed she had hid herself in the Hayloft, we all went thither in
Procession, where we found her lying amidst the Hay, without any Clothes, but
her Wedding Shift. I leave it to your selves, Ladies, said the Count, to guess,
how much surpised I was to see her peepout of the Hay, like a Mouse out of a
Nest of her own making, where she intended to have spent that whole night. The
Marchioness her Mother taking her by the hand drew her away by force, she being
very unwilling to to stir from thence, and having first given her a good
Reprimand, she re-conducted her into my Chamber.

Being once more gone to bed, I spent great part of the night in endeavoring
to persuade her out of this savage and barbarous Humor; but after I had
endured the utmost fatigues, I found my self where I was before. Her Innocence
and Youth, which were the cause of her crime, were all my Comfort, in hopes
that time would work out that, which was impossible for my Love and Passion to
effect. I might represent to her what I thought fit concerning the sacred Tie
of Matrimony, which had joined us together, and that, for the future, we were
to be but one Flesh, according to the true Principles of Christianity: That
this was the most sacred and inviolable Knot of matrimonial and civil Society,
and the only one in which consisted all the Pleasure and Tranquillity that we
Mortals are capable of enjoying upon Earth. I did not forget to produce a
thousand Examples of young Virgins, who having been married at the same age,
had before the years end brought forth the fruits of their tender Love, in
having honored their Husbands with Children, which were looked upon as the
Pledges of Conjugal Love, and as certain Blessings from Heaven. All these
Reflections were in vain, and made no more impression upon her Mind, than if
she had heard a Fanatic, or Mountebank, making an Harangue. Come, come, Count,
said Monsieur de Boufflers, let us leave these moral Reflections to the
Priests: Father Bourdalou takes care to furnish the Ladies with 'em in his
Sermons: Let us hear the end of your Story.

Whatever pains I took, continued the Count, to obtain from this inhumane
Creature the last favor, it was all to no manner of purpose, so 15 days were
spent in vain Attacks; and the more Bravery and Eagerness I showed to assault
the Place, the oftener was I repulsed with Vigor; the Governess of the Fort
taking as much Pride in defending it, as the Vestal Virgins did heretofore in
preserving the sacred Fire. But pray observe what another trick she played me to
free herself from my importunities. She having therefore again advised with
Pasquette, her Chambermaid, who is as unlucky as a Demon, and more ingenious
at a contrivance than Ariadne; this cursed Megaera made her a Puppet about the
same bigness as my Wife; and, because I had been so cautious as to get the Key
of that private door behind my Bed into my own Custody, they had by somemeans
or another procured a false one, by the help of which, they intended to deceive
me, tho I were as watchful as Argus. One night, supposing that no body was with
me in Bed, but this cruel fair One, and turning my self toward her, I found in
her place this Puppet, which they had taken care to dress up very neatly. Thus
for several nights together, my Wife was accustomed to undress her self before
me, so that when I thought my self most sure of her, I found in her place a
piece of Wood as cold as Ice.

O Sir, not to interrupt your Discourse, said Monsieur Boufflers, this was most
convenient to quench your flame. It Is true, Sir, reply d the Count, but a Block
of Wood is a very insipid thing for a passionate Lover. If you had been in my
place, you would I believe, with all your Stratagems, Bombs, and Fireworks,
have been put to a Non plus. You might have planted your Cannon, and fixed your
Mortars, according to the most exact Rules of the best Ingineers of the
Kindgom; you would have miss d your aim for all this, and that too, some
hundred paces beyond the mark; and if at last you had not turned Fool you must
have had very good luck. Sir, replied Monsieur Boufflers, the Art of War is of
little use in Expeditions of this nature. The Subtilty of a Fox, and the
Nimbleness of a Cock, are sufficient qualifications for such Exploits; these
will make the Pullets dance after their Pipe; take this Doctrine from me, Sir,
as old an Engineer as you are. Sir, replied the Count, you are just at the
point of giving us some proofs of your Bravery: Time and opportunity will
questionless inform us, with what skill you shall have brought your self off
these Quicksands, where the most able Seamen have often suffered Shipwreck.

But Sir, said the Duchess of Artagnan, whilst all the rest of the Ladies were
laughing out, and what issue had this fatal Adventure? Madam, answered the
Count, the end of the Story is, that it cost me a vast series of cruel
sufferings, which made me lead a languishing Life like a poor condemned Wretch,
for the space of six months; insomuch that I was verily persuaded, that this
time of Penance ought infallibly to deliver me from the pains of Purgatory, if
I should be condemned to go thither after my death; for I give you my word for
it, that all the torments of Hell cannot exceed those pains which we endure by
the cruelty of a charming Beauty so much beloved and admired as this unlucky
Creature was by me, pointing with his finger to the Countess his Spouse, who
laughed open-mouthed, when she saw her Husband relate this Story with so much
concern. But you have forgot my dear Husband, said she, to tell us the
circumstances of our Reconciliation. You are in the right on it, my dear Child,
said the Count, but give me but leave to cough, and to cleanse my Lungs a
little, and then Mr. Preacher will begin where he left off before. Having thus
suffered all this cruel usage which I have just now related to you, and having
taken no rest day or night for a considerable time, I told my Mother-in-law
frankly, and plainly, That I was resolved to give her her Daughter again, as
good as I had found her, if by her authority, she could not prevail upon her to
accommodate her sentiments to the State of Matrimony. The Marchioness, being
moved by my complaints, at last resolved to call an Assembly of Ladies of her
next Relations, and having given an account to 'em of her Daughters aversion to
the Conjugal Bed, and to all Men whatever, she ordered a most magnificent
Collation, which was to be the preparative of one of the most famous General
Councils that ever was held among Women. At last, after the Doors of the
Appartment, where these Ladies were assembled were shut up close, the Defendant
was called up to appear before her Judges, where she was examined concerning
the present state of her natural Parts, to see whether she were an
Hermaphrodite, or whether she had some other impediment, which might exclude
her from the enjoyment of the Conjugal Union.

All Parts thereabouts having been found in a very good condition, and
conformable to the Rules of Anatomy, (according to the report made by a certain
expert Matron, who was sent for on purpose to assist at this Inquisition) and
the Generation-box being found without blemish, they past on to
Interrogatories. The Marchioness, my Wife's Mother, being there present in
quality of my Lady Chief Justice, demanded of her Daughter, What was the reason
that she refused to live as a married Woman ought to do, with a Man whom Heaven
and she had given her for her Husband; there being nothing wanting in her
Person which Nature had bestowed on the rest of her Sex for the bringing forth
of Children; especially since the Count her Husband was a Man of a very
considerable Estate and Quality, descended from one of the most ancient and
noble Families in France. She added, That the hopes of begetting lawful Heirs,
was the only motive that induced him to desire her in Marriage; there being
otherwise a considerable disproportion in their Age; that he grounded his
opinion upon her being so young, and descended from a fruitful Family; for
which two reasons, he thought himself sure of Children that might inherit his
Estate: And finally, that he was the last of his Family, which was the chief
consideration that had made him resolve to marry at that Age. The poor Child
answered her Mamma, that the Count had so frightened her, that she would much
rather go into a Nunnery, than to let that be sacrificed which was the most
precious to her in the World, meaning her Maidenhead. How! Daughter, what do
you mean by this? said her Mother, full of indignation. Explain your self, what
reasons have you for so doing? Mamma, answered the young Countess, my Husband
told me one day, I think it was just the day before our Wedding, that he
believed he should not live long. And why so, replied her Mother. Because that
he had -- answer d the young Lady: O Lord! Mamma, I dare not tell it. Speak out
you Fool, cried the Marchioness, there is none but Women here. He told me,
answer d the Countess, that he had a certain Gut that would come out in... If
it be so, Mamma, I cannot possibly lie with him, because I know not what it
means. At these words, all the Ladies fell a laughing as loud as they could for
a considerable time. But to come to the end of my Story, added the Count, my
Mother-inlaw, and the rest of the Ladies who were there present in Court as
Assistants, did so tutor this ignorant Girl, and explained this Gut in Terms so
lively and natural to her, that the poor Child at last was over-perswaded to
sacrifice her Maiden-Treasure, which she had hitherto so carefully preserved;
so that after six Months Marriage she was made a Wife: the Prodigy of our Age,
and perhaps the most extraordinary one that ever was heard of before.

The Count having finished his Relation, Madam de Tilladet and the rest of the
Ladies, taking the Countess de Surlaube on one side, asked her, Whether her
Husband had spoke nothing but the truth as to all the circumstances of his
Narrative. He has been very punctual, replied the Countess, laughing as loud as
she could. My dear Child, said Monsieur Boufflers, addressing himself to
Mademoiselle de Grammont; and how do you like this Story of the Gut? shall I be
as unfortunate as the Count? I am devilish impatient, continu d he; if any
thing like this should happen to me, my Wedding Day would be that of my
Funeral. Sir, replied Mademoiselle pleasantly, if I thought I should act with
as good success as the Countess, I should take it to be the greatest pleasure
in the World to let you languish for some time. She accompanied these words
with so charming a smile, that the Marshal was easily convinced, that at her
Age she was not so ignorant as Madam de Surlaube had been, and that whenever
that time should come, she would not stop her Ears to his demands.

The Marshal answered her by a thousand amourous looks, telling her, That he
was not ignorant, what delight young Ladies would often take to play a spiteful
trick with their Gallants. I think, said he, that it is much more excusable,
when it proceeds from a Principle of Modesty and Innocence, which is natural to
so tender an Age. In such a case as this, I should be so far from tormenting my
self about it, that on the contrary, I should esteem it as the most delicious
and most savory Dish Love can afford us: I should then look upon my self to be
the Possessor of the whole stock of Charms and sweet Fruits that Love is able
to give to a Lover; and that I might flatter my self, even to an assurance,
that I was the first who put the Plow into that ground, which I think to be the
greatest, Charm peculiar to a Beauty that never saw daylight before. This is
so great a rarity, continued the Marshal, in the Age we now live in, that such
a Mistress is to be accounted a Phoenix. Our modern Gallantry in use among
Ladies, is like an Academy of young Beauties, where at the Age of 14 they are
so well instructed in these matters, that they will scarce refuse a good thing
when it is once offered em.

This is past contradiction, said the Count, de Surlaube. Monsieur de Boufflers
Morals tho somewhat remiss, come very near the truth, and probability pleads
strongly for what he has offered. Experience has sufficiently taught us, that
he talks of it like a Master, and that the Draught which he has given us of the
Intreagues of the fair Sex is done to the Life. For my part, added he, I
foresee already that he will have no reason to complain of his Lady s cruelty,
and that his Happiness will be more complete at the very beginning, than mine
has ever been as yet; tho thanks to Heaven, I have no reason to complain now of
her, who made me suffer so much before. You ought to attribute your Felicity
replied Monsieur Boufflers, to the explication of the Story of the Gut, for
without that, I believe your Lady would have been a Maid to this day.

Monsieur de Boufflers had scarce spoke these last Words, when a Page of
Mademoiselle de Grammont s came to advertise him, and his Lady, that Madam de
Maintenon's Coach was at the door. This Lady had not seen our Lovers for some
days last past; and as she of all the rest that were at Court, showed most
concern for their Happiness, and had her self been the first that spoke in
Monsieur Bouffler's Favor to Mademoiselle de Grammont; nothing was transacted
in carrying on the Match without her approbation. The Marshal and Mademoiselle
de Grammont, went immediately out of the Room to receive her at the Stair-head,
she being accompanied by the Abbot de Tellier, Brother to the late Marquess de
Louvois.

Madam de Maintenon at her coming into the Chamber, being overjoyed to meet
with so much good Company, all the Gentlemen and Ladies, of whom we spoke
before, entertained her with all the Courtesy imaginable. The Marshal de
Boufflers himself presented a Chair to her, and the Marchioness de Maintenon
having taken her Seat Nephew, said he, (for so she was will not to call him) I
have some good News to impart to you. And what good News, pray Madam, said the
Marshal. I just now came from Court, replied the Machioness, where the King
told me, that his pleasure was, that those obstacles, which have hitherto
obstructed your Match should be removed, His Majesty, added she, is resolved to
beg in the Campaign very early and therefore will soon have occasion for your
Service in Falnders. It is for this reason that he will have the Marriage
forthwith consummated, and that all shall be over in fifteen days. I am very
glad to bring you these good tidings, that both you and Mademoiselle de
Grammont may take yorr measures accordingly. I don't question but you are
already so far advanced into your Mistress's favor, that she will not be
dissatisfied with this sudden change. I know that young Ladies at her Age, are
not so backward to taste those secret enjoyments which Love offers; the first
night after Marriage, supposing this to be true, I believe you both have an
equal share in this satisfaction.

Madam, answered the Marshal, except I shou d differ from all the World, and
that my Heart shou d be quite insensible; how could I choose otherwise than to
be charmed with the engaging allurements of such a Person as Mademoiselle de
Grammont. I am already all over in a flame, according to my natural
disposition, and this fire cannot but burn with great vehemence, when it is fed
by an object more bright than the Stars. Give me leave, added he, looking upon
Mademoiselle de Grammont, with a very passionate Eye, give me leave, my most
Adorable, to speak what is due to your merits, and do you accompany my words
with your charming smiles and your sweet and amorous glances, which being the
interpreters of your Heart, may assure me of what your Tongue is unwilling to
express. The Mashral spoke these words with such a grace and presence of mind,
with so frank and becoming an Air, that he was applauded by the whole Assembly;
and his Mistress found her Heart assailed by a thousand amorous transports. The
Eyes of this fair Lady, the faithful Interpreters of the tender passion and
shamefacedness of a young Beauty, who always receives the caresses of her Lover
with silence, because Modesty requires it; made their addresses to him, giving
him to understand the most secret and sincere motions of her Heart.

A Lover who is beloved is Master of the secret of unfolding these amorous
Riddles, which are no small addition to the variety of Love sports; so that if
a Mistress will but favor that Person with a smile, unto whom she has given
her heart before, he needs not covet any thing more, to make him the happiest
Man in the world. This was the condition in which the Marshal was at that time
with Mademoiselle de Grammout. The Marchioness de Maintenon, who was very
expert in this noble Art, might easily judge that her Nephew had no reason to
repent of the pains and trouble he had undergone for a Lady of that quality and
merit as Mademoiselle de Grammont was, whom she had first brought into his
acquaintance. And that which increased her satisfaction, was, that she could
now applaud herself to have been successful in the choice of one of the
chiefest Ladies about Court for her Nephew, whom she ever looked upon as her
adopted Son, and in whom she took a more than ordinary delight.

All the actions of our Marshal have always met with the approbation of the
Marchioness de Maintenon, who has showed all the kindness to him that could be
expected even from a Mother, from the beginning of his appearing at Court till
this time; which has been the main cause of his Preferment. Whenever the King
had a mind to talk of his great Officers, Madam de Maintenon would seldom let
slip the opportunity to enlarge upon the Merits, Vigilance, Bravery, and
undaunted Courage of her beloved Favorite: These Encomiums coming from the
Mouth of one who had such a sway at Court as Madam de Maintenon; who both at
that time and at present, bestows what favors she thinks fit within the verge
of it; having by the continual care she has taken to please his Majesty, got
such an Ascendant over this Monarch, that she is, as it were, his right hand,
and he seldom does any thing of moment without her Advice: Monsieur Boufflers
at last, by her frequent Intercession, was advanc d to the Dignity of a Marshal
of France. This was the highest Pinnacle of her, hopes to see her Favorite so
dignified, not questioning, but if the difficulty were once surmounted, she
might find means to accomplish this Match, which she had projected long before;
and which without that advantage scarce would have come to a happy conclusion:
for, Madam de Grammont would hardly ever have been prevailed upon, to give her
Daughter in Marriage to Monsieur de Boufflers, who was then but a Soldier of
Fortune; having, as she was will not to say, taken a resolution, to bestow her
upon none less than a Marshal of France, who might be answerable to that high
renown, which the Marshal de Grammont had acquired by his Heroic Achievements.

But we will lay aside for some time these Reflections which only appertain to
to the Hero of our History, and give you a particular account of some passages
of that August Assembly, where were present all the Noblemen and Ladies of the
highest Quality at Court. They entertained one another with a thousand pleasant
Stories, and among the rest with several of their own adventures of Love and
Gallantry. For the greater satisfaction of the Reader, we will make choice of
some few of the best, and such as seem most worthy to be taken notice of, they
having been unknown hitherto in public; and in regard that I was present at
this entertainment; so I will undertake to relate them with all the
faithfulness imaginable.

Madam de Maintenon having for some time hearkened to the discourse of some of
the Ladies, concerning what News lately happened in Paris, began to speak thus.
Ladies, I am about to give you a relation of a most Tragical Story, which will
appear to be the more particular in its kind, the more extraordinary and
surprising it is in it self. I have it, added she, from Father La Chaise' s own
Mouth, not above two days ago, when I was with him last, and it is so much the
more certainly true in regard that it happened to himself not above fourteen days
before. When you have heard all the circumstances of the whole matter you will be
convinced, that some things are transacted in Paris, which are buried in
eternal oblivion. And if it so fall out sometimes that such like things are
discovered, it is owing to Providence which brings them to light to convince us
of the Vanity of this World, and to make us sensible of what abuses are daily
committed among Men. At the same time it must be acknowledged, that Gallanary
is the famous Theater, where, these Tragic Parts are displaid; this occasions
more horrible crimes than any thing else that I know of, The following History
will furnish us with a notable example to prove my Assertion.

Father La Chaise told me, that on the 24th of April last past, about a quarter
of an hour after twelve a clock at night, when the whole College of Jesuits
were in Bed, there came to the Door of the Monastery a Coach with six Horses;
and a Footman coming from behind the Coach, rung the Bell at the Gate. The
Porter, being in his first Sleep, did not hear him immediately, which made the
Footman ring again so loudly, that the Porter was awakened at the noise he
made. The Porter having asked, Who is there? the Footman answered, That he
desired him to open the Gate. Brother Ambrose (which is the name of the Porter)
told him, That 'twas not in his power, because the Rector of the College had
forbid him to open the Gate so late to any one whatever. The Footman made
answer, that they wanted a Father Confessor for a Person of great Quality, who
was just at the point of Death; and that it was a case of very urgent
necessity. Brother Ambrose, having understood these words, opened the Gate,
when the Footman told him, That he was come to fetch Father La Chaise; that
the sick Person of whom he had spoke before, whose Name he was not to tell, was
desirous to have Father La Chaise, and no body else, for some very weighty
reasons, which related to the satisfaction of a wounded Conscience, and the
Salvation of an immortal Soul. Brother Ambrose told him, That he would go up to
Father La Chaise' s Chamber, and let him know what he said. The Footman prayed
him to make all possible haste he could, by reason that no time was to be lost.
Brother Ambrose having awakened Father La Chaise, informed him of what he knew
of the matter. Father. La Chaise having asked him the Name of the Lord or Lady
that sent for him. Brother Ambrose told him, That by the Train and Equipage it
should be a Person of the highest Quality. He also told him, that there was a
mourning Coach at the Gate, drawn by six black Horses: That the Coachman,
Postilion, and four Footmen, who attended it, were all clothed in black; that
they appeared as black in their Faces as Negroes; and that they had no Flamboys
along with them, neither could he devise what might be the meaning of it,
because they refused to tell the Name of him who had sent them.

Father La Chaise being by this time got out of Bed, went down to the Gate
himself, where the same Footman, who had spoke before to the Porter, said,
Good Father I entreat you to get up into this Coach with six Horses. Who is it
that sent you to fetch me? replied Father La Chaise, Good Father, said the
Footman, We came from a Person of the first rank in the Kingdom, who desires
to impart to you something of great consequence before he dies. He is not
inclined to have any other Confessor, but your self, and we dare not tell his
Name, because we are forbid it. Father La Chaise, who could not discover whose
Equipage this was, the Footmen being all disguised by their black Faces, like
your very Negroes, thought it most convenient to advise with the Rector,
Prefect, and other Superiors of the Order, whether they would approve of his
going along with those unknown Persons. He began to make serious reflections
upon the matter; his Head being filled with jealousies, that perhaps some
Person of Quality disgraced at Court, and excited by discontent, hatred, or
revenge, against his Person, might by this means endeavor to get him into some
private place or another, there to serve him an Italian trick, without being
any more to be heard of for ever.

All the good Fathers being got out of their Beds, and having weighed the
matter with deliberation, it was resolved, that Father La Chaise, who was so
dear to theirwhole Order, ought not to expose himself to this hazard. The
Rector being of opinion, that some body else ought to be sent in his stead.
Father Bourdalou generously offered himself. But being come down, the Footman
who had spoke to Father La Chaise before told him, That they had orders to
bring along with 'em none else but Father La Chaise, and that he need not make
any scruple to trust himself with 'em, they being assured that he would be in
no more danger, than if he staid in the Convent. For the rest, they desired him
to consider, That the Welfare of a Soul lay at stake, and that it was one of
the greatest Men at Court, whose Conscience could not be satisfied till he had
seen him; that there was not much more time to lose; that if he tarried one
quarter of an hour longer, it was to be feared it would be too late, because
the sick Person was almost at the last gasp.

Father La Chaise, who shows much zeal in matters relating to the Salvation of
Souls, being moved at these words; entreated the rest of the Fathers to let him
perform his duty in a place whereto his Conscience called him; and so, in spite
of all the disswasions of the Rector, Prefect, and Father Bourdalou, who went
down with him to the Gate, he resolved to go, whatever might come of it. Having
therefore crossed himself three times with the sign of the Cross, he went into
the Coach. The Coachman, lashing the Horses soundly with his Whip, drove away
with a full Gallop. Father La Chaise, tho it was very dark, did take as much
notice as possibly he could of all the Streets and by-lanes through which they
past; and tho he knew exactly all the places throughout that vast City; yet he
was never able afterward to find out any of those parts through which he was
conveyed; the Coachman being ordered to drive round about some parts of the
Town, passing and repassing several times the same Streets, the better to
deceive the Father, and to prevent any discovery of those places through which
they went.

In the mean while Father La Chaise lying along the bottom of the Coach, began
to make a thousand ominous Reflections, accusing himself of Imprudence to have
so slightly exposed himself to the utmost hazard of his Life. But as the case
now stood, the best advice he could take was, to set his Conscience at rest,
and to prepare himself for Death, in case he should have occasion to dye at
that instant. Conformably to this Resolution, he made a full Confession of his
Sins to Almighty God, begging pardon for those that he had committed since his
last Confession, and for all such as might not then occur to his Memory,
adding, that if he had done some ill office to some great Man or another with
the King, who stirred up by his hatred against him, had resolved to make use of
this opportunity to draw him into a Snare, which should cost him his Life; he
prayed God to forgive him, because the Station he was in, of being Confessor to
the greatest Monarch, made him against his Will, often liable to the
Discontents of the Courtiers, who laid claim to some office or another, which
were often bestowed upon others, by his solicitation.

Having been thus perplexed in his thoughts for a good half hour, he came to
the place where he was to be set down. The Coach having stopped, he saw a
Footman coming out of a great Gate, which was all hung with black Cloth, that
hid the Coat of Arms belonging to the Family, to keep it from his sight. The
same Footman, having in one Hand a Flamboy made of black Wax, opened the door
of the Coach, and with his other Hand helped our Father out, who was conducted
into a great and and very fine Palace, all hung with black; several Footmen
all with Flamboys made of black Wax in their Hands standing at the Stair-foot,
from whence they led him up Stairs, two stories high backwards into a very fine
Appartment. All the Domestic Servants were clothed in black, as were likewise
their Faces, shining as if they had been true Black-moors. This was contrived
on purpose to deceive Father la Chaise, who perhaps had seen them a thousand
times in his Life time, but was not able to give the least guess at them under
this disguise.

This Appartment was like all the rest, hung all over with black, and as soon
as Father la Chaise was entered, all the Candles were put out at once, so that
all upon a sudden he was left quite in the dark, and conducted up to the other
end of the Room, where a Chair was set for him under a Canopy, upon a piece of
Tapestry spread upon the floor. When he was set down, he could hear the voice
of a Lady bewailing her self, and imploring the mercy of a Person, who as he
understood, was about to put her to death for her unfaithfulness. Come, come,
Madam, said the Nobleman, your Father Confessor is ready, you have but a few
moments to live, which you may bestow, in settling your Conscience. The time
draws near, for me to revenge my self in putting an end to your Life: I pray God
to forgive you your sin.

Immediately after, the Lady was conducted out of an Appartment hard by under
favor of the darkness, directly to the place where our Father expected her
coming: Father la Chaise by her Confession, was informed of the crime, which
was the occasion of her death, but she did not say one word, either concerning
her own Name, or his, who intended to put her to death, and whatever pains he
took, he could not bring out one word from her as to that matter; till at last,
the Lady perceiving the curiosity of her Confessor, told him, that she was
afraid, lest his Curiosity might prove fatal to him, and that therefore she
advised him not to dive any farther into the matter, or to oblige her to commit
an indiscreet Act, because, if her Lover should get the least notice of it, he
would certainly be the death of him, and would perhaps provide for him the same
entertainment, which she was about to receive,

There needed nothing else to silence our Father; for in an instant he lost the
use of his Tongue, not speaking so much as one word more, but employed the rest
of his time in hearkening to this disconsolate Lady, whilst she made a
particular confession of all her sins, which, having asked pardon of Almighty
God, she received Absolution from the Mouth of her Confessor. It is to be
observed that during the whole time, as well as before, that the Lady was with
him, they were without light; so that he had not the least opportunity to know
her. But, to come to an end of this Tragical History; no sooner had the Father
Confessor pronounced these words: Absolvo te, or I absolve you, but a certain
Gentleman Usher came to re-conduct this unknown Lady into a Room next by, where
a Bath was prepared for her. After she had been undressed by her waiting
Gentlewomen, she entered the Bath, and being set upon a Chair, the Veins in her
Arms and Feet were opened, till all-her Vital Spirits having left her with the
Blood, she died in the same manner, as Seneca did heretofore, this being looked
upon as one of the most gentle kinds of death.

Father la Chaise was re-conducted to the same Coach, which had brought him
thither, attended by the same Coachman and Footmen, who carried him back to
the Convent, but by a quite different way, than what they had passed through
before, having made so many turnings and windings, that 'twas impossible for
the good Father to remember them, who, besides this, was very glad to see
himself return safe and sound, and to have paid no dearer for his Journey. As
soon as they were come again to the Gate of the Monastery, one of the Footmen
opened the Coach-door, and rung the Bell to awaken the Porter. Father la Chaise
coming out of the Coach, had no sooner set his Feet to the ground, but away
drove the Coachman, whip and slash immediately out of sight, not staying to
see whether the Gate were opened or not. As soon as the Porter had let Father
la Chaise in, he went up directly to the Chamber of the Rector and the
Prefect; O my good Fathers! said he, I never heard of any description of Hell
more terrible than what I have seen, since I left you. Every thing about me was
black and frightful, the most dismal Funeral pomp that ever was beheld. Then
Father la Chaise gave 'em an exact account of all that had passed, without
being able to tell 'em one word, which might contribute any thing toward the
discovery of the Noble Man's Name, or of that of the Lady, who had received
Absolution from him. The good Fathers were extremely surpised at the
strangeness of the Matter of Fact, which appeared to 'em so terrible, and so
Tragical, that the like had not been known in Paris, in the Memory of Man: And
what I have told you, added Madam de Maintenon, is true even beyond
contradiction, Father la Chaise being the Man who was concerned in that Affair,
no longer than some few weeks ago; from whose own Mouth I have received it,
with all these circumstances, which I have related to you.

Madam, answered Monsieur de Surlaube, Love is a strange capricious Passion, it
is the cause of great Evils in this World, the fewest of which come to our
Knowledge, the rest being buried in Eternal Oblivion. If Men are once possessed
with jealousy, it makes 'em furious, and incapable of Compassion toward their
Mistresses; the least slip they make, is sufficient to raise in 'em a suspicion
of Unfaithfulness, which is enough for 'em to render their Mistresses Criminal
in their sight. I cannot deny it, Sir, replied Madam de Maintenon, but Methinks
this Crime ought not to be looked upon as so enormous, as not to be expiated
without death. A Gentleman of Honor ought to take Compassion of the frailty of
the Fair Sex. And if they will needs make it a rule to be inexorable upon that
account toward their Mistresses, why should not they with justice, pretend to
the same right, to inflict such rigorous Punishments upon their Lovers when
they prove treacherous. We are pretty well acquairted with the Qualities of
your Sex, added the Marchioness, if Women are sometimes unfaithful, you I am
sure a thousand times more; the least thing in the world makes you changeable.
How many do you think there are of your Men of Fortune in the World whom Baron
has so lively represented in his Comedys? I believe there are very few among
you all, but what may find their true Character there; and turn it which side
you will, you do us the greatest Injustice in the World, thus to exercise your
Tyranny, in exacting a blind Obedience from our Sex, and to deprive us of that
small share of Liberty which is allowed us. If you Gentlemen were all to be put
to death, as this poor Lady was, of whom you have heard this Tragical Relation,
as often as you prove perjured and unfaithful to those several Ladies unto whom
you have sworn one after another an inviolable Love, confirmed by most sacred
Oaths, the common Language of Lovers; I believe verily there would scarce be
any one living but that deserved to undergo the like Capital punishment.

Hold Madam, said the Marshal de Lorge, you have fairly shown your skill in
pleading the Cause of your Sex; but I hope you will give me leave to tell you,
that their natural constitution seems to require from them more Reservedness,
Constancy and Fidelity, than from us Men. This is the only Heroic Virtue in
your Sex, to be faithful; this is the only Charm by which you captivate us, and
which makes Men so passionate toward you, and which besides this,
distinguishes Virtuous Women from the crowd of wanton Jilts, and common
Prostitues; who ought to be esteemed as Monsters; and for whom a Man of Honor
can never have those sentiments which are, as it were, Spice to make Love
savoury to the taste. Insomuch that upon the whole, this fickle Humor in
Menought to be considered as a slight Trespass, and not as a Capital Crime; as
you would willingly represent it. If a Man has more Mistresses than one, he may
be respected for all that, as a Gentleman of Honor and Probity; whereas a
Woman that prostitutes her self to many, loses inevitably all that modest and
innocent behavior, which are the inseparable Companions of Virtuous Women; and
without which it is impossible for a Man to be charmed, or to be made sensible
of any real satisfaction from a Lady who does not possess these Endowments. The
Marshal de Lorge is in the right on it, said the Count de Surlaube. Your too
forward Women are just like your sparkling Wines, no body cares to buy them.
That which renders Love delicious, and which makes Men amorous and passionate,
is that Innocence which we admire in the Person beloved. The most real and
sweetest pleasure, a Man is capable of enjoying with his Mistress, is, the
delight he takes to instruct and breed up a young tender Heart, which may be
compared to your pure Wines, which are still upon the Lees; or to a Rose
gathered early in the Spring, when it just begins to bud: And that is, what
properly ought to be called a Maidenhead, without seeking any further for it,
as most Men do, who seldom find it any where else, but in conceit, when their
Brains are heated with amorous Fancies.

Madam, added the Count, addressing his Speech to Madam de Maintenon, We are
here teaching a Doctrine, which may seem to savor somewhat of Libertinism, and
which I don't know how it may relish with you: All I have to say is, that
considering the circumstances of the time, our Friend Boufflers being so near
his Wedding Day, we could scarce pick out a more agreeable and diverting
Subject. One may, without Flattery, continued the Count laughing, tell him,
that he is the happiest of all Men in the choice of a Mistress, who will make
him sensible of all those Charms we have spoke of just now with so much
Commendation. Mademoiselle de Grammont is one of those rare Beauties, which
have not as yet been brought to light, and whom the God of Love himself takes
care to instruct in his Charms, and to make her sensible of all his mysteries.
The Abbey of St. Cyr, where she has resided of late, has not been a little
instrumental in preserving these charming Qualities, which few of your young
Ladies in Paris can boast of, who perhaps have been more conversant in the
Affairs of the World, and have had the opportunity of making more Conquests,
but which, if truly considered, are nothing but Vanities. For example, why must
we be pestered with so many Abbey-Lubbers about the Town, who make it their
chief business to visit Ladies, and to talk to them of their Passion? How many
beautiful Damsels are there in Paris, who are fond of the flattering Praises
bestowed upon them by these insinuating Tartuffs, who ought to say their
Breviary, instead of playing the Gallants? I am not able to endure, Madam,
continued the Count, all these Extravagancies, I cannot but pity on one side
those poor simple Creatures, who suffer themselves thus to be cajoled by these
Sparks with their little Bands; and on the other, I am at the same time
surprised at the Impudence of these Rascals, who acting the Libertine, do not
make any Conscience of seducing abundance of young Gentlewomen of very good
Quality, who quite spoil their Fortune by these extravagant Courses.

I do declare to you, replied the Marchioness de Maintenon, that I am no great
Friend of these Sparks of the Collar-band; and if his Majesty would follow my
Advice in this particular. I would have 'em meddle with nothing but their
Breviary, without giving 'em the opportunity to scamper about to Debauch our
young Women. If they have not the Gift of Continency, and the Frailty of their
Flesh will not admit of this Doctrine taught by the Holy Fathers; I would have
their black Coats pulled over their Ears, to give 'em instead of it, a red
Cloak and Sword, that they may have liberty to Marry.

O Madam, answered the Count, it is under the Cover of their long Robes that
they play the best of their Game; not to take notice here, of their Revenues
and fat Benefices, which make 'em appear so freshcolour'd and of so ruddy a
Complexion: It seems to me, as if these Sparks had alone the Touchstone in
Hand, to try the goodness of all sorts of Metals; there is not a savoury Bit in
Paris, but they have it at their Devotion. The most part of young Women are led
away by 'em, as it were by so many Sirens, which inchant 'em by their
Allurements, and the sweetness of their Voice; for most of these Gentlemen are
well skilled in Music, which is in great esteem among the Fair Sex, who love
to have their Ears tickled with harmonious Strains, by which Bait they may
easily inchant 'em so far, as to catch 'em in their Nets.

Let us not be any longer disturbed with these Abbots, said Monsieur Boufflers,
let us talk of us Men of the Blade, who are the truly generous Souls; being
very serviceable both to the State, and to the Commonwealth of Beauty, whose
Representatives they always treat upon Honor. We are, added he, like Gold, the
truest and best of all Metals, and if we were conscious to our selves of having
the least wronged the Female Sex, we should think our selves unworthy of
wearing a Sword. Hold, Sir, replied the Count de Surlaube, you run too fast;
you do very well to Hector it in so good Company: For if we should begin to
rehearse all your amourous Exploits, I question whether you could with Justice,
make appear so much Sincerity on your side. But come, added he, we will not be
too hard upon you at this time; Marriage is likely to cure you of this Volatile
Humor, which was wont to carry you from one fair Lady to another; and you will
be forced at last, in spite of your self, to submit to those Chains and
Fetter-Locks, which Love has prepared for you by Mademoiselle de Grammont. I am
persuaded, you will look upon 'em as very glorious for you, because you have
all the reason in the World to flatter your self, of having obtained the most
precious Jewel in France, and having married the most accomplished Lady of the
whole Court.

The Duke du Maine, who had not as yet been to complement Monsieur de Boufflers
and Mademoiselle de Grammont upon their intended Marriage, coming into the
Room, did for some few moments interrupt their former Discourse. And the
Marchioness de Maintenon, having looked upon her Watch, to see what a Clock it
might be, rose up from her Seat, and told the Company, That she was, by Order
from his Majesty, to be at Court at a prefixed time, about some Business of
great Consequence. As soon as she was gone into her Coach, the Lords and Ladies
began to sit round again, every one in his own place, passing away the time,
till the Collation should be ready, which was preparing for 'em. The Duke du
Maine told 'em, That he was just now come from the Abbot Tallement's, where he
had spent an Hour the most agreeably, that ever he did in his Lifetime. The
Ladies asked him, With what? The Duke du Maine told 'em, That he had seen
there, some of the finest Pictures that could be, and among the rest, a most
curious Piece, in which the Ladies have a more particular Concern. In this
Picture, said he, are contracted all the Perfections of the Fair Sex, to that
degree, that there is not any one wanting, to make the Copy absolutely like the
Original. To be short, it is an universal Piece, where all at once, are
represented both their good and bad Qualities. And, what is the most
surprising, all is done at one and the same time, without the least alteration.

The Ladies being overcurious to be better informed concerning all the
Circumstances of this Picture, which seemed to be a Riddle to 'em, and
surpassed all their Imagination, begged heartily of the Duke, to give 'em a
full Description of it. This I will do, replied the Prince, with a certain
malicious Smile, but it is purely out of Complaisance and Obedience to your
Commands. I am sensible, that Ladies love to hear a Declamation in their
Praise, and that they would willingly have their good Qualities made known to
the World; and I know not any thing which will suit better with their Humor,
or please 'em better, than this following Description. I was just now,
continued he, with the Abbot de Tallement, one perhaps of the most curious Men
in Europe. After he had conducted me into his Closet, he showed me a Piece, in
which was represented a very ugly Head: It had 3 Mouths, 6 Eyes, and 3 Noses,
so that it appeared to me like a Monster. Besides this, there was painted on
one side a Magpye and a Peacock; and on the other, a smoking Chimney.

The Abbot asked me, Whether I understood the Riddle, and whether I was
sensible of the rarity of the Piece? I answered him, That I could see nothing,
but what appeared to me very gross and confused. And that besides, I did not
understand the meaning of this Hieroglyphick, desiring him to explain it to me.
Sir, said the Abbot, pray shut your left Eye, and with the other, look through
this Hole. I did as the Abbot had directed me, who having taken a Cylinder,
made of a piece of polished Steel, he fixed it opposite to the Hole through
which I looked. In an instant, this Monster of a Head, the Magpye, the Peacock
and the Chimney-piece, were, by a sudden Metamorphosis, changed into a Woman's
Head, the finest and handsomest that ever I saw. The Abbot, having with one
Hand, covered the Figure which represented the Magpye, the Mouths immediately
disappeared; so that nothing was seen in the Cylinder but a Woman's Head,
without a Mouth: Afterward, having laid his Hand upon one of the Eyes, that
were painted on the Piece, I could not see any thing in the Cylinder, but one
Eye. I never in all my Life time, added the Duke du Maine, have seen such a
curious Piece in the Optics. The Ladies, who began to be impatient to hear the
Explication of it, could not forbear interrupting the Prince, desiring him that
he would be pleased to explain to 'em the several Pieces, of which this Picture
was compo'd. Ladies, said the Duke du Maine, the 6 Eyes denote, that the Women
would see all Things; the 3 Mouths, that they always begin to Talk first, and
leave off last; the 3 Noses give us to understand, that they have a very quick
Scent, and will not be easily deceived; the Peacock shows their Vanity; and the
Magpye signifies, that they are always Chattering and Quarrelling: Lastly, the
Chimney and Smoke are a Representation of their Inconstancy and fickle Humor;
and all these Qualities are so essential to the Perfection of the Head,
represented in the Cylinder; that if but any one of 'em be wanting, the whole
is imperfect, as I have told you before.

We must confess, said all the Ladies in general, this Picture has somewhat
surprising in it. You must look upon it, added the Marshal, as a Panegyric, in
Short-hand-Writing, upon your Sex. It Is true, Sir, replied Madam de Tilladet,
but this Encomium only expresses our bad Qualities. What, said she, addressing
her self to the Duke du Maine, Sir, will not you do us the favor as to give us an
account of some of your Optics, which may make amends for this, by
representing us on the best side, with all those rare Accomplishments which
captivate your Hearts, and make you our Slaves to wear our Chains, and to pay
us Hommage. This is true, answered the Duke du Maine, but it is much against
our Will. At the same time, Ladys, added he, I would not have you think me so
vain, as to pretend to set up for a Critic, or to draw upon my self the ill
Will, as poor Orpheus did heretofore, of so strong a party, as the Women are.
Whatever I have said, was done merely out of complaisance, and to satisfy your
Curiosity.

Madam de Tilladet seeing how dextrous the Duke was at turning the matter from
himself, and in making his Apology to the fair Sex, for whom he had always
shown a most particular esteem, being one of the most Gallant Princes about the
Court; told him, That 'twas resolved among 'em, that all the Ladys there
present, should go to Morrow, in a Body to the Abbot Tallement, on purpose to
ask him, whether, what the Prince had related to 'em, were really so; and that
if they could get this Picture, so injurious to their Sex, into their Hands,
they should make a Bonfire of it, and burn it in some public Place, as it is
usual to do with Books that treat of Magic. I must confess to you, Ladies,
replied the Duke du Maine, that I took it no otherwise at first, till the Abbot
Tallement discovered to me the whole business, and convinced me, that every
particular of it, was a necessary consequence of the Rules of Optics, He
showed me another Piece, no less surprising than the former, and which seems to
contain somewhat supernatural in its kind: It is a Venice Looking-glass, which
represents People that look into it, stark naked, If I were Monsieur de
Boufflers, I would go thither with Mademoiselle de Grammont. This Looking-glass
will give him a faithful representation of those Beauties, which young Ladys
take so much pains to hide from their Lovers: And at once looking only in the
Glass with his Mistress, he may learn more in one Moment, than two Months
Courtship, and serious Conversation are able to teach him. Away, away, with
these Triffles, answered Mademoiselle de Grammont, with a charming and pleasant
Air, the Marshal has no occasion either for a Confident or for a Looking-Glass
to discover my Defects. He is wise enough of himself, not to be surprised or to
be imposed upon.

Ladys, replied the Duke du Maine, since these pieces of Gallantry do put you
out of Humor, come let us have a touch at Morality. The Abbot, said he, showed
me among the rest, another Piece, which was no less surprising than the former,
and as far as I remember, I never saw any thing finer, and more curious in my
Life time. Well, let us hear what it is, said Monsieur de Boufflers, but let me
desire you, Sir, not to offer any thing, to affront the fair Sex: I must needs
tell you, that I am so very nice in that point, that I declare to you, I shall
be ready to revenge their Quarrel, and even not to grudge, to employ my Sword
in their just Defense, if there should be occasion for it. Wherefore Sir, added
he smiling, and you had best have a care what you do. No, no, replied the Duke
du Maine, this has no relation more to one Sex than the other; but all People
are concerned in it.

The Abbot Tallement showed me a large Painting, divided into three Columns: In
the middle Column on the right hand, was represented, first of all, our Holy
Father the Pope, as being the Chief of the Church, after him follow all the
Cardinals; Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Abbots, Curates, and in general,
all the rest of the Members of the Clergy. In the Column on the right side, you
might see a great many Portraitures, representing Temporal Princes, as
Emperors, Monarchs, Kings and other Princes, followed by the Nobility and a
multitude of Courtiers. The Column, which was on the left side, was filled up,
with the third Estate representing the Courts of Justice; where you might see
the Pictures of Lords Chief Justices and Judges, Masters of the Rolls,
Counselors, Attorneys, Sollicitors, Notaries, Tipstaffs, Sergeants and such
like. So, that this whole Piece was filled up, with an infinite number of all
sorts of Persons belonging to the three Estates, every one in his Habit,
according to the rank he bore in the Church, in the State or in the Courts of
Judicature. The Abbot, after I had taken notice of the Medley, desired me to
put one Eye to a Hole at one end of the Picture, and from thence to look upon
the Cylinder which he had placed opposite to it, at the other end of it: All
these different Objects, having made a reflection upon the Cylinder of polished
Steel, this Instrument did represent, no otherwise, than in a Looking-glass, a
Death's Head, extremely well done; to put us in mind of the end of all Mortal
Men, who in what station soever, must all pay this last Tribute to Nature.

I assure you, said Monsieur Boufflers, this seems to me, to be one of the most
curious Pieces that ever was made in the World, and I will give you my Word,
that Mademoiselle de Grammont and I, will to Morrow, do our selves the Honor
to go and wait upon the Abbot, and take a view of all his Curiosities. But that
which is most admirable in this Piece, is, added the Duke du Maine, that if you
cover any part of these Pictures, contained in the three Columns, with your
Hand; the Death's Head, which is reflected in the Cylinder, appears defective,
and there is some part or another of it wanting; to convince us, that none can
be exempted from the unavoidable necessity of Dying. We entreat you, said the
Ladies, directing their Discourse to the Duke du Maine, let us not talk any
more of this doleful and frightful Subject, Death. Let us rather return to our
Jollities, and divert our selves with some Pleasant Story or another; they are
most seasonable at this time, when we are met together, on purpose to be merry
and pleasant. Mademoiselle de Grammont is most concerned in the matter, and it
is chiefly upon her account, that the Ladys desire it. Because you will have it
so, said the Duke du Maine, I will relate to you another very extraordinary
Story, which perhaps you will look upon, as one of the most refined pieces of
Necromancy; the whole being altogether full of Gallantry.

The Abbot, continued he, having given us a view of all the Rarities in his
Closet, took me on one side, whispering me in the Ear. Pray my Lord, bring the
Ladys who came along with you, into this Spacious Appartment, I have a mind to
show you the Masterpiece of all my Rarities; but don't you speak one word to
'em, you will divert your self extremely, provided you let 'em know nothing of
the matter; because they will perhaps be unwilling to see this Curiosity which
indeed, will be very well worth your trrouble, and will undoubtedly give you
more satisfaction, than any thing that you saw before. I went therefore, to
fetch in the Ladys, and having taken the Duchess de Chevreuse by the Hand, to
lead her into a very fair and spacious Room, which was just by; the rest of the
Ladys followed us thither. No sooner were we all entered the Room, but the
Abbor, having drawn a Curtain, and opened certain Windows; we looked into a
great Plain, which extended it self beyond our Sight, and which appeared to us,
to be one of the best and fairest Landskips in the World.

Sir, said the Abbot to me, do you see that Countryman and young
Country-damsel there in the Meadows, I will make 'em come hither in an instant,
in the same moment that I give the Word of Command, they shall come and present
themselves in this Looking-glass. This was an extraordinary fine Venice-glass,
of about six Foot high, covered with a green Curtain; the Ladys, who suspected
some trick or another, began to laugh, but at the same time, gave the Abbot to
understand, that they were very impatient to see the issue of it, because the
Peasant and the Damsel were at above a Mile's distance from us: The Abbot, to
satisfy the curiosity of the Ladys, who were very eager, took a Speaking
Trumpet (the Invention of Sir Samuel Moreland, an English Knight) and
pronounced these Words; You young Damsel, pull off your shoes, and come hither.
The Damsel obeyed immediately, and at that very instant, appeared in the
Looking-glass. For the Abbot, having drawn away the Curtain, which covered the
Glass, and told the Ladys, that they should take notice of what they saw; they
were very much surprised to see the same Damsel stark Naked in the Glass, which
made 'em put their hands before their Eyes, though at the same time, they laughed
as heartily as they could. Sir, said they, we have enough of this, it being
more than we are able to comprehend; and we know our shapes well enough before
hand, without your Enchanting Looking-glass. Lady's answered the Abbot, this is
not all, I have another diversion for you, before we part. You Damsel, said he,
put on your Clothes, and go from whence you come. This being done, he again
took his Speaking Trumpet, and having called the Peasant, he immediately
appeared in the Looking-glass in the like manner, without any thing to cover
his Nakedness; at this Spectacle, the Ladys with blushes in their Cheecks, run
quite to the other end of the Room, though they could not forbear laughing at the
same time.

For my part, said the Duke du Maine, I did all that lay in my Power, to make
the Ladys return to the Looking-glass, but could not prevail upon 'em. At last
having diverted our selves with these several sorts of most surprising
Adventures; the Abbot commanded the Peasant to take his Clothes, and be gone
immediately, which he did in an instant, and flew away from our Eyes like
Lightning. Good faith! Sir, said I, you are more skilful than all the Magicians
put together; I wish I could learn your Art, the better to divert some Ladys at
Court, who sometimes give me the Honor of a Visit. Thus Ladys, continued the
Prince, I have given you a very diverting Story; which, methinks, should please
you all, and if you will vouchsafe to take my advice, I would have every one of
you get you such a Looking-glass in your Chamber, in which you may be able to
take a full view of your Beauty, and of those Charms that make Men to be such
Fools, as to run after you, and which you are always so careful to hide from
our sight. Sir, answered Madam de Tilladet, if such sort of Pictures were
exposed to public view, they would appear frightful to you; it is more safe to
have 'em only in your imagination. Nothing is more in esteem among us, than
what is concealed from us, and it is perhaps that which makes Love relish so
well, and draws that respect from you, which you pay to the fair Sex.

Supper-time being come, the Company broke up, leaving the Marshal de Bouffiers
and Mademoiselle de Grammont by themselves, who spent the rest of the time in
Amourous, Caresses; for Monsieur Boufflers did not part with his Mistress till
pretty late at Night, when he went home to Bed; but his Head being disturbed
with Amorous Fancies, he was not able to rest all the Night, sometimes he
flattered himself that in time, his Mistress's Heart would be mollifi'd, who
hitherto looked but coldly upon him, yet so as to treat him Honorably and
Civilly. I want something else besides Complements, said he, this not being
that which can make me happy.

Thus he tormented himself Day and Night, which made him appear in a very
Melancholy and Languishing condition, his Countenance being quite altered, so
as to be scarce like himself; which at last turned to his Advantage; for
Mademoiselle de Grammont having taken particular notice of it, begun to
Commiserate his Condition, and one time when he complained to her of his
Sufferings; Truly Sir, said she, I am moved with Compassion for you, and I
begin to hear some share in your Trouble. She spoke these words with so sweet
and so charming an Air, that the Marshal did now no longer question, but that
he was beloved by her. Monsieur de Boufflers having received this assurance,
managed his Affairs with so much dexterity, that he at last overcame the rigor
of his fair Mistress.

The news being soon spread abroad, that he was upon the point of being
Married, every one came to Complement our two Lovers, and the King himself, who
had received the News from Madam Maintenon's own Mouth, spoke to our General,
concerning this Match, in very obliging Terms; which proved a means to engage
his Mistress more strictly to him than before. They spent their whole time in
nothing but Feasting, going abroad, Balls, Plays; and such like diversions,
which made a great noise about the Town, being all performed with a great deal
of Magnificence; so that this Conquest cost our General not only a great deal
of Trouble, but also good store of Money. In the mean time, in regard that he
was of a very hot Constitution, and that his Mistress was the nicest Woman in
the World, as to the point of granting him the least Favor, besides that he
bore so extraordinary a Respect to her, as scarce to dare to steal a Kiss from
her; he resolved (in order to allay a little his natural Heat) to court a
pretty young Damsel, whom he had seen at Boulogn, not far from Paris,
imagining, that since his Match was so far advanced, such a piece of Gallantry,
if it should happen to be discovered, could not prove any Obstacle to it.
Conform bly to this Resolution, he often went to visit this Damsel, disguised
in the Habit of a Countryman, for fear of being known by any one, to his
Prejudice.

One Day, Mademoiselle de Grammont happened to go to the same Village, with
some of her Friends, to see a Nurse who had had the Nursing of her, when the
Marshal came just from visiting his Country-Mistress; and having been observed
by the Nurse, Pray, Mademoiselle, said she, look upon that young
Country-Fellow, what a genteel Spark he is; he comes very frequently of late to
that House, to see a certain young Damsel, the handsomest, I believe in a
hundred Miles round. The Marshal was so near 'em, that they might easily
discern his Face, which made Mademoiselle de Grammont say to one of the Ladies
that was with with her; I vow my Dearest he is as like the Marshal de
Boufflers, as one drop of Water to another. The Marshal having heard his Name
mentioned by his Mistress, immediately scamper'd out of the Village, to an
adjacent Wood, where he changed his Country-Habit, for his own Clothes, which
he had left there before, with one of his Servants.

Mademoiselle de Grammont, being curious without any further design, having not
the least suspicion that it was the General, whom she had seen come out, would
needs go to see this fair Country-damsel; and was extremely taken with her
charming Beauty. Her Nurse told her, that she was natural Daughter of the Count
de Harcourt, by whom her Mother, who was as Beautiful as the Daughter, had had
two or three Children; and as to the Countryman, who came to Visit her, no
body could tell who he was, but that he was generally believed to be some
Person of Quality under a disguise. Mademoiselle de Grammont, making no further
reflections upon the matter, only told the Nurse, That she could not imagine
who he should be, but that he resembl'd as much as one Brother does another,
the Person she had spoke of before. O! replied the good Woman, embracing her, I
have heard it talked of among us, that you are going to be Married to that
Monsieur Boufflers, who makes so much noise in the World. Indeed it is much
discoursed of, said she, my Friends are busy in making up the Match: if it
comes to a conclusion, you shall be at the Wedding. That is evident of it self,
answered she, What? a Child, that I have so carefully Nursed, should she not
let me have a share in that merry day? Alas! if your dear Father, the late
Marshal de Grammont, God bless his Soul, had been alive, I should have sat at
the upper end of the Table; Ay marry should I, because he had promised it me a
great while ago. Don't trouble thy self upon that account, Foncette, replied
Mademoiselle de Grammont, taking her by the hand, thou shall certainly be
there, though not just at the upper end of the Table, for thou know that that
belongs to the Mistress of the Feast; all my Kindred have a kindness for thee
for my sake. When she had spoke these words, she put a Piece of Gold in her
Hand, and so went in her Coach with her Companions, and an Aunt of hers,
directly taking their way to Paris.

But the Marshal de Boufflers, who had watched their coming back upon the road,
accosting 'em on foot with one Servant only, they desired him to come into
their Coach; Mademoiselle de Grammont, having asked him, what could induce him
to take so long a walk? I do not very well know, Mademoiselle, said he, rubbing
his Forehead, and looking upon her with a passionate Eye, those Commotions
which Love has raised in my Heart, have such strange Influences over my Spirit,
that I think the solitary Deserts and frightful Forests, the most suitable to
my Humor. The Ladies, who were present, did not in the least question but that
this Complement was addressed to Mademoiselle de Grammont, who, at this time,
had the least share in it; his Mind being at that instant, taken up with the
Beauty of his Country-damsel, whom nevertheless, he was fain to abandon at
least for some time, for fear of spoiling the whole Business, if the Hony-Pot
should be discovered: In the mean while finding, that by the overflowing Heat
of his Love, he had spoiled the Country-damsel's Shape, he thought it most
convenient to provide her a Husband, before it was too late; and having found
out a Water-man of his Acquaintance belonging to the River Seine, he gave him
20 or 30 Pistoles, as a Portion with his Wife, to make him some amends for his
Horn-work, which he afterward took care to make a regular Fortification, by
adding several new Bastions and Half-moons in the Front of the Place.

Some Weeks after, Mademoiselle de Grammont, who had not yet forgot the
beautiful Country-damsel she had seen at Boulogn, talking of the Gallantries of
the Count de Harcourt, whose Mistress this young Woman's Mother had been, told
the Marshal, that she had seen there, a certain Man as like him as could be in
all respects, except in his Clothes, which were very ordinary. The Marshal, who
otherwise is not very shamefaced, blushed at these words; his Heart accusing
him of Treachery, the common vice of Men, and our fair Lady having observed his
Color to go and come, Ha! said she, one while a Flush appears in your Face,
and anon you grow pale again. Sir, surely you have had a finger in the Pie, as
the saying is, and indeed your looks betray your Guilt. And what Guilt pray,
Mademoiselle, replied the Marshal? No less than high Treason, said she with a
smile; Possibly you have infringed that fidelity which you have so often sworn
to me you would keep inviolably. Certainly, my most charming Creature, answered
the Marquess de Boufflers, you are only in jest, and throwing himself at her
Feet, is it posible, said he, for you to imagine, that any thing in the World,
could appear to me more worthy of all my care, and that does better deserve the
entire disposal of my Heart, than you? O! do me more Justice, or else I shall
not be able to live any longer. Then I would have you live; said she, although
possibly I might be mistaken, yet I am willing to believe you the most innocent
of all Men. Can any thing be paralleled to my present happiness, cried the
Marshal transported with Joy; Since I have met with a Person endu'd with so
much Good Nature and Generosity, and capable of curing her self so soon, of the
Distemper of Mistrustfulness, which is certainly the greatest Evil that can
befall any one in this World. For either it is requisite to rely upon a
Confident or not, and if one cannot put trust in a Friend, what satisfaction
can there be in this Life? You say very well, Sir, replied the young Lady, but
you will allow, that if one loves a Friend, one is very unwilling to lose him,
and that is the true cause of Mistrustfulness. Then you own you love me a
little, said the Marshal, looking upon her very tenderly. At this very Moment
my adorable Deity it is, that I can properly call my self happy. And do you
question it, Sir, replied Mademoiselle de Grammont, is it possible to marry a
Man, without loving him? Indeed that is a thing, I could never do; I should not
be of the same mind, as some of our light House-wives are, who Marry a Man
merely to serve 'em as a Cloak for their extravagancies. Your Gallants,
continued she, will find very slender entertainment with me. When I am Married
my Husband is to be my All in All, and I should think my self very happy, if I
were sole Mistress of his Affections. And as I never can love any Man besides
him, whom my Destiny has provided for me; so he ought not to doubt, but that I
shall always be entirely at his Devotion. And is it easy to be believed,
Mademoiselle, replied Boufflers, that a Person so adorable at your self, whose
singular Merits are so well known to all the World, and who has been always
surrounded with so many Adorers; should never as yet have had a kindness for
any Gentleman before? Sure your Heart must needs be made of a very hard sort of
Metal, to have been Proof against so many Sighs and Tears, as have been so
lavishly bestowed upon you. Certainly it is almost past belief, considering you
are so Lovely, so Engaging and Transcendently Beautiful. Nothing is more true
than what I have told you, Sir, replied the fair Lady, and I did not deliver my
Mind with so much freedom, on purpose to be complemented by you; but only to
let you know, that I shall for ever place all my Joy and Felicity in preserving
my Heart entire for him, who has so much deserved it.

But now the time of Courtship being passed, it was thought convenient to come
to the Consummation of a Match, in which the Court took so much concern; and
the Marshal was preparing to go to Church with Mademoiselle de Grammont; which
he did one Morning early at six a Clock, when they were Married by the
Archbishop of Paris in the Church of our Lady. The Ceremony being over, and the
Marshal thinking himself now at the very point of casting Anchor in the Port of
Felicity, he could not without a great deal of affliction understand from
Mademoiselle de Grammont, that she was not at present in a condition to go to
Bed with him, being disturbed at that time, with a certain Infirmity incident
to all young Women once a Month: The Marshal would have made a Jest of it, but
his Lady being positive in her Resolution, he was so Complaisant, as to
languish three Days longer. The next Day after the Wedding, a great number of
Persons of Quality, who were invited to a sumptuous Feast and Ball, that was to
be that Evening; came to Congratulate our Marshal for the happy Minutes he had
enjoyed the Night before with his Spouse; whom they looked upon as a Person so
full of Charms, as to be capable of giving all possible satisfaction, as to
what Men can imagine most delicious in Love; But he, who had not as yet tasted
of the Sweat-meat, received their Complements with so much coldness and
indifferency, that the whole Company was much surprised at it. The Count de
Montal at last, unto whom the Marshal, as to a most intimate Friend, had told
the business, unfolded the Riddle to some, who made themselves very merry with
it in our General's presence. The Marriage being at last consummated with a
great deal of satisfaction on both sides, they received for 8 or 10 Weeks
successively, the Visits of most Persons of Quality at Court; and the Marshal
after having reaped the first Fruits of the Matrimonial State, was by virtue of
his Majesty's special Command, obliged to go to Flanders, not without a most
sensible regret of being forced so soon to quit his adorable Spouse.

FINIS.

