THE HISTORY OF THE Intrigues and Gallantries OF CHRISTINA, Queen of Sweden.

AND Of her COURT, whilst she was at ROME.

Faithfully Rendered into English, from the French Original.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1697.

To his Excellency CHARLES EARL OF Dorset and Middlesex, One of the Lords
Justices for the Administration of the Government, during the King's Absence.
Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
My LORD,
THE Queen of Sweden, who traveled so much, and spoke so many Languages, being
now the Subject of this present History, implores your Lordship's Protection,
having but newly learned to speak English: She comes not now as formerly, in
the Pomp and Splendour of a Crown, but to render an Account of her Actions,
which in her Lifetime, made so mighty a noise in the World; and which, though
they cannot be called altogether Innocent, are yet very diverting, and will, I
question not, afford a great deal of Pleasure and Delight to the Reader; there
being no Tragedy in her whole Life, except that of the Murder of the Marquis
Monaldeschi.

She always maintained the Majesty of a Queen, both in her Person and
Character, to the highest Degree; and her Wit and Parts were so very
extraordinary, that they raised the Admiration of all. Her Inclinations were
nice and curious, and her Passions strong and violent; but the Vanity and
Inconstancy of her Temper, would not suffer them to endure long; and she had
none of any Continuance, except that which she had for Chemistry, which lasted
even to her dying Day. The great Opinion she had conceived of her own Abilities
in all things, did very much contribute to the Cheat, she put upon her self in
this Affair, and caused her to be led by those wandering Experimentators, who
being deceived themselves, make no scruple to deceive others. The Author has
handled them very severely, and some of them no less than they deserve, and
especially such as those, the Queen of Sweden generally met with.

In short, as she was a Princess of a wonderful mixture, and strange variety,
there is something to be found in every turn of her Actions, so great and
surprising, that there needs more than a common Understanding, to make a right
Judgment concerning her. She cannot therefore be recommended to a fitter Hand
than your Lordship's, not only in regard of the Greatness of your Descent and
Original, but of your Candor, and good Humor, together with the Excellency of
your Parts, and that Exactness of Judgment, for which you are so justly
celebrated.

The Author of this History, spends a great deal of time, in describing the
Persons that composed her Court, and their Adventures are so interwoven with
the Queens Affairs, that he could not avoid it; but both the Characters, and
Adventures are so pleasant, that they make a sufficient Recompense; and indeed
the History would not have been complete without it. They are filled up with a
great number of Delightful Intrigues, and odd Circumstances, and most of the
Accidents are so entertaining, that I persuade my self that your Lordship, who
is so Communicative and Generous upon all Occasions, will permit me to make use
of so great a Name, to recommend this Translation to them, who cannot, with
your Lordship, discern the Beauties of the Original, and will pardon the
Ambition, with which I subscribe my self,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Dutiful and Obedient Servant, Phil. Hollingworth.

TO THE READER.
A French Abbot, of great Merit and Understanding, returning from Rome, with
the French Cardinals, from the Election of Innocent XII. showed me some curious
Manuscripts, which he had obtained during his stay in Italy; and among others,
this of the Intrigues and Gallantries, of Christina Queen of Sweden, and her
Court, while she staid at Rome. I presently became of his Opinion, and judged
them worthy of the Press, believing it would be a pleasure to the Public, to
communicate the particular Circumstances of the Life of this incomparable
Queen, which none till this present time have had any knowledge of. If this
Work be received well, as I hope it will, I will afterward Print the Maxims and
Sentences of this Queen, which have the force and Spirit of those of the Duke
de Rochefoucaults, as also the Conclaves of the last Popes, differing very much
from those already Printed, and other curious Munuscripts which do well deserve
to appear in Public.

Though I have not seen this Work, but in the French Language, yet the
Gentleman who gave it me, assures me, that the Original was Italian, and found
among other Papers of the Author, who died at Rome, a little before the Abbot
who brought it, came from thence. One may easily see that it is nothing but a
Translation, by many Words an^ improper Phrases, which are not French; but I
hope the Reader, will have the Goodness to excuse it, and content himself with
the Truth, seeing he may be sure to find it here, without the least Disguise or
Deceit. More time will be requisite, to finish the other Manuscripts which are
preparing, and will be published quickly after this Work; whose Author was one
of Queen Christina's Officers, and of sufficient Esteem and Credit with her, to
have had a share in her Secrets. It will be seen clearly enough in the reading
of the History, though he endeavors to persuade us, that he was never in her
Service. Flattery has no part in his Writing, as may be found by his Complaints
against Cardinal Azzolini, and oftentimes against the Queen her self, who
committed all to his Eminence, without leaving any thing, for her Domestics to
do. And it may be seen, that the Affection, which he has for his Mistress,
makes him often spare her, without revealing all those ill things, which he
very well knew; and could easily have given an Account of.

THE HISTORY OF THE Intrigues and Gallantries OF CHRISTINA Queen of SWEDEN, and
of her Court, whilst she was at ROME.
ROME which is the Center of Religion, is also the Theater of the finest
Comedies in the World: And there did Queen Christina behave her self with so
agreeable a Demeanor, that I believe it will very much contribute to the
Diversion of the Public, without shocking the Majesty she always upheld, if I
give an Idea or Description of her particular Actions, and to her Heroic ones,
add certain little Enjoyments, which are not to be accounted altogether ill, in
a Person who had quitted a Throne for a private Life, that she might give her
self a little more liberty. The Great Ones have their Frailties as well as the
less; and when we consider them only, in the Splendour wherewith they are
surrounded, Vice passes oftentimes for Virtue: But when we bring them to a
narrower Examination, we shall easily discover those great Passions, which make
them set all their Engines at work to satisfy them. History which flatters
not, renders Justice to all, because she speaks nothing but what Truth
suggests. It Is Truth which brings all things to Light, and without it we know
nothing certain. She appears in all her Simplicity in the History of the
retired Life of Christina Alexandra, Queen of Sweden, and of the Goths and
Vandals. There is enough said there to inform the Curious, and show the
Frailties which appeared in the private Life of a Princess, who in her public
one demonstrated so much Greatness of Soul. Her History is writ by too many
Authors of different Nations and Languages to make mention of in this place.
They all agree in Matters of Fact, and we may follow them without any s^ruple.
But seeing they have spoke nothing of the secret Intrigues of this Princess,
known only to her Domestics, we question not but that it will oblige the
Public to communicate these Memoirs; and we shall here find that Princes do
easily impose upon us, and what is oftentimes attributed to Policy, is yet
nothing else but the Effect of irregular Passion.

Christina Alexandra has perhaps been the Princess, who has most of all imposed
on us, and made her self most talked of in the World. She knew so well to
assert a certain Character of Greatness in her whole Personage that she charmed
all Mankind. Her Wit caused Admiration in all who were able to comprehend it;
and certain Graces sparkled in her Face, which caused Love in all that viewed
them: Nevertheless she had more agreeableness in the one than the other; and
her extraordinary Qualities hindered People from reflecting upon the real
Defects of her Person. She was a little bent, not to say crooked: Her Stature
was middle-sized, inclining to be fat^; and yet she was at a reasonable stand
as to that Point: Her Complexion was the finest in the World: Her Eyes were
beautiful and sparkling; her Lips red; she had good Teeth, and an Aquiline
Nose; her Neck and Hands white, though she never washed them in any thing but
cold Water. Besides these Excellencies of her Sex, which made her a Beauty in
her own Nature, she had some of the best Qualities of ours, such as Courage and
Undauntedness, with an admirable knowledge of most things; a great dexterity in
the Conduct of the weightiest Affairs, as also of the most curious. And in a
word, she had almost all the choicest Qualifications of both Sexes. The
greatness of her Wilt, the facility of her Genius, the exactness of her
Thoughts, the delicacy of her Expressions, and last of all a prodigious Memory,
which made things past appear as present: All these rare Talents should I say,
or rather all these extraordinary Qualities did so astonish all that approached
her, that they were not capable of attending any other thing. And yet those who
would not suffer themselves to be so easily led away without a nicer
Inspection, could find considerable Faults in her, how great and transcendent
soever her Wit were. She so much loved her Pleasure, that she observed no
Measures in the taking of it, and would Debase her self so far as to be
Familiar with many of her Officers. Her Domestics, who would take all sorts of
Liberty with both Sexes, were sometimes Doubtful of their own, and her greatest
Favorites have oftentimes found her Light, Inconstant, Contradictory, and
always full of her self; things scarce Supportable even in Princes themselves.

The Greatness of this Princess's Soul manifested it self in the generous
laying down of her Crown, and quitting her Kingdoms to Carolus Gustav^s, Prince
Palatine of the Rhine. Every Body was Surpised at it, but no one could tell
the Causes and Reasons which induced her to it: But the Queen, excellently
skilled in the Art of Dissimulation, alleged many, which being very specious,
made her the more ^steem^d. For she having Knowledge in History as well as
Languages, ^ad read, that some Princes who had been Crowned with Glory, but
^ired with the noise of Arms, and the trouble of Royalty, chose to retreat
toward the end of their Lives, into places separate from the Commerce of
Mankind, to live a more easy and quiet Life. But this Example was not the
motive of her Retirement; for she was then in the flower of her Age, and had
scarce tasted the Pleasure of Reigning: Nor was it want of Success, which has
often been the cause of the precipitate Retreat of Princes, fearing to tarnish
the glory of their former Actions, by the shame of the ^atter. For Fortune had
smiled upon our Queen even till that present time. Her People were Victorious
over their Enemies. She was the Refuge of the Princes of Europe, and indeed
every thing conspired to make her Feared of the one, and Esteemed by the other.
Notwithstanding all this, she took the Resolution of quitting Sweden, and
advancing the Prince Palatine of the Rhine, who was next Heir to the Throne.
Her Subjects opposed themselves, and represented the miserable Effects of it;
and redoubled the Esteem and Respect which they always had for her Majesty.

It was noised in the World, That she being disgusted with the Lutheran
Religion, had a design to make Profession of the Roman Catholic, which was not
agreeable to the Laws of the Sweden, and that she had rather follow the motives
of her Conscience, than preserve her Crown. For my part, I should believe with
others, that this was the true motive of her Abdication, if she had not
afterward given the Lie to those great things she at first had done for God's
sake. But being thoroughly informed in all her Secret Intrigues, I believe that
Love, which very often ascends the Throne with Princes, was the cause which
made Queen Christina Descend. She Loved Count Magnus of Gardia so desperately,
who durst not answer her Passion, that whereas Kings elsewhere make Queens by
Marriage, she endeavored to make a King on the same manner. But not being able
to bring the Estates of Sweden to Consent to this, she took so great a despite
at it, that she resolved to live for the future in a Melancholy Single State
However, she had neither inclination nor disposition to pass the rest of her
days in Retirement, being persuaded, as she said, that Virtue did not consist
in being Severe or Rough; nor in retiring from Humane Society, to seek God in
the Horror of Solitude; And that it was the way to draw and collect a Man to
himself, rather than to Unite him to God. Adding, That since there was innocent
Diversion to be had in Society, and that Pleasures were permitted to the World,
one might find God among Men without refusing them. So that acting upon ^his
fine Principle, she took a resolution to quit the troublesome business of a
Crown, that she might give her self up the more entirely to her own Fancies.
But withal thinking to improve her Wit by enlightening her Reason, she intended
to Travel all over Europe, for Rules to perfect her Manners, to be built upon
the different Maxims of those People among whom she came. All this (joined with
the Secret of making her self universally talked of) was the reason of calling
in Prince Carolus Gustavus to Reign in her place. However, she reserved to her
self the Revenue of Pomerania, and other Estates of the Crown of Sweden, in
Germany. Thus she renounced her Royal Dignity, at 27 Years of Age, Anno Dom.
1654. and a little after left Sweden, going into Germany, which she traversed
almost throughout, and when she came to Instruck, abjured her Religion: After
which, shen went into Italy, in the Year 1655. You may easily imagne, that she
was every where received with the Honors due to her Quality, without being at
the trouble of a particular Recitation. We would willingly have related what
passed in her Voyages, if there had been any thiny that would have stirred up
the Curiosity of the Reader, but she mush have made a longer stay in all
Cities, to have entered upon Intrigues, and therefore this was reserved for
Rome, where she would be more Easy.

Pope Alexander the VIIth, who promised himself great Matters from a Queen who
was become a new Convert, gave order to receive and treat her Royally through
all the Teritories of the Ecclesiastical State, and himself gave order for her
entry into Rome; which came very near to the magnificence of the Triumphs of
the Ancient Romans; but whether it were that she could not find what she sought
at Rome, or whether her Inconstancy would not suffer her to stay there for any
long time, she departed for France in the Year 1657. From whence she hoped to
^ind an easy Passage for Engiand. But Cromwell believing it to be done out of
Policy, and his Affairs being in a Staggering condition, refused to receive
into his new Estates, so unquiet and turbulent a Spirit as was that of the
Queen of Sweden. However she had ^ound in France wherewith to satisfy her self
for the shameful refusal she had met with in England, if she had known how to
manage it; for the King, as busy as he was, to make an end of a Civil War,
which had almost ruined his Kingdom, omitted nothing that might render France
agreeable to the Queen. And all the Princes after his Example, crowded to Visit
a Princess who had obtained so great a Reputation among among all Nations. The
Men of Letters also made their Court, as well as the Persons of Quality, and
both the one and the other always departed well Satisfied in the Witty and
Learned Conversations they had with her. There was presently some Talk of her
Intrigues with certain Princes, whom she had inspired with Love; but these
Amors were only flying Gallantries, and there was none but the Duke of Guise
that had any Engagements with her for any considerable length of time.

This Prince who was as knowing and dextrous in Courtly Qualifications, as
skilful in Arms, was chose by the King to go and receive her upon the Frontiers
of France. He showed in his Voyage that he had lost nothing of his good Mein in
the Revolution of Naples, and that the Edge of his Passions were not quite
taken off by the Prison of Segovia; for he knew so well how to turn all things
to his own Advantage, that he quickly entered into the Queen's good Graces. She
was her self too well skilled in Gallantry, not to see the Duke's Passion
through all his Cares, and the great Honors he caused to be paid her in all
places where she passed. The particular Distinction which she made of this
Prince, did confirm that it was not reported without a probable appearance,
that an Intrigue was formed in this Voyage. On the other hand, the coldness
which the Queen showed to her grand Usher, whom she had formerly Loved,
augmented the Suspicion, and made her Domestics believe that the Duke had
insensibly banished the Love of the Marquess Monaldeschi out of the Queen's
Heart. They were deceived in these Conjectures, as it often happens to those
who judge of every thing, without knowing any thing to the Bottom: For it was
no new Engagement the Queen had, which made her neglect him, but the indiscreet
Conduct of Monaldeschi. This Italian Gentleman had forgot, it seems, that
Policy which makes a particular Character of the People of his Coutry. Some
Letters which the Queen had writ to him, fell into his Enemies hands, who sent
them into France to the Queen. The Cardinal was accused of it, and the
Suspicion perhaps was not ill founded. But however it were, the Queen
Sacrificed this once admired Love, to the Outrage done to her Honor, without
any regard either to the delight she had taken in his Person, or the Laws of
the Realm where she then was. This lofty Princess believed, that because she
was a Queen, she by her own Power, might do her self Justice upon a Person who
had discovered her Weakness; and her Resentment was so great, and so much to
the Quick, that she passed over all Laws, in erecting a kind of Sovereign
Tribunal, where he was Condemned, as himself declared to some, without being
guilty of any other Crime, than answering to the first Advances that this
Princess made to him. This Assassination committed in the Gallery of Hearts, so
called, in the Royal Palace of Fountain Bleau, sounded so ill in the World,
that the Court could not but disapprove so Inhumane an Action.

Our cruel Lover being come to her self, after she had dipped her Hands in the
Blood of a Man whom she was often accustomed to Caress, saw that she now had
lost her self in the Esteem of one of the most Splendid Courts of the World,
and was also constrained to leave France, which was, as the confessed, the
finest and most agreeable part of Europe, adding, that Paris was the Seat of
Pleasures, and the Center of fine Wits. That the Court of France was the most
Magnificent in all Europe; and that there was more Politeness there, than in
any other place of the World. However, the Season then, was not at all proper
for Intrigues of Love; for although the Capital City was Free and at Ease, all
was yet in Confusion upon the Frontiers, and the Nobles were more employed to
follow Mars amidst the dangers of War, than to prosecute the Pleasures of Venus
in the Streets of the Ladies of Paris. Well, she went away at last, though with
much difficulty, which was very happy for her, had she been able by distance,
to extinguish the Reproaches she had justly drawn upon her self, by the violent
Death of the Marquess Monaldeschi. And after all, she has not been able to
hinder Historians from transmitting to Posterity a Fact which should teach
Youth to bridle their Passions, by showing them, that this was only Love
changed into Hatred; That offended Love sets every thing at work to Revenge it
self, And that such Amors do often end in a fatal Catastrophe.

After this, Queen Christina took her way toward Rome, with a design to end
her Days there, but the Plague, which afflicted it, Anno 1659, kept her along
time in the City of Pesaro, and in some other places of the Ecclesiastical
State, till this Lash of the Almighty being taken away, she might return in
Safety to Rome.

Though her second Entry into the Capital City of the World, came not near the
Pomp of the first, it was however very Magnificent. A great many of the
Nobility went to meet her out of the City, and to give her a welcome Reception,
and she had the general Acclamations of all sorts of People. Immediately after
she came, she put her Court into good Order, taking Persons of the first
Quality for Gentlemen and Pages; but had so little Economy in her House, and
made so extravagant an Expense, that her Revenue was not able to Maintain so
numemerous a Court. And being always in Debt, she was necessitated to Pawn her
Plate, as she had done her Jewels, for Money to pay off Bills. All which, the
Pope understanding, gave her Cardinal Azzolini to be her Director, and
Intendant of her House. This Wise and Prudent Oeconomist, by retrenching part
of the foolish and unnecessary Expenses of the Queen's Palace, put things into
Order in a little time, and by receiving her Majesty's Effects, instead of
being in Debt as before, he so disposed Matters, that she had always a ready
Cash.

This wise and able Politician never opposed himself to the Queen's Will, but
on the contrary, gave free consent to what Designs soever she had. And because
he knew her Fancy, made her House finer and more sumptuous than ever, advancing
Money of his own when the Queen's failed. By this means, he entered so far into
the Queen's good Graces, that she could never speak of him without
acknowledgment of his Kindness. But the Cardinal, who had more Contrivances in
his Head than one at a time, looked upon the Queen as a Person deserving to be
Beloved, without daring to declare himself a Lover; therefore studied to gain
her altogether by his Merit; And to make his Design take better Effect, he
never spoke to her but after he had been taking some great Care, or made some
particular Application about her Majesty's Domestic Affairs. The Queen, who
staid some time for nothing but his own Declaration to Surrender her self, at
last prevented him, by giving him Signs that he might be happy when he pleased;
and he knew well enough how to make use of the occasion, and followed her
Inclination, and so they first embarked in the business of an Amor.

Behold here what ill Will has made public concerning an Intrigue, which had
no other Witnesses but the Parties themselves, pretending there are such clear
Reasons of this Discovery, as will not suffer us to doubt the Truth of the
Matter: However thus it is, that all the World speaks about it.

This Conquest, supposing it true, dissipated all the Queen's Melancholy, so
that laying aside all care, she entertained no Thonght of any thing but her
Pleasures, and to inspire Love into her new Favorite. The specious pretense of
Business did facilitate their Interviews, so that they might lay their Heads
together, when they had a mind to take their fill of Pleasures, without
Reflection or Scandal. Nevertheless the Cardinal continued to have a great care
of the Queen's Affairs; but took upon him to speak with such Command, and in so
lofty a manner to the other Officers, that they concluded he was authorized by
the Queen to do it; and looking more narrowly into the Reason of this, they
found him to be as well the true Favorite, as the Intendant of the Queen. And
it was so managed by him, that no body durst speak of this Familiarity with
her. But what the Domestics durst not say then, Monsieur Coulange afterward
expressed in this Song. But her dear Azzolini in Rome
So charmed her with Delight,
From him she could not live a Day,
Nor pass a tedious Night.
In these few Words Monsieur Coulange has expressed very much, and withal
comprehended the Intrigue of the Cardinal with the Queen: But he says nothing
of the Cardinal's Character; which we must take in the Portraicture that
follows.

Cardinal Decio Azzolini, was born at Fermo an Archiepiscopal See in the Marca
Anconitana, Anno 1623. He was a handsome Person, tall, and well proportioned,
had black Hair, lively and sparkling Eyes; but his Nose was somewhat short, and
yet he might be said to have had a pleasant and happy Countenance. The
Qualifications of his Mind were extraordinary; He had so great a knowledge in
all good Literature, that scarce any of his Nation could equal him; and had a
Genius more adapted than any other to penetrate into the Sciences. And as our
Cardinal's Sphere wherein he moved was very large, it gave a large scope to his
Mind. He had an excellent Gaiety, Briskness, and Strength of Wit, spoke very
well on all Subjects, writ exactly, and was admired in Conversation. Which
Character agreed well enough with his Years; and though he was not altogether
the Person he seemed to be, was yet of great Advantage to him, to insinuate
himself into the Queen's Mind. He was not exempt from Faults; for he was of a
jealous and deceitful Temper; flexible and patient to excess, when his Affairs
required it; also covetous and biased to his own Interest, but of great
Ability in the management of the most difficult Matters, and in the discovery
of the most secret Intrigues. He owed his Cardinal's Cap to his Abilities this
way. For though he was of Quality by Birth, and that there had been a Cardinal
of his Name under Sextus V. He could not propose to obtain the Purple by his
Merit alone; and besides, he had taken up a ^ort of Life for a long time, which
seemed to be against his mind: For having gone through his Studies in the City,
where he was born, the necessity of his Affairs obliged him to put himself into
the Service of some Prelate of Rome. And for this purpose he employed the
Credit of Cardinal Barbarini Patron of the French, and the Pope's Nephew, to
whom he was recommended. He got him entered into the Service of the Archbishop
Pancirola, Titular Patriarch of Constantinople, whom afterward the Pope sent
his Nuncio into Spain; Azzolini accompanied him in this Voyage, and performed
the Office of Secretary, during all the time of his Nunciature. In this place
he made it appear to his Patron, that he was capable of being something better
than a Scribe; and indeed from thence forward the Patriarch conceived so
advantageous an Idea of him, that being promised to be a Cardinal, he made
Azzolini his Conclavist, after the Death of Urban the VIII.

Azzolini gave new and farther Proofs of his Abilities in this higher Station,
insomuch that in this Conclave, Innocent X. being created Pope, he sometime
after declared Cardinal Pancirola his prime Minister, in the room of Cardinal
Pamphilio his Nephew, who had left his Hat that he might espouse the Princess
of Rossano. Azzolini's Protector being thus raised to the highest Charge in the
Court of Rome, did not forget a Man whom he knew to be fit for great Employs,
and made him Secretary of State. This new Post furnished Azzolini with fair
Occasions of making himself known, by the management of his Patron's Favor:
But Fortune would not suffer him to enjoy it long, and the Death of this
Minister was enough to have shaken any other besides himself. But he had the
good luck to please the Pope; and the Holy Father taking him into his
Protection, put him immediately into the Prelature, by declaring him
Chamberlain of Honor, and permitting him in the Interim to exercise the Charge
of Secretary of State. Afterward he was made Secretary of the Breves of
Princes; and he acquitted himself so well in this Office, that the Pope called
him his Eagle. These Breves were full of fine Thoughts, and all so nobly
expressed, that one might take a great pleasure in reading them several times
over. However Azzolini did not limit himself to these Breves; but fearing that
his 2d. Protector might fail him in the middle of his Fortune, as the first had
done, he endeavored by all Methods to advance himself; and, in the end found a
favorable opportunity of doing it upon the Ruins of another.

Pope Innocent X. having no Nephew since the Marriage of Prince Pamphilio,
adopted Cardinal Castalli his Favorite, and gave him all those Employs and
Offices which the Pope's Nephews usually enjoyed; and yet this ungrateful
Person ruined his Fortunes by his own Fault; for not being content with his
Prosperity, be thought to raise his Merit with the Spaniards, who had given him
the Protection of the Kingdom of Sicily. And this he endeavored, by revealing
Secrets of State to them, in prejudice of the Rights of the Holy See, because
the World believed that the Pope, during Masanello's Rebellion, had a Mind to
unite Naples to the Ecclesiastical State. And perhaps Astalli thought to come
to the Sovereign Pontificate by the help of the Spaniards, whose Favor he
underhand sought by such shameful Methods. Now the Pope coming to the knowledge
of the Matter, very much reproved him for it, and forbad him to see the Spanish
Ambassador any more. But it was to no purpose, which so angered his Holiness,
that he promised the Hat to any one that could discover the Intrigue of
Cardinal Astalli with the Spanish Ambassador. Azzolini who lived in the Palace,
took his Advantage of this Conjuncture, and observed him very narrowly, till he
discovered that every night about twelve of the Clock when the Pope was in Bed,
Astalli came came down from his Apartment, in the Palace of Montecavallo, by a
little winding pair of Stairs, at the bottom of which there was a Gate, leading
out to a narrow Street, through which he passed in disguise; and some paces
from thence went into an Hackney Coach, which conveyed him to the Spanish
Ambassadors: There he staid two or three hours, and returned back in the same
manner. Azzolini told the Pope of this, who caused Cardinal Astalli to be
seized, as he was thus returning one night from the Spanish Ambassadors; and
after he had upbraided him with Perfidiousness, discharged him from being of
his Family, took from him his Employments, and expelled him his Palace. After
which he fled into Sicily, and there died of Grief at his Bishopric of Catanea.

Presently after this, Azzolini appeared at Rome clothed in Purple, being made
a Cardinal for his having made himself a Spy. His Promotion was much talked of,
and surpised many People, and this his Vigilance in discovering Intrigues,
has been observed upon many other occasions, but particularly when he acted in
his own Interests; for he would then use all Arts imaginable, till he brought
his Designs about; and from hence it was that since that time we always saw him
make so great a Figure in the Sacred College. He was Secretary of State under
the Pontificate of Clement IX. and in the four Conclaves wherein he was
present, he had a good part in the Election of the Popes, Alexander VII.
Clement IX. Clement X. and Innocent XI. being one of the most esteemed
Cardinals of his Faction, which was called the Flying Squadron: But the best
Fortune that ever happened to him, was, that he knew the way so soon to obtain
the good Graces of Queen Christina; which he preserved all his Life; and she as
religiously kept her Word at her Death, which she had given him at the
beginning, that she would make him her Heir-General.

Gallantry was not the only Business of the Queen; for as she always affected
to pass for a great Wit, and pretended to an Understanding of all things,
(though some have reported that she had but a superficial knowledge of the
Sciences) ^he kept an Academy of good Literature in her Palace; where the most
learned Men in Rome came to submit their Works to her Judgment: And she would
listen with Pleasure to the immoderate Praises which were given her. Neither
was Chemistry one of her least divertisements: For though she were descended
from a Throne, she had not utterly cast aside the Love of Riches; and she
believed all her Life, that she should obtain immense Treasures by means of
this deceitful Art. Count Santarini entertained her with these Visions, and
caused her to convert a good part of her Revenue into Smoke. But if he
satisfied her in the foolish Passion which she had for Chemistry, he gave her
also a great deal of Vexation, by the Violences he was guilty of; for he
committed an infinite number of Disorders in Rome, under the Protection of her
Majesty. Nor was he the only irregular Person of her Court, for it seemed as if
the Queen's Officers thought they were no way obliged to observe the Laws, and
that they had a permission to do all manner of Ill, and Affront all the World.
They became the Protectors of Assassines and Thieves; and the Honor both of
Wives and Daughters submitted to their Tyranny. The Farmers of the Customs
complained that they could not pay their Rent, because the Merchants caused all
sorts of Goods to enter the City by the Queen's Coaches and Liverymen, which
hindered them from being Visited. Cardinal Farnese, the Governor of Rome, a
Person of Integrity, that rendered Justice to all, without respect of Persons,
Chastised some of the Queen's Domestics, for committing Crimes in contempt of
his Authority. But she who would play the Sovereign in the Dominions of others,
took it heinously, yet could have no redress herein from the Pope, who was
already tired with the complaints of their perpetual Disorders. So that now he
did not look upon her with the same Eye as before, and resolved to retrench the
greatest part of the Immunities, Exemptions, and Privileges he had given her,
seeing her Domestics did abuse them in so gross a manner. And though the Queen
was obliged to Cardinal Farnese, who as Major Domo to the Pope, had omitted
nothing for the Queen's good Reception, the first time she entered Rome: she
notwithstanding did what she could to give him Trouble and Vexation. For this
Cardinal being of the Family of the Duke of Parma, had the use of a House of
Pleasure belonging to the said Prince, which was situate near the Gate of St.
Pancras, a little above the Palace de Riarli, at Langara, which the Queen had
bought for her Life. The Cardinal coming often thither for benefit of the Air,
took a Pleasure in Beautifying the Garden; and because he wanted Water, agreed
with the Fountain-keepers of the Apostolic Chamber, to furnish him with two
Cocks of Water from the Fountain of Pope Paul V. which appears so Nobly above
St. Peter di Montozio. But at the same time, it seems he diminished the
Queen's, which he believed her Servants would not perceive, because the Queen
had abundan^^ of Water. The Gardiners neverthel^^ complained to her Majesty,
how th^^ had lessened the Current which serv^^ to water their Herbs and other
Plan^^^ Now, the Queen durst not complain (...) the Chamber it self, and
therefore thre^^ all her Choler at the Cardinal; and b^^cause she would spite
him, caused so^^ Palisadoes she had in her Garden, a^^ held up the Earth of the
curious Terra^^ which they call La vigna Farnese, to (...) pulled up; so that
it was ready to tumble into the Queen's Garden, that lay beneath it. His
Eminence would willingly have built a Wall, but could not effect it, by reason
of this Difference: however, he said pleasantly, That he had bought the Water
of the Apostolic Chamber, and that if the Queen had a mind to have more, and
would make her Application to the Officers that Rented out those Waters, she
might have enough to serve many Mills.

All these Vexations joined to the Queen's natural Inconstancy, made her
resolve to return once more into Germany. She therefore departed from Rome Anno
1666, dismissing Part of her Family, and to defray the Charge of her ^oyage,
borrowed Five thousand Crowns ^f Cardinal Antonio Barberini.

When she Arrived at Trent, the Mar^uiss del Monte who had been Banished ^ut of
the Ecclesiastical State, for certain Crimes, came to throw himself at ^er
Feet, and desire her Protection. The Queen admitted him into her Service, not
for any Merit of his Person, but being a great Boaster, she was glad to have so
brave a Champion in her Train. But that which more engaged her to Protect him,
was to do a despite to Cardinal Chigi^* which was butan ill return for the
great Honors and Respects Pope Alexander VII. of the same Family had done her
when she came first to Rome.

Horatio de Bourbon, Marquess del Monte, was of so Noble a Family, that he had
the Name and Arms which the Royal Family of France* for many Ages, had born
with so great Glory. The Bourbons of Ita-derive their Pedigree as high as
Charlemaigne: And though they do not descend from Robert Count of Clermont in
Boauvoisis, fourth Son of the King St. Lewis, from whom Henry the Great came in
a direct Line; yet are they come from Archambaud, Sire of Bourbon, that left
the Bourbonnois to Prince Robert, who Married his Daughter and sole Heir. And
it is supposed this Bourbon Archambaud, was a Prince of the Royal House of
France; that he descended from Lewis the Young; and was a Cade^, who in the
time of the Croisade, settled himself in Italy. They possessed the M^rquisate
Delm^nte in the App^nnine Mountains, under their Cousins of the Duchy of
Vrbino, Tuscany and Romania: It Is a Fief of the Empire, whose Investiture was
given by Charles the V. and as themselves pretend, they have been Masters of it
from the Reign of the Emperor Frederick II. However it be, this famous Person
having always a round Family, and their Marquisate being very Poor, situate
upon the Frontiers, and in inaccessible Places as well by Art as Nature, was
always a Retreat for the Banditti, of whom these Gentlemen became the
Protectors. And I have spoke with some Ancient People, who assured me, that the
Father of Marquess Horatio, and his Uncles devoured more Men for the sake of
their wealth, than any of the most famous Bandits in the Kingdom of Naples have
ever done. This Marquess Horatio, was a proper Man of a handsome Shape, had a
large Face, hollow Eyes, a hook Nose, a large Mouth and a forked Chin; his
Complexion was pale, and his Hair of an Ash Color; he was Nervous, and of a
strong Constution, having his Body Hairy, his Knees turning outward, and his
Feet inward; he had a precipitate Gate, and nothing great or Majestic in him;
he was neither very Fat, nor very Lean, a great Opiniator, and had a Womanish
Voice: He had the appearance of a good Man, but was wholly steered by his own
Interests; a Person very Sensible, but more inclined to Ill than Good,
excessively addicted to Women; Passionate in Play, and knew all the Tricks and
Cheats thereof, was a great Dissembler, of a Vicious Mind, Revengeful, and very
Cruel.

In a little time he got such an Ascendant over the Queen, that she adhered to
every thing he said: And he spoke with so much Assurance, and was so Positive,
that all that heard him were Astonished. As for his Religion, his Manners
showed that he had very little, however he confessed and communicated as others
do. He knew when to Speak, and when to be Silent; was very brisk among the
Ladies, and spent much Money upon them, but 'twas oftentimes at the Expense of
Merchants and Tradesmen. Every thing that he could lay hands on, was his own,
whether Sacred or Profane; and he used to say, That he would revenge himself
without Threatening, for feas of being prevented. He eat well, but without
Excess, and if any one had a Secret to excite Luxury, he would have it, though
he dearly bought it with his Money. Troufles, Mushrooms, Sellery, Artichoak
bottoms, and all things which stir up and provoke, were for his Palate: He
drank none but the choicest Wines, and after a Feast, would drink a glass of
Greek, or other such sort of Wine, and eat two or three Comfits to help
Digestion.

The Queen Traveled over Germany along with him, but made no stay till she
came to Hamburgh, where she Resided a long time, taking sometimes little
Journeys to Staden, Verden, Bremen, and other Cities of the Neighborhood under
the Dominion of the Suedes. At last she took a Fancy to re-enter the Kingdom;
and upon her Arrival at Nicoping, the Council of State, who had the
Administration of all Affairs, during the Minority of this Present King,
Charles the XI, Son of Charles the X. to whom she had resigned the Crown, sent
to entreat her to come no farther, for fear of giving occasion to some People
of mutinous and unsettl'd Spirits, to believe she had a mind to re-mount the
Throne. But the true reason of the Senate's Message was, that they apprehended
some danger from her unquiet and embroyling Humor; besides, they believed,
that she might possibly have some Party in the Kingdom, and that she repented
her Abdication, as Charles the V. had done. The change of her Religion, and the
Insolence of her People, was another reason why they refused to permit her
Entrance into their Capital City; and especially after the Accident which
happened to one of her Almoners, called the Abbot Santoni, a Priest of Tuscany,
whom she had carred along with her, contrary to the Counsel of Cardinal
Azzolini, who gave her two Priests of the Oratory of the new Church, to direct
her Conscience, and to celebrate Mass. These good Fathers were as Prudent and
Regular, as the Abbot Santoni was Irregular and unworthy of his Character.

One day he was like to have Deflowred a Damsel of Nicoping, who came into that
City from a Neighboring Castle, to pay her Duty to Queen Christina as her
ancient Sovereign. But during her stay in the City, Santoni got an Acquaintance
with her; and because she expressed her Respects with a certain Freedom, which
is natural to those Northern People, he thought she used some Compliance, of
which he might make his Advantage. in this Imagination, he one day finding an
Opportunity, endeavored to force her Modesty, and had committed an Outrage
upon her, if she had not cried out for help. This brought in a great many
People, who laid hands on this ^nfamous Person. Which Action of his, gave a
great Scandal to the Catholic Religion, the People being usually unjust enough
to conclude Generals from Particulars, as if Faults were not Personal, and as
if there were not Good and Bad in all Societies. But though the Queen did not
turn him away for this shameful thing, the Parents of the Damosel conceiving
great Indignation at so impudent a Villainy, Waylaid him, with an intent to
bath their Hands in his Blood, for the Injury he had done their Daughter; which
the Queen understanding, was obliged to take him into her own Coach, to shelter
him from their Insults; which without doubt he would have received, had it not
been for this Precaution.

The same Santoni had like to have been Killed at Hamburgh for another Frolic.
There was a French Protestant, a Merchant of Rochel, who had settled himself,
and Married a Wife in that City, with whom Santoni having got an Acquaintance,
had the freedom of his House, and Visited his Wise in his Absence, as is usual
among Civil People, without any ill Consequence. Now our Italian being born in
a Country where Jealousy reigns, and not without cause, and he not being
accustomed to such Familiarity, hoped that the Lady would not be Cruel, when
any handsome opportunity offered, and therefore to captivate her good Will, was
ve^^^ Complacent to her upon all occasions; but one day he had a certain
Caprice which had like to have cost him very Dear. For the Wife having desired
him to tell her how she might Complement her Hus^and and in Italian when he
came ho^^ he taught her such Words as an honest Woman ought not to have in her
Mouth, if she knew what they signified: But as she understood no Italian, she
innocently repeated the words she had learned, for he had taught her this sweet
Lesson so often, that she had got it by Heart. He did this thinking the
Merchant had not understood Italian, but was mistaken, for he had Traveled in
his Youth into Italy, and was so Astonished to hear himself saluted with such
vilainous Words, that in Passion, he gave her a sound Box on the Ear. The poor
Woman very much surprised at these new Caresses, fell a Weeping: But the
Merchant did not stop there, he would know who taught her these Words. He
understood at last, though by Force and Threatenings, that 'twas the Abbot
Santoni; and she made him so thoroughly sensible of her Sincerity and Innocence,
that the good man could no longer doubt; so that he turned all his Fury upon
this unworthy Priest, and went to seek him at the Queen's Lodgings, with an
intent to Kill him; but the Rage which transported him, having alarmed those
which he met with, they gave advice to Santoni to avoid the Rencounter. How^^^^
Santoni durst come no more afterward to the Merchants.

Q. Christina returned by Land from Nicoping to Colmar, where she Embarked for
Lubeck, and from thence came into the Duchy of Bremen and Principality of
Verden; and as these Estates depended on the Crown of Sweden, they expressed
themselves to her with very great Respects; she was well received by the
Magistrates, and they presented her their Keys. The Burgers with all the
Militia, not only put themselves in Arms, but also drew out the Regular Troops,
as well Infantry as Cavalry, to give her all the Honor they could. The Queen
was equipped in a Black Velvet Justacore, having an Hat upon her Head, adorned
with a Plume of White Feathers, and being Moucted like a Cavalier upon an
Excellent Horse, we rid through their Ranks, where she met with many old
Officers who had served her in the Army during her Regn, and some that had even
served under the Great Gustavus Adolphus her Father. Among others, she knew
General Vrangel, to whom she made a thousand Compliments, and would needs
exercise the Troops in his Presence. She would undertake to give Directions for
the Marches and Counter-Marches of the Infantry, and the like for the Wheelings
of the Horse; but it seemed the Management of an Intregue of Love, was more
suitable to her, than the ordering of an Army, for she gave very improper Words
of Command, which made Vrangel Laugh; and he was forced to assist her by fit
Terms, and to explain her Orders, that he might not introduce new Phrases into
the Art Military, but this could hinder him afterward from making pleasant
Jests of her among his Friends, and making Reflections on the Queen, as guilty
of Folly and Self-conceitedness. And yet for all this, she had so good an
Opinion of her own Merit, that she believed her self perfectly Skilled and
Knowing in all things: And when once invited at Stade to a Wirschaff, which is
a kind of merry Ball, she appeared in an Antique Habit, dancing in Masquerade,
Clothed like a Nymph of the Woods, and behaved her self in a most Ridiculous
manner.

In the mean time the Marquess del Monte knew so well how to Insinuate himself
into the Queen's Mind, that he became the Arbitrator or Master of the House.
But he was as Scandalous as the Abbot Santoni; and it seemed as if these two
Men had an absolute Authority to Seduce all the Women they came near. The Queen
often heard of their Insolences, but when People complained, did nothing but
Laugh, or gave such gentle Reprimands, that they took them as a permission to
commit further Disorders.

The Marquess was not content with his Debauchery only, but plotted and
contrived to commit Violence and Rapine; Covetousness having no less the
Dominion over him than other Vices. The first proof of his priveledg'd Valor,
was to cause a poor Frenchman to be Killed, who not knowing how to moderate his
Tongue, was the cause of his own Death: His Office was a Lungs or
Bellows-blower, introduced to the Queen's Service in savor of that worthy
Science, which her Majesty had in so great Esteem, for she hoped by it to
recompense the giving up her Crown, in getting the Philosopher's Stone. And for
this purpose, she built a Laboratory in her Lodgings at Hamburgh, where this
French Chemist begun his Operations. The Marquess seeing the Queen was so
easily persuaded to convert a large Sum of Money into Smoke, thought he might
do very well to save one half of that Expense, and so keep as many of the Gold
and Silver Pieces for himself, which the Chemist had to calcine, as he could
conveniently; ordering him to find out an Invention to make the the Queen
believe, that the loss of them happened some other way, and for so doing,
assured him both of his Protection, and his future Kindness to him. This lasted
for some Months; but the Intendant of her Majesty's House, required at last, to
know what was become of all the Money; for the Queen who was only made
acquainted with things by Halves, contented her self with some Experiments,
trusting to the deceitful Promises of the Chemist, who promised her Mountains
of Gold. Well then, this Bellows-blower was obliged to come to an Account, and
his inability to answer it, struck him with such Fear, that he was fain to run
from Hamburgh, and fly into the Territories of Denmark, which were very near;
from whence he wrote to the Queen, that the Marquess del Monte had embezled and
misapplied the greatest part of the Money. The Marquess being a Bold and and
Confident Man, cleared himself of this Calumny, and all the Reproach was thrown
upon the poor Chemist, to whom the Marquess caused a Letter to be written under
a false Name, inviting him to go to a certain Place, where he should find an
Employ: The Chemist went readily thither, thinking no harm, and was there
Murdered by the Marquiss's Orders.

Our Barbon now wanting this Income, was obliged to find out another way to get
Money: He was called Barbon, by a corruption of the word, instead of Bourbon,
which is the real Name of his Family. There was at Hamburgh a very rich Jew, a
Portuguese by Nation, Named Teixero, who was a famous Merchant, and worth many
Millions: This Man having a great deal of ready Money, was the Receiver General
of the Queen's Revenue, and used to advance her Money at a large Interest. The
Marquess at^their first Acquaintance pretended himself his great Friend, but
with an intention some way or other to screw Money out of him. This Jew had a
Nephew whose Name was Abraham, a very handsome young Man, to whom the Marquess
presented a fine Horse, on which this young Gentleman would sometimes Ride to a
Country House belonging to his Uncle, to take the Air, and Divert himself;
thither the Marquess would often send him little Presents, and Musicians for
him to make Merry with his Mistresses: Which Kindness was continued for some
time, till at last one Night the Marquess caused Abraham to be Seized by six
Horsemen all Armed, whom they took and lifted up at his whole length, and put
him in a great Coffer, which they boar'd at both ends on purpose to give him
Air, threatening to Kill him if he cried out or spoke one word, and so conveyed
him into a Wood in the Country of Brunswick. In the mean time Teixero was
extremely troubled that he could not see his Nephew return; and after two or
three days Absence, he sent to his Country House to enquire News of him; and
word was brought back, that the young Gentleman parted from thence the same day
he came, with intent to return to the City. The Uncle caused great Search to be
made far him every where, and the Marquess del Monte was not a little Officious
to serve him in it, making show as if he would rumage every corner of the whole
World to find out his dear Friend Abraham. Now, there was one Cleuter a Servant
of the Queen's, said to be a Shoomaker's Son of Liege, who undertook to make so
strict and narrow a Search, that he would not fail to bring some News of him.
The Queen promised a considerable Gratuity; and the Jew on his part engaged to
give a good Reward to the Person that could bring back his dear Nephew. After
five days Search (altogether at the Expense of the good Man) Tidings were
brought, that Abraham was found in a Wood, at the Mercy of six Men Masqued, who
said, They were poor Officers that wanted Money to Re-mount their Companies;
and gave the Searchers to understand, that they would not release their
Prisoner at a lower Rate than Twenty thousand Rix Dollars; That they had Thirty
Comrades more at their Command, and in case they were forced, they would sooner
Kill Abraham, than release him for a less Sum. The Jew when he heard this sad
News, was driven almost to Despair; and the Queen was so much incensed at it,
that she would have sent the whole Suedish Army into the Country of Bremen to
have destroyed those Thieves; but General Wrangel, who had been an old
Experienced Officer, and had no mind to undertake the Exploit, could not
sorbear Laughing, and represented to her Majesty, that these Troopers contained
in the Forest, were a pack of Desperate People, like so many furious Wild
Beasts, and that a great many brave Men might be lost before they could be able
to hunt them out of the Wood, or get any advantage of them; and that if they
should kill Abraham, his Friends would be never a whit the better. To make
short the Story, after a great many Treaties and Offers, they were at last
forced to carry Ten thousand Rix Dollars, which were divided among these honest
People, according to the Distribution of Barbon, who kept the greatest share
for himself. Abraham returned presently to Hamburgh, fcom whence he durst not
go abroad any more, for fear of such another Accident.

Our Barbon was no less Gallant in Amors, than other Intrigues. For a French
Captain of Foot in the Service of Sueden, coming out of the Duchy of Bremen to
Hamburgh, about some Business, brought a pretty Mistress along with him, whom
he called his Wife, and was so Jealous of her, that contrary to the Custom and
temper of his Country, he kept her up close. But the Marquess happening to see
her, was so taken with her Beauty, that he fell into an extreme longing to have
an Amorous Correspondence with her. By the power of Money he found means to
speak to her, and send a small Present, which she refused with Disdain, and
Checked the Messenger very Severely for offering it. But Cleuter to serve the
Marquess, went to the Captain like a Blockhead, and after a short Compliment,
told him, Captain, you have a very handsome Mistress, sure you will not be so
unreasonable to keep her all to your self. The Captain, who was a Man of very
high Courage, being surpised with so blunt a Salute, fiercely answered, that
he wondered a Man of his Appearance and Character, durst speak so to a Military
Man, who carried that by his Side which would do him reason against any
insolent Affront that should be offered him. That the Consideration and Respect
he had for the Queen, did hinder him from making a proper return at that
Instant, but that he hoped to find both a fitter time and place to make him
repent his Ra^hness. This was great Moderation for a Man of Courage as he was,
and who had the Principal Officers in that City to back him, I mean the Body of
the Army, which the King Quartered in Bremen, Verden, and Staden, all which had
been yielded up to him by the Peace of Munster; for there was a great many
French among those Troops. Such of them as were then at Hamburgh seeing the
Captain out of Humor, would needs know the Reason, and having understood it,
would have humbled Cleuter after another manner. But the Captain intending to
revenge himself like a Man of Honor, went first of all to the Quee^^ who only
Laughed at him, being prepossessed by the Marquess, who was the prime cause of
the Difference. This Angered the Frenchman and made him Challenge Cleuter to
fight him with Sword and Pistol. Cleuter accepted it with difficulty, being
indeed forced to it for fear of passing for a Coward and loosing his
Reputation; but however took Eight days to prepare himself. The Frenchman
generously and readily consented, and the Marquess in vain endeavored to agree
the Matter during that interval of time.

The day of Combat came, and the People (as is usual there) flocked out of
Hamburgh to go and see it. For though the Magistrates had forbidden Duels in
the City, yet they could not hinder People from going out and fighting in the
Lands that were under the Power of Denmark, which was but a League from thence,
at a place called Altena; near which, scarce any Week passed, but there was
some Duel or other fought, the Custom being grown so general, that even among
the very Tradesmen, every one pretended this way to revenge himself of the
Injuries done him. Our two Champions being met, went together upon the top of a
little rising Ground, near a Meadow, and there wheeling about, they both fired
their Pistols at the same time; the Frenchman's failed, but Cleuter's went off,
and Shot his Adversary in the Arm, who finding himself Wounded, was the more
Enraged, and notwithstanding his Wound, drew out the other Pistol, which also
failed as the first did. The Frenchman seeing this immediately Dismounted, and
with Sword in hand Attacked Cleuter, but he, though he saw so much Bravery,
instead of offering fair Quarter, fired his other Pistol, Shot him into the
Belly, and Killed him. After which, the Spectators ran in and parted them; but
the Frenchman having lost much Blood, was carried Dead on a Bier into Hamburgh.

Thus passed this Combat, at which the French were extremely Mortified. And it
was said, that Cleuter had a Charm which hindered his Enemies Pistols from
going off: But for my part, I really believe it to be his Misfortune, for Arms
do often fail Men on that manner, of which this is not the first Instance. At
least Cleuter did not act like a Genteel Cavalier in the Queen's Judgment, who
ought, (as she her self consessed) to have given good Quarter, when he saw his
Adversary not in a condition of Fighting. But he on the contrary, did not show
the least Compassion for his Misfortune, nor gave him the least good Word, but
always, like a Brute, said an hundred things of the French Nation. But one
Clairet, Valet de Chamber to the Queen, who was a Friend of the French
Captain's, was extremely affected with Grief at it, and had the Generosity to
assist his Widow. The Queen also gave her something out of Charity toward her
Maintenance. As for Cleuter, he acquired the reputation of a Valiant Person
among those of his Gang, which made him more Insolent than ever.

At that Juncture, a Scotch Colonel made his Court to the Queen, in hopes of
obtaining some considerable Employ by her Credit. But as he was coming away
from her Majesty, had some Difference, I know not how, with Cleuter, and he
without many words, gave him a Wound in the right side with his Sword. The
Scotchman had no time to put himself upon his Defense; for Cleuter was assisted
by Seven or Eight, who kept Guard at the Gate of the Queen's Palace, and they
pursued the Scotchman with Sword in Hand, so that he was fain to fly for fear
of worse Mischief.

The Queen augmenting her Guard, after an Accident which happened to her in
Hamburgh, of which we shall speak by and by, made Cleuter a Captain, whom she
carried with her afterward to Rome, and there presented him to Pope Clement,
who gave him a Regiment, which he sent to Candia. Cleuter in that Expedition
reaped more glorious Laurels than he had done in Germany. And after his return,
had a company of the Pope's Guards, even to his Dying day.

Although the Queen had Reformed one part of her House at Rome, as that of her
Pages, Gentlemen, and other Officers, yet for the sake of her Grandeur, the
Salaries of the Duke of Poli and other great Officers of her Chamber, were
constantly paid. Cardinal Azzolini, who had not been much against the Queen's
Journey, believing she would have moderated her Expenses, and by it have
cleared her self out of Debt; being very much surpised to hear of the Queen's
profuse way of Living, could not forbear Writing to her Majesty, and giving her
to understand that he could no longer support her House at Rome, whither she
sent nothing since her Departure from thence; That he had Borrowed what Money
he was able, and had no further Credit; And that there was a considerable Sum
owing to her Domestics for Wages; That he desired she would at least give him
permission to put off her Stables, and sel^ the Horses, because this was of
very great Expense to her there. The Queen who wanted not a quick Apprehension
in other things, did not believe that the Life she led Abroad, had been so well
known at Rome, and upon the reading this Letter, fell into a very great and
fearful transport of Passion. She complained, that she had as many S^^es about
her as she had Servants; and her Physician was suspected to have written an
Account of his Mistress's Actions to Rome. The poor Man was sent for into her
Presence, and she took him by the Collar and would have Strangled him, if he
had not been Rescued out of her Hands; and after a Thousand injurious
Reproaches, she turned him out of her Service, without giving him leave to
Justify himself. The Marquess Del Monte doubting lest he should also be taken
to Task, had an extraordinary Curiosity to see the Letters which came from
Rome, and importuned Laudini, a she Favorite of the Queen's so much, that she
ventured to take some of them out of her Toilet, and others our of her Pocket
when we was in Bed. By this means he found what he sought for, and knew that
Azzolini was informed of all. From thenceforward he therefore took all those
into his Interests who made their Advantage of the Queen's Extravagance; for
indeed, almost every one Pillaged her, and was for catching at what he could
for himself. But her Intendant, whose Name was Pezze, whom the Cardinal had
recommended as a ^^n of Integrity and great skill in the management of Household
Affairs, did very often beseech her to look into his Accounts, and to moderate
her Expenses: But she always told him she would never Quarrel with him, and
that she had rather trust him than any other, and desired him not to trouble
her with his Books. This was fine Economy and excellent Order in a Queen's
Court, who pretended her self a Philosopher, and Moraliz'd upon all things. But
for all this, the Intendant or Steward, contrary to the usual and general
Practice and Principles of those of his Profession, was Faithful to her even to
his Death, which happened to him not long after in a small Village in Brunwick,
as he was returning with the Queen for Rome. The violence of the Convulsions,
in which he Expired, did apparently demonstrate that he was Poisoned, and the
Marquess was supposed to be the Author; though it was noised Abroad at that
time and Print^d in some Gazetts, that the Queen had caused him to be Killed,
which I am apt to believe, was mere Calumuy, for she could have no Hatred
against him, seeing he served her very well. Yet she never made any Enquiries
into the manner of his Death; and after she was come back to Rome, when the
Brother of this Unhappy Person, came to throw himself at her Feet, and to beg
Justice of her with Tears and Sighs, she did nothing but Laugh, and gave not so
much as one word of Comfort to the poor Man.

As for Laudini, she had been a Sempstress at Paris, and her Name was Fancho^.
The Queen being at Paris, took her into her Service for her Talkativeness, and
because she was tolerably Handsome, and very Handy in whatever she did. Her
Majesty made her one of the Women of her Chamber, and a little after Married
her to an Italian called Landini, who was one of her Auspessades, and one of
them who Killed the Marquess Monaldeschi by her Order. She served the Queen to
her dying day, and followed her in all her Travels. Her Husband stayed at Rome
by reason of some Indisposition; but the Marquess did so well Comfort her in
his Absence, and so ^ffic^ciously supplied the want of the Auspe^^^e, that
Laudini became ^ig with Child, which put her into a terrible Conste^nation.

But the Queen who was good Natured and pitied the weakness of those of her
Sex, perceived by her Cou^^enance and Melancholy Behaviou^, that (...) had some
Trouble upon her Spirits, and by the force of Questions understanding the truth
of the whole Matter, she bid her be of good Courage, and not Despair, for she
would take care to Pacify her Husband. And since the thing was done, she
Pardoned her upon the condition she would be wiser for the time to come. But
alas, she Preached to an hardened Impenitent, for both before and after this
Accident, she gave her self entirely up to the Embraces of the Marquess.

For whenever she saw the Queen busy in her Chemistry, or in writing Letters,
she would go out at the Garden Gate to her Gallant, with a Rinquelet upon her
Head, and her Face covered like the Women of Hamburgh when they have no mind to
be known. A Rinquelet is a kind of Veil, made of fine black Serge, which being
put over the Head, covers both the Arms and Shoulders. Ludini went often thus
Disguised to a French Perriwig Makers, called La Fortune, whose Wi^e was the
Manager of their Intrigue. 'Twas there the Marquess used to m^^t her, and
obtain all the Favors he could wish for; but she went so often that at last
she became Big, as I (...) been saying, and came somewhat before her time,
being brought to Bed of a pretty Female Child, which was Baptized and Named
Mary. This the Queen took and (...) up in her Palace, and there she always
liv^d under her Mother's Wing, till her Majesty's Death. The Child having a
fine Voice, as she grew up, was taught to Sing and Play on ^^vers Instruments,
and became very skilful in Music, insomuch, that one of the Princes of
Bruns^ick, who Resided for some time at Rome, immediately after the Queen's
Death, carried her back into Germany, where she had the Hononr of being
admitted into the Service of the Duchess of Hanouer, by means of these
Qualifications.

As for Landini, the Husband, who threatened his Wife by Letters, with nothing
less than Murder and Poison, at last did Pardon her, through the instant
Prayers and entreaties of the Queen, who also gave him wherewithal to make
Atonement for the Injury and Affront his Wife had done him.

Whilst the Queen was at Hamburgh, Monsieur Pompone, Monsieur Chevalier de
Terlon, and Monsieur the Bishop of Beziers, now Cardinal Bonzi, in their return
from their several Ambassages of the two Northern Crowns, and to Poland,
passing by this Place, Saluted the Queen, who received them with great Respect,
according to their Quality; and she forgot not to make mention of her Marquess
Del Monte, to boast of his Nobility and of his Honorable Name of Bourbon. But
Monsieur Pompone one day told her very calmly, when the Queen would have
persuaded him, the Marquess was of the Family of the Kings of France; that he
had read and examined over and over the Genealogy of the House of Bourbon, but
then he had no where found, that any Branch of it had ever passed into Italy,
except one, unless the Constable de Bourbon, who Commanded the Imperial Army,
which Sacked Rome in the Year 1527, had left any Bastards in Italy. And at
another time, Mo^sieur de Terlin Reproached him before the Prince of Hamburgh,
with the Belying his Descent, by his suffering so long the Insolences of
Cleuter toward the French; telling him, that he instead of Reproving him,
seemed rather to encourage him against them. But the greatest Mortification
that ever the Marquess had, was that of Madam the Grand Marshal Sobieski, since
Queen, and at this present, Widow of the late King John of Poland, who passing
by Hamburgh, the Marquess was sent to Compliment her, and after in a Visit she
made the Queen, he would needs have offered her some unbecoming Familiarity,
though I do not well know or in what manner it was; but he received for it such
a severe Reprimand from that Princess, and she looked upon him with so much
Contempt, that he had no further inclination to make the like Attempt again.

During her stay here, Pope Alexander VII. died at Rome, and the Queen
apprehending that Cardinal Farnese might be chose Pope, she presently thought
of a Retreat either to Venice or Holland, believing that this Pope would not
suffer the Disorders of her Court. But the States of the United Provinces, who
some time before had obliged the Swedes to restore to Denmark all they had
taken from that Kingdom, sent word to the Queen, That her Royal Character would
be slighted in their Republic: And at last she had a mind to have Settled her
self in England, which was then quiet enough, but she did not like the People.
In the midst of these Thoughts and Projects, she understood by a Letter from
Cardinal Antonio, that Cardinal Julio Rospigliosi, was created Pope, by the
Name of Clement IX. on the 20th of June 1667.

There had been some Friendship formerly between them, and she hoped to draw an
Advantage from his Pontificate. Now, therefore because this was a Subject that
deserved it, she resolved to give a public Testimony of her Joy,
notwithstanding the Remonstrances of the Count de Homburg, one of the House of
the Lantgraves of Hesse, who advised her against it, for fear the People of so
great a City as Hamburgh, should commit some Insolence against Her Majesty.
This was also confirmed by one of the Magistrates, but notwithstanding all that
could be said, she would follow her own Capricio, and the Counsel of the
Marquis, who always pushed her on to Expenses, wherein ^e always found his
Account, seeing all things passed through his Hands.

She gave Order therefore for the preparing a fine Artifical Fire, and
illuminated the Front of her Palace, where she caused to be painted a noble
Compartment with the Pope's Arms in it, and many curious Figures which
represented his Virtues. But above it there was displayed the Picture of the
Eucharist in a Cloud, adored by Angels, and below was an Emblem of the Church
in a Pontifical Habit, treading Heresy under Foot. One might easily have
imagined the Effects which such a Representation would produce in a Protestant
City, where the Exercise of the Catholic Religion is not publicly permitted.
So a great number of Seamon, both English, Dutch and Danes, joined to the
Populace of Hambourgh, crowded into the Space which is before the Palace, being
drawn together by the Novelty of the Sight. Where to increase the Misfortune
she had made two Fountains of Wine, whose Liq^or animated them the more to
throw Stones against the Decoration. Some of the Queens Domestics to repress
the Insolence of the People, shot Pistols out at the Windows without Ball, but
this instead of dispersing, incited them the more, and made them redouble their
Insults, till they within were forced to shut the Palace Gates. The Windows
were quickly battered all to pieces, and many of them would have set fire to
the Gates with Bundles of Straw. In this Extremity the Queens Servants had
recourse to four Falcons that lay in the Hall, loading them with broken pieces
of Brass and Iron, and discharged them against the enraged Populace, of whom
they killed some and wounded others. This indeed made them recoil a little, but
the Blood and Cries of their wounded Companions animated them afresh; so they
returned to the Charge with an Intent to break open the Gates and plunder the
Palace. But because they had neither Petards, nor Engines to force them, a
Score of Lusty Fellows brought a huge long Body of a Tree, that lay at a
Carpenter's Door in the Street to make a Mast for a Ship, which they moving
backwards and forwards like the Battering Rams of the Ancients, did many times
essay to break open the Gates.

It was then the Queen knew, but too late, that she had done ill to follow the
Counsel which had been given her; and the fear of falling into the Hands of
this Insolent Mob, did so terrify her, that she knew not what to resolve on;
for the Place was no longer tenable, and the greatest part of her Domestics
were without Doors, and even the Marquis Del Monte from whom she had it.

At last two of the Servants took the Queen by the Arms, and led her out at a
Backdoor, which opened into another Street, and brought her on Foot, in Man's
Apparel, to Monsieur le Chevalier de Terlon's Lodgings, who was then at
Hambourgh; from whence he was to pass into Denmark and Sueden. He lived in a
Quarter of the Town that was at some distance, and the Queen being half dead
when she got thither, they put her to Bed, and presently after brought up
Supper. When she was come to her self, she began to eat with a good Appetite,
and after a while falling into her accustomed Rhodomontades, she affirmed, That
if they would but have let her appear at the Windows, she should have
Thunderstruck all this Rabble, which had lost the Respect that was due to her.

The Prince of Homburg being informed of this Uproar, he (accompanied by some
other Gentlemen of Note and Reputation) crouding themselves among the Populace*
endeavored to appease them with fair Words, swearing they themselves would be
revenged on those Dogs the Papists, that had been the Cause of this Scandal;
But (said they) the Queen knows nothing of all this, and will be the first that
shall Chastize the Inventers, provided you commit no further Outrage, by
forcing her Palace. But know, that if we do not make a speedy Reparation for
the Injuries done Her Majesty, we shall not only draw upon us the Arms of
Sueden and Denmark, but of all the Princes of the Empire, and of the Emperor
himself, who will severely revenge it. These few Words pronounced with force,
disarmed these Mutineers; to which also the Burghers being in Arms, did not a
little contribute. So the Seige was raised, and the next Week after the
Magistrates conducted the Queen to her Palace in Triumph. And then this
Princess was so bountiful as to disburst Two thousand Crowns among the Wounded,
of which two died; yet after this hot Alarm, she staid not long in this City,
but in a few Days set forward for Rome.

If I had been a bribed Historian, I should have extolled the undaunted Courage
of the Queen upon this Occasion to the very Skies, and assured the World, that
the gave the utter most Proofs of an Heroic Courage, but then I should have
betrayed the Truth: For it is most certain, that never any Woman was more
timorous than she; though when the Danger was passed, she played the Braggadocio,
and was infinitely pleased when her Sycophants affirmed, That neither Alexander
nor Caesar had ever testified so much Bravery in the midst of so many Dangers.
So true it is, that Flattery can disguise any thing, and that Princes take a
great deal of Pleasure in being imposed upon that way.

This little Accident makes me remember another which happened a long while
after at her Palace of Laugara in Rome, where she expressed every whit as
little Courage as here. There was a Linen Cloth put up before the Window in
the Lower Court, to keep off the violent Heat of the Sun. A little Boy of the
Neighborhood by chance throwing a Squib happened to set it on fire. This
inconsiderable Flame did so distract her, that she ran up and down from place
to place like a Mad Woman, crying to the first she met, and beging with her
Hands folded together, to rescue her out of the Fire, though there were People
more than enough ready to extinguish it, and that it burnt nothing but the
Linen Cloth, which was not much bigger than an ordinary Table-Cloath: But the
Danger being over, she played the Gascon again among her Bravo's, as if she her
self had saved the whole City of Rome from being burnt.

Before she went away from Hamburgh, she gave a Magnificent Treat to many great
Lords and Ladies which were in the Suedish Interest, and the Marquis Del Monte
was the Superintendant or Manager of this Feast. 'Twas prepared in a very
spacious Tennis-Court, around the side whereof were high Scaffolds erected as
if for the representing a Comedy in a Theater, on which a vast number of
Spectators were placed to behold it. But I shall not endeavor to make a
Description thereof, nor speak of the abundance and delicacy of the Meats,
which were dressed with excellent Skill, and adorned with the greatest
Curiosity imaginable. A more Eloquent Pen than mine would write nothing but
truth, if he compared it with the most sumptuous Banquets of the Ancients; and
especially when he should introduce the Instruments of Music, with the most
Charming Voices, giving an Account of the most harmonious Consorts performed by
the skilfullest Hands; and describe the great variety of costly Illuminations,
which seemed even to outdo the Sun it self. After all there was a grand Ball,
with variety of Dances, wherein the Cavaliers and Ladies acquitted themselves
with great Applause; and the Joy was in all respects perfectly complete. But
the Marquis Del Monte had more reason than any other, for besides the Share he
had of the Banquet, and the Entertainment of his Eyes and Ears, he obtained
Favors of some easy Ladies. But above all the forgot not his chief Ends, for
Clairet assured me, That above an hundred Pistoles of the Charge of this stuck
to his Fingers. And to keep Landini still at his Devotion, he took her by the
Hand, and Danced with her as Maid of Honor to the Queen, though that Title was
not at all her due, for she was a very Contemptible Woman, whose ill Conditions
and Scandalous Behavior, would have driven her out of any Fami^y, that had
been but a little more regular than that of Queen Christina's.

At last Her Majesty came to Rome the third time, never to go away any more
from thence. She arrived under the Pontificate of Clement IX. which may be
called the Golden Age of our Times, as that of Innocent XI. the Age of Iron.
For indeed under the Reign of Rospigli osi, the Court of Rome became so
Magnificent, that it surpassed all others in Splendor and Gallantry. New Shows
were to be seen every Day; (...) while we were diverted with t^^ Entry of some
Ambassa^or, another with a promotion of Cardinals; to Day entertained with a
Feast, and to Morrow with a Cavalcade. The Divertisements succeeded one another
in such sort, that commonly the Morning was spent in Devotion and Business, and
after Dinner, which was generally very plentiful, and served up with
extraordinary Curiosity (for they begun then to follow the French Mode) they
went to a Comedy, or Opera, where the Machines were very surprising, or else
heard some great Master's Composition of excellent Music, performed with
variety both of Instruments and Voices. That Holy Father who was naturally
Generous, and Beneficent, inspired these good Qualities into his Nephews.
Avarice had no Dominion over those young Lords, as in the Reigns of other
Popes; but on the contrary, they spent more than their Revenues would well
allow, and yet they so well knew how to make their Interests in that Court,
that they are now the richest Princes in Rome. The Ladies all dressed very
richly, and the French Modes being then it troduc'd, they appeared so charming
in their Habits, that they could never afterward resolve to leave them, but
have retained them to this very Day; so that at this present Luxury excessive
at Rome. Nor did Love fail to make his Party, for many enrol'd themselves under
his Banners, hoping to make an happy Progress under so flourishing a Reign. But
this good time did not endure long; for the untimely Death of that Pope blasted
many Intrigues which were but just in their Bud, because this Accident changed
both the Fortune and Interest of a great many People.

Clement X. being made Pope Anno 1671. after a Conclave of six Months, they
reassumed the same Course of living as before. For Cardinal Altieri, who
governed the Ecclesiastical State under his Pontificate, after he had been
adopted Nephew by this, did not put himself to the trouble of reforming any
thing, provided he could but heap up Riches for himself, of which he was always
known to be covetous enough; so that there was a sufficient Liberty for People
to ruin themselves by excessive Profusion. Don Gasper, who by his Nise was the
Pope's Nephew, though he were not of so easy and so generous a Spirit, as they
of the Family of Rospigliosi, appeared yet very splendid and magnificent, and
the Ladies were more glorious than ever. So that in the beginning of this Reign
there was nothing to be seen but Rejoycings at Rome; Promotions of Cardinals,
and the pompous Entries of Ambassadors. The first was that of Portugal which
was very solemn, being performed in a most stately Cavalcade, by reason it was
an Ambassade of Obedience; that is to say, it was the first time the King of
Portugal sent an Embassy to Rome, since his Family had reascended that Throne;
and it was of no small Glory for him to be acknowledged by the Pope among the
number of Crowned Heads.

After this was the Entry of the French Ambassador the Duke D'Etree's, which
was no less splendid than the former, though it was only made in Coaches, there
being at least five hundred, drawn by six Horses each, attended with very rich
Liveries; but above all that of the Ambassador was most glorious, for the
Family of the D'Etree's took great pleasure to appear magnificent and pompous
upon all Occasions which they had to express their Zeal for the Service and
Honor of their grand Monarch. Then also the public Comedies were represented
at Torra di Nona by the Contrivance of Count Alibert and his Company, during
the Carnaval time. A sumptuous Box was there fitted up for the Queen with
extraordinary magnificence, whereon neither gilding nor any other Ornaments
were spared, and it was hung with Damask, and other rich Stuffs adorned with
fine Lace and Fringes of Gold. This Box might contain fifteen or sixteen
Persons, and there were always ten or a dozen Cardinals who went to the Comedy
to Honor and Accompany the Queen in her Box, as they did also in her glazed
Gallery, which was near to the Passage into St. Mark's place, at the ^orner of
the Street called St. Remua^^ where she had hired a Palace to see (...)
Masqueraders pass by, with wh^^^ all that place is usually filled during the
Carnaval.

The Queen though she was at that time above forty Years of Age, yet continued
very brisk and gay, and so soon as the Theater was opened and the Comedians
acted, as they did very well in the Opinions of all; Her Majesty caused Women
Singers to be brought amongst them, which Charmed the Ears of the Auditors by
the sweetness of their Voices, as they did their Eyes by the agreeableness of
their Persons, and richness of their Habits.

Among the Cardinals that frequented the Queens Box, Ca^dinal Benedetto
Odeschalchi never failed so much as one Night being there during all the five
Years, the Qu^en maintained her said Box in the (...), but after the Elevation
of this very Cardinal to the Popedom* (...) changing his Humor and Conduct
both at once, endeavored to destroy the Play h^^se, werein he had formerly
taken (...) much pleasure. And to bring it the mo^e ef^^ctuall, to p^ss, he
made a rigorous Edict, which (...) remains in force, by which he (...) Women to
Rehearse any P^^t upon (...) Stage, he liking rather ^^at young Musicians
should play those Parts, and be clothed in their Habits contrary to the
express prohibition of the Sacred Scripture, which forbids Men to wear Women's
Apparel, as being an Abomination before God. The Novelty of this Spectacle drew
such vast numbers of People thither, that they had much ado to get Entrance for
Money. For at that time was a great Concourse of Strangers of Quality there,
who had brought with them the Newest Modes from abroad, which the Roman
Cavaliers imitated, and made themselves all fine and gallant.

There was one among the rest who was of the first Rank, and surpassed them all
in richness of Clothes, his Stature was middle sized, the Features of his Face
rarely composed, his Eyes black and as lively as those of the finest Roman
Ladies, he had a happy Physiognomy, and a Head of Hair which made him one of
the handsomest Gentlemen in Italy. He Sung and Played rarely well upon diverse
sorts of Instruments, was a great lover of Poetry, and had also himself
composed three fine Pieces. Happy indeed, if with all these Advantages he would
have Corresponded with the Ladies Desires, for there was more than one who were
willing to have put him to the Proof; but he made no answer to their Attempts,
as we shall presently acquianit you. He was then in the Flower of his Youth,
being entered into the twenty third Year of his Age, and his Blood boiled in his
Veins, which made him appear all Spirit.

The Queen seeing this young Lord in a Box just over against her, as he was
making a profound Bow to her, immediately felt an extraordinary Emotion, by
looking upon him, and having learnt his Quality and personal Merit, it
augmented the Esteem which this Princess began to have for him, and she could
not forbear casting her Eyes toward his Box very often. A little while after
one of Her Majesty's Valets de Chamber, who had been an old experienced
Gamester at Love Intrigues, hearing the Queen one Day speak many kind things of
this young Prince, and at the same time say, She had a mind to have her Hair
cut, took his opportunity to tell her; Madam (said he) the Prince Don Benigno
(for that was the Name of this young Lord) has a Valet de Chamber a
Perriwig-maker, who cuts Hair rarely well. The Queen ravished with the Thoughts
of having an occasion to speak well of a Person for whom she had so strong an
Inclination, sent for the Perrwig-maker, who performing his Office according to
her Desire, after having spoken very advantagiously of his Master, gave him ten
Pistols. One of the Queens Officers was afterward with the Prince, who told
him, That he was extremely joyful that the Queen had so far honored him as to
make use of one of his Servants; to which the Officer answered in few words,
but setting forth the Queens admirable Qualities in the choicest Expressions he
could invent. The Prince mightily extolled her, and Her Majesty was informed of
all he said to her Advantage, and was infinitely pleased with it.

Another time she sent to the Prince to desire him to let her see one of his
Perriwigs; she tried it on, and made a short one of the same color, being of a
fair and bright color, which she wore many times afterward. When the Queen
was in private among her Women, there was nothing to be heard but the Praises
of Don Benigno, and no other Subject could afford her so much pleasure as that.
One of her Maids a great Favorite at that time, who was very handsome and well
shaped, called Signora Octavia, hearing her speak so often in the praise of
this young Prince, fell in Love with him, but not daring to discover her
Affection, she consumed and pined away. The Queen was troubled, and seeing her
thus Languish without knowing the Cause, obliged her to go and take the Country
Air. Octavia chose to go to Frascati, as being one of the most delicious Places
about Rome, where the greatest part of the Cardinals, and Gentlemen of Rome had
Vineyards and Houses of Pleasure, which looked like so many Enchanted Palaces.
Don Benigno had one there which was none of the least, and he was actually
himself there, enjoying the Pleasures of the delicate Season of the Spring. The
Queen gave Octavia two Calas^es covered, and two ^acquies; and she brought her
Mother, Sister, and some other Women along with her, and for Valet de Chamber
she would have that Intriguing Purvoyour who had been employed in the Q^eens
Amors. Arriving at Franscati, they alighted in a private place, because they
would incommode no Body, and the Train stayed at the Stables of the delicious
Vineyard of Ald^brandina, where they were well received because of the Queens
Liveries, by the Orders of Madam the Princess di Ross^no. Achelmere (for that
is the Name of the Purveyor) took care of preparing the Dinner, while the Women
went to Mass at the Capuchins, and in the way met Don Benigno by chance.
Octavia turned her self aside, that she might hide the Blushes which appeared
in her Face, though they rendered her yet more beautiful. There was only a
single Salute on either side, and after the walking of a Turn or two, they
returned to a slender Dinner at their Lodging; for in Italy People are very
Sober, when they live at their own Expenses. However, she eat with a good
Appetite, and reproached A^^hemere for being so sparing. While these things
were doing a Footman came from the Prince, who brought in a Man that carried a
great Vermilion Basin, whose outside was gilt with Gold, full of most exquisite
Viands, and desired to speak with the Conductor. Achelm^^e presented himself,
and the ^ootn an told him, Tha^ the Prince Don Lenigno had sent him t^a small
Trisle to make merry with the Company, and to drink his Health; and at the same
time another Person a^^ear'd, who was loaded with twel^^ Bottles of most
delicate Wine. The ^egale was most agreeably received, and they thanked the
Prince in most submissive and acknowledging Terms. Octavia cast a glance upon
the Conductor, as a sign that the Regale was for her sake; and after having
well enjoyed themselves, and reposed for some Hours, they had a Mind to go to
the Vineyard of Aldobrandina, or Belvedere, as well for the Walk, as to see the
wonderful Cascades, or Falls of Water, which cause so much Admiration to
Strangers. Passing by a Vault which leads to the first Tarrass to avoid the
Sun, they met Don Benigno, who was walking there in Company Achelmere made him
a profound Reverence, and thanked him for his Regale in the Name of the
Company, who partook with him in the Obligations they all had to so generous a
Lord. The Prince smiled and said, It was only a Trisle, and did not deserve to
be mentioned; that he would have offered the Ladies an Apartment in his Palace,
with all nece^ssary Conveniences, but that he had not done it, for fear of
burthening them with incommodious Civilities, seeing they would think
themselves more at Liberty, than either with him, or the Queen, whose Officers
should be welcome to him without the least Complement, whenever it pleased
Her Majesty. Octavia addressing her self to the Conductor, told him, He was
very happy to be so much considered by his Excellency. The Prince answered,
That he had a Value for them all in general. Do not envy my Happiness, Madam,
(says Alchelmere) it is only for your sake that his Excellence considers us,
never Prince had so great a Regard for the Ladies a^ himself, but at this time
I am in possession of a great part of his Bounty, having h^^ the Honor of
being his Servant along time ago. This was spoke only en passant; but the
glances of the Eye have a more passionate Language: But the Prince immediately
left them, in order to rejoyn his Company, who were already got at a
considerable distance. After they had seen the Vineyard and the Cascades, they
returned to Rome the same Night; and the Queen who would know all the
particulars of the Voyage, was extremely pleased with the Prince's Gallantry.
She was the best Mistress in the World, when she was in a good Humor, and she
seemed to take it ill, that her Maids had not stayed three or four days in the
Country. Two days after the Prince came to Rome, and sent to seek Archelmere,
to ask him who that Maid was, for whom he already felt so strong an
Inclination. Achelmere told him, it was Signora Octavia, That she was one of
the Queen's Confidents; adding withal, that she was charmed with the Merit of
so Accomplished a Prince. The Glances she often gave him at several other
Meetings, caused him perfectly to understand it. Words are seldom made use of
in Italy; and they can manage an Intrigue well enough without 'em. But the
Prince, who showed so much Ardor at first, relented presently, knowing that
Octavia would consent without much Entreaty, though she had taken precautions
not to suffer an immediate Shipwreck. However it was, some odd Reflection or
other changed the Prince's mind, for he went to the Rendesvouze, and after
that, Octavia conceived an implacable Spite against him, whilst her Introducer
was Confounded, and gained nothing but Hatred on both sides.

On the other hand, the Queen, who as yet knew not the Prince's cold temper,
gave him him sufficient Hints, both by Signs and dark Speeches, as she found
Opportunity, that himself was the cause if he were not Happy. They h^d much ado
to assure him, that he might dispose of the Queen's Person, seeing he possessed
her Heart already; but he would never pass the bounds of the most innocent
Gallantry. The more the Obstacles were br^ke, the more reserved he became,
though afar off out of Danger, he testified a great deal of Ardour to meet the
Queen's Flame, who despaired to make any thing of him, by reason of his
Fearfulness and over great Respect. He was offered what Security he pleased,
that the Queen her self should come incognito to what Place he pleased, and
that she should be at his Disposal; but the very conceit made him Abhor it. At
last the Queen was perfectly ashamed to explain her self too clearly; and the
Rage to find her self Slighted, converted her Love into implacable Hate; and if
she did not take a solemn Revenge, it was to be looked upon only as an effect
of her Goodness: So dangerous a thing it is to be either Loved or Hated by
Great Persons.

If the Prince had refused the Queen only, it might have been said, That the
fear of falling into the same Misfortune with the Marquess Monaldeschi, had
hindered him. But he has also despised the Fires of many other Ladies, who have
accused him of Impotence, or a Timidity unworthy of his Rank: for the World
does not esteem a Person who contains himself within a Principle of Religion.
We have seen how his Courage failed him in his Intrigues with Octavia; and we
shall find presently, that he showed no greater, in the case of a fair
Duchess, who had all the Qualities requisite to make a Lady Beloved. 'Twas
said, that Prince Columbieri had Loved her a little before Don Benigno had
settled his Affections there, and that he was very well satisfied. Don Benigno
finding the place vacant when he enterpriz'd the Conquest of Diana's Heart, for
that was the Name of the Duchess; first made use of a Porter to a numerous
Community, who had Victory for their Arms, but not finding him fit for
Management, employed a French Merchant that lived near to St. Augustin's,
because he Served the Duchess, and was very capable to manage an Amorous
Intrigue. After a thousand Caresses, he opened his Design to him, and promised
him Mountains and Wonders as Lovers used to do, and put the conduct of his
Affairs into his Hand.

As soon as this Confident came to the Duchess, under pretense of bringing her
a new French Stuff, he fell on the reading of a Billet while her Back was
turned, but suffered himself to be Surpised. The Duchess asked what it was?
The Merchnat, who was Familiar with her, told her it was the Pleasantest Paper
in the World, and that it was a Billet of Love in behalf of the Person he
Esteemed most. I Am resolved I will see it, said Diana. Hold, Madam, answers
this rare Merchant, or otherwise you will be my Confident. She snatched it from
him, and read these Words. Madam, the Prince Don Benigno Adores you, and has
charg^d me to let you understand it; I could wish that for the repose of his
Love, you would hear it from himself; I am (...) you would take Pity of him, if
you know the Torment (...) es for you, and if you will give me the liberty I
will acqu^in^ you ^ith the rest by word of Mouth. I must own that this
confident Tradesman was as fit an Instrument as could be thought o^ for this
Affair, provided he ^an not Risque; for a Woman is always pleased when she is
persuaded she is Amiable. This Princess, whose Curiosity carried her to read
this Billet, believing it to be another thing, was Surpised at this new way of
hearing her self to be Beloved, and became as a Rose, remaining perfectly
Silent for some time in a Confusion, which showed a strong agitation of her
Mind.

The Duke her Husband entered the Chamber at the same time, to see the Stuff the
Merchant had brought before they cut it, and seeing the Duchess in a great
Trouble, asked her if she were not satisfied with so fi^e a Stuff, which
appeared to him to be very Rich. She testified her Content, but said she would
willingly have it all, because the Princess of Sonino had a Mantua and
Petticoat very like that which she had before. The Secret, says the Merchant,
is to take whole Piece, for I assure you there is no more such in Rome. Claude
has Reason, says the Duke, and I would counsel you to buy the whole Piece, if
it be not too Dear; as to the rest, I believe he will be Faithful. Yes
Monsigneur, says the Merchant, Madam may reckon that I will be Secret in that,
and every other thing, and at the foot of the Account 30 Pistols, more or less
ought not to hinder her Excellence from taking a Stuff which is the most in
Mode, and especially when there will be none like it for a long time. See what
an Admirable Fellow this is, says the good Husband, buy it Madam, but take care
to see the Stuff well Measured.

There was nothing else worthy of Remark which passed in this first Interview;
and the Merchant went immediately to give Don Benigno an account of his
Negotiation. The Prince finding his Declaration very Ingenious, Embraced the
Merchant, and told him, that he had begun very well, and prayed him to continue
it till such time as he was Happy. Two days after, he came again to bring her
the Lining of her Garment, and she had been impatient to see him; but by a
Slyness peculiar to Ladies, when they have a regard to Decency, she expected
when he would begin. Being then alone with her, he desired to know of her, what
effect his Billet had produced; She sat down upon her Couch, and said, with a
seeming Carelessness, that she made no account of it; and that she was unwilling
to embark her self in an Amor with a young Man who was over Bold, that
presumed too much of himself, and because he was a fine Youth, believed himself
a Narcissus. The Merchant assured her, that the Prince had an inviolable and
inseparable Affection for her; and that as his Passion could not be greater, so
his Respect and Fidelity would not be the less. Upon these assurances, she told
the Merchant, Monsieur Claude, said she, I beg of you not to Flatter me with
any hope, till I have made Trial, for under pretense of guarding all the
measures that are necessary, I shall find whether he will persevere or no She
then confessed to the Merchant, that she had some inclination for him, and that
he should not be unhappy upon her Account.

I believe she had reason to say this, for she perfectly knew the Person of
whom she spoke; for without doubt, if his Vigor had answered his Presumption,
he had wherewithal to please the Ladies. However, he was yet such a Novice,
that he thought 'twas sufficient to tell a Lady he was Amorous of her, to
oblige her to have the same Passion for him. But he found in the Person of
Diana, a Woman that knew how to teach People Manners, and instruct him how to
Live.

One day Don Benigno being at Frescati, was Attacked by three Ladies, who
believing themselves Handsome, set with their Tongues very briskly upon him.
One of them was the Marchioness Nari, who told him in Railery, That as
Beautiful and fine Shaped as he was, he had found the Ladies Cruel; that they
had heard news of his Affairs, and were obblig'd to that beautiful Person to
whom he paid his Vows, for preserving in him a respect for the Sex. He was
stung with these Words, but kept still to his Indifference for the Ladies;
nevertheless his vanity being excited, he was resolved to make use of all
things to make himself Beloved of Diana. And he did very well at first, for
after he had given some Signs of Perseverance, he made a Present to the
Duchess, of a Slk Stuff with a blew Ground, stripped with Silver Columns,
interwoven with most beautiful Leaves Flowers both of Gold and Silver, to a
great Value. To conceal this from the Duke, the Duchess made him believe that
the Merchant was content with the third part in Money, and for the rest he
would take Wheat and Wine, at so much per Month, till 'twas all paid. The Duke
was very glad of it; for in Rome the Great Lords have oftentimes but little
Money, because they Farm a great part of their Estates themselves, and have but
few Tenants that pay them in ready Money.

The Duchess after this, became a little more Familiar with Don Benigno; and
the Carneval being come, the Prince often went out in Masquerade, wearing a
short Cloak surr'd with Ermines, with a small Cuffedg'd with Bone-lace, and a
red Ribban on his Head, which was the Signal to make himself known by. Diana
was in the Balcony as the Train went along, and looked upon him with a sweet
and Languishing Eye; and they saw one another at Comedies, and danced together
at Balls; but this afforded only an opportunity of speaking some few Words by
Stealth, the Italian Jealousy not permitting a regular Conversation at such
times. He would willingly have obtained some Favor from Diana, but she had a
mind to make him value the thing, however, she promised that she would find an
opportunity in the Lent time to satisfy his Desires.

The first Week being come, the Rendesvouze was agreed upon, which was to be in
a Garden ^ear St. Sabina, upon Mount Aventine, into which there is an entrance
at two different Gates. Don Benigno came there in a close Coach, which was left
about Fifty (...) from the Privy Gate. The Duchess who came by the great Gate,
received him very agreeably, while his Confident entertained her Associate,
till such time they had insensibly got a good distance from them. Diana who for
this time had a mind only to Amuse the Prince, ordered her Follower not to lose
sight of her; and she obliged her, though she kept her self out of Call. The
Conversation lasted about half an Hour with equal Satisfaction. Don Benigno was
very well content with this first Interview; but as in Italy they have but
little liberty of seeing one another, he desired the favor to write to her,
and the pleasure of Receiving her Answers. Diana made a great difficulty of
this, and said, there was less danger in satisfying a Lover, by yielding the
last Favors, than to write to him and receive his Letters; because if a Lover
should boast of Privacies with his Mistress, (as it often happened) she had
power to deny it all; but as for Letters, the Characters being once known, they
were certain and undeniable Testimonies. At last, by the means of Prayers and
Entreaties, he obtained so far as to have Billets, upon condition he sent them
back in his Answers. All these Difficulties being Surmounted, the conclusion of
some twenty Letters were made by a Rendesvouz with Diana at a certain Hour, at
which Don Benigno did not fail.

He came very late at Night with his Confident, and they entered by the
Back-Gate of the Lady's Palace. They wrapped their Faces in their Cloaks, and
mounted a pair of Stairs without seeing any Body, till they came to the
uttermost Lanthorn, where they found a Gentleman, Don Arimatheia, Brother to
Diana, who looking upon them a little, went away, and said Laughing, God send
you good Luck, my Friends. Being come into a little Gallery, which led into
Clarice's Chamber, Diana's Follower: They were not yet at the end of their
Troubles; for having shut up their dark Lanthorns, they knew not where they
went. The Merchant, who knew the Passages, went first, groaping the way, but
thought he should have been Strangled by the Prince, because he pulled him so
hard by the Cloak. At last, after a Labyrinth of turnings, they entered into a
little Chamber, where the first thing they saw, was the Head of a Bed, and a
Crucifix upon it Ten Foot high. Above It was a small Picture of St. Francis,
encompassed with a Chaplet about an Ell long, and the Bed w^ not above two Foot
high from the Ground.

Don Benigno had put on a black Perriwig instead of the light Hair'd one, which
he always wore, and Combing it, expected when the Nymph would arrive, assuring
himself, that he was prepared for the Combat, and carried good Arms to attack
and batter the Fort in a most regular manner. A little after, the Duchess
appeared at the further end of the Gallery, and came brighter and more
sparkling than the Moon; she had a Wax Candle in her hand, her Habit loose and
white, and her Head dressed very advantagiously. She had a fine Knot of red
Ribbands on her Breast, which being but half discovered, gave a great luster to
one of the finest Necks in the World. Don Benigno was somewhat in a Maze at her
Approach, till after the first Compliments were over: Then the Merchant
retired, leaving the Lovers at full liberty to do what they pleased. But all
passed in Ceremonies, Don Benigno knew not how to say any other thing to Diana,
than that he died for Love of her, and that though she left him at liberty to
enterprise any thing, yet he durst not attempt what he most desired. So going
away without doing what was expected. He was afterward ashamed of his
Bashfulness, and had a great mind to repair his fault: But a second Audience
which was agreed to, did nothing but divulge the Secret; so that Prince
Columbiere having got the Wind of it, procured six Fellows to wait for Don
Benigno under the Portal of the Palace D'Estre; where presenting a dark
Lanthorn to his Face, that they might know him, they retired presently, as if
they had been the Round, though one of them followed him at a distance, as far
as Diana's Palace. There Don Benigno got admittance, but was on purpose Baffled
as before: From which the Prince Columbiere did not fail upon the first
occasion to congratulate him upon the number of his Mistresses, which he told
him, hindered his being able to satisfy them all.

This joined to the Advice he had that the Prince Columbieri saw Diana again,
renewed his Passion, Jealousy working a more powerful Effect upon him than
Love. He complained of Diana that she preferred an old Man before a Youth full
of Vigor, and ready to satisfy the Ladies at all times, whereas the Prince
Colombieri must have eight Days to prepare himself. These Complaints were
carried to the Duchess by the Merchant, word for word; to whom she answered,
that Don Benigno was worse than the Prince Columbieri; for, said she, if he
must have eight Days to prepare himself, I have given that Poultron more than
three Months, and he has always failed me in the occasion. Madam, replied the
Merchant, that may happen through too much Ardour, as it did in France to the
Count de Guiche. Fie, fie, answered Diana, that is a mere Trifle; for though it
may once happen so, yet a Man of Vigor is never more distinguished then upon
such occasions. The Merchant knew not what to answer in defense of so ill a
cause. Believe me honest Claud (pursued she) your Friend is not like the
Scorpions which sting with their Tail; for he stings only with his Tongue; and
we ought to distrust those great Boasters, which make a fair Appearance, and
are good for nothing. The Merchant then to divert her, said, Madam, a Man of an
indifferent Stature, large Shoulders, brawny Limbs, and full of Muscles, that
has black Hair, a brown Visage, and full of Vigor, is 35 Years old, with Eyes
sparkling and filled with Fire: And as to the rest, though the Man be not
handsome, is he good for nothing? Very good, said she, that is as we love; it is
for Women to be fair, and for Men to be brisk, and methinks you do very much
resemble that Man. She lay then upon her fine downy Couch, with her Breasts
naked, in a very tempting posture, when at that instant one came and scratched
at the door to give notice that Cardinal Colonna was below and come to make her
a Visit. She arose in haste, took her Coif, and went to the Cardinal, while the
Merchant slipped into a Closet, and from thence into the Wardrobe, and
afterward went his way by a private pair of Stairs. He went then to Don
Benigno to tell him that if he did not use Diana better, it would oblige her to
renew her Friendship with Prince Colombieri; but he took the thing wrong, and
made use of this pretense to break off with Diana. He said he would not have
the Leavings of Prince Colombieri, who was the Town-Bull of Rome, and had
certain Distempers which he should be sorry to contract; yet the Prince
Colombieri was very well and in perfect Health; so was the Duchess also fresh,
and sound as a Roach.

To be short, Don Benigno went to the Duchess no more, and, to spite her, kept
one of her Letters, which he was resolved never to restore. All the Revenge she
could take, was to laugh at him with the Queen, with whom she was very great:
When they spoke of him together, it was with the uttermost Contempt; they
treated him as the most wretched Man living, and ever loaded him with all the
Jeers and Affronts they could invent. And the Queen who took a great liberty of
Speech, had certain Expressions for him in French, which she was ashamed to
speak there in the Italian Language, because those Terms do not make such an
Impression in a strange Language as in our own, told Diana one day she had
found a Nickname which agreed with him best of any, which was Limberham or
Fumbler. The Duchess applauded it, and both in concert cried, Let the Devil
take the Fumbler.

Don Benigno durst come no more to the Queen's, though he used to go thither
very often, and particularly when she kept her Academy, whither also the finest
Wits in Rome resorted; and he took the pretense of being unwilling to have any
Conversation with the Marquis del Monte, whom the Queen had made great Master
of her Horse; and, to spite her Majesty, he obliged his Sister the Princess
Altamira, to turn away the Page she had, who was Brother to Seignora Octavia,
and which she had taken out of respect to the Queen.

But Love was not the only amusement of this Royal Lady; Chemistry was her more
serious business, though she had lost considerable Sums of Money by it at
Hamburgh; and particularly with one Borry a Chemist of Milan, who is now
condemned to perpetual Imprisonment for Heresy in the Castle of St. Angelo,
and who returned her only Cinders and Smoke for 2 or 3 thousand Crowns. The
unfortunate Experiments she had often made, excited her to go forward in the
search of the Philosopher's Stone. As soon as she arrived at Rome, she built a
great Laboratory in her Palace, and consumed the best part of her ready Cash,
not so much in Coals and Ingredients, as the Roguery of the People she employed
in this miserable Trade; for it is ordinary with great People to be robbed by
those they put the most Confidence in. Cardinal Azzolini, who would not openly
oppose himself to this her predominant Passion, presented a Chemist to her, who
was named Bandiere the Son of an Apothecary, in a little City of Romagina near
to Bologne, thinking that by this means he had sufficiently engaged her to keep
within some reasonable bounds, himself pretending to follow the Queen's
Inclination for Chemistry. But though this Man rendered an exact Account of all
things to appearance, the Cardinal easily found out a great deal of Roguery,
seeing there was scarce a Month passed, wherein the Expense upon Chemistry,
which they called Distillation, did not amount to three, and sometimes four
thousand Livres. And notwithstanding his Pretenses, he had only some Secrets in
Chemistry of little use, and sustained himself upon nothing but incoherent
Tattle, and fabulous Receipts of fine Experiments, which he had never made. In
a little time he had the Artifice to insinuate himself very much into the
Queen's Favor, by his unreasonable Complaisance, so easy was she to be
governed by People of no Account. But this way of Proceeding did not always
succeed; for sometimes she beat him, and handled him very ill more ways than
one. It Is impossible to reckon up all the Rogueries he had done in his Life;
but above all, while he was supported by the Queen: And yet notwithstanding the
ill Treatment he sometimes met with, he made bold with all Mankind, except the
Queen whom he was forced to flatter, and such as durst show their Teeth; for to
these he was very humble, being the greatest Coward in the World, though he
always went armed with Pistols and Bayonnets. He was a Liar to the utter-Point,
and a Traitor to that did him good, as well as those that hurt him; very much
addicted to Women, and almost always drunk when he had no business with the
Queen.

After the Heat of this Princess was a little abated; (that is to say, after
three or four Years,) she was willing to content the Cardinal, and bargain with
Bandiere to undertake this Distillation at two hundred Pistols per Month, which
he was obliged to accept of; for besides this he got Clothes, with fifteen
Crowns wages per Month, and many other little Profits; but he committed so many
Rogueries, that he must have a good memory that is able to reckon them. Those
who understand any thing of Chemistry, know what abundance of Utensils and
Instruments are requisite to such Undertakings, not only in Coals and Furnaces,
but in diverse pieces of Earth and Glass, Vials, Alembicks, Mortars, and other
Vessels of Earth and Metal. But the greatest Expense is in Drugs, Quicksilver,
Litharge, Lead, and a thousand other Ingredients which they pretend to convert
into Gold. The Queen would always go her self, to calcine, filter, distill, and
to find out that which was never found. The miserable Bandiere was the Jest of
the Queen and Cardinal, who being willing to put the Queen into a disgust of
this Trade, was very glad to see all things go cross: So that Bondiere passed
his Days with trouble enough, but the Nights brought an heap of Miseries upon
him; for then the Queen being at leisure, would keep him locked for six or
seven hours together at his Furnaces; and because she could never meet with
what she sought for, she would throw at his head any thing that came next to
her Hand, and sometimes would give him good rough blows with a Faggot-stick.

At last the Queen perceived that the Cardinal only laughed at these her
Fancies; yet because she would not break with Bandiere, but keep some measures
with him, she ordered him to make Bills of what he wanted for Manual Operation,
imagining she should save something, when he had no more the management of the
Money: So Bandiere went for his Powders and other Drugs to the Druggist: But at
the Year's end the Cardinal discovered that it came all to the same Expense.
Well the Queen left off Chemistry for a time, because her Rents from Sweden
came not so current as formerly, by reason of the War. Nevertheless she pleased
her self with making little Experiments, and to draw Salts from many things. I
have seen Bandiere bring her little Bits of Glass found in the digging of
Caves, and in the Channels of Rome, and other like Trinkets, and the Queen would
sometimes commend him, and sometimes again reward him with a Box on the Ear.
This miserable Wretch was sometimes so vexed, that he would call her a thousand
Fools, and yet no body durst tell the Queen of it, because she thought they
bore Malice against him; and that the Reports which were told of him were
nothing but ill Will, on purpose to destroy him. But after all this unhappy
Man's Sufferings, he made all others suffer in their turns, because he would be
always whispering Stories to the Queen, having the Privilege at all times to
enter into any place where she was. Thus he became the Protector of all the
Villainies that were committed in her Majesty's Quarter; and being in League
with the Marquis D^l Monte, would discover to him all that passed between this
Princess and the Cardinal; which was easy for him to do, knowing all corners
of the Palace where he might hide himself to hearken. The Cardinal being
enraged against him, and grown almost desperate, showed him a Trick of Kindness
on purpose to destroy him. He begun to caress him afresh, and insinuated into
the Queen to put into his Hands the Alms of an hundred Crowns a Months, which
she caused to be distributed to the poor Families of Rome. He was transported
with this pious Office; but he composed himself after such a manner in the
doing of it, that the Cardinal had quickly an Opportunity to revenge himself of
the Vexations he had given him. For this Rogue in distributing the Alms,
instead of giving it to honest Families according to the Queen's Intention,
gave it to People of an ill Life to satiate his infamous Passions. And because
he was obliged to show Certificates of Poverty signed by the Parish Priests, he
counterfeited them, or else applied himself to Women and Maids of Reputation to
procure true Certificates from them; and he so ordered it that he subborn'd the
greater part of them at the 2d. or 3d. Visit of Charity, to give them an Alms
in secret. Those who would not abandon themselves to his Lusts, were deprived
of the Alms; and he gave in his Report that they were People of a scandalous
Reputation, and did not deserve the Queen's Charity. They murmured and
complained to the Cardinal, but he would take no Cognizance of the Matter,
craftily sending both the poor People and the Parish Priests to make their
Complaint to the Queen. A zealous Curate, one of those whom they call the
Pope's Barboni, went boldly one Day to find her Majesty; but whether it was
that the Priest did not play his part well, or that the Queen would not take
notice of his weakness, and her ill choice of Bandiere for her private Almoner,
the Barboni was child, and Bandie^e denying his ill Actions was believed upon
his Word. But as he was a Wretch whom no Politics could make wise, he went on
at such a rate, that Pope Innocent XI. had Complaints against him from all
sides.

Cardinal Azzolini going to an Audience of the Holy Father, found that he was
angry, and he told him of it in such a manner, that the Cardinal could not
forbear writing a Letter to the Queen about those Complaints which were made
against Bandiere. The Letter was brought unhappily at a time when the Queen was
embroiled with the Cardinal about other Affairs, insomuch that it was not well
received; nay, on the contrary, she gave it to Bandiere out of spite to the
Cardinal, saying, Bandiere these wicked Priests would ruin thee with me; but
laugh at both of them, for I will always take care of thee.

Bandiere kneeling down before the Queen, with Crocodiles Tears implored her
protection, and afterward showed the Cardinal's Letter to all the World, and
gave him all the ill Language imaginable. The poor Cardinal seeing the Queen
had thus sacrificed him, made as if he never minded it; and because of his
Heirship to the Queen, suffered both this and a great deal more from others, as
well as Bandiere. But the Cardinal's Heirs were well revenged upon this Wretch,
and reduced him to that pass that he perished for want, after having been the
reproach and scorn of all that knew him. For as he had a wicked Tongue, and had
offended every body, he found no Friend in time of need, neither ought it to be
at all wondered at, if seeing he had dishonored so many honest Families, God
permitted the same to fall upon his.

He had a Daughter tolerably handsome, but very ambitious, who was not
contented with the Clothes her Father would bring her, because being covetous,
she often wanted what was necessary: She therefore contrived to have them
another way than from him. For a certain Abbot happened to fall in Love with
her, who was an Italian Gentleman descended from an honorable Family, and was
called the Abbot Vannini; which Man became notorious for his Extravagancies, as
you will find in the progress of this History. For this our Prelate always
loving a sweet Bit, and never valuing the Expense of it, his Propositions were
quickly list'ned to; and the Conclusion was made betwixt them without any great
Preliminaries: For in Italy they come presently to the Point in these kind of
Affairs, because Opportunities are more scarce there than elsewhere; and when
such are presented, Lovers never fail to take their Advantage.

One Night, though very late, as Bandiere according to his Custom came from the
Queen, he found a Guard at the Door of his Lodging, who would not suffer him to
enter; and because Bandiere used to say he could lie when he would at the
Queen's, where he had a Bed, our Lovers did not expect he would have come to
interrupt their Pleasures, and trouble the Merriment. Bandiere being thus kept
out of his House, laid his hand upon his Pistol; but whether it were that it
did not take Fire, or that he knew not how to make use of it, two Men took hold
of his Clothes and drubb'd him soundly, but did not kill him. These troublesome
Companions went along with him as far as his good Friend the Marquis Del
Monte's House, where he got in, and sheltered himself, passing the rest of the
Night very ill. And, after all this, his Daughter's Lover marched off at his
own leisure; but the next Day this Story was spread through the whole City.
Bandiere complained of it to the Queen, who as she sometimes paid him home,
told him, that he ought not to think it strange, if the same measure were meted
to him that he himself measured to others. Cardinal Azzolini laughed with all
his Heart; and the Marquis Del Monte having had his part of the Concern, would
fain have persuaded the Queen to put this young Woman into a Monastery for some
time. But she was only a Young Thing, who had married her self without her
Parent's Consent to one who was better Acquainted with the Daughter, than the
Father: But the poor Wretch died in Childbed of her first Child.

Now the Queen did not only search after the Art of making Gold, but pretended
to find out the Universal Medicine, and the Secret of living an hundred Years.
As she was very easy of belief, having read a Secret of this kind in the
Mercury Gallant, so she would try it upon her own Person, without any
Precaution; but she quickly began to swell so much that she was ready to burst,
and had been in a very ill condition, if she had not received a speedy Remedy.
This Experiment not succeeding, she suffered her self to be deluded afterward
by an English Chemist, who having entertained her one Day with a great many
things which were very curious, assured that he had had a Secret to prolong
Life, and that by it Persons being of about fifty or sixty Years of Age, might
maintain themselves in the same Vigor to Sixscore Years, and much further. He
said he had made the Application upon himself, and being 70 Years old as he
pretended, he had yet a good Appetite, slept well, and had all the Functions of
Life as a Man of fifty Years old. And for a proof of his Knowledge, he showed
her Certificates from a great number of Persons, whom he had not only cured of
strange Distempers, but had made Young again, and given them Vigor. He said he
had tried the Experiment upon the Marquis Del Monte, who showed thereupon
anextream Vigor in the Combat of Love, and assured the Queen, that the Marquis
(though he were 60 Years old) had never more Vigor than at that time. He needed
say no more to set the Queen on fire. This English Mountebank, knew so well how
to persuade her, that she would have this Secret at any rate. He professed that
he would never teach it to any Person, but that he would furnish her with a
Dose which should be sufficient to keep by her without revealing his Secret,
because Her Majesty being the most Generous Queen in the World, would make no
difficulty of teaching it to a great many People, and for his part this Arcanum
was all the Treasure he had. At last the Queen being eager, promised him ten
thousand Crowns for his Secret, upon Condition he should go immediately out of
Italy, and come thither no more. But he every Day raised his Price higher and
higher, and the Marquis Del Monte who intended to have his Share herein,
persuaded the Queen by any means not to let this Secret escape, and the thing
was carried so far, that he was offered thirty thousand Crowns. But Cardinal
Azzolini having understood it, was all over in a cold Sweat at so great a Sum;
for the Queen was ready to have given him a Bill upon the Bank of Santo
Spirito, which was engaged for Payment, or would have put her Jewels into his
Hands for Security.

One Day being among her Maids, as they were combing her Head, she said, I will
put my self into the Mode now more than ever; my Secret will be vhemently
desired by some People, and rejoice others. I hope in God to live yet longer
than I have lived, to a large extent of Years, and to see a dozen Popes more.
Then I shall tell them a great many things which I can assure them I have seen,
though Cardinal Ricci said of me, The Queen of Sweden eats a great deal, and
digests but little, because she does not chew it well; and this will hasten her
Death. And now the old Fool is dead himself, but as for me I shall live a long
time; and other such like things. But all these fine Hopes presently vanished;
for Cardinal Azzolini, with an hundred Pistols, sent this English Man out of
Rome, though himself afterward showed a Weakness of the like kind, in his last
Sickness, where he would have given two thousand Crowns for a Pill composed by
the Marquis Santanell.

The Marquis Del Monte lost a Gudgeon, by the English flight, but he had many
other Supplies, being accustomed to live upon Rapine. The Charge of Captain of
the Queens Quarter or Barrier, furnished him continually with new Means of
getting Money; But Play swallowed up all. When he was in Debt he would appear
before the Queen with a Melancholy Air, and she demanding the reason of his
Sadness, he would tell her with admirable Address, That he had lost at Play.
She saw him thus oftener than he really had Played, and would give him Bills
from thirty to forty Pistols, more or less, according as it happened. For the
Queen reserved a certain Sum per Month, for small Uses, and sometimes she had
certain Funds out of Sweden, which she kept in private to be liberal with, upon
occasion. But she did not so often distribute them according to Peoples Merits,
and in proportion to the Services done her, but almost always by Fancy, and
without distinction. The Marquis had caused his Wife and Children to come to
Rome, with the Marquis Mario his Brother, and he would have found a great
difficulty to maintain so numerous a Family, without his Industry, because he
had but very small Funds from his own Patrimony, and no more than thirty Crowns
a Month from the Queen. It Is true that the other Advantages which he had from
this Princess came to as much more, for she paid the Hire of his Lodgings, kept
him a Coach, gave him also many Privileges and Exemptions of Customs of Goods,
and many other things.

This Marquis who had a mind to furnish his House at the Expense of such as
retired into the Queens Quarter, had a thousand Intrigues with the Jews; and it
would be tedious to reckon up all the Stories of the Cheats he put upon them.

I will only mention one, whereby he got a great many good Pictures, without
disbursting one Farthing. He had a Tailor, whom they called the Liegeois, as
being of the Country of Liege, who had not much Wit, though he was a Man of
Substance. He had an Acquaintance with some Flemish Painters, who were able Men
at their Art., from whom he had very valuable Pictures, because they were
Originals, for Clothes, the Hire of his House, and a little ready Money. He had
bought a little House at Langara, within the Queen's Jurisdiction, or
Franchises, and it had a little Garden well Cultivated, full of Flowers and
Fruits; and among other things, with fine Oranges and Limons in Vessels of
Earth, which were the Delight of this poor Man. The Marquess went to him, and
demanded this House in the Queen's Name, to lodge a Swedish Gentleman in, who
was one of the Queen's Receivers, and was then at Rome. The Liegeois at first
refused this Demand; but being threatened with ill Treatment, he presented a
Petition to the Queen, who had no regard at all to it, but on the contrary,
forced him to give the Swede the best Room in his House. The Marquess went to
see him often, and the Flowers and Fruits in his Garden.

This pierced the poor Proprietor to the Quick; and to redeem himself out of
this Vexation, he threw himself at the Marquiss's Feet, who promised him to
Dislodge the Swede, provided he would lend him four of his best Pictures to
take Copies of. You shall not only Copy them, said the Tailor, but I will give
you the Originals with all my heart, provided you will grant me your Protection
The Marquess Embracing him, promised him he would, and Dislodged the Suede, who
was however just upon his departure out of the Country. By this Trick, the
Marquess got four Original Pictures, which might be worth about 12 or 14
Pistols a piece; and sometime after, he desired four more, only to Copy, which
he promised to restore, without performance, deferring it so long till the
Liegeois Died; and his Heirs could never regain them: For not long after, the
Marquess Del Monte made a Voyage into Sueden, where he staid a long time, and
at his retnrn alleged Prescription, and would never hear them talked of any
more.

At the same time he was preparing his Chambers for the Taylor's Pictures, he
contrived to fill his Cellar with good Wine for nothing. There was a cheating
Rogue named Gaspar, a Joyner by Trade, who wanted the Marquiss's Protection,
which he bought to the Price of 80 Barrels of excellent Wine, and it cost
nothing either to the one or the other. He had a Friend, one of the Queen's
Suisses, called Melchior, who was a Sergeant, and kept a Cabaret or place to
sell Wine at Langara, where he had a good Trade by the Refugees and other
wicked People, who retired into the Queen's Franchises, because they would not
pay their Debts, or to avoid Punishment for their Crimes. Melchior, who was as
great a Cheat as Gaspar, went with his Comerade, into the Villages about Rome,
where the best Wines in the Country grow, as at Frescati, Albano, Gensano,
Tivoli, and others, where they bought 300 Barrels of Wine, at half a Pistol a
Piece to be paid in Rome, paying only a little Money in Earnest, to cover the
Cheat. The Marquess, as we have said before, had 80 Barrels of the best Wine
Albano afforded; Gaspar had twenty Barrels, and Melchior the rest to sell by
Retail. And the Merchants doubted nothing for three or four Months, but
afterward came to Rome to demand Payment. At first they gave them good words,
to draw the thing at length, and hoped to tire them by sending them so often
back without doing any thing. They Addressed themselves to Cardinal Azzolini,
who shrugg'd up his Shoulders, and advised them to present a Petition to the
Queen, which they did, but they lost a great deal of time, because the Queen
was very often not to be seen. The Cardinal, who was willing to have Justice
done, favored them all he could with the Queen. She sent the Petition to the
Marquess Del Monte, and ordered him, as Captain of the Queen's Quarter, to see
Satisfaction given to these poor Merchants. This was to make him Judge of his
own Cause; and he ordered it accordingly, for he gave them nothing but good
Words, and appointed several days of Payment, one after another: At last for
Form sake, he called the Debtors before him, in the presence of the Creditors;
sometimes they denied the Debt, and sometimes quarreled with the Price and the
Quality of the Wine, pretending they had been Cheated. At last, one of the
boldest of the Merchants presented a Petition to the Pope; and the Marquess
understanding it, persuaded the Queen not to hear them, because they had
Affronted him, in recurring to another Justice besides his own. Upon a second
Petition to the Pope, his Holiness ordered the Governor of Rome to see good
Justice done; and thereupon the Joyner was taken out of the Queen's Quarter,
and put into Prison, but being insolvent, he came out at three Months end, by
listing himself for a Soldier. The Goods of the Swisse were Seized in
Execution, and sold by the Queeen's Permission; and he was obliged to serve a
Year without Wages. So that with this and some Money the Queen gave in Charity,
the Merchants were paid some well, some ill, and some scarce any at all.

The Marquess being got out of this untoward Business, thought of nothing else
but Diverting himself; and the Franchises of the Queen's Quarter furnished him
every day with an opportunity of satisfying his irregular Passion for Women.
For those whom Debauchery had caused to retire thither, were obliged to abandon
themselves to him, that they might have permission to prostitute themselves to
others. When they were afraid of Danger, or too great in Number, he was
contented with a Present, to let them stay in the Queen's Quarter. And you
might frequently see Maids, who run away thither from their Father's Houses;
and Wives that forsook their Husbands Beds, to live publicly in a Crime,
without fear of being Punished, so that our Barbon got Money by them, and might
produce them to his Friends. He ordinarily kept Company with Prince Columberi,
who was the Town-Bull of Rome, and let him know the fine things, and pleasant
Recreations of the Queen's Quarter. This great Prince, who was very
Accomplished, had no other fault, but that he was addicted to Women: But having
too great a Soul to approve the Cheats of the Marquess, he was yet very glad to
see by his means, fresh Women as often as he pleased, to amuse himself withal.
For indeed, the Great Lords do not know for the most part how to spend their
time, when they are neither exercised in War or Hunting. Though he was far from
being Liberal, he never Cheated any body* no not so much as one single Person;
and if he did not pay them in Money, furnished them with Wine, Wheat and Coals.
For having a great deal of Land in and about Rome, he did not always receive
his Rents in ready Cash, and therefore it was more commodious for him to pay
rather in Provisions than Money; reserving the latter, only for new
Acquaintance. To these he would give only a Testoon of about the value of
Eighteen pence, never more nor less; for he was not of their Humor, who ruin
themselves by Women, as the Spaniards often do. And indeed, the great number of
those he dealt withal, made him put a low Price upon them, and he found his
Account much better among the Lesser, than with the Great Ladies, who are not
to be enjoyed without great Expenses; for he was not so blind to sacrifice his
Interests to his Pleasures. As the Princess his Wife had forsaken him, he was
not of a Complexion to forsake the Sex, but therefore gave himself up to
Pleasure, and would taste of all, without setting any Bounds to himself. No
Woman 'scap'd him that had any Dealings of that kind, and he was welcome every
where by reason of his Birth and the Charms of his Person; For^ he was well
made, and very well provided with the Talents of Nature, and principally those
appropriated to the Pleasures of Venus.

Although his Prince would see many Women, yet he had but one which he
constantly kept; to this he paid his Respects, and no body durst touch her for
fear of being Murdered upon the least Signal, by some of his Bravo's, of which
he had always twenty at command. She I am going to speak of, was Daughter to a
certain Widow named Manchol. Prince Columbieri did as many of the long Robe do
at Rome, who not being able to Contain, are obliged to make a fair Appearance,
and choose out a poor Maid, such as they like best, both for Beauty and other
Respects, and keep her at a distance from them, paying her Lodging with a
Salary of nine or ten Crowns a Month, where they recreate and themselves as
often as they please, without permitting her to see any other Company. And this
management having lasted some Years, or till such such time as the Vestal
begins to grow Old, they put her off to some Vltra montain, Ar^ificer, or
^^adesman newly come thither, who Marries her for a Virgin. After this, some of
them live Virtuously. But they that cannot forsake their vicious Courses, live
with their Husbands till such time as their Debaucheries are discovered, and
then they withdraw into the Franchises of the Queen, or some Ambassador, and
there live freely, according to their former manner of life, till such time as
Sickness or old Age, disorders or quite break it off. There happened one time a
villainous case of this Nature, which cries out for Vengeance. One of these
sorts of Maids having Married an Artizan who was a Stranger, and excellent in
his Art; She left him at three Weeks end, because he would force her to live in
Order; and therefore she contrived with her Mother, to destroy her Husband; and
the Measures being taken accordingly, one day as the Mother did entertain her
Son-in-law in a Chamber with a long Discourse, her Daughter brought in a Man at
another door, where on a sudden they were Surpised by the Sbirries, who were
hired and let in on purpose, to carry them all to Prison. And there was
immediately a Criminal Process formed against the Husband, at the request of
the Fiscal, who was also gained, and the poor Man was condemned to the Galleys
for five Years, for a contented Cuckold, or such a one as will suffer his Wife
to be Kissed in his Presence for Money, and died in Misery at Civita Veccia,
while his Wife in the mean time prostituted her self to all the People in Rome.

But to return to Manchol, Prince Columbieri had Lodged her in a Private House,
but pleasant, with a fine Garden, toward St. Mary Majeure, where he furnished
her with all things necessary. She had two Daughters, one of which was called
Menica, and the other Antonia. The first was that which the Prince Loved: She
was one of the finest Women in Rome, of a curious Stature, the turn of her
Visage well made, fine Eyes, and the finest Teeth in the World, an admirable
Neck, and Sung well: In short, there was no Defect in her Person, except that
her left Arm was a little shorter than the right, with a little Hand, which was
something dry. Her Sister was a great fat Woman, and of a Swarthy Complexion.
The Prince Charmed with his Menica, had a fancy to show her to the Marquess Del
Monte, to challenge him to show any Woman in the Queen's Quarter that was
comparable to her.

All these three made a bargain to bring these Girls to walk to the Banqueting
House of Farnese, at the Gate of St. Pancrass. The Marquess also promised to
bring his Damosel, who was then a small Remblant, or the Leavings of the
Queen's Tailor; yet she was very Handsome and full of Play, and was called
Rosina. They came pretty early to the Banqueting House, in Coaches with the
Windows shut, and in company of their Mothers. Our three Palad^nes came later,
every one in his Coach. The Marquess Del Monte, brought a course Dinner, which
he had made ready at the Cabarets of the Gate Settignana. But our Nymphs gave
notice to their old Sweethearts, that if they had sufficient Dexterity, to come
into the Banqueting House without being seen, they would steal from them a
Moment to entertain them in Private. The World is always full of Waggery, for
though these Gentlemen Treated their Damsels well, they were mad that they had
been Faithful so long, and almost died with longing to Betray them, so true it
is, that there is little stress to be laid upon these kind of Animals. The
three Favorites, were the Queens Tailor, a Valet de Chamber of her Majesty,
and another Tailor of the Place, d'Espagne, called Picard, a very Debauched
Fellow, no Novices in the Court of Venus, and who failed not to be there
according to the Assignation. In the enclosure of the Vineyard of Furnese,
there is a great and a little Banqueting House; in the great one is a large
Hall, marvelously built, from whence you may see the Fields as far as the Sea.
'Twas there the Feast was made, and the two Mothers of these two Girls Dined
with the Housekeeper, and our People diverted themselves together, each one
embracing his Cloris. The cunning Jades counterfeited with admirable
Dissimulation, and one would have sworn it was the first time they had been
with Men. For the Romans do know so well how to make themselves Grave, that the
most Debauched would pass for Lucretia's by their mein and outward appearance,
unless they chance to mistake when they are heated with Wine and good Cheer.
When the Chevalier had Dined, he took a Guitar and Played, to which they Danced
and Caper'd; and when they had heated themselves sufficiently, our Seniors went
to Sleep, as it is the Custom of Italy after Dinner, and gave liberty to the
Girls to walk in the Porch. But they impatient to see their ancient Gallants
again, Detatch'd themselves out one after another, and went to find them in the
little Banqueting House, carrying some remainders of the Dinner, and some
Bottles of Wine half empty along with them. These new Comers had some Advantage
of the Regale, while their good Mothers stood Centry. This was not the first
time they had been at the same Rendezvouse; for they were so well acquainted,
that they knew every Creek and Corner, and nicked their Opportunity, because
the Moments are there Precious.

But in the midst of all the Joy, our Seniors awaked and demanded their Nymphs.
Their Mothers called them, but that did not avail, for they were so impatient,
that they could not forbear to Search after them. But in the interim, the Valet
de Chamber and the two Tailors slipped away cunningly, and leaped over the Wall
into the Queen's Garden below, going as softly as they could through the
Thickets and Brushes. The Girls were found Blood-red and all in an Heat; and
our Seniors, who were old experienced Gamesters, got Ladders and looked over
the Wall, to see if they could perceive the Tracts of any Body. The Marquess
Del Monte, who knew the place best, discovered the Matter by some prints of
their Feet, but had the Discretion to say nothing, and to tell them on the
contrary, that it was a false Alarm. They Diverted themselves to the full^till
the Evening, or rather the Night came; and they had no sooner retired, but the
Marquess told all to the Queen, who was ready to die with Laughing, and said
there was no trusting to Beasts without Tails: Those were her very words.

Love and Debauchery though they were a great part, were not the only business
of the Marquess Del Monte, for at the same time he had a regard to his
Interests; for his Affairs being but in an untoward posture, he took all
occasions to better them, and therefore demanded his Tribute from those who
sheltered themselves in the Queen's Quarter. He helped the Merchants as much as
he could to Cheat the Custom-House of all sorts of Merchandise. A Cashier of
the Mount of Piety, run away into the Queen's Quarter with a Strumpet called
Isabella, and three Thousand Crowns he had Robbed the Bank of, was sent away
some days after in the Queen's Coach, as far as the Confines of the Realm of
Naples, by the means of a Present of two Hundred Pistols he made the Marquess.
Some time after, one of the Cashiers of the Bank de Spirito Santa, named
Paterno, fled into the Queen's Quarter with ten Thousand Crowns in Gold and
Silver, which he had Cheated the Bank of; the Marquess conducted him in the
Queen's Coach, as far as Mantua, for the Sum of 2000 Crowns. This Wretch went
to Hamburgh to Teixere, upon the Marquiss's Recommendation, where he died in
the Flower of his Age, having shortened his Life by Debaucheries and vicious
Courses.

When the Debauched Monks had a mind to divert themselves with Public Women,
they commonly came to the Caberets of Port Settignana, where they were covered
from Justice and the Censure of their Superiors. The Marquess always found a
Seat at their Table, and perhaps something else at the end of the Feast. And
indeed he let no opportunity slip, to make his Advantages upon the Chapter of
Interest and Love. But however, he was sometimes mistaken, as may be seen in
the following Instance.

A Piemontois Lady, the Wife of a Marquess in that Country, I know not for what
reason, went away from her Husband, and came to the Queen, disguised under a
false Name. Her Husband being angry that his Wife had left him, or rather her
Parents complained to the Duke of the ill Usage of her Husband, and moved his
Royal Highness to send after her to Stop her. This was done, but it proved too
late; for having always the wind of the Pursuers, she came to Rome without any
Obstacle, and went directly into the Queen's Quarter. The Marquess Del Monte
having Notice of it, did not fail to Introduce himself, and went readily to
wait upon her. She was one of the finest of a brown Complexion, the Court of
Savoy had. This Lady seeing her self under the necessity of having a Protector,
recommended her self to the Marquess Del Monte, who brought her to the Queen.
Her Majesty seeing a Woman so fine, well Shaped, and of considerable Quality,
had all the consideration and regard for her possible. But in the interim, the
Duke of Savoy had wrote to the Pope, and Cardinal Francis Barberini, Dean of
the Sacred College. The Pope at that time would take no cognizance of it
himself, but spoke to Cardinal Barberini to Address himself to the Queen about
it; which was difficult, because this Princess was angry that the Duke of Savoy
had not sent to her. The Savoyard Lady seeing so many Powerful People at work
to force her back to her Husband, cast her self at the Queen's Feet, humbly
begging her to take Compassion of her, because her Husband was the Cruellest of
Men; and if she should be constrained to return to him again, he would
certainly make an end of her Life. Cardinal Barberini came to the Queen under
pretense of a Visit, and falling into Talk about the Piemontois Lady, he
exhorted the Queen to restore her to her Parents. The Queen who knew that
Cardinal Barberini had received a Letter from the Duke of Savoy, desired to
know, her self seeming ignorant of the Matter, why he concerned himself about
this Lady, seeing nobody had as yet addressed themselves to her upon that
account. The Cardinal answered, that the Duke of Savoy doing him the Honor to
Write about certain Affairs, had desired him in the same Letter, that if he
knew the Lady was at Rome, as he was assured she was, he would oblige her to
retrrn to her Husband, and had given his word upon the Faith of a Prince, that
her Husband should treat her with all sort of good Usage, and would take the
trouble upon himself to compose the Difference betwixt them. The Queen Answered
him, that when she had the same Assurances, she would restore her, and that in
the mean time, she has promised her Protection, and that she would deliver her
to no Body, but such Hands wherein the Lady might trust her* self with all
manner of Security. Hereupon the Cardinal replied, that he thought her Majesty
would have been satisfied upon his single word; that delay in a thing of this
Nature, would but exasperate her Husband; that he would entreat the Queen to
consider that the Lady's being in a particular House, looked a little strange;
and if her Majesty would acquiesce either in his Opinion, or most humble
Request, he would take care to put her into a Convent. Hereupon the Queen began
to be hot, and demanded whether he would put her into the Sculetta, or St.
Jaques, in the company of Whores; for it is there Married Women are shut up who
are Surpised in those kinds of Gallantries. Barberini was hot also in his
Turn, for being every whit as Passionate as the Queen, he could not forbear
telling her, that he knew he had given her Majesty good Counsel, and that
perhaps they would make but a bad bargain of the Matter. Upon this, the Queen
was downright angry, and after many words and a great deal of course Language
between them, called Barberini Vecchio Matto, Old Fool, and conducted him quite
out of hearing with those words. Barberini made no other Answer, but Vecchiosi,
ma matto no. I am Old, it is true, but I am no Fool for all that. But afterward
Azzolini interposed himself, the Pope made a Noise, the Lady was Restored, and
at last of all, the Marquess Del Monte got nothing for his Pains.

The Marquess was not the only Officer that diverted himself, but others
managed their Intrigues with greater secrely, and did not give so great a
Scandal: But above all, there was none that managed their Affairs with so much
privacy as Count Boccabella the Queen's Groom. He was a Man of a fine Stature,
but gross, deformed, stufft up, of a very amorous Complexion, and one that
slipped no occasion of satisfying his Sensuality. Instead of dividing his Love,
as formerly, among many Persons of different Humors and Tempers, he resolved,
in the Instance I am now speaking of, to reunite his wandering Affections, and
fix them all upon a single Object; but instead of a Maid, who had been at
perfect Liberty to dispose of her self, he took away a Married Wife, and
carried her off in this manner:

The Climate of Italy, and particularly Rome, is so hot, that it is no wonder if
all the People there are inclined to Love: The Women, above all, when they
follow their own Inclination, and suffer themselves to be guided by the
Dictates of corrupt Nature, are most addicted to it. Their Diet contributes not
a little thereunto: For, because they pretend that Water is crude and
unwholesom, the Women and Maids drink as much, nay, more Wine than the Men,
without making any Ceremony upon the matter, and especially the Vulgar. Besides
this, they eat very often Leeks, Onions, and Garlic, which they swallow down
like Sweetmeats: Cellery, Feunel, Artichoaks, Mushroms, Trousles, Spiceries,
and, in a word, all sorts of Aliments which are hot and provocative, are their
Delight; and there are but very few to be found there, that have any
extraordinary Appetite for things tending to Mortification. It Is true, they are
kept up very close; but because things forbidden make us long after them the
more, this constraint is not at all proper to inspire Continence; nay, on the
contrary, they believe for the most part, that they are not accountable for the
Honor which Men dare uot trust in their hands. But to speak the truth, there
is never so much reason to keep them up, as when Ambassadors enjoy the
Franchises of Quarters; for when they fly thither, a Person cannot re-call his
Child, nor an Husband his Wife; nay, further, when a Maid is Marriagable, that
is to say, above Twenty Years old, and runs away from her Father's House, and
goes to the Governor or Register, and declares that seeing her Father and
Mother have not Married her, she will turn Courtesan; he gives her his
Protection, and her Parents cannot afterward keep her up; on the contrary,
they often exercise this infamous Trade before their Eyes, and they are not
able to hinder them.

It happened ill to a Coachman of Burgundy, Servant to Cardinal Altieri, who
knew not this Custom, though he had lived Twenty four Years in Rome. His
Daughter being unfortunately run away from him, to set up this hopeful
Occupation, he found out the Place where she was, and brought her back to his
House, where he lashed her stoutly; but this was looked upon as a Breach of the
Public Liberty, and Justice took her away again; and if he had not had good
Friends, he had been publicly chastised. This is hard to believe of so Holy a
City as Rome; but it happens sometimes, and they obliged to tolerate such
Abuses, for fear of Spite, and some other Reasons, which the Reader will find
in the sequel of this History.

This is certain, that when a Woman addicts her self to Ill, she always finds
some way or other to satisfy her Passion: To instance ^n what happened here some
Years ago in a Merchant of Terre-Sanguina, who had a Wife, believed to be the
Mirror of Chastity; and he watched her narrowly; for as the Italian Nation is
very distrustful, he locked her up when he went abroad, and never lost sight of
her when she went out, going along with her both to the Church and to walk; and
yet notwithstanding all the care he could take, she fell in Love with a Young
Man that passed often that way, and made Love to her by Signs, which is a
Language well understood by the Italians. She found a way to let him know, That
if he came upon a certain Saturday at night, he should find the Gate open at an
Hour she told him of; and to deceive her Husband, staid while he was in bed.
She was no sooner come to bed also, but she cried out, O God! Husband, I have
no Cravat nor Sleeves for you to wear to morrow, and I never thought on it; I
must rise again to wash and iron them quickly. The Husband, who believed she
spoke truth, let her do it, and slept soundly, having been at work all day by
himself; for the Women there never put their foot into the Shop. In the mean
time, the Merchant's Wife comes down, and opens the Door to her Lover, to whom
she prostituted her self, and then returned to her Husband, as if she had but
just iron'd the small Linen. Next Morning the Merchant went to trim himself at
the Barber's, where was usually good store of Company; his Wife's Lover was
there also, who not knowing the Merchant, old all the story of his Adventure
with the Merchant's Wife, whom he had the Indiscretion to name: But it cost him
his Life; for he was Poniarded the same Night ar he went home. Neither did his
Wife stay long for the Punishment of her Crime; for as Men dare, and attempt
all things in Italy, her Husband brought her Fruit to eat, which he had
poisoned beforehand; and she perceived nothing 'till the Poison began to work
its Effect; and then he reproached her with Unfaithfulness, Injustice, and
Baseness, and exhorted her to prepare for Death, acknowledging that he had
poisoned her. He sent for the Curate, and in the mean time fled away, taking
with him all the Money and Jewels, and what he could conveniently carry
besides, and was never more heard of.

But to return to Count Boccabella: He having an Intrigue with a Tradesman's
Wife, was resolved to carry her off; and they agreed together, that it should
be upon a Wednesday in March, when her Husband went to St. Peter's Church,
where there was great Devotion, and a grand concourse of People, because of the
Indulgences given at that time. As she was going under the Columns of the broad
Passage, called St. Peter's Place, she set up a cry, O my God! I have lost my
Chaplet of Beads; but it must be fallen near this place; for I had it as I
passed by the Penitentiary. In Italy the Women always wear a Chaplet in their
Hands when they walk in the Streets, and are incessantly mumbling over their
Pater-Noster's. Hers was of Coral, or Granat, with great Silver Medals. Stay
here, says the poor Novice of a Husband, I will return by and by, and perhaps I
may find it. This sweet Beast of a Wife desired him to make haste; but as soon
as ever his back was turned, she advanced three or four steps forward, and on
the other side of the Columns, she found one of the Queen's Coaches, into which
she stepped, and was carried to Longara to Count Boccabella, where she stayed as
long as he lived, the Count's Domestics knowing not one word of it. They only
wondered that their Master eat all alone; that he served himself, and carefully
locked the Door after him; that he consumed as much Meat as would serve two;
and, that there was no body entered into his Apartment, which was called The
Noble, because he kept his Fair One enclosed there. But when the thing was once
become customary, they took it for Fancy, which caused the Admiration in some
measure to cease.

It is surprising that this Woman should live so many Years in Adultery,
without speaking to any body, and without the least sense of Religion. Count
Boccabella died suddenly of an Apoplexy, at a time when he thought least of it,
and some say in the very Act, and that he was drawn off by force: A fit End for
such a Life! But one would never have imagined such a thing of a Man that
pretended to be a Devotee, and was a Member of one of the Principal
Fraternities of Rome, I mean that which wears a particular Mark upon their
Garments, and practice all manner of Spiritual Exercises. But howsoever the
thing were, never was Woman in so great a Perplexity; for as soon as it was
known he was dead in that manner, there was a great Alarm in the House, and the
Woman was in such a confusion and consternation she knew not what to do: But
when she had recovered herself a little, she sent to find out the Marquess Del
Monte, and falling upon her knees, with Tears trickling down, besought him to
procure the Queen's Protection for her.

This Princess being informed of the Accident, hindered Justice from taking
cognizance of the matter, and the rather, because he was one of her Domestics,
and dead in her Quarter. The Corpse of the Count was carried to the
Parish Church of St. Dorothy, and there interred without any Ceremonies. And as
for this miserable Woman, the Queen put her among the Penitents, where she
entered voluntarily, choosing to be shut up there, rather than return to her
Husband, from whom she had no reason to expect a kind Reception, after such an
injury to his Bed. The Marquess, who would do nothing but upon Interest,
pretended to obtain some Favors for his Pains; but she was so afflicted, she
could not so much as hear him, and so he passed it by, having otherwise
wherewithal to recompense himself: But he did so many Exploits and injurious
things, and the Complaints against him came so fast to the Queen, that she was
obliged to turn him out, at least in appearance, from being Captain of her
Quarter, and to give it to Count Vasenau, who was Captain of her Suiss Guards.

Count Vasenau was Natural Son to Ladislaus King of Poland, and a Polish
Damosel: He had a delicate and forcible Wit, a Soul filled with Greatness and
Integrity; and you might see something Noble in all his Manners, which
corresponded to the Nobility of his Birth; but he had nothing handsome in his
Face; which however is no mighty Fault in a Man's Phisiognomy. He clothed so
fine (for he followed none but the Modes of France, of which he had generally
the first notice) that the most Genteel Persons did always imitate him; but
commonly adding something of their own, spoiled what was good in the Inventions
of the others. He had a German Gate, and was a little heavy on Horseback, which
made some People difficult to believe that he was so perfect at the Exercises
of the Body as he was reported to be. I should easily agree to his Bravery; and
there are none but those who are either malicious or misinformed, and have been
at Madrid or Holland, that can dispute it; and there is none of them perhaps
will say they had measured Swords with him, as the Gascon Captain, who was in
the Spanish Service, did. His great Patience in suffering Affronts, which
passed for Insensibility and Cowardice, has given occasion to some to form
injurious Sentiments concerning him: But however, it is not always
insensibility in a Man to suffer; it is Prudence to dissemble that, which the
necessity of Affairs will not sometimes permit him to revenge. If Fortune had
not been addicted to persecute the Count, without doubt he had took fire as
soon as another upon the least Injury done him. If he was at any time
complaisant toward a Person, it was rather out of Policy than Baseness of
Mind: Nor was it that he loved the making of his Fortune more than his Fame;
for we do not see that he made any great Business of the Queen's Service, which
he might have done perhaps, if he had not had so nice a Conscience. It Is well
known what Temptations were offered him by a Jew of Hamburgh, who was gained by
the Marquess Del Monte, to corrrupt him when he went into Sweden to receive the
Queen's Revenues, as we shall find in the ensuing History.

Having lost the King his Father, when as yet he had done nothing for him, he
took a Fancy to travel to the Northern Parts by his own Natural Inclination;
but they persuaded him, and that with Reason, that he might find that elsewhere
which was not to be found amongst them. He passed first into England, where he
had the Honor to insinuate himself into the Favor of King Charles the II. and
received several Obligations from him; but he was not long there; for he
happened into some Quarrels, which obliged him to repass suddenly into Holland,
where Fortune did not declare her self in his Favor: So he went into Spain,
and had good Success at the first; for his Air and Manners being very
agreeable, gave him an Entrance into all Places; and his way of Address pleased
many, and particularly Don John of Austria declared himself in his Favor. But
a certain Gallantry he had with a Spanish Lady, brought him into fresh Trouble,
so that he was constrained for his own Safety to depart out of the Estates of
the Crown of Spain. From thence he came into France, where he found a good
Establishment, and a Fortune worthy of himself.

Casimir King of Poland after his Abdication, chose France preferrably to all
others to pass the rest of his days in. This Religious Prince took Count
Vasenau near his Person, and bestowed so many Kindnesses upon him that he was
quickly envied. And some, even among the Rank of Princes, would have supplanted
him at the same time the King of Poland thought to advance him. And for this
purpose, because the King would go upon sure grounds, he proposed to
acknowledge him for his Nephew in the Parliament of Paris; but however it was
not difficult to turn this inconstant Prince from his Design, or at least to
cause him to deferr the Execution of it.

And it was deferred so long, that in the Interim the King died in the Abbey of
St. Germain de pre, so that these good Projects quickly vanished; and instead
of an Establishment, he was forced to be content with a small Matter the Prince
of Conde gave him, of what the King left at his Death. Afterward he came to
Rome to Queen Christina, who owned him for one of her Family, and put him into
the number of her Domestics. Cardinal Azzolini and the Marquess, who were
afraid of these Marks of Distinction, would willingly have seen him far enough
of, suspecting that this Kinsman and New-comer would become the chief
Favorite, and obtain the highest Reward.

However they made fair Weather to him at first, though in the mean time they
thought of nothing more than how to get rid of him. The Queen made him Captain
of her Swiss Guards, and a little while after Captain of her Quarter. But he
had this last Charge only in appearance; for the Marquis performed all the
Functions of the Office, so that we ought not to impute those disorders to the
Count, which afterward happened in the Queen's Quarter.

He spent his first two or three Years in great Tranquillity, and without any
thing remarkable except some small petty Amors: Madam de Chalais was the first
of his Inclinations; but seeing she was enclosed in a Convent of Nuns of St.
Mary, or of the Visitation at Langara, this was only an Amor of an Iron-Gate.
I have seen him often in a Moonshine Night playing upon a Violin, which he had
in his Pocket, round about the Walls of the Cloist^r; and at the sound of
certain Airs, Madam de Chalais would show a small Light in her Apartment on the
Garden-side, where the Count having found a way to enter, made Love to her
afterward by Signs. They had seen one another in Spain, when the Prince of
Chalais retired thither by reason of the Troubles he had in France; and the
Count had a Company of the Regiment of Chalais in the Spanish Service. The Duke
de Poli entered into a stricter Tie of Friendship with him than any other, and
they made a little League between themselves to uphold one another with the
Queen; nevertheless the Count diligently made his Court to Cardinal Azolini,
who treated him with a great deal of Civility, Ceremonies of which the
Italians, and above all the Courtiers are no way sparing.

This Union of the Count with the Duke lasted continually, and so much the more
agreeably on the Count's part, for that the Duke of Poli had a Daughter married
to another Duke, who passed for one of the finest and most charming Ladies of
the Age. She was rarely well shaped, and of a stature good enough: Her
Complexion was fine, the Lineaments of her Face were agreeable, and she had
the whitest Teeth in the World. Her Mouth was a little large, her Eyes black,
lively, and well defended; Her Complexion was very beautiful and uniform; Her
Hair curled and brown, a fine Neck, and indeed her whole Person had an Air of
Quality. She sung divinely well, and understood Music perfectly, and touched
all sorts of Instruments most excellently. She was then in the Flower of her
Youth, about 20 or 22 Years of Age, and as she was often in the Conversation of
the Duke her Father, the Count had seen her a long time before he fell in Love
with her. She charmed all the Company that heard her play upon the Base Viol,
as much as any Master of Music could do; which did facilitate the Conquest of
his Heart to so rare and beautiful a Person as the Duchess was, so that in a
little time he became desperately in Love. His Air, his Manners, and his Eyes
did all denote him in a strong Passion, but a certain Respect, and
Timerousness, hindered him from declaring himself. He therefore endeavored to
do that by another, which he durst not do by himself. And to this purpose he
cast his Eyes upon a Tailor which made the Dutchesses Clothes, and he was a Man
proper for a Confident. He was Discreet and Bold, Prudent and Ingenious,
Qualities necessary to the Conduct of an Amorous Intrigue. He did it with
Success, and as these sort of Tradesmen find an Entrance every where, he made
no great difficulty to acquit himself of his Commission, and in the consequence
rendered himself necessary, both to the one and the other, without being
suspected.

He then saw the Duchess the same Day, and gave her an Account of some
Love-Matters, without telling her from whence they came, and she heard him so
favorably, that he did not conceal the Name of the Count de Vasenau: The Lady
had already observed his Mysterious and Studied Arts, and did easily believe
that he was in Love; so she voluntarily heard the Declaration made to her by a
Person well known, and whom she knew to be in the Count's Interests. She
returned as agreeable an Answer as the Count could wish; but added, That she
had Measures to guard, for that she had a Severe Father, and a Jealous Husband,
who looked strictly after her. And thus the Introducer concluded the Matter
without much difficulty.

All the Secret then was deposed into these Hands, and he made so faithful a
Report to the Count, that he became more Amorous than before. He sought for an
opportunity to speak to her without his Introducer, but it was very difficult
to find one, at least to come Head to Head, or enjoy one of those happy Moments
where he might find her alone. All that could be done was within the Circles of
the Ladies of Italy, that is to say, in casting some Glances by Stealth, which
did not satisfy our Passionate Lover, who believed, that the Duchess as well
as himself, did not intend only the Language of the Eyes. But fearing that she
did not see one half of his Passion, he desired to explain himself by Billets
Deux: However, the Duchess being of Opinion that these Letters did often
discover Intrigues, which otherwise had been concealed, would never receive
any, for fear they should fall into a strange Hand. And indeed she had
Supervisors in the Country, and Spies set over her by others, as well as the
Duke of Aqua Sparta her Husband. And Ambassador who had all the Qualities to
please Ladies, even to Old Age, and had lost almost nothing of the Beauties and
agreeableness of Youth, set all Hands at work to enter into an Intrigue with
the Duchess, and he handled the Matter so neatly, that, he was with her at the
Baptizing of a Child of a French Bookseller, who lived in the Place Navona. The
Honest and Engaging Compliments of this Ceremony, were renewed every time they
saw one another, with abundance of Sweetness and Reciprocal Pleasure. The Duke
D'Etree, for it is easy to see that it is he I speak of, made a most innocent
Amusement to please the Duchess, but withal spared no cost to obtain her
favor, and he was so liberal upon all Occasions, that even Daphne her self
would have turned back again, if she had been flying away: It cannot be thought
strange therefore, if the Duchess did not hate him; but though she was very
reserved, ill Tongues did so envenome all things, that this Princess was
banished Rome, and sometime after confined by her Husband to one of his Estates;
and he was assisted in it by Cardinal Baromeo, and the Princess Corboniano who
were Related to the Duke. In the mean time the Count's Affair advanced nothing
at all, although his Confident was not asleep; for he let slip no Opportunity
to make the Duchess sensible of the Count's Torments. This expert Introducer
would speak his things so agreeably, that she would hear him with Pleasure, and
as he always mingled some pleasant things in his Discourse, he would make her
Laugh; so that the Confident had more Pleasure than the Lover himself. For
there was never a Day in the Week wherein he did not go to see the Duchess
under some Pretext or other. The Count would often go and ride about her Palace
mounted upon an excellent Horse, Calashes being then not so common, for
Cardinal Chigi first used them in imitation of the French Mode. One Night the
Count's Confident ventured to introduce him into the Dutchess's Palace, wrapped
in a Cloak, under pretense of an Address to a Damsel who was the Lady's
Confident, but they were greatly astonished to find the Duke in his
Entertaining Chamber. They strove to hide themselves in a corner to avoid
meeting him, but to no purpose, for he discovered them as they were retiring,
and was very much surpised to see two Men in his Palace at such an Hour, and
in such a place. But the Tailor who had both Courage and Dexterity, came up to
him, and told the Duke, That the Duchess h^d ordered him to come to speak with
Madamosel Palma, for so was the Maids Name, to take the Body of a Gown to make
fit, and that the other Man was his S^rvant. The good Duke searched no further
into this Affair, but permitted them to enter where Palma was. She was
Astonished to see the Count, but did promise and assure to serve him to the
uttermost; nevertheless, for want of being Liberal, his Affairs advanced but
slowly. Some time after he was in the Conversation of the Duke of Po^, and
there was Singing, with a Symphony, and Consort of Musical Instruments, and a
Comedy with Marrionnets. That Night the Count thought he should have died of
Love, for the Duchess was as Lovely and Fine as an Angel. But while these
things were transacting, the Queen's Affairs being Embroiled in Sueden, her
Majesty sent Count Vesenan to receive her Rents, and put things into better
Order. 'Twas then he must forsake her for a long time, and his Sighs and Tears
gave the Duchess an Account of his Despair; and they promised each other to
Love eternally: But the Count's Back was no sooner turned, but she forgot him.
Being arrived in Sueden, his Confident wrote to him every Post, and sent him
News of the Duchess; but he was not Faithful, because he was employed in
another Intrigue between the Duchess and a Roman Prince of great Merit.
However he was useful, in giving him notice of all the Traps and Machinations
against him, which came to his Knowledge: For the poor Gentleman had a great
deal of Persecution from the Marquess Del Monte, who was enraged that he was
not sent in his Place.

Cardinal Azzolini did what he could to calm the Queen's Mind, but the
Marquiss's Cabal aggravated it, and Landini always entertained the Queen with
this Discourse, when she was in an ill Humor. The Queen of Sueden, the young
King's Mother, did him all the Service she could with Queen Christina; but the
famous Jew at Hamburgh, called Teixere, who was in the Interests of the
Marquess Del Monte, because he had confirmed his Commission to receive the
Queen's Rents in Pomerania, and in the Duchy of Bremen, which he always
remitted to the Queen by the way of Venice, at great Interest. This Perfidious
Man, gained by the Marquess, made all things go Cross, on purpose to ruin and
destroy the Count. It Is true that he had some complaisance for this Jew, but if
they had Robbed the Queen together, his Affairs had gone better; but he had too
Generous a Soul, and a Heart too well fixed; and in all his Voy^ge and stay at
Stockholme, he comported himself as a Man of Probity, which in part was the
cause of his Ruin; for the Receivers forsook him, because he made too strict
an Examination of their Accounts. But that which completed his Ruin, was a
Letter he writ to the Queen, wherein he gave her an Account, that he had found
a way to save a great deal of Money in Exchanges, by returning her Subsidies by
the way of France, and exchanging with the Pensions the King of France gave the
Suedes; so that whereas she paid Nine per Cent by way of Venice, he reckoned
not above Two or three to make it come by France. This vexed the Queen afresh,
because it should seem by this Letter that she had a Commerce with the Minister
of France in Sueden. But he knew not she would take it ill. After all, the
Count returned to Rome, and went to the Queen with Boots and Spurs on, but she
gave him a very brisk reception, for she would scarce suffer him to speak, and
when he did, he was not heard. He ran to Cardinal Azzolini, to beg of him to
interceed with the Queen on his behalf, alleging, that he was obliged to
Protect him, because of the good intelligence that had always been betwixt
them. But his Persecutor the Marquess, represented that the Count was more
careful to give the Cardinal an account of Affairs, than he was to her Majesty
her self. She who had a Domineering mind, and would play the Sovereign in all
things, took Umbrage at the Count's Proceedings, and treated him ill upon all
occasions. Nay, she proceeded to that Excess, that having one day sent for him
into her Presence, and charging him with Injuries* She in great rage gave him
three or four Blows over the Head with a Cane she had in her Hand. This poor
and much afflicted Lord went to bed with a Fever, and perfectly despaired to
see himself treated in this sort; but he must have Patience, for what could be
done with a Fool that had neither Rhyme nor Reason? Neither is he the only
Person who has been thus treated, for the World is full of the Extravagancies
of this Princess. But that which gave him most Affliction of all, was the
Cheating and Mockery of the Marquess Del Monte, who came to Comfort him, and
that was the cause of all the Mischief that befell him. The poor Duchess of
Aqua Sparta Wept for Grief, and the Count's Confident was witness to her
Sorrow: For notwithstanding the Count had not seen the Duchess, she had yet
some consideration for him. His ingenious Confident obliged her to write a word
or two, to testify that she took a share in his Disgraces; And this she did,
upon condition that he would restore the Letter, as he punctually did, after he
had kissed it very often wi^^ (...) Transport. It was matter of great
consolation to him, that so lovely a Person was touched with his Disgrace. The
Duke of Poli sent to Visit him often, and they saw one another incognito; and
at last Cardinal Azzolini reconciled him to the Queen, who made him
Satisfaction. After the Count had respited a while, he would willingly have
renewed with the Duchess; but besides that, he was engaged, in some measure,
with the Prince I have spoken of already, and would give him no occasion of
Jealousy: An unforeseen Accident broke all the measures of their ancient
Correspondence. The Queen at the Count's first coming to her, had hung two of
his Chambers with Damas, and at his departure for Sueden, had deputed the Duke
of Poli to serve in his Place, till his Return. The Duke appropriated these
Hangings to himself, as coming to him from the Queen. And the Master of the
Hotel had put him into some hopes of them, which embroiled the Matter further.
At last the Count peremptorily demanded the Damas from the Duke, who refns'd to
restore it, alleging Prescription and Possession. Neither of them durst
complain to the Queen, and the Master of the Hotel would disoblige neither of
them. So they took Cardinal Azzolini for Arbitrator betwixt them, and he
counseled the Duke to restore them; but he was Obstinate, and would keep them.
The Queen came to understand it by means of the Marquess her Spy, who loved to
fish in troubled Waters. She Laughed and diverted her self with their Dispute,
without obliging either of them to desist from their Pretentions. At last comes
a Jew and ended the Strife, desiring the Duke to restore him the Damas, which
he proved to be his own, or to pay him for the Hire of it. The Duke restored
him the Damas before the Count, and neither of them had it. So the Count lost
both his Damas and the favor of his Lady. So that we see Interest is sometimes
stronger than Love. The Duchess expected, that at his return from Sueden and
the Low Countries, the Count would have brought her some piece of Holland, or
some fine Flanders-Lace: But he gave her nothing but Gugaws, small works of
Ivory, and some other things made at N^remburgh, which though artificially
done, were nevertheless but of small Value.

(...) no such great matter of mingling Blood, as they do in France and
Germany. At last the Business was made up by Donua Maria Candida, a Religious
of St. Cecily, and the Abbot de Cabannes, Gentleman to Cardinal Altieri. It is
Suprizing, that at a time when the Queen her self lived upon Alms, or a Pension
which the Pope allowed her, her Rents not coming from Sueden because of the
War, that Cardinal Azzolini should find Ten Thousand Crowns in ready Money, to
Marry Octavia to the Marquess Caponi. This she had, without reckoning what she
got from the Queen both before and after this Marriage, which amounted to more
than double the Sum. Fortune was very favorable to this Girl; seeing that
they, who would otherwise have ruined it, contributed so much the more to her
Preferment. So poor Count Vasenau, on which Side soever he turned him, was
always Crossed.

Nor are we yet at the end of his Misfortunes. For Prince Radzevil, Ambassador
of Poland, arrived at Rome in the Year 1680, and visited the Queen in form: And
Madam the Ambassadress went also to see the Queen, who gave her a favorable
Reception, not only in quality of Ambassadress, but as one of the Family of the
King of Poland. Count Vasenau served as Ambassador, and she vigorously
recommended him to the Queen. The Ambassador, who was willing to serve the
Count also, opened a way to appropriate to him certain Pensions in the Realm of
Naples, which belonged to the Jagellons, who Reigned so long in Poland, of
whose Family Count Vasenau was the last. The Queen listened to this Overture,
and writ into Spain to the Duke de Medina Celi, first Minister to the Catholic
King, who was Sovereign of the Realm of Naples. She wrote also to the Marquess
Don Velos, Vice Roy of Naples; and every thing prepared to favor the Count, if
her Vanity and Inconstancy, had not spoiled all. Sometimes she would accept
this Obligation from the Spaniards; and sometimes she would not have it said
she should have begged their Favor, being persuaded they would find some sly
trick or other not to keep their Words; as indeed they did, when they had
penetrated the Queen's Intentions: And so Count Vasenau was frustrated of his
fine hopes.

Sometime after, it happened, that the Queen would raise the Marquess Del Monte
to the Charge of Great Master of her Horse, and gave him the Title of
Excellence, pretending this way to Recompense him for the Services he had done
her in Sueden, whither he had accompanied her in her last Voyage, and whither
he went afterward upon the Queen's Business; but the Ambassadors and
Cardinals, except Azzolini, refused to give it him. The Queen hoped, that at
least the Duke of Poli would obey her Will; but though he was but a poor Lord,
and drew great Subsidies out of the Queen's House, he chose rather to quit her
Service than stoop to so mean a thing. But the Marquess Del Monte did not loose
it, for besides the Charge of great Master, he was made Major Domo of the
Queen's House, and had the profit of both Charges. As for Count Vasenau, he not
only gave him the Title of Excellence without Scruple, but would likewise have
given him that of Highness, if they would have let him alone. Upon this, the
Marquess looked upon him with a better Eye, and protested he would serve him
upon all Occasions. The Queen also made him more than ordinary Caresses,
because of his Obedience, and ordered him a Coach for himself all alone,
augmenting the number of his Liveries, which were not much different from the
Queen's; an Honor the Queen did to no body but himself, as being one of her
own Family.

The Count now finding himself a little at Repose, and more Honored than
before, fell into an amorous Intrigue, being content to sweeten his Misfortunes
with Madam Beauregard, whom he saw every day. But then he left her in the
Lurch, and bestowed all his Courtship upon a new Mistress which he had, without
going out of Langara. It was the Duchess of Salviati with whom he was Smitten,
and she was of the first Quality, and Allied to the greatest Houses in Rome.
She was a very Handsome Person; and when you look upon her altogether, she was
not more agreeable in Beauty, than in a sprightly and charming Wit; for she had
great Accomplishments in Conversation, and you would never be weary with
hearing her Discourse, for she reasoned with a great deal of Exactness and
Judgment. It Is true, she was subject to some little Discontents, which took her
now and then, but that did not hinder her in her Lucid Intervals, from being
brisk and sparkling, and to Charm all those which had the happiness to approach
her. This I say, because she communicated her self only to Persons of her own
Genius, who knew how to bear her Conversation, but besides they must have the
gift of managing her, for she had a Briskness that was able to dash even those
of the best Assurance. She was Sister to Don Frederick Scorza, now Duke of
Caesarini, by his Wife's Title. Count Vasenau found a way to insinuate himself
by honest means. For she had a young Son who was a Comely Youth, and of great
Hope, but because he had not Traveled; the Count to make him an Accomplished
Prince, instructed him in many things, showing him how to Tread well, and take
upon him an Air of Greatness, conformable to his Birth, and to appear Gallant
in the Streets. During the whole Carnaval, he never left the young Lord; and at
the same time, the Duchess went Masqued in the Concourse, in a Magnificent
Chair, with those of her Family and Domestics. The young Prince and the Count
were always at the sides of them with Masks on, mounted upon excellent Barbs,
which they made to wheel and Prance with a Grace. As for the Duke her Husband,
he is a Solitary Prince, and does not love to appear in Public. The Night
after, having accompanied the Duchess home, the Count and the young Prince
were at a Ball together all Night, and passed the time very pleasantly. Thus
the Count comported himself in this new Intrigue, which nevertheless, he must
quickly break off: For the old Duchess Dowager, the Duke's Mother, a very
Severe Princess, of great Virtue, and admirable Conduct, who was afraid any
Body should speak to speak to her, obliged the Count to retire by degrees,
though they showed him great Respect. This old Lady was Sister to Cardinal
Cibo, and so great an Enemy to all sorts of Intrigues, that when she was young,
she broke the Skull of a pretty Girl with a Plate, whom her Husband
entertained, and used to serve at the Table. After which she retired into a
Convent at Florence, and there remained till her Husband's Death. Afterward
she returned to Rome to her Sons, where she took care to see every body live in
order, and according to their several Duties. The Count had other Amorous
Intrigues, besides those already mentioned, with which I am not willing to tire
the Reader; but however we may say something perhaps in another place, if an
occasion present it self. I shall make an end of this Article with the telling
you, That after the Death of Pope Alexander VIII. he was made one of the
Knights of Honor, to Pope Innocent XI. where he subsists by the Pope's Bounty,
and a Pension of 500 Crowns which the Queen left him for his Life, payable by
the Heirs of Cardinal Azzolini. But the Count is not now the same he was
heretofore, for having renounced the Vanities of the World, he practices great
Devotion, and lives a very Exemplary Life, and worthy of a true Christian.

Since we have begun to note the Characters of the Queen's Principal Officers,
who have so great a part in her History, it will not be amiss to see here the
Portraicture of the Duke of Poli, who made the finest Figure with this Princess
next to Cardinal Azzolini; and afterward we shall speak a word or two
concerning Count d' Alibert, whom she honored with her Confidence, though she
did not much esteem him at first.

The Duke of Poli was of the Family of Conti, which is one of the Noblest and
most Ancient in Rome, out of which there has been Eleven Popes. He was a big
Man, very gross, whose Age made him grow stooping. He was certainly a Lord of
Merit, full of Honor, and incorruptible Probity, reserved in Discourse, and
Phlegmatic to the uttermost point: He would always say, that every thing was
brought to pass with Patience* He was as severe as Cato; and as to his
Economy, it would have been called sparing in another, who had not been
charged with so great a number of Children. Pope Alexander VII. proposed him to
the Queen to be her Major-Domo, or First Gentleman of her Chamber; and she
accepted it so much the more readily, because she was ambitious of having one
of the First Gentlemen of Rome in her Service. He behaved himself there with a
great deal of Prudence, but he could not forbear to testify his Displeasure
when he saw things done disorderly. He was adored by all the Queen's Officers,
and respected as much as her self, because of his Probity. Crowned Heads did
much look upon him, and their Ambassadors came to visit him, not so much for
his Birth, as the Esteem they had for his Person. He had the good Fortune to
marry his Eldest Son, who had been one of the Queens Pages, with the Sister of
the Constable Colonna, Widow to the Duke de Bazianello. This Alliance did much
displease the Constable, who crossed it as much as he could, but could not
prevent it. The Widow was endowed in Fifteen Thousand Crowns in Rent, and the
Duke supposed that both the Goods and Estate, would come into his Family with
the augmentation of her Dowry, because she had no Children by her first
Husband. But she was happier in this second Marriage, for she had a fair
Lineage from the Duke the Guadagnoli.

The Profits the Queen gave to the Duke of Poli were great. She paid the Hire
of his Palace which was near the Queens, and she kept three Coaches and
Liveries for him. This joined to the number of Privileges, Exemptions, Rights
of Entries, and 180 Crowns per Month, made him up 4000 Crowns per Annum,
comprising therein 600 Crowns for the Duchess of Poli, who was first Lady of
Honor to the Queen, though she very seldom performed her Function. For besides
that, Her Majesty had other Ladies and Damsels, she had so little inclination
for her Sex, at least in the beginning, that Women were seldom seen with her;
and when she went abroad, she had never any followed her. So that the Duchess
of Poli went only to the Queen at good Feasts, to receive Ambassadors,
Princesses, and Nieces of Popes that came to visit Her Majesty. As for other
Roman Princesses and Dutchesses, as the Queen could give them nothing but a
Cushion, without transgressing the Law of Ceremonies. So they never came to see
her, because they pretended to greater Honors. The other Visits which the
Queen received were from Ambassadors and Cardinals, who when they came to Rome
were obliged first to visit the Pope, next St. Peter's Church; afterward the
Dean and Cardinals, and immediately after the Queen, and if they made any other
Visit before, she would not give them Audience. She came to the Top of the
Stairs to receive Ambassadors, Cardinals, Princesses, Ambassadresses, and
concucted them back again to the same place, and sent her Gentlemen to
accompany them to their Coaches; but she came to the Bottom of the Stairs to
receive the Pope, and conducted him back again also. For all the four Popes
which Reigned in her time, came very often to visit her, and she kept a Chamber
for them alone; and seated them under a Cloth of State, embroidered with Gold.
She visited also the Pope, and never failed twice a Year, to wit, at the
Nativity of our Savior, and St. Peter's Day.

The Duke of Poli had a Brother a Cardinal, who is yet living, and called
Cardinal Conti; he was Bishop of Ancona, and made his ordinary Residence there;
and as he was in a Possibility of being Pope, the Queen was very glad to be in
the Interests of that Family, that she might obtain some Credit under his
Pontificate, in case he happened to be chose. This Incomparable Queen, who
pretended to surpass all the World, one Day as the Cardinal took leave of her
to enter into the Conclave, after the Death of Innocent IX. Embraced him and
said, Monsieur Cardinal, Remember Queen Christina, if you become Pope, as I
believe you will. The Cardinal smiled at this Discourse, and said, He was her
very humble Servant, without any such hopes; but in what Estate soever God
should put him, he would always remember the Obligations that both himself and
all his Family had to her. This Discourse being reported to the Duchess of
Aqua Sparta the Duke of Poli's Daughter, the said, That if the Queen had no
better a Method to obtain Authority, then in her Uncle's being chose Pope, she
was much deceived; for mine Uncle (said she) will have enough to do, to provide
for so numerous a Family, and such a multitude of Kindred. As to the rest, though
the Incomes of the Duke of Poli were well paid, and that he was in great
Necessity, yet he quitted the Queens Service some time before her Death upon a
point of Honor. The Queen took a fancy to declare the Marquis Del Monte her
Grand Master, and in this Quality would oblige all the Family to treat him with
the Title of Excellence. Cardinal Azzolini who had reasons not to displease
her, obeyed without Contradiction. But though the Marquess was of most Nobl^
Blood, as his Surname of Bourbon made it appear, he never had this Title in
Rome, and the Duke of Poli, having consulted the Duke de Bracciano, the
Constable Colonna, and other Princes of Rome, to know whether they thought it
convenient he should give this Title to the Marquis Del Monte, they were all
against it, and concluded they would keep no further Society with him, if he
gave the Title of Excellence to the Marquis. This made the Duke resolve to
desire his Conge of the Queen, under pretext, That his great Age of 75 Years
obliged him to retire, and prepare himself for Death. And he had another reason
as specious as the former; for the Queen would have him give place to the
Marquis Del Monte out of the Palace, when they went with her abroad; though she
consented, that the Duke should have the Preference within. This Proposition
being injurious to the Duke, he chose rather to forsake her Service and retire,
as we have said.

Count Alibert Son to one of the Intendants of the House of Monsieur Gaston
Duke of Orleance, Uncle to the French King, was Originally from Orleans, (...)
born at Paris. After his Father's Death he was sought after, for some
Miscarriages committed in his Charge; but be was so nimble, that he saved
himself at Rome with above 50000 Livres in ready Money. At first he had a
magnificent Equipage, for he prepared himself a Coach, four Lacquies, and a
Valet de Chamber; went with a fine Air, and had the Ambition to play with great
Lords, and among others with the Princes of Brunswick at the Constable
Colonna's, and other Ladies and Gentlemen, who though they often plucked away
some of his Feathers, yet he had enough to sustain himself still. In the
Carneval-time he had one of the proudest Chariots of all, representing Mount
Parnassus, with Apollo and the Nine Muses, which sung in Music; and this
joined with a Consort of Instruments, made a fine Symphony. He passed with this
Magnificent Train before the Queens Palace, and she came to know him by this
means. She permitted him afterward in her Antichamber, and had some
consideration for him, till at last she took him into her Service in Quality of
Secretary of Embassies. He was of a middle Stature, and neither well nor ill
made, except that he was a little flat Nosed; a great Talker, and spoke nothing
to the purpose; Sparkling enough, but of no Solidity; Intriguing and Curious,
but a little fearful; full of Activity, and made abundance of Motions, which
tended to no purpose. When he would compose a Letter, he sometimes did it well,
but it was after he had pillaged Balzac and Voiture. He affected in his
speaking, to declaim and gesticulate like a Comedian; and with all these fine
Qualities he entertained the Queen every Day after Dinner for two or three
hours. She often corrected him, but he suffered it very patiently; and above
all, when he brought her the News of the Pope's Palace, or the City, which were
often invented, because he knew not what to say. I remember one Day the Queen
asking his Opinion of some black Laces which she had in her Hand, demanded,
Whether they were not Violet color? Yes, Madam, (says he) they are Violet. You
are a Sot (says the Queen) they are a Dark Gray. It Is true, Madam, (says the
Count:) You're a Beast (says the Queen) they are an obscure Blue. That is the
Term (says he) that I could not find out. In fine, he said what she would; but
after her Back was turned, addressed himself to the Valet de Chamber, and said,
What Folly is this? But I must say as she does. Another time, having a mind to
flatter the Queen upon the Whiteness of her Hands, as she was washing with her
Arms naked as high as her Elbow; I must own, Madam, that your Skin is parfectly
fine, and very white; it is admirable, for it is all pure Nature, and Art has no
share in it. You Are a pleasant Jack F -- (said she) to speak to me after this
manner? Do thou think I am thy Wife that paints as low as her Breech? He
bore all these Reflections without Regret; and she would often say to him, Qui
vive? And would take Pleasure in making him deny his Country, and to say, Let
France be Damned, and even worse than that, though he was always a good Frenchman
in his Heart. One Day he demeaned himself, laying by his Cloak, and took Nails
and an Hammer to tack and untack a Picture against the Wall; where being
mounted upon a Chair which fell backward, he had like to have broke his Neck.
All these Debasements of himself, made the other Gentlemen of the Queens
Chamber, to have but a very low esteem of him; till such time as being one Day
in Her Maj^sties Antichamber, speaking about the News of the War with Count
Caprara, whose Brother was in the Emperor's Service, and had been engaged in a
Fight against the Viscount Turenne; Caprara would needs prefer his Brother
before this great Captain, which Alibert could not suffer with Reason. But one
word drew in another, till they came to gross Injuries; and Count Caprara
without respect of the Queens Palace, or her Domestics, threatened to Battoon
him; and did it to the purpose. The noise coming to the Queens Ears, inftead of
taking the Part of poor Alibert, to enrage him the more, applauded Count
Caprara, and told him that he ought to be served so. One Day as Count Alibert
reasoned before the Queen in the Presence of the Messieurs de Vendome, he said
so many silly things, that these Princes as they were going out, said to their
Governor; Is it posfible that the Queen of Sueden, who has so much Wit,
should hear with Patience all the Fopperies which Alibert utters every Day, in
so troublesome a Manner? The Queen knew very well they were nothing else, but
did it only for her Divertisement. And it is impossible for a Man that talks
two hours a Day, without a Subject, but he must be very impertinent.

After he had staid some Years in the Queens Service, he had a mind to Marry,
and made choice of the Niece of Col. Ornano, who had commanded the Militia in
Corsica, before he was suppressed for an Insult made upon the Family of the D.
of Crequi. The Baron Ornano Father of the Lady, was very hot upon this Match,
believing that his Son in Law, that was to be, was very rich, because he had
been brought up with Monsieur the Duke of Orleans; where one Ornano had made
his Fortune, and came to be Marshall of France. But when the Business was
done, Count Alibert could not have the Considerable Portion promised him. And
as he had imposed upon his Wives Parents, by his Pride and Boasting, was
himself shamed in his imaginary Possessions, which he thought lay in the Isle
of Corsica, which made the Queen say, That both the Parties were equally
deceived. And to add to the Misfortune of Count Alibert, he lost a great deal
at Play. But to make up his Losses he had recourse to Inventions; for under the
Pontificate of Clement X. he set up a Lottery in the Hall of the College de
Sapienza, where being assisted by some Friends, he put in some odd Baubles,
Looking^ Glasses, and other little things. He obliged many Tradesmen to whom he
owed Money, to take Billets of his Lottery in Payment; but almost all these
Unhappy People lost their Debts, being paid only with a little Paper; for when
they came to Draw, they met with nothing but Blanks.

After this he essayed with some of the Altieri's to make a Theater for
Comedies at the Tour de None, which was formerly the Prison of Rome; and in
this he had the Address to get a considerable Sum from the Queen to assist him
toward the Expense. The Altieri's contributed too; and the Chevalier
Acciajoli, who is admirable at fine Decorations, and to rectify the Order of
the Theater, had the Conduct of the Enterprise. It would have succeeded very
well, if Count Alibert could have abstained from Gaming: Not that he took any
great Pleasure in Play, but engaged in it out of hopes of Winning; wherein he
was always deceived, for he had neither good Fortune to befriend him, nor
sufficient Understanding and Skill to manage such an Affair; so that it is no
wonder, if the Chevalier Acciajoli often called upon him to discharge the
Expenses of the Habits, as also the Salaries of the Actors, and Musicians.
Acciajoli complained to the Queen, and she was angry with him, but that could
not restore what was already lost, and therefore he must have Patience, and
stay till the Carneval was past, before he could have the Money which he
expected from the Hire of Lodgings and Gardens. At last the Design was carried
on, and the Business completed, but he was never the Richer sos it. He also
found out an Invention to play with Marionnets at his own House, and made a
Traffic of it. And for some time he kept Playing in his House, under the
Queens Protection, otherwise he durst not do it, because it was forbidden in
Rome; where to entertain the Gamesters so much the better, he had from time to
time Consorts of Music, whose Symphony Charmed the Ear, while their Pockets
were emptying.

He set up a Tennis Court, near the place d^ Espaign, toward the Garden Di
Napoli; and (...) time made a Trade of hiring Chambers ready Furnished. When he
put his Men into ^iveries, he had a thousand Inventions for that with the Jews,
and always without ready Money, for sometimes he would Truck one thing, and
sometimes another. And after all, no Knight of Industry, knew more Tricks than
he; And he that would undertake to write the Particulars of his Life, might
make a large Volume of it. During the War in Pomerania, the Queen not receiving
her former Rents, was forced to reform her House, and to throw off the greatest
part of Domestics. The Count, with many others, having lost his Service, was
resolved to try his Fortune in another Court, and went to Turin to offer his
Services to Madam Royal, who then governed the Estate during the Minority of
the D. of Savoy, who now Reings. He was well looked upon in the beginning, but
when he was once thoroughly known, they set but little by him: And so he, who
thought to have business only with the Allobroges, found in that little Court
People so Spiritual and of so great Sense, that it does not give place to the
Court of France it self, except in Number. At last, Count Alibert being weary
of the Court of Savoy, or the Court of Savoy of him, returned to Rome, where he
found his Countess, who did not expect him with any great Impatience: For this
Lady had found an opportunity of enjoying her self with a Young Man, who lived
over her in the same House. As for the Young Man, he was a Roman Gentleman, a
Beau and Gallant, who seeing the Convenience the Neighborhood afforded, had no
mind to run further abroad, if you will believe the Scandalous Chronicle. And
as for the Countess, she was none of those Beauties that would engage a Man in
spite of his Teeth; but the facility of seeing her every day, or at least at
the Window, engaged them in a Commerce of Gallantry, as much as the Italian
Severity would permit. She was of a gross Stature, a fault very common among
the Romans. The turn of her Visage Irregular, black Eyes, but well defended:
And as for her Complexion, she was never satisfied, borrowing from Art what
Nature had refused. She always daubed over her Face, as the Queen reproachfully
told her Husband, which made it shine like a Looking-glass, or a Bottle of Oil,
and caused her to loose all her Teeth at Forty years old. Her Mind was as ill
composed as her Body; (...). notwithstanding all this, it is pretend ^s'd but
without Ground, that she did not want Adorers.

After the Peace of Nimmeghen, the Queen enjoyed her Revenues again, put her
Court into its former Splendour, and reestablished Count Alibert in his Charge.
This did easily comfort him, for his past Disgraces, and to sweeten his
Discontents, he would make Love to Madam Beauregard, Daughter of a Confederate
of France, that made his Fortune with Mazarine. But fled into Italy after
Monsieur Fouquets Disgrace, for he was Taxed by the Chamber of Justice; but had
the good luck to carry off the best part of his Effects. He was Originally from
Lucca, and was called Diodati; so being a Refugee at Rome, he put himself under
the Protection of the Constable Colonna, but did not live long. His Widow was
introduced by little and little to the Queen; and she had an only Daughter,
which was called Madamosel Diodati. This young Creature was very Tall, and had
the Air and Visage of a Musketeer: The lineaments of her Face were irregular,
and she had the finest Nose in the World to carry a (...) of Spectacles. But in
all the rest, she he^ well and hondsome enough. As ^on her Wit, she thought she
had enough, because she had got all Clelia by Heart; Cyrus and Cleopatra were
her Delight, and by the help of Romances, she was become a precious Jewel of
the first Order. A sturdy young Fellow, who was the only Son of a Councellor of
the Parliament of Grenoble, called Monsieur de Beauregard, was come to Rome
unknown to his Father, and became Amorous of so Charming a Person. He lived
with Madam the Constable, and though he was well Shaped, his Name did not at
all fuit him, for he was a Slouch, Pur-blind, and of mean Regard. This fine
couple of Lovers served to divert all that came to the House of Colonna.
Nevertheless, Love did so well play his own Game, that they must needs be
Married, without the consent of the young Man's Father. The Ceremony of this
Marriage was performed in the Queen's Chapel, and in her Majesty's Presence,
by a little Prelate of Lucca, called Monsieur Bottino, a Kinsman to the Married
Couple. He made a very Spiritual Railery, and much to the purpose, upon the
Consent of the Parties, required in the word Oui. Yes. Saying, Though it was
but a word composed only of three Letters, it made many People Repent. This was
but too true in regard of the Espoused: For the young Man not being able to get
any succor or help from his Father, was forced to return into France to Plead
against him. He made two or three Journeys to no purpose, and died in Misery at
Marseilles, leaving his Wife and three Children behind him. Count Alibert
endeavored to Console her; but Compassion quickly gave place to Love, and to
break it to her, he studied the finest Commonplace Books of the Romans, to make
a Speech according to his Fancy. But none of them pleasing him, he wrote one of
the most Elegant Letters that was to be found in the Secretary a-la-mode, which
he got by Heart. Upon this, the Count assumed a fine Air, combed his Periwig,
and tied his Stockings about his Legs better than ordinary, and his Cloak did
not hang on the left side, as in time past; And for a Livery, he made a red
Serge Breeches, with white Satin Points, set out with a fine Galloon. Madam de
Beauregard who never had so Magnificent a Lover before, answered the Count's
Desires with all the Ardor he could wish. All that discontented the Count was,
that she came too fast upon him, for he would have conducted his Amors like a
Roman, that is to say, with one Adventure upon another. But Madam de Beauregard
had a good Appetitite, and did not care for Procrastination. Count Alibert was
apparently at a Stand, seeing he must for Decency sake furnish his Countess
with things necessary, who then lived Soberly, that she might give no ill
Impressions concerning her Person, such power had the Queen's Satyr's in
rendering her Virtuous. Madam de Beauregard, who had her Ends, which she would
not speak of, was stark mad that he was so cold. But he found a way to content
her; For he knew so well how to take the Queen in a good Humor; that he
procured her a Pension of Ten Crowns a Month, which the Queen gave her for
Life: And after the Queen's Death, she retired to Lucca to her own Relations.
As for Count Alibert, the Queen left him nothing, though he deserved it better
than most of them that had. Monsieur the Duke of Chaunes, gave him the Office
of Secretary of the Chamber of Ambassies to France, but he performed no
Function of it, after Cardinal Janson came to have the charge of the Affairs of
France in Rome, his Eminence using his own Priests and Domestics. Nor did he
long enjoy the Pay, because the War hindered it; For many more necessary to the
State than himself, found a great deal of trouble in getting their Salaries.
However, he went up and down to procure News, as he used to do, without
bringing any thing to the purpose. His great business was at the Theater of
Torre de Nona, where he bestowed his Cares, and subsisted most of all by the
Profit which he drew from thence.

If the Queen made Count Alibert her Sport, who had Birth, and some Merit, she
made a Minister, of her Favorite, Valet de Chamber, called Claret, who had
neither Birth nor Education. We will relate some Circumstances of his Life, to
see if he deserved so great a distinction from so clear sighted a Queen.

Clairet Poissonnet, Son to a Man that kept a Cabbaret at Triere, a Village
between Pontoise and Poissi, was first Lacquay to Monsieur the Marquess de
Valancay, who brought him to Rome, when he was Ambassador from France. The
young Boy could neither Write nor Read, but addicted himself to Comfiture, and
perhaps did not ill understand a Kitchen. Having lost his Master, a Polish Lord
brought him into Poland, where he got into the Service of King Casimir, before
he was Crowned. But he did not stay there long, for having a mind to see the
Countries, he engaged himself in Service to the Suedish Ambassador, who was
then at Warsaw. He came then with his Master into Sueden, and being very Active
and Handy, had the Honor to enter into the Service of Christiana Queen of
Sueden, by means of one Bourdelot, a French Physician, whom the Queen had
drawn, by several Gifts and Advantages to Stockholm, to be near her Person. The
first Employ he had in the Queen's House, was to be Comfiter and keep the
Linen. But in a little time he had the good Fortune to make himsel known upon
this occasion. Her Majesty had sent for one Champagne a French Head-dresser,
out of France, who knew the Art in Perfection, and therefore was much sought
after by the fair Sex; and he came to be known to her upon this occasion. One
day as they were making a Wirchaff, which is a sort of Masquerade in Sueden,
where every one, without being entirely Masked, takes what Figure he pleases.
Champagne who saw Clairet had very fine Hair, had a mind to put him into
Women's Clothes, and dress up his Head a-la mode. The Caprice had good Success;
For Clairet being then very Young, and had a very fresh and lively Color,
passed for a Woman. The Queen, who knew it, took great pleasure in seeing him
in this Habit; and he Served her afterward in many Affairs under this Figure.
There was a Court-Lord her Majesty was dissatisfied with, and he retired into
one of the most distant Provinces of the Realm, to hide and conceal himself,
and by that means to avoid the effects of her Wrath. She had much ado to
discover him, because there was a great many Nobles in his Interests, and
favored his retreat. Clairet knew him at Stockholm, and promised the Queen to
bring News of him. And for this purpose, Habited himself in Women's Apparel,
kept his Hair always close Shaved, and went into the Province whither the
Gentleman was retired, under pretense of being a Chambermaid to Lady of that
Country, who kept Intelligence with, and was the Queen's Friend to assist
Clairet to discover him. The poor Gentleman had a Valet de Chamber, who was a
Piemontois and spoke French: Clairet under this habit, got Acquaintance with
him, and seeing Love mixed it self in the Conversation, it was easy enough for
Clairet, by means of her Lover, to discover where the Gentleman hid himself:
Who although he kept upon his Guard, and apprehended Ambuscades and Traps to be
laid for him, could not hinder a Discovery through such a Disguise. Clairet
being sure of his Blow, took Post and went to Stockholm to advertise the Queen,
while the pretended Damosel passed for a Sick Woman upon the Piemontois, who
Prayed heartily, and made Vows for her Recovery, with a great deal of Zeal. In
the mean time, his Master was Seized, and drank exceeding deep of the Cup of
the Queen's Resentments. Clairet having succeeded so well, was made Valet de
Chamber to her Majesty: But it is surprising, that this Man, who knew neither
how to Write nor Read, and who never spoke any Language tolerably, (for he
confounded them all together) should have the Fortune to succeed so well in
those things the Queen employed him. This Princess seeing the Nobles
Discontented at her Government, was desirous to establish her self with France.
And to keep her Affairs secret, could find no better an Expedient, than to make
use of Clairet. After he had received his Instructions, and a Letter of
Credence put between the Soals of his Boots, he took his Leave of the Queen,
upon pretense that the Climate was too cold for him; and the favor was granted
him with difficulty to all appearance.

Upon his Arrival at Paris, he gave his Letter to the Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, and having given in his Instructions by word of Mouth, and
received his Answer, he returned into Suedon, pretending he had repented
himself, and was sorry he had left the Queen's Service. She took him again with
great difficulty, upon the pressing and earnest Solicitations of the Marquess
of Gardia and the Physician Bourdelot, so well was the Play acted. One Night as
he went to drink with a Friend of his, he was set upon by four Armed Men, he
drew a Pistol, and had the good luck to Wound one, but having made head for
some time, he was forced to give way to Number, seeing he was already Wounded
himself; and they had certainly done his Business, if one of the Counts of
Coningsmark, had not passed by accidentally, with four stout Footmen, carrying
of Flambeaux, and given him a timely, and seasonable Assistance. This
Rencounter coming to the Queen's Ears. She gave Orders to the Officers of her
Regiment of Guards, to send two of the best and stoutest Soldiers along with
Clairet, when he had a mind to go abroad in the Night. It was never known from
whence this Blow came, but it was supposed to be from the Relations of the
Gentleman that was Arrested by Clairet's means. One of the chief Senators of
Sueden having found that Clairet loved Drink, would have forced him by Wine and
Caresses, to discover the Queen's Secrets but to no purpose, for he could never
Surprise him. And it is Astonishing, that he should be more reserved when he
was Drunk, than otherwise, for when he was in that condition, he would do
nothing but Sing, Laugh, and play Monkey tricks. At first he was Secret for his
own Interest, but became more reserved afterward, and at last got such an
habit of it, that all the World admired it. Nevertheless, he was extremely
Curious, and pressed very much to know the Secrets of others. The Queen, who
made use of him for a Spy, was very glad to find in him these good Qualities,
and never suffered him to be without good store of Money. With these helps he
would discover any thing he had a mind to, insomuch that the Count de Chanut,
Ambassador of France in Sueden, forbad his Domestics to keep Company or have
any Converse with him, because when he had made them Drunk, he would lead them
by the Nose, and get from them the most Secret Words and Actions of their
Master. He had a prodigious Memory, and never lost one word that he heard.

After the Queen had Abdicated the Kingdom, he accompanied her in all her
Voyages, and was Marshall of her Lodgings; and when the Queen Traveled into
France, he went before, and had Order with the Abbot Bourdelot, to make an
hundred Embroidered Cassacks, and as many Boots, Holsters, and Arms, for an
hundred Horse Guards, that were to accompany her at her entry into Paris.

When the King was with his Army in Flanders, and the Court at La Fere in
Tartenois, There came an Order for an hundred thousand Franks, to help her to
support the charge of her Voyage. Clairet had a Commission to receive this
Money, and he carried it to Monsieur Basiniere, who told him, he had also three
thousand Franks for himself, but desired him to write a Receipt for both the
Sums at the bottom of the Ordonnance. He answered, that being a Gentleman, he
would give no Receipt, but would commit it to one of his Lacquays. But he was
told that those that receive Money at the Royal Treasury, even as high as a
General himself, wrote a Receipt with their own Hands, below their Ordonnance,
and that it would not all derogate from his Nobility. He found himself then in
a great Distress; For as on the one side he was not willing to renounce so
advantageous a Commission, and on the other, ashamed to look like an Ass. He
said, to excuse himself, that he had been in a small Skirmish, and was Wounded
in the right Hand, so that he could not use it at present. So they made up a
Receipt for him, that he might subscribe his Name at the bottom; but they were
very much surpised when they saw him make nothing but a Cross, and that he
knew not how to hold his Pen. This made them Laugh, and it was sent to be
Signed by the Queen's Intendant.

Clairet went afterward to Triere his place of Birth, to see his Parents, and
he treated them Magnificently, together with the chief Inhabitants of the
Village, for he ordered Tables to be prepared for above an hundred Persons. The
Meat was the most delicate that could be got; and as Triere is a place that
abounds in delicious Wine, they drank to Excess. It was pretty to see and hear
the good People drink the King and Queen Christina's Health; the Feast was so
Splendid, that it made a kind of Wake in the Village, and the Gazett made
mention of it. What a loss it is, that the Mercury Gallant was not then
Invented, that Posterity might learn the Circumstances of it! This Feast
increased his Reputation; and Cardinal Mazarine one day demanding News from the
Queen, she gave Clairet a very advantageous Character, exaggerating his
Fidelity and Zeal for her Service. His Eminency was astonished to hear that a
Man without Birth, Education, or Study, should be fit for every thing the Queen
would have him. The Queen knew well enough, that she was not deceived in
putting Confidence in him, and therefore when she designed to Murder the
Marquess Monaldeschi at Fountainbleau; 'twas Clairet that was the first
Conductor of the whole Intrigue, and none truly knew but himself who they were
that Assassinated the poor Gentleman.

If Clairet was useful to the Queen in her Voyage to France, he was not less in
that which she made first to Rome, and particularly in riding Post with a
Letter to Cardinal Antonio Barberini, to know beforehand how she should be
received and treated both at her first Entry, and during her abode there. He
never left the Queen in her Voyages, whether into Italy or Germany. And while
this Princess was at Hamburgh, upon the Election of Clement IX. she sent
Clairet Post to Rome to Congratulate his Exaltation, and to beg permission of
him to return to Rome. The Pope received him very well, and by him as the
Queen's Envoy, invited her to return, and promised to give her Eminent Marks of
his Paternal Friendship. And because he kuew Clairet when he was but a Prelate,
he Caressed him greatly, and gave him a Medal of Gold, of the value of Ten
Pistols. Clairet begged of him the grant of some Indulgences to the Chapel of
his Village; and he gave him an entire Saint's Body over and above; and the
Prelate which distributed the Pope's Graces, presented him with a Prayer that
would keep him from all Evils, provided he recited it every Morning. He
demanded, whether it would not have the same effect, if it was said by another,
and he was answered, that it was better to recite it himself: Give me then a
Schoolmaster, said he, which shall teach me to Read. This quick Answer, made
the Pope Laugh, and he discharged him from the reading on it, which would have
the same effect, carried in his Pocket. But Clairet was no great sayer of his
Prayers, a Bottle of good Wine went a great deal nearer his Heart. His business
every Morning was to go into the place d'Espain, or into the best Inns of the
City, and when any Stranger of Note arrived, he made himself acquainted with
his Followers or Domestics, and from them learned the Adventures of their
Master, the Subject of their Voyage, and gave an account of all to the Queen.
He ransacked every where among the Ambassadors and Ministers of Princes, and
made his Advantage of all that he heard. And he went also to the Post, and took
from thence the Letters which belonged to Gentlemen of Quality of other
Countries, and after the Queen had read them, Sealed them up again, and carried
them back to the Post. But as these things made him serviceable to the Queen's
pleasure, it drew upon him a great number of Enemies, and sometimes he was in
danger of being knocked in the Head with Stones, or else severely Battoon'd.
Though he knew neither how to Write nor Read, yet he received Letters every
Post, and made an Answer regularly thereunto, without ever revealing his own
Secrets. In fine, after he had lived till the 77th year of his Age, he died
almost suddenly at Rome, upon the same day that Monsieur the Duke d'Estrees
Deceased, and had the Impudence to make the Queen his Heir, though he did not
leave one Farthing; nay so far from it, that her Majesty was forced to Bury
him; and afterward had the goodness to pay 500 Crowns that he was Indebted to
several People.

Some time after, the Queen lost her brave Marquess Del Monte, at a time when
she had most need of him to maintain the Franchises of her Quarter, which the
Pope now began to Dispute. He died as he had lived, that is to say, in
Disorder, having no time to Repent in. The Circumstances are terrible to
relate, but is however necessary, were it only for Example sake. How happy are
they who know how to profit by the Faults of others! But for the Coherence of
the Story, we must take it a little higher.

After the Peace of Nimeguen, the Queen who had been some Years without her
Rents, by reason of the War, sent the Marquess Del Monte into Sueden, where he
staid above a Year, to put her Affairs into order, and give an account of her
Majesty's Receivers, who pretended they were not able to pay her. The King of
Sueden was so favorable ^o the Queen, that he caused her Receiv^^ General to
use such diligence in p^tting things into good Order, that the Queen's Affairs
went according to the Marquiss's Mind.

The Court of Sueden began to respire after so many Losses, and the Marquess
passed under the Figure of the Queen's Envoy. Where when he had a little
settled Matters, he began to call those to an Account who had fingered the
Queen's Revenues, and he found many who had been fishing in troubled Waters.
The Marquess wrote to the Queen, and insinuated his Thoughts, and desired her
Majesty te have some Compassion upon the People, representing that the Wars had
put them out of a condition to perform the Obligations of their Leases. The
Queen either out of Generosity or Compassion, that she might not beregretted by
her ancient Subjects, discharged them of many things; but the Marquess never
discovered this Nobleness of the Queen, till he had accomodated Matters
according to his own Interests; for he always minded himself first, and the
Queen afterward. He got new Tenants to some parts of her Estates, and it
availed him in such sort, that the ancient Tenants made him Presents, which he
greedily took with both hands, and preferred them that gave most. After he had
continued a long while at Stockholm, he went into Pomerania, which was the
Province from whence most of the Queen's Rents came, where coming into a City
of that Country, he Lodged at one of the Queen's Receiver's, who had great
Effects in his Hands, and he treated him with all the Kindness imaginable, to
lay an obligation upon him to confirm him in his Place. He promised to serve
him effectually, but it was after he had drawn a good Present from him; and he
staid a great while in that House, expecting as he said, the Queen's Answer.
But the true reason was, the Receiver had Married a very pretty Wife a little
before that, and the Marquess devoured her Eyes, and delayed the time, in hopes
to make himself Beloved. The Receiver's Business obliged him to be frequently
absent from his House, which gave Barbon an occasion to let her know how much
he was in Love. He was Bold, and she Timorous, so that he would easily have
brought his purposes about, if the Receiver's Brother, who did not like the
Marquiss's Proceedings, had not got an inkling of the Matter. The Marquess
seeing this Rub in his way, feigned that he had received Letters from the
Queen, and that she had sent him a Blank, desiring him therefore to get on
Horseback quickly, and go two days Journey from thence, to find out his
Brother, who must come to him, that they might compose their Affairs. This Man
being doubtful of the Marquiss's Design, dissembled an Obedience. He got on
Horseback, but returned the same Night, and having left his Horse with a
Friend, put himself into an Ambuscade in a Place where he knew the Marquess
would pass to his Fair Sister. Not long after, the Marquess came, and without
any other Weapon but a Sword. He was all in the dark, and walked very softly,
for fear of Discovery. In the mean while, the young Man, who could not discern
Objects, let fly a Pistol in the dark, charged with three Bullets, but missed
the Marquess on purpose, who fell, and rolled down the length of a pair of
Stairs, which bruised his whole Body, and made a dangerous Contusion in his
Head. The House was presentld in an Uproar, and the Domestics run together
from every side, and found the Marquess all in his Blood. None of them knew
what to think of such an Accident, but after he had recovered his Spirit, and
the Surgeon laid the first dressing to his Wound, though yet full of Confusion
and Fear, he said, That he was coming in at the noise of the Pistol, but taking
a false step, had fallen all along. In the mean time the young Man got away
without being perceived, and went to find his Brother as fast as he could,
telling him that the Marquess was too dangerous a Ghest in his House, but told
him nothing at all of what had happened. At their return, which was next day at
Night, the Receiver was amazed to understand what had happened, but the
Marquess dissembled it Wisely, and after they had finished their Affairs, he
returned, for Stockholm, to take leave of the King of Sueden in order to return
for Rome.

Being arrived at Hamburgh, he found there Teixere the famous Jew, who expected
him to regulate the first payment of the Queen's Revenues, which was Ten
thousand Rix Dollars, and Five thousand more which the Farmer-General had sent
upon the Queen's Account. At last the Marquess arrived at Rome full of Glory
and Riches; for he made his Journey worth thirty or forty thousand Crowns,
where he was received both by the Queen and Cardinal with great Applause, and
the Queen's House was put into a good posture, not forgetting that of the
Marquess. And the Queen proclaiming every where that the Marquess had done her
good Service, some time after raised him to the Charge of Grand Master of her
Horse, which had been vacant since the Murder of the Marquess Monaldeschi,
ordering all her Domestics to give him the Title of Excellence; which though
the Duke of Poli refused, the rest Obeyed.

The Marquess after his return to Rome, followed the same course of Life; but
not to trouble the Reader with his Debauches, I shall say only one word of his
disrespect both for the Palace and the Queen's Domestics; for he spared
neither of them when they came in his way. It Is true, he found a free Passage
in the Instance I speak of; but he ought to have stopped the Scandal, rather
than increase it by his own Example. But to come to the particulars.

The Queen's Court being then become finer than ever, every one fell into some
Amor or other. Seignora Giovannia Giustiniani, younger Sister to Signora
Octavia, was a very lovely Maid, a little brown, but having all the Ligeaments
of her Visage excellently formed: A fine Stature, together with so ^ine a Neck,
that the like was no where to be sound. At first when the Queen brought her
from her own Village, she was simple enough, but the Court Air quickly refined
her, and she was not very long in taking the humor of being Talkative and
Proud; Manners, to which the most elevated of that Sex find so strong an
Inclination. Her Majesty had a great kindness for her, but she abused her good
will, and became so presumptuous, that she would not acknowledge her Birth. A
Page of the Duke d'Estre's Ambassador of France was the first that offered
Incense at her Altar. He was a young Italian Gentleman, well Shaped, Fair and
Gallant, and and had every thing requisite to create Affection. The Palace
Farnese where the Ambassador lived, was over against the Queen's at Langara.
The Tyber was betwixt them, with a double range of Houses, but the two Palaces
were so ^o^ty, that our two Lovers could easily see one another upon the
Terrasses, and make Signs of Intelligence. At last they found a way to send
Billets, and the Queen being no way prepossessed, took pleasure in this
Foolery. One day the Queen Surprised Signora Giovannina, as she was writing a
Billet-deux; and she was so attentive to answer her Lover, that she did not
perceive the Queen when she seized upon her Letter. The poor Girl believed she
was utterly Ruined, for sometimes the Queen, at least to appearance, would make
a show as if she were Severe. Giovannina then cast her self at her Feet,
apprehending that she should have been ill treated, but she was quickly rid of
her fear, for the Queen Smiled, and was so complasant, that having forbidden
her to speak of it, she made a Billet for her after her own fashion, which was
the most spiritual in the World. Tree Page ravished with joy to receive the
marks of so obliging a Tenderness, from his Mistress, was so little Master of
himself, that either through Vanity, or Indiscretion, he showed the Billet to a
Gentleman of of the House, who made it known to the Ambassador; but he only
Laughed, and would see what course and Method these Lovers would take. In the
beginning of the Spring, another of the Queen's Maids, named Portia, under the
pretense of being Indisposed, got leave of the Queen to take the Air of the
Fields every morning with her Kinswoman Giovannina, in their Mother's Company.
They went out of the Gate of St. Pancras, and going along the Ramparts,
re-enter'd by the Gate of the Light Horse, on St. Peter's side. By this means,
our Lovers saw one another often, but they must do it with Secrecy for fear of
Argus's, I mean the Old Women, who would no more leave them than their Shadows,
according to the Custom of Italy. But Love found them out a way to see one
another more easily. For the Page being bold and hardy, got into the Queen's
Garden, which was of large Extent, where there was great Walks, shaded with
fine Greens, and there these Virgins came to take the fresh Air every Morning;
and they were both agreed to serve one another upon such Occasions. There the
Page and his Mistress were hid together, and without as Witness, declared their
Loves, and spoke the tenderest things in the World. The Pleasure continued for
some time, to the great satisfaction of both; but their Interview being
discovered, she was obliged to be more retired. The Page, whom these Obstacles
made the more ardent, invented new ways to see his Mistress; but some small
difference happening between the Queen and the Ambassador, he was to keep at a
distance for some time.

The Marquess de Mala Spina was the next, who was Gentleman of the Chamber to
her Majesty. He was Young, and well Made, extraordinary Handsome, and had a Bon
Grace in all that he did: But he was an universal Lover, and managed an Amor
like a Roman Hero. It was only Languishing and Sighs, that expressed his Flame
at the first, and he was diligent both Night and day, to make her see and
understand it. She gave him some Hopes which made it stronger, which were fully
to be explained by the Marriage Bed. But however the Queen had no inclination
to give the poor Gentleman any thing, though he had served her as a Page from
his Youth; and her Majesty had bestowed Favors upon others who had not merited
so much as himself. Her Caprice crossed this Amor, but his Patience and
Assiduity gained his Mistresses Heart, insomuch, that she gave him to
understand, that if he was not Happy, it would be his own fault. But however,
these fair hopes were of no long continuance, for the Count of Warwick came in
to Traverse 'em, by declaring himself a Lover, and was received with little
Ceremony. He was an English Lord of high Birth, Son to the Earl of
Northumberland, but being a younger Bro^^er of that Illustrious House, which
were Persecuted for their Loyalty to their King, during the Troubles of
England, raised by Cromwell and the Parliament, he was obliged to seek his
Fortune in Foreign Courts; and was at last recommended to the Queen, who made
him Major Domo, after the Death of the Marquis Del Monte. The Earl of
Northumberland died at Florence, where both himself and Family, were Maintained
by the Bounty of the Grand Duke. Count Warwick was of a slender Stature, and
had an Air of Grandeur, which showed who he was. His Complexion was very
delicate, but his Health seemed to be ruined, by the paleness of his Face,
whether it came from his Temperament, or Debaucheries. As to the rest, his
Carriage was the most agreeable in the World; and if his Health had been
perfectly entire, he had been one of the finest Gentlemen in Italy.

The Marquess de Mala-Spina being allarmed at so redoubtable a Rival, did not
know what to do, daring neither to conceal nor publish it, because of the
Antipathy of the Queen against him: But his good Genius inspired him to go to a
Lady of Quality who was Married to a Roman Lord, (Captain of a Troop of
Light Horse in the Pope's Guards) called the Marquess Cavallieri, his Lady
being Sister to Count Warwick. He entreated her to do him the Favor, to
represent to her Brother, that his Intention in addressing himself to
Jovannina, being not to Marry her, he would not cross a Passion, which tended
to that Holy Sacrament. The Marchioness readily undertook it, for fear her
Brother should fall into any Trouble in the Queens Service, and caused him to
desist; so that the Marquess was quickly at Repose on that side.

Jovannina having lost Count Warwick, treated the Marquess much better, for
fear he should escape again; and these two Lovers managed their Interests so
well, that the Maid (by the Ascendant she had over the Queen) brought her to
consent that the Marquess should make Love to her in the way of Marriage. But
Cardinal Azzolini, who was afraid the Queen would execute this Project, and
spend as much Money upon her, as she had done upon Octavia her Elder Sister,
turned the Queen against it, and broke all the Measures of these poor Lovers,
and at last to comfort her said, The Marquis was impotent, and no way fit for
Marriage. The poor Girl afflicted with so many Crosses, fell sick, and must
take the Air again to dissipate her Sorrows. And she had scarce begun to take
Breath, when a certain Italian Abbot of some Birth, but little Merit, and full
of Vanity, thought it a seasonable time to persuade her to hear of a Passion
which he begun to have for her. To this purpose he employed a Woman, who was
one of the Queens Guardrobe, who had not been Cruel in her Youth, and was very
proper to tie an Amorous Noose. And as she had an Entrance into the Appartment
of the Maids, and some part of their Confidence, it was easy for her to
persuade Jovannina to have some Complaisance for the Abbot Vannini, the same
Person that had already dishonored Bandiere's Daughter

This Maid being dejected at the ill success of her Amors, and the Disgrace of
being cast off by so many Lovers, embraced the Motion, upon Condition that her
Mother approved it. The good Mother who lived upon nothing but the Wages of the
Daughter, and had other Children besides, and an Husband to maintain, yielded
to the Temptation of a Thousand Crowns which he gave her, and delivered up her
Daughter to this Villainous Baboon, whom Vanity, and the Difficulty of it,
stirred up to so hard an Enterprise. To come to him, she counterfeited her self
sick once more, and the Queen out of Complaisance sent her to Albani, where not
to lengthen out the Story, the Abbot was satisfied.

After fifteen or twenty Days absence, she returned to Rome, and the Abbot (who
found her a delicate Morsel) invented a way to introduce himself into the
Queens Palace, by means of his Mistresses Confidents. His Liberalities gave him
Entrance every where, and surmounted all Obstacles, but he could not do his
Business so ^^^retly, but that it was found out by the Marquess Del Monte, for
he surpised the Lovers in the very flagrant Delight, and threatened to destroy
them, if he did not come in for a share. And as he was Almighty with the Queen,
so he had a Talent to make himself feared: Thus he obtained his Wishes, and the
Abbot always paid the Expense of the Feast.

But after all these Pleasures, poor Jovannina found her self with Child, which
affrighted her, and made her perfectly desolate, and her Mother became the most
sorrowful of all Women; but the Queens Goodness supplied all Defects, and she
had Remedies given her to take it away, but they had so ill success that she
died, and was interred in the Habit of a Carmelite Crowned, and set round with
Flowers, for a mark of her Virginity. The Queen wept as much as if she had been
a Relation; so good was this Princess, and so full of Tenderness for her
Domestics, that she would have left them all Rich at her Death if they would
have permitted her to do it. It Is Time that wipes away Tears, and Her Majesty
comforted her self for the loss of Jovannima, by (...) Acquisition of another,
called Georgina, who surpassed her in all things, but was the innocent cause of
her Death, as shall be related afterward.

At this time the Duke of Mantua being come to Rome, the Queen did him so great
Honors, as none ever received from her before, and the Duke on his side would
not be behind her in Civility; but at last the Ceremonies abated both of one
and the other side. The Queen was over joy'd that a Sovereign Prince came to
visit her, for no Body would visit her, since she had caused the Marquess Del
Monte to be Treated with the Title of Excellence; and she was well enough
pleased, that the Duke of Mantua spoke to him by a third Person, as is usual at
Rome to avoid Disputes, without giving him any Title. Afterward the Marquess
never quitted the Duke all the time he stayed at Rome, who though he came in
cognitio, had the finest number of Followers that any Prince ever had. For
almost all the Nobles of his Estates accompanied him, and the Roman Cavaliers
thronged in to add to the Number of his Train, but he had the Moderation to
hinder his Guards du Corpse to accompany him on Horseback, giving order that
some of them only should follow him on Foot. He Lodged at the Palace Des Vrsins
in Monte Giordiano, and the Queen sent him every Morning not only her best
Coach, but two more of the House-Choaches, and one part of her Pages, with Men
that bore Staves.

The Duke d'Estrees Ambassador of France did the same, to augment his Train,
and there came with him Monsieur Gambaul the Envoy of France to his Highness. I
shall say nothing of the Public Honors done him at Rome, the Gazettes have
spoken enough of it, and therefore I shall rather choose to make mention of the
Private Divertisements, in which the Marquess Del Monte was his Procurer,
because they are known to very few.

He brought him acquainted with Georgina, the Famous Singer, and he was
exceedingly Charmed to hear her Sing one Evening at the Vineyard of Corsini,
without the Gate of St. Pancras, whether he brought her without the Queens
Knowledge. He saw her often afterward with the Queen her self, and agreed with
her to carry her off, and bring her into his own Estates, but she did not keep
her Word. Another time he Regaled the Duke with one Fani in the same place. She
was so fine a Widow that she made her self the common Topic of Discourse;
insomuch that her Parents shut her up in a Convent, but she found a way to
escape, and retire into the Queens Quarter.

This angered the Pope very much, so that having now understood she was gone
out of the Queens Franchise, to meet the Duke of Mantua at the Vineyard
Corsini, gave order for a Bariseel to seize and carry her off, as she returned
from thence. But having timely notice, she was put into one of the Queens
Coaches, with her Sister La Mosca, and by this means re-entred the Franchises
in spite of the Pope's Arrest.

These two Sisters were Daughters to a rich Banker, who had given them Twenty
Thousand Crowns a-piece to their Portions, and had Married them to the most
Eminent Nobles of Italy. Fani was of a middle Stature; the turn of her Visage
was very agreeable, Blue Eyes, a fair Skin, and in good Health, fine Teeth, a
little Mouth, and very pretty, had not Laughing spoiled it: But her Mind was
Foolish, and she had little Judgment, and less Conduct. Her Sister, who was
called La Mosca, was not quite so sparkling, but all things considered, was
more esteemed then Fani. Nevertheless she was a well shaped Person, of a solid
Wit, and had the Conduct to appear Fair in the Eye of the World, so that her
Freaks were known but to few. Fani's first Amors were with the Marquess Mari)
who went with her to Comedies all the Carneval, and every Night to a Ball. She
had afterward a great many Lovers, of which many Stories might be made, but
this would drive us too far from our Subject.

The Young Marquess Matthew Del Monte, Son to Barbon, became Amorous of her,
though he was Married; but to speak the Truth, she was rather Amorous of him;
for the Young Marquess had all Exterior Qualities that were fit to render him
amiable. He was of a Stature something above the ordinary height, a well made
Person, and had the Air of a Man of Quality; but Presumptuous, despising his
Equals, and so conceited of his Birth, that his Vanity made him insupportable,
which yet notwithstanding proceeded only from his Youth.

After his Return from France, his Father would Marry him to the Niece of the
Marquess Monaldeschi, the same whom the Queen had Sacrificed to her Resentment
in the Gallery of Fontainbleau: Her Majesty being desired to give her Consent,
did it accordingly, and it was a great Advantage to the Marquess, for she was
an only Daughter, very Rich, and yet more accomplished by her Virtues, but the
poorest Lady in Italy for Beauty, though she had a fine Stature and an Air good
enough, when she was Masqued. The Young Marquess having understood this last
Quality, would not Marry her, though he esteemed her other Perfections, being
passionately in Love with Gabrieli Niece to a Cardinal of the same Name, who
was very handsome. But the Marquess his Father being more tied to his own
Interest than his Son's Satisfaction, would be obeyed. The Son resisted, but
the Father outrageous with Choler, and mad that his Son contemned so great
Advantages, and the Opportunity of making his Fortune, set a Poniard to his
Throat to compel him to resolve upon it. The Queen, when she came to her
Presence, knew so well how to flatter her, that she gave her self up to her
Reasons, and so the Marriage was concluded by Her Majesty's means: By which we
may know that Hatred is not Immortal; for she was willing upon this occasion,
to give satisfaction to the Memory of her Uncle, by the Honors she would do to
his Neice. The Nuptial Benediction was performed in the Queens Chapel, and in
her Presence, where she often told the Husband leaning upon his Shoulder, Ah
how well shaped and Charming is your Bride! But he turning aside his Head,
because he would not give a disrespect to Her Majesty, always answered, That he
knew the contrary but too well. The Young Marquess contained himself for some
time within the Duties of Marriage, but at last flew off, and embarked himself
with Fani, who became Foolish, and passed eight times a Week in a Coach by
Langara, to ^ee and be seen of the Young Marquess. Every Body laughed in the
Palace-Windows, but as on the one hand Love cannot be altogether restrained, so
on the other, she ought to have managed things better, both to avoid Scandal,
and for her own Interests. For the Prince of Belleville who Maintained her at
that time, could not endure this Commerce, and threatened to forsake her, if she
did not break off this new Intrigue. She would not loose him, not so much for
his Merit, as Liberalities to her, and therefore constrained her self for some
time. The Marquess who was of an hot Temper, and Transported of a sudden,
threatened to destroy all things, if she did not regard him better, as if the
Lady could Live upon his good Mein and Vigor, for that was all he paid her.

One Day as she passed by his House tell in a Coach, being Transported with
Choler, he came immediately down Stairs, cut the Harness of her Coach, and gave
her many Blows on the Face, speaking all the Vile and most Infamous Things,
that could be said to Common Whores. Poor La Mosea, who was in the Coach with
her, thought she should have died for fear. Fani suffered her self to be thus
abused, and did nothing but cry; but the Spectators were like Stocks,
immovable at the Sight of the Tragedy, for there was never any Example before
of so criminal an Insolence. So the Pope, who was a great Enemy to these
Scandals, caused them both to be Arrested, and would have sent the Marquess to
the Castle of St. Angelo, if he could have got him out of the Queens Quarter:
But at last Cardinal Colonna did remonstrate to the Pope, that the two Sisters
being Widows, were not obliged to live with the same Circumspection as if their
Husbands were living.

The good Prince Belleville, employed all his Interest to obtain her Liberty,
believing that after so public an Affront, she would have broke entirely with
him. But he was very much mistaken, for she was no sooner out of Hold, but she
immediately fled into the Queens Quarter, who received her very well, and was
mightily overjoyed she had got this Celebrated Fani, who was every where talked
of as one of the most perfect and exact Beauties. She kept her continually
afterward, till in the Young Marquiss's Absence, who was sent into Sweden, the
Father got her sent away, and would not permit her to return any more.

After the Departure of the Duke of Mantua, and the Death of the Prince
Col^^bier, the old Marquess who ought to have retired by reason of his great
Age, begun to make Love more than ever. The Marquess Cincinnatus, who drew his
Nobility from the ancient Romans of this famous Name, as it is thought, but
whose Riches did not answer his Quality, had Married one of the finest Women of
Italy, who was of mean Birth, but Rich, and though she had brought him many
Children, had not yet lost that luster which sparkled in all her Person. Her
Stature was of a middle size, but slender, her Complexion fine and united; her
Eyes, Mouth and Teeth in a rare Perfection; and besides had a Wit that was
lively, pleasant and agreeable. The Marquess who had a numerous Family upon his
Hands, had a mind to enter into the Queens Service, in Quality of a Gentleman
of her Chamber, which was easy for him to obtain by the Credit of the Marquess
Del Monte, who procured it more for his Wifes sake than his own. The Tie that
was between the two Marquisses, being now both in the Queens Service, gave
Barbon a free access to the Fair Riga, Wife to Cocles, for so was Cincinnatus
called, because he had but a short sight. The Queen that knew all that passed,
(for Barbon, to divert her, told her all his good Fortune) said, speaking of
Cocles, That he had an happy ignorance of what was done at his House; for his
short sight hindered him from seeing many things which otherwise would terribly
vex him. He seemed to do what he could not understand when himself was spoken
of; and yet he was perpetually at the Queens, where he passed his time in
telling of News with the other Courtiers. The Marquess Del Monte was so charmed
with his Mistress the Fair Riga, that he resolved from henceforward to fix all
his Love upon her; so that he did all that he could to make himself agreeable;
he spent more than ordinary, Regaled his Mistress often, took care to inform
himself in the New Modes, that he might bring her News of it, and was very
liberal toward the Ladies Domestics, and others who assisted him in his
Amor. And whereas when he was threescore Years of Age, he endeavored to
support his Vigor by Art. But one Day being more than ordinarily heated, he
slept upon his Mistresses Bed till Dinner time; and as it happened, the Abbot
Cincinnatus the Marquisses his Brother came in unawares, without being
perceived, and saluting his Fair Sister, was extremely surpised to see Barbon
sleeping upon the Bed: He demanded of the Fair Riga from whence this
Sottishness proceeded? She presently answered, That the Marquess being come to
see Cincinnatus, was taken with a Faintness, which obliged him to lie upon the
Bed. That Is all Trifle, (replied the Abbot) it is you have put him out of
Breath. Riga fell into Tears, and answered, Alas Monsieur, I hope you will not
kill him? No, Madam, (answered the Prelate) you will much oblige me to kill him
your self. The Marquess awaked with the Noise, and being much surprised to find
himself in such a place with so good Company, said in his own excuse, That he
came thither to seek for Cincinnatus from the Queen, and being taken with a
Faintness and Stupidity of Brain, he was constrained to lay himself down upon
the first Bed he found. This Prelate who was very wise, and did not think it
convenient to make a noise of it, left the Guilty to their Remorse, and
pretended to change the Discourse, but could not hinder himself from saying,
Marquess have a care of your self, and manage it so with her, that you remember
you are no more Young; Reflect upon what I have said, and turn it as you
please: And so being a little more pleasant he retired; but Riga all in
confusion shut her self up in her Closet, and the Marquess went away in all
haste.

In the mean time the Pope was perfectly oppressed with the Complaints daily
made of the Disorders committed in the Franchises, and particularly in the
Queens Quarter. He lamented that he was the only Sovereign that could not be
Master of his Capital City, and could not hinder the greatest Disorders. This
at last confirmed him in the Resolution, to execute the Design he had long
before conceived of abolishing these Franchises of Quarters, and he did it a
while after with a Courage that was not to be shaken. He was always of this
Mind, that it would put Tranquillity and Calmness among Families, honest and
fair Dealing into Trade and Commerce, and would make the City secure. And it is
so true that the fear of Punishment is necessary to Mankind, and Nature without
Grace so corrupt, that the hope of Impunity carries Men on insensibly to commit
the greatest Crimes. It Is certain, that if this Affair had been well brought
about, it would have Immortalized the Pope who began the Enterprise. In truth
he had all the Zeal that was necessary upon such an occasion; but being
encompassed by People who were declared Enemies to a Crown he ought to have the
greatest respect for, he was carried on to those Excesses that everlastingly
sullied the high Reputation which he had acquired by his Innocence and Holy
Life. But before we enter into a Discussion of his great Affair, where the
Queen had a considerable share, we must make an end of the History of the
Marquess Del Monte.

In the time the Queen united her Interests with those of the Marquess Lavardin
Ambassador of France, to obtain satisfaction of the Pope, for the Violence of
his Ministers concerning the Quarters. Barbon persuaded the Queen to make a
Serenade to spite the Pope, and so much the rather seeing the Season was
proper for it: And accordingly Couplets and Songs were made, and recited with
Consorts of Instruments; the most famous Musicians in Rome being of the Party,
with two of the finest Singers the Queen had, Georgina or Angelica, and
Mariouche or Maronte Daughter of Barbon and Landini. They made also an
Amphitheatre in a little Garden of Jessamy, which was toward the Street, at
the Appartment of Marquess Del Monte, over against the Queens Palace, where
there was great preparation; for there was a number of Galleries built for the
Ladies, and he failed not to put the Fair Riga in full view, by building a
Place on purpose for her and her Friends. There was also many Repetitions in
the Queens great Hall, the last of which was extraordinary, by Illuminations
and an hundred sort of Instruments and fine Voices which answered the Harmony,
which was most Charming. That which was most extraordinary, was to see Marquis
Del Monte bestir himself to put all things in order, and command every one to
his Duty. The Fair Riga, with other Ladies, whose Husbands had any Charge under
the Queen, sat in little Boxes on the upper part of the Hall, and there was
nothing to be heard, but the yauling of the Feminine Voice of the Marquess. He
was all on fire through the Vehemence of the Action, and after all was done,
thrust himself forward to re-conduct the Ladies, and do the Honors of the
House; the last Caresses which he made, were to Mariouche his dear Daughter,
applauding her that she had Sung so well this Night. The Queen was pleased to
the highest point, that her Opera succeeded so well, commended the Marquess
before his Face, and withdrew very late; and the Scandalous Chronicle says,
That she went to abandon her self with the Fair Riga. Being retired at last to
his own House, he drank a great deal of Soup, and Supped well, and among other
things eat a Sallad of Cellery well prepared.

Afterward he went to Bed, and rose next Morning about eleven of the Clock, to
shave himself, and at the same time was taken with an heaviness in his Head,
and palpitation of his Heart: Quickly after he fell into a kind of Convulsion
Fit, which made him lean his Head on the Back of his Chair; he fell a foaming
at the Mouth, his Face was swelled and discolored, and his Eyes star'd. All
the House was in an Allarm, and the Cries and Tears came to the Queens Ears, who
ran thither presently; but seeing him stiff and in this Condition, was struck
with such an Horror that she returned all in Confusion, and had not the
Courage to speak one word of Comfort to any. To make short, he never came out
of his Fit, but died suddenly without Sense, and his Enemies spread it abroad,
that the Devil strangled him; and others said, that having set at naught, both
the Pope's Remonstrances and Threatenings, God had visibly punished him. But it is
most probable, that his continual Debauches having exhausted him, together with
his great Age, were the occasion of his Immature Death.

By the Consequence of this History, showing the irregular Conduct of the
greatest part of the Queens Officers, it is easy to judge of the great
Disorders which reigned in her Quarter. This was one of the specious Pretenses
of Pope Innocent XI. to abrogate the Franchises of the Queens, and Ambassadors
Quarters; as if there had been no way to stop the Disorders of particular
Persons, but by taking away the Rights of Sovereigns. But the Pope found more
difficulty in the Execution, than he had foreseen in the Project. He renewed
the Bulls of the Popes his Predecessors about the Revocation of Franchises, but
no Body desisted; he remonstrated to Ambassadors, That the Dissorders committed
in Rome, came from the Immunities of Quarters; and that they had authorized the
Fault by protecting the Criminals. But seeing they gave no heed to him, he
spoke to the Princes of Europe by his Nuncio's, in which they succeeded no
better than the Pope had done. For the Ambassadors wrote to their Masters, and
they took the Remonstrances to come as from Persons suspected to act in favor
of their own Interests.

In the mean time, if the Princes themselves had faithfully understood the
Disorders committed in these Quarters, it is not to be imagined they would have
much insisted upon those Immunities, for no Body can persuade himself that any
Prince has pretended by maintaining the Franchises of their Ambassadors, to
make them a Retreat to Thieves, Assassins, and Debauched Women. They would
without doubt give orders to remit them into the Hands of Justice, though
refug'd in their Quarters, or their Palaces themselves. But seeing the Affair
advanced not, the Pope was forced with displeasure to expect that from Time
which he could not obtain by Force. He reserved himself therefore for a better
Opportunity, resolving that when Princes should recall their Ambassadors, he
would receive no others, till such time as they had renounced these Franchises.
This way was easier, though longer about, and it succeeded better than the
violent Courses he had took. Spain by and by recalled the Marquess Del Carpio
her Ambassador, to send thither the Viceroy of Naples, in the beginning of the
Year 1683. The Pope immediately after his Departure, sent all his Sbirries to
take possession of his Quarter, in the Place d'Espaign, and scowr'd it of all
the Malefactors that were retired thither. The Quarters of the Ambassadors of
Venice and Portugal were recovered in the same manner; that is to say, by the
Departure of those that possessed them. Prince Radzeville the Ambassador of
Poland, who made his Entry in the Year 1680. and the Lord Castlemain Ambassador
of England, in the Year 1686, were neither of them acknowledged in this
Quality, till they had declared that they would not pretend to Franchises, or
Quarters. The Pope would never receive the Marquess Cogliudo Son of the Duke of
Medina Caeli, new Ambassador from Spain, but upon the Assurances of the
Marquess de les Balbazes, that this Ambassador should pretend neither to
Franchise nor Quarter, in case other Ambassadors did likewise renounce them.

There was none now at Rome which enjoyed either Franchises or Quarters, but
the French Ambassador, which gave occasion for a Song which was then in
fashion, whose Ends sounded like one another in two Syllables.

SONG.
DAns Rome qui n'est plus la terr^ur de -- l'Afrique
Depuis que ses Soldats chantent none au -- Bivach
Que ses Elections se forment par -- Micmac
Et que ses Senateurs sont Maitres de -- Music.
Ceux la cedans, la France a tort dans son -- Refus
Les Cadets a l'aine doivent fair le -- Planche
Selon le resultat de Conseil de -- Bibus:
La null Ambassadeur par belle -- Politic
Ne sera non pluus franc qu'un Merchand de -- Tabac
Et sans aucun respect nec ab hoc nec -- Ab hac
Les Sbirres passeront par son palais de -- Brique.
Les Jurisdictions n'iront pas plus -- Vltra
Portugal, Angleterre, Venise, and -- Caetera
Meme l'Ambassadeur du pais Don -- Sanche.
No sooner was the Duke d'Estrees Dead, toward the end of Jan. 1687. but the
Sbirries came presently and appeared at the Palace of Farnese, and took
Possession of the Quarter. Monsieur the Cardinal d'Estrees who received this
Loss of his Illustrious Brother, like a true Christian, with the Sentiments of
an enlightened Soul, did not think of maintaining the Right of the Franchises,
believing that there was no prescription in the case, and that the King being
better established in the Enjoyment of Quarters than any other Prince, would
have time enough to repress those who pretended to take them away; and so his
Eminence immediately left the Palace Farnese, and went to Lodge at the Vineyard
of Pamphilio.

In the mean time the Queen of Sweden was the only Person remaining, who had
any Possession of Quarters; and they presently became the most frequented in
Rome, and Langara which was the most desert, became now the most populous part
of the City. So that all Lewd People being retired thither, there was every Day
new Stories, and nothing in Rome was more talked of, than the Adventures of
Langara. The Pope who was very sensible of it, sometimes spoke to Cardinal
Azzolini and sometimes to the Queen, expressing his Resentments, but it was all
to no purpose.

After all, he saw plain enough that notwithstanding all his Endeavors, he had
done nothing, as long as there was any Asylum, or place of Refuge, left for
Criminals to fly to. But at last the Queen by the Measures of ill concerted
Politics, remitted her Right of Franchises into the Pope's Hand, of which she
was not long before she repented. She knew well enough that her Title to these
Immunities was not over well founded; nor durst she pretend to them, in either
of the Voyages which she made to Rome, in the Year 1655. and 1659. and yet she
showed afterward as great a difficulty to part with them, than if they had
been the Rights of her Crown. Neither had she over-done it at all, if the
unfetled State of her Affairs had not engaged her to endeavor to manage the
Pope in favor of her own Interests. See here the Contents of a Letter which
she writ to him after the Death of the Duke D'Estrees Ambassador of France.

Most Holy Father,
TO second the Just Intentions of your Holiness, in abolishing the Franchises
of Qnarters, I come to offer you to resign for ever mine, which the Justice and
Courtesy of your Holiness, and your Predecessors have permitted me to enjoy
without disturbance till this present, reserving nevertheless the Respects due
both to my Habitation and Domestics. I acknowledge that I offer nothing to
your Holiness, but what is your own; and can we offer any thing to God Almighty
but what is his already? But yet the Offer is not only acceptable, but
recompenc^d by the immense Bonnty, with unspeakable and eternal good things. As
for my self, I neither pretend to, nor desire any thing of your Holiness, I
only pray you to accept this my Example, which perhaps may not be unuseful in
the present Conjuncture of Affairs. I protest that I am with a profound
Veneration,

Your Holinesses Most Devote, and most Obedient Daughter, Christina Alexandra.


This good Princess did believe she should bring the Princes of Europe to
agree; and that her Example would cause even France to give up her Franchises;
but she was mistaken, for the Most Christian King while these things were in
doing sent the Marquess de Lavardin his Ambassador to the Pope. This Minister
entered Rome the 16th of Novembor 1687. and went to live at the Palace Farnese,
where he re-established the Franchises of his Quarter, during all the time of
his Abode, upon the same foot his Predecessors had enjoyed them time out of
mind.

To speak the truth, the Pope's Predecessors had never contraven'd the Rights
of France; for they knew too well from whom they had the Patrimony of St.
Peter. They acknowledged the Kings of France as the only Pro^ectors of the Holy
See; Pepin and Charlemagne having highly declared themselves against the
Enemies of the Popes, and made it their proper business to enter into War in
their behalf: They themselves bestowed on them the Exarchal of Ravenna, and the
other Provinces of the Patrimony of the Holy Foundation of the Church of Rome,
after the Defeat of all their Enemies: So that all this, and an infinite number
of other Services which the Kings of France had rendered the Church, made Popes
to distinguish them from all the Princes of Europe. It Is true, that
notwithstanding all this, the Ingratitude of Priests is so great, that there is
no Statue of Pepin or Charlemagne to be found in Rome, nor the least
Inscription in their Honor. If Pope Innocent XI. had no mind to hear the
recital of all these Donations, nor search into Antiquity unknown to him, he
might at least have called to Memory the Treaty of Pisa, concluded in these
Days, wherein the Possession of the Franchises were confirmed to the French.
But the Spirit of Partiality, which ought never to reign in the Common Father
of Christians, hindered Innocent XI. from entering into these Reasons, and made
him push on things to a Scandalous Extremity. If he had as soon given Audience
to the Marquess de Lavardin, or Monsieur Chanelay Envoy of France; as to the
Envoy of the Prince of Orange, he had known the true Sentiments of France. All
the World knows that this Minister had order to remit the Franchises, if the
Pope would have given him a present Audience, but not being able to obtain
that, which was yet accorded to a Protestant, he would not yield up his
incontestable Rights. But this drives us off ^oo far from our Subject; we will
therefore return to see the Consequences of the Queens dismission of her
Franchises, which cost her so much Displeasure and Uneasiness. We shall
understand it best from the following Relation which was sent me from Leghorn,
by a French Officer of the Queen's, who went thither to seek for an Employ. As
he was Her Majesty's Confident after Clairet's Death, no Body knew the Queen's
Secrets better than himself; and therefore having desired him to instruct me,
as to what passed upon that occasion, I shall relate it according to the Words
of his own Writing.

The Queen of Sweden having promised, and afterward written an eloquent Letter
to Pope Innocent the XI. (wherein she makes the Resignation with a great deal
of Zeal to please his Holiness) quickly saw her Error, and the Injury she had
thereby done to her self. For whether it were that she had not used all the
Precautions that were necessary to make this Action valuable, or pretended that
the Pope ought to have given her thanks, or rather because her People were
accustomed to an insupportable Liberty, and could not be contained within
Bounds; but so it was, that the Cession of the Franchise did not last above two
Months, before the Queen received Discontent and Vexation from it every way.

The first thing that was seen was a Battallion of Sbirries, with their
Bariseil at the Head of them, to take possession of the Quarter with
insupportable Pride. The Pope made these Scoundrels insolent by the Power given
them, and it was the reason that we looked upon them with Contempt; and it did
so much the more mortify all the Domestics, in that they were not used to be
vexed with such Rogues with whom they had never any thing to do before.

At last happened an Accident which was the Cause of all the Mischief that
might be foreseen. A Valet of one of the Queen's Anspessades, had cheated a
Banker of some Barrels of Brandy; and the Sbirri's, whether of their own
Motion, or excited by some of the Queen's Enemies, took him Prisoner upon
Easter Day, near the Queen's Palace, and dragged him as far as the Steps of the
Church de Regina Coeli, which is at Longara. Many Footmen, and others of the
Queen's Domestics, who went to St. Peter's for their Devotion, cried out to
the Sbirri's as they went along, that it was a shame to take him upon
Easter Day, without regard to the Sanctity of the Festival.

This did not terrify them at all; for they brought their Prisoner to a
Cabaret, keeping him by main force, though they remonstrated to them that he
belonged to her Majesty. The Queen having understood it, sent to disengage him,
being angry that they had not asked her permission to take him. He was taken
away by force, out of the hands of these Rascals, and brought back in Triumph
to Langara, the People crying out Vivat to the Queen, and Hooting at the
Sbirri's. But this caused a great Noise; for the Pope taking Offense, that they
had committed Violence to the Ministers of his Justice, and enterpriz'd upon
his Authority, made a Criminal Process against all those that had a share in
this business, and condemned them all as seditious.

The Queen being stark mad to see the Placards, stuck upon the Walls of her
Palace, wherein the pretended Criminals were condemned to Death for Contumacy,
and their Heads set at a Price, kept no farther measures with the Pope; and to
brave him, took the occasion of a Feast which the Jesuits made, whishe went
with a magnificent Train, accompanied by all her Domestics, armed like so many
St. Georges under their Habits: The Condemned had order to follow her Majesty
at the sides of her Coach, with the three accused Auspessades, and nine others,
which made up the number of a dozen all well-arm'd, and resolute to the
uttermost.

I remember poor Captain Landini who had before passed for a Man of Courage,
considering the danger, fell a trembling when he went out of the Port
Settignana; and whereas he should have followed the Queen at the Head of the
Auspessades, was forced to be put into one of the Queen's Coaches, being as
pale as a dead Man. However they seemed to take no notice of it at the
Apostolic Palace, but on the contrary, the Pope regaled her Majesty with some
Basins of Fruit, the first of which, I remember, was green Raisins, a Rarity
for the Month of May, as then it was. A Chamberlain of Honor presented them to
the Queen, who gave him no more than ordinary Thanks; but after he was gone,
looked upon me, and said, What does Mingon mean with his Raisins? She spoke of
the Pope; who, being of an austere Temper, refused almost every Favor asked of
him, with this Word Minga; which is as much as to say, No, or not at all, in
the Milanese Language, or in the Country of Spain, from whence the Queen gave
him the Nickname of Mingon.

Does he think, said she, we are asleep, No, I will vex him in my turn. She
then gave Orders, that as many Sbirries as passed by her Quarter. should be
taken up. One Merula, a Neopolitan Bandit, whom the Queen had taken from
Justice, which would have punished him for some Crimes committed in the Realm
of Naples, was her Bravo. And indeed this Man, though but of few Words, was a
wicked Devil; for he would Kill a Man upon the least occasion, or for Money, if
you pleased. There was then a Corporal of the Sbirries, who had Insolence
enough to speak some ill things of the Queen, and to boast an Exploit which he
had done in her Quarter; but he did not live long after this Temerity, for he
was Killed by Merula, at Noon day, as he was going out of his House, near the
Governor's of Rome. The Pope enraged at the Death of this Man, redoubled his
Edicts against the Queen's People; and and came to such a point of Choler, that
he proposed in a Consistory to Excommunicate the Queen. But Monsieur the
Cardinal D'Estrees so strongly represented to his Holiness, that he must have
more circumspection in regard of Crowned Heads; and that it could not be proved
that the Queen was the cause of it, that it hindered his Holiness from coming
to this Extremity. And it is remarkable, that the Queen, who had often vexed his
Eminence upon many occasions, found no body but him to maintain her Interests,
for I think Cardinal Azzolini was then Sick. In the mean time, things grew
worse and worse, insomuch, that the Queen having understood that the Pope would
send all the Sbirries to carry away the Condemned by force out of her Palace,
ordered the Marquess Del Monte to give Notice to all her Household to be in her
Palace on Sunday after Mass. All the Domestics were there, and above all, the
Gentlemen were the first that heard the Queen's Speech.

She said,

Gentlemen, and all you others my Domestics, I have brought you hither to tell
you, That the Pope is coming to the Sword's Point with me, by forcing my
Domestics, your Comerades, into the hands of Justice; I am resolved not to
forsake them, and therefore those that are in my Service, must prepare
themselves to run the same Fortune with me, and to repulse couragiosly those
Violences that will be offered; I will be at your Head, and exposed to the same
Perils with all of you. You know me, and understand by some Actions of my Life,
that I am not Fearful; let those that have not Courage to serve me, declare it,
for I will force no body. I know the Pope is your Sovereign, and if any
Interest oblige you to retire, those that have a mind, may do it freely; I had
rather have ten Courageous Men, who are willing, and will be Faithful, than a
thousand timorous Persons and Cowards, who for fear of prejudicing their
Affairs, are not willing to run the same Fortune with me.

They all appl^ud^d the Speech, but you might see by their Faces, that one half
of them could have wished themselves far enough off. I was a Filecloser, or the
last Man that brings up the Ranks, and cast my self at the Queen's Feet,
assuring her, that any Interest of the Family, should make my spend the last
drop of my Blood in her Service. Go my poor N. said she to me, I know thou
speak from thy Heart, and one time or other, I will take an opportunity to
let thee know, that I am fully persuaded of it. Not I alone, Madam, (said I)
but all the French that are in Rome, will take it for a Glory, to die in your
Majesty's Service. I know said she, the French Nation loves me, and as I always
Esteem them, I shall freely receive their Service. The good Princess in a
Transport, fell into a Panegyric upon the French Nation, exalting to the
Skies, their Fidelity and Love to their King, and for all the Princes they took
an inclination to Serve.

The Pope, when he understood the Queen's Resolutions, fell a Laughing, as he
had reason. Nevertheless, some of the Court-Prelates took the liberty to
represent to the Pope, that if he pushed things to extremity, he would cause a
Mutiny among the People, and especially by the French, who were not well
satisfied about the Proceedings of the Court of Rome, and having but the least
Pretense, such as that of the Queen's was, would blindly follow her Will. It Is
certain that these Reflections did a little slacken the Court-Resolutions. But
while these things were doing, the Queen called to me after Dinner. At first
when I came, I fell on my Knees before her, as she was sitting on a Couch. I
send for you now, said she, because I would be seen by no body else, for now
every one is at Rest, because of the Heat. And indeed there was no body about
her. I remember (pursued her Majesty) what you said to me some days ago: The
Pope continues his Anger, and though he be Pope, I will make him remember I am
Queen. You know all the French which are in this City; manage them, for I shall
have occasion, and I esteem an hundred French, more than a thousand Italians. I
have already provided (said I, Madam) the gre^ter past of the French, which I
esteem the most Brave, and who have no settlement in Rome, but seek for some
Business, or an occasion to show their Bravery. Your Majesty knows, that as the
French Nation is Persecuted at Rome under this Pontificate, because of the
Differences between the two Courts, upon the Subject of the Regalia, and the
four Propositions of the Clergy of France; So, Madam, the profound Veneration
which the French have for your Majesty, and Hatred to the Pope, will make them
enterprise all things. If your Majesty will be so kind to permit me to do it, I
will bring you Fifty, all good Men, who shall pass under your View, without
their knowing of it.

The Queen approved my Design; and the way I took was th^s. Whereas, her
Majesty's Palace was adorned with precious Movables, fine Pictures, and
excellent Statues, which were inviting to Strangers. It was not difficult for
me to bring whole shoals t^ see these Rarities at certain Hours. A Valet de
Chamber, who was a Confident, had order to leave all Open; So I brought in
every time Nine or Ten Persons; and when I had introduced them into the Chamber
of the Mirroir of Time, where all the fine Paintings were; She could see them
without being seen her self, by means of certain Windows which were above, near
the Ceiling. One day above the rest, I brought in a certain French Grenadier,
who had Deserted; he looked upon the Queen's Picture very earnestly, and cried,
Oh, how great a Queen is this! Gods Zd^, Why is she not at the head of her
Armies, as heretofore, I would Serve her willingly. I said to him, Monsieur, If
there should be an occasion, you would hardly be of the same mind. Yes by G.
answers my Brave, I have h^lf a Dozen Comerades besides, which shall be at her
Service. Well, said I, Gentlemen, you have seen all, let us go and drink her
Majesty's Health. Judge you whether I did not do my business to effect, for she
sent for me again, and as soon as she saw me, said, Oh, how well things go!
these are the People I must have: Get in besides, some Trades-People if you
can, for they are, for the most part, as good as Soldiers. So I went to her
Shoemaker and her Tailor, who had got ten Boys a piece, all Merry Lads. I
declared my self to their Masters, and as I could trust them with the Secret, I
told the Lads, that the Queen had given me a Pistol to make them Drink. Her
Majesty, who would see all, made me bring them into a great Cabbaret, at the
Port Settignana, over against one of her Apartments, where she could both see
and hear us. We were there in the Afternoon under a Tree, which cast a great
Shade: There was an Arbor in the Branches, and Banks round about, into the
Apartment^ of which Places you must enter by a Wooden Bridge, where there was
Conveniences for 20 Men, without incommoding one another. These Merry Blades
began to Sing and drink the Queen's Health: She heard all, and took a great
deal of Pleasure in the Applauses given her: so that she sent a Footman, who
gave order to the Landlord, to distribute a dozen Bottles of Wine, to redouble
her Healths. This Surpised me, because I would have conducted this Affair with
all the Secrecy imaginable, till such time as I had brought the Train to
Perfection. I saw her Majesty next day, and she told me all went well. Madam,
said I to her, I manage my People, and do not declare my self, but to those
that I am sure will make no noise, till the time comes, according to your
Maj^sty's Orders; But if I durst, I would ask, on whose behalf it was, that we
were Yesterday Regaled with a dozen Bottles of Wine, because I am apprehensive
lest it should discover my intrigue. The Queen, whose intention it was to make
a noise, fell a L^ghing, and told me, she was very well pleased with my
Conduct. And to make short, in three or four days time I was assured of four or
five Hundred Men. The Pope, who had Notice given him, that the Queen Fortified
her self, and knew very well that the French were ill satisfied with their hard
Usage, began to fear some Rising; but his Humor being severe and inflexible,
he did not come to any terms of Accommodation. Yet at last, by the means of
Monsieur Albani, Secretary of the Briefs, who Succeeded Cardinal Siusius, and
wore the Purple by his proper Merit, who was of great Credit with the Queen,
and to whom the Pope always listened, and the Endeavors of Cardinal Azzolini,
things began to sweeten and come into a better temper. Albani went to vlsit the
Queen as from himself, and at first talked about things indifferent, but
insensibly fell into the Quarrel between the Pope and the Queen. She
complained, that the Pope treated her with Rigor; and the Prelate assured her
Majesty, that his intentions were good, but complained that her Majesty
suffered her self to be possessed by certain People of her Court, who proceeded
contrary to his Interests. Then we are both equal in the matter, says the
Queen briskly, for he is more possessed than I, seeing his Ministers create
Trouble to all People. Monsieur Albani sweetened the matter as well as he could,
representing to her Majesty, that what angered the Pope most, was, that it
seemed to him as if the Queen had a mind to make a Sedition in Rome, by raising
the People. I had no such thought (said she) for I know too well my Duty
toward His Holiness to do any thing of that nature; But I would take such
measures that may put him in mind who I am. I own, that among Strangers and the
People of Rome, I find some whose Minds are more inclinable to me, than the
present Government; nor does it belong to me to reform it; But however, I will
at least take care, that my Domestics be not taken away from me, and my Palace
Rifled before my Face, as I have been threatened, and know not how soon it may
be executed. Monsieur Albani concluded, that the Pope could not retract what he
had done; but if her Majesty would permit the formalities of Justice to be
done, it were not difficult to find such a Temper, that no body might receive
any harm, and that the culpable being condemned by Justice, might be Pardoned
again, because the Pope's Authority would suffer damage, if he acted otherwise.
And my Honor (said the Queen) would be wounded if I should act in any other
manner; and if I were to begin again, the Pope should not have so free
Acknowledgments and Condescentions, seeing I have made my self Enemies to
please him; But now Crowned Heads are well agreed, it is in his power to give
me a Disturbance. But (said she to conclude) things are not yet past remedy,
for my own part, if an Expedient can be found to save my Reputation, I will
give him both my hands to what he pleases.

Nevertheless, things continued in this posture till the coming of the Marquess
Lavardin, Ambassador of France, with whom she found it convenient to unite her
Interests, because he was the Minister of a Potent Prince, who was ill
satisfied in the Court of Rome. She said a thousand good things by way of
Advance, and spoke of him always in the most Obliging terms. As for Instance,
That the King of France could not have made a better choice, than to have
employed a Person of so much Understanding as himself. That being most
intelligent in the business of Ambassages, he would cause the respect due to
his Character to be easily paid him, and other things of the like nature. Her
main end was to join her self to him, to obtain Satisfaction of the Pope,
supposing she could not make her own Accommodation apart; For notwithstanding
these apparent Unions, they would easily separate and forsake one another, to
better their own Affairs. But the Pope, who did not like this Embassage, and
would never acknowledge him, made Lavardin (seeing himself forsaken by all)
very glad to unite with the Queen, who was also in the same Circumstances.

The day that this Ambassador made his Entry into Rome, the Queen under most
rigorous Penalties, forbad all her Officers and Domestics to see it. But I who
knew by her Eyes, that she made this Prohibition contrary to her Inclinations,
asked leave by the Marquess Caponi, as being a Frenchman, to go and see this
Entry: She granted it in the Presence of the Marquess Del Monte, with this
condition, that I should observe very well all that passed, and give her an
Account as soon as it was done. After I had seen all, I came to give a relation
of the Particulars as well as I could; and remaining alone with her Majesty,
she said to me, Look you, this is a matter of Consequence, act with all the
address you can, and do not fail to get Acquaintance with some Favorite Valet
de Chamber, to discover as much as it is possible, what passes at the Marquess
de Lavardin's.

At the beginning every one managed the matter so as to serve themselves with
most advantage in the Court of Rome. The Ambassador and the Cardinal D'
Estrees, did not fail to manage all their Intrigues either to bend or terrify
the Pope. At last the Ministers of his Holiness having renvers'd all the
Projects of the French, and the Pope having refused to receive a Letter written
with the King's own hand, brought Express by Monsieur Chanelay, Gentleman in
ordinary of his Chamber. Things broke without return, and made the Ambassador
resolve at last, to unite with the Queen. They who desire a thing, do easily
believe it, or seem so to do. Two or three days were scarce past, but there run
a Report, that the Courts of France and Rom were just upon agreeing; and at the
same time arrived a Courier from France, as 'twas said, about the Vacancy of
Benefices, but no Body knew what the Letters imported. The Queen being in
suspense, and not knowing what to believe, desired me to bring her the Courier,
whom I was Acquainted with. I pretended to show him all the Rarities of the
Queen's Apartment. He came, and I conducted him through all Places, till we
came to the Chamber of Mirroir, where the Queen Surpised us, at it were by
chance; She questioned the Courier very much, but being one of the Cabinet, and
a Man of Wit, she could only draw from him some general things.

In the mean time, she never left to speak a thousand good things of the
Ambassador, and the Ambassador of the Queen, and I found out an Invention to
bring them a little nearer one to another. I told her Majesty, that Madam the
Ambassadress had brought the finest Habits in the World along with her: And she
let me know that she was very desirous to have a sight of them I made the
Ambassadress acquainted with it, and she failed not to send them to the Queen,
and she said, she was much pleased with them, but should have been better to
see them upon the Person for whom they were made. Madam de Laverdin understood
this, and was mightily pleased with the Esteem the Queen had for her. For the
poor Lady, in the Mis-intelligence between the Court of Rome and her Husband,
saw no body which gave her the Title of Excellence, out of her own Palace, nor
treated her as Ambassadress, and therefore died with longing to see her self
Honored with these Titles by so great a Queen. I Dined at the Ambassadors some
time after, and by way of Entertainment, it was asked me how her Majesty would
treat Monsieur the Ambassador if he should do her the Honor of a Visit. I
answered that I knew not the Queen's Secrets, but yet I durst promise, that her
Majesty would treat him according to his Character. The same Night I saw the
Queen, and said, Madam, dare I enquire of your Majesty, how you will treat
Monsieur de Laverdin, if he gives you the Honor of rendering his Devoirs. I
would treat him (said she) as all other Ambassadors of France; or in short, how
he pleases. She let him know it also by other means; and the same Night I went
to tell the Ambassador's Confident what the Queen had said: And after some few
days, a Valet de Chamber of Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees, called Constant,
met me going over the Bridge of Ponte Sista, and told me, that the next day
Monsieur the Ambassador of France would come to Visit her Majesty. I flew
presently to tell her, and as soon as she saw me, asked me: Well, what News?
Madam, (said I, speaking very low to her) Monsieur the Ambassador will come to
Morrow to Visit you. She was much surpised at these words, and said, Ah N --
the Affection you have for me, makes you desire these things. No, Madam,
(answered I) there is nothing so true, I have seen the Preparations, and was
told it by a Friend. My Child, (said she) I have no News of all this, and I
believe the Orders of the Court are changed; but say nothing, to Morrow we
shall know all. I could not Sleep all that Night, and the next Day went to the
Queens Levee, and she cast so many Glances at me, that I was quite put out of
Countenance; but she was scarce clothed before Monsieur de la Brussiere Master
of Monsieur de Lavardin's Chamber, came to tell Her Majesty, that Monsieur the
Ambassador desired the Honor of paying his Respects to her, and doing his
Devoirs.

One may easily believe that the Queen gave a good Answer to this agreeable
Message, saying that Monsieur the Ambassador was perfectly Master to come when
he pleased, and that he should be received, according both to his Character and
his Merit. The Visit was great and magnificent, and they spoke an hundred
obliging things, and full of esteem one for another, and in the praise of that
great Monarch Monsieur Lavardin represented. This Visit entertained all the
City with Discourse for some time, and all the Queens Courtiers became good
French Men. Madam the Ambassadress came also to see the Queen, and was well
received; and after this, there was nothing so frequent as the Coaches of the
Ambassador and his Lady in the Queens Court.

I had forgot one Circumstance, which is, that while this Enterview was
treating, Her Majesty went one Day to the College of St. Clement, to hear some
Academical Discourses, in Prose and Verse, with a recitation in Music, and it
was at the time of the Carneval, Anno 1688. when all Rejoycings were forbidden
by the Pope's Authority. I told the Confident of Monsieur the Ambassador, that
the Queen in returning home, would pass by the Palace ^arnese; which Monsieur
de Lavardin understanding, assembled all his Guards Marine, together with his
whole Household, and made a double Hedge, in the middle of which the Queen
passed with all her Train, with Flambeaus lighted. Monsieur the Ambassador,
Madam the Ambassadress, Madamosel their Daughter, and a little Child a Daughter
of theirs, were upon the Balcony, where they made a profound Reverence to the
Queen; she re-saluted them with her Hand, and all the Nobles with their Hats
off accompanied Her Majesty as far as Ponte-Sisto.

In short, the whole Carriage of the Thing was Agreeable and Magnificent on
both sides; for the Queen had one of the finest Coaches in Rome, and a Chair of
the same, all her Footmen and twelve Anspessades at the back of them, and all
illuminated by twenty six Flambeaus in White Wax.

It was again inquired, how Madamosel Lavardin should be treated if she came to
kiss Her Majesty's Hands. The Queen asked me from whom I brought that Question,
and whether Monsieur the Ambassador made this Demand? No, Madam, (I answered)
it is a Damsel that waits upon Madamosel Lavardin. They are not very knowing in
the Ceremonial Law, (said the Queen;) If Madamosel Lavardin comes to see me, I
must stand upon Niceties; but because we will not come to that, I will go
abroad for her sake, and we will meet one another in a Church or Religious
Monastery, and I will carry her to see the finest Convents in Rome, that I will
treat her with all Civility, and make her sit in my Presence next my self. This
was done, and the Young Lady was entirely satisfied in Her Majesty's Goodness.

One Day the Queen would have me to watch when the Ambassador passed by
Longara, to go to the fine Garden of Cardinal Barberini, which is near the Gate
de Spirito Santo. After I knew, I gave notice to Cardinal Azzolini on Her
Majesty's part, who was to come to meet him as it were by Chance, and they met
one another over against the Monastery called Regina Celi, where there passed a
great many Civilities between them, and the Cardinal treated the Marquess de
Lavardin with the Title of Excellence and Ambassador, in the Presence of a
great number of People who waited on purpose to see how they would Salute one
another. I caused the Ambassador's Trumpets to come afterward into the Queens
Garden, where they Played most excellently, and were gratified with ten Pistols
from the Queen, and Monsieur the Ambassador extolled this Liberality to the
Skies.

The Queen being desirous to compose the Difference that was between the
Cardinals Azzolini and D'Estrees, could not bring it about, and was so angry at
it, that to be revenged she straitway remonstrated to the Ambassador, That the
hot Councils of Cardinal D'Estrees had exasperated Matters, and would cause him
to make false steps; that such a Man as he had no need either of Counselor or
Pedant, and that the Pope was irritated against him for Cardinal D'Estree's
sake; that Azzolini was certainly a good Servant of the King's; and though
decried in the Court of France, had always maintained a great Respect for the
King; and that if his Excelle^^e would confide in him, he would manage things
to his Satisfaction.

Monsieur de Lavardin gave Ear to it, and looked coldly upon Cardinal
D'Estrees; but this incomparable Cardinal, who had faithful Spies over the
Queen, was immediately informed of all, and so with his winning Manners
prevented the Ambassador, and said to him; Monsieur, the Queen of Sweden is so
Inconstant, and Cardinal Azzolini so great a Deceiver, that if the Pope do but
make the least show of giving them some slight satisfaction, you will find the
Queen turn her Back of you. I know, Monsieur, she has told you, that you may
lay aside my Counsels, and that you have no need of a Pedant: But since the
King has done me the Honor to communicate his Affairs to me as, well as your
self, I will always speak my Thoughts, where the Interests of his Estates are
transacted. But Monsieur Lavardin, who was of Opinion, that the Court of Rome,
was not very fond of the Queen of Sweden, was well satisfied with this
Remonstrance; but the Queen gave D'Estrees to the Devil, knowing he had been
informed of all, and was never able to discover him that betrayed her. What
happened after the Discovery of all these Intrigues? The Pope was always
obstinate, and would hear no body. The Queen died the 13th of April, 1689. The
Marquess de Lavardin parted from Rome into France from whence he came, without
seeing the Pope, who died the 12th of August in the same Year: And as to
Cardinal Azzolin^, he died on the 9th of June, going before that of the Pope.

This Relation, though a little long, (...) us in many curious Circumstances,
and shows the inconstant G^nius of the Queen. For after all, who would have
believed a little before, that she would have made so strict an Union with the
French Ambassador, after she had spoken so much ill of this Crown, and
concerning which, she pretended to be dissatisfied. Witness what escaped from
her as she was talking to the Envoy of England, who was at Rome a little after
James II. came to the Crown of those Realms.

She received his Picture from the same Lord, and made him as magnificent a
Reception, as if he had been declared Ambassador, though he never had that
Character; for it was Conferred upon the Lord Castlemain. She Regaled him one
Night with fine Music and Verse in the Praise of King James, a quantity of
Liquors, and other Refreshments, and holding his Picture in her Hand: This is a
great King, and (said she) I hope I shall not die, till I see the English again
in France, as they have been heretofore, to humble that Light and Ambitious
Nation. If the Pope would believe me, I could show him a way to penetrate into
the Bowels of France: The true way to abate the Pride of the French, (who would
not acknowledge the Holy See, except for Interest) is to make a firm League
with the King of England.

To know the Original of that Aversion which the Queen and Cardinal had for
Cardinal D'Estrees, we must go a step higher; for it is certain that this
Misintelligence begun before the Ambassadors of the four Crowns were
discontented with Cardinal Altieri, who governed the Ecclesiastical State, as
of Cardinal Patron, under the Pontificate of Pope Clement X. I say he governed
the Estate, for the good Pope Altieri being come to decrepit Age, and fallen
into mere Childhood again, had no part in it: Which made Pasquin say, when
Marforius demanded under whose Pontificate they lived? Sumus sub Pontificatu
Alterius. We are under the Pontificate of another, (answered he) alluding to
the Pope's Name, and the small share he had in the Government.

Another time Pasquin said no less ingeniously upon this Subject, that Clement
X did only Benedicere and Sanctificare, whereas Cardinal A^tieri did for his
part Regere and gubernare.

The Pope was Elected 22th of April, 1679. in spite of the Queen and Cardinal
Azzolini's Mind, who had an hundred Juggles and Contrivances, to make Cardinal
Vidoni Pope; this Princess hoping that under his Pontificate she should have
the same Respects and Conveniences that she had under Clement IX. But Fortune
was not so favorable to Vidoni, as Pasquin also had foretold: For during the
Conclave, there was found a Writing fixed upon the Gate of the Pontifical
Palace at Monte Cavallo, where was written, Qui non intrano, ne Facchini, ne
Guidoni. Alluding to the Names of the Cardinals Facchenetti, and Guidoni, or
Vidoni; the last of which signifies a Beggar, or a Rogue, and the other a
Porter.

Azzolini who hoped to be Secretary of State under Vidoni, as he was under
Clement IX. was satisfied no more than the Queen, so that when Her Majesty
received the News of his Elevation, she would not believe it, and treated all
them that brought it as Beasts, saying, they did not understand themselves.

In the mean time Count Alibert entered, and told her with his affected Air,
Madam, the Cardinal Altieri is Pope: Oh been bestia (said ^he) non occorro
altro, s'attacchi la Carr^zzo. She went out with all her House by the Garden
Gate, which opens toward the Gate of St. Pancras, to avoid the Crowd, and
entered into the Bourg of St. Peter, by the Gate of the Light Horse, from whence
she went directly to the Vatican; but she had no heart to receive him at the
bottom of the Stairs, she was only in the Hall, where some Prelates were come
before her. After her Compliment made to the new Pope, which was very brief,
she went back as she came, but so melancholy, that we easily knew she was not
content, Azzolini having missed his Blow, quickly found means to adjust his
Affairs to the new Regent.

At this time the House of the D'Estrees pretending to an Hat for the Bishop
and Duke of Laon at the Solicitation of Portugal, entered into Cabals with one
another; but the Queen being of a restless Spirit, and always an Enemy to
France, because they would not yield to her Sentiments, would with Azzolini
cross as much as they could the promotion of the D'Estrees; and this
illustrious Prelate waited a long time, because he would be a Cardinal by his
own Merit, and not put on his Hat at a price, as was hoped for by the devouring
Avarice of the Regent. From hence began at first the Antipathy for the
D'Estrees, which augmented afterward by diverse Accidents.

After the Death of Clement X. the Queen out of Policy writ a Letter to the
Most Christian King, by which she offered to join Azzolini to the Faction of
France, for the Election of a Pope; but they made so little account of it, that
they never returned her an Answer, till two Days after the Election of Innocent
XI. the Queen took it with all the spite that could be thought of, and had the
Injustice to believe that Cardinal D'Estrees was the Cause of this Contempt.
She was angry besides that they did not give her timely notice of the Queen of
France' Death, and for that reason would not wear Mourning; but afterward
changing her Opinion, in favor of so Pious and Holy a Queen, she habited her
self in a stuff of Goats Hair of a Violet Color, which is made no where but at
Naples, and is very dear, and the Thing of the World, which is the deepest
Mourning.

But that which most augmented the Queens Rage and her Marquisan, for so she
her self used to call Azzolini, because he was of the Marca de Anchona, was the
Affair of Molinos. He was a Secular Spanish Priest, and undertook the direction
of Consciences for twenty Years in Rome, and under this Pretext brought in a
new Heresy without making a noise, which was so much the more pernicious in
that, under a show of Elevating the Mind, to a more sublime Contemplation, he
would not have us stop at the Humanity of the Word Incarnate saying, that we
ought always to consider it in the Bosom of the Eternal Father. This made some
to believe him to be a concealed Jew, of which there was a great deal of
likelihood. In effect all his Discourses tended to destroy as much as possibly
he could the Ineffable Mysteries of the Holy Trinity, and the Incarnation of
the Son of God. He was against all Images, and renewed all the Dreams of the
Ancient Iconoclasticks, condemned by so many Orthodox Councils. His Manners
were as corrupt as his Faith, and he would abuse the finest Women and Maids to
whom he had access, by persuading them that Whoredom was no Sin, when it was
not Scandalous. According to him, Confession was no way necessary, and that
Prayer of Quietude abolished all sorts of Sin; so the Tribunal of Penitence,
was no more frequented, and the most Devout to outward appearance, whom he had
seduced, approached the Holy Table, as soon as ever they came to Church,
without putting themselves to the trouble of an Absolution; this abominable
Rogue, all the while rejoicing at the horrible Sacriledges he committed.

But there is no need I should enlarge my self any further in things which are
known to all the World, nor upon the Important Service Cardinal D'Estrees
^ender'd the Church, in advertising the Holy Office of this Infamous Heretic,
who had infatuated all the principal Personages in Rome, as far as the Queen of
Sweden, nay even as far as Pope Innocent XI. who believed him a Saint, and
would have made him a Cardinal in a few Days. The Method Cardinal D'Estrees
took to Arrest Molinos, was a piece of consummate Prudence, and any other
Person but himself, who should have declared it, would have suffered him to
escape. It was upon a Thursday that the Congregation of the Holy Office was
held before the Pope, where after they had expedited the Affairs which lay upon
the Table, Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees demanded and obtained Audience of
the Pope, and the Sacred College, about a thing of the greatest importance;
and every one being silent, said, That one of the most pernicious of Heresies
was formed in Rome, and if a prompt Remedy were not applied, there was an end
of all Religion. But that he who was the Author, had so great Credit even in
the Sacred College, (meaning Azzolini without naming him) that he would escape
as soon as the Congregation was ended, if sufficient precautions were not taken
thereupon. And therefore he required the Pope's Order to seize the Person he
would name, and bring him to the Prisons of the Holy Office, before the
Assembly should separate.

This being agreed to, Monsieur the Cardinal D'Estrees, named Molinos, as the
most detestable of Heretics, summoning the Pope to keep his Word, and cause
him to be Arrested, and immediately to conduct him to the Prisons of the Holy
Office. The Pope had a mind to take his part, and to justisie his Innocence
before hand: But the Cardinal protested, that if he intended to act for the
Glory of God, he ought not to loose one Moment; and when they were assured of
his Person, he might give him time enough to justify himself.

Upon these Remonstrances the Pope sent for a Ba^iseel, and commanded him to go
with all his Sbirries, and Arrest Doctor Molinos, who lived near St. Laurence
in Panisperna, and to bring him immediately into the Prisons of the Holy
Office, telling him, That he lost his own Head if he missed his Blow.

In the mean time the Cardinal D'Estrees kept Azzolini always in his Eye, for
fear he should go away, and give notice to Molinos, and retained the Cardinals
locked up with the Pope, till two of the Clock, after Dinner, notwithstanding
the great Heat of Summer, till the Bariseel had brought a Scrowl of his
Imprisonment, who after three Months Juridical Proceedings, made a Public
Recantation of Errors, at the Minerva. He Detested, Abjured, Anathematized
them, and after he had received Absolution, he had the Penance inflicted on
him, of being confined all his Life, in the Prisons of the Holy Office.

This wicked Person had the address to insinuate himself into the most
considerable Persons in Rome, among whom he spread his Venom more or less,
according as he found the Subjects disposed. He had seduced and infected almost
all the City of Rome, where they looked upon him as a Saint, even as far as the
Queen her self, who gave him Audience for three Hours every Monday. It Is
certain that the Queens House received a great deal of ease by his means, in
that he moderated her violent Transports, which would become sometimes so
excessive, that no Body durst come near her. She treated her House in so rude a
manner, and committed such insupportable Extravagancies, that if they did not
forsake her, pure Necessity was the reason. For the greatest number of
Servants, serve their Masters out of Interest, and not Duty or Conscience; and
if they honor them by one Motive, contemn them by another. Count Alibert who
studied to know her so well, had his Hands full, for sometimes when he would
come to her after his Flattering and Complaisant way, thinking to find her in
an happy Hour, it was then oftentimes she was most untoward.

I remember one Day he came to the Queen with a pleasant Air, and told her,
Madam, your Majesty may be pleased to understand that this Morning Cardinal
D'Estrees has been ill satisfied with the Pope* and that the Affairs of Fran^^
are more embroiled than ever: And afterward made a very troublesome Narration
of all that he had heard or invented, as 'twas ordinary with him. But he had
not always the good luck to succeed, and particularly at that time; for the
Queen who had no more reason than others to be satisfied, treated him with Sot
and Beast, that would make (...) believe any thing; that he studied nothing but
Lies to amuse her, and that she would cause him to be thrown out of the
Windows: And so the poor Eternal Flatterer finding himself thus terribly
repulsed, came out with Tears in his Eyes.

But to return to Molinos: Never Woman appeared more transported than the Queen
at the taking of this Impostor; she spoke all that Choler could inspire with
Infernal Fury, and among other things, that she wondered that so Learned and
Judicious a Congregation as that of the Holy Office, in which the Pope
presided, should suffer themselves to be led by the Sophistical Discourse of
Cardinal D'Estrees, whom she called Rattle-Head twenty times. I shall say
not^^^g of the Applications made Pope to save Molinos, to which he (...) but
too much inclination; but that which is of most concern is, that this Impostor
should give her a Confessor to cheat her, (a Calabrian by Nation) and made her
dismiss a Reverend Capuchin Father, a Man of an Holy Life, and a better
Director than himself, under pretense that he was not learned enough, because
he would innovate nothing in Religion.

As long as the Process of Molinos lasted, she sent to him Fruits and
Comfitures, and obstinately continued so to do for two or three Months after
his Condemnation, against the Advice of Azzolini himself.

Cardinal D'Estrees only laughed at these Transports, and upon all occasions
served this Princess afterward with the best Grace in the World: But there was
always a Coldness between the Cardinal and Azzolini, and yet they saw one
another in Chapels, Consistories, Congregations, and other Functions of the
Court of Rome, where they could not avoid speaking without Scandal, but they
were very reserved, and had no Confidence one in another. The Queen would have
had them have gone to it briskly, but they were too wise to make a Noise, which
made the Queen say aloud one day, when she saw Azzolini discoursing with
D'Estrees, in the Presence of many other Cardinals, at the Theater of the Tour
de None. Politica delli miei coglioni mar chiginacccio.

It is time to finish this History by the Death of Queen Christina, but it is
so interwoven with the Adventures of Georgina, or Signora Angelica, that we
cannot describe the one without making mention of the other. For though this
Charming Virgin was the innocent cause of her Death, it had been better she had
never entered into the Queen's Service, for this Princess perhaps might have
been yet Alive, had she not died of spite that she could not revenge her self
of an Outrage done in her Family, to Signora Angelica. It must be acknowledged
that Beauty is a dangerous thing in a young Virgin, but above all when she has
other Talents, which inflame no less, seeing the Palace of a great Queen was
not able to protect her from the Ambushes laid for this fair Singer, by which
she became a Prey to a Wretch, after she had triumphed over the Pursuit of the
greatest Lords in Rome.

Angelica was a Virgin, incomparable both for Beauty and Wit; her Stature was
something above the ordinary size, well taken and slender; her Visage a perfect
Oval, her Eyes Sparkling, her Hair of a bright Flaxen color, but inclining to
White, an Aquiline Nose, white Teeth, vermilion Lips, and her Neck excellently
Shaped; Her Wit was full and exact, her Conception easy, of a complaisant
Humor, and such an agreement in her whole Person as made her Beloved by great
and small, for it may be said, that from the Scepter to the Spade, all Estates
and Conditions of Men have done Homage to her Merit. In fine to make a just
Portraiture of her, one must take a Muse for a Model, for to all her
Perfections, she would sing so rarely, that it would Ravish all that heard her,
and touched Instruments to a Miracle. Her putative Father was Comptroller of
the Mount of Piety (...) and because he was called Georgino, she acquired the
Name of Georgina. Her Mother who was very Intriguing, some time before her
Marriage, had a Knight of the Order of Melchisadec^. And ill Tongues, who are
never idle, would let themselves loose against this excellent Virgin, as if she
had a fault in her Birth, and that the Religious would have her, because
Ecclesiastics have there sometimes a Commerce of Gallantry, as if they were
not like other Men. Love is the most Violent of all the Passions, and there are
none but are sensible of its Effects. A peaceable and sedentary Life, is more
susceptible of it than any other, and to sum up the Account, a Man with a long
Gown, both in Italy and Spain, though he be obliged to live in Gaelibate, does
not loose his Reputation among Men, because he has had an Amorous Intrigue. I
know, that before God it is a Sin without Excuse: But however it be, when the
Fact is done, the Laws oblige Priests who have Children, to breed them up well,
and to furnish Necessaries for their Subsistence and Education.

Monsieur Z^chary performed this to excess, in favor of Georgina; For never
any Father took greater care in the Breeding and Instruction of a Child, than
he of her, without sparing of Expenses; so well did he love her, and with
reason, for as much a Child as she was, she had so many Agreements, that she
Charmed the most Insensible. As she had Naturally a most admirable Voice, and
an inclination to Music, he gave her the best Masters in Rome, to teach her to
Sing, and touch all sorts of Instruments, which she learned so easily, that she
surpassed all her Masters without taking pains; and to this day she has not any
equal at the Lute, Theorboe, Harpsicord, or Virginals. She had besides the
finest Voice in Italy. For though there be excellent Musicians at Rome, who are
most of them Castrated to preserve their Voices, there was found in hers a
certain Harmony with such force and sweetness, as there was nothing like it.
These rare Qualities made her sought after by the greatest Princes in Europe,
and it was Force only that withheld her from going to the Emperor's Court, or
that of France, where she was much desired. But those who gave Life to her,
could never resolve to loose her out of Sight, through the Affection they bore
her, judging besides that she would not fail to make her Fortune in her own
Country by her Merit, without exposing her to the danger of Travel. Signora
Caterina, her Mother, who had other Children to provide for, was very fond of
Angelica's Merit, who had a great mind to Travel, and above all, into France,
Because the Modes and Gallantries of that Court, run strongly in her Mind; but
not being Mistress of her own Will, she had no other part to take, but that of
Obedience. Her Beauty and her Talents increased with her Age, and at the same
time, the number of her Admirers augmented every day. The first who enterpriz'd
the Conquest of her Heart, were young Men of a suitable Condition to her own.
For she always passed for the Daughter of a little Commissioner of the Mount of
Piety, of a very indifferent Fortune, but yet one who was a civil Person, and
maintained his Family Honestly npon the Revenue of his Employ, and some
Assistances which Monseignieur Zachary furnished them with Privately upon the
account of Angelica. Georgino had not Married the Mother of Angelica, but in
view of a better Dowry than she would have had without her Gallantries with the
Prelate, and in hope of being assisted for their Care in the Education of his
Daughter. And that as he was none of those Commodious Husbands which suffer
their Wives to live in Disorder, provided it bring Water to the Mill; so on the
other hand, he was not so scrupulous about the Gallantries his Wife had done
before Marriage. He lived very Privately, according to the Custom and Genius of
the Italians, keeping almost no Company, and therefore lived in a Quarter that
was distant from Noise, and Great People, in which also good Husbandry might
have a share, as well as the love of Ease. For in the Quarter of Trastevera,
Houses are very Cheap, though Spacious enough, and he had there the convenience
of a Fountain and a Garden, being near the Monastery of St. Cecilia, over
against the Working-Shop of the French Accademy. Every body knows, that the
French King maintains an Academy in Rome, for Twelve French Youths, who there
learn fine Arts, with intention to become capable of the better Service of
their Country, when they come home. This Academy is composed of six Painters,
four Gravers, and two Architects, whose Business it is to Copy and imitate the
finest Paintings and Sculptures in Rome, and to Measure the finest Palaces and
other Edifices, both Ancient and Modern. Monsieur Errard, Director of the
Accademy, lived with his Pupils, in the old Palace, near St. Andre de la Valle;
but because he had not room enough for Marble and other Materials for
Sculpture; he had a Working-Shop, as I said before in Trastevera, near St.
Cecilia, where the Gravers of the Accademy Wrought, and Dined every day for
their greater Convenience. A young French Graver called Theodon, who was
already very skilful in his Art, and besides a well Shaped Person, having upon
occasion seen Angelica at a Window, and and as she went to Church, became
Charmed with her Merit, and endeavored to make her understand it by Signs. His
Perseverance touched her at last, and she permitted him to see her sometimes,
which pleased him extremely; but he was so often crossed by other Pretenders,
that it gave him mortal Alarms, fearing one or other of them would ravish away
his Mistress's Heart. The Fame of Angelica increased daily, as well as her
Voice and Beauty. Her Mother often brought her among the Religious and Ladies
of the first Quality, where she Charmed them all by her Singing, and her
address in touing of Instruments. This increased the multitude of her Lovers,
among which were many Persons of high Birth; this obliged her Mother to keep
her shut up closer than usual, and to watch her Conduct more narrowly. This
proceeding did nothing but augment the crowd of her Adorers, and their Quarter
was more frequented than ever, to have the pleasure of seeing her at her
Window, which she kept open more than ordinary, to cross the Jealousy of her
Mother, and above all, in Carnival time, where the finest Masquerades would
forsake their Course to come and walk up and down about her House. Her Mother
being Cunning and Intriguing, made a great advantage of the Presents made her,
in giving some hopes to all People, without engaging her self too much, and
obtained what Favors she pleased from the Great ones, who Sighed and
Languish'd for her Daughter. Prince Columbiere proposed to Marry her to one of
his Gentlemen, to get her into his House. But her Mother discovering the
Intrigue, would hear of it by no means, and besides, expected a more
considerable Match for her Daughter Angelica, whose proper Merit, was her
Misfortune, desired to match with one of an equal Condition with her self, out
of fear that if she Married above her self, her Husband should come to Despise
her, if a fit of Sickness, or any other Accident, should cause her to loose her
Beauty, or her Voice. Among all that sought after her, none pleased her so well
as Theodon the Graver. He was a well shaped Person, and they had a Sympany in
their Humors. He excelled in his Art, and did the Office of Director of the
Accademy, instead of Monsieur Errard, whose decrepid Age, had made him unfit
for Business. Catherine, who was more ambitious than her Daughter, would hear
nothing of it; and in the mean time making advantage of the Gifts, which the
greatest Lords in Rome Presented her, to obtain the promise of hearing Angelica
Sing, though they did not end their Pretensions there. But she not seeming to
penetrate their Thoughts, and agreeing to their Demands, was contented to keep
her Daughter in her Sight, fearing otherwise there might happen some Accident
which might loose her Reputation and ruin her Fortune. Angelica, who did not
like this Management, and could not find poor Theodon in all the Crowd, became
so Melancholy that she fell Sick, and was in danger of Death. Her Parents were
much Alarmed, and the Prelate told her Mother, that if she did not drive away
this Multitude that Besieged his Daughter, he would take her out of her Hands,
and put her into a Convent. As he was a severe Man and had Authority, they must
obey him, and so they sent her into the Country, where the Air quickly
reestablished her Health.

Being returned to Rome, some time afterward, she was invisible to all the
World, except Theodon, who saw her at a Window, and spoke to her by Signs:
Signora Caterina sent Angelica to the first Mass upon Sundays and Holydays, and
made her keep within all the rest of the Day.

But this constraint being very uneasy to Theodon, he spoke to a Friend of his
who was the Father of Inventions, and he promised him to find out some way or
other, to have a sight of his Beloved. He searched round about the House, and
sound a small House just by it, which had a Court yard well stored with Fowls;
he got acquainted with the good Woman that kept them, and under the pretense of
buying of Eggs, and a Present, obtained Permission to come into the Courtyard
every Night with his Friend Theodon, because a back Window of Angelica's
Chamber looked into it.

They advertised the Fair one of this Discovery, and she promised at a certain
Signal to appear at that Window; but she was so high they could not hear her,
unless she spoke aloud, which she durst not do, for fear of a Discovery: Then
they tied Billets deux to the end of a Packthread, and she drew them up, and
some time after sent back an Answer the same way. Her Billets were so Spiritual
and Tender, that one might see, that her Heart and Love dictated them; but
besides these, she had something in store for the happy Theodon, that was more
Charming.

Whereas in Rome other Lovers Serenade their Mistresses at their Windows in the
Night, and endeavor to express their Torments in tender and passionate Airs;
here on the contrary, this Charming Virgin would Sing to her Harpsical, pieces
of an Opera, which agreed so well to the Subject of Love, that one would think
they were made on purpose. You may believe that Theodon and his Friend did not
fail to be at the Rendezvouse, where they always found new Pleasures, and they
carried also little Collations, and served her always with the best things,
which they put into a little Basket, and the Lovely Prisoner drew it to her
self, and so participated of the Feast, telling them that she eat these Fruits
and other Trifles with more appetite than a Hawker, or those Solider Viands her
Mother was so often Regaled with; for she could not hinder her self from
receiving part of that which the most illustrious of her Pursuers, would
privately bring into their House.

There was two among the rest who were very considerable, both in their Quality
being Princes, and by their Liberality. Catherine managed them both, and
assigned them different Hours, for fear they should meet one another; but but
this Precaution was all to no purpose, for their Grisons discovered them, and
they were much amazed to meet one another in the same Chase, for they were both
Comrades, and Allies.

Things being so, they were forced to accommodate themselves to the Season, and
each endeavored to prefer himself to his Mistresses Favor, living as yet in a
good Understanding with one another; but the Coldness and Indifference of
Angelica toward them, made each of them believe his Comrade happy to his
prejudice. They fell out upon this Imagination, and would have made a noise, if
they had not been hindered. For one who was called the Abbot of St. Marc, was
Violent, Imperious, and of an high Hand; but the other, who is at present Lord
de la Mouche Erithree, was more Tractable. Angelica hated them equally, and
being a Person no way suitable to either of them, sighed only for her dear
Theodon.

The frequent Importunities of these two great Lords, forced Angelica to have
recourse to her Father, (for so they called Monseigneur Zachary) exaggerating
the Tyrannies of her Mother. This Prelate to encourage his Daughter, to enter
into a Convent, gave her a Dowry of eight thousand Crowns, which were put into
the Bank of the Mount of Piety in a borrowed Name. Angelica not being able to
do any better, disposed her self to enter into a Nunnery, comforting her self
with this, That she should however be near her Lover, and that she might see
him in his Working-Shop, by the Ballistrades of the Clock, which at the same
time denotes her Innocence.

While these things were a doing, the Prelate dies, leaving this fine and
desolate Daughter to the Discretion of her Mother, who dissuaded her from going
into a Convent for the Interests of her Family, and the poor Daughter was
forced to accommodate her self to her Humor; she must then take up again the
Trade of Singing as before.

A Cardinal of the first Rank in the Sacred College, and perhaps one of the
handsomest, who had sometime before made an Ambassadress of France, in Love
with him, hearing so many fine Things spoken of Angelica, would see whether
they were true: His Authority and Liberality found every where a free Access;
and he was Charmed with the Voice and Manners of Angelica, but he went so
often, that the noise came as far as the Ears of Pope Innocent XI. As he was a
very severe and angry Pope, and would let no Body be at quiet, he took a
resolution to cause Angelica to be taken up and put into a Convent, as
Scandalous, and of ill Reputation. So true is it, that in his Time, the
Innocent suffered as well as the Guilty; for her Mother was more to blame than
she, seeing she received no visit but out of Obedience.

At that time, the Duke of Mantua was at Rome, and they boasted to him of
Angelica, as one of the Singularities, or finest thing that was to be seen in
Rome. The Marquess Del Monte brought her to his Highness, as we have said
before; and he found her so well to answer her Character, that he made her very
considerable Offers to come to his Court. The great Liberalities he bestowed
upon her Mother, engaged her to promise a consent to his Will; but Angelica,
who saw no Security for her self, when she was in the hands of so puissant a
Prince, was not able to resolve what to do. She had notice given her quickly
after, to have a care of her self, because the Pope was going to take her up
and put her in a Convent, and this put her into a terrible Fright; for though she
had no repugnance to enter into Religion, she could not suffer her self to be
confined in a Monastery, ordained only for Women of ill Reputation. There was
then no remedy, but in all the haste imaginable, to implore the Protection of
Queen Christina. She did it, and this Generous Princess, who had a great value
for her, because she had heard her Sing often, not only permitted her a Refuge
in her Quarter, but took her into her Service, with a Sister of hers named
Barbara, who was also a most Beautiful Virgin, but had not so great a faculty
of Singing.

Theodon was over joy'd that his Mistress had escaped so many and powerful
Rivals, and it gave him courage to continue his Pursuit. To this end, he
addressed himself to one of the Queen's Valet de Chambres, who was his Friend,
to get a sight of her, and easily obtained his Request. But as Lovers are never
contented, Theodon importuned him so much, that he promised him, that he should
come to the Speech of her.

One day the Queen kept an Academy of Music in her Garden, and there was a
great many Ladies, Knights and Gentlemen, under the shady Grove, where was a
fine breeze of Air: Angelica, when she had sung her Roll, slipped down an Alley
with her Sister, and entered into a little Banqueting House, where Theodon had
made a magnificent Collation to present her with in his Friend's Company, of
the best Wines that were to be had. It was about the time that the Song of
Flon, Flon, was in request; and the Trumpets of the Marquess de Lavardin, being
posted upon a little Hill in the same Garden, sounded the same Tune. The
Eccho's repeated the last Words; All the World Sung it, and the Qeeen her self
sung Flon, Flon. The Joy was universal, and the Wine made our Lovers become
Poets; For after they had drank plentifully, they proposed to make every one a
Couplet to this new Air, and Angelica taking her Guitarre, began, and did it
very well for an Extempory Effort, and was followed by Theodon's Friend. A
thousand sits of Laughter accompanied the Music, insomuch, that others of the
Queen's Maids walking in the Garden, were drawn thither by the Noise. They
presented them Fruits, and they sat down on Angelica's side, and drank their
Healths over and over, and the Sport ^^sted till almost Night, when a Footman
came to give her notice, that she must wait upon the Queen, the Company being
now gone. She broke off therefore this sweet Conversation, but with Violence to
her self, and promised to see him again as often as she could.

But this happy Season did not last long; for a little after the Queen fell
Sick, and so all sorts of Divertisements ended. This Sickness was fatal to
Angelica, for her own Mother delivered her up to be Dishonored by an infamous
wretch in the Queen's Palace. It was to the Abbot Vannini, (whom I have
mentioned before) the same that abused Signora Giovannini, and was the cause of
her Death. This Prelate, who was ambitious to make himself Talked of, had
gained Signora Caterina, with a Present of Silver, of above the value of a
thousand Crowns; Angelica having all sorts of Liberty of going out with her
Mother; was carried to walk among Women, where she always met the Abbot
Vannini, who perpetually courted her, but to no purpose; For she was extremely
angry, that her own Mother should so often expose her to the Outrages of this
rash Man, insomuch, that she protested, she would no more go out of her
Majesty's Palace, whose Sickness increased daily, and at the same time, the
Fears of the House.

The Abbot, notwithstanding all the Disdain of Angelica, was neither ashamed,
nor dejected, but thought to obtain that by Presents and Importunity which he
could not by Personal Merit; but he advanced nothing at all that way; for all
his Presents were rejected, and his Sighs despised.

At last being provoked by such a Resistance as he expected not to find, he
undertook one of the rashest and most dangerous Actions that could fall into
the Imagination, of so contemptible a Person as himself, which was to do
Violence to the Honor of Angelica, even in the Palace of the Queen her self.
To this end and purpose he gained a Neapolitan, who was one of the Queens Valet
de Chambres, with his Brother an Anspassade, and they brought him privately
into Angelica's Chamber, with the consent of her Mother. Angelica was then with
the Queen, scarcely ever forsaking her, because her Sickness was very
dangerous; But coming into her Chamber by chance to do something, she was
extremely surpised to find a great Collation, and the Abbot Vannini, who
invited her to eat, with her Mother, and those honest People, that were of the
Plot. But she, seeing her self Betrayed by her Mother, was perfectly
Astonished, and set up a great Cry. The Abbot threw himself upon his Knees, and
endeavored to assure her, by good Words, but in the mean time they all slipped
out of the Chamber, and left them alone, and one may easily imagine that the
Abbot being Master, did not loose time. The Chamber was so high that Angelica's
Cries could not be heard; but there was other Signs of the resistance of this
Generous young Woman, for the Table and Chairs were all overturned, and at last
so great a noise was made, her (Chamber being just over the Queen's) that her
Majesty complained they had lost their Respect.

One of the Gentlemen run up and saw this fine Farce, and cried out for help to
some Auspessades and Foot men, who were upon the Guard. Her Friend Theodon ran
up at the Noise, and she Embracing him, begged that he would have Compassion of
her; He presently took him by the Throat, and would have Strangled him, if he
had not been forced out of his hands. They then sent to seek out Monsieur
Pompey Azzolini, the Cardinal's Nephew, to know what they must do with this
impudent Person. His first thought was, that he should be hewed in Pieces; and
in so doing, he had followed the Queen's Genius, and highly revenged the Injury
done to her Majesty. But considering that the Queen was Sick and the Abbot well
Allied, he thought it convenient, (for fear of making himself Enemies) to
suffer him to Escape. He saved himself at the Cardinal D'Estes, and the two
Neapolitans Fled, and were never heard of since.

They told the Queen, that the noise came from Cats, who had overturned the
Utensils of the Chamber, and caused this Alarm.

Poor Angelica, after so bloody an Affront, abandoned her self to Despair, and
was a long time in a Swoon, and amazed, not knowing what to do. Her Sister
coming up at the Noise, put her to bed, for the Traytress her Mother. was as
invisible as the rest, and Angelica was seized with a Fever, and sick of Grief
for a long time?

In the mean time, the Queen began to be better, and all People rejoiced for
her Recovery. For she was well Beloved in Rome, because she gave much in
Charity toward the Subsistence of the Poor, and Maintained a great many
People. The Nation of the Marca d' Ancona, made a fine Feast at the Church of
St. Savior du Lau^ier, in honor of the Queen, and fine Illuminations in the
Street of Coronari, which is near it, with Bonfires and other Rejoicings of
Drums and Trumpets.

Count Alibert also made a very Magnificent Feast at Jesus, where a Votive Mass
of the Blessed Virgin, was Sung in a Thanksgiving for the Queen's Health, and
he had the most excellent Musicians in Rome, and the Church was hanged with the
richest Tapistry her Majesty had, and all People crowded into testifies their
joy. But at last she perceived that Angelica failed in her Duty, and asked for
her very often, but they always told her she was Sick.

Cardinal Azzolini had forbidden any body to speak of this Scandal which had
happened in the Queen's Palace. But a certain Woman who helped Bandiere in his
Operations of Chemistry, whom they called Sybil, for the reasons we shall
afterward mention, told the Queen either by Accident, or out of Malice, that
Angelica was Well. The Queen sent presently to call her in all haste, and the
poor Girl being frighted, because she was forced to appear before her, whom she
believed to be informed of all the Affair, cast her self at her Feet, pouring
out abundance of Tears, and could not speak for Grief. The Queen pressed her to
tell the reason of her Tears, and she answered, that her Misfortune was but too
public. Her Majesty ordered her to Explain her self; but Sobs interrupted her
every Moment; and therefore the Queen desired Cardinal Azzolini who was then
come to her, to inform her of all the Affair Azzolini being troubled at the
unseasonableness of the time, palliated the Matter, and told her only what he
thought convenient to discover, for fear she should fall into an excessive
Passion, which might make her relapse.

But this did not satisfy her, for she saw well enough, that he hid the
greatest part of the Circumstances from her, and therefore could not be quiet
till she had learned the whole Story from her Domestics, by Questions and
Threatening. What he had foreseen, fell out, for the Queen presently fell into
an horrible Passion against this infamous Abbot, and against all those that
suffered him to Escape. After she had comforted Angelica, about the Disgrace
she was no way guilty of, sent for Captain Merula her Bravo, and commanded him
to bring her the Head of the Abbot Vannini, and to observe him so narrowly,
that he did not Escape; and because she would be sure of her Blow, she ordered
what Men and Money he had need of, promising him a good Reward and protection
against all his Enemies.

It is not known whether this Assassin by Profession, did himself discover her
Orders, or that it came to be known some other way; But Vannini fled from Rome,
to Subjacco an Abbey of Cardinal Charles Barberini in one of his Eminence's
Coaches, but absconded often by the way, and at last when he came there, looked
more like Dead, than Alive, so true it is, that Vice is its own Executioner. He
passed from thence into Abruzzo, a Province of the Realm of Naples, where he
remained till the Queen's Death. In the mean time, Merula sought him every
where, or pretended so to do; for it is believed, that the two Cardinals who
were the Abbot's Protectors, presented him with a thousand Crowns, to hold his
Hand. Besides that, he might fear their resentment if the Queen should Die
quickly, of which there was great likelihood. The Queen being impatient, often
demanded from Merula the effects of his Promises. But one day he owned, without
thinking on it, that the Criminal had escaped out of his Hands, and had refug'd
himself within the Realm of Naples. At these words, the Queen was in such a
Rage, that she Scratched him in the Face, and gave him twenty blows with her
Fist, reproaching him with Perfidiousness, and had certainly Strangled him, if
she had not wanted Strength. But she killed her self in the Effort which she
made; for this Agitation brought her Fever on her again, and sent her into her
Grave in a little time, to the great damage of the Domestics, for whom she had
no time to provide.

No body got more by her Death than Angelica; For if the Queen had lived a a
little longer, she had been confined in a Convent all her Life, as Scandalous,
though she had more misfortune, than fault in her Conduct. For the Queen had
promised the Pope (who was irritated by the frequent Stories brought him
concerning her) that she would put her among the Religious of St. Ruffinus in
Trastevera.

The best way Angelica could take in this unhappy Conjuncture, was to put her
self under the Protection of the Duke of Medina Celi, Ambassador of Spain; And
he came to take her at the Queen's Palace Gate, just as she was Expiring,
before they had forced her into a Convent. He placed her under the Duchess his
Lady, where she lives yet at this present time, in Quality of her first Lady of
Honor, being equally dear both to the Husband and the Wife, who know very
well, by long Experience, that she has given no occasion for those false
Reports, which have almost tarnish'd her Reputation; and that her Merit only
has been the cause of all her Persecutions. There run a Report, that Monsieur
the Ambassador, had Married her to a Spanish Gentleman in his Service; but it
is not true, for she is not yet engaged in that Sacrament, no more than her
Sister Barbara, who is also Maid of Honor to Madam the Ambassadress of Spain.

The Sieur Theodon being convinced, that Angelica was not ordained for him, has
Married another, who has neither the Gifts nor Reputation of Angelica, yet
notwithstanding is not inferior to her in Wisdom. She brought him a
considerable Portion, and he lives with her like an honest Man, and has
obtained by Merit, to be Director of the Works of Architecture, and Painting of
the Basilique of St. Peter at the Vatican, which is very Gainful.

We must not forget, before we finish this History, that the Duke of Mantua
made another Voyage to Rome incognito, toward the end of the Queen's last
Sickness, (and as the common Vogue goes) to carry away Angelica, with her
Mother's Consent; but being prevented by the Spanish Ambassador, he was so
angry, that he had been twice cheated by that Interested Woman, that he slit
both her Husband's, and afterward her Son's Nose, who is a Glasier, and keeps
a Shop in the Bouchi. They are so disfigured, that they will carry the Marks,
as long as they live; which will testify to all the World, that Georgina
having Perfections enough to Charm many Princes, and great Lords, had not yet
the happiness to please them all.

The Queen had some Pre-sentiments of her Death, which made her apprehensive,
she should not live long. Six Months before her Sickness, or thereabout, she
made her a Habit of Satin, white Ground, stitched with Flowers, and other
works of Gold, garnished with Lace, and Buttons set in Gold, and Fringe of the
same below. This Habit was Invented by her self, and served for a Manteau and
Body together. It was close before, without a Tail, and round at the bottom,
and the Queen tried it on upon Christmas Eve, and took many turns in her
Closet, without speaking a Word: She looked upon her self often, both before
and behind, in a couple of Looking-glasses, which were set opposite one to
another, and then walked again, in profound Silence. Her Tailor, who thought he
had done better than ordinary, rejoiced within himself; And there was none but
him, the Marquess Caponi, and two Maids there, when Sybil entered. This Sybil
was a Woman well skilled in Chemical Operations, and had served the Queen for
some time. Cardinal Azzolini brought her in to counter-check Bandiere. Her Name
was Julia, and she was Daughter to an Apothecary, a good Simpler, who taught
her his Trade, which she improved, by the Invention of a certain number of fine
Secrets. She had something Marvelous in her Person, and her Birth was
Extraordinary. For when her Mother Lay in of her, which was upon the 3d. of
November, 1665, she was seven Hours in Travel, with great Pains, and was not
Delivered, but by an horrible Clap of Thunder: The Lightning that accompanied
it, made her Chamber seem all on Fire; and the Fright made such an Impression
upon her, that it threw out the Child.

Her Sex was doubtful at first, and though time made it appear she was a Girl,
yet she always had the inclinations of Men, flying Girls Company, and seeking
after Boys; She would throw Stones as they did, and fight with her Fists, and
showed a Masculine Spirit in all things. She learned Latin, and made a a great
Progress not only in Pharmacy, but Chemistry; besides this, she touched
Instruments well. But she had yet a Quality beyond these, which pleased the
Queen better than all, which was that of the foretelling of things to come, and
for this reason, the Queen gave her the name of Sybil. I have been informed,
she had once an Husband a Distiller, but he died after he had been Married
about six Months.

The Queen, who was foolish in the belief of all vain and curious Sciences, as
Chemistry, Astrology, the Divining-Rod, and loved those who pretended to
possess them believed all that Astrologers said, and particularly the Abbot
Massoni, who used to flatter her with the promise of living Fourscore Years,
and by these deceitful hopes, he drew a good deal of Money from this credulous
Princess, and afterward Laughed at her.

I could tell you a great many Stories of this nature, if this Book were not
too big already.

Sybil coming to congratulate the Queen upon her fine Garment, exaggerated the
fineness of the Stuff, its Beauty and Fashion, which very well suited her
Majesty's Person.

Well, Sybil, (says the Queen) does this Habit please you?

Yes, Madam, (repled she) it is perfectly well made.

Upon this, the Marquess Caponi took up the Discourse, and said, you are come
very luckily, for we are here acting the Comedy of the Mutes.

It is true, says the Queen, that no body has said any thing, nor I my self,
but this Habit which you see, makes me think of some things of great
Consequence, and I believe it will serve me in a little time, in one of the
greatest Functions that can be; but Sybil, thou art not able to Divine what
Function this should be.

Pardon me, Madam, (answered she) looking attentively on the Queen, your
Majesty thinks this Habit will serve; Shall I speak it, Madam?

Yes, says the Queen.

The thought afflicts me, says Sybil, Your Majesty thinks, you shall be Buried
in this Habit in a little time.

And I, says the Marquess, interrupting hastily, believe the Queen thinks it
will serve her to wish the Pope an happy New Year in.

Sybil has spoke the Truth, replied the Queen, that was it I thought on, but we
must put all into the Hand of God, for we are all Mortal, and I as well as
another.

The Tailor, to divert this sorrowful Discourse, addressing himself to the
Queen, said,

Will your Majesty have a Cover made for this Habit?

Why a Cover, great Beast, says the Queen?

To keep it twenty Years, and above, says the Tailor; For if it be designed
for the use your Majesty speaks, you must take care the Worms do not eat it.

She fell a Laughing, and was well pleased with the Repartee. After some
Discourse of this nature, they separated, and the Marquess grumbled at Sybil,
for her ill Augury.

You mistake, quoth Sybil, I have not foretold the Queen's Death, I only found
out her Thought.

This odd Apprehension did so possess the Queen's Mind, that the Tailor
Congratulating her upon the recovery of her Health, as others did, said,

Madam, the Habit is the Cover, and may, if it please God, be so a long time.

God grant it, says the Queen, but I am of Opinion it will serve me ere long
for the use I believe it is designed.

This thought made too strong an Impression upon her Spirits, to believe the
Sybil Divined it merely by chance.

It is strange, says the Marquess Caponi, your Majesty should think so much
upon the words of a Fool; And will your Majesty be always abused?

Cardinal Azzolini coming in, he desired him to assist, to take off the ill
Impressions the Queen had received; which he endeavoring to do, the Queen
seemed to believe, only for this reason, that he might no farther trouble her
Head about it.

The Cardinal meeting the Sybil afterward, gave her a smart Reprimand, for
entertaining the Queen with Melancholy Visions. But she excused her self, That
she had done nothing with an ill intent; That she wished not the Queen's Death,
for her own sake; for, said she, there will no body loose more than my self,
for I foresee the Crosses and Persecutions that will happen to me. God preserve
us, for your Eminence will not be long after the Queen, when God shall call her.

Azzolini, who heard the first words of the Sybil, without Emotion, was
troubled at the last, and turned his Back all in Confusion.

She repented that she had said so much, for her Predictions were but too true,
whether it were that she was effectually Inspired from Heaven, or Chance and
Conjecture, that made her to advance things, I know not, but the Event
confirmed them.

She had also told the Queen, that the Pope would die the same Year, in the
Canicular days, and he Deceased the 13th of August next following.

He was informed of these Predictions of the Sybil, and was so displeased, that
as soon as ever the Queen's Eyes were closed, he caused her to be taken up, and
Imprisoned in the Castle of St. Angelo, where she remained till her dying-day.

She said something also of Alexander VIII. but he changed her Prison into a
Conservatory, where she consumed and pined away for Grief.

At a time when the Queen did not think of Death, she had a mind to Bespeak a
magnificent Tomb. She sent for for her Graver, called Francis Marie Anconitano,
and ordered diverse Models, without telling him of any Place where it should be
set up. The Graver being busy, and not having his Measures ready to extend his
Figures and Bas Reliefs there, the Queen was forced to tell him she would have
it made round, like the Pantheon of Agrippa in old time. At the same time she
forbad him to speak a Syllable to any Person about it, but above all, enjoined
him, that Cardinal Azzolini should know nothing of it. However, the thing was
so long in Agitation, that Cardinal Azzolini came to know of it, and was
affrighted at the vast Expense of bringing it to Perfection, but however durst
say nothing of it to the Queen.

This had pleasant Consequences, for when the Intrigue came to be known, the
Graver was turned off, though he represented to her Majesty, that he could not
make his Models with so much caution, but that Cardinal Azzolini might get an
inkling of it.

The Queen having asked him, what the Expense of the whole might amount to, he
told her ingenuously, that an hundred thousand Crowns would not finish it.

You're a Rogue, said she to him, an hundred thousand Crowns, I would spend a
Milion upon it. The Cardinal hearing this, fell a Laughing, knowing that all her
Estate, did not amount to half a Million. And after all, she was poorly
Interred in a Cave of the Sacrasty of St. Peter.

This shows the Genius of the Queen, who would do every thing extraordinary;
and with the Magnificence due to her Character.

But finally, it must be said in Praise of this Generous Princess, that she
died with an Intrepidity worthy of the Daughter of the Great Gustavus Adolphus.

Her Relapse having taken from her all hope of Cure, she very early took care
of her Soul; She Confessed with great Sentiments of Contrition; and received
the Holy Sacrament with profound respect, and unspeakable Comfort. Finding her
Strength to diminish, she sent to desire the Pope's Benediction; praying him to
forgive all the Differences, that had been between them, which yet had not
hindered her from being inviolably fixed to the Interests of the Holy See; and
that she had always a great respect and esteem for the Person of Innocent 11th.

Afterward, she Signed her last Will and Testament, and presented it to
Cardinal Azzolini, which he told her, was advantageous to her Majesty's
Household, though he made it only according to his own Interest.

Father Sclavata, a famous Discalceat Bohemian Carmelite, exhorted her to
prepare for Death; sometimes speaking Latin, and sometimes German, or French.

At last the Queen Died, April 19th. 1689, at Six of the Clock in the Morning;
and her Body was carried next day, toward Night, to the New Church of the
Fathers of the Oratory of St. Philip Neri, being Embalmed and Clothed in the
same Habit, which was designed for her Funeral Solemnity. It was carried in a
Coach, accompanied by the Cardinals Chaplains, and the Curate of St. Dorothy's
Parish.

The day following, the Queens Body was exposed upon a Bed of Parade, with a
Royal Crown upon her Head, and a Scepter in her Hand, in the Body of the
Church, and round about her 300 Flambeaux of white Wax. The Church was hung
with Mourning, with Escutcheons of her Majesty's Arms, and with Counterfeit
Bas-reliefs of Black Marble, which alluded to the Vanity of Life, and certainty
of Death.

Her Obsequies were very Magnificent, and the whole College of Cardinals
assisted, and Azzolini appeared in deepest Mourning, with the greatest
Lowliness and Dejection. Toward Night, the Queen's Body was transported upon
the same Bed of Parade, with her Face discovered, to the Church of St. Peter,
at the Vatican, the Con-fraternities of the Regular and Secular Clergy, the
Canons of St. Peter, and her Domestics in Mourning, going before; The Counts
of Warwick, Vasenau, and two other Lords of Note, holding the four Corners of
the Pall. The Pope accompanied the Body, by the Officers of the Papal House, as
is done when the Dean of the Cardinals, and the Ambassadors of Crowned Heads
die at Rome.

She was Inhumed in the Sacristi of St. Peter's, an Honor done to no body but
Cardinals, and Arch-priests of St. Peter; for in the Church it self, none are
Interred, but Popes only. And it is said, that the Pope would have erected a
magnificent Tomb for her, if he had lived any time longer.

Thus did Queen Christina Alexandra of Sueden, testify all along more Firmness
and Grandeur of Soul at her Death, than she had showed Constancy in her Life:
Her Inequalities, Ambition, and vain Occupations, had much diminished the
Esteem whith the Public had of her Magnanimity. She always loved Change except
in Religion, which when once she had found to be true, she embraced it so
firmly, that nothing could Separate her. In all other things, she showed her
self a true Woman, that is to say changeable. She affected to pass for a Maid,
and the word Woman offended her horribly. So that for fear of Offending her,
you must say for Example, Your Majesty has most excellent Maidenhair, and not
Woman's; and so of the rest.

She had Eloquence, Spoke well, and Wrote better, even in many Languages; but
above all in French and Italian. The Learned do yet admire her Letters to the
King of Poland, upon the raising the Siege of Vienna, and the Battle of Barcan,
to the Chevalier Terlon, upon the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and to
Cardinal Azzolini, upon the retrenchment of the Pope's Pension, and others.

One day hearing of the Death of Casimir King of Poland, in the Abbey of St.
Germain de Pre, at Paris. She said, I am very glad to hear that he is Dead
among Men, for if he had staid in his own Country, he had died among Beasts.

She loved neither Bigots in Religion, nor Atheists. She had a true regard to
Piety, though in her Youth, the Abbot Bourdelot and other Libertines, shook her
Religion. She participated of the Holy Sacraments, and after she understood the
Impostures of Molinos, who would have Seduced her, she was the more confirmed
in the true Faith. She trok care that her Domestics should practice all the
Duties Religion requires, and go to the Communion in general three times a
Year, as the Cardinal did. She heard Mass every day, unless some Indisposition
hindered her; and sometimes she had so tender a sense in Religion, that one
could not wish more even in a Capucin. One day looking upon the Picture of the
Great Gustavus her Father, she said, Ah poor Gustavus! What great things have
thou done in thy Life! But what have thou done for thy Soul? I thank God for
his favor in making me to understand the Truth, and causing me to enter into
the good way of Salvation.

She said, that of all the Sacraments, she held that of Confession to be the
most useful. That in truth the Lutherans did practice it, though not in Form,
and that a good Confession was the Bridle of Vice.

One day as she went to an Audience of the Pope, she said to the Women which
Dressed her, Cover my Breasts well, for fear Mingon should be angry. For he
stood upon the most minute things, which are so much the more indecent, in that
they are not Evils he rebukes.

To what purpose should the Women of the World, wear the Habit of Beguines? Put
them under what Habit you will, they will always find some agreement to please
the Men.

Another time when she went to the Pope, to show her Obedience, she dressed her
self and all the Ladies of her Court, in a sort of a Robe which they call
Innocentian, being long Vests which trail upon the Ground, close before, and
strait Sleeves which come as far as the Wrists, and so close at the Neck, you
could scarce see her Collar of Pearl. To this fine Habit, she likewise added
some few knots of Ribbands. None of her Woman could hardly forbear Laughing.
But other Roman Ladies Laughed at them outright, and said, The Queen might make
as many Apes as she pleased, but she should not make them Monkies, by imitating
her Fashion.

This Princess hated, or pretended to hate Marriage; insomuch, that at her
first coming to Rome, she could not endure any Married People in her Service.
When Landini was big with Child, she would not see her, and if she had occasion
for her, she would say, Bring the Cow hither, and send her away again as soon
as she has done.

When she had made the Marriage of Beauregard, she said to the Husband, God
send thee the Signs of the Zodiac; and to you Beauregard, (says she to the
woman) If you come to show like a Cow, do not come to see me in that condition.

But she was quite otherwise in regard of the Marquess Caponi, for she would
cause his first Child to be brought to her, Caress it, and sometimes hold it in
her Arms; and when the little Child began to go, and came to the Table to
Embrace her Feet, she would fill his little Apron with Fruits and Comfitures.

Though she was a huge Eater, as the Northern People are, she drank almost no
Wine. She loved rather Colliflowers, or boiled Chestnuts with her Maids, for
which she would slip into their Chambers on purpose, rather than eat the
delicate Morsels which were prepared for her with royal Magnificence. The Sieur
Romulus Spoziola, her Physician, Remonstrating to her, that it was not good for
her Health, she called him Drunkard and Beast, and said he knew no more than
her Cap.

Her Tailor trying on a Coat one day when she had been let Blood, prayed her
not to force her Arm; but she gave him a Box on the Ear, with the same Hand,
which filled the poor Advice-monger with Confusion.

She was often at Difference with the Ambassador D'Estrees; But as she had no
Gall, she was very glad to make Peace with him. One day as he was at the
Vineyard of Pamphilio, she coming thither by chance, and perceiving him there,
ran to him and made him an hundred Civilities, insomuch that she mounted a
little Horse of Monsieur the Ambassador, and made him turn and Prance in his
Presence, above half an Hour, with a very good Grace.

Another time as she was driving a Calash in the Alley's of her Garden, she
asked one of the Ambassador's Domestics, that she found there by chance,
whether ste did not Drive well? He told her, that there was no body but her
self and the King of France that knew how to drive a Coach well. She was stung
with this Answer, and run like a Fool up and down the Field: But the Calash
Overturned, and her Majesty came to the Ground with her Coats upwards, and
cried out for Help. And because no Man durst come near her in this condition,
she Laughed at their foolish Shame, saying, I am not sorry I am seen by this
Accident, to the end it may be known that I am neither Male nor Hermophrodite,
as some People in the World have passed me for.

As the Queen had an infinite deal of Wit, she believed therefore that she
ought to have a proportionable Prudence and Policy; but she took little care to
show it, and would not take the trouble upon her to be so much upon her Guard,
as to make a decent appearance.

She freely followed her own Genius in all things, and cared not what any body
said. She maintained all her Life an Emulation and secret Envy against the King
and French Nation, though otherwise she infinitely esteemed that Monarch, and
took him for the Model of her Conduct, saying, She would make a little Queen of
France in Rome; yet she let slip no opportunity to speak evil of the French
Nation, either to lessen their Advantages, or magnify their Faults.

'Twas in in this mind, that being one Night at a Comedy at the Theater Tour de
None, in Company with the Cardinals Rospigliosi, and Altieri. She said to the
first, Is it true then that the Army of Marshal Turenne is entirely Defeated in
Germany.

I know not Madam, (anwer'd Rospigliosi coldly, but we have this Night a new
Musician in the Opera will advance the luster of the Theater; It Is Feed, who
knows so well how to Charm the Ear, that your Majesty will not be uneasy to
hear the Singing, as you were Yester-night. This enraged the Queen, who turned
her Back upon him, to speak to Cardinal Altieri, concerning the Consequences of
this pretended Defeat, asking him if General Montcuculi would find resistance,
if he Sacked all, even as far as Paris? He answered, That he had never been in
War, and that he did not know how the matter would go. She then spoke to him
against Cardinal D'Estrees, with whom he had some Misunderstanding. But as
Altieri was a refined Politician, who knew how to hide his Sentiments, for fear
of prejudicing his Interests, turned off the Discourse with such a presence of
Mind, that the Queen could draw no Advantage against D'Estrees, with whom she
would fall out, and was Reconciled as often, and had occasion to make use of
him at that present.

After the Queen's Death, Cardinal Azzolini was very willing to be reconciled,
and enter into the favor of Cardinal D'Estrees; but he lived so little a time
after, that he had not leisure. However it is certain, it was not long of him,
and to prove this, I will insert here a Letter, written to me from Leghorn,
from the same Person, who sent me a Relation touching the Affair of the
Quarters. See here the Contents.

I should fear the Relation would want something, If I should not inform you of
the last Sentiments of Monsieur Cardinal Azzolini, for Monsieur Cardinal
E'Estrees. Some time be fore the Death of Queen Christina, Monsieur Cardinal
Azzolini sent for me, and said.

MY little Compere (for he had done me the Honor to be Godfather to my Child)
I would communicate to to you an Affair of greatest Importance. It Is believed,
that I have been an Enemy to the Crown of France. It was never true, for I
esteem my King as much as any of his Subjects. I say, my King, for I have
always had a strong Affection for this great Monarch. And many of my Letters
show, that this Disgrace has happened to me from being too much engaged in the
Queens Interests. And notwithstanding the Differences I have had with Monsieur
Cardinal D'Estrees, I am his Servant and Friend. In short, my Compere, the
Queen is Dead, and had made me her Heir, as you know very well. She has left me
very precious things of all sorts, and there is none but my King to whom these
things deserve to be Presented. And know that no Interest moves me to do this;
I contend only for the Honor, that he would accept these Testimonies of my
good Will.

But Monsigneur, said to him, If you will permit me to speak my Thoughts to
your Eminence; I do not believe the King will accept these things as a pure
Gift.

All the World knows, (Answered he, that the King of France, is the most
Generous of all Princes, but we do not act with Kings as we do with Merchants;
All that I wish is, that he will do me the Honor to accept them. You are a
good Frenchman, and have a love for your Country; I have known you a long time,
and I confide in you, because I am persuaded I shall find you Faithful. You
know I have opened my Design to Monsieur Alibert, and he would be overjoyed to
have it done by his Means. But some Reasons oblige me to Prefer you. You have
some Acquaintance with Monsieur Cardinal D'Estrees. Endeavor to insinuate to
his Eminence, as from your self, that he ought not to let this occasion slip;
and that if he will undertake it, he shall be Master of all. I know your
Conduct in Affairs, and it will make your Fortunes, if you bring this about.

After so fair an Instruction, I took leave of his Eminence, and the same day,
I made it my business to see the Cardinal, under pretense of thanking him for
the Protection he had generously given me, upon the occasion of a Quarrel I had
with a Suede, who had spoken ill things of the Queen. The Discourse fell
afterward insensibly upon the fine Movables the Queen had left to Cardinal
Azzolini: And I Remonstrated to his Eminence, that the Medals and Manuscripts
of her Majesty, and above all, the Pictures of Paul Varonese and Cortege, were
Originals of an inestimable Value, and fit to be presented to the King.

Monsieur the Cardinal was of the same mind; and I told him in few words the
Intentions of Cardinal Azzolini, giving him an Account of the Conversation I
had with him. His Eminence took it well that I had freely discovered the Truth
to him, and ordered me to see the Cardinal often, and to tell him directly,
that he himself was in the fault, if the Rarities of the Queen's Palace did not
come into the King's Hands; and that assuredly he would loose nothing by it.

Two days after I went to Cardinal Azzolini, and gave him an account of my
Negotiation, assuring him, that Cardinal D'Estrees had writ to Court about it.
He was then Indisposed and in Bed, but showed a great deal of Joy that I had
begun so well, and giving me his Hand, which I respectfully Kissing, he
promised me he would not be Ungrateful, if the Affair succeeded. I was
perfectly overjoyed and filled with the finest Hopes in the World, but they
quickly vanished, for the Sickness of this poor Lord did so increase, that
there was no speaking with him. However, I did not stir from his Palace, and
gave an exact account of his Sickness to Cardinal D'Estrees.

The same day that Cardinal Azzolini was given over by his Physicians; his
Eminence went himself to know the State of his Health, just at Twelve a Clock,
and came thither from the Congregation of the holy Office. It was in June, and
in the hottest time of the day, which made me think 'twas out of Policy,
because he would not be obliged to go up.

Cardinal Azzolini being advertised, that Monsieur Cardinal D'Estrees scop'd
his Coach at the Gate, to Enquire how he did, either Rejoiced so much, or so
well dissembled it, that his Expressions melted those that heard him. Is it
possible, says he, that his Eminence should come to Visit such a poor Sick
Person as my self? I shall reckon this day the happiest in all my Life, and I
wish its prolongation for no other reason but to embrace so good a Lord. Desire
him nevertheless not to incommode himself by coming up, for fear the great Heat
should do an injury to his Health, for the preservation of which, I would
Sacrifice my own.

Cardinal D'Estrees answered this Discourse with such Expressions as were yet
more Obliging, and said to his Master of the Chamber, all that the most tender
Friendship conld think of, to persuade a sincere Reconciliation between two
Friends, who had lived some time in a Misintelligence one with another. The
Master of the Chamber went many times up and down between them, each of their
Eminencies being desirous to have the last word.

If I had not been present at all these Discourses, I should never have
believed it. And because Dissimulation cannot be carried so far in such a
Conjuncture, I am verily persuaded, that it was Sincere, and that Policy had no
hand in it; my self being very much Edified by such a Proceeding.

I am, etc.
Who would ever have believed that a little Gentleman of Marca d' Ancona should
become Heir to the Daughter of the Great Gustavus Adolphus the Terror of
Germany: And yet it has happened to Pompey Azzolini, Nephew to the Cardinal of
that Name, by which he is become Master of that Rich Possession, by the
greatest Fortune in the World. If his Uncle had died before the Queen, as he
died immediately after, she would have disposed of the Succession after another
manner, because she did not love this Nephew at all. The Cardinal put him into
the number of her Majesty's Gentlemen, but it was to be a Spy upon her Conduct.
And one day she gave him very ill Language, because he discovered to his Uncle,
that the Queen went out in the Night with the Marquess Caponi in a Close Coach,
to go to a Ball, stopping afterward at Monsieur Monfronio's, where she spent
the Night very Pleasantly.

Pompey Azzolini did not quietly enjoy his Inheritance; and the ready Money
went for the most part to pay the Charges and Legacies of the Will. The rest
consisted in fine Movables, which were bought upon Credit, by diverse great
Lords, who as to all appearance, will not Pay in a long time, because they are
above the pursuit of Justice. Pope Alexander VIII. bought the Queen's fine
Library, which was so rich in Manuscripst, for a piece of Bread. Don Livio
Odescalchi, Nephew of Innocent XI. had the Cabinet of Medals, of which there
was so fine Setts in all sorts of Metals. The Pictures are engaged here and
there; and so the rest: So that there is no great matter remains now to Pompey
Azzolini: and seeing he took no Pains to get it, it is not reasonable he should
enjoy alone the Spoils of so great a Princess, while her Domestics, who have
Served her so long, remain in Misery.



FINIS.

