THE One Good Way OF GOD: CONTRARY To the many different ways of Men's making.
WITH Loving Warnings, Exhortations and Cautions, to all sorts of men concerning
their souls, and to be at peace amongst themselves.

By One that truly loves them in and for God. -- Known by the outward name,
RICHARD HODDEN. Gal. 6.7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap, etc. Ephesians. 6.11, 12. Put on the whole armor
of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil: for we
wrestle not with flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness
in high places. Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to
and fr^, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by slight of men, and
cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. LONDON: Printed by J.
C. and are to be sold by Richard Moon, Bookseller, in Windstreet in Bristol.
1661.

To the READER.
Friendly Reader,
I Have here made mention of the Good Cause and Way of God in plain words,
(according to the knowledge of his Son revealed in me) with much love to all
men; that they might with their eyes see, and with their ears hear, the voice
of the beloved Son of God; be converted, healed, and live unto him in
righteousness and true holiness. And if thou be willing to know this one way
for thine own soul, (with the true state thereof) turn in thy mind to the pure
light of the Lord Jesus, to the word that is near thee, in thy mouth and in
thine heart; commune there, and be still to obey it, that thou may know thine
own Teacher, learn thine own Lesson, feel and find how thy soul prospers and
travelleth in its journey toward the holy Land of heavenly Love, and blessed
Rest; to enter therein, and cease from thy own works, as God did from his.

And thus prepared, read on considerately with deep sadness, great dread, love
and meeckness, that thou may feel the love and favor therein, (not to get
words, and thereby deceive thy soul) and ever mind the present stirrings in thy
heart to love and long after the Lords knocking at thy door for thee to open,
that the King of glory may come in, and show thee what his good pleasure it in
thine own particular, for thy good, (without running into others conditions to
loose thine own strength) that thou may walk in obedience thereto, by the
leading of his blessed spirit of holiness, (whatever others scoffingly may
speak thereof) and so feel and find what advisable part of the ensuing
Treatise may concern thy present state; and therein wait, and abide faithful,
until thou shall hear the voice saying, Come up higher, and then follow it: for
the eternal life (here but hinted at) is far from the roving wild mind, and
unstable soul, and cannot be truly tasted, or sweetly savoured, so long as the
soul remains ignorant of its self and true Teacher, or beholds any created
things, and mingles with them; because Eternity is perfectly free from all
similitudes, appearances, and perishing things, as being of and in the Father
of lights, (with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of changing) whose pure
presence so ravisheth the enlightened souls that it desires nothing but union
with that light, and to know and do what that wills in him; and therein
seeks to bring all others into the same heavenly frame and happy estate of
endless joy and blessed love, (without hope of reward, or fear of punishment)
wherein depends all the souls happiness, which no man ought to shun, neither
indeed does, but he that is wilfully blind, willingly ignorant of the love of
God in Christ Jesus, (the true light;) and enemy to virtue, and the health and
safety of his own soul, because this pure path is ready prepared, and ever
open, waiting to embrace and conduct the soul that so comes; and is such as
whereas the pure mind finds the entrance easy, plain and pleasant, such as
wherein the unlearned, (fools in the worlds esteem) and of mean capacities,
cannot err: but the worldly-wise, prudent and learned Clerks, may not
(thereby) be acquainted with it, it is so contrary to their wisdom; and the
entrance, a strait gate to them, because therein their invented Arts, and
earthly skill, have no place, (which they that trust to, shall one day know,
and pay for their credulity) though otherwise commendable and useful in the
managing of earthly matters. And herein is the great mercy of Almighty God
manifested in Christ Jesus to sinners, (that have long neglected his love) that
the poor, the blind, the lame, and all willing, watchful, and weary souls,
(that truly love him in his least and lowest appearance) might come to him; and
in his pure path of pleasure and light, see light, and find refreshment, as
those that have gone before in owning and witnessing his good old Cause in his
way; as did righteous Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, the Prophets, Christ
Jesus himself, and his Disciples, (Martyrs and others) did, and still do, to
obey him in all the leadings of his love in their souls, and feelings of his
grace and spiritual favor; that they may know him more and better, and so grow
up in him, and (by his spiritual nourishment pruning and purging, be sitted to
bring forth more fruit in most humble and modest manner of obedience, according
to the farther discoveries of his higher glory, and be therein exercised, that
the purchased inheritance of the Saints in light, and crown thereof, may be in
due time received.

Thy Friend, R. H.

The Contents.
1 EPistle. 2 Of Adam. 3 Worldlings. 4 Formalists. 5 Zealots. 6 Love of God. 7
Jesus Christ. 8 Soul. 9 Meditations. 10 Prayer. 11 Pearl. 12 Conversion. 13
Temptations. 14 Faith in fleshly feeling. 15 Darkness of Soul. 16 Meekness of
Love. 17 Faith in spiritual favor. 18 Conclusion. Peace in all. Humility in
all. The Cross in all. Tenderness in all.

The One Good Way of GOD, Contrary to the many different Ways of Men's Making.
I Intend not here to say much (though something may be expected) of the Manner
how, Matter whereof, or Time when the Lord God formed the first Man Adam, and
breathed into him the breath of life, whereby he became a living soul; or how
long he abode in that innocent life, of obedience, according to the abilities
thereby given him, to converse with God, and give names to the other Creatures,
according to their natures; how God made him a meet helper; how the Devil (as a
s^btil Serpent) prevailed with the woman, and both with Adam, to learn and
strive to be kingly, potent, and skilful to reign, and rule over the Love and
meekness of God, and by self-will to look out (with a lastful mind) after what
was forbidden him, and to take content in the visible things of this Earthly
Creation, and be ambitious and covetous thereof (wherein the devils Kingdom
consists) for which the serpent was rejected, and also man cast out of
Paradise, from the sweet presence of God, into this visible world, to take his
portion (where his proud heart had chosen it) in the knowledge of good and
evil, inventions and lusts, without and contrary to God; and how this begot in
him an evil opinion of God, trouble of Mind and condemnation in himself;
whereby sorrow of soul seized on him, love, meekness and humanity was lost, and
he was dead unto God, and all good, but alive to every lust and fleshly
delight, inwardly as a devil, and outwardly as a beast (by his so abusing his
trust) insomuch, that he then esteemed God (who before was his life and
delight) as his enemy, and became afraid of him, and could in no wise change
his mind to love and trust God again, (though the Lord God changed not) but
covered himself with outward things, as Fig Leaves, and hid himself from the
presence of God amongst the trees, when he heard his voice there in the cool of
the day: Or how Adam excused himself concerning his nakedness, his fear, or the
prevalency of the temptation, by reason of his light or loose-mindedness; how
he was driven out of the Garden, and Cherubims with a flaming sword set up to
turn every way, and keep the way of the tree of life: or what was figured out
thereby, concerning man's having his chosen portion in this world of his own
will, selfish wisdom, and earthly glory, by which sin entered, and death by sin
came over all men, inasmuch as all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God, by turning his truth into a lie, worshipping and serving the Creature
instead of the Creator, (who is God over all, and rich unto all that call upon
him) and so are become enemies in their minds through evil works, and to every
good work reprobares; and no way to be recovered, but through the love and
tender mercy of the Lord God, (so much abused) in the then promised seed, to
bruise the Serpents head, destroy his sinful will and wisdom in man's mortal
body, and restore him again to God, (from whom by transgression he fell) by
turning his mind into the eternal counsel and will, and thereby bringing in an
everlasting righteousness, in the new man, created in Christ Jesus, by the
spirit of holiness, to good works, and walk in them, to the restoration of all
things, etc. But of these things briefly, that I may be more large touching the
end of man's Creation, and his duty in relation thereto, in which Abel offered
an acceptable sacrifice, Snoch walked with God, pleased him, was translated,
and not found (by any tentation) for God took him into the eternal heavenly
hearing, seeing, tasting, feeling of love, and firm obedience, wherein the Lord
GOD accepts every man that so comes unto him in Christ Jesus, (the same
unchangeable way, truth and life) as babes and sucklings, and so receive his
kingdom as little children, and (in the new spiritual birth, and by the sincere
milk of the word) grow up in him, and become wholly his, and for him, in his
eternal counsel and will, and have their conversations in heaven, hating the
flesh, and drinking the blood of the Son of God, and partaking of his holiness,
and glory, wherein the Tempter cannot find them, though he may contend as he
did about the body of Moses. But though Enoch so walked with God, and after
him, Noah was singular in his generation, yet (as it is written) The wickedness
of man was great in the earth, the imaginations and thoughts of his hears only
evil continually; for all flesh had corrupted their way; the earth was filled
with violence: insomuch that the Lord repented that he had made man on the
earth: but man (by his Deed causing this) repented not to give glory to God,
(in any general way) yet for all this, the Lords love and long suffering waited
in the days of Noah, and afterward suffered the evil manners of his people
(the natural seed of Abraham) in the wilderness, and endured (as now he does)
the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, (by unbelief, hardness of heart,
and rebellion against him) that spend their times, and weary their wits, about
eating, drinking, revelling, dancin and serving their lusts of all kinds, with
violence, in vicious living, as if that were the very end of man's Creation. The
Lords love in tendering redemption, his outward chastisements, inward smitings,
and sufferings in his beloved servants, whereby he warns all men to
repentance, and to take heed how they allow or plead for their sins, (as most
do) saying, They must have their sins while their souls are in their bodies; or
(as some speak) until their last gasp: but it were better said by such men,
That they may, but will not, come to Christ to be led otherwise by his light
and spirit of holiness, to be cleansed from all unrighteousness: were they but
willing to follow him in his blessed footsteps before the Lords jealousy and
wrath be yet farther kindled against them, that so wax old in their evil ways
by custom therein; specially in these times of trial, while he is working
wonders in the earth, and delivering his chosen ones, avenging his elect, (that
cry to him) executing the judgment written, as well for the rebellious, as for
proving and purging his own houshold-servants; or think the time not near when
he shall say, They are turned to their idols, let them alone. They that are
filthy, let them be filthy still. Why should they be smitten any more? Let them
go to the gods they have served. Give them their portion, etc.

As ignorance is ever the mother of Devotion in erroneous principles, Opinions
and Practices; so consequently it is of Divisions in those erroneous-paths,
whereby wilful ignorance is turned into immodest Zeal, and hasty frowardness to
make by-ways, with gaudy and gilded shows for others to fall down before, and
worship: but my business being (here specially) to give some directions to
weary Travelers that are going out of their way, and yet would know, and enter
the door of mercy, and hope to find refreshment for their souls; and likewise
to the rebellious, (that are in bondage) that the Lord God might dwell amongst
them, and bring them also into his fold, and freedom of glorious liberty with
the sons of God; and therefore briefly touch and pass over the many byways that
lead to, and through Presumption into Despair, and thence into endless misery;
as the way of Cain, Nimrod, the old world, Jannes and Jambres, Ishmael, Esau,
Core and his company, Nadab and Abibu, Balaam, and sundry other false Prophets,
Apostates and Persecutors, as recorded in holy Scripture, over-many here to
mention, and at this time too manifestly in use to be now hid.

III. The covetous profane worldly men, in their several ways, choose their
portions in this world, their great desires, hopes, fears and cares, being to
get, save and possess an earthly inheritance; which is their portion, and their
hearts there also: some taking liberty (in the will of Satan and the flesh) to
use (or rather abuse) the outward things upon their own lusts, without any
touch of Conscience, as being unwilling to know what Conscience, and the light
therein, means, lest it should hinder their earthly happiness of glorying in
their shame, as men not in their right minds, but bereaved of their wits; not
knowing what they are, of whom they are, to whom they belong, what their
business is here, or how to gain content in anything; but every Toy disquiets
their minds, every filthy lust takes hold of them, and gets dominion over them,
leads them captive; and they say they cannot help it: some adding, that if God
had given them grace to forsake their evil ways, (as he has done to some
others) then they should be happy, and gladly leave their sinful courses; and
when God gives them grace, they will, etc. Now to such I say, They speak
truly, (but very wickedly) that they have no grace; and therefore none they
will have, (though the grace of God has appeared to all men) but they continue
still in their filthy love, and delight in their lusts, and that because they
disable themselves to receive grace, and neither wait to be prepared for the
drawings of God in them, nor take any heed to his leading or light that would
show them better, but resist all; so that they seldom feel any glimpse of the
light of Christ, neither are willing to suffer it to rest in, or shine into,
their souls, lest it should draw them from the great love and liking of this
world, and the lusts that seem so sweet to them. But, Do they say they want
grace to resist sin, and tentations thereto, that do presently yield themselves
to sin upon the motions thereof? These men have grace truly offered to them,
but they withstand it, and turn it into wantonness, and resist the true light
and holy Spirit when it moves and striveth with them, (as sometime did the old
world) whereby it becomes as natural to such men to commit sin, as the Ox to
drink in water; and therefore think it impossible to withstand it; but it is by
reason of their custom therein, and willingness thereto, which does so weaken
and enfeeble their wills and affections to grace, that they feel not the virtue
thereof to resist the Devil, or sin, when he offers it to the soul: and when
they do feel inward smitings in their Consciences, or as a heavy weight upon
them, they presently (to quiet their Consciences) flee to their vain pleasures,
and lustful practices; even as beasts and Sodomites, to eat and drink, and rise
up to play; fill themselves with worldly solace, and leave tokens of their
jollity behind them; from whence that general Question arises, Do you love
this meat, or drink? this or the other outward thing? etc. about which lusts,
many do so mightily spend their strength, and employ their wits, in striving to
get needless wealth, to satisfy this love, this lust, this god their bellies,
(wherein they glory) which tends to their utter loss in spiritual things; and
that when they have overmuch, unless they would employ it better, and also
cast it off, and detract from their desires, inordinate affections, loves and
likings that keep them from the love of God, sight and feeling of Gods grace,
and way of restoration to the heavenly mysteries of his glorious Kingdom; all
bodily things being for support of bodily strength, (as physic for health)
with much Caution, lest Just step in with the use: so could Paul beat down his
body; and others following his example therein, as he followed Jesus Christ, to
the glory of God the Father.

IV. O ye Formalists, that have (in these days) your ways in the aerie Element,
without footing or foundation; that turn any way with every wind, not knowing
whither you go, because darkness has blinded your eyes, and sloth so possessed
your souls, that you are unfree and afraid to have your eyes opened in the
light, lest it should prove to your loss in earthly things, and therefore do
neglect the light, and silence the voice of Jesus Christ in your own and others
Consciences, by your formal and fleshly inventions of Conformity, and bodily
exercises, (that all are to perish with the using) being (as it is written)
after the doctrines and commandments of men, etc. from whence spring up the
devised snares and gins to catch the innocent, and Non-conformists, that are
not of your aerie minds; without considering the commands of Christ Jesus, (the
Lord of the harvest) who said, Let the tares and wheat grow together (in the
world) until the harvest; and again in these words, Whatsoever y^ would that
men should do unto you, so do you unto them: or how he pleasech respectively to
carry on his great work of so^ls, to reform them into faith and spiritual
feeling; neither yet how you your selves (or some of you) are but newly
released from under the yoke of your bondage, and suddenly step up, upon a
stage of this world, (to show your selves for a little season) should not in
any wise lay a (like, or greater) yoke of bondage upon the necks of others,
then you your selves were able to bear: and especially in these transient
times, when (as it is written) the holy God is pouring contempt upon all flesh;
and these fading glories are vanishing away, ready to be left by you, or
snatched from you before you have any firm hold of them: but times and seasons
are all in the Lords hands, and his secrets with his saints; and therefore (in
love to your souls) consider well your way, and be not high-minded, but fear
before the God of heaven; and learn of him to be wise in this your day of
trial, to understand what the good will of the Lord is respectively to you; and
let not love and meekness be mastered by any exalted, peevish, wrathful spirit
of contention in you, for he is now proving you, that you might know what is in
your own hearts, and that others might see whether you will indeed, truly
incline your souls to him and his service; so to act, as you seem to pray, to
have his will done in earth, as it is in heaven, etc. who will no more spare
you then he has done others, in case you be found in their footsteps, contrary
to his one good way, truth and life, which those that have truly tasted the
sweetness of, cannot neglect, whatever others do; for the reasonable service is
(as it is written) not a conforming to this world, but a being transformed by
the renewing of the mind. To prove what that good, and acceptable, and perfect
will of God is, whereby he reforms men's souls through faith (as pleases him)
into a perfect inward savor, taste, feeling, and wise skill, which the holy
Ghost teaches and planteth in the powers of the soul, whereby he requites no
hard, harth, or intricate service, but what is according to right reason, and
the knowledge thereof to be received in his own light, and spiritual leading in
every man's conscience, there to arise, and his enemies be scattered, as he
transformeth and renews the mind, according to his blessed will of heavenly
love; and the contrary thereto is only unreasonable, unrighteous, intolerable
and abominable to God, as that which enforces men (of corrupt and unstable
minds) to formalities and hypocrisy, whereof ensues condemnation in
themselves, to their souls, besides the many other mischiefs and miseries to
mankind; for what is out of faith, is sin, both in the commander and actor;
and if the heart condema, God is greater, and knows all: and who shall
justify where he condemns? and (as it is written) Blessed and happy is he that
condemns not himself in the thing that he allows, and contrarily; which ought
to be well heeded, and warily observed by all men; and is by those that are
willing to know and perform the great trust reposed in them concerning their
own souls, as knowing that they must give an account of themselves to God, and
ought not to trust their souls with others, that have other ends then for the
Lords service, and learned Arts, whereby to call good evil, and evil good, put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, as blind men, or with their eyes
shut, and unwilling to know the light of life, and leading of the holy Spirit
of truth, as if (as the fool said in his heart) there were no God, or not
desiring the knowledge of his way; and yet concerning the things of this world,
cry, Give, give, more, more, when they have not rightly learned how to use that
they have.

V. You that are strict and zealous Professors in your ways, should study to be
quiet in your selves, and with others: you have a zeal as for God, but not
according to knowledge of him, (as a fire of love in you kindled by the holy
Ghost) and therefore you are such, and so diversely opinionated, without unity
or order amongst your selves; but one fort contending for the Monster
Uniformity, another for their new-made Faith, a third for their dead, dumb, and
empty ordinances, and each impleading others, and employing your selves (like
Nadab and Abibu, or Core and his company) in kindling and offering strange
fires before the Lord, and resisting the truth taught in the light of Christ by
his blessed Spirit which leads into all truth, (as Jannes and Jambres sometime
withstood Moses) but your deeds are so manifest, and you stopped and reproved in
your inward and outward parts, so as not like much farther to prevail, are
again (in love as heretofore) warned to turn in your minds to him that there
smites for amendment that a remnant of you (forsaking the sparks of their own
kindling) may be purged, purished, and brought forth as gold tried and saved by
that consuming fire which burns, and wastes all sin our of obedient souls, with
the fleshly loves and lovers thereof; so as there may be no more mis-judging by
private and perverse spirits of ignorance, weakness, or thick darkness, that
cannot comprehend the deep things of God, but do turn the minds out of the true
light of Jesus Christ, (wherein his servants see light to walk that pure path
of holiness in him) to glory in words, emptiness and vanity of your wills,
bodily wits, and works, (as did the former persecuters of Christ Jesus) not
wisely heeding the Lords hand, whereby he is restoring all things into the
glorious liberty of his sons and daughters, and how he therefore now shakes the
earth and heavens also; which should abate the edge of men's earthly appetites,
(accompanied with such strange and hideous effects) and would, if they knew any
thing of the Lords pure and powerful workings, or of the times and seasons, or
were but near ripe for truth, and apt to the kingdom of God; and would take
such off from expecting greater signs and wonders, or acting another thing by
another spirit of private interpretation, (different from the Lords purpose so
many ways manifested;) and therefore it is evident that such men are sick,
weak, or fallen asleep; so that they cannot discern the Lords body, his truth,
and true worshippers, nor other things that differ. -- And though you may not
be competent Judges in spiritual matters, yet consider, is it righteous or
reasonable, that those who are either merely carnal or have not yet received so
much as the bare presence of the holy Spirit in grace, should judge others that
are sealed with the Spirit of promise, baptized and made to drink into that one
Spirit which judges all things, and so are partakers of the divine nature of
the immortal and invisible God? Have you never read how the Lords praise is
perfected in the mouths of his babes and sucklings? and that whosoever does not
receive the kingdom of God as a little Child, shall in no wise enter therein?
or how the mysteries of that kingdom are hid from the wise and prudent, and
revealed to such babes? or how the halt, lame and blind, (whom you despise) do
enter, while you your selves and others art shut out, and the rich sent empty
away? Remember that Exhortation of Christ Jesus, (to men of your sort) saying,
Wash the inside, that the out may be clean also. It is high time for you to be
willing to put away the evil of your doings, and yield to his light, and
leading of his Spirit, that your souls may be prepared and fitted to feel and
know him as God equal with the Father, (spiritually) to cleanse you from all
unrighteousness; and then you will not suppose that any good thing of him can
make you happy, but what is so revealed, and wrought in you; or be ignorant of
the danger of resisting, or neglecting such divine stirrings in your souls, by
any your exquisite Arts, natural Reasons, or bodily Wits, as some do, who are
so much thereby deceived, that they think they are not deceived. You may read
likewise of some that had traveled pretty far in outward Ordinances, been
baptized with water, etc. and yet not heard that there is an holy Ghost; and
such in those days, are not a few, that have their cars stopped with dumb and
deadly sounds of words, or thereby become so dull of hearing, that they hearken
not to the voice of the Charmer, though he charm never so wisely; nor are
gotten one step farther then those that had not heard of an holy Ghost, (though
they can talk much of him by what they have read, or others told them:) and,
how then should they believe on him of whom they have not heard? specially
while they are so willingly led by such ignorant talking, that so dulls them,
and hinders their heeding of the true light, and hearing what the holy Spirit
says, and how he reveals the deep things of God to all watchful and willing
souls; so that such have their loves to, and their faith and lives in, man's
wisdom, and seldom (or never) come to the love of God, indeed and in truth, but
remain vain and unruly talkers and contenders about words, questions, and
outward things, and would make themselves love God by their own strength and
wisdom; which may not be, though they should act therein never so violently, as
it were to pull God out of heaven to them by their strivings, pantings and
burstings out into heat in their devoted zeal: for though such suppose in their
thoughts and hearts they love God, and also resolve so to do, and for his sake
to suffer death; yet these men's love (in that manner) is neither truly so, nor
is any strength so asked by them to stand therein; for such souls have but
either received that gift of love through Christ as a man, or they have it not,
but would have it; and so strive in their own strength to feel the love of God,
but come not to a waiting in the light to see and know their own souls, nor
themselves unworthy and unable to do any good thing, think a good thought, or
in the least measure to move toward God, or prepare their own hearts for him,
or see their own miserable, blind and naked condition, as dead in sins and
trespasses, waiting at the Pool to receive help and healing by the Angels
moving of the water, as the Lords free gift of love to eternal life; which is
the way for them to come to the sight of Jesus Christ, as being all to them,
and working all in them; and therefore not to strive outwardly, but quietly
wait, and ask nothing but the gifts of love, that they might be touched and
taught of him, to see God by his blessed light, and gracious presence; and then
love him by his own gift of love so received through patient suffering, as
wrought in their souls by the holy Ghost, without bodily strength, or earthly
skill; these being the means whereby souls are made so meek and obedient, that
they work not of themselves at all by bodily wit or exercise, but freely suffer
the holy Ghost to will and to do in them, and with them, as best pleases him,
for the working of their souls into faith and feeling of his love by degrees,
without outward noise or strivings about it; for Christ's Voice was not heard in
the street; it is a soft and still voice to be heard in silence, and felt of
all the senses and powers of the soul, and is very sweet to all savoury minds
that have waited for him; and they that so wait long, and covet after the
fruits of the Spirit, and sow thereto, shall much increase therein, But as this
is not by bodily exercise, so it may not be by resting in spiritual employment,
already done, but a pressing forward toward the mark of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus; and ever following that they feel, to grow therein toward
perfection; for otherwise there will be a sudden settling upon the old Lees,
and so a declining to loss, and the end without profit or comfort: as some
Apostates who have said they have gone round, back again, etc. and so lost not
only their hold of perfection, but their first love, and leading principle of
God in them; for there is first a beginning with rude souls, and a change of
the mind in the working of faith; and then faith works by love, and after
that by the more strong, clear and pure stirrings (as felt in all active souls)
toward that life of perfect love: for though the body of sin be at first seen
in the light, then debased, and in some suddenly crucified; yet it will be
seen, felt, and labored in, and against, until full victory be obtained: as
the beloved Paul said, by his rejoicing in Christ Jesus, he died daily; whereby
the old feeling of the body of sin comes to be destroyed, and the soul brought
into a new gracious feeling by the operation of the holy Spirit, to grow up in
him who is the head of all principalities and powers.

VI. These things being so, it highly concerns every man (respectively) to
weigh, and warily consider his own way, station and standing, and to prize the
time and abilities that the Lords love in Christ Jesus has allotted him, to
wait and watch for his conversion, reconciliation and salvation, and to account
the time (misspent and irrecoverably past) sufficient to have done the will of
the flesh, in thinking his own thoughts, speaking his own words, and acting
contrary to the eternal counsel and will; and that the present time is only
man's to make his use of, (not knowing what shall be to morrow) and the loss of
what is past, will be his greatest grief, as his ignorant soul comes to see it
self, its sins and duty; or otherwise (as Christ said of Judas) better to him
he had never been born: Whereof I only query, (as the beloved Peter) What
shall the end be, of those that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ; but take
pleasure in unrighteousness, and mind not the Lords love in drawing them, or
their duties in a willing yiedling, and suitable subjection thereto? For great
was the love of the Lord God in creating man after his own image and likeness,
with a soul fair, clean, and fit for his service and glory; and yet greater
(when man had proudly departed from that holy and happy condition, and made
himself unfree and unfit to embrace that love, and serve that end) in
commending, promising and setting forth his love again in his own only Son, to
restore man, and bring him back into God, (from whom he so wilfully and
wickedly departed by the enticement of the Devil) and thereby to free him from
the snares thereof, and pains due therefore; and yet his especial and greatest
love, is to be felt, tasted, and sweetly savoured in his free cleansing of man's
soul by the gift of the holy Ghost, whereby it becomes to be conformed to the
likeness of his dear Son; by which love, he gives of his Godhead to every
obedient and clean soul, (that comes to will and to do of his good pleasure) as
a fit vessel and temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and walk in: which all
his sons and daughters (that are heirs of this salvation) do right-well know,
and therein are made willing and obedient, ready and diligent to help all
others (what they may) to come to the same happy condition of blessed love and
heavenly sweetness, that all things may be restored to their first and
primitive purity, and the great mercy and love of the Lord seen to, and felt by
all his creatures; for whom he takes care in their respective kinds, feeding
the Ravens, clothing the Lilies, and much more the obedient soul that is of his
own breath, and waits upon him by his Spirit, being plain and simple in the
truth, and willing to do all things in the eternal will, ever waiting to live
always in his light of love by every word that proceeds out of his mouth, until
he be swallowed up of the divine will, and inexpressible goodness and wisdom;
and so settled in his rest, (with a sober and chaste mind) as to be preserved
from touching any thing that defiles, or wherein the soul feels not the pure
love, meek motion, and heavenly life of Jesus Christ above all outward
appearances, likenesses or forms of words; and as it is contrary to, and envyed
of, all natural selfishness.

VII. In the next place, truly to know this one Lord Jesus Christ come in the
flesh, as the new and living way to the Father, the Immanuel, (God with us)
making the atonement by the blood of his Cross, to have all things subject unto
him, his servants in him, and he in them; which is the great mystery of
godliness, hid from Ages and Generations, until the fullness of time, and then
manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, believed on in the world, and
received up into glory; which none of the wise men of this world ever knew, or
can know by all their learned skill of earthly wisdom; nor any man that lives
after the flesh, or satisfies himself with hearing, reading, telling, or
talking of him, or concerning what he or his Apostles did, said, or suffered;
as those that vainly take his Name into their mouths, (on most occasions of
their invented ways) but know him not, neither by his divine Nature nor Name,
nor how God and man became one Christ Jesus, how that which may be known of God
is manifest in man, how he is the wonderful, counselor, The mighty God, The
Prince of peace: The Author and Finisher of our faith: how he saves his people
from their sins, is the Reconciler without imputation of sin: how he is formed
in his servants, and cleanses them by his blood from all sin and
unrighteousness: how they take up the cross and follow him, or what the cross
is; how the body becomes dead because of sin, and the spirit alive for
righteousness sake: how they are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones: how he is their Leader, and captain of salvation, made perfect through
sufferings: how they are baptized into his death, and saved by his life; how
the Union is perfected in all the parts and members of his body the Church:
what the Church is, or how his Body; or what it is to eat his flesh, and drink
his blood; without which (as himself said) we have no life in us: how every
knee shall bow to him, of things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth; and
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father: how he is
that blessed and only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords: The head of
all thrones and dominions, and every name that is named, etc. And therefore
(not knowing him) cannot worship him accordingly. Neither are such willing to
become obedient to him in his light that makes all things manifest, naked and
bare; whereby he brings every secret thing to light, and passes judgment upon
the transgressing nature, and bruiseth the branches of it with every lust of
the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life, (that are not of the Father,
but of the world) nor to know him the Healer and Maker up of the breach, the
Repairer of the ancient path to walk in; by cleansing men's souls, that are full
filthy, while they remain ignorant of him, or have any fleshly appetite, lust,
or like desire alive in them, whereby the fair pearl is blemished; and much
more filthy, when their souls are taken up with a full love and liking of this
world, and wholly overcome by the sensual and fleshly part, that they choose it,
and delight therein as the full rest of their hearts; so that they feel no
liquor of life, or sweetness of grace stirring them to loath what their flesh
likes; nor to desire that heavenly food of their souls: so they do not bear
the image of sin, but are born, and carried with it, and of it, and feel no
strength but in it, nor no will to leave it, but yield thereto with all ready
forwardness. -- But Jesus Christ is the food of all hungry souls; and through
him, in him, and by him, are such souls reformed and restored into their first
and fair likeness of God, in righteousness and true holiness; and so is the new
man created in Christ Jesus to good works to walk in them by the Divine will,
and quickening Spirit; whereby the flaming sword comes to be removed, and the
everlasting gate opened to all willing and watchful souls to enter thereat into
the heavenly and endless life, where Jesus Christ is the Door, the Porter and
Receiver, always waiting ready to embrace the souls that so watch, pray, wait
and attend to be (here in this life) reformed by his Spirit into his likeness
and love, to live by the words of his mouth, as swallowed up of the Divine will
of inexpressible sweetness, and so walk in the Spirit of love and meekness,
with sober and chaste minds, as the Lords freemen, without handling or
touching any unclean thing that defiles, or where in their souls feel not the
pure love, meek motion, and holy life of Jesus Christ above all shadows, types,
figures, forms, or fleshly things, etc. There be many that think they love
Jesus Christ, and know him, to whom he may truly say, I know you not; depart
from me, ye are workers of iniquity. -- Though they may have attained to a
fleshly knowledge of him, by imagining, thinking, and fashioning him in
themselves, (with their minds, thoughts, affections, desires, cares, and bodily
wits) and so suppose they love, fear, serve and worship him as a man like
themselves, (yet without sin) that God is wroth with them as a man that is
offended, that Christ died for their sins, and therefore they fall down at his
feet with sorrow of heart, crying for mercy and pardon; and (like the five
foolish Virgins) suppose they are ready for him, have good trust in his mercy,
and so reverence him, and fear before him; and thereupon do verily believe they
so know and worship him, because they feel their hearts moved and stirred with
love to him, and desire of him. -- But this is not the worship in spirit and
truth, which he expects, and accepts; for all this while these worshippers know
not their own souls, nor God in Christ Jesus reconciling them to himself; nor
have they any Oil in their lamps, or sweet liquor of life suppling their souls;
for the Lord Jesus is not seen, much less known and worshipped by men's
imaginations; for the earthly nature cannot receive, retain, or bear this
heavenly new wine. -- So there was a time when Christ Jesus told his Disciples
he had many things to say unto them, but they could not then bear them; and yet
being upright in hearts to the Lord, he is pleased so to temper, strengthen and
comfort them with such an inward beholding, that they forsake sins, and the
great love of this world, whereby the invisible light of his Godhead is
somewhat shadowed to the inner eye of their souls, under the bedily likeness of
Christ's fleshly holiness; and may be in so great love, that it slays all
wicked love in their souls, and strengthens them to suffer freely for him; and
yet this over-shadowing of their souls, (whereby they are kept from the great
love of the world) is only as a shadow of the invisible light of the Godhead
and manhood united, and lightly touching the serious and devour soul; whereof
the Prophet spoke, as being under the shadow of his spiritual wings, (or
manhood) and yet this is but Christ's love received intomens dark minds and
imaginations, though it be that condition whereunto thousands (professing
Christianity) have not yet attained, though they pretend much, and seem to
teach others also. -- But it is faith and spiritual feeling of Jesus Christ
which purifieth the heart, and whereby the soul comes to understand his
spiritual love in the Godhead, (as Christ said) I in them, and thou in me, and
to be made perfect in one, etc. to which all bodily beholdings are but as means
directing men's minds to the light, and thereby their souls to a serious
consideration of the wonderful love, goodness, power and wisdom manifested in
the manhood of Christ spiritually. -- And so it is like Martha loved him, and
labored in outward service for him, and that with hearty affections: but Mary
chose the better part; she received and embraced him with more pure affections,
and retained him in her beart. -- Mary Magdalen loved Christ well before his
passion of bodily death, but her love was much bodily, and little spiritually,
for she loved him not as God before, though her thoughts and affections were
set upon him; in which affections, (or actions, expressing her love) Christ
condemns her not in that time, (so far as we find) but after when he was risen
from death, and appeared unto her, she would have reverenced him with such a
manner of love as she did before, and then Christ forbad her, saying, Touch me
not; as, look not on me with a fleshly eye to rest therein, for so I am not
ascended to my Father, nor equal to the Father so; but now, love me as I am one
with the Father, in the form of the Godhead; know, love and worship me as God,
and man like God, so to be with me; love and worship me only for that I am
God, that took the nature of man; and therefore receive and embrace me as God
in thine heart, and in thy love of me, and worship me in the enlightened
understanding of thy soul, as Jesus Christ, God and man; the saving truth,
goodness, and light of blessed life, and spiritual joy: and so Christ Jesus
promised to come unto his Disciples, and be with them by his holy Spirit,
(after given them) with power from on high to teach them all things, and lead
them into all truth: the which heavenly gift of holiness and glory, few have
yet attained to in these latter times, since the Apostasy: and therefore those
souls (that have not attained to this spiritual understanding of him through
his grace) are to wait in his light, with pure affections of fervent love,
until more grace be freely given unto them, and not to overrun the conditions
wherein they are, but stay therein until they shall respectively feel a better
revealed in them; still minding, that all spiritual gifts are felt and tasted
in the powers of the souls; chiefly, in love and spiritual understanding, but
not in imaginations through the strength of the body, or bodily wits, which are
not spiritual feelings, and at most but outward tokens of spiritual inward
feelings in the powers of their souls, where the holy Ghost has lighted their
reasons, and kindled their affections with his blessed Presence so clearly in
fervent love, that they immediately thereby received the knowledge of spiritual
truth, and perfect love, with an outward showing of of the inward feeling of
spiritual grace. -- And as it was in the former Disciples, so it is now in
other like-perfect souls, visited and lighted within by the holy Ghost, whereby
there is an outward feeling of the inward grace, and the body made obedient
(thereby) to the Spirits moving and leading; without fainedness or fancy of
imagination. -- And he is no spiritual man that has not thus learned Christ,
or is taught his lesson by him in like spiritual wise; nor any way qualified to
judge of spiritual matters, but must consequently err in his understanding,
and mar all he meddles with; and not know how, or wherein he so erreth, much
less how to amend his own crrours; and how then shall he reform others, but as
a blind man may judge of colors, because these spiritual things are above the
sight of his carnal eye, so that he perceives them not that has not the
spiritual eye of his understanding opened? and how then should he open the
Scriptures, that (as Christ said) neither knows them, nor the power of God, or
be skilled in the use of his spiritual Weapons, his warfare or work to be done
in his Vineyard, or know the kingdom, power or glory of God, whereto all true
service tends? -- For, (as it is written) The natural man understands not the
things of the Spirit of God: but they are foolishness to him; for it is the
spiritual man that judges all things, and is judged of no man, because his
life is hid with God in Christ, as taken from the earth, and unknown to the
world, but well known to God; and is so reformed in soul, that he feels the
least fleshly stirring in him, and condemns it, and loathes it in his heart, and
ever flees to God for strength against all such motions; and loves not his
life to attain the life eternal, but is passive in every thing; a man of
sorrows and sufferings, as his Lord Jesus was, and left him an ensample to
follow him therein.

Seeing the business in hand is of soul-concernment, it is absolutely
necessary, that the soul should know it self, with the faculty, virtues and
powers thereof, by its turning into, and watchful keeping in its pure principle
of the light of Christ Jesus in the Conscience, to love that light, and observe
its motions as it shall be led by the holy Spirit into all truth, and thereby
restored into its primitive purity, fit to enjoy the sweet presence of God, as
Adam did before his disobedience. -- For a miserable and wretched man is he
that knows not the workings, worth and worthiness of his own soul, (the first
lesson to be learned in Christ's school, as the trade of his youth) it being the
most excellent Creature that the Lord God formed for his service and glory,
(whereto nothing can give true content, satisfaction or rest, but God only;
and therefore neither to love nor desire any thing but him) for otherwise he
cannot come to know the Spirit of God, and what it wills, works, or would
work in him; how it striveth, how it is grieved, how quenched, how he searches
all things, ( even the deep things of God:) how he dwells in man, how he
witnesses with man's spirit, or how he baptiseth into the one body; how the
excellent mysteries of divine love are revealed (to the obedient and clean
soul) by the holy Ghost; or how so to live and walk in the Spirit, as not to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. This living soul is not any corporeal substance,
but a life invisible, (as God is invisible) for it is of the breath of God, and
so is Gods, (in an especial manner) that by its virtue bears up the body, and
quickneth it, and so the Spirit formed in man is said to be the candle of the
Lord, useful there in searching the inner parts, and knowing the hearts
secrets. This soul consists of reason, mind, will, and other faculties, fit
to receive and retain God in its understanding and knowledge, without
forgetting him, or being distracted by any Creature, or creaturely thing; and
as the Reason is enlightened, and becomes clear, and bright, (free from error
and darkness) and the will and affections turned into the light and love of
Christ Jesus, (the promised seed, and endless wisdom of God) and is free from
all beastly love of the flesh, or any Creature, by his blessed love, mere
mercy, and sovereign goodness of his holy Spirit. -- The soul becomes as Adams
was in Paradise, an innocent Life of conversing with God; and as Enochs, that
walked with God, pleased him, and was not found, etc. But this soul cannot be
found or known while man has any thing molesting it that is of his own body,
or bodily wits, wherewith the senses may be exercised, ( so he that will save
his lise, must loose it) for the reasonable soul is a life immortal as well as
invisible, and has a power and pure light of Christ in it self, to see, know
and love the truth, and true good, which is God only: and he that truly feels
and knows this, and is sensible of the touches thereof, feels and knows
somewhat of the reasonable soul, and the kindly workings of it; and the more he
becomes acquainted therewith, (in this manner) the better he sees and knows
himself, and others also; and the more meek, humble, lowly, loving, tender and
compassionate will he be toward all men and creatures. -- And this was the
highestate and condition, the heavenly and excellent dignity that Adam lost
when he became in love with himself, and selfish things, taking delight in
earthly knowledge and worldly glory, whereby he fell into a dark, feeble and
wretched estate, like the beast that perishes; by which the love that before
was clean, savory and sweet in the holy Ghost, was so turned into a filthy
beastly love and liking of himself and the creatures, wherein he sought
content, but found it not, (as it now is with all that remain in that
degenerated nature;) and therefore the soul, to be brought back to know it
self, and be fitted for the service whereunto it was ordained, by its being
gathered up into its self, and fully departed from beholding all creaturely
things, or selfish use of bodily wits, arts, wisdom or knowledge of man,
(gotten by any natural means, study, labor, or exercise) so that the soul feel
it self in its own kind, in being as it were without a body; for as the eye of
the soul is opened to Jesus Christ in his pure light, and the love turned to
him, it is received up above all bodily creatures, from beholding, liking,
thinking on, and using them; and ever disdaining to be obedient to any worldly
thought, or earthly thing, (that perishes with the using) And while the soul
is so kept, therein comes no error, nor deceit of its enemy, because it then
sees Jesus Christ above and in him, and holds the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience, and all created things below under his feet, as not in him, nor of
him. So David waited upon God for salvation, and his heart hearkened and indicted
of that good matter, and so became very ready in it, and saw the beauty of the
Lord; and when the soul is brought into this heavenly harmony, it truly loves
God, and all creatures spiritually, (not fleshly and carnally as in its former
ignorance) and is overcome with the sweetness of Christ's words of love, clearly
revealed and spoken into the ear of the heart; which that soul hears and
obeys with good savor, and true joy in him alone; and so his secrets are
with his saims; but not with the blind world; for the ignorant soul is so
over-laid with worldly love, that it is all common as the highway, so that
every stirring of the flesh and the Devil sinketh into it, rests therein, and
passes through it as it pleases without control; and so if any good seed
fall therein, it withers for want of earth, it is choked, or these fewls of
the air steal it away, and devour it; there being only the degenerate nature
of old Adam, while that which became a living soul wants the quickening spirit
to form the new man, settle and establish the soul, not according to the carnal
commandment, but after the power of the endless life. But how hard and
difficult this is for the rude soul so unacquainted with it self, and
accustomed to receive tentations, make provision for the flesh, and fulfill its
lusts, and be stirring much in filth and fleshly things, to enter this strait
gate to the knowledge of its self, in its true light, is evident by the
ignorance of most, and the small numbers of those that find it; for most men
that would find entrance, and know their souls, (in stead of turning in, into
the light of Christ) turn their thoughts with imaginations into their bodies,
to seek for their souls, and to feel them; as though they were hid within their
hearts, as their hearts are holden and hid within their bodies. Now if a man
should covet to know his soul, and that never so earnestly, and seek for it in
that manner in his body, he may not possibly so find it in its self, but the
more he seeks to feel and know it by studiousness, (as he would know or learn
tongues, arts, or other bodily things) the farther shall he be from it by that
seeking; and therefore so many weary themselves in vain, by seeking the door in
a wrong way, and contrary nature, whereby it is hid from the wise and prudent,
and revealed only to babes and sucklings at the breasts of consolation in the
pure light of Christ, who is this Door, and by whom the diligent soul comes
truly and quickly to enter, understand and know what its self is with its true
Teacher and Guide, while the other soul falls suddenly into imaginations of
bodily things and words; supposing thereby to have or gain the light of its
self, and so of God, and spiritual things; which (as I said before) can never
be so attained, (by imagination or bodily wit) as the mind may see sensibly
what is just between man and man by its understanding thereof; for then the
soul might see it self in understanding reasonable things. -- But the soul is
to seek for a higher knowledge of, and in it self, in the light, as to know
that it is invisible and immortal, of the breath of God, wherein God is to be
seen spiritually, which is a great mystery, not to be expressed in words, but to
be sought out, and kept clean and bright from worldly wisdom, fleshly filth,
and earthly vanities, above the sensual part, to see it self in Jesus Christ,
the Way, Truth and Life; the ancient Path wherein the holy men of God ever
walked to please him in diligent labor and travel of mind, and sufferings of
the outward man, and yet with fullness of joy and spiritual delight.

In every spiritual work and employment, man's will, wisdom, reasoning and
earthly affections, are to be left behind, as Abraham left his servants when he
went to offer his Son Isaac for a burnt-offering to the Lord; and as Moses
drawing near to God put off his shoes, so all you that will draw near unto the
Lord God, cast aside, and leave behind you, your own selfishness, wills,
wisdoms, and imaginations, with every high thought that exalts it self, and
keeps your souls from closing with the Lord in his holy service, that you may
be by him prepared to meditate, watch, pray, and give thanks in all things, and
at all times, and embrace all divine counsel and heavenly help thereby, freely
tendered in the pure light and tender touches in the conscience, to move the
heart into an awful dread, and true fear of God, that by the stirrings of grace
you may come to a knowledge of him spiritually; which gift is common to all,
bat particularly received by the diligent soul that waits therein stable and
firm, according as it so receives, and keeps thereto with all ready
cheerfulness, moving in its own measure of grace so given, (though it be never
so little) for the Lord is pleased suddenly to prepare men's hearts by putting
meditations into their minds in the beginning and time of their conversions;
especially of such as have been much occupied in worldly defilements; and then
commonly the thoughts of such (when once turned in) are most upon their sins,
with great sorrow, meekness and tears, asking forgiveness, and watching
thereto, as the Lord touches their so us sharply to make them the sooner
clean; for then the sin will be ever in the sight as foul and horrible, and
accompanied with fightings and hard conflicts in their consciences, so as that
they can take no rest (until the Lord Jesus give it as pleases him) wherein is
his tender mercy, that he may scowre and cleanse such souls the more speedily,
and forgive their sins as he wipeth them away, (wherein justification is in
sanctification, and sanctification accompanied with justification) and fitteth
the soul to receive some spiritual grace and gift of his love; and so the holy
Spirit often stirs to meditations in God, which works a kindly work in their
souls to be waited in, and the fruits of the Spirit to be received, and all in
Jesus Christ, as the pure power, endless love and wisdom of God that sets the
heart upon hungering after his virtue and spiritual discoveries, in such
exercises as God is graciously pleased to give in to the soul; and so
meditation, watching and praying have no rules, bounds or limits set by man
unto them, but when and as the Lord Jesus pleases to give by the holy Spirit;
for his gift it is, for disposing of his chosen ones, and drawing in their
souls to him, to be made wise in waiting, knowing and obeying him spiritually;
wherein he gives such tender-heartedness, that they often melt into devotion,
and are ravished in souls above measure; somewhat like as it sometimes was with
the Disciples that sat together, and were filled with the holy Ghost, and then
spoke forth the great and wonderful things of God, when all they knew was oy
that spiritual ravishing love; and so the Lord is pleased oftentimes to open
his treasury, and give to some very plentifally in all ages, as their souls
come to be cleansed, and the way made open and easy to them, though the doing
thereof is a great mystery to others that remain ignorant, or are net watchful
and diligent; so that it passes over them, (some growing contrary to it, and
at enmity with it) for then the Lord withdraws it again by reason of that
slothfulness and abuse, and sometimes from the more diligent, to prove and try
such, that they may know wherein their strength stands, and after that to
feel their own weakness, and also know their respective states, and how to love
more spiritually: and so partly it was with the Disciples that loved Christ
much while in the flesh with them, but then fleshly as in his manhood; and
therefore he told them it was necessary for them that he should go away, and
send the holy Ghost to teach them, to know and love more spiritually; and so
the Lord often withdraws himself outwardly, that the inward and heavenly presence
of his love may be the more earnestly desired, meditated on, and pressed after;
and that the soul may know its duty and employment in waiting, watching and
suffering, until it be thoroughly renewed, strengthened and established in his
spiritual might and power, to glorify him with more fervent love and holy
worship: and if it so come to pass, that he who is watchful and diligent
therein, feels not this virtue enabling him to meditation, or spiritual
employment with his whole heart, (as he desires) but in stead thereof, fee
leth many other thoughts run in upon him, and hinder him; and the more pain he
takes to keep his heart in watching and waiting for spiritual feeling, the
farther off it is to the very last, and again harder afterward: this is to
teach him to watch more singly and sincerely within the soul, and forget all
things without; and to know that it is no easy thing to love with all the
heart, until the heart be renewed; for this work will be found painful and
laborious at first by the pressing in of vain thoughts; and a full hard task it
is for him that feels no grace, to be long meditating, waiting and watching in
his soul; and much will he be encumbered with running and roving thoughts, as
having gotten no sure hold of his heart; and therefore is the heart to be kept
unto God (in the light) with all diligence, for thereout come the issues of
life or of death; for there is the good or the evil treasure; and when well
kept, there springs up wise and clear thoughts, clean affections, fiery desires
to spititual employment, virtue and virtuous actions: but otherwise thereout
come the contrary, as evil thoughts, unclean desires and affections; for every
man's thoughts and meditations discover to him (that is of a heedful mind) what
he is; as that whereon he thinks and meditateth in, that he loves, so that
he loves is his God; and the more he loves God, the more he minds him, and
meditateth on him, and his motions; and the more is the soul alive, and active
to him, accounting it a shame to be fed with swines meat of fleshly things and
savours, wherein he feels no spiritual refreshment, or true joy of love and
delight. -- And therefore he ever sets his heart and mind spiritually upon
good, meditates on him, to know what he wills, and to please him, see him,
know him, have, love and enjoy him by his grace, and by degrees more and
better; and as the soul ever keeps to these desires, it will be showed plainly
(in the light) what is evil, and what good; what is pleasing to God, and what
is contrary to him, and teach him all needful things for salvation, gain them
for him, and bestow them on him: and therefore as there is a standing fast in
this watchful desire, victory will be given, so that the soul wait and meditate
meekly and patiently until Jesus Christ accept thereof, give spiritual savor,
and accomplish his own work therein with victory (as to other saints) in his
own time, and so as it may become that souls chiefest joy to know and do that
heavenly will, because of the true spiritual delight therein. -- But if man
should comply, and strive with his bodily wits and worldly wisdom, that will
but drive him farther off: -- and a wretched thing it is for any man to leave
the inward watch and keeping of his heart, and shape to himself any outward
form, figure, likeness or habit of virtue and holiness in meditation, prayer,
or other performance, to live in such a form of outward exercise, beholding,
joining with, or imitating others, and supposing himself right and righteous in
so doing; for thereby he departs from the light, guidance and government of
Gods blessed Spirit, and deceives himself by thinking he has acceptance with
God in his own doings; which so done, are directly against God, though they
might be right and acceptable in those that were led thereto by the Spirit of
God.

In this general calling of souls employment, nothing is rightly done but in
watching and prayer; nor any true watch kept, or prayer presented, but in the
light, and with a spiritual understanding, wherein virtue, wisdom and strength
comes to be received and rightly employed: but this consists not in learning to
say words, or know how many parts prayer has, or how to word it wisely for the
drawing of others affections, and so to make long prayers for pretense, or as
to be heard for much speaking in the way that man's wisdom teaches of bodily
exercise, (as did the Pharisees, whereof Christ warned his Disciples) and
lifting up themselves in their own strength for the applause of men, that they
may be reputed able Christians, of excellent parts, full of knowledge, better
then others, etc. By which means many are themselves deceived, by thinking they
have the grace of Christ, and spiritual knowledge; and thereupon do so worship
and please themselves in their hearts, as if they were the only men to pray,
praise, and give thanks to God for, with, and above others, while all is but
with their lips, vain words, and bodily wits, wherewith they only dishonor
God, and defile themselves and others, (that so join with them in words before
their hearts and souls are therein agreed) by stealing the thanks, praise and
worship from God to themselves: like the Pharisees that would presently be
thanking God in words, and judging others, without the fear of God, faith in
him, or any true love in feeling or affections, or desires, to know their own
hearts, and the iniquities thereof; much less that God (or others) should know
them, or they their duties to him. -- But these forward minds are far from any
sure savor of delight, or being in God; and therefore their prayers or praises
find no place with him, neither are they fair or seemly in the mouths of such
men where self is loved, and their minds employed to provide for the outward
man; and their pride is the greater that so move, while they keep no true watch
and guard over their thoughts, have no hold of their hearts, or stay of their
minds, but multiply words in a powerless way of man's wisdom, by imagining
evils, finding faults, accusing themselves and others, and asking sometimes
what they do not in truth desire, and often what they do not want, but to spend
upon their lusts; wherein the most are misled, (as their consciences witness)
being ignorant of the A ostles doctrine, fellowship and prayers, as they are of
the knowledge of God, and the Godhead in the manhood of Christ -- But that no
man may mistake my understanding in the commands of Christ Jesus my Lord, how
to pray, or my practice in obedience thereto, let every one turn in their minds
to his light, and there wait to know how he said, Enter into thy closet, and
shut thy door, (forget not that) and pray to thy Father in secret: So Christ
himself prayed in the mountain, in the garden, in the desert, alone from his
Disciples, and required them to watch and pray. -- And also appointed joint
praying, and said, Where two of you shall agree upon any thing to ask, it shall
be granted of my Father which is in heaven: but (said he) Use no vain
repetitions, as the heathen do. And again, Hitherto have you asked nothing in
my Name; ask, and you shall receive, that your joy may be full. -- And his
Disciples did afterward so ask in his Name, in faith and feeling, and that
without wavering, (as it is written) and prayed much, without ceasing, with all
manner of prayers and supplications in the Spirit, and with the Spirit and
understanding, not knowing what to ask but as the Spirit helped, and made
requests with sighs and groans not to be uttered; and so asking, they received,
whether privately alone, as Paul, when he felt the grace sufficient for him; or
as agreed in particular cases, as was that in choosing one in the room of Judas,
their praying together with one accord, their sitting so together waiting for
the gift of the holy Ghost, (while they had received but the first fruits of
the Spirit.) So likewise the Church prayed for Peter, and for others, on other
occasions; but still more and more in the pure power and fervent love, as they
received the more spiritual gifts of the holy Ghost. -- By all which it is most
evident, that the fire of that blessed Spirit of holiness at all times kindled
the sacrifice; and the praise was not of men, but of God. And thus they prayed
in Christ's Name, as they were made partakers of his divine Nature: But what
outward naming of Christ was there in all this? (which is a work that the rude
and un^^ly soul, the wild and worldly mind, knows nothing of:) Or what of set
times, places, or personal respects was used therein? though now men have
learned frequently to take the Name of God and Jesus Christ in vain into their
mouths, while they hate to be reformed, and neither know his Nature nor his
Name; and therefore so many (under pretense of prayers and praises to God)
stick not to scoft at the teachings of the holy Spirit, gift of the holy Ghost,
silent waitings upon God, watching, praying, new lights, etc. and so go on
blaspheming the Father of lights, and the holy Name by which his saints are
called, as things most contrary to their natures, and fleshly affections; and
therefore it highly concerns you every one to consider well with what you come
before the Lord, and to examine your selves whether you are in the faith,
whether Christ Jesus be in you, or you are reprobates. -- Now if Jesus Christ
be forming in you, then the body is daily dying; and if he be there formed, the
body is dead because of sin, and the Spirit alive for righteousness sake; and
then all sensible things of bodily wits, of imaginations, natural reason and
understanding are brought under the true light and heavenly Spirit, and yielded
up, so as to know and do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus; wherein I do not
mean only naming him, as his names are written in a Book, or on a Wall, or
spoken of by polluted Livs, -- but in the light, and by his Spirit, with the
thoughts and affections, naked, bare, and free from beholding bodily or earthly
things, as altered from fleshly likings and affections into spiritual savor,
sweetness and delight in his divine presence, wherein the Spirit of prayer is
freely given and felt, as a flaming desire in the heart to Jesus Christ, (the
mighty power, love and wisdom of God) by the heavenly touch of spiritual love,
which is neither bodily, nor can be bodily felt; only the soul that is wholly
devoted to God may and does feel it, but not with any bodily wit, wisdom or
skill, because it is not felt but in the spiritual desire of the soul that is
cleansed (or waiting to be cleansed) from all unrighteousness; and there it
does so warm, heat and quicken to watchfulness in prayer and obedience, that it
enliveneth the soul, and ravisheth it more and more with pure joy and
consolation in him; so that the thoughts are gathered in at all times to think,
speak and act soberly, sadly and seriously, and in prayer ever to express such
words as God (only by his Spirit) puts into the heart, (like an echo of
man's voice to his friend) which prayer is much alone, (as Christ's also was)
free from all lets and interruptions, and is the gift of the holy Ghost, and
lasts not very long at a time, (in the fervor of it) for that it is
laborious to the Spirit, though very pleasant through the passion of love
therein felt, truly tasted, and sweetly savoured, (not much unlike that of
Moses when he opened not his lips, or of Hannah when she did but move her lips)
which breaks down all lusts and likings of earthly things with so great
force, as that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence thereby, while the soul
is wounded with the sword of love, and thereby overcomes and obtains the
requests, in some sense as Jacob did; but the body then seems to fall down, and
may not bear it, because the working is of so great force, that the most
vicious and fleshly man on earth, (so touched) would be right sorrowful and sad
therewith for the time, and loath all his lusts and fleshly likings of earthly
things by him most delighted in before; as Jeremy said the love and feeling of
God was made as burning fire in his heart; and this is the holy Ghost and fire,
even the love of God in man, burning and wasting all other loves and likings in
man's soul, as a fire sticking in the bones, and filling all the powers of the
soul with grace and glorious sweetness, as marrow fills the bones; and yet not
without the wits, but within them; so full of might and power, (where it
works within) that if smites down into, and through all; and throws down the
body into quaking and trembling, for that it is so far unlike, and contrary to
the body, that the body cannot skill of it, nor bear it: as was in like manner
witnessed in Moses, David, Habakkuk, and others, and also in some of my dear
friends that are living witnesses thereof, (yet in the flesh) only our Lord
Jesus moderateth it, and tempereth it into a soft and sober sweetness, (by
abating the fervor and motion in time convenient) and administreth life and
peace as the soul becomes capable of it. -- So that the holy Spirit teaches
for what and how to pray, watch, meditate and move to please, God without any
man's teaching; and so our prayer is continual, without ceasing, and most and
best alone in the heart that is made pure and clean by the operation of the
holy Spirit, that teaches to do all things, and live ever in the love and
sweet presence of God, without any great letting of lusts, vanities, or other
tentations, as the soul becomes clean and purely devoted to him.

We read in holy Scriptures of the woman's lost Groat, the pearl and tre^sure
hid in the field, selling all, buying, etc. which certainly are matters of some
importance to man, because so significantly expressed by Jesus Christ of himself
and man's soul; as of lighting a candle, sweeping, searching, finding,
rejoicing, digging deep, selling all other merchandise, buying, etc. and
therefore it skills much to have this Candle lighted, whereby man's soul may see
this treasure in its self, and know the value of it, whereby it may be induced
to sell all for it; which may not be until it be known that it is lost, and
where, as in the inner part of man's own house: for as Jesus Christ was lost in
man's soul, so there he is to be found; -- what was lost there by Adam, is to be
found there in Christ Jesus, the pure pearl of high price, and primitive
perfection: but he may not be there found in naming of him by any his outward
names, nor as by faining his name, or any power in man's heart, by the labor of
his mind, or studying that name never so strongly or earnestly; for in this
manner do those that are far out of the way think to find him, and by so
seeking miss of him, as neither knowing his Voice, Name nor Nature; or taste
any savor of him, or see comeliness in him to desire him; but live without, as
strangers to him, (even without GOD in the world:) but he that comes to have an
inward sight of a little of that spiritual fairness and dignity which the
reasonable soul had of and in God at first, (that was lost in Adam) and is to
be had again by grace in Christ Jesus, as it shall be enlightened to see him
spiritually, and shall not hide that light (as under a bushel) by over-laying
it with earthly business or affections, but shall love it above all earthly
things, even as the soul is swept with the fear of God, washed with tears
within, etc. and so the groat, the pearl, the Kingdom of heaven, (that Christ
said is within) the heritage of heavenly love is found and repossessed in man's
soul; for it is not so easily found as many usually suppose; nor is it a work
of one day only, but attained by much waiting in the light, sweeping,
searching, watching, praying, and silent mourning before the Lord; and as the
heart and conscience becomes purified, then he shall find that homely and
peaceable presence of Jesus Christ (the pearl of great price) in the glimmering
shadow of pure shining brightness in his soul. -- But though Jesus Christ is so
hid in the soul, yet no man is any whit the better thereby that does not there
find him, and feel his operations spiritually, but remains (as it is written)
a reprobate, whatsoever he may be otherwise. -- And a great mercy it is to man
that this Jewel was lost where it may be found again by the light in the
scarching and watchful soul, where Jesus Christ full often calls and knocks
by his privy voice, stirring, reproving, and inviting the soul to a diligent
search, and withal to abandon other lovers, vanities and entanglements that
hinder the hearing of his voice; for (as it is said) this daughter must
consider and forget her own people, and her fathers house, (of worldly
thoughts, loves, cares and fears) which hinder the soul that it can neither see
him, nor hear him; and therefore all troublesome thoughts, restless noise and
imaginations are to be put away, as Hagar the bondwoman, that may not be heir
with the son of the free woman; for while the soul is in the bondage of
corruption, there is nothing within but black clouds, and spiritual blindness,
with fleshly thoughts and desires, crying against it in the dark conscience:
but as the inner eye of the soul is opened in the light which is of Jesus
Christ, (in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily) there is that
pure sight and sweet love of endless virtue and blessed rest, which is found
within the soul by the great and burning desires for him, whereby all other
loves and lovers are cast out, and not suffered to rest in the heart; which is
a right seeking for him, this hid Treasure. -- And as this stirring and waiting
in the light waxes firm, stable and unmovable, it will be helped and
comforted by inward and spiritual strength of love and sweet savor in the
soul, with light of continual springing faithfulness, and assured knowledge of
him, and the powers of the thoughts only upon him, and freed from every other
affection, to rest in the sweet anointing, which is the shadow and taste of
Jesus Christ; and the better any soul finds him, the more it will desire him in
cleanness of heart, and pureness of conscience, to meet him more singly in the
same way he appears, and wherein it has seen and found him at first, (and
other times since) most savourly. And though thou art altogether blind, and
see nothing rightly in thy self, or of the Godhead of Christ; yet consider
seriously what thou want, and what thou have lost; for thy soul can have no
true content, or sure satisfaction, but in God from whence it is; and if thy
heart say, I want, and would have Jesus Christ, and nothing but him only, wait
therein for him, (as not satisfied with that appearance) and follow him as he
leads thee, and more and more press forward to know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and fellowship of his sufferings, and to be made conformable to
his death, and so grow up in him, as he moves and grows in thee; and yet know
that when thou have found the most of him in the highest ravishments of spirit,
(as Peter and John in the mount, or as Paul mentioned) thou have not therein
fully attained to him as he is in his joy, for he is still above that any soul
feels, as the fountain of all joy and sweetness; but thou art ever to know
and feel a spiritual longing after him, and a loathing of all things else; and
then thou will find him more worth then all things, even then all visions and
revelations, (though not without visions and revelations) then all joy in
heaven and earth, if it might be had without him: for thou will then say in thy
soul, (as David) whom have I in heaven but thee? and I desire nothing in the
earth besides thee: as feeling and finding that his pure presence only gives
understanding to the simple, he teaches fools knowledge, whereat the Nations
are angry, the people and their teachers rage, and imagine a vain thing against
him and his holy One, as not willing to know him for fear of the Cross and the
shame, (which he despised for the joy set before him) and are therefore grieved
that any others should.

Conversion is properly a turning from evil to good, from lust to pure love,
which is God; and this conversion is ever accompanied with repentance from dead
works that are past, and out of that nature, love and liking, wherein they were
wrought, to serve the living and true God; and therefore it is not every
turning of man's body and mind from one outward form or practice to another, as
it were thereby to serve and worship God; for then the diverse Political
turnings of former and latter times, would be conversion to him; which he may
not so accept, because he changes not, but is the same at all times, even the
unerring Father of spirits, and so to be worshipped in spirit and in truth: and
these are outward turnings from one act of man's will to another, or from evil
to worse; as the Proselytes that the Pharisees made sevenfold worse then
before, whilst the ground of sin, with its branches, remain standing, uncut
down, or touched, from whence such traditional turnings arise, to oppose that
one truth and good way of the Lord wherein all obedient souls are made free
from such shifts and changes: but while men have either not know the fear of
the Lord, or are departed from it, left, and lost the power of godliness, and
simple truth in themselves, (so that their salt is without savor) their minds
run abroad, and their hearts are filled with fleshly desires, loves and fears,
wherein they labor night and day, to gain and keep the love and friendship of
this world, (which is enmity to God) with the profits and pleasures thereof,
and therein serve themselves, like the beasts that perish; and have their
hearts often filled with wrath and revenge, (like unreasonable beasts against
others of their own kind) when they are hindered of any their desired ends, and
likewise against such as so hinder them not therein, unless by standing in
their way, (as the Angel before Balaam) and so touching their more quick and
tender parts, and that only in love, to bring them back into the light and
fear of the Lord, that their blind and dead souls might be lighted and
enlivened to have regard to the honest principle of God in themselves and
others, that would rule all men according to right reason, and clear them of
their fleshly lusts that war against their souls, did they not disable
themselves thereto by withstanding it, and the checks thereof in their own
consciences, and by yiedling to the enemy of their souls to have dominion over
them, whereby the working of grace comes to be stopped, so that it may not enter,
shine, find room or rest in their souls, though it be truly tendered, and
there shows it self to discover things that differ, (as the Sun does outward
things where it is not let) but while the strong man thus armed keeps the
house, the things he possesses are in peace, the root, body and image of sin
stands, the false and misruled love lives, and the soul remains insensibly
wrapped up in stinking rags of sin and selfishness, where it feeds on nothing but
black smoke in thick darkness, and spiritual blindness, as a body of sin and
death, born about, and heavily loading the soul and conscience, that it cannot
comprehend the light, but every tentation (of the same nature with it) prevails
over it, and leads it captive more and more into a servile slavery and lustful
living in fleshly filth; for sin is not any corporeal thing, and therefore not
corporeally to be destroyed, striven about, or contended with, neither have men
any power of themselves to amend this in themselves, more then in others; and
therefore cannot but so remain, until their minds be truly turned into, and
surely kept in the pure light, which only can discover, and show them the
fairness or foulness of their souls, and the love of Jesus Christ, therein
giving power to take up and bear the cross within (in the powers of the soul)
and feel the two Laws warring against each other, (as Paul sometimes did) and
the innermost (of the Law of the spirit of life) striving for deliverance out
of captivity, and to gain victory over the Law of the flesh, earthly will, and
worldly wisdom that rests seated in the bodily wits; and as the reasonable soul
comes to take part with, and thereby wait in the pure principle of light and
spiritual leading, to have some sight of it self, and somewhat of the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge that are in Christ Jesus, (as his free gift to all
obedient souls) thereby the soul begins to see somewhat of it self, and how
highly it is concerned to keep a constant inward watch, labor and strive (by
the measure of light and life (so in wardly received) to keep the thoughts from
all bodily things, until the sore pain and miserable blindeness of that
condition (as Paul when he cried out, O wretched man that I am!) be found and
felt, and then will the Lord Jesus appear as the pain of this dark soul and
conscience; wherein is to be a free suffering, with a patient waiting and
abiding with him (in his love and meekness) until he shall please to raise the
so^l up, and cause the light to shine out of, and over this darkness, as the
day star arising in the heart, to give another life, whereby to overlive all
the former dead and dark life, and then to think no more on that darkness past,
(as a woman forgets her pain and peril, for joy that a man is born:) loathe and
despise it; but be ever ready and quick in keeping the heart, and taking heed
that no open door nor privy hole, be left to imaginations, wisdom of words, or
earthly vanities, that would draw out the soul from the love of God; ever
minding, that as we have born the ugly image of the earthly, so it is requisite
that we bear the image of the heavenly; and as our Lord Jesus breaks down this
earthly image of false love and likings, he sets up the contrary virtues of
pure love, meekness, patience, and brotherly kindeness, of his own forming, in
the poverty of such spirits; and also gives true zeal in spiritual devotion,
with soberness and chastity in soul and body; and so puts down the old man,
with his deeds, rotten desires, and affections, and there sets up the new man
of a meek and chaste spirit, (created in him to good works, to walk therein)
with all his parts and members fitly composed together for his service and
glory; wherein the old members, eye, ear, heart, affections, imaginations, or
desires, will not serve the turn; but all the whole vessel must be new, to hold
the new wine and heavenly liquor of the blessed and endless life, and thereby
be freed from fleshly uses, vain thoughts, light looks, unsavory words, carnal
reasonings, and heeding the praise or dispraise of men, and men's judgments;
but surmounting and over-topping all lets and impediments in the way of this
perfect freedom, and lightsome liberty in the Lords service, as guided and
strengthened therein by his holy Spirit, as it turns the reason into that pure
light, and the will into the eternal will, which is a great work, and therefore
to be well waited in until there be no sin charged or felt as a load on the
conscience, but all freely pardoned, (as it is discovered to the soul) and
clean wiped away, and so the soul reformed by the siritual light, and bright
beams of Jesus Christ, (let into it) as burning desires, clean affections, holy
and wise thoughts and considerations, and therewith abilities to flee all
deadly stirrings in this travel of soul from the first old Adam to the second,
that makes all things new. -- And though men should otherwise cease to meddle
with worldly business, avoid outward delights and pleasures, and devote
themselves to pray, read, study, learn and confer of heavenly matters; sigh,
weep, or do any other act outwardly, or otherwise; yet if he love himself, mind
or carefully heed providing for the flesh, or outward man, or have any other
earthly fears, cares, or immoderate desires; this will not do it; but the
greater is the deceit, by such forsakings and actings, in his becoming affected
with himself, as if better then others; or in slighting others, by terms or
titles of distinction, (whereby he is so much the worse, and more disabled to
good:) or if he suffer his heart (at all) to rest in bodily feelings of
spiritual comforts or sweetness, or set his heart on any such fleshly savours;
he thereby loses that life he seems to seek for, because not rooted and
grounded in love; but the fleshly part gains ground again, in the earthly dark
and dead nature; and then is the law of sin served for the time: but yet if
there be no wilful sin, or liking thereto, it is not he, but sin that stirs
in him, which he consents not to: And thus have many been troubled and
overlaid for a time with weight upon their weaker parts, that they have not had
(for that time) any clear sight, or freedom in themselves, but sat sadly
without any knowledge of their own conditions, or abilities to move one step
forward, because sin got so great a hold (or as a lodging) in their fleshly
parts, that it troubled the Reason, and sometimes so far prevailed, as to
occupy the affections of the soul, while the Spirit as a law within, was
laboring for deliverance, until the Lord Jesus pleased to prepare the soul,
and break into it by his blessed presence, and give it feeling of pure love;
and so stretch the heart forward, to fathom and follow what is before; for
behind are all bodily things, thoughts, desires, fears, and such like, that
hinder the comfort in, and speed of, the whole work: for nothing is to be kept
from the slaughter, that is for destruction; no mean in destroying sin, though
a right hand or eye, they must away, and give place to the divine work of the
Spirit in the light, which is before; as the spiritual virtues beg^n in the
Reason of the willing soul, and to be perfected in love, as it comes to be
reformed into the grace of Christ, to a perfect hatred of the deeds of the
flesh, and all wavering mindedness, and want of love; for otherwise he hinders
the work through his own w^lfulness, and choice, in the contrary nature; which
will cause all to be to little purpose, troublesome, and heavy, as a working in
the fire, (if not thereby destroyed) because of his not feeling any grace, or
spiritual savor therein.

The ways, wiles and d^vices of the evil one, to deceive and devour souls, are
such, and so diverse, (in these later days) that the ignorant and unskilful
souls, may not easily escape, because he takes all advantages, by the times,
temptations, bodily wits, and faculties of such dark souls, to lead them into
self-love, and the sundry kinds of lustful living, in the vanities of their
minds, wantonness and pleasure, upon the earth, (as fitting themselves for a
day of slaughter) and so keeps them (while he may) in presumption, etc. but if
once he see any soul would entirely give themselves to be spiritually employed,
then he striveth (by himself and his ministers) to set their sins in order
before them, and tells them they are great sinn^rs, and more in this change and
turning then in any thing before, saying to them, That is not the way, but a
denial of Christ, a fancy, and frenzy, of a Fanatic spirit, and for some
wicked end; and that it will bring them into contempt, want and poverty,
wherein none will pity them: that they must change their conditions with their
minds, wives and children come to want: that they will fall into bod^ly
sickness, and be laid in prisons: that they should have learned men to advise
them better, the Ministers to admonish them, and pray for them: to take counsel
at the Priests lips, which preserve knowledge; and not run of their own heads,
with a few giddy, contemptible people, that are ignorant of the Scriptures, and
Original tongues: and if they depart not from their new way, greater
temptations will overtake them. And with much more of this kind, does this
flattering devil seek to beguile such souls as hearken to him, by the cunning
craftiness of such as lie in wait to deceive, and that entangle with enticing
words of man's wisdom, to beguile their souls, with bodily savours, sweetness of
wits, arts, and outward exercises, and thereby (if possible) draw them aside
from the simplicity, and puff them up with conceit of themselves; as if they
had by such wisdom (and the ways thereof) formerly found the feeling of
heavenly joy; and so lead them back again, and up into high notions and
conceits of a proud mind; until they become base and blockish, and thereby
fall full low at last, with their cold, dry and barren souls: for the more
they imagine to gain by such means, the greater will be their loss, and they
the farther off from what they so seem to seek, and much more indisposed to
return into the right way of obtaining it; for thereby the mind will be often,
and highly lifted up, as if it were in a happy estate and condition, more
holy, virtuous, and better then others; and to rejoice, as if they had escaped
a very great temptation; and to conceive angry stirrings in themselves, when
others seem not so to esteem of them: and the flattering spirits will suddenly
praise and applaud such, as for good deeds, and virtuous living; and this last
is the sorest and greatest of all temptations, and most dangerous, because of
the delight men will seem to feel about them, by such sounds to the ear, and
sweet savor of sense, tickling them with delight therein; as if all were well,
and they had much grace, and were rightly traveling, with their minds from
fleshly things, while they are only ravished with spiritual pride, wherein the
vain love, and self-conceit, prays, weepeth, speaks and thanketh God, (with
the Pharisee) while they know not God; but their proud hearts deceive them, and
lead them to show outward love and meekness in speech and gesture, as if they
were spiritually virtuous, and that they disliked nothing but sin, only
because it is contrary to God; and yet are even then at the gate of spiritual
death, so puffed up with pride and pleasure therein, as that they are even dead
while they live, or rather twice dead, and plucked up the roots; become servants
to men and times, mistaking one thing for another, with their fleshly hearts
got aloft, and puffed up, resting in the root and rottenness of sin, black and
thick darkness, filling their souls; which may be hid from some men, yet Christ
Jesus sees it, and abhors it and their services, because of their hypocrisy
and heresy, so accompanied with bodily and spiritual pride, (which was never
learned of Christ) as their God; for man makes any thing his God that his
heart is in love with; that he takes content in, dares sin against God for, or
wrong any man by; and so such men have their diverse kinds of Idol-gods; one his
belly, another the applause of men; a third his opinions and words, heard or
spoken, (wherein such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own lustful minds)
and every other thing that a man chooses by his own act, to take pleasure in,
is his God; and then when God stirs up such souls to obedience, and gives them
suitable abilities, these proud hearts resist all, and in stead of obedience,
become rebellious, heady, harsh, and high-minded, abusing the tender mercies of
the Lord God, in the light of his spiritual leadings to repentance: and this
condition is (as aforesaid) the more desperate, because therein such conclude
that all is well, and sound, and that they are right, sure, and righteous,
(even above any ordinary Pharisee) and so arrogate to themselves. And therefore
hear and consider, thou that think thou stand, that supposest thou art
raised from death to life, have tasted of the good word of God, and born (it
may be) some afflictions; and take heed of this false liberty, for then will
Satan try and winnow thee, and be teaching thee, as aforesaid; or as sometime
he would have done Jesus Christ, to cast himself down, to turn stones into
bread, etc. And full many have so fallen by his means into this high spiritual
pride, and thought that therein they have done God service; and unless the soul
be rooted and grounded in love, and so in meekness, (with a spiritual feeling
of Jesus Christ as God equal with the Father) it will be apt to yield to such
transformings, and to ask (as the Disciples sometimes did) who shall be
greatest? and so may soon depart from the simple and pure life, and loose their
hold of that which leads the humble and meek to perfection: and therefore what
great care, waiting and diligence; yea, what faithfulness is requisite in
keeping in the light that will let men see the deceit, and lead them in the way
to escape the evil thereof? for (as we read) the Lord Jesus was tempted, but
was not overcome, because the Devil found nothing in him whereto he might
fasten the temptation. -- And this is of experience and advisement to all
willing souls, that when tentations come, and move to fleshly love and likings
of earthly things, heed them not, consider them not, whether it concern outward
profit or loss, scorning or despising, frowning or flattering; for if the Devil
(by himself or means of his instruments) prevail with thee to consider it, thou
art then (thereby) more then half overcome, because the same nature in thee
will be apt to join with it; and the great danger is, lest thou should like
it, or be afraid of it, and so be overcome by it. -- Therefore keep within, in
the light, that thou may be able to say to thy self, (in that case) I have
chosen my way, my part, my portion is in Christ Jesus; him I love, in him I
have righteousness and strength, in him I rejoice and enjoy all things; and
nothing will I have out of him, for he accepts me as worthy to love him, etc.
and be sure to be bold and clear therein, and then shall thou find thine
enemies less bold against thee; for truth never suffers more than when it is
coldly and faintly owned. -- Though these enemies will be still striving
against thee, and telling thee of dangers, and perilous things to befall thee in
that way, and set themselves to hinder thee by slanders and reproaches of all
kinds, stri^^ thee of thy reputation, and strive to drive thee aside into
anger, and words of reb^ke, that they may have whereof to accuse thee:
therefore take h^ed thereof, and keep thy tongue as with a bit and bridle; and
as thou com^st to know Jesus Christ spiritually, thou will also come to a
hearty love, in being despised, sputned at, trampled upon, and abused; and if
there shall happen to be some inward regret, or rising against it, the light
will show thee the evil of it, and the spirit of love will suppress it, and
give victory over it; and (as thou attendest faithfully) thou will find and
know, that God forsakes no man, in such tentations, unless it shall be to
increase their spiritual strength, (if they suffer a while patiently, and not
turn to folly) that they may find Jesus Christ, the sweet and ready way, full
of spiritual refreshments and comforts; and themselves poor, blind and naked
without him, and to have nothing b^t what he gives, and herein suffer much
buffeting of Satan and his ministers, witho^t heeding, or rather with despising
such tentations, setting them at naught, etc. But if any shall strive with his
thoughts and bodi^y wits to drive away tentations, and put them out as by
mastery, thereby will the enemy get advantage and overcome: and therefore (as
before, so I say again) ever withdraw thy thoughts from the tentations into the
light of Jesus Christ, where the striving and life of strength lies, and wait
on him for deliverance and victory. -- And also beware thou never show such
temptations to any worldly men (though reputed never so wise, learned or
religious) that have not felt the like trials in themselves, for they will
certainly bring thy soul into greater danger by their worldly advice to thy
fleshly feeling. -- And this also know, that the Lord is pleased to leave the
soul, so sometimes (for its trial a little season) that in mercy he may gather
it more cleanly into himself, to grow and spring up as a morning star; and
deliverance he will surely give (in the needful time) to all his members, that
they may trust in him more fully; and then he gladdeth them with his presence,
and fasteneth them to himself; showing them his secrets, and giving them
treasures of wisdom and knowledge: He brings in light, and expels darkness;
opens the eye of the soul, and lights it to see how good it was for it to be
so troubled: the like whereof David witnessed, and thereby learned the Lords
righteous judgments.

I shall here say little of the Faith that stands in the wisdom of men, (though
that be most in use and esteem with the worldly wise men of this generation)
because it is of mentioned in other places as the great Engine of deceit,
serving to silence the voice of Christ in their own and others consciences, and
for other earthly ends, and to lead them into perilous paths of sin and
selfishness, from the pure and spiritual path of Jesus Christ, the endless
light, love, wisdom and power of God, whereby man's conversion is hindered, and
the way thereto, as it were (thereby) blockt up; for in man's conversion, before
reason be turned into light, and will into love, and the soul comes into a
waiting condition for cleansing, it usually feels its self heavy laden, d^ll,
and indisposed thereto, by reason of such obstructions as thereby (and
otherwise also) lie in the way: yet as Jesus Christ moves and desires, so is
he therein covertly desired; and thereupon he f^rther moves to work his secret
work in man, as in a reasonable instrument, that by degrees may have faith
wrought in him, with knowledge of Christ Jesus, and his spiritual presence,
light and truth; and for that end, that so I begins to wait upon him at all
times diligently with the whole heart, until he give words whereby to pray, and
do fitly order the affections to that contin^al duty, without using words
otherwise heard, lest vanity of mind and spiritual enemies enter and blind the
eyes, and hinder the soul from chasing the love of God in Christ Jesus, whereby
the heart should be cleansed and established to feel and find how fair and
profitable his work will be in and to the soul, as it comes to know the two
days or lights, the false light and true light, the love of this world and
fleshly things, and the pure love of Jesus Christ, through grace establishing
the soul, with the real difference between them, and begins to feel some
increasing knowledge in the true light; to feel the false light, worldly love,
and lustful pleasures seem l^ttle, and pass away as a shadow; which is the
light that the Devil brought in by Eve and Adam, saying, they should be as gods
knowing good and evil; whereby the inner eye of Adams soul was shut, and the
spiritual light then over-laid, as withdrawn from his soul, and the outward eye
of fleshly love and worldly liking was opened in him, with which he did not s^e
before, nor know that new day of evil and darkness, wherein he afterward, and
all his posterity, (in that nature) now rejoice, and take their pastime; and
yet, but as in vain shows, unskilful heaviness of heart, with fleshly
angeriness, fears and dreads; and this before the eye of man's understanding be
opened, so as to discern spiritual things, or to understand Scriptures; and no
doubt but these are well known unto many, who have also in prayer and otherwise
felt and tasted the sweetness of the spiritual work, so as to have thought
nothing so pleasing as it, and have not known what it was that they so
delighted in, but it was indeed the gift of God in the light, to be waited on
as it begets devotion, contrition, many sweet tears, burning desires and
mournings for sin, to scowre and cleanse the heart, and mould it into a
wonderful sweetness of a ready mind to fulfill the will of God, and to trust him
without questioning what shall become of the outward man, or other like
relations, so as the will of the Lord were done in him and by him. But some
that so obtained to this first gift of God in light, that would have wrought
them into a like condition and resolution, (had he been attended upon therein)
have departed from it, as many did that followed Christ, (for a time) which
caused him to say to Peter and the rest, Will ye go away also? but if such
inward feeling as this, bring with it true and pure love, then it may not be so
lost, though sloth may cause it to seem hid or clouded for a time, and
especially in case the mind so moved shall turn out (by consent) into the
visible things, and thereupon the evil one catch it, and transform it into an
angel of light; and then that soul is not able to see clearly within it self
who is working there, (much less afar off) though he have a kind of outward
feeling, but no stability of soul, or inward certainty, but all sounds and
favors, any way satisfying the senses, draw out the mind from Jesus Christ,
the true light, so that it cannot then come to see and behold him spirituasly,
and love him perfectly, as leading into heavenly thoughts and desires, and to a
loathing of self and all earthly delights; and then (by reason of such lazy
and lustful desires) the steadfast minding of JESUS is neglected, and the
intended knot of union (then in knitting) becomes loose, and unties for the
time. -- But of this be sure, that what spiritual feeling, revelation or
manifestation knits that knot of love and devotion to Jesus Christ, and opens
the eye of the soul to a more clear and spiritual knowing of him, also begets
meekness, and love, and settledness in the soul, and casts man down by reason
of his unworthiness and unprofitableness toward God and man, as a wretch and
outcast of men, unmeet to live amongst them, by reason of his beastly, lewd,
fleshly and blind mind, ignorant of spiritual things, and of his own soul, not
knowing Jesus Christ, nor any of his spiritual workings or worship; for that
none worship him truly, but in the spiritual revelation and feeling of
himself: for it is by meekness of love that a man is kept single to God, and
free from harshly beholding other men's deeds, (unskilfully done) and looking on
others evil actions irregularly, or otherwise then as matters of mourning and
cautions to himself and them; and if he reprove them, to do it in love soberly
and secretly, and to look on God and on himself as if there were no other man
in the world, and himself most wretched and vile; and teaches him ever to
watch diligently, lest sin get entrance into his soul; to judge or condemn no
man hastily, but say always to himself, What have I been? what am I? what has
God done for me? what have I done against him, and what for him? thereby to
come and see his own state and station; and as the Lord gives him grace, to
wait in that his own measure of the gift, and never fain to have more then he
has in faith and feeling, or act otherwise then he has received grace, and
keeps to that; (though it be never so little) and moves not our of that so
received, or to do any thing because another did or does it, for that cannot be
of faith, but will run a man out of breath, and become sin to his soul. -- And
know for certain, that he who waits meekly, and acts according to his
measure of grace received, until more be given by the pure motion and
revelation of Jesus Christ, and yet ever desires more, most and best, (but
works only according to what he has) shall be sure (in due time) to have a
suitable supply. And thus ought every man to enter particularly into his own
soul, to know it, and the strength thereof, with its fairness or foulness; to
see its dignity at first, and wretchedness by sin since, with the laboring in
the soul against the ground of all sin, (little and much) which ground is only
the false misruled love of man's heart to himself, from which at first sin had
its beginning in him; and until this fallow-ground be plainly plowed up, and
all fleshly and worldly loves, hopes, desires and fears be removed, the soul
can never see and feel the pure burning spiritual love of Jesus Christ, nor
enjoy his presence in the soul, or discern spiritual things by the light of
understanding; (which is not right until wrought into the fear of God) for
thereby is the mind and heart drawn out to all sinful likings; by man's own
understanding to rest in all beastly love, earthly thoughts, and fleshly
things; and therefore it is (at first) so laborious to love Jesus Christ truly
and spiritually, and may not be while his love is not felt therein, because
that must teach him to hate his fleshly life, father and mother, (as Christ
said) and take up the cross quietly, and follow Christ, (as before is said) to
the mortifying of his members that are earthly, even every unclean lust, and
unskilful love of himself, and see the ground of sin broken within, and by
degrees the body thereof destroyed, as there shall be a loathing and despising
of it in the heart, and of all the beauty, liking and fairness of this present
world, as a stinking Carrion; laboring night and day to war spiritually
against it, and all its enticements, as the spiritual eye shall be opened, for
otherwise none can see it, much less war against its enterprises.

As Adam by his sin saw and felt the new light of fleshly love and likings of
this world, (which in his innocence he saw not) in the new and evil day that
Job cursed, (being the concupiscence which the Devil and man made) might
perish, and be no more: -- for the everlasting love of God in Jesus Christ, is
the true light and blessed day, (love and light being of and in him) in whose
light the children of the day see light, and greatly rejoice. But they that
truly seek him, must be content to abide a while in the darkness, for the
darkness was before the light, and the evening and morning were the first day;
and man may not suddenly come from the dark day, (which is the love of himself
and this world) into the perfect love of God in and to his soul, and to see and
feel spiritual things, gaining victory in his thoughts to bring all into
obedience; because it is first night or darkness with him, wherein the love of
this world is shut out, and the day springs from on high, and visits; and as
the soul becomes quiet and still, the light breaks forth more and more unto the
perfect day, as he becomes wholly acquitted of his sin, and the favor of it.
-- But as there is a passing to this light through the evil day or night of
darkness, (wherein is no pleasure, but sorrow and sighing, doubts and deadness
of soul) there is a blind longing after, and thinking on Jesus Christ, how good
and blessed he is, with desires to feel his love, and be lighted with his
presence, (as David sought God in the night) to be hid (though in pain) from
beholding the world, and its false likenesses, (which so well please those that
are blind in spiritual things) and dwell quietly in this darkness, (wherein
Satan comes with his likenesses and light, under color of true light) until
the light of love (by little and little) break forth to him (so dwelling in the
shadow of death) and shine through the darkness and death, etc. for there are
many that would seem to forsake the love of the world, and also would come to
the love of God, and his light, to understand him: but through this darkness
they will not come to know themselves what they have been, and are in their
sinfulness against God, to enter into themselves, and view all things there,
with all wicked stirrings and risings in their hearts of pride, envy, anger,
and other evils, and to wait desiring in the still silence, and spiritual
watchfulness to Jesus Christ, (as his Saints ever did) but so soon as (in their
own wills) they seem to have forsaken the world outwardly, they presently think
themselves holy, and full fit for spiritual understanding, and heavenly
mysteries; and that they love God perfectly, and have received grace through
the special gift of the holy Ghost; for they are stirred and seem to feel
knowledge, as it were then given to them, without great study beforehand, and
a hear of desire therewith to preach forth truth and righteousness, and will
run into words thereof as with great forwardness and zeal, etc. And this they
hold for the grace of God, and visitation of his blessed light, before their
souls pass through this darkness: -- though this light of knowledge, and heat
of desire, they feel, comes not of the true love of Jesus Christ, but from the
Devil, and his transformings, as being only a fained light, and likeness of
the true light, and Son of God; whereby cunningly he leads blind souls into a
presuming of being themselves righteous, and abusing others, (as the Pharis^es
did) and so have no light of grace to them given by the holy Ghost: for though
the knowledge they have were in it self outwardly true, yet by the Devil and
man's own wit, it makes only a fained light of true things, but not the light
of the true Son, nor approved of by his pure light in their Consciences; and
such men are so blind by these fained lies, and puffed up with spiritual pride,
that they see it not, nor are willing to consider it; but highten their hearts
against the true light, surposing the feeling in their own wills is perfect
freedom of spirit; and so like clouds without rain, (tossed to and fro) bring
forth one device, e^rour and heresy after another, which are known by their
wild minds exercised in covetousnesaid) this wiss;s, much vanity, talking,
disputing, contending about words, railing and reviling others, and perfecuting
them; and yet will not be ashamed to say, They do all this in charity, and zeal
for righteousness. -- But (as James said) this wisdom is not from above, but is
earthly, sensual and devilish: and therefore this cunning (that brings forth
such Saints) is not of the God of peace, and Father of lights, (with whom is no
variableness, or evil speaking) but such as Jesus Christ used not, nor allowed
in his Disciples; but to do all in his spiritual light, and faith in him, which
is a mystery held in a pure Conscience, in the love and meekness of Christ
Jesus: for it is the fire of love that goes before him, to consume the enmity
and evil works, etc. whereof such are ignorant as have not been smitten down
from their height and haughtiness into the lowest degree of meekness, and there
purged from all spiritual filthiness; without which they cannot endure the
bright shining of spiritual light, the precious liquor of the love of Jesus
Christ, because not purified in the heavenly furnace, to receive the gracious
light of heavenly knowledge and perfect love, which is the true Son of
rightcousaess, (with healing under his wings) and he that thereby reforms in
feeling, through the dear light that springs forth, and arises after this
darkness, which is not well known but to the soul that travelleth in darkness,
and cries after light, to show it the right way, and comfort it in travel
therethrough: for after true darkness, where one firmly sets himself to forsake
the love of this world, and through grace come to a feeling and knowing of
himself, and keeps meekness therein, he may not be destroyed by errors or
fancies; for the feeling of grace in that meek darkness, teaches the soul to
be faithful, and watchful against the enemies motions, and subtle slights. --
And it may so be, (and often is) that some have these workings, and firm desires
in them, and yet remain doubtful thereof what the issue may be; but such (as
they know it begets love and meekness) are to keep it tenderly, and pursue it
fervently, that no creature hinder it: for this grace will ever be free from
sin, and worldly business that hinders it; which cannot be, until he be
thoroughly dead to the world, poor inward and outward, and have fully forsaken
the love of it, without any worldly cunning, covering or device, whereby to be
esteemed above others; but rather despised of the world, and all worldly men;
sets not his heart upon his own deeds or virtues, nor loves nor allows any
heart-risings against others for any matter or cause whatsoever: -- so that he
does not disease, nor anger any man willingly in word or deed, nor pats any
trust in worldly goods or friends: -- for otherwise he cannot be free to wait
on Jesus Christ as he ought; for so long as love to any creature or lustful
desire carries the mind out from Jesus Christ, (his true light within) he
cannot die to the world, nor come into this darkness of knowing himself, and be
crucified to the world, as not desiring it, nor accepting it. -- And for this
forsaking, (said Jesus Christ) he shall have a hundred fold, even the profit of
this darkness, be hid (through grace) from worldly goods, that he seek them not
earnestly, is not let by them, loves them not, looks not after them; and
therefore has an hundred fold more then any King, or rich man of the earth,
that takes care to keep that he has, and yet covets more; for he that coveteth
Jesus Christ, and him only, he has more rest of heart and conscience, true
love and delight in his soul, in one hour, then he that loves the things of
this world, has, or can have, in all his lifetime: and this darkness is but
as midday, when the Sun shines out of the darkness, and Jesus Christ gives
rest to his beloved, that stands firm in his couns^l, and doubts not, nor
is afraid for any evil tidings, because his heart is sined; and is well
assured, that the light of knowledge, and feeling of spiritual love, is in
Christ Jesus, of him, and for him; and that the darkiness in forsaking of
worldly love, is by his forming, and reformming the soul only to and for
himself; and that he reformeth us, in us, and not without us; for grace is
inwardly given at first, and so wrought by degrees as man applies his heart
thereto. As first, Jesus Christ by his light and Spirit calls from worldly
vanities, and that then brings great sweerness, and joy with it: but if left,
and not seconded, it stays there but for a little season, though the
remembrance thereof abides; and after that, the time of reforming and setting
the soul at rights, is with much labor and watching; for when the mind is set
against all sin within and without, and the desire wholly on the love of Jesus
Christ, wherein there will be felt many lets, (from within, in his own will,
and without from his enemies by temptations) and his great torment that he has
lived so long in, the false love of the world; and this will stick close to
him, until he pass through spiritual tribulation, and be purified through
fears, doubts and perplexities, that he will be near unto despair, and wholly
left unto the enemy, save only that the Lord Jesus privately loves him; and
such a soul has also private trust in his mercy: and go he never so far, he
shall not fall, because he is born up from despair, though with great inward
pain; so that he sometimes knows not whence it comes; and yet then that soul
would not for all the world be blinded with the false love, as before it was;
for that were hell to such a soul: and this the Lord Jesus does in pure love,
and for great profit to that soul, to drive out sensuality, that it might
receive spiritual light. And when the soul is reformed in feeling, and freely
accepts the gift of perfect cleansing, (to enter into the rest, and cease
from his own works, as God did from his) then is Jesus Christ more sweetly
familiar with the soul, (that is so brought through the fire of afflictions
into true peace) and in this working, some souls have great devotion in prayer,
and main touchings of spiritual light in understanding; and others of
comfortable heat, and great sweetness, (and never come fully to this restful
darkness) with a present fervent desire of lasting love, and longing after God:
but these inward feelings (where they stand in compunction, and sorrow for sin,
or of devotion, or outward imagination) are not the feelings that the soul
shall have, and feel in the gracious habitation with God spiritually, (while in
this life, or body of flesh) though they may be gracious gifts of God, and not
to be abused or neglected, although the soul that feels them is not yet
reformed in feeling; for it has not yet received the gift of perfect and
spiritual burning love to Jesus Christ, as they may come to, if they be
faithful in it; and yet they may feel more of the love of God then others,
(that have that gift in the way toward perfect feeling) in as much as the
feeling shows more outwardly by their fervor in bodily tokens, as in
weeping, praying, speaking, and other bodily stirrings and strivings, that some
others would think them ravished with love, etc. Yet still consider, that these
stirrings and strivings are of God, to stay them from the worldly love, and
lusts of the flesh, that have so long been rooted in their hearts; from which
(worldly love) they may not be drawn out by such feeble stirrings of great
fervor, and outward strength, which is no true token of much love, but of
weakness, and little love in their souls, that cannot bear a little touching of
God; for it is yet fleshly, and fastened thereto, and not mortified there from
by the work of the Spirit of God. -- For the touch seems so quick, and also
delectable over all things felt before in fleshly love of earthly things, that
it is over-taken with it, for that it is so new, sudden and strange, that the
body cannot well bear it, but breaks out into weepings, bodily stirrings, and
other actions; as Christ said, the old bottles would break, and not hold the
new wine, but that God keeps it whole, in mercy lets it break out into
tears, and words, through weakness and feebleness of soul, and not because of
much love, (as some may suppose) but afterward, when (through love) the
uncleanness is melted out of the soul, by such fervor, then is the love clear,
and stands still; and then perfect love casts out fear; then is the soul in
peace, and much more in love then before, though it show less outward; for it
is now all whole, at rest within, and little appearing outwardly. -- For in the
first state, such feelings come to the soul suddenly, before it be well aware;
and as it comes before the soul knows it, so it often returns or departs
without its knowledge; neither can the soul tell how to come to that state
again, no know where to find it; for the thought are not yet kept within in the
light, with a firm longing desire to Jesus Christ, nor the eye of the soul kept
open, and near to the spiritual beholding of heavenly things; and so the heart
is not sixed: and then what weakness and unsuitableness is in all, without
stedfasness, firm faith, and full intent to God; to know his secrets, and obey
his will? -- And it is always to be diligently minded, that there are two
manner of feelings; the one inward, according to man's bodily wit and skill; and
the other more inward, or within that, being of spiritual light, wisdom and
skill, which the holy Ghost teaches, and planteth in the powers of the soul.
-- So there is a meekness that is gained, by the working of reason, in fleshly
feeling; and another that is deeply felt in the soul, and is the free and
spiritual gift of love: and it is a full hard thing, and a great mystery to him
that stands in the working of his own reason, to keep constant rest and
softness in his heart, and charity to love men, when they despise him; without
resisting or repining thereat, etc. Both these are of love, but the first
works by the reason of the soul, the second works by the holy Spirit in the
soul; and so the first is imperfect, the second perfect: The first, meekness, a
man feels in beholding his sin and wretchedness, and judging himself unworthy
of any mercy, or good thing at the hand of God, and (as the worst of creatures)
worthy of all sufferings, and thus thrusts himself down under all others, and
grieveth in his heart, when he is overcome by any temptation; confesses,
accuses himself, and asks forgiveness, etc. But this is not perfect
meekness, for it comes of beginning to profit in grace, caused by beholding of
sins; and this is the meekness that love works by the reason of the soul. --
But perfect meekness the soul feels of the sight, and spiritual knowledge of
Jesus Christ, seeing him to be all, and do all in the soul, and for it, and
has so great love and joy in that spiritual sight, that it forgets it self,
(after a sort) and leans to Jesus Christ with all the love it has to behold
him, and heeds not any unworthiness or sins before done, but sets it self
with all sins past, and good deeds also, at naught, as unworthy to be
remembered; and judges no particular soul, (neither better nor worse them
himself) but loves and helps the good in all, and every man therein; and
slighteth and despises all the joy and worship of this world, as seeing it so
little and naught, in regard of the joy and love the soul feels in the
spiritual sight of Jesus Christ, and knowledge of his purity and holiness, that
though he might have all worldly joy, and worship without sin, yet he would not
meddle with it. The world has no savor in this meekness, but is exceeding far
from it. It is the lover of Jesus Christ only that has this meekness abiding
in him with liking and gladness, and that without any heaviness, or stirring
for it -- But the world has a proud meekness, belonging to an hypocrite,
(without this joy or gladness by the gift of the holy Ghost) and do heed the
praises of men, as also fear their dispraises, taking pleasure or displeasure
thereat in themselves: and it is like this was the snare that David prayed to
have his heart plucked out of. -- And many that yet love the praise of men more
then God or his praise, do bestir themselves, travel and labor, with their
wills, wits and affections, and so think on God, Christ, and outward exercises,
as it were by their strength to draw out of themselves a feeling of the love of
God in Christ, even by bodily force and mastery, if that were possible. But
these love not spiritually, nor is this a kindly or gracious work of love, but
a kind of maddoing of the soul at Reasons bidding; which (without meekness, and
forsaking the love of earthly things) is very dangerous to beget spiritual
pride, which otherwise done in meekness of love, and a loathing of all earthly
affections, may find favor with the Lord, and be by him changed from man's own
works into spiritual workings: for as man cannot think a good thought of
himself, so he ought to forbear his own thinkings, words and works, as not
good, and therefore can find no acceptance with God; and wait with patience for
the Lords working in him, to will and to do, of his good pleasure; all other
workings being to the soul's greater sufferings, and loss: as the Prophet said,
The kindling of fires with man's own sparks, causes the foul to lie down in
sorrow. -- In such an imperfect Lover, Love works freely by the affections of
man; but in perfect Lovers, Love works within, in the light, by spiritual
affections, killing all other affections in the soul, and that both kindly and
quietly: -- but man not knowing this work of the holy Spirit, will not believe
how the virtues of Meekness, Soberness, Chastity, Love and Cleanness, is
wrought so quietly and surely, without travel or painful labor of the body,
and bodily wits; and therefore they labor and toil day after day, with their
Reasons, and outward exercises, in their own strength, to get virtues, and make
love by words, and other stirrings; and what they seem so to get, they have
much more ado to keep, with all their fightings against sin, contendings for
grace, and wranglings about it; and therefore are like Wrastlers, sometimes
above, and soon again underneath; up and down, in and out, off and on, getting
and losing, and so weary their wits, and tire themselves; because all this
striving is in their own reason, might, and strength of self-will, as fightings
with themselves, but neither in true savor nor love, and therefore have not
the victory or upper hand of what they strive about; and such must loose the
full rest, because no man may so put himself fully into Gods hands, for that
man sees him not; but his eye being shut, he thereby closes it faster, (lest
he should see) and will not know it: and though some such may suffer bodily
pains for what they do, as in love to Jesus Christ, and that gladly; yet being
not of the holy Spirit (led by the fire of burning love and brightness) it is
fully mingled with high pride, presumption, judging and disdaining them by whom
they suffer; and yet these say and think they are in charity, and that they
suffer all for the love of God; but are begailed by the Devil's transformings,
because their knowledge of God is principally in imaginations, and their love
to him in natural affections, and bodily likenesses; at the best, but as milk
before strong meat; for in strong feeding on the Father's Bread, at his own
Table, the imaginations may not be serviceable, unless to the feeling in
understanding, when need is; and then only as a handmaid, waiting on the hand
of her Dame.

Many do like well of the Virtues of Meekness, Lowliness, and Patience, as in
their own reasons and wills, that are enemies thereto in their affections,
through grudgings in themselves at those in whom they are; and so can have no
love to Virtue, or virtuous men, or know how to delight in them as such,
spiritually; and what these men do by the stirrings of reason in them, is but
out of a fleshly fear of God, (or rather applause of men:) for Jesus Christ is
but as a stranger to the soul, until his Image be therein reformed, in meekness
and love, which is his Livery, and wherein he discovers himself and his
secrets; as he said to his Disciples, Learn of me; for I am lowly and meek, and
you shall find reft to your souls: and again, Love ye one another, or, love
together as I have loved you; by this (said he) shall all men know that you are
my disciples. He did not say, They should be known by working miracles, casting
out Devils, preaching, teaching, or praying, which should be more minded by
those that now desire signs and wonders (that they may otherwise see if they
shut not their eyes) while true love and meekness are the greatest of miracles
in these last and perilous times, wherein men strive to resist evil, (not to
suffer it) to revenge wrongs, rather then to forgive them, as Christ commanded;
rather to fain love and meekness, then be possessed of them, suffer and endure
all things; and such is not worthy the name of love or meekness in man's will,
which is but altogether imperfect: but meekness as in pure love and spiritual
affections, is perfect meekness; and he that has this, is a meek man, poor in
spirit, that knows himself as he is, and ought to be known, dissembleth not,
but loves all others in or for God; but where grudgings are in the heart
toward any, or unquiet thoughts, the heart is not clean, the conscience is not
pure, nor the walking charitably, or with God, in love of clean affections, and
consequently in and for God: for the more evil any one does to a meek man, the
more good does he to him, as to a man out of his right mind; and so do thou,
and pray for such as Christ commanded, and observe how he himself did by Judas
(for all his wickedness) and to others, never so much as saying to any man,
Thou lie; though some falsely accused him, said, He had a devil, etc. neither
do I read that he reproved Judas openly, b^t rather waited for his repentance
to the very last: and the more like to Jesus Christ thou art herein, the more
thou love thy self only in God, and not out of him, and so thou love
truly, and not only for righteousness and virtue of God in thee or others; so
thou love not thy felf, but God; and if thou be yet bound in sin, and feel
the burden of it, then so thou love thy self for God, to be freed by him from
sin, into his service; and so if thou truly live in meekness, thou love every
man; in the first place, thou love God in man; and in the second place, thou
love man for God; that he may be his; and so should God be loved in all, and
for all, and all in him; and this is true love; but if thy mind be troubled,
or unquiet when thou art rebuked, belyed, or evilly entreated, then there is
pride remaining in thy heart, (seem thou never so holy outwardly) and there
lies hid like a Fox in his den; -- And no good deed can thou possibly do, but
it is spoiled therewith, and thou have thy reward: -- for it is a mystery to
love men's persons, (which ever ought to be) and loathe their sins, as contrary
to God; but it is no mystery to fain or pretend love, fast, sit silent, preach,
give to the needy, etc. for these things bad men may do; but to love men truly,
and hate the evil in them, is the gift of God by the holy Spirit of Love, which
he gives freely and readily to all that wait truly for it; and is therefore
most precious and profitable: and without this, there is not meekness of love
to all men, and a seeking the salvation of all, but a stumbling and erring from
the truth, and mistaking one thing for another, errors for truth, and truth
for errors; because Covetousness and Anger is not forsaken, while any other
love (but what is so in God and for God) remains as to any creature or thing;
and thou shall sinde it easier to forsake riches and lusts, then the love of
them; for he that coveteth or desires any thing he has not, and thereby keeps
back the clean desires to Vert^e, is yet covetous; and look how much sorrow
thou feel upon the loss of any thing, so much was thy love to it; so that
thou covetest not spiritual things, so as thou ought, but that thou
stamblest at them; and then how should thou be filled with kindly savor
within, while the flesh retains its beastly savor without? -- But this know,
that diligent watching, inward hunger and pains helps the holy Spirit in thee
to overcome; yet while the bad root lives its evil branches will be springing
up, for therein is the complete nature of the evil root, and thereof the
loathsome fruit, which every evil man brings forth, out of the evil treasure of
his heart, and there the strong man armed keeps the house, until there be a
free yiedling to Jesus Christ in meekness and pure love, wherein he may
overcome that strong man, and strip him of all his strength, and weapons
wherein he trusts, and create the new man according to his own image and
likeness of righteousness and true holiness; and as thou receivest him with
ability to exercise thy senses, and discern things rightly; to have Jesus
Christ formed in thee, and as thou conceivest him, and he lives in thee, thou will bring forth good things out of the good treasure of his life, by strong
desires, and earnest actings to please him, and be made like unto him; not as
of fleshly forming, but in full meekness of mind, pure love, full perfection
and fruition of all heavenly virtues, and unchangeable blessedness, whereunto
Christ Jesus is the door, he the Porter, (and not another) he opens, and no man
shuts; and shuts, and no man opens; by him is the entrance, the going in and
out, and finding pasture; for he is the pasture, even the living bread that
came down from heaven, and is in heaven; the well of water springing up to
everlasting life, of whom all the several sects and sorts of men (that climb up
another way) are ignorant, and so (wanting the nourishment thereof) fall short
of the glory of God; and yet forward to reprove others, without any certain
knowledge of those things in themselves, or considering with how much meekness,
gentleness, love and privacie (for the most part) reproofs ought to be, even in
weighty matters, and in all as thrust on by divine love, and some hopes of
thereby showing the sinner the evil of his way, that he may be reclaimed; ever
weighing well how dangerous it is to abase and reprove others, and not live in
the light ones self; and how many tribulations and tentations others have born;
to keep thee low in thine own eyes, and learn to know how to esteem others
highly in love for their works sake: but but whosoever arrogates to, or exalts
himself, thereby becomes base and blockish, an antichrist, unfit for any
spiritual work, and shall certainly fall low at last, because the power of the
Lord Jesus has not had a kindly working in such a soul, or his pure presence
received by it, or rightly known to it, to live and grow up in it; as it is in
all meek souls, that in a still and quiet staidness suffer him, and yield to
him, for the increase and finishing of his own work therein.

The Soul of Man, which the LORD GOD formed (as has been said) by breathing of
his breath of life into him, is a worthy likeness, image, or similitude of God;
-- not the bodily shape, but the inner powers thereof; -- but since falling
from the light and heavenly presence of sweet love, and sure joy, into the
painful darkness and lusts of this wretched life, is by his own act cast out of
the heritage of heaven: So that man now in no wise can know Jesus Christ (the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world) by running out with his
thoughts into the most excellent way that man's wit can imagine, but by a
turning the Soul in to that of God within it self, in the light thereof, and
there waiting for his still voice, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ moves; --
which the wise and prudent men of this world imagine to be a low, mean, natural
and contemptible thing; but therein is the living and true God discovered to
the soul, and exalted above all created things, whereby the soul sees it self,
and also above it self into the heavenly place; while it is so kept in the most
inner and precious clean part of it self, and takes pure pleasure therein, and
that not only for the light sake, but for the blessed love which is in that
light, and the knowledge it gives how to seek God within, and forget all
bodily things without, and also forget thinking of it self, and waiting to
find therein, only the uncreated God, that made him, and gave him reason,
will and affections, and quickens him in Christ Jesus by his blessed light;
and so as Christ Jesus moves in him by his grace, so moves the soul to find
and feel him more in himself, as the true light, which is not a natural or
bodily thing, but truth and faithfulness in spiritual light; for as bodily
light serves to the body, or outward man, so this true light, and faithful
spiritual being (which is God in Christ) shows to the reason of the soul,
first it self, and then in and by it self, all other spiritual things that are
needful to the knowledge and salvation of the Soul: So said David, By, or, In
thy light we see light: And thus is God a consuming fire, that burns and
consumes sin out of the soul, and purifieth it, even as fire parifieth Metals;
and these are as favory words (as also is the work) to those that so receive
them; and when the inner eye of the Soul is opened through grace, to have such
a beholding of Jesus Christ, thereby shall the soul be raught to turn the
outward powers into spiritual use; and not to reft in a bare believing, but
grow in farther sight and knowledge of him, until the reasonable soul receive
the kingdom of God (as Christ said) and that full blessed and endless life in
him. -- And in order thereto, ever to feel and know how Jesus Christ opens the
inner eye of the soul, of his goodness and mere mercy, when and as he pleases,
by lighting the reason with his true inner light in the conscience to see him,
and know him by little and little, as the soul may suffer him; whereby he
gently shows the soul that he is an unchangeable being, of saving strength,
faithfulness, goodness and blessedness of endless life, which the obedient soul
learneth to see (as much more then can be well expressed) as Jesus pleases to
reveal to him by his holy Spirit, and that not blindly, nakedly, or
unsavourily, as in man's own reason (by his outward learning or other bodily
abilities) but with an understanding enlightened, comforted and strengthened by
the gift of the holy Ghost, with a wonderful inexpressible love, reverence,
godly fear, spiritual savor, and heavenly delight; so as that the affections
become ravished therewith, and keeps from the minding of earthly things: And
thus is Go! pleased to beget his own likeness in man, which beg tring is his
Son in flesh, even that goodness, sight, and sure knowledge of God in Christ,
and love unfeigned in him, which is a reforming of the soul in faith and
feeling, and yet may not be grown so fully perfect in love, as some have felt
and written of; but the more clean, clear and simple the soul is made in
parting from fleshly love, the more quick sight and greater love to God it
has; and it may be so, as though there were no other man, that believed in, or
loved Jesus Christ, but that he were alone (as Elijah once thought) yet he
would love him, trust in him and follow him, and not part with him for all
other things; and then a man valueth all earthly created things at one rate, as
nothing worth in his esteem, knowing that both the love and the things
themselves (that worldly men esteem and delight in) shall perish together, --
coveting nothing but close communion with Jesus Christ spiritually; not
fleshly, for he knows not after the flesh, but loves and owns Jesus Christ in
all men, without respect to outward persons and things, and flies from the vain
sights of worldly delights, that others take pleasure in, his delight being
only in Jesus Christ, lest other things should let the freedom of his heart
from him; neither does he value or heed the speakings of other men, unless in
the same light, love and meekness of Jesus Christ; and would rather be still in
peace, having nothing outwardly, unless it be spoken feelingly and stirringly,
as of the love of Jesus to farther him therein. -- And as for speaking or
hearing of worldly speech, it has no savor in him, much less stories,
tidings, or vain janglings, can have no place in his thoughts, and therefore
not in his affections; for as the inner eye of the soul is opened through
faith, working by love, into the beholding of Jesus Christ by inspiration of
special grace, it is thereby made clean, subtle, and able to move to, and
work in the Lords vineyard, in such manner of working by the holy Ghost, as the
greatest learned men on earth cannot imagine, with all their wit and skill,
much less show it with their tongues; because it is not gotten by study, nor
through any man's labor, but by pure and special gift of the holy Ghost; and
is not different in quality from the heavenly gift in conversion of the chosen
souls, but is the same, though it be otherwise felt and shadowed out to the
soul -- For as the soul grows in grace, so grace grows in the soul, and
increases more and more unto the perfect day, and heavenly kingdom of
especial seeing into the secrets of the Lord Jesus; so that when the heart
awaketh to God, and is knit to him, then it sleeps, and is lost from the
world: And thus the Apostles slept to the worldly love, while in true
inspiration of the holy Ghost, contemplating on Jesus Christ, they were awake
(though they had other sleeps, sometimes, as when Christ said, Could you not
watch with me one hour?) having their souls inspired through grace, and the
special eye therein opened, and beholding Jesus Christ in purity and poverty
of spirit, inward silence, true rest, peace in conscience, highness of heavenly
thoughts, with singleness and purity of heart, disliking the joys of this
world, and only delighted with spiritual savor of bright burning love;
thirsting for, and gently seeking the Lords blessed presence spiritually. These
are true testimonies of the inspiration of the holy Ghost, in this keeping the
spiritual eye of the soul; but seeing that reforming only in faith, and
fleshly feeling is very low and perilous in its beginning (because of the
aptness then to yield to the tempter and backslide) and reforming in spiritual
feeling and savor so high and sure, great diligence is requisite in watching,
waiting, coveting, and laboring (as the Lord Jesus moves) in disposing the
affections, and bringing the heart to cleanness and feeling of grace, which is
a constant work, of much travel of soul against all wicked stirrings and
temptations; for it so falls out with some, that through negligence and
yielding to tentations, the enemy enters the soul again; and then it feels not
the grace as it did, but it is withdrawn, and the soul returns into the state
as before; but then the soul is in much blindness, pain, sorrow and
unsavouriness; for it relisheth worldly things but unsavourily, and is
encumbered with bodily wit and earthly matters for the time; and then it
desires after the grace of Christ Jesus again, and may not find it for a time:
but this withdrawing is always for just cause, and also in much merey to prove
the soul, and let it see that without Christ it can do nothing, and come to him
again with much pain and labor, fear, care, and watchfulness; while it
supposes that Jesus Christ hears not, which is his dealing with many, for
their spiritual strength and growth in him; for then the Lord Jesus is sure
that the soul will not turn again to worldly love, for that it can have no
savor therein; and then after a time Jesus Christ returns into that soul
full of grace and truth; visits it in its desires, sighs and longings, for
very love to his presence; and then as he touches it softly, and anoynieth it
with the oil of gladness, it is healed of all pains and pantings, and then it
cries to Jesus in the spirit, with a glad heart and sweet still voice, as his
love teaches.

This opening of the spiritual eye of the soul, is a light darknesle, and
rich poverty, leading to purity of spirit, quietness of conscience, inward
peace and spiritual rest, with high and heavenly thoughts, in singleness of
soul, a light and feeling of grace in the secrets of the heart, -- tasting
heavenly savor of inflamed love, with bright-shining light, of reforming into
pure feeling, whereof many holy men of God have written every one according to
his respective feeling thereof in the grace of the holy Ghost; and though they
seem diverse in showing by words (because then each one spoke after his own,
then receiving and increasing in grace) yet nevertheless they agreed in all, as
in one sentence of unchangable verity; -- for the soul that (through the Lords
merciful visiting with his grace) comes to see the face of Jesus by that
touching and especial grace of the holy Ghost, is changed and turned from what
it was into another manner of living, for it is wonderfully drawn; first into
it self, from love and likings of all earthly things, insomuch that it has
lost the savor of the bodily life, and all things else, save only Jesus
Christ; and is thereby made clean from all the filth of sin, and all inordinate
affections are wiped off, and washed away in the blood of the Lamb, and has
nothing standing to hinder him (between God and his soul) but only the bodily
eye, which is thereby become blind, and the soul in spiritual rest with Jesus
Christ, without fears, cares or desires of worldly things, but fully employed
in a free and spiritual working, and love therein; whereby its rest increases
to perfection; it being truly called rest, because grace has wholly loosed the
heavy yoke and bonds of fleshly love, to work with ease in sweet amity, joy and
delight, as the holy Spirit directs the soul and leads it: -- And this does
silence the soul from janglings of all other speakers; -- for it is the voice
of Jesus Christ in heavenly virtue, softly sounding in the clean soul by his
quick and piercing word (sharply dividing between the joints and marrow, and
discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart) that slays all fleshly
love, and keeps the soul quiet from all the stirrings thereof, and so is
silence made in heaven for half an hour (as it is written) even within in the
clean soul, that is lifted up by grace, from earthly love to heavenly
conversation; and so it is in silence, though but for a short time before it be
again assaulted by its enemies; -- yet has it peace in conscience, because
this grace puts out all gratings, prickings, stirrings and fightings of sin,
making Jesus Christ and the soul both one in agreement of will and affections,
so that there are no upbraidings of sin, nor reprovings for faults; -- for the
Son and that soul have kissed each other, and are become friends, and all
faults past are forgiven, whereby the soul feels assurance of its salvation
(by the witness of the holy Ghost in the heart) and thereby receives day by
day more and more spiritual joy and boldness to come to the throne of grace,
the holy Spirit bearing witness of its sonship, and the witness in the
conscience administering sure consolation, with peace and pure accord, love and
lasting friendship between Jesus Christ and the soul, so that the soul is then
above the world in high and heavenly contemplation, which is an earnest of true
glory here in the body, in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, with so strong and
lasting desires of love, that many waters cannot quench; -- And blessed is that
soul which is ever fed in feeling of love in Jesus Christ's presence, and is
born up by desire to him in his absence; for he is wise and has well learned
Christ, that holds him sadly and reverently with pure affections, while he is
present; and while he is as absent, bears it patiently and easily, without
bitter pains of impure desires; -- and as there are diversities of feelings in
the presence of grace, so there are in the absence of grace, according to the
souls meekness or growth therein; and therefore he that knows not the absence
of grace, is readily deceived by outward sounds of other men's sayings; -- and
he that is not diligent and watchful to keep the presence of grace, is very
unkind to Jesus Christ, that in and for love gives it; for the soul should be
like her head in virtue and firmness of perfect love. -- And this take for a
maxim -- that he who perceives no changes in feeling of his grace given him,
but still remains a like, all whole, strong, stable, unbroken, or unhurt (as he
thinks) must needs be either full perfect, or full blind; but the latter is
more like, or most to be feared; for he that is so perfect, that he is above
all touches of earthly things, dwells in Jesus Christ by sweet and soft love,
is accepted into a high estate of heavenly glory and restfull pleasure, knowing
nothing but pure love, which is God; -- but he is full blind indeed, that
feigneth himself to be in grace and savor with Jesus Christ, without
spiritual feeling of the holy Ghost, and setleth himself in a stayed
condition, as if he were ever in feeling and working in spiritual grace,
thinking that all is grace that he feels, without and within, and that what
he does and speaks is grace, and that he is unchangable therein, -- and
always at one stay and condition, which he esteems good: -- Such a soul is
fully blind, and altogether without feeling of grace in any its workings; for
they are wrought as aforesaid, and by a lively inspiration thereof, with the
spiritual presence of Jesus Christ in the soul, and sweetness of his love, by
his wonderful in-dwelling there. This is the life of feeling in grace (after
the measure of the gift) with a reverend beholding him spiritually, without
which (in some measure) all is but deceitful, and nothing worth, nor any way
of good use, but hurtful; for as the soul is the light and life of the body,
so is Jesus Christ the light and life of the soul, by his gracious presence,
which cannot so well be expressed as felt; for it is the light, life, love, joy,
strength and rest of the soul that has painfully felt it; yet with sweetness,
insomuch that it cannot cease from desiring it: -- And this is, that no man may
mistake in or concerning the work of grace in his own soul; and he who will
remain still filthy, may bear his own burden (whatever he be) and his shame
also; for God has not left himself without a witness in every man, neither is
he wanting to any, though (as Christ said) The holy Ghost inspireth where and
when he will, and that privily (as the wind blows) oft-times when men are
least aware of him, but is known by his stirring and turning the heart into a
beholding of his goodness, and melting it into softness of love, and yet
wondereth at his highness and shining brightness: but the substance and effect
of this shining grace remains (though not in its fervor) while the soul is
kept clean without fallings (by wilfulness or negligence) into a dissolute life
of fleshliness and outward vanity; -- and also know, that the soul which is
unacquainted with the touches of spiritual grace, is an enemy to all
spiritual works, as being old, dry, rotten, barren, and without savor in it
self; for the salt has there no savor, and to be trodden under foot, and
nothing but the light of grace (through touching) makes it lively, sharp,
quick, subtle, ready and able to spiritual work, by giving it great freedom,
and a holy readiness in will and affections to obey all the stirrings of grace
in the soul, and to watch thereto for opening of the spiritual eye, whereby it
becomes apt to meditation, watching and prayer, but not to pray in the common
manner it did before, with loud voice, many words, and other men's speakings,
but in stilness of the voice, and tenderness of heart, and being gathered up
into it self, and in the spiritual presence of Jesus Christ, wherein every
word and syllable has a savoury sweet sound, and delectable melody in the
heart by the holy Spirit; as being wholly entered into the fire of love, the
powers of the soul being all heated and inflamed with love, so that the sparks
fly upward, whence the fire came; and therein is the soul so comfortably
enlightened, that it knows not how to leave off watching, praying, and praising
God, with spiritual delight and heavenly joy, when no matter is seen
outwardly, nor voice heard: And this is the food and nourishment of the soul,
and of much virtue against temptations and likings of the world; for it bears
up both soul and body from painful heaviness of heart, and feeling of the
wretchedness of this earthly life, and the soul is thereby kept quick and
lively: This was David's prayer as Incense ascending and perfuming the soul, and
so as any has a Psalm of the spirit, which is savoury and soft, sweet and
pleasant, in the pure mind, broken and burning heart, it gives up a sweet
smell to the face of our Lord Jesus Christ: these are the prayers and praises,
heard and accepted of God, (as before has been said) yielding and also
receiving grace from him, which he accepts as an addition to his Glory; and all
other praying wants savor and sweetness, as a speaking of words with the
tongue, when the heart is gone after other lovers, or likings of fleshly
things, and the soul is not master of the bodily wits, and imaginations of the
brain, and is that wherein is no constant devotion, no free^om of spirit, no
ardent and burning love and affections, nor whole mind; but much speaking and
running about here and there by words (seeming to speak of spiritual matters)
without savor, profit, or any soul-satisfaction, and therefore hear with me a
few words more of this weighty business of Prayer, and keep first to silence
and firm watchfulness, that thou may first come to a joyful feeling of this
spiritual praying, and that shall teach thee unchangable wisdom, without
fancy or faine^ness (that those are possessed with that speak well or ill of
things they know not) and therefore abide therein, until grace come into thy
soul otherwise, and will remove it in part for a time, and employ thee
otherwise; and then therein be obedient, for that is the best of all
sacrifices, whereby the holy God will be served; and so there is no need of
man's teaching how to pray or praise him, what words to speak, how to divide
duties into parts, or to guide the affections; for the holy Spirit teaches all
this, and much more, as he pleases; and the soul feels it self led thereby
to enjoy Jesus Christ in some measure: but this praying and praising God with
the Spirit and understanding, the wise world accounts foolishness, and (being
strangers to it) would have others continue so likewise. In this spiritual
watchfulness is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, whereby the writings of the
holy men of God are rightly showed and opened, which man's wit, learning,
reason, or study, cannot reach; for the understanding thereof is freely showed
to the clear soul by Jesus Christ, who is the wellspring of wisdom and
knowledge; it is he that makes the soul lively, and wise to understand the
holy Scriptures, and yet not all at once in special view thereof, but grace
gives ability in spiritual manner, as it comes into the pure mind: and this
opening of the understanding is by the working of the holy Ghost in the
p^esence of Jesus Christ, whereby the soul is enabled to expound the Scriptures
one after another, be they never so hard or secret; and the harder they be, and
the farther from man's reason and understanding, the more delightful is the
true showing of them, whether it be Literal, as concerning the outward man;
Moral, to inform of virtues to be followed, and vices to be eschewed; Mystical,
to see the words and works of Jesus Christ spiritually; or Spiritual, as
longing after him and his works, to do them in like love, and live in them as
his friends (so said he) and this last truly understanding Scriptures savours
well, and very sweetly in the Lords taste; for so the spirit of life gives
understanding of what was formerly by himself directed, and from him written
(and so of no private interpretation) quickening the thoughts of the soul
therein with great sweetness, savor and delight, in special, sad, and serious
waiting on Jesus Ghrist, to understand Scriptures in his will, and his
testimonies of love therein, through diverse inward discernings, sweet movings,
and sudden touchings of the holy Ghost, whereby the soul is taught and enabled
thereto, without other helps; and he that thus is given to understand the
Scriptures, values not the knowledge of men, gotten by learning, arts and
sci^nces, though of never so great worldly cunning and skill; for the end of
the true knowledge thereof, taught by Jesus Christ, is, that the soul may see
and enjoy him, and attain salvation to life eternal, and therein glorify him,
as God equal with the Father, etc. whereas the other way of knowledge is for
self ends, worldly vanities, and fleshly delights.

When the servants of Jesus Christ are well skilled concerning their hearing
the voice of Christ, they truly hearken, know, and follow him; and then neither
feignedness (by transformings, nor otherwise) can deceive them; for therein is
no fainedness, fancy, pride, nor hypocrisy, but soundness, meekness, peace and
charity, full of life, love and grace; so that when it sounds in the soul, it
so abounds with strength and virtue, that it causes the soul to leave all to
wait upon it, to listen, hearken, perceive, rest in, and love the sweet
breathing of his spiritual voice, according as he shows himself, whether as
a Master, a Father, a Husband, etc. keeping the soul in a wonderful reverence
and lively beholding of him, with much liking and delight to the soul, that it
may become a true and faithful Spouse to him in the fullness of fellowship, and
light of love: -- and this is in great power and glory, a state of perfection,
in the way to as full communion with God, as Adam had in innocence, and Enoch
by walking with him -- but the sight, strength and comforts of some are therein
more then others, though all in this state are growing into the love and life
of God in Christ Jesus, so as the eye of heaven is opened to all such clean
souls, whereof holy men have diversely written, as they were moved by the holy
Ghost, as of a life above all appearances, likenesses, bodily creatures, or
things, even as in heaven beholding the Lord Jesus spiritually, and loving him
faithfully, and therein knowing God the holy Ghost, as love uncreated, and the
love formed in the affections of the soul, to be of and by him, through the
sight and knowledge of the unchangable light and truth, which is of God placed
and seated in all meek souls, wherein the spirit of holiness rests and
pleasantly walks; -- pet this formed love in the soul is not God himself, but
the love which the soul feels in Jesus Christ, and to him; neither is this
the cause of coming to Jesus Christ, but pure love, which is God himself, is
the true cause of this knowing and drawing to himself; for he shows and
gives of this love (which is the holy Ghost) to teach and lead therein, so
that God is both the giver and the gift, as Christ Jesus said, I give my life,
etc. whereby man's soul comes to know this uncreated love, and to know and love
Jesus Christ, as the free gift of God, whereby he touches the heart with the
invisible light, to know him, and receive his love, and to love him again, as
in and with the same love (so freely given and received) but all in his own
time, by more quick or flow gracious feelings, imparted into such souls as are
clothed with the new light of righteousness and true holiness, which is a
right reforming in this spiritual savor, love and meekness; but he is not so
lighted and led by the holy Spirit, that thinks he can do any good thing of
himself, or otherwise then by such working in him spiritually.

To you my dear friends, that are of the holy brethren, partakers of the
heavenly vocation, I salute you in the pure light of unchangable and endless
love in Christ Jesus our Lord, according to the spirit of holiness, and
undefiled liberty, wherewith he has made us free, to serve him in spirit and
truth; -- have you born the indignation of the Lord in your own particulars? --
are you purged from the pollutions of the world, cleansed from the filthiness
of flesh and spirit, and thereby departed from the shadows of this world, and
received glorious garments of the Lord; put off the mortal, and put on the
immortal clothing, and sweetly confessed, and meekly suffered for the name
and testimony of our Lord Jesus, who is our life, and who of very faithfulness
and pure love has caused us to be troubled, and is near at hand to succor you
and give you rest in him, purify and prepare you for further trials, to your
spiritual profit and advantage, in filling up the measure of his sufferings in
your flesh, and overcoming by the blood of the Lamb, the word of his testimony,
and not loving your lives unto the death, wherein the eternal God will be your
refuge, and underneath his everlasting arm for your defense; and therefore all
to be faithful and diligent, that truth suffer not by any faint or feeble
owning of it; for we are not called only to believe, but to suffer also for
him in whom we believe; and you be here only as pilgrims and strangers that
have freely parted with your own wills, desires, fleshly affections, and
worldly delights (that the eternal will of God may be done in you and by you)
and now bear the Cross quietly and patiently, in clean vessels, as Temples of
the living God, for his worship in the beauty of holiness; -- and what have you
here more that is worthy your minding, that man can take from you? or how may
you withhold any other thing from our Lord, or his service, wherein you know
that your loss or labor will not be in vain? And therefore gird up the loins
of your minds, stand fast, quit you like men, and be strong in the Lord, and
the power of his might, that the fear of man, careful thought, or immoderate
desire, be not found in any of you; watch and pray, that you enter not into
tentations, or give occasion to the enemy of your souls, lest there should be
floath, guile, or dissimulation hid in any heart, or a root of bitterness
springing up, to trouble and defile, or other unskilful stirring by inordinate
affections, in any soul after the bodily sufferings; changes being seldom free
from temptations, specially in the weak, who are most apt to censure the
strong; he that has the beam in his own eye, to pull at the moat that is in
his brothers eye: while contrarily the strong strive not with the weakness in
any but ever to strengthen the pure principle, and help it over the weakness,
that you may appear (as you are) the plant which the Lords right hand has
planted, so as that none can pluck you up, his portion and peculiar treasure,
his Jewels, sons of the free woman, that abide in the house for ever; a people
whom the Lord loves, leads about, instructs in his way, and keeps from evil,
and to whom is his blessing of peace and life for evermore; that are as living
stones built up a spiritual house, as a city set on a hill, that cannot be
hid, to show forth his praise in the blessed love and brightness of his shining
glory, and be a sweet savor to him in them that believe, and in them that
perish in unbelief; by holding forth the faithful word of his patience, and
everlasting Gospel of man's salvation, etc. What manner of persons ought you
therefore to be in all holy conversation, that by the burning beams of his
beautiful and holy presence, you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men, that blame your good conversation in Christ Jesus, and the hearts of
others (that tremble at the word of the Lord) be melted into tender love and
heavenly sweetness, suitable to receive that blessed Gospel of peace and
reconciliation, and so suck at the breasts of consolation, as to be daily
delighted with the fresh springs of his love, thereby to flourish as an herb,
and be prepared to enjoy the inheritance of the Saints in light; -- and though
the world know you not, and Satan (the enemy of your souls) would not have you
known (lest it should be to his loss) yet is the righteous God (greater in you
then he that is in the world) hasting to clear up your innocence, that you may
be well known to have no strange god amongst you, that you touch not the
unclean thing, but are his sons and daughters, having your habitation in the
holy mountain, with the shout of a King amongst you, and that his word spoken
shall surely come to pass, your enemies be found liars, and confess that they
have dealt unworthily with you, for the Lord has kindled a fire that shall
proceed out of your mouths to devour the adversary (which cannot be quenched)
and they that hurt you must be so killed, and there is no project to prevent
it; but as you are faithful to our Lord, spiritual victory you shall have
over the beast, over his image, over his mark, and over the number of his name,
and be found without spot before the throne of God and the Lamb; -- and this is
it that gives you victory, even your firm faith; but you have need of
patience, and that it have its perfect work in you, so that (having done the
will of God) you may enjoy the promises in the new heaven and earth, the true
voice of God in spiritual glory, in the essential freedom of will, and
restitution of all things into the heavenly rest, wherein all doubts are
resolved, un on cleared, and expectations satisfied: and in the way every one
is to take care there be no giving or taking offense, no falling our, no
touching of any unclean thing, no^ha^y striving with the evil nature in any
others (for that (as pitch) will defile) no giving place to evil, but overcome
it with good (as our Lord commanded) and being ever apt to teach and bless,
that you may be heirs of the blessing.

And to conclude, here is nakedly and barely set before all sorts of men the
ways and wages (as Moses sometimes said) of good and evil, life and death, for
every man to choose which he will; for so it pleases the Lord to deal with
every man, and therein he does man no wrong, by leaving him to his own will,
and giving him a reward according to his own works, etc. and experience
teaches that every man will say, he loves God and Christ, and would be sorry
else (while he acts as his enemy against him) and that he would have
everlasting life, his soul saved by partaking of the joys of heaven, and
avoiding the torments of hell; and therefore would die the death of the
righteous, and have his latter end like his. -- And so said Baalam when he was
striving to curse the people of God, and gave wicked counsel to the King of
Moab against them; and to such I say, Why walk you then in Balaams way for men's
favors and rewards and so act against the Lord, his servants, and the light of
him in your own consciences, for self ends; and make such provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof? And why are you not now willing to live the
life of the righteous, but have him in so great derision, and a proverb of
reproach (as at this day) why do you account his life madness, and his end
without honor? why err you so from the truth, that the light of righteousness
should not arise and shine in you, but rest your souls so in fleshly likings,
and love of this world, whereby godliness seems nothing to you, but as a
scornful thing of naught, and wrath rests in your hearts, even against the
Lord and his servants though you say you love him; but know, that for all these
things, the Lord God will bring you to judgment, and you shall see (as it is
written) the righteous stand with great boldness, and his salvation seem
strange to you, above all you looked for; and then (over-late you may say
within your selves, What has pride profited us, or the pomp of riches (with
our vaunting) brought us? when the ^dolgods you now serve shall depart as a
shadow, or Post that passes by, with the friendship of this world, whereby you
are at enmity with God; for (as it is written) whosoever will be a friend to
this world is the enemy of God, and afraid of him, seeks to hide his heart from
him, and inward fear possesses him (as it did Adam) so that he hates his
light, loves darkness, keeps in it, flies, wanders, stumbles, staggers, and
peace departs from him; and though he force to himself a kind of counterfeit
mirth for a time, yet therewith also he is soon pinched, and feels a heavy
weight and pain in his own bosom, from which he cannot fl^e, but it reproves
him and condemns him at every turn; and as for the light that shines in the
dark place of his soul, he is afraid of that also, and faith or love find no
room in his earthen vessel; for his own lusts fill up the place, and devour
all, by conceit, imaginations, and vile affections, wherein he spends his time
to beast himself, and yet got swelling words of vanity, touching things he
never saw, and to have men's persons in admiration for advantage sake; which is
a knowledge and condition that puff^th up the heart (but redeems not to God
from the worldly glory and vain conversation) wherein some are so fettered that
they will not be reclaimed, or endure to be soberly admonished to the contrary
for the safety of their souls; from whence there is this one only way, Jesus
Christ (the pure path to be known spiritually) and the Father worshipped in
him; -- to which a very plain simple man (as the fishermen without humane
learning) may easily attain, if he hinder not himself by his own willing,
seeking, desiring, hearing, striving, or outward contention about it; because
there is a pure principle in every man's conscience, which has only need to be
awaked, stirred up, and quickened to behold and see all things, in the inner
powers and parts of the soul, and so cease from all outward seekings for it,
because it is there the free gift of God by his spirit, and such as no man can
fully teach the knowledge of to another (though he were never so well
acquainted with the Divine Mysteries) which if well considered by those that
have attained to some small measure or degree of grace, they world not so run
into words as many do, or be so conceited of their little grace received, as to
lose it by vain glory, while others that have much more, wait in still silence
of their souls for the Lords work, to be therein accomplished, as these also
would (often times when they speak) did they know how little grace or spiritual
favor they have, in respect of what God gives to others (that singly wait on
him with holy and humble hearts) and may give also to them, if they likewise
wait diligently for it -- Ah that worldly and vain minded men would, at last,
consider and commune with their own hearts, to find out their ways, and see
the sadness of their conditions, with the high concernments of their souls, and
how the difference stands between the children of this world (that are wife in
their generation) and the children of light, and how the latter exceed the
former by many degrees of true wisdom from above, and heavenly joy, when no
word is spoken, or matter seen outwardly; whereof may be some directions found
(suitable to each man's present condition) in what is here written (according to
my understanding in the simple and unchangable truth) that has a willing heart
to embrace the appearances of Jesus Christ spiritually in his own particular;
-- and if not, here is overmuch said to rise up in judgment against him, when
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to his Gospel,
who is the Lord of Life and Glory.

22. of the second month, 1661.
THE END.

