ANIMADVERSIONS ON Two Pamphlets Lately Published by Mr. COLLIER.

The one called, A Defense of the Absolution given to Sir William Parkins at
the Place of Execution, April 3d.

The other, A Vindication thereof; occasioned by a Paper entitled, A
Declaration of the Sense of the Achbishops and Bishops, etc.

Showing the Nature of the late Absolution, both as to CHURCH and STATE.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

LONDON: Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, near the
West End of St. Paul's. 1696.

Animadversions ON Two Pamphlets Lately Published by Mr. COLLIER.
SIR,
ACcording to your Desire, I have sent you here my Thoughts concerning the
Proceedings of the three Absolving Clergymen, at Sir J. Friend's and Sir W.
Parkins's Execution, together with some short Remarks on Mr. Collier's two
Papers in which he has endeavored to justify those Proceedings.

I shall consider 'em, First, With Relation to the Church; and Secondly, With
relation to the State.

As they are considered with Relation to the Church; I take 'em to be irregular
and unwarrantable on several accounts.

For, 1st. Such an Imposition of Hands, as those Clergymen made use of in the
Absolution, is by no means warrantable. Mr. Collier endeavors to show that the
giving of Absolution, with imposition of Hands, was the general Practice of the
Ancient Churches, particularly in St. Cyprian's Age, and that the performance
of this Ceremony was allowed to Priests, and sometimes to Deacons as well as
Bishops.

Suppose all this, Yet this Practice of those Ancients does not at all justify
Mr. Collier's Proceedings in this Point, and that for these two Reasons.

1st. The Absolution in which those Ancients made use of Imposition of Hands,
was not such an Absolution as that in which Mr. C. was concerned; but an
Absolution of Persons Excommunicated, or such as had deserted the Communion of
the Church. It was customary in the Ancient Church to Excommunicate such as had
committed any very grievous and notorious Crime, and after they had given the
Church Satisfaction, and were again to be reconciled to it; they were Absolved
from the Censure of the Church by the Imposition of Hands. What they meant in
this Case by the Laying on of Hands, Ep. 74. p 213.
we may learn from S. Cyprian. They looked upon those that were out of the
Church, to be deprived of the Holy Ghost, and (as he says) not to be truly
Christians. And, as now in our Ordinations, we make use of the Imposition of
Hands; so the Ancients frequently made use of the same Ceremony for restoring
to the Communion of the Church, such as before were Excommunicated.

For the same cause it was that they that were Baptized either by Heretics or
Schismatics were not among them received into the Church, but by Imposition of
Hands; for tho they owned the Baptism of Heretics and Schismatics to be
valid, yet they did not believe that any so Baptized, could be endued with the
Holy Ghost, till the Church had laid their Hands on 'em. For the same reason
the Imposition of hands was made use of when any one that had turned Heretic,
or Schismatic, was again reconciled to the Church; as also in the Absolution
of the Lapsi, that is, such as in the times of Persecution, had Sacrificed to
the Heathen Gods; and by doing so, had thrown themselves out of the Communion
of the Church.

The Examples and Authorities produced by Mr. C. are all of this kind; neither
can he (if I am not much mistaken) produce any one instance of the Imposition
of Hands in Absolution, except in the Reconcilement of Offenders to the Church.
His Albaspinaeus will hardly be able to supply him with any that are pertinent
to his purpose. But,

2dly. Could he show that in the Ancient Church, this Ceremony of Imposition of
Hands was made use of in Absolution, in other cases besides that mentioned; yet
his Proceedings, (who professes himself to be a Member of the Church of
England, and to Govern himself by the Orders of it) could not be Justified by
any such Instances of those times.

It is Tertullian's Observation, Lege fidei manente caetera jam disciplinae and
conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis. De Virg. Veland, c. 1.
That the Law of Faith remaining entire, other things belonging to Discipline
and Conversation, admit alteration according as circumstances require.

And accordingly our Church has declared, That every particular, or National
Church has Authority to Ordain, Change, and Abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the
Church, Art. 34.
Ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be done to Edifying.

Now since the laying on of Hands in Absolution, is acknowledged to be only a
Ceremony, and not to be necessary to it; it must be in its own Nature
changeable, and so may be used or laid aside as the Church shall see meet.

And since it is a Ceremony not retained in the Church of England, it is being
in use heretofore in another Church or Age, cannot warrant the use of it in any
particular Officer of this Church, no more than it will the standing on the
Lord's Days between Easter and Whitsontide, the Trine Immersion, and several
other Rites, too many to be here repeated.

The Church of England has as much Power and Authority, as to the Institution
or Abolition, the Use or Disuse of any particular Ceremonies, as St. Cyprian's
own Church had; and a Minister of the Church of England, is not to govern
himself herein by the usage of the Church of Carthage, but by his own. And
therefore it is not sufficient for Mr. C. to show Imposition of Hands in
Absolution to be a Ceremony used in the African Church that will justify his
Practice; for then by the same Reason all Ceremonies of those Churches, and of
all other Orthodox Churches in that time, or before, would become obligatory;
But, (as a Member of the Church of Carthage would then) he must be able to
prove it to be the Injunction or practice of his own Church. What say the
Articles, or Rubricks, or Canons, or Offices of the Church where he Officiates?
What they enjoin, he must use; what that uses he may Practice: But he cannot be
a Rule to himself. He is no more to add* than he is to enjoin or alter, for
they all belong to the same Authority. So impertinent is that which he alleges
in his own defense, viz. That as the Ceremony of Laying on of Hands is not
prescribed in the Rubric of Absolution; so neither is it Prohibited. For if
the not being Prohibited, could be a sufficient warrant for a particular
Person's Practice, we might return to the condition the Church was in, in St.
Austin's Time, which he complains of; nay, to the Ceremoniale of the Church of
Rome; and so the Rubric of our Church concerning ceremonies, why some are
abolished, and some retained, be altogether in vain. Good Order, Uniformity and
Decency require, that, as those Ceremonies which the Church Ordains, should not
be omitted at pleasure by particular Mininisters; so They should not make use
of any but what the Church and Law amongst us do Prescribe; of which Mr. C. may
be convinced, if he peruse the Act of Uniformity, XIV. Car. 2. or the Rubric
of Ceremonies, why some be abolished, and some retained.

Secondly, It is contrary to the Practice of the Church of Christ in general,
and against the Direction of our Rubric in particular, to Absolve a Person, or
to assist in the Absolution of a Person, whose Confession and Repentance are
known no otherwise than by the Testimony of others; as Mr. Collier assisted in
the Absolution of Sir I. Friend; and Mr. Snatt, and Mr. Cook in that of Sir W.
Parkins. It Is required by the Rubric in the Visitation of the Sick, that
before the Absolution there shall be a Confession of Sins to the Minister that
Absolves, and that after the Confession, the Penitent shall desire Absolution
from him.

It runs thus: Here shall the sick Person be moved to make a special Confession
of his Sins, if he feel his Conscience troubled with any weighty Matter. After
which Confession, the Priest shall Absolve him (if he humbly and heartily
desire it) after this sort, etc. The Instances brought by Mr. C. to justify
his Practice, from the Custom of the Ancient Church, of admitting Strangers to
Communion, by Virtue of a Certificate given by the Bishop under whom they
formerly lived; and from the Custom of our Church of conferring Holy Orders on
such as are not personally known, upon the Recommendation of others, is by no
means sufficient. For as to the former, he passes by the main point, and does
not so much as venture to give one Instance of Persons Absolved after that
Manner, by a joint Act of several Presbyters; and by the Major part of such as
had no Personal knowledge of the State of the professed Penitent. And the
Instances he gives, are not at all parallel; since those Ancients never gave
those Certificates to such as were not Personally known to them, or whose Case
they were not privy to; and much less to such as stood Condemned for Notorious
Crimes. As to the latter, [the Practice of our Church,] he is guilty of a gross
mistake; for Orders amongst us are never Conferred upon such as are not
Personally known. The Law and Canons indeed require, That the Person to be
Ordained should be recommended by some approved Presbyters, that give him
Credit as to his Behavior and other Qualifications by a Certificate. But
notwithstanding, he is further to be particularly Examined by the Archdeacon,
the proper Offsicer deputed by the Law and the Church for that Service; V.
Office for Ordination.
who is to Enquire of him, and Examine him, and is to give an Account of the
Candidate's Qualifications, and to declare Publicly and Solemnly to the Bishop
before his Ordidination, that the Person whom he presents, is apt and meet for
the Ministry. But were it so, that Orders are Conferred upon others
Recommendation, yet it is supposed to be what the Law and the Canons of the
Church allow and appoint. But to absolve or to assist in the Absolution of a
Person, whose Confession and Repentance we are not immediately acquainted with,
is contrary to the Directions of the Church; neither is there any Necessity
that can justify it, or if it could, it had no place here. For it had been
sufficient and regular also, if He that received the Confession had given the
Absolution without any Assistant.

3. Another thing that I look upon to be Irregular, is, their pronouncing
Absolution in Public, when there was not any public Confession. What Example
of this kind does Mr. Collier meet with in the Ancient Church? In a Case where
the Crime had been Public and Notorious, and the Penitents were reconciled to
the Church and admitted to Communion, the Absolution indeed was public, but so
was also their Repentance and Confession: But in such a case to give a Public
Absolution, upon a secret Confession and private Repentance, is peculiar to
these Persons, and what they have the Honor to be the first Inventers of. But
this I shall have farther occasion to touch again on by and by, when I come to
consider their Proceedings with relation to the Civil Government.

Neither 4thly, can their concurring all Three together in the Absolution, be
sufficiently excused. For though perhaps in it self it carries nothing of ill
with it, yet it is no small Presumption in the Clergy, to pretend to do a thing
so unusual in the Church, without any Church-Rule, or any former President in
the Church, especially, in that which they stand related to.

Mr. Collier would persuade us, that such things as these which I have
condemned as Irregularities, are left by the Church to the Prudence and
Discretion of those that Officiate, though they are but of the inferior Clergy.
No such matter. It is not the Inferior Clergy to whose Prudence and Discretion
such things as these are left. There are many things left to the Prudence and
Discretion of the Bishops, the Fathers and Governors of the Church: But the
Inferior Clergy, are to act according to the received Rules and Directions;
they are not to Innovate in any thing without the permission and leave of their
Superiors. Mr. Collier might have learnt from St. Cyprian, (to whom, as he
acknowledges, we are principally obliged for the Remains we have of the
Discipline and Government of the Primitive Church,) a better and truer Notion,
concerning the Obedience and Subjection of the Inferior Clergy to their
Diocesans, and the Honor that is due to the Episcopal Order. There never was
any Bishop that paid greater deference to his Inferior Clergy, than that Great
Man did: Yet would he have suffered his Clergy to alter the Rules and Customs
of the Church without his Consent? Would he have thought well of such forward
and presuming Presbyters? It was usual with him to consult with his Clergy, for
the Government and good Order of his Church; but he knew better things, than to
suffer them to make use of their Prudence and Discretion, in opposiion to, or
differently from the Customs and Rules of his Church. He expresses in many of
his Epistles, a very great dislike of the Proceedings of some of his Clergy, in
using their own Discretion, in admitting the Lapsi to Communion without his
Knowledge and Consent. He asserts his Episcopal Authority, and he strictly
charges them not to take upon them after that manner, and not to Absolve for
the future, till he himself should return and judge of the sufficiency of the
Confession and Repentance of those that were to be Reconciled, and together
with the Clergy lay his Hands upon them. He tells them roundly, that in the
Time of his Predecessors, no Presbyters durst do such things, that Quod enim
non periculum metuere debemus de offensa domini; quando aliqui de Presbyteris,
nec Evangelii, nec loci sui memores, sed neque futurum domini judicium, neque
nunc sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod nunquam omnino sub
antecessoribus factum est, cum contumelia and contemptu Praepositi, totum sibi
vindicent? Ep. 16.
their Proceedings were an Affront to his Authority; and Inde per temporum and
successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut
Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur: Et omnis actus Ecclesiae per eosdem
Praepositos gubernetur. Ep. 33.
that all the Acts of the Church ought to be governed and directed by the
Bishops of the Church. And it plainly appears from his Eighteenth Epistle, that
his Regular Clergy did not dare in his absence to Absolve the Lapsi, even in a
Case of Necessity, when they lay on their Deathbeds, till he himself had Writ
to them, and given them a Commission to do it without him.

I shall say no more of these matters, but only take notice how briskly and
triumphantly Mr. C. lays about him sometimes in the open Air without any
Adversary to oppose him. You would think the Bishops, according to his
Representation, (if you had not read their Declaration) were to be very easily
refuted, and guilty of strange mistakes. But when you compare the Declaration
and the Answer together, you will have occasion to wonder, who it is Mr. C. is
pleased to write against. The Bishops never denied that the laying on of Hands
was oftentimes used by the Ancients in Absolution: But they understood (I
presume) that it was not made use of in such an Absolution as Mr. C. was
concerned in. They never denied but that in reconciling to the Church a Person
that was out of its Communion, even Presbyters themselves did sometimes
Officiate alone with that Ceremony. But they do not allow that they should take
upon themselves to alter the Established Rules and Customs of the Church, or to
add any to them which are not already Established. They do not deny, but that a
Malefactor condemned to die, if he appears to be truly Penitent for all his
Sins in general, and particularly for that for which he stands condemned, and
does humbly and earnestly desire Absolution, may be allowed that Benefit and
Comfort; but they do not approve of its being performed in Public without as
public a Confession, much less by such Imposition of Hands; neither do they
allow that any such Clergyman should Absolve, who is not immediately and
particularly acquainted with the Condition of the Person.

There is one thing more which ought not to be passed by without an
Animadversion, and that is Mr. Collier's disingenuity in laying to the Charge
of the Bishops, that they blame the Absolving Clergymen for pronouncing a Form
of Absolution. With submission (says Mr. C.) a Form is better than no Form. He
adds, that he is sorry to see the solemn Offices of Religion mentioned, with
such seeming Coldness and Abatements of Expression. I hope Mr. C. will, on
second Thoughts, be sorry for so false an Accusation, and think himself obliged
to ask pardon of the Bishops for Expressions so unbecoming toward Persons of
their Character and Station. And that you may be able to judge what reason he
has to do so, I shall here produce their Words.

Lastly, For those Clergymen that took upon them to Absolve these Criminals at
the place of Execution, by laying all three together their Hands upon their
Heads, and publicly pronouncing a Form of Absolution: As their manner of doing
this was extremely Insolent, and without Precedent, either in our Church or any
other that we know of; so the thing it self was altogether irregular. By which
it appears, that They do not disapprove of their using a Form of Absolution,
but of their using it with such Circumstances, and on such an Occasion.

I come now to consider the Proceedings of the Absolvers with relation to the
State.

As this matter is considered with relation to the State, I cannot call it by a
softer Name than that of a daring -- I do not love to use hard Words; I hate it
in others, and I would not do it my self; yet I cannot but call it a daring
piece of Insolence. Mr. C. is pleased to tell us, That if he had been permitted
to wait upon Sir W. Parkins in Prison the Morning that he was Executed, he had
given him Absolution, not in public, but in private.

In Answer to which, I must beg your leave to observe Three Things. 1. That Mr.
Snatt and Mr. Cook were permitted to be with Sir John Friend so long, that
they might have Absolved him in private, if they had not chosen to do it in
public. 2. That after Mr. C. was prohibited, there was another Non-jurant
Minister, one Mr. Bell, allowed to wait upon Sir William Parkins, by Sir
William's own desire: Now, why did not that Gentleman Absolve him there in
private? What reason can be given for that, except it be that the Absolution
was intended to be public? Was it because Sir William desired to be Absolved
by Mr. Collier? Why would not the Other's Absolution satisfy him; especially
considering that he was of his own choosing? 3. It is to be observed, that (as
Mr. C. himself informs us) upon the same occasion at the Execution of Mr.
Ashton 1690. the Absolution was pronounced by a Non-jurant Minister in Public,
at the same place, and in the same manner. Would not this alone (were there
nothing else to be said) give us too much reason to suspect, that it was not
Mr. Collier's being incapable of pronouncing the Absolution in Private, that
made him do it in Public, but that he had all along intended to perform it in
Public. He that seriously considers that the same was done before at Mr.
Ashton's Execution, and with the same Circumstances, and what I before
observed, will be very apt to believe, that it was the Resolution of those of
the Non-jurant Clergy who have forsaken our Assemblies, to Absolve their
Friends after that manner. I might add, that Mr. Collier's Inclination to
perform the Absolution in Public, does sufficiently appear from his
forwardness in joining with the other two Gentlemen in the Absolution of Sir
John Friend, with whom he had not been at all concerned.

Mr. C. is a Gentleman whom I know not, and I Am sure I do not hate: And I would
rather excuse him if I saw any way to do it, than aggravate his Crime. I will
for the present force my self even against my reason to yield to what he says.
Let the matter therefore stand thus, as to him: Yet it cannot be denied, but
that the Resentment which the Government has expressed on this occasion is
highly reasonable and just.

For First it ought to be considered, that to Absolve a Person condemned for
High Treason, if he owns the Fact, and does not show himself sorry for it, is
plainly to declare that we look on that Fact as no Crime. And therefore though
the Absolution be pronounced in private, yet if it be known that there was such
an Absolution, the Government has reason to look upon the Absolver as an Enemy,
and accordingly to proceed against him; how much more when the Party Absolved
is not only condemned for High Treason, but for the horridest part of it, a
Design to Assassinate a King! When I first looked into Mr. Collier's Papers, I
was in hopes he would have given the World an Assurance, that he thought Sir
William Parkins, whom he had Absolved, truly Penitent for the Crime for which
he was condemned, and that he was surpised to find afterward by the Speech,
which he left behind him, that he was not really so. If he had said this, he
had said something material. But instead of that, you will meet with nothing
but what will abundantly convince you, that when he Absolved him, he did not
look upon him to be sorry for that Fact in particular: And therefore since he
Absolved him, he justified the Fact. Mr. C. tells us, that he did not see Sir
William Parkins's Paper till after the Execution. But did he not know by his
Confession how far he was engaged in the Crimes he was condemned for, and how
little sorry for it? He says he is not obliged to reveal any part of his
Confession. But why will he not? One Reason may be, because it will make, not
for him, but against him. If Sir William denied, that he was any ways concerned
in that of which he was accused, and for which he was condemned, or if he
repented of it; why will not Mr. C. tell us so? To say the Truth on it, Mr. C.
seems here to be at a loss; whilst at one time, he says, Sir William gave him
the State of his Conscience, and upon which he judged him fit for the most
solemn A^solution of the Church; and yet another while, he would have his
Reader believe, that Sir William did not acquaint him with the intended
Assassination. But because this was a little too gross to impose upon his
Reader in, he shuffles it off again; and would have it understood, that if he
was acquainted with it, it was in Confession; and then he is obliged to conceal
it. What else can be the meaning of what he says? Pray did he confess it to
me, and have I revealed any part of his Confession? Then I had been guilty of
High Misdemeanour indeed. I had broke the 13th Canon, and been pronounced
irregular by the Church, etc.

Mr. C. must have been in some distress, or else one of his capacity could not
but have seen into the inconsistency of this. For

1. If Sir William gave him a State of his Conscience, he must give him an
account of his acquaintance with the intended Assassination. For that was a
Crime could not escape his Penitent's cognizance; and being of such an heinous
nature in common estimation, the least that can be supposed of Sir William is,
that he would know his Casuist's Judgment of it; whether it was a Crime or no
Crime.

2. If Sir William did not acquaint him with it; yet the Confessary was bound
to lay it home to his Conscience, if he himself knew it, and judged it to be a
Crime; and for which the Confessary had a great advantage and a fair
opportunity offered to him; because, he says, Sir William seemed very desirous
of absolution at his hands.

3. The Confessary was bound not to be ignorant of this; for who would go to a
Criminal, and be prepared to give him Absolution, and yet know nothing of the
Crime he stood condemned for? This is contrary to common Sense, and to the
whole Form of proceeding according to the Rubric in the Office; and what no
Man in his Wits can believe of Mr. C. Nor indeed could he be herein ignorant,
unless he had led the Life of an Hermit; and been carried directly from his
Cell to Newgate, to hear his Confession.

And yet when he talks of the Committee, and the Votes, etc. its after as loose
a way; and what none that know the circumstances of the Confessary can imagine.

4. However there remains a terrible Cast behind; for he suggests that he
should be chargeable with no less a Crime than betraying Confession, if he
should discover it; and if he had owned that Sir William acquainted him with
the Intended Assassination.

This I own would be the best Argument if it were true, or had any thing to
support it. But how sacred and inviolable soever, the Seal of Confession is;
and which our Church has obliged all Guides of Souls to preserve in cases
secret, and that concern the private State of a Man's Soul: Yet there is an
exempted case, as Mr. C. acknowledges, in which the obligation does not hold;
and that is, when the Crimes are such as by the Laws of this Realm, the
Minister's own Life may be called in question, for concealing the same. Can.
113.
And what Crime is there that more apparently falls under this exception, than
Treason, and the Assassination of a Prince? A Crime which indeed had at the
time of making this Canon, some Patrons in the World; but none till now in our
Church. And now I leave it to every Impartial Person's Judgment (but amongst
them in this Argument, I am afraid I cannot promise Mr. C. will be one) to
observe, whether the Exception in the Canon does not reach the case in hand,
even upon the largest supposition, as Mr. C. affirms.

Upon the whole I know not by what Principles these New-fashioned Guides
proceed; nor to what Church they are so near a kin, as that on the other side
the four Seas: Such Principles are as unintelligible to me, as the Methods of
Murder he talks of. And if after all, Mr. C. can Absolve without knowing the
Case of the Penitent (as, he did not know it, if he was not acquainted with Sir
William's Concernment, or Charge at least, in the Assassination) or can judge
him to have aright to all the Privileges of Communion, that as far as he seems
to know, died Impenitent as to the highest Charge; then such a Confession and
such an Absolution, and I may add such Confessaries too, are the first, for
ought I know of that sort and, I pray, God they may be the last that shall
trouble the World in this kind.

The Government is thoroughly persuaded, that Mr. C. and his Absolving Brethren
did believe the Persons Absolved were concerned in those things for which they
were condemned, and that they did not repent of 'em. Is the Government mistaken
in this Opinion, or not? I would ask Mr. C. etc. that one Question. They dare
not say that it is: They must therefore excuse it, if it look a little hard
upon them and express a Resentment suitable to their Faults.

But 2dly. Should we grant that Mr. C. intended to pronounce the Absolution in
private, if he could have been admitted to the Prisoner the last day, yet when
he came to give it at the Place of Execution, he did it (as well as Mr. Snatt
and Mr. Cook) in such a manner and with such Circumstances, as show, that he
designed to make it as public and notorious as possibly he could. It plainly
appears that they all three had concerted and agreed that Matter beforehand.
If they needs would Absolve them, why did they not endeavor to conceal it from
the People? No, that would not serve their turn. They were not content to
pronounce the Absolution, unless it were known to all the Hearers and
Bystanders that it was an Absolution. And because there were many Spectators,
who were not also Hearers, they contrive by using an unusual Ceremony to make
it be seen where it could not be heard, and to make it as more notorious, so
also more memorable. And lest it should be suspected that they were not all of
the same mind, they all join their Hands together in the Absolution of both
Persons. As they show by pronouncing the Absolution, that they look upon the
Fact as no Sin, so by doing it after that manner, with such unusual
Circumstances, they bid the World take notice that they do not think it a Sin.

And after all this, can they think the Government so stupid as not a little to
rouse itself up at so public and daring a Defiance? They may call these
Proceedings, if they please, an innocent Conduct; they may think of the
Government as they please; they cannot but know, that whatever they think of
the Government, It thinks (upon good grounds) very well of itself; and of
consequence they must acknowledge, that it had Reason to resent their Carriage
and Behavior as extremely insolent, and to endeavor, by showing itself
sensible of this Affront, to secure itself from the like for the time to come.

Mr. C. tells us, that when at Mr. Ashton 's Execution, Absolution was given in
the same manner with Imposition of Hands, at the same place, and upon the same
occasion, and a justifying Paper left by the Person that suffered; at that time
there was no Exceptions made either to Manner or Thing. The Performance was so
far from displeasing, that the Sheriff gave his Thanks for the Solemnity of the
Office. There was no Complaints either at Lambeth, or Whitehall, no public
Invective, no seizing of Body and Goods; in short, no Signs of the least
dissatisfaction. And who (says he) could imagine, that the bare repeating of an
Action, should raise such a Storm upon us now, which was perfectly inoffensive
before? To punish in this manner without Warning, or Precedent, without Canon,
or Law, is (with submission) somewhat unintelligible. I have Reason to believe
that what was done of this nature at Mr. Ashton's Execution, was never made
known to the Governors either of the Church or State: And how could they
punish a Person for that which they never heard of? If a single Example of this
kind be made use of as a Precedent, it is fit the Government should take care
that there may be no more such Precedents. But says he the performance was so
far from displeasing, that the Sheriff gave his thanks for the Solemnity of the
Office? What for the Office of Absolution, without declaring his Repentance for
the Crime he was condemned for? He might as well have said, that the Sheriff
thought well of Mr. Ashton's justifying Paper, because he was so civil as to
receive it; and well of the Cause he died in; because he would not interrupt
him in his last Hours. Both alike probable, and both alike true. But among some
Men Civility will pass for approbation; and every Man that is not rude shall be
of their Party, or a well-wisher to it. The Worthy Person that at that time
bore that Character is alive, and the best Relater of his own Actions: But he
knows nothing of this matter; and says it is no other than a Fiction; or at
best a gross mistake.

Mr. C. thinks it somewhat unintelligible to punish in this manner without
Warning, or Precedent, without Canon, or Law. To me it is not only somewhat but
very unintelligible, that to punish for such a Proceeding is to punish without
Warning, or Precedent, or Canon, or Law. Are not Men sufficiently warned not to
do any thing that may reasonably be construed to be a Defiance to the
Government? Is there no Law or Canon of the Church to Admonish such Presbyters
as presume of themselves to act contrary to the Rubric, and openly to use such
Ceremonies as are not customary? Is there no Law to punish and chastise such
Persons as declare, by their Actions, in the face of the whole World, that they
think it no Crime to bring in a Foreign Power; (whose business it has been to
extirpate the Protestant Religion in his own Country, as well as to trample
under his Imperious Foot the native Privileges of his People?) Is there no Law
to call such Persons to account; that violate the Laws of Nations, and that
combine to assassinate one whom the Nation after the most solemn manner has
owned to be their King; and who enjoys the Crown by the surest of Tenures, the
affections of his People, as well as the Consent of the Estates of the Realm?
Is there no Law, nor Canon to punish such Confessaries, as Absolve those that
imbrue their hands in the Blood of Princes, and that dye without declaring any
particular Repentance for what they stand condemned for, and a Repentance as
open and notorious as their Crime? By this new sort of Casuistical Divinity,
They may dye as innocent as the Child unborn, who combine to call in and join
with a Foreign Force; that should they have had Success answerable to the
design, would have laid the whole Nation desolate, and made it a Field of
Blood. These are the Persons that are absolved. But how are they absolved? Mr.
C. peaks for the rest, I, says he, absolved Sir William as a Penitent. Thus
indeed it should have been, if the nature of Absolution had been heeded; for
that (as Mr. C. rightly observes) supposes both sin and repentance in the
notion of it. And if Sir William died as a Penitent, and Mr. C. absolved him as
a Penitent; then surely Sir William did express his Repentance, and his
Repentance, especially, for being concerned in the intended Assassination. Here
Mr. C. cautiously slips this over (as he always does, when it comes in his way)
For, says he, as to the matter of Sir William 's Repentance, that is never
likely to be known from me. A caution that is indeed fit to be observed (as has
been before said) in cases secret and that belong to the Closet. But what is
this to Sir William's Case, who was condemned for a Crime as notorious as
heinous; and what he confessed himself to have been guilty of? Now can Mr. C.
be supposed to receive his Confession, and that this should not be a branch of
it? Then it would have been a defective Confession indeed. But, says he,
supposing I received a defective Confession, am I accountable for it? Yes
surely, accountable to God for suffering him that was ready to receive the
fatal stroke, to dye Impenitent; for so Sir William did, if he neither charged
himself with it, nor was charged with it by Mr. C. And accountable he is to the
State, nay to all Mankind for absolving him as a Penitent, that died guilty in
design, of an execrable Assassination; which is in Mr. C. a fair step to the
justifying of it. So that as to the World Sir William is thought to dye
Impenitent; and if not so to Mr. C. he must dye as to him a Martyr.

I shall add but a word or two more, and that is to tell you, that I think the
Non-jurant Clergy are obliged both in Conscience and Honor, and as they desire
the Protection of the Government, to Protest against these Proceedings of their
Brethren, Mr. Collier, Mr. Snatt, and Mr. Cook; and not by Silence or
Connivance, much less by direct and avowed Approbation, to consent to their
Irregularities, and to make their mere being of the Party, a sufficient
Qualification, how uncanonical soever they were in giving Absolution to others,
to obtain from them their Own.

I am Sir, etc.

FINIS.

