STIGAI (...) OR MARKS Of the Absurd Geometry Rural Language Scottish
Church-Politicks And Barbarismes
OF JOHN WALLIS Professor of Geometry and Doctor of Divinity. By THOMAS HOBBES
of MALMESBURY.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crocke, at the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard,
1657.

To the Right honorable Henry Lord Pierrepont Vicount Newarke, Earl of
Kingston, and Marquis of Dorchester.
My most Noble Lord,
I Did not intend to trouble your Lordship twice with this Contention between
me and Doctor Wallis. But your Lordship sees how I am constrained to it; which
(whatsoever reply the Doctor makes) I shall be constrained to no more. That
which I have now said of his Geometry, Manners, Divinity, and G^ammar all
together is not much, though enough. As for that which I here have written
concerning his Geometry, which you will look for first, is so clear, that not
only your Lordship and such as have proceeded far in that Sicence, but also any
man else that does but know how to add and substract Proportions (which is
taught at the twentieth third Proposition of ^the sixth of Euclide) may see the
Doctor is in the wrong. That which I say of his ill Language and Politics is
yet shorter. The rest (which concerns Grammar) is almost all another man's,
but so full of Learning of that kind, as no man that takes delight in knowing
the proprieties of the Greek and Latin Tongues, will think his time ill
bestowed in the reading it. I give the Doctor no more ill words; but am
returned from his manners to my own. Your Lordship may perhaps say my
Complement in my Tittle page is somewhat course; And it is true. But, my Lord,
it is since the writing of the Title page, that I am returned from the Doctors
manners to my own; which are such as I hope you will not be ashamed to own me,
my Lord, for one of

Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servants Thomas Hobbes.

TO DOCTOR WALLIS In answer to his SCHOOL DISCIPLINE.
SIR,
WHen ^nprovok'd you addressed unto me in your Elenchus your ha^sh complement
with great security, wantonly to show your wit, I confess you made me angry,
and willing to put you into a better way of considering your own forces, and to
move you a little as you had ^moved me; which I perceive my Lessons to you have
in some measure done; But here you shall see how easily I can bear your
reproaches, now they proceed from anger, and how calmly I can argue with you
about your Geometry, and other parts of Learning.

I shall in the first part confer with you about your Arit^metica Infinitorum,
and afterward compare our manner of Elocution; then your Politics; and last
of all your Grammar and Critics. Your spirall line is condemned by him whose
Authority you use to prove me a Plagiary, (that is, a man that st^aleth other
men's inventions, and arrogates them to himself) whether it be Roberval or not
that w^it that paper, I am not certain. But I think I shall be shortly, but
whosoever it be, his authority will serve no less to show that your Doctrine
of the sp^rall line from the fi^th to the eighteenth proposition of your
Arithmetica Infinitorum, is all false; and that the principal fault therein (if
all faults be not principal in Geometry, when they proceed from ignorance of
the Science) is the same that I objected to you in my Lessons. And for the
Author of that paper, when I am certain who it is, it will be then time enough
to vindicate my self concerning that name of Plagiary; And whereas he
challenges the invention of your Method delivered in your Arithmetica
Infinitorum to have been his before it was yours, I shall (I think) by and by
say that which shall make him a shamed to own it; and those that writ those
Encomiastick Epistles to you ashamed of the Honor they meant to you: I pass
therefore to the ninteenth proposition, which in L^tine is this. Your Geometry.
Si proponatur series Quantitatum in duplicata ratione Arithmetice.
proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum Quadraticorum) continu^
crescentium, a puncto vel o inchoa^arum, (puta ut 0. 1. 4. 9. 16. etc.)
propositum sit, inquirere quam habeat illa rat^onem ad seriem totid^m maximae
aequalium.

Fiat Investigatio per modum inductioni^ ut (in prop. 1.)

Eritque ^ ^ ^ and sic dein^eps.


Ratio proveniens est ubique major quam subtripla seu *; Excessus autem
perpetuo decresci^ prout* numerus terminorum augetur (puta 1/6 1/12 1/18 1/30
etc.) aucto nimirum fractionis denominatore sive consequente rationis in
singulis locis numero senario (ut pa^et) ut ^it rationis provenientis excessus
supra subtriplam, Ea quam habet unitas ad sextuplum numeri terminorum posto;
adeoque.



That is, if there be propounded a row of quantities in duplicate proportion of
the quantities Arithmetically proportional (or proceeding in the order of the
square numbers) continually increasing; and beginning at a point or 0; let it
be propounded to find what proportion the row has; to as many quantities
equal to the greatest;

Let it be sought by induction (as in the first proposition)

The proportion arising is every where greater then subtriple, or, And the
excess perpetually decreaseth as the number of terms is augmented, as here,
1/6 1/12 1/18 1/24 1/30 etc. the denominator of the fraction being in every
place augmented by the number six (as is manifest) so that the excess of the
rising proportion above subtriple is the same which unity has to six times the
number of terms after 0; and so.

Sir, In these your Characters I understand by the cross + that the quantities
on each side of it are to be added together and make one Aggregate; and I
understand by the two parallel lines = that the quantities between which they
are placed are one to another equal; This is your meaning, or you should have
told us what you meant else: I understand also, that in the first row 0 + 1 is
equal to 1, and 1 + 1 equal to 2; And that in the second row 0 + 1 + 4 is equal
to 5; and 4 + 4 + 4 equal to 12; But (which you are too apt to grant) I
understand your Symboles no further; but must confer with your self about the
rest.

And first I ask you (because fractions are commonly written in that manner)
whether in the uppermost row (which is ^) 0/1 be a fraction, 1/1 be a fraction,
be a fraction, that is to say, a part of an unite, and if you will (for the
ciphers sake) whether 0/1, be an infinitely little part of 1; and whether 1/1,
or 1 divided by 1 signify an unity; if that be your meaning, then the fractio^
0/1 added to the fraction 1/1 is equal to the fraction: But the fraction 0/1 is
equal to 0; therefore the fraction 0/1 + 1/1 is equal to the fraction 1/1; and
1/1 equal to which you will* confess to be an absurd conclusion, and cannot
own that meaning.

I ask you therefore again if by 0/1 you mean the proportion of 0 to 1; and
consequently by 1/1 the proportion of 1 to 1, and by the proportion of 1 to 2:
if so, then it will follow, that if the proportions of 0 to 1 and of 1 to 1 ^e
compounded by addition, the proportion arising will be the proportion of 1 to
2. But the proportion of 0 to 1 is infinitely little, that is, none. Therefore
the proportion arising by composition will be that of 1, to 1, and equal
(because of the symbol =) to the proportion of 1 to 2 and so 1 = 2: This also
is so absurd that I dare say that you will not own it.

There may be another meaning yet: perhaps you mean that the uppermost
quantity 0 + 1 is equal to the uppermost q^antity 1; and the lowermost
quantity 1 + 1 equal to the lowermost quantity 2: Which is true: but how then
in this equation = + is the uppermost quantity 1 equal to the uppermost
quantity 1 + 1; or the lower most quantity (...) equal to the lowermost
quantity 3 + 6? Therefore neither can this be your meaning; unless you make
your symbols more significant, you must not blame me for want of understanding
them.

Let us now try what better success we s^all have where the places are three,
as here ^: If your Symbols be fractions, the compound of them by addition is
5/4; For 0, and 4/4 make 5/4; and consequently (because of the Symbol =) 5/4
equal to 5/12 which is not to be allowed, and therefore that was not your
meaning. If you meant that the proportions of 0 to 4 and of 1 to 4 and of 4 to
4 compounded is equal to the proportion of 5. to 12. you will fall again into
no less an inconvenience. For the proportion arising out of that Composition
will be the proportion of 1. to 4. For the proportion of 0. to 4. is infinitely
little. Then to compound the other two, set them in this order 1. 4. 4. and you
have a proportion compounded of 1. to 4. and of 4. to 4. namely, the proportion
of the first to the last, which is of 1. to 4. which must be equal (by this
your meaning) to the proportion of 5. to 12. and consequently as 5. to 12. so
is 1. to 4. which you must not own. Lastly, if you mean that the uppermost
quantities to the uppermost, and the lowermost to the lowermost in the first
Equation are equal, it is granted, but then again in the second Equation it is
false. It concerns your fame in the Mathematics to look about how to justify
these Equations which are the premises to your conclusion following, namely,
that the proportion arising is every where greater then subtriple, or a third;
and that the excess (that is, the excess above subtriple) perpetually
decreaseth as the number of terms is augmented, as here 1/6 1/12 1/18 1/24 1/30
etc. which I will show you plainly is false.

But first I wonder why you were so angry with me for saying you made
proportion to consist in the Quotient, as to tell me it was abominably false,
and to justify it, cite your own words Penes Quotientem, do not you say here,
the proportion is every where greater then subtriple, or? And is not the
quotient of 1. divided by 3? You cannot say in this place that Penes is
understood; for if it were expressed you would ^ot be able to proceed.

But I return to your conclusion, that the ex^ess of the proportion of the
increasing quantities above the third part of so many t^mes the greatest,
decreaseth as 1/6 1/12 1/18 1/24 1/30 etc. For by this account in this row ^
where the quantity above exceeds the third part of the quantities below by '
you make equal to ' which you do not mean. It may be said your meaning is that
the proportion of (...). to the subtriple of 2. which is exceeds what? I
cannot imagine what, nor proceed further where the ter^s be but two. Let us
therefore take the second row, that is, ^ The sum above is 5. the sum below
is 12. the third part whereof is 4. if you mean, that the proportion of 5. to
4. exceeds the proportion of 4* to 12. (which is subtriple) by 1/12' you are
out again. For 5. exceeds 4. by unity, which is 12/12 I do not think you will
own such an equation as ^. Therefore I believe you mean (and your next
proposition assures me of it) that the proportion of 5. to 4. exceeds subtriple
proportion by the proportion of 1. to 12. if you do so, you are yet deceived.

For if the proportion of 5. to 4. exceeds subtriple proportion by the
proportion of 1. to 12. then subtriple proportion, that is, of 4. to 12. added
to the proportion of 1. to 12. must make the proportion of 5. to 4. But if you
look on these quantities 4. 12. 144. you will ^ee and must not dissemble that
the proportion of 4. to 12. is subtriple, and the proportion of 12. to 144. is
the same with that of 1* to 12. Therefore by your assertion it must be as 5. to
4. so 4. to 144. which you must not own.

And yet this is manifestly your meaning as apppeareth in th^se words; u^ (...)
rationis pr^venien^is excessus supra subtriplam ^a quam ^abet unitas ad
sextuplum numeri terminorum post 0, adeoque, which cannot be rendered in
English, nor need to be. For you express your self in the 20th. pr^position
very clearly; I noted it only that you may be more merciful hereafter to the
stumblings of a hasty Pen. For excessus ea quam does not well, nor is to be
well excused by subauditur ratio. Your 20th. proposition is this*

Siprop^natur serie^ quantitatum in duplicata ratione Arithmetice
proportionalium (sive jux^a seriem Numerorum Quadraticorum) continue
crescentium, a puncto vel O in choatarum, ratio quam habet illa ad seriem
to^idem maximae aequalium subtriplam superabit; eritque excessus ea ratio qua^
habet unitas ad sex^uplum n^meri terminorum post 0, sive quam habet radix
Quadraticae termini primi post 0 ad sextuplum radicis Quadraticae termini
maximi.

That is, if there be propounded a row of quantities in duplicate proportion of
Arithmetically-proportionals (or according to the row of square numbers)
continually increasing, and beginnin gwith a point or 0. The proportion of that
row to a row of so many equals to the greatest, shall be greater then subtriple
proportion, and the excess s^all be that proportion which unity h^th to the
sextuple of the number of terms after 0, or the same which the square roo^ of
the first number after 0, has to the sextuple of the square root of the
greatest.

For proof whereof you have no more here, then pa^e^ ex praeceden^^bus; and no
more before but adeoque. You do not we^l to pass over such curious
propositions so slightly; none of the Ancients did so; nor, that I remember,
any man before your self. The proposition is false, as you shall presently see.

Take for example any one of your rows; as ^. By this proportion of yours 1 + 4
which makes 5 is to 12 in more then subtriple proportion; by the proportion of
1 to the sextuple of 2 which is 12. Put in order these three quantities 5. 4.
12. And you must see that the proportion of 5 to 12 is greater then the
proportion of 4 to 12, that is, subtriple proportion, by the proprtion of 5 to
4. But by your account the proportion of 5 to 4 is greater then that of 4 to 12
by the proportion of 1 to 12. Therefore as 5 to 4 so is 1 to 1^. which is a
very strange Parodox.

After this you bring in this Consectary.

Cum autem cresente numero terminorum excessus ille supra rationem sub^riplam
conninuo minuatur, ut tandem quovis assignabili minor eva^^t (un p^tet) si in
in^ini^um producatur prorsus evaniturus est. Adeoque.

That is, seeing as the number of terms increases, that excess above
subtriple proportion continually decre^seth, so as at length it be^omes less
then any assignable (as is manifes^) if it be produced infinitely, it shall
utterly vanish, and so. And so what?

Sir, This consequence of yours is false. For two quantities being given, and
the excess of the greater above the less, that excess may continually be
decreased, and ye^ never quite vanish. Suppose any two unequal quantities
differing by more then an unite, as 3 and 6, the excess 3, let three be
diminished, first by an unite, and the ezcesse will be 2 and the quantities
will be 3 and 5. 5 is greater then 4; the excess 1. Again, let 1 be diminished
and made. ^he excess and the quantities 3 and 4. 4 is yet greater then 4.
Again diminish the excess to, the quantities will be 3 and 4 yet still 4 is
greater then 4. In the same manner you may proceed to, 1/16, 1/32, etc.
Infinitely; and yet you shall never come within an unite (though your unite
stand for 100 mile) of the lesser quantity propounded 3, if that 3 stand for
300 Mile. The exce^ses above subtriple proportion do not d^creas^ in ^he manner
you say it does, but in the manner which I shall now show you.

In this first row ^ a third of the quantities below is. set in order these
three3 quantities 1. 2/9.. The first is 1 equal to the sum above, the last is
equal to the subtriple of the sum below. The middlemost is 2/9 subtriple to the
last quantity. The excess of the proportion of 1 to above the subtriple
proportion of2/9 to is the proportion of 1 to 2/9, that is, of 9 to 2, that is
of 18 to 4.

Secondly in the second row which is ^ a third of the sum below is 4 the sum
above is 5. Set in order these quantities 15. 4. 12. There the proportion of 15
to 12 is the proportion of 5 to 4. The proportion of 4 to 12 is subtriple; the
excess is the proportion of 15 to 4, which is less then the proportion of 18
to 4. as it ought to be; b^t not less by the proportion of to 1/12, as you
would have it.

Thirdly, in the third row, which is ^. A third of the sum below is 12, the su^
above is 14. Set in order these quantities 4 (...). 4. 12. There the proportion
of 42 to 12. is the same, with that of 14 to 4. And the p^oportion of 4 to 12
subtriple, less then the former excess of 15 to 4. And so it goes on
deceasing all the way in this manner, 18 to 4. 15 to 4. 14 to 4 etc. which
differs very much from your 1 to 6. 1 to 12. 1 to 18 etc. and the cause of your
mistake is this; you call the twelfth part of twelve 1/12, and the eighteenth
part of thirty ^ix, you call 1/18, and so of the rest. But what need all those
equations in Symbols, to show that the proportion decreases; is there any man
can doubt, but that the propartion of 1 to 2 is greater then that of 5 to 12,
or that of 5 to 12 greater then that of 14 to 36, and so continually forwards;
or could you have fallen into this error, unless you had taken, as you have
done in very many places of your Elenchus, the Fra*ctions and 1/12, etc. which
are the quotients of 1 divided by 6 and 12. for the very proportions of 1 to 6,
and 1 to 12. But notwithstanding the excess of the proportions of the
increasing quanti^ies, to subtriple proportion decrease still, as the number of
terms increases, and that what proportions soever I shall assign, the
decrement will in time (in time I say without proceeding in in^initum) produce
a less, yet it does not follow that the row of the increasing qu^ntities shall
ever be equal to the third part of the row of so many equals to the last or
greatest. For it is not, I hope, a Paradox to you, that in two rows of
quantities the proportion of the excesses may decrease, and yet the excesses
them selves increase, and do perpetually.

For in the second and third rows, which are ^ and ^ 5 exceeds the third part
of 12, by a quarter of the square of fo^r, and 14 exceedes the third part of 36
by 2 quarters of the square of 4, and proceeding on, the sum of the increasing
quantities where the terms are 5 (which sum is 30) exceeds the third part of
those below (those below are 80 and their third part 26 by 3 quarters and a
quarter of the square of 4. and when the terms are 6 the quantities above will
exceed the third part of them below by 5 quarte^s of the square of four. Would
you have ^en believe, that the forther you go, the excess of the increasing
quantities above the third p^r^ of those below shall be so much the less? And
yet the proportions of those above, to the the thirds of those below, shall
decrease eternally; and therefore your (...) proposit^on is ^alse, namely this.

Siproponatur series Infinita quantitatum in duplic^t^ ratione Arithmetice
proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum quadraticorum) continue
crescentium (...) puncto ^ive O inchoata^um; eri^ illa ad seriem to^idem
maximae aequalium, ut 1 ad 3.

That i^, if an infinite row of quantities be propounded in duplicate
proportion of Arithmetically proportio^alls (or according to the row of
quadratick numbers) continually increasing and beginning from a point or 0;
that row shall be to the row of as many equals to the greatest, as 1 to 3.
This is false, ut patet ex praecedentibus, and consequently all that yo^ say in
proof ^f the proportion of your Parabola to a parallelogram, or of the spiral
(he true spiral) to a circle is in vain.

But your spiral puts me in mind of what you h^ve underwritten to the diagramme
of your prop 5. The spirall in both f^gures was to be continued whole to the
middle, but by the carelessnesse of the Graver it is in one figure manca, in
the other intercis^.

T^uly Sir, you will hardly make your Reader believe that a Graver could ^ommit
those faults without the help of your own Copy, nor that it had been in your
copy, if you had known how to describe a spiral line then as now. This I had
not said, though truth, but that you are pleased to say, though not truth, that
I attributed to the Printer some f^ults of mine;

I come now to the thirty ninth proposition which is this

Si proponatur series quantitatum in triplicata ratione Arithmetice
proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum cubicorum) continue cresentium a
puncto sive O inc^oata^um, (puta ut O. 1. 8. 27. etc.) propositum sit inquirere
quam habeat series illa rationem ad seriem totidem maximae ^qualium.

Fiat investigatio per modum Inductionis (ut in prop. 1 and prop 19.)

Eritque ^ ^ ^ Et sic d^inceps


Ratio proveniens est ubique major quam subquadrupla, sive. Excessus autem
perp^^uo decrescit, p^o ut numerus terminor^m augetur, puta.. 1/12. 1/16 etc.
Aucto nimirum fractionis denominator^ ^ive cansequente rationis in ^ingulis
locis numero quaternatio (ut patet) ut sit rati^nis provenie^ ^xcess^ supra
subquadruplam e^ quam habet unitas ad Quadruplum numeri terminorum post 0.
Adeoque.

That is, if a row of quantities be propounded in triplicate proportion of
Arithmetically proportionalls (or according the row of cubiqu^e numbers)
continually increasing, and beginning from a point or o (as 0. 1. 8. 27. 64.
etc.) let it be propounded to enquire what proportion that row has to a row of
as many equals to the greatest^

Be it sought by way of induction, (as in prop. 1. 19).

The proportion arising is every where greater then subquadruple, or, and the
excess perpetually decreaseth as the number of terms increases as,, 1/12,
1/16, 1/20, etc. The denominator of the fraction, or consequent of the
proportion being in every place augmented by the number 4 (as is manifest) so
that the excess of the arising proportion above subquadruple is the same with
that which an unite has to the quadruple of the number of the terms after 0.
And so. Here are just the same faults which are in prop. 19.

For if 0/1 be a fraction, and 1/1 be a fraction and be another fraction, then
this equation ^ is false. For this fraction 0/1 is equal, to 0* and therefore
we have 1/1 =, that is the whole equal to half. But perhaps you do not mean
them fractions, but proportions; and consequently that the proportion of 0 to
1, and of 1 to 1 compounded by addition (I say by addition; not that I, but
that you think there is a composition of proportions by multiplication, which I
shall show you anon is f^lse) must be equal to the proportion of 1 to 2. which
cannot be, For the proportion of 0 to 1 is infinitely little, that is, none at
all; and consequently the proportion of 1 to 1 is equal to the proportion of 1
to 2* which is again absurd, There is no doubt, but the whole number of 0 + 1
is equal to 1, and the whole number 1 + 1 equal to 2. But reckoning them as you
do, not for whole numbers, but for fractions, or proportions, the equations are
false.

Again your second equation 2/4 = + though meant of fractions, that is of
quotients it be true, and serve nothing to your purpose, yet if it be meant of
proportions, it is false. For the proportion of 1 to 4 and of 1 to 4 being
compounded are equal to the proportion of 1 to 16, and so you make the
proportion of 2 to 4 equal to the proportion of 1 to 16, where as it is but
subquaduplicate, as you call it, or the quarter of it as I call it. And in the
same manner you may demonstrate to yourself, the same fault in all the other
rows of how many terms soever they consist, Therefore you may give for lost
this 39. prop. as well as all the other 38 that went before. As for the
conclusion of it, which is, that the excess of the arising proportion etc.
They are the words of your 40* proposition, where you* e^presse your self
better, and make your error more easy to be detected.

The proposition is this.

Si proponatur series quantitatum in triplicata ratione Arithmetice
proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum cubicorum) continue crescentium a
puncto velo inchoa^arum, ratio quam habet illa ad seriem totidem maximae
aqualium subquadruplam superabit; eritque excessus ea ratio quam habet unitas
ad quadruplum numeri terminorum post 0; sive quam habet radix cubica termini
primi post 0 ad quadruplum radicis cubicae te^mini maximi. Pat^^ ex
praecedente.

Quum autem crescente numero terminorum excessus ille supra rationem
subquadruplam i^a continuo minuatur, ut tandem qu^libet assignabili minor
evadat, (u^ pa^et) si in Infinitum procedatur, prorsus evaniturus est. Ade^que.

Paret ex prop. praecedent.

That is; If a row of quantlties be propounded in triplicate proportion of
Arithmetically proportionalls (or according to the row of cubick numbers)
continually increasing; and beginning at a point or 0; The proportion which
that row ^ath to a row of as many equals to the greatest is greater then
subquadruple proportion; and the excess is that proportion which one unite
has to the Quadruple of the number of terms after 0. Or which the cubick root
of the first term after 0 has to the quadruple of the root of the greatest
term.

It is manifest by the precedent propositions.

And seeing, the number of terms increasing, that excess above quadruple
proportion does so continually decrease, as that at length it becomes less
then any proportion that can be assigned (as is manifest) if the proceeding be
infinite, it shall quite vanish; And so.

This conclusion was annexed to the end of your 39 proposition; as there
prooved. What cause you had to make a new proposition of it, without other
proof then pate^ ex praecedente, I cannot imagine. But howsoever the
proposition is false.

For example, set forth any of your rows, as this of four terms. ^

The row above is 36* the fourth part of the row below is 27. The quadruple of
the number of terms after 0 is 12* then by your account, the proportion of 36
to 108 is greater then subquadruple proportion by the proportion of 1 to 12.
For trial whereof set in order these three quantities 36. 27. 108. The
proportion of 36 (the uppermost row) to 108 (the lowermost row) is compounded
by addition of the proportion^ 36 to 27, and 27 to 108. And the proportion of
36 to 108 exceeds the proportion of 27 to 108 by the proportion of 36 to 27.
But the proportion of 27 to 108 is subquadruple proportion. Therefore the
proportion of 36 to 108 exceeds subquadruple proportion, by the proportion of
36 to 27. And by your account by the proportion of 1 to 12; and consequently as
36 to 27 so is 1 to 12. Did you think such demonstrations as these, should
always pass?

Then for your inference from the decrease of the proportions of the excess to
the vanishing of the excess it self, I have already showed it to be false; and
by consequence that your next Proposition, namely, the 40 is also false.

The proposition is this.

Si pr^ponatur series infinita quantitatum in triplicata ratione Arithmetice
proportionalium (sive juxta seriem numerorum cubicorum) continue crescentium a
puncto sive 0 inchoatarum, erit illa ad seriem totidem maximae aequalium, ut 1
ad 4. pa^et ex praecedente.

That is, If there be propounded an infinite row of quantities in triplicate
proportion of Arithmetically proportionalls (or according to the row of cubick
numbers) continually increasing, and beginning at a point or 0; it shall be to
the row of as many equals to the greatest as 1 to 4. Manifest out of the
precedent proposition.

Even as manifest as that 36. 27. 1. 12. Are proportionalls: seeing therefore
your Doctrine of the spiral lines and spaces is given by your self for lost,
and a vain attempt, your first 41 propositions are undemonstrated, and the
grounds of your demonstrations all false. The cause whereof is partly your
taking quotient for proportion, and a point for 0, as you do in the 1. 16 and
40. propositions and in other places where you say beginning at a point or 0;
though now you deny you ever said either. There be very manay places in your
Elenchus, where you say both; and have no excuse for it, but that in one of the
places, you say the proportion is p^nes quotientem, which is to the same or no
sense.

Your 42 proportion is grounded on the 40; and therefore though true, and
demonstrated by others, is not demonstrated by you.

Your 43 is this.

Pari methodo invenietur ratio seriei infinitae quantitatum Arithmetice
proportionalium in ratione quadruplicata, quintuplicata, sextuplicata, etc
Arithmetice proportionalium a puncto seu 0 in choatarum, ad seriem totidem
maximae aequalium. Nempe in quadruplicata ^^it, ut 1 ad 5; in quintuplicata ut
1 ad 6; in sextuplicata ut 1 ad 7.

Et sic d^inceps.

That is, By the same method will be found the proportion of an infinite row of
Arithmetically proportionalls in proportion quadruplicate, quintuplicate,
sextuplicate etc. of Arithmetically proportionalls beginning at a point or 0,
to the row of as many equals to the greatest; Namely, in quadruplicate, it
shall be as 1 to 5, in quintuplicate as 1 to 6; in sextuplicat^ as 1 to 7; and
so forth.

But by the same method that I have demonstrated that the 19. 20. 21. 39. 40.
41. Propositions are false, any man else that will examine the 43 may find it
false also. And because all the rest of the propositions of your Arithmetica
infinitorum depend on these, they may safely conclude that there is nothing
demonstrated in all that Book, though it consist of 194 propositions. The
proportions of your Parabolo^ides to their Parallellogrammes are true, but the
demonstrations false, and infer the contrary. Nor were they ever demonstrated
(at least the demonstrations are not extant) but by me; nor can they be
demonstrated, but upon the same grounds concerning the nature of proportion,
which I have clearly laid, and you not understood. For if you had, you could
never have fallen into so gross an error as is this your Book of Arithmetica
Infinitorum, or that of the Angle of Contact. You may see by this that your
symbolick Method is not only, not at all inventive of new Theormes, but also
dangerous in expressing the old. If the best Masters of Symbolicks think for
all this you are in the right, let them declare it. I know how far the Analysis
by the powers of the lines extends, as well as the best of your half-learn't
Epistlers, that approve so easily of such An^logismes as those. 5. 4. 1 12, and
36. 27* 1. 12* etc.

It is well for you that they who have the disposing of the professors places
take not upon them to be Judges of Geometry, For if they did, seeing you
confess you have read these Doctrines in your School^ you had been in danger
of being put out of your place.

When the Author of ^he paper wherein I am called Plagiary, and wherein the
honor is taken from you of being the first inventor of these fine Theoremes,
shall read this that I have here written, he will look to get no credit by it;
especially if it be Roberval, which me thinks it should not be. For he
understands what proportion is, better then to make 5 to 4 the same with 1 to
12. Or to make again, the proportion of 36 to 27 the same with that of 1 to 12;
and innumerable disproportionalites that may be inferred from the grounds you
go on. But if it be Robeval indeed, that snatches this invention from you, when
he shall see this burning coal hanging at it, he will let it fall again, for
fear of spoiling his reputation.

But what shall I answer to the Authority of the three great Mathemiticians
that sent you those Encomiastick letters. For the first, whom you say I use to
praise, I shall take better ^eed hereafter of praising any man for his Learning
whilst he is young, further then that he is in a good way. But it seems he was
in too ready a way of thinking very well of himself, as you do of your self.
For the muddinesse of my brain, I must confess it. But ^r, Ought not you to
confess the same of yours? No, men of your tenets use not to do so. He
wonders, (say you) you thought it worth the while to ^o^^l your fingers about
such a piece. It Is well; Every man abounds in his own sense. If you and I were
to be compared by the complements that are given us in p^ivate letters, both
you and your Complementors would be out of Countenance; which ^omplements,
besides that which has been printed and published in the Commendations of my
writings, if it were put together would make a greater volume then either of
your Libels. And truly Sir, I had never answered your Elenchus as proceeding
from Dr. Walli^* if I had not considered you also as the Minister to execute
the malice of that sort of people that are offended with my L^viathan.

As for the judgment of that Public Professor that makes himself a witness
of the goodness of your Geometry, a man may easily see by the letter it self
that he is a dun^. And for the English person of quality whom I know not, I can
say no more yet, then I can say of all three, that he is so ill a Geometrician,
as not to detect those gross Paralogismes as in^er that 5 to 4 and 1 to 12 are
the same proportion. He came into the cry of those whom your title had deceived.

And now I shall let you see that the composition of proportion by
multiplication as it is in the 5 d^f. of the 6 Element, is but another way of
adding proportions one to another. Let the proportions be of 2 to 3, and of 4
to 5. Multiply 2 into 4 and 3 into 5 the proportion arising is of 8 to 15. Put
in order these three quantities 8. 12. 15. The proportion therefore of 8 to 15
compounded of the proportions of 8 to 12 (that is, of 2 to 3) and of 12 to 15.
that is, of 4 to 5 by addition. Again, let the proportion be of 2 to 3 and and
4 to 5 multiply 2 into 5 and 3 into 4 the proportion arising is of 10 to 12.
Put in order these 3 numbers 10* 8. 12. The proportion 10 to 12 is compounded
of the proportions of 10 to 8 that is of 5 to 4, and of 8 to 12, that is of 2
to 3 by addition* I wonder you know not this.

I find not any more clamor against me for saying the proportion of 1 to 2 is
double to that of 1 to 4.

Your Book you speak of concerning proportion against Maybonius is like to be
very useful when neither of you both do understand what proportion is.

You take e^ceptions at that I say, that Eucilde has but one word for double
and duplicate; which nevertheless was said very truly, and that word is
sometimes (...) and sometimes (...)* And you think you come of handsomely with
asking me whether (...) and (...) be one word.

Nor are you now of the mind you were, that a point is not quantity
unconsidered; but that in an infinite series it may be safely neglected. What
is neglected but unconsidered?

Nor do you any more stand to it, that the quotient is the proportion. And yet
were these the main grounds of your Elenchus.

But you will say perhaps I do not answer to the defense you have now made in
this your School Discipline, It Is true. But it is not because you answer never a
word to my former objection against these prop. 19* 39. But because you do so
shift and wriggle and throw out ink, that I cannot perceive which way you go;
nor need I, especially in your vindication of your Arithmetica Infinitorum.
Only I must take notice that in the end of it, you have these words, well,
Arithmetica Infinitorum is come off clear. You see the contrary. For sprawling
is no defense.

It is enough to me, that I have clearly demonstrated both, before sufficienly,
and now again abundantly, that your Book of Arithmetica In^^ni^orum is all
naught from the beginning to the end, and that thereby I have effected that
your Authority shall never hereafter be taken for a prejudice. And therefore
they that have a desire to know the truth in the questions between us, will
henceforth, if they be wise, examine my Geometry by attentive reading me in my
own writings, and then examine, whether this writing of yours consute or
enervate mine.

There is in my 5 lesson a proposition, with a diagramme to it to make good, (I
dare say,) at least against you, my 20. Chapter concerning the dimension of a
Circle. If that demonstration be not shown to be false, your objections to that
Chapter (though by me rejected) come to nothing. I wonder why you pass it over
in silence. But you are not, you say, bound to answer it. True, nor yet to
defend what your have written against me.

Before I give over the examination of your Geometry, I must tell you that your
words (page (...) of this your School Discipline) again the first Corollary
are untrue.

Your words are these, you aff^n that the proportion of the parabola A B I to
the parabola A F K is triplicate to the proportion of the time A B to A F, as
it is in the English. This is not so. Let the Reader turn to the place and
judge. And going on you say, or of the imp^ B I to F K, as it is in the Latin.
Nay, as it is in the English, and the other in the Latin. It Is but your
mistake; but a mistake is not easily excused in a false accusation.

Your exception to my saying, That the differences of two quantities is their
proportion (when they differ, as the no difference, when they be equal) might
have been put in amongst other marks of your not sufficiently understanding the
Latin tongue. Differ and Differentia differ no more then vivere and vita,
which is nothing at all, but as the other words require that go with them,
which other words you do not much use to consider. But differ and the
quantity by which they differ, are quite of another kind. Di^ferre ((...))
differing, exceeding, is not quantity, but relation. But the quantity by which
they differ is always a certain and determined quantity, yet the word
differrentia serves for both, and is to be understood by the coherence with
that which went before. But I had said before, and expressly to prevent cavil,
that relation is nothing but a comparison, and that proportion is nothing but
relation of quantities and so defined them, and therefore* I did there use the
word differentia for differing, and not for the quantity which was le^t by
substraction. For a quantity is not a differing. This I thought the intelligent
Reader would of himself understand without putting me, instead of differentia
to use (as ^ome do, and I shall never do) the mongrell word (...) differ. And
whereas in one only place for differ ternario I have writ ternarius, If you
had understood what was clearly expressed before, you^ might have been sure, it
was not my meaning, and therefore the excepting against it, was either want of
understanding, or want of Candou^; choose which you will.

You do not yet clear your Doctrine of Condensation and Rarefa^lion. But I
beleev^ you will be degrees become satisfied that they who say the same
Numerical Body may ^e sometimes greater, sometimes less, speak absurdly, and
that Condensation and Rarefaction here, and definitive and ci^cumscriptive and
some other of your distinctions elsewhere are but ^nares, such as
School-Divines have invented -- (...),
(...)
to entangle shallow wits.

And that that distinction which you bring here, that it is of the same
quantity, while it is in the same place, but it may be of a different quantity,
when it goes out of its place, (as if the place added to, or took any quantity
from the body placed) is nothing but mee^ words. It Is true that the Body which
swells changes place; but it is not by becoming it self a greater body, but by
admixtion of Air or other body; as when water rises up in boiling, it takes
in some parts of Air. But seeing the first place of the body is to the body
equal, and the second place equal to the same body, the places must also be
equal to one another, and consequently the dimensions of the body remain equal
in both places.

Sir, When I said that such Doctrine was taught in the Universities, I did not
speak against the Universities, but against such as you. I have done with your
Geometry, which is one (...).

As for your El^quence let the Reader judge, whether your^ or mine be the more
muddy, though I in plain s^olding should have out done you, yet I have this
excuse which you have not, that I did but answer your challenge at that weapon
which you thou^ht fit to choose. The Catalogue of the hard language which you
put in at the 3. and 4. pages of your School-discipline, I acknowledge to be
mine, and would have been content you had put in all. The titles you say I give
you of Fools, Beasts, and Asses I do not give you, but drive back upon you;
which is no more then not to own them; ^or the rest of the Catalogue I like it
so well as you could not have pleased me better, then by setting those passages
together to make them more conspicuous, that's all the de^ence I will make to
your accusations of that kind.

And now I would have you to consider whether you will make the like de^ence
against the ^aults that I shall ^inde in the Language of your School-Discipline.

I observe first the facetiousnesse of your Title page. Due Correction for Mr.
H^^bs, or School Discipline, for not saying his lessons right, what a quibble
is this upon the word Lesson; Besides, you know it has taken wind; for you
vented it amongst your ac quaintance at Oxford then when my Lessons were but
upon the Press. Do you think if you had pretermitted that piece of wit, the
opinion of your judgment would have been ^re the less. But you were ^ot
content with this but must make this Metaphor from the rod, to take up a
considerable part of your book; in which there is scarce any thing that your
self can think wittily said besides it. Consider also these words of yours; It
is to be hoped that in time you may come to learn the Language, for you be come
to great A already. And presently after, were I great A before I would be
willing to be so used, I should wish my self little a, a hundred times. Sir,
you are a Doctor of Divinity, and a professor of Geometry, but do not deceive
your self; this does not pass for wit in these parts; no nor generally at
Oxford. I have acquaintance there that will blush at the reading it.

Again, in another place you have these words, Then you catechize ut, what is
your name. Are you Geometricians? who gave you that name etc. Besides in other
places such abundance of the like insipid conc^ipts as would make men think, if
they were no otherwis^ acquainted with the Universitv but by reading your
Books, that the dearth there of salt were very great. If you have any passage
more like to salt then these are (excepting now and anon) you may do well to
show it your acquaintance, lest they despise you; For (since the detection of
your Geometry) you have nothing left you else to defend you from contempt. But
I pass over this kind of eloquence; and come to somewhat yet more rural.

Page 27. line 1. You say I have given Euclide his Lurry. And again page 129.
l. 11. And And now he is lest to learn his Lurry. I understand not the word
Lurry. I never read it before, nor heard it, as I remember, but once, and that
was when a Clown threatening another Clown said he would give him such a Lurry
come poope etc. Such words as these do not become a learned mouth, much less
are fit to be Registered in the public writings of a Doctor of Divinity. In
another place you have these words, just the same to a Cows thumb, a pretty
Adage.

Page 2. But pree-thee tell me. And again page 95. pree-thee tell me, why do
thou ask me such a question, and the like in many other places. You cannot but
know how casy it is and was for me; to have spoken to you in the same language.
Why did I not? Because I thought that amongst men that were civilly bred it
would have redounded to my shame, as you have cause to fear that this will
redound to yours. But what moved you to speak in that manner? were you angry?
If I thought that the cause, I could pardon it the sooner, but it must be very
great anger that can put a man that pro^esseth to teach good manners, so much
out of his wits as to ^all into such a language as this of yours; It was
perhaps an imagination that you were talking to your inferior, which I will
not gran^ you, nor will the Heralds I believe trouble themselves to decide the
question. But howsoever I do not find that civil men use to speak so to their
inferious. If you grant my learning but to be equal to yours (which you may
certainly do without very much disparageing of your self abroad in the world)
you may think it less insolence in me to speak so to you in respect of my age,
then for you to speak so to me In respect of your young Doctor-ship. You will
find that for all your Doctor-ship, your elders, if otherwise of as go^d
repute as yo^, will be respected before you. But I am not sure that this
language of yours proceeded from that cause; I am rather inclined to think you
have not been enough in good company, and that there is still somewhat le^t in
your manners for which the honest youths ^of Hedington and Nincsey may compare
with you ^or good Language as great a Doctor as you ar^.

For my verses of the Peak, though they be as ill in my opinion as I bel^eve
they are in yours, and made long since, yet are they not so obscene, as that
they ought to be blamed by Dr. Wallis. I pray you Sir, whereas you have these
words in your Schoole-Discipline page 96. unless you will say that one and the
same motion may be now, and anon too; what was the reason you put these words
now and anon too in a different Character, that makes them to be the more taken
notice of; Do you think that the story of the Minister that uttered his
affection (if it be not a sl^nder) not unlawfully but unseasonably, is not
known to others as well as to you? what needed you then (when there was nothing
that I had said could give the occasion) to use those words; there is nothing
in my verses that do olerehircum, so much a^ this of yours, I know what good
you can receive by ruminating on such Ideas, or cherishing of such thoughts.
But I go on to other words of (...) by you reproached, you may as well se^k the
Focu^ of the Parabola of Dives and Lazarus, which you say is mocking of the
Scripture. To which I answer only, that I intended not to mock the Scripture,
but you; and that which was not meant for mocking was none. And thus you have a
second (...).

Grammar and Critickes.
I come now to the comparison of our Grammar and Critics. You object first
against the signification I give of (...), and say thus, what should come into
your cap (that if you markit in a man that wears a square cap, to one that
wears a Hatt is very witty) To make you think that (...) signifies a mark or
brand with a hot iron, I perceive where the business lies. It Was (...) run in
your mind when you talked of (...); and because the words are somewhat alike
you jumble them both together. Sir, I told you once before, you presume too
much upon your first cogitations. Aristophanes, in R^nis. Act. 5. Scen. 5.
(...) etc. The old Commentator upon the word (...) says thus (...). That is,
(...) for (...) for he (Adimantus) was not a Citizen. I hope the Commentator
does not here mock Aristophanes for jumbling (...) and (...) together for want
of understanding Greek. No, (...) and (...) signify the same, save that for
branding I seldom read (...) but (...). For (...) does no more signify a brand
with a hot iron then (...) a point made also with a hot iron. They have both
one common theme (...), which does not signify pungo, nor interpungo nor inuro
(for all you Lexicon) but notam inprimere, or pungendo notare, without any
restriction to burning or punching. It is therefore no less proper to say that
(...) is a mark with a hot iron, then to say the same of (...). The difference
is only this, that when they marked a slave, or a rascal as you are not
ignorant is usually done here at the Assizes in the hand or shoulder with a hot
iron they called that (...), not for the burning but for the mark. And as it
would have been called (...) that was imprinted on a slave, though made by
st^yning or incision, so it is (...) though done with a hot iron* And therefore
there was no jumbling of those two words together as for want of reading Greek
Authors, and by trusting too much to your Dictionaries (which you say are
proofs good enough for such a business) you were made to imagine. The use I
have made thereof was to show that a point (both by the word (...) in Euclide,
and by the word (...) in some others) was not nothing, but a visible mark; the
ignorance where of has thrown you into so many Paralogismes in Geometry.

But do you think you can defend your Adducis Malleum as well as I have now
defended my (...)? You have brought, I confess, above a hundred places of
Authors where there is the word Duco, or some of its compounds; but none of
them will justify Adducis Malleum and (excepting two of those places) you your
self seem to condemn them all, comparing yours, with none of the rest but with
these two only; both out of Plautus, by you, not well understood. The first is
in Casina Act. 5. Scen. 2. ubi intro hanc Novam Nuptam deduxi, via recta,
Clavem abduxi. Which you presently presuming of your first thoughts (a peculiar
fault to men of your principles) assure your self is right. But if you look on
the place as Scaliger reads it cited by the commentator, you will find it
should be obduxi, and that Clavis is there used for the bolt of the lock.
Besides he bolted it within. Whither then could he carry away the key? The
place is to be rendered thus, when I had brought in this new bride I presently
locked the door, and is this as bad every whit as Adducis Malleum. The second
place is it Amphytryo Act. 1. Scen. 1. Eam (Cirneam) ut a matre ^uerat natum
plenum vini Eduxi me^i. Which you interpret I brought out a flag^n of Wine.
Unlearnedly. They are the words of Mercury transformed into Sofia. And to try
whether Mercury were So^ia or not, So^ia asked him where he was and what he did
during the Battle; to which Mercury answered, (who knew where Sofia then was
and what he did) I was in the Cellar where I filled a Cirnea, and brought it up
full of Wine, pure as it came from its mother. By the mother of the Wine
meaning the Vine, and alluding to the Education of Children, for Ebibi said
Eduxi, and with an Emphasis in meri, because Cirnea (from (...), Misceo) was a
vessel wherein they put water to temper to their Wine. Intimating that th^ugh
the vessel were Cirnea, yet the Wine was meru^. This is the true sense of the
place; but you will have Eduxi to be I brought out, though he came not out
himself. You see Sir, that neither this is so ^ad as Addu^^s Malleum.

But suppose out of some one place in some one blind Author you ^ad pa^ralled
your Addu^is M^ll^um, do you think it must therefore presently be held for good
Latin, why more then learn his lurry must be therefore thought good English a
thousand years hence, because it will be read in Dr. Wallis long*liv'd works.
But how do you construe this passage of the Greek Testament (...). You
construeit thus: she shall be saved notwithstanding Child bearing, if (the
w^men) remain in the faith. Is childbearing any obstacle to the salvation of
women? You might as well have translated the first verse of Romans 5. in this
manner, Being then justified by fait^, ^e have pea^e with God notwithstanding
our Lord Jesus Christ. I let pass your not ^^nding in (...)* as good a
Gra^arian as you are, a Nominative case to (...). If you had remembered the
place. 1. Pet. Chap. 3. verse 20. (...), that is, They were saved in the
wa^^rs, you would have thought your construstion justified then very well; but
you h^d been deceived, for (...) does not there signify causam, nor ablationem
impedimenti but tran^m; not cause or removing an impediment but passage. Being
come thu^ ^^r I found a friend that has eased me of this dispute; for he
showed me a letter written to himself from a learned man, that has out of very
good Authors collected enough to decide all the Grammatical questions between
you and me both Greek and Latin. He would not let me know his name, nor any
thing of him but only this, that he had better ornaments then to be willing to
go clad abroad in the habit of a Grammarian. But he gave me leave to make use
of so much of the letter as I thought fit in this dispute. Which I have done
and have added it to the end of this writing. But before I come to that, you
must not take it ill (though I have done with your School Discipline) if I
ex^mine a little some other of your printed writings as you have examined mine;
for neither you in Geometry nor such as you in Church politics can not expect
to publish any unholesome doctrine without some Antidotes from me, as long as I
can hold a pen. But why did you answer nothing to my sixth Lesson? because (you
say) it concerned your Colle^gue only; No Sir, It concerned you also, and
chiefly. For I have not heard that your Colleague holdteh those dangerous
principies which I take notice of in you. In my sixth Lesson page 62. upon the
occasion of these words, not his but yours. Perhaps you t^ke the whol^ History
of the fall of Adam for a fable, which is no wonder, seeing you say the rules
of honoring and worshipping of God are to be taken form the laws. In answer to
which I said thus. You that take so hainously, tha^ I would have the rule of
Gods worship in a Christian Commonwealth to be taken from the Laws, tell me
from whom you would have them taken. From your self? Why so, more then from
me? From the Bishops? Right, if the Supreme power of the Commonwealth will
have it so; if not, why from them rather then from me? From a Consistory of
Pres^yt^rs* themselves or joined with Lay Elders, whom they may sway as they
please? Good, If the supreme Governor of the Commonwealth will have it so. If
not, why from them rather then from me, or from any man else? They are wiser
and learneder then I* It may be so; but it ha^ not yet appeared. Howsoever, let
that be granted. Is ^h^re any man so very a fool a^ to subje^^ himself to the
rules of other men in those things which do so nearly concern himself, for the
title they assume of being wise and learne^, unless they also have the sword
which must portect them. But it seems you understand the sword as comprehended.
If so, Do not you then r^ceive the rules of Gods worship from the Civil Power?
Yes doubtless; and you would expect, if your Consistory had that sword, that
no man should dare to ex^rcise or teach any rules concerning Gods worship which
were not by you allowed.

This will be thought strong arguing, if you do not answer it. But the truth
is, you could say nothing against it without too plainly discove^ing your
disaffection to the Government. And yet you have discovered it pretty well in
your second Thesis maintained in the Act at Oxford 1654, and since by your self
published. This Thesis I shall speak briefly to.

Scotch-Church Politics.
You define Ministers of the Gospel to be those to whom the preaching of the
Gospel by their o^fice is enjoined by Christ. Pray you, first, what do you mean
by saying preaching ex Offici^ is enjoined by Christ. Are they Preachers ^x
Officio, and afterward enjoined to Preach? Ex Officio adds nothing to the
definition; but a man may ^asily see your purpose to disjoyn your self from the
State by inserting i^.

Secondly, I desire to know in what manner you will be able out of this
d^^inition to prove your self a Minister? Did Christ himself immediately enjoin
you to preach, or give you orders? No. Who then, some Bishop, or Minister or
Ministers? Yes; by what Authority? Are you sure they had Authority immediately
from Christ? no. How then ar^ you sure but that they might have none? At least,
some of them through whom your Authority is derived might have none. And
therefore if you run b^ck for your Authority toward the Apostles times but a
matter of sixscore years, you will ^inde your Authority derived from the Pope;
which words have a ^ound very unlike to the voice of the Laws of England. And
yet the Pope will not own you. There Is no man doubts but that you hold that your
Office comes to you by successive impo^ition o^ hands from the time of the
Apostles. Which opinion in those gentle terms passes well enough; But to say
you derive your Authority from thence, not through the Authority of the
Sovereign power civil, is too rude to be endured in a state that would live in
peace. In a word you can never prove you are a Minister, but by the Supreme
Autho^ity of the Commonwealth. Why then do you not put some such clause into
your definition? As thus, Ministers of the Gospel are those to whom the
preaching of the Gospel is enjoined by the Sovereign power in the name of
Christ. What harm is there in this definition, saving only it crosses the
ambition of many men that hold your p^inciples? Then you d^^ine the power of a
Minister thus; The power of a Minister is that which belongs to a Minister of
the Gospel in virtue of the Office he holds; in as much as he holds a public
Station, and is distinguished from private Christians. Such as is the power of
preaching the Gospel; administering the Sacrament; the use of Eccles^astical
censure^; and Ord^ining of Ministers etc.

Again; how will you prove out of this definition that you or any man ^lse has
the power of a Minister, i^ it be not given him, by him that is the Sovereign
o^ the Commonwealth* For seeing (as I have now proved) it is from him that you
must d^rive your Ministry, you can have no other power then that which is
limited in your Orders, ^or ^ha^ neithe^ longer then he thinks fit. For if he
give it you for the instruction of his subjects in their duty, he may take it
from you again whenever he shall see you instruct them wi^h undutiful and
seditious principles. And if the Sogeraign power give me command (though
without the ceremony of imposition of hands) to teach the Doctrine of my
Leviathan in the Pulpit, why am not I if my Doctrine and life be as good as
yours, a Minister as well as you, and as public a person as you are? For
public person primarily is none but the civil Sovereign, and so seconda^ily
all that are employed in the execution of any part of the public Charge. For
all are his Ministers, and therefore also Christ's Ministers because he is ^o;
and other Ministers are but his Vicars, and ought not to do or say any thing to
his people contrary to the intention of the Sovereign in giving them their
Commission,

Again, if you have in your Commission a power to Ex^ommunicate, how can you
think that your Soveraig^ who gave you that Commission intended it for a
commission to Excommunicate himself, that is, (as long as he stands
Excommunicate; to deprive him of his Kingdom) If all Subjects were of your
mind, as I hope* they will never be, they will have a very unquiet life. And
yet this has (as I have often heard) been practiced in Scotland, when Ministers
holding your principles had power enough (though no right) to do it.

And for Administration of the Sacraments, if by the Supreme power of the
Commonwealth it were committed to such of the Laity as know how it ought to be
done as well as you, they would ips^ facto be Ministers as good as you.
Likewise the right of Ordination of Ministers depends not now on the Imposition
of hands of a Minister or Presbytery, but on the authority of the Christian
Sovereign Christ's immedi^t Vicar and supreme Governor of all Persons and Judge
of all causes both spiritual and temporal in his own Dominions, which I believe
you will not deny.

This being evident, what Acts are those of yours which you call Authoritative,
and receive not from the Authority of the civil power? A Constable does the
acts of a Constable authoritatively in that sense. Therefor you can no
otherwise claim your power then a Constable claims his, who does not
exercise his Office in the Con^^ablery of another. But you ^orget that the
Scribes and the Pharisees ^it no more in Moses Chair.

You would have every Minister to be a Minister of the Universal Church, and
that it be lawful for you to preach your Doctrine at Rome; if you would be
pleased to try, you would find the Contrary. You bring no argument for it that
looks like reas^n. Examples prove nothing, where persons, times, and other
circumstances differ; as they differ very much now when Kings are Christians,
from what they were then when Kings per^ecuted Christians. It is ea^ie to
perceive what you aim at.

You woul fain have Market Day Lectures set up by authority (not by the
authority of the Civil power but by the authority of example of the Apostles in
the Emission of Preachers to (...) I^fidels) not knowing that any Christian may
lawfully preach to the Infidels. that is to say, proclaim unto them that Jesus
is the Mesiah without need of being other ways made a Minister; as the Deacons
did in the Apostles time; nor that many teachers unless they can agree better,
do any thing else but prepare men for faction, nay, rather you know it well
enough; but it conduces to your end upon the Market-dayes to dispose at once
both Town and Country, under a false pretense of obedience to God, to a
Neglecting of the Commandments of the Civil Sovereign, and make the Subject to
be wholly ruled by your selves; wherein you have already found your selves
deceived. You know how to trouble and sometimes und^e a ^lack Government, and
had need to be warily looked to, but are not fit to hold the rei^es. And how
should you, being men of so little judgment as not to see the Necessity of
unity in the Governor, and of Absolute obedience in the Governed, as is
manifest out of the place of your Elenchus above recited. The Doctrine of the
duty of private men in a Commonwealth is much more difficult, not only then
the knowledge of your symbols, but also then the knowledge of G^ometry it self*
How then do you think, when you err so grossly in a few Equations, and in the
use of most common words, you should be fit to Govern so great Nations as
England, Ireland, and Scotland, or so much as to teach them. For it is not
reading but judgment that enables one man to teach another.

I have one thing more to add, and that is the disaffection I am charged with
all to the Universities. Concerning the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, I
ever held them for the greatest and Noblest means of advancing learning of all
kinds, where they should be therein employed, as being ^urnished with large
endowments, and other helps of Study, and frequent* with abundance of young
Gentlemen of good families ^^d good breeding from their child hood. On the
other side, in case the same means and the same wits should be employed in the
advancing of the Doctrines that tend to the weakening of the public, and
strengthening of the power of any private ambitious party, they would also be
very effectual for that; And consequently that if any Doctri^e tending ^o the
diminishing of the civil power were taught there, not that the Universities
were to blame, but only those men that in the Universities either in Lectures,
Sermons, printed Books, or Thesis did teach such Doctrine to their hear^rs or
readers. Now yo^ know very well that in the time of the Roman Religion, the
power of the Pope in England was upheld principally by such teachers in the
Universities. You k^ow also how much the Divines that held the ^ame princi^les
in Church Government with you, have contributed to our late troubles. Can I
therefore be justly taxed with disaffection to the Universities for wishing
this to be reformed. And it has pleased God of late to reform it in a great
measure, and indeed as I thought totally, when out comes this your Thesis
boldly maintained to show the contrary; Nor can I yet call this your Doctrine
the Doctrine of the Vniver^ity, b^t surely it will not be unr^asonable to think
so, if by public act of the University it be not disavowed, which done, and
that as often as there shall be need, there can be no longer doubt but that the
Universities of England are not only the Noblest of all Christian
Universities, ^ut also absolutely, and of the greatst benefit to this Common
wealth that can be imagined, except that benefit of the head it self that
uniteth and rules all. I have not here perticularized at length all the ill
consequences that may be deduced fromthis Thesis of yours, because I may, when
further provoked, have somewhat to say that is new.

So much for the 3. (...).
An extract of a Letter concerning the Grammatical part of the Controversy
between Mr. HOBBES and Dr. WALLIS. Mr. Hobbes has these words
LOngi^udinem percu^sam motu uniformi, cum impetu ubique ipsi B D ^quali. Dr.
Wallis says cum were better out, unless you would have impe^us to be only a
companion, not a cause. Mr. Hobbes answered it was the Abla^ive case of the
manner. The truth is the Ablatives case of the manner, and cause both, may be
used with the conjunction cum, as may be justified. Cicero in the 2. de Not.
Deor. moliri aliquid cum labor operoso ac molesto; and in his Oration for
C^cinn^. De se autem hoc praedicat, Antiocho Ebul^j se^vo imperasse ut in
Caecina^ advenien^em cum serro invaderet. Let us see then what Dr. Wallis
objects against Tully; where a Causality is imported; Though we may use with in
English, yet not cum in Latin, to kill with a sword (importing this to have an
instrumental or causal in^luence, and not only that it h^ngs by the man's side
whilst some other weapon is made ^se of) is not in Latin, occidere cum
gladio, but gladio occidere. This shows that the Dr. has not forgot his
Grammar, for the subsequent examples as well as this rule are borrowed thence.
But yet he might have known that great Personages have never confined
themselves to this Pedantry, but have chosen to walk in a greater latitude.
Most of the Elegancies and Idioms of every Language are exceptions to his
Grammar. But since Mr. Hobbes says it is the Ablative case of the manner,
there is no doubt it may be expressed with cum. The Doctor in the mean time
knew no more then what Lilly had taught him; Alvarez would have taught him
more. And Voss^us in his Book de constructione Cap. 47. expressly teaches,
Ablativ^s causae, instrument^, vel modi, non a verbo regised a praepositione
omiss^, a vel ab, de, e, vel ex, prae, aut cum, ac praepositiones eas quandoque
exprimi nisi quod cum ablativis inst^umenti haud ^emere inve^ias; and
afterward he sath non timere imitandum. If this be so, then did Mr. Hobbes
speak Grammatically, and with Tully, but not usually. And might not one retort
upon the Doctor, that Vossius is as great a Critic a^ ^ie.

His next reflection is upon praetendi^ scire, this he says is an Angli^isme.
If this be all his Accusation, upon this score, we shall lose ma^y expres^ions
that are used by the best Authors, which I take to be good Lati^smes, though
they be also Anglicismes, the latter being but an imitation of the former. The
Do^tor therefore was too fierce to condemn upon so general an account, that
which was not to have been censured for being an Anglicisme, unless also it
had been no Latinisme. Mr. Hobbes replies, that the Printer had omitted se. He
says, this mends the matter a little It is very likely, for then it is just
such another Anglicisme as that of Quintilian; Cum loricatus in foro ambularet,
praetendebat se id metu facere. The Doctor certanily was very negligent, or
else he could not have missed this in Robert Stephen. Or h^ply he was resolved
to condemn Quintilian for this and that other Anglicisme, Ignorantia p^^tendi
non potest, as all those that have used praetendo, which are many and as good
Authors as Doc^^r Wallis that makes his own Encomiasts (not an English man)
amongst them to w^^te A^glicismes.

Then ^e bl^mes Tractatus ^^jus partis t^rtiae, in q^a mo^us and magnitudo per
se and abstract^ consideravimus, te^minum hic statuo. Here I ^^st con^esse the
exception is colonrable, yet I can parallel it with the like objection made by
Erasm^s aga^^st Tully, out of whom Erasmus q^otes this passage; D^ut us
comm^tans Athents; quo^^am ven^ negabant solvendi facultatem, e^at ani^us ad ^e
scr^bere: and excuses it hu^, that Tully might have had at first in his
thoughts v^bam or statuebam, which he afterward relinquished for erat animus,
and did not remember what he had antecedently w^itt^n, which did not vary from
his succeeding, though^^, but words. And this excuse may pass wi^h any who
knows that Mr. Hobbes values not the study of word^, but as it s^rves to
express his thoughts, which were the same whether he wrot^; in qua metus and
m^g^i^udo per se a^ abstracte considerati sunt, or consideravimus. And if the
Dr* will make this so capital; he must prove it volunta^y, and show that it is
greater then what is legible in the p^ny Letter of his Encomiast, whom he would
have to be beyond except^^n.

Now ^ollowes his r^diculous apol^gi^ for adducis malleum, ut occidas muscam*
The cause why he did use that prov^rb (of his own phrasing) was this. Mr.
Hobbes had taken a great deal of pains to demonstrate what Dr. Wallis thought
he could have proved in shor^; upon this occasion he objects, ad ducis malleum
ut occidas muscam, which I shall suppose he intended to English thus, you bring
a beetle to kill a ^^y. Mr. Hobbes retor^ed that adduco was not used in that
sense. The Dr. vindicates himself thu^; duco, dedu^^, reduco, perduco, produco,
etc. signify s^range things, ergo, adduco may be used in that sense; which is
(...) most ridic^lo^^ kind of arguing, where we are but to take up our
Language from others, and not to coyue new phr^ses. It is not the Grammar that
shall secure the Dr. nor weak Analogies, where Elegance comes in contest. To
jus^i^ie his expression he must have showed it usu tritum, or alleged the
Authori^y of some Author of great note for i^. I have not the leisure to exam^e
his impertinent citations about those other compounds, nor yet of that simple
verb duco; nay, to justify his saying he has not brought one parallel
example. He talks indeed very high, that duco (^ith its compounds) i^ a word
of a large signification, and amongst the rest to Bring, fetch, carry etc. i^
so exceeding frequent ^n all Authors (Plautus, Terence, Tully Ca^ar, Tacitus,
Pliny, Seneca, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Claudian, etc that he must needs be either
maliciously blind, or a very stranger to the Latin tongue that does not know
it, or c^n have the face to to deny it. (...) ^ead what will ^e my doom for
not allowing his Latin; yet (...) must profess I dare secure the Dr, for
having read all Authors, notwithstanding his assertion, and I hope he will do
the like for me. And for those which he has read, had he brought no better
proofs then these, he had, I am sure, been whipped soundly in
Westminster-School, for hi^ impudence as well as ig^or^nce, by the learned
M^ster thereof a^ present. But I da^e f^^ther a^m, the Dr. has no^ read in this
point any, *but only consulted with Robe^t S^ephen's Thesaurus Li^guae
La^inae, whence he h^th borrowed his allegations in adduco; and for the other I
had not so ^u^h Idle ^ime as to compare them. And lest the fact might be
discovered he has sophi^^icated those Authors whence Stephen cites the
expressions, and imposed upon them others. If it be not so, o^ that the Dr.
could not write it right when the c^py was right before him, let him ^ell me
where he did ever read in Plautus, adducta res in fastidium. I fin^e the whole
sentence in Plinie's preface to Vespas^an (out of whom in the precedent
Paragraph he cites it) about the ^iddle: alia vero ita multis prodita, ut in
factidium sint adducta, which is the very example Stephanus uses, although he
does p^emise his adducta res in fastidium. Let the Dr. tell where he ever did
read (...) Horace Ova noctuae etc. ^aedium vini adducunt* Did he (or any else)
with the interposition of an etc) make Trochaicks? I say, and Step^anus says
so too, that it is in Pliny lib. 13. cap. 15. near the end; the whole sentence
runs thus; Ebriosis Ova noctuae per ^^id^um data in vino, ^aedium ejus
adducunt. I doubt not but these are the places he aimed at, although he
disguised and min^*d the Quotatio^s; if they be not, I should b^ glad to
augment my Stephanus with his Additions.

These things pr^mis^d, I come to consider the Doctors proofs: Res eo adducta
est: adducta vita in ex^remum: adducta res in fas^idium: rem ad muc^ones and ^s
adducere: contracta res and adducta in a^gus^um: ^es ad concordiam adduci
potest: in ordinem adducere: adducere febres, s^^im, taedium vini (all in
Robert Stephen) betwixt which and adducere malleum, what a vast difference
there is, I leave them to umpier ^iteretes and religiosas nacti sunt aures* who
are the competent Judges of Elegancy, and only cast in the verdict of one or
two, who are in any place (where the purity of the L^tin ^ongue flourishes) of
great esteem* L^saeus in his Scop^ Linguae Latinae, ad purgandam Linguam a
barbary, etc. (would any think that the Doctors elegant expression, frequent
in all Authors, which none but the malicious or ignorant can deny, should
suffer so contumelious an expurgation?) Losaeus (I say) has these words,
Adferre plerique minus attentiutuntur pro adducere. Quod Plautus, in Pseudolo,
insigni exem^lo notat. C. Attu^i hunc. P. Quid attulisti? T. Adduxi volui
dic^re P* Quis istic est? C. Charinus. Satis igitur admonet discriminis inter
ducere, reducere, adducere and abducere, quae de pers^na; et ^erre, adferre
etc. quae de re dicuntur. Idem. Demetrium, quem ego novi, adduce; argentum non
mo^or qu^ feras Cavendum igitur est ne vulgi more, (let the Dr. mark this* and
know that this Author is authentic amongst the Ciceronians) adferre de persona
dicamus, s ^^adducere; licet et hoc de certis quibus^am rebus non inepte
dicatur. In this last clause he ^aith as ^uch as Mr. Hobbes says, and what the
Dr. proves; but that ever the Dr. brought an example which might resemble
adducis malleum, is denied; for I have mentioned alre^dy his allegations every
one, of adduco. Another Author (a fit Antagonist for the elegant Dr.) is the
^arrago ^ordidorum Verborum, ^oyned with the Epitome of L. Valla's elegancies.
He says, Acce^se, adduc Petrum, latin dicitur pro eo quod pueri dicunt* adfer
Petrum. And this may suffice to justify Mr. Hobbes's exception, who proceeded
no further th^n this Author to tell the Doctor that adduco was used of Animals.
But the Dr. replies, this signification is true, but so may the other be also*
I s^y, if it never have been used so, it cannot be so, for we cannot coin new
Latin words, no more then French or Spanish who are Forreign^rs. Mr. Hobbes
was upon the negative, and not to disprove the contrary ^p^nion. If the Dr.
would be believed, he must prove it by some example (which is all the proof of
elegancy) and till he do so, not to beleev^ him, it is sufficient not to h^ve
cause. But Dr Wallis, why not adduco for a ^ammer as well as a tree? I answer,
yes, equally for either, and yet for neither; Did ever any body go about to
mo^k his Reade^s thus solemnly? I do not find, (to my best remembrance) any
example of it in S^ephen, and the Dr. is not wiser then his Book; if there be,
it is strange the Dr. should omit the only pertinent example, and trouble us
with such impertinences for three or four pages. In Stephen there are adducer^
habenas and adducere lorum, but in a different sense. It is not impossible I
may guess (...) the Doctors aim. In Tully de Not* D^or (as I remember) there
is this passage; Quum autem ille respondisset, in agro ambu^anti ra^ulum
adductum, ut remissu^ esset, in oculum suum recidisse, where it signifies
nothing else but to be bent, bowed, pulled back, and in that sense, the hammer
of a Clock* or, that of a Smith, when he fetches his strok^* may be said
addu^i. And this I conceive the Doctor would have us in the close think to have
been his me^ning; else wh^t does he drive at in these words? When you have done
the best you can, you will not be able to find better words then addu^ere
mall^um and reduce^* to signify the two contrary motions of the Hammer, the
one when you strike with it, (excellently trivial!) The other when you take it
back (better and better) What to do? to fetch another stroke. If any can
believe that this was his meaning, I shall justify his Latin, but must leave
it to him to prove it sense. If he intended no more, why did he go about to
defend the other meaning, and never meddle with this? Which yet might have been
proved by this one example of mine? May not therefore his own saying be justly
retorted upon him in this case, Adducis malleum, us occidas muscam?

Another exception is* Falsae sunt et mult^ istiusmodi (propositiones) I wish
the Doctor could bring so good Parallels, and so many, out of any Author, for
his Adducis malleum, as Tully affords in this case. Take one for all out of the
beginning of his Paradoxes; Animadverti saepe Catonem, ^um in senatu sententiam
diceret, Locos graves ex Philosophia tractare, abhorrentes ab hoc usu forensi
et publico, sed dicendo consequi tamen, ut illa etiam populo pro^abilia
viderentur. This is but a Solaecophanes, and h^th* many p^^sidents mo^e, as in
the second ^ook of his Academical questions, etc.

I cannot now stay upon each particular p^ssage; I do not see any necessity of
tracing the Dr. in all hi^ figaries. Now he dis^llows tanquam diceremus, a^ if
we should say. But why is that l^ss tolerable then tanquam feceris, as if you
had done? It should be quasi (forsooth!) Or ac si, or tanquam si, which is
Tulli's own word. (What is tanquam si become but one word?) tanquam si tua res
agatur etc. Good Dr. leave out Tully and all Ciceronians, or you will for ever
suffer for this, and your Adducis malleum. Is not this to put your self on
their verdict, when you oppose Mr. Hobs with Tully? But the Dr. gives his
reason. And though he has had the luck in his Adducis malleum, to follow the
first part of that saying, Loquendum cum vulgo, yet now it is, sentiendum cum
sapientibus. For tanquam without si signifies but, a^, not, as if. It is pity
the Dr. could not argue in Symbols too, that so we might not understand him,
but suppose all his Papers to carry evidence with them, because they are
Mathematically scratched. How does he construe this, Plance, tu^es alto
Drusorum sanguine, tanquam
Feceris ipse aliquid, propter quod nobilis esses.
So Coelius, one much esteemed by Cicero, who has inferted his Epistle^ into
his works, says in his fifth Epistle (Tul. Epist. sam. lib. 8. Ep* 5) Omnia
desiderantur ab eo tanquam nihil denegatum sit ei quo mi^us paratissimus esset
qui publico negotio pr^positus est. But it was not possible the Dr. should know
this, it not being in Stephen, where his examples for tanquam si are.

But the Dr. having pitched upon this Criticisme, and penned it, some body, I
believe, put him in mind of the absurdity th^reof* and yet the generous
Professor (who writes running hand and never tra^scrib^d his papers, if I am
not misinformed) presumed no body else could be more intelligent then he, who
had perused Stephen. He would not retract any thing, but subjoyns, That he will
allow it as passable, because other modern writers, and some of the Ancients,
have so used it, as Mr. Hobs has done. I know not what Authors the Dr. meant,
for, if I am not much mistaken, I do not find any in Stephen. His citation of
Colum^lla is not right L. 5. cap. 5. (nor can I deduce any thing thence till I
have read the passage) but if he take Juvenal and Coelius for modern Authors, I
hope he will admit of Accius, N^vius, and Ca^me^ta for the only ancients. Let
him think upon this *Criticisme, and never hope pardon for his Adducis malleum,
which is not half so well justified, and yet none but mad men or fools reject
it.

But certainly the Dr. should not have made it his business to object
Anglicisines, in whose Elench^s I doubt not but there may be found such phrases
as may serve to convince him that he is an English man. However Scottified in
his principles. If the Dr. doubt of it, or but desire a Catalogue, let him but
signify his mind, and he shall be furnished with a Florilegium. But I am now
come to the main controversy about Empusa. The Dr. says nothing in defense of
his quibble, nor gives any reason why he jumbled Languages to make a silly
clinch, which will not pass for wit either at Oxford, or at Cambridge; no nor
at Westmi^ster.

It seems he had derived Empusa from (...) and (...), and said it was a kind
of Hobgoblin that hopped upon one leg; and hence it was that the boys play
(Fox come out of thy hole) came to be called Empusa. I suppose he means Ludus
Empusae. This derivation he would have to be good, and that we may know his
reading (though he has soarce consulted any of the Authors) he says Mr.
Hobbes did laugh at it, until somebody told him that it was in the Scholiast of
Aristophanes (as good a Critic as Mr. Hobbes) Eust^thius, Erasmus, Coel^
Rhodiginus, Step^anus, Scapula, and Calepine. But sure he does not think to
seape so. To begin with the last, Calepine does indeed say, uno incedit pede,
unde et non^^n. But he is a Modern, and I do not see why his Authority should
outweigh mine, if his Authors Reasons do not. He refers to Erasmus and
Rhodiginus. Erasmus in the adage. Proteo mutabilior, has these words of
Empusa. Narrant autem uno videripedi (this is not to hopp) unde et nomen
inditum putant, (...). He does not testify his approbation of the derivation
at all, only lets you know what Etymologies some have given before him. And
does any body think that Dr. Harmar was the first which began to show his wit
(or folly) in e^ymologizing words? Coelius Rhodiginus does not own the
derivation, only ^aith Nominis ratio est, ut placet Eustathio, quia uno
incedit pede; (is this to hopp?) sed nec desunt qui alterum interpretentur
habere ^neum pedem, and inde appella^ Empusath; quod in Batrachis Aristophanes
expressit. And then he recites the interpretation that Aristophanes's Scholiast
does give upon the text, of which by and by. If any credit be to be attributed
to this allegation, his last thoughts are opposite to Dr. Wallis; and Empusa
must be so called, not because she hopped upon one leg, but because she had
but one, the other, being brass. But for the former derivation he refers to
Eustathius.

As to Eustathius, I do easily conjecture that the Reader does believe; that
Rodiginus does mean Eustathius upon Homer, for that is the book of most repute
and fame, his other piece being no way considerable for bulk or repute. But it
is not that book nor yet his History of Ismenias, but his notes upon the 23
verse of Dionysius (...). The Poet had said of the stone Jaspis, that it was,
(...),


Upon which Eustathius thus remarks; (...) (forte (...) Steph.) (...). This
testimony does not prove any thing of hopping, and as to the derivation, I
cannot but say that Eustathius had too much of the Grammarian in him, and this
is not the first time, neither in this book, nor elsewhere, wherein he has
trifled. It is observable out of the place that there were m^re Empusa's then
one, as indeed the name is applied by several men to any kind of* frightful
phantasme. And so it is used by several Authors, and for as much as phantasmes
are various, according as the persons affrighted have been severally educated,
etc every man did impose this name upon his own apprehensions. This gave men
occasion to sain Empusa as such (for who will believe that she was not
apprehended as having four legs, when she appeared in the form of a Cow, dog,
etc.) but as apprehended by Bacchus and his man at that time. I do not find
that she appeared in any shape, but such as made use of legs in going, whence
I imagine that Empusae might be opposite to the (...), which appellation was
anciently fixed upon the gods (propitious) upon a twofold account, first for
that they were usually essigiated as having no feet (which is evident from
ancient sculpture) and secondly, for that they are all said not to walk, but
rather swim, if I may so express that non gradiuntur, sed fluunt, which is the
assertion of all the commentators I have ever seen upon that verse of Virgil,
Et vera incessu patuit dea --


This whole discourse may be much illustrated from a Passage in Heliodorus,
Aethiop. L. 3. Sect. 12, 13. Calastris told Cnemon that the gods Apollo and
Diana did appear unto him, Cnemen replied, (...); upon this the old Priest
andswered, that both gods and demons, when they appear to men, may be
discovered by the curious observer, both in that they never shut their eyes,
(...) (...)
(...)
(...). Farnaby upon the place in Virgil observes, that, Deorum incessus est
continuus and aequalis, non dimotis pedibus, neque transpositis, (...).
Cernelius Schrevelius in the new Leyden notes, says, Antiquissima quaeque
Deorum simulachra, quod observarunt viri magni, erant (...), dijque ipsi non
gradiuntur sed fluunt. Their statues were said to stand rather upon Columns
then upon legs; for they seem to have been nothing but columns shaped out
into this or that figure, the base whereof carrying little of the
representation of a foot. These things being premised I suppose it easy for
the intelligent Reader to find out the true Etymology of Empus^, quasi (...),
or (...) from going on her feet, whereas the other gods and demons had a
different gate. If any can dislike this deduction, and think her so named from
(...), whereas she always went upon two legs (if her shape permitted it)
though she might draw the one after her, as a man does a wooden leg; I say if
any, notwithstanding what has been said, can join issue with the Doctor, my
reply shall be, (...).

Now as to the words of Aristophanes upon which the Scholiast descants, they
are these. Speaking of an Apparition strangely shaped, sometimes like a Camel,
sometimes like an ox, a beautiful woman, a dog etc. Bacchus replies, (...).
The scholiast hereupon tells us that Empusa was (...) And this is all that is
material in the Scholiast, except that he adds by and by, that (...) is all
one with the leg of an Ass, And this very text and Scholiast is that to which
all the Authors he names, and more, do refer.

I come now to Stephen, who in his Index and in the word (...), gives the
derivation of Empusa. (...), gradior, inced^, (not to hop) sic Suidas (...)
dictam ait (...). In the Index thus; sunt qui dictam putent (...), quod uno
incedat pede, quasi (...), alterum enim pedem aeneum habet. But neither
Stephen, nor any else (except Suida^, whom the Hypercritical Dr. had not seen)
no not the Scholiast of Aristophanes (a better Critic then Mr. Hobbes) does
relate the etymology as their own. Nay, there is not one says, Empusa hopped
on one leg, which is to be proved out of them. The great Etymological
Dictionary deriveth it (...), to binder, let etc. its apparition being a token
of ill luck. But as to the Doctors deduction, it says (...). It does only
seem so. And it is strange that (...) should not alter only* its aspiration,
but change its n into m, which I can hardly believe admittable in Greek, least
there should be no difference betwixt its derivatives and those of (...). When
I consider the several (...) which the Grecians had, some whereof did fly, some
had no legs etc. I can think that the origin of this name may have been thus.
Some amazed person saw a spectrum, and giving another notice of it, his
companion might answer, it is (...), etc. but he meeting with a new phantasme,
cries, (...) or (...), for which apprehension of his some body coined this
expression of (...). It may also be possibly deduced from (...) might
afterward be reduced to the single term of Empusa. Nor do I much doubt, but
that those who are conversant in Languages, and know how that several
expressions are often jumbled together to make up one word upon such like
cases, will think this a probable origination. I believe then that Mr. Hobbes's
friend did never tell him it was in Eustathius, or that Empusa was an hopping
phantasme. It had two legs, and went upon both, as a man may upon a wooden
leg. (...) is also a name for Lamia, and such was that which Menippus might
have married, which I suppose did neither hop nor go upon one leg, for he
might have discovered it. But Mr. Hobbes did not except against the derivation
(although he might justly, derivations made afterward carrying more of fancy
then of truth, and the Dr. is not excused for asserting what others barely
relate, none approve) but asked him, where that is, in what Authors he read
that boys play to be so called. To which question the Dr. (to show his reading
and the good Authors he is conversant in) replies, In Junius's Nemenclator,
Rider and Thomas's Dictionary, sufficient Authors in such a businesss, which me
thinks no man should say that were near to so copious a Library. It is to be
remembered that the trial now is in Westminster School, and amongst Ciceronians,
neither whereof will allow those to be sufficient Authors of any Latin word.
Alas they are but Vocabularies; and if they bring no Author for their
allegation, all that may be allowed them is, that by way of allusion our modern
play may be called Ludus Empusae. But that it is so called, we must expect till
some Author do give it the name. These are so good Authors that I have not
either of them in my Library. But I have taken the pains to consult, first
Rider; I looked in him (who was only Author of the English Dictionary) and I
could not find any such thing. It Is true in the Latin Dictionary which is
joined with Rider, but made by Holyoke; (O that the Doctor would but mark!) in
the Index of obsolete words, there is Ascoliasmus, Ludus Empusae, Fox to thy
hole, for which word, not signification, he quoteth Junius. The same is in
Yhomasius, who refers to Junius in like manner. But could the Dr. think the
word obsolete when the play is still in fashion? Or does he think that this
play is so ancient, as to have had a name so long ago, that it should now be
grown obsolete? As for Junius's interpretation of Empusa, it is this, Empusa,
spectrum quod se in^elicibus ingerit, uno pede ingrediens. Had the Dr. ever
read him, he would have quoted him for his derivation of Empusa, I suppose. In
Ascoliasmus he says, Ascoliasinus, Ludus Empusae fit ubi, altero pede in aere
librato unico sub^^liunt pede. (...), Pollux. Almanice. Hinctelen. Belgi^e, Op
(...) been springhen. Hinctepin^^en Flandris. But what is it in English he does
not tell^, although he does so in other places often. What the Dr. can pick out
of the Dutch I know not; but if that do not justify him, as I think it does
not, he has wronged (...), and grossly imposed upon his Readers.

But to illustrate this controversy further, I cannot be persuaded the Dr.
ever looked into Junius, for if he had, I am confident, according to his wonted
accuratnesse, he would have cited Polluxs's onomasticon into the bargin, for
Junius refers to him, and I shall set down his words, that so the Reader may
see what Ascoliasmus was, and all the Drs. Authors say Ludus Empusae and
Ascoliasmus were one and the same thing. Jul. Pollux, Lib. 9. Cap. 7. (...).
(old editions read it (...)) (...). So that Ascoliasmus, and consequently,
Ludus Empusae, was a certain sport which consisted in hopping, whether it were
by striving who could hoppe surthest, or whether only one did pursue the rest
hopping, and they fled before him on both legs, which game he was to continue
till he had caught one of his fellows, or whether it did consist in the boys
striving who could hop longest. Or lastly, whether it did consist in hopping
upon a certain bladder, which being blown up, and well oyled over, was placed
upon the ground for them to hop upon, that so the unctuous bladder might slip
from under them and give them a fall. And this is all that Pollux holds forth.
Now of all these ways there is none that has any resemblance with our, Fox to
thy hole; but the second: and yet in its description there is no mention of
beating him with gloves, as they do now adays, and wherein the play consists
as well as in hopping. It might notwithstanding be called Ludus Empusae, but
not in any sort our Fox to thy hole, So that the Dr. and his Authors are out;
imposing that upon Junius and Pollux, which they never said. And thus much may
suffice as to this point. I shall only add out of Meu^'s Ludi Geaeci, that
Ascolia were not Ludus Empus^ but Bacchisacra, and he quotes Aristophanes's
Scholiasts in Plutus, (...). As also Hesychius; (...).

But I could have told the Dr. where he might have read of Empusa as being the
name of a certain sport or game, and that is, in Tu^nebus adve sar. Lib. 27.
Cap. 33 There he speaks of several games mentioned by I^stinian in his C^de, at
the latter end of the third book; one of which he takes to be named Empusa;
addding with all, that the other are games, it is indisputable, only Empusa,
in li^e and causa erit, quod nemo nobis ^a ite ass^ sit Ludum esse, eum constet
spectrum queddam fuisse formas vary mutans. Sed quid vetat eo nomine Ludum
fuisse? certe ad vestigia vittatae Scri^ quam proxin e accedit. Yet ^e only is
satisfied in this conjecture, till somebody else shall produce a ^etter. And
now what shall I say? was not Turnebus as good a Critic, and of as great
Bead^? as Dr. Wall^s? who had read over Pollux, and yet is afraid that no body
will believe (...) to have been a game, and all he alleges for it is, quid
vetat? Truly all I shall say, and so conclude this business, is, that he had
read over an infinity of ^ooks, yet had not had the happiness which the Dr.
had, to consult with Junius's Nomenclator, Thom^us and Riders Dictionary,
Authors sufficient in such a case.

I now come to the Doctors last and greatest triumph, at which I cannot but
stand (...) admiration, when I consider he has not got the victory. Had the
Dr. been pleased to have conversed with some, of the fifth form in Westminster
School (for he needed not to have troubled the learned Master) he might have
been better informed then to have exposed himself thus.

Mr. Hobbes had said that (...) signified a mark with a hot iron; upon which
saying the Dr. is pleased to play the droll thus, Prithee tell me, good Tho*
before we leave this point. (O the wit of a Divinity Dr.!) who it was told thee
that (...) was a mark with an hot iron? for it is a notion I never heard til now
(and do not believe it yet.) Never believe him again that told thee that lie,
for as sure as can be, he did it to abuse thee, (...) signifies a distinctive
point in writing made with a pen or quill, not a mark made with a hot iron,
such as they brand rogues withal; and accordingly (...), distinguo,
interstinguo, are often so used. It is also used of a Mathematical point, or
somewhat else that is very small, (...), a moment, or the like. What should
come in your cap, to make you think that (...) signifies a mark or brand with a
hot iron? I perceive where the business lies; 'twas (...) ran in your mind
when you talked of (...), and because the words are somewhat alike, you jumbled
them both together, according to your usual care and a^curatenesse, as if they
had been the same.

When I read this, I cannot but be astonished at the Doctors confidence, and
applaud him who said, (...). That the Dr. should never hear that (...)
signifies a mark with a hot iron, is a manifest argument of his ignorance. But
that he should advise Mr. H^bbes not to believe his own Readings or any man's
else that should tell him it did signify any such thing, is a piece of
notorious impudence. That (...) signifies a distinctive point in writing made
with a pen or quill, (is a pen one thing and a quill another to write with?) no
body denies. But it must be withal acknowledged it signifies many things else.
I know the Dr. is a good Historian (else he should not presume to object the
want of History to another) let him tell us how long ago it is, since men have
made use of pens or quills in writing; for if that invention be of no long
standing; this signification must also be such, and so it could not be that
from any ^allusion thereunto the Mathe maticians used it for a point. Another
thing I would fain know of this great Historian, how long ago (...) and (...)
began to signify inter^ungo? for if the Mathematics were studied before the
mystery of Printing was found out (as shall be proved when ever it shall please
the Dr. out of his no reading to maintain the contrary) then the Mathematical
use thereof should have been named before the Grammatical. And if this word be
translatitions, and that Sciences were the effect of long contemplation, the
names used wherein are borrowed* from talk, Mr. Hobbes did well to say that
(...) precedaneously to that indivisible signification, which it afterward
had, did signify a visible mark, made by a hot iron, or the like. And in this
procedure, he did no more then any man would have done; who considers that all
our knowledge proceeds from our senses; as also that words do, primarily,
signify things obvious to sense, and only secondarily, such as men call
incorporeal. This leads me to a further consideration of this word. Hesychius
(of whom it is said that he is Legendus non ^anquam L^xicographus, sed tanquam
justus Author.) Interprets (...), which is a point of a greater or lesser size,
made with any thing. So (...) signifies to prick or mark with any thing in a^y
manner, and has no impropriated signification in it self, but according to the
writer that uses it. Thus in a Grammarian (...) signifies to distinguish by
poin^ing often, sometimes, even in them, it is the same with (...), sometimes
it signifies to set a ma^k, that something is wanting in that place, which
marks were called (...). In matters of policy (...) signifies to disallow,
because they used to put a (...) (not (...)) before his name who was either
disapproved, or to be mulcted. In punishments it signifies to mark or brand,
whereof I cannot at present remember any other ways then that of an hot iron,
which is most us^al in Authors, because most practiced by the Ancients. But
that the mark which the Turks and others do imprint without burning may be
said (...), I do not doubt; no more then that H^rodian did to give that term to
the ancient Britains, of whom he says, (...). Thus Horses that were branded
with (...) and (...) ((...) and (...)) were said (...). Thus in its origin
(...) does signifi^ a b^end or mark with an hot Iron, ^r the like, and that
must be the proper signification of (...), which is proper to (...), none but
such as Dr. Wallis ^an doubt. In its descendants it is no less evident, for
from (...) comes Stigmosus, which signifies to be branded; Vitelliana cicatrice
Stig^^sus not Stigmatosus. So Pliny in his Epistles, as Robert Stephen cites
it. And (...) (the Derivative of (...), which signifies any mark, as well as a
brand, even such as remain after stripes, being black and blew) was a Nickname
imposed upon the Grammarian Nicanor, (...)* And though we had not any examples
of (...) being used in this sense, yet from thence for any man to argue against
it (but he who knows no more then Stephen tells him) is madness, unless he will
deny that any word has lost its right signification, and is used only (by the
Authors we have, although neither the Dr. nor I have read all them) in its
analogical signification. I have always been of opinion, that (...) signified
a single point, big or little, it matters not; and (...), a composure of many;
as (...) signifies a line, and (...) a l^tter, made of several lines. For (...)
signified the Owl, the S^mana, the letter K, yea whole words, lines, Epigrams
engraven in men's faces; and (...), I doubt not, had signified a single point,
had such been used, and so it became translatitiously used by Grammarians and
Mathematicians. I could give grounds for this conjecture, and not be so
impertinent as the Doctor in his Sermon (where he told men that (...) was not
in Homer; that from (...) came Ebrius; that Sobrietas was not bad Latin, and
that Sobrius was once (as I remember) in Tully. Is this to speak suitably to
the oracles of God, or rather to lash out into idle words? Has the Dr. any
ground to think these are not impertinences? Or are we, poor mortals,
accountable for such idle words as fall from us in private discourses, whilst
these Ambassadors of Heaven droll in the Pulpit without any danger of an after
reckoning?

But I proceed to a further survey of the Doctors intolerable ignorance. His
charge in the end of the School* Masters Rant, is, that he should remember
(...) and (...) are not all one. I complained before that he has not cited
Robert Stephen aright, now I must tell him he has been negligent in the
reading of Henry Stephen; for in him he might have found that (...) was
sometimes all one with (...) though there be no example in him wherein (...) is
^sed for (...). Has not Hes^od (as Stephen rightly cites it) in his S^u^um.

(...) ubi Scholiastes; (...). So Johannes Di^conus upon the place, a man, who
(if I may use the Drs. phrase) was as good a critic, as the Geometry
Professor.

Thus much for the Doctor. To the understanding Reader, I say, that (...) is
^sed for burning with a hot iron; (...)* Macchab. 9. 11. where speaking of
Antiochus's lamentable death, his body putrefying, and breeding worms, he is
said (...); being pained as if he had been pricked, or burned with hot ir^ns.
And that this is the meaning of that elegant writer, shall be made good against
the Doct^r, when he shall please to defend the vulgar Interpretation*
Pausanias, in Baeoticis, speaking of Epaminondas, who had taken a town
belonging to the Sicyonians called Phaebia ((...)) wherein were many Baeotian
fugitives, who ought by Law to have been put to death, says, he dismissed them
under other names, giving them only a brand or mark (...). It is true (...) is
here put adverbially, but that does not alter the case. Again Zonaras, in the
third ^ome of his History, in the l^fe of the Emperor Th^ophilus, says, that
when Theophanes and another Monk had reproved the said Emperor for demolishing
images, he took and s^igmatised each of them with twelve lambicks in their
faces. (...). A place so evident, that I know not what the Dr. can reply. This
place is just parallel to what the same Author says in the li^e of Irene,
(...). If the Dr. object that he is a modern Author, he will never be able to
render him as inconsiderable as Adrianus Junius's Nomenclator, Th^mafius and
Rider. If any will deny that he writes good Greek, Hieronymus W^lfius will tell
them, his only fault is, (...), redundancy in words, and not the use of bad
ones.

Another example of (...) used in this sense, is in the Collections out of
Diodorus Siculus lib. 34. as they are to be found at the end of his works, and
as Photius has transcr^bed them into his Bibliotheca. He ^aith that the Romans
did buy multitudes of servants and employ them in Sicily; (...). These are the
words but of one Author, but ought to pass for the judgment of two, seeing
Photius, by inserting them, has made them his own.

Besides, it is the judgment of a great Master of the Greek tongue, that
stigmata non tam puncta ipsa qudm punctis variatam super^^ciem Gr^ci
vocaverun^: I need not I suppose, name him, so great a Critic as the Dr.
cannot be ignorant of him.

Nor were (...) commonly, but upon extraordinary occasions, imprinted with an
hot iron. The letters were first made by incision, then the blood pressed, and
the place filled up with ink, the composition whereof is to be seen in Ae^ius.
And thus they did use to matriculate Soldiers also in the hand. Thus did the
Grecian Emperor in the precedent example of Zonaras. And if the Dr. would
more, let him repair to Vin^tas's Comment upon the fifteenth Epigram of
Ausonius.

And now I conceive enough has has been said to vindicate Mr. Hobbes, and to
show the insufferable ignorance of the puny professor, and unlearned Critic.
If any more shall be though^ necessary, I shall take the pains to collect more
examples and Authorities, though I confess I had rather spend time otherwise
then in matter of so little moment. As for some other pssages in his book, I am
no competent judge of Symbolick Stenography. The Dr. (Sir Reverence) might have
used a cleanlier expression then that of a s^itten piece, when he censures Mr.
Hobbes's Book.

Hitherto the letter. By which you may see what came in to my (not square) cap
to call (...) a mark with a hot iron, and that, they who told me that, did no
more tell me a lie then they told you a lie that said the same of (...); and if
(...) be not right as I use it now, ^hen call these notes not (...), but (...)
I will not contend with you for a tris^e. For howsoever you call them you are
like to be known by them. Sir, the* calling of a Divine has justly taken from
you some time that might have been employed in Geometry. The study of Algebra
has taken from you another part, for Algebra and Geometry are not all one; and
you have cast away much time in practicing and trusting to Symbolical writ
ings, and for the Authors of Geometry you have read, you have not examined
their demonstrations to the bottom. Therefore you perhaps may be, but are not
yet (...) Geometrician, much less a good Divine. I would you had but so much
Ethics, as to be civil. But you are a notable Critic So fare you well, and
consider what honor you do either to the University where you are received for
professor, or to the University from whence you came thither, by your Geometry;
and what honor you do to Emanuel College by your Divinity; and what honor
you do to the degree of Dr. with the manner of your Language. And take the
counsel which you publish out of your Encomiast his letter; think me no more
worthy of your pains, you see how I have ^ouled your fingers.

FINIS.

