SEVEN Philosophical Problems, AND TWO PROPOSITIONS OF GEOMETRY.

By Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury.

With an Apology for Himself, and his WRITINGS.

Dedicated to the KING, in the year 1662.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1682.

TO THE KING.
THat which I do here most humbly present to Your Sacred Majesty, is the best
Part of my Meditations upon the Natural Causes of Events, both of such as are
commonly known, and of such as have been of late artificially exhibited by the
Curious.

They are ranged under seven Heads. 1. Problems of Gravity. 2. Problems of
Tides. 3. Problems of Vacuum. 4. Problems of Heat. 5. Problems of Hard and
Soft. 6. Problems of Wind and Weather. 7. Problems of Motion Perpendicular, and
Oblique, etc. To which I have added, Two Propositions of Geometry; One is, The
Duplication of the Cube, hitherto sought in vain; The other, A Detection of the
absurd Use of Arithmetic, as it is now applied to Geometry.

The Doctrine of Natural Causes has not infallible and evident Principles. For
there is no Effect which the Power of God cannot produce by many several ways.

But seeing all Effects are produced by Motion, he that supposing some one or
more Motions can derive from them the necessity of that Effect whose Cause is
required, has done all that is to be expected from Natural Reason. And though
he prove not that the thing was thus produced, yet he proves that thus it may
be produced, when the Materials, and the power of Moving is in our hands; which
is as useful as if the Causes themselves were known. And notwithstanding the
absence of rigorous Demonstration, this Contemplation of Nature (if not rendered
obscure by empty terms) is the most Noble Employment of the Mind that can be,
to such as are at leisure from their necessary Business.

This that I have done I know is anunworthy Present to be offered to a KING,
though considered (as God considers Offerings) together with the Mind and
Fortune of the Offerer, I hope will not be to Your Majesty unacceptable.

But that which I chiefly consider in it is, that my Writing should be tried by
Your Majesty's Excellent Reason untainted with the Language that has been
invented or made use of by Men when they were puzzled; and who is acquainted
with all the Experiments of the time; and whose approbation (if I have the good
Fortune to obtain it) will protect my reasoning from the Contempt of my
Adversaries.

I will not break the custom of joining to my Offering a Prayer; And it is,
That Your Majesty will be pleased to pardon this following short Apology for my
Leviathan. Not that I rely upon Apologies, but upon Your Majesty's most
Gracious General Pardon.

That which is in it of Theology, contrary to the general Current of Divines,
is not put there as my Opinion, but propounded with submission to those that
have the Power Ecclesiastical.

I did never after, either in Writing or Discourse, maintain it.

There is nothing in it against Episcopacy; I cannot therefore imagine what
reason any Episcopal-man can have to speak of me (as I hear some of them do) as
of an Atheist, or man of no Religion, unless it be for making the Authority of
the Church wholly upon the Regal Power; which I hope Your Majesty will think is
neither Atheism nor Heresy.

But what had I to do to meddle with matters of that nature, seeing Religion is
not Philosophy, but Law?

It was written in a time when the pretense of Christ's Kingdom was made use of
for the most horrid Actions that can be imagined; And it was in just
Indignation of that, that I desired to see the bottom of that Doctrine of the
Kingdom of Christ, which diverse Ministers then Preached for a Pretense to their
Rebellion; which may reasonably extenuate, though not excuse the writing of it.

There is therefore no ground for so great a Calamny in my writing. There is no
sign of it in my Life; and for my Religion, when I was at the point of Death at
St. Germains, the Bishop of Durham can bear witness of it, if he be asked.
Therefore, I most humbly beseech Your Sacred Majesty not to believe so ill of
me upon reports, that proceed often (and may do so now) from the displeasure
which commonly arises from difference in Opinion; nor to think the worse of
me, if snatching up all the Weapons to fight against Your Enemies, I lighted
upon one that had a double edge.

Your Majesty's Poor and most Loyal Subject, THOMAS* HOBBES.



PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS*
CHAP. I. Problems of Gravity.
A. WHat may be the cause, think you, that stones, and other bodies, thrown
upward, or carried up and left to their liberty, fall down again (for ought a
man can see) of their own accord? I do not think (with the old Philosophers)
that they have any love to the Earth, or are sullen, that they will neither go
nor stay. And yet I cannot imagine what body there is above that should drive
them back.


B. For my part, I believe the cause of their descending is not in any natural
appetite of the bodies that descend, but rather that the Globe of the Earth
has some special motion, by the which it more easily casts off the Air, than
it does other bodies. And then this descent of those we call heavy bodies, must
of necessity follow; unless there be some empty spaces in the world to receive
them. For when the Air is thrown off from the Earth, somewhat must come into
the place of it, (in case the world be full) and it must be those things which
are hardliest cast off, that is those things which we say are heavy.


A. But suppose there be no place empty (for I will defer the Question till
anon) how can the Earth cast off either the Air, or any thing else?


B. I shall show you how, and that by a familiar Example. If you lay both your
hands upon a Basen with water in it, how little soever, and move it circularly,
and continue that motion for a while, and you shall see the water rise upon the
sides, and fly over; by which you may be assured that there is a kind of
circulating motion, which would cast off such bodies as are contiguous to the
body so moved.


A. I know very well there is; and it is the same motion which Country people
use to purge their Corn; For the Chaff and Straws, by casting the Grain to the
side of the Seive, will come toward the middle. But I would see the Figure.


B. Here it is. There is a Circle pricked out, whose Center is A, and three
less Circles, whose Centers are B, C, D; let every one of them represent the
Earth, as it goes from B to C, and from C to D, always touching the uttermost
Circle, and throwing off the Air, as is marked at E and F. And if the world
were not full, there would follow by this scattering of the Air, a great deal
of space left empty. But supposing the world full, there must be a perpetual
shifting of the Air, one part into the place of another.


A. But what makes a stone come down, suppose from G?


B. If the Air be thrown up beyond G, it will follow, that at the last, if the
motion be continued, all the Air will be above G, that is, above the stone;
which cannot be, till the stone be at the Earth.


A. But why comes it down still with increasing swiftness?


B. Because as it descends, and is already in motion, it receives a new
impression from the same cause, which is the Air, whereof as part mounteth,
part also must descend, supposing as we have done the plenitude of the world.
For, as you may observe by the Figure, the motion of the Earth, according to
the Diameter of the uttermost Circle, is progressive; and so the whole motion
is compounded of two motions, one circular, and the other progressive; and
consequently the Air ascends and circulates at once. And because the stone
descending receives a new pressure in every point of its way, the motion
thereof must needs be accelerated.


A. It Is true; For it will be accelerated equally in equal times; and the way
it makes will increase in a double proportion to the times, as has heretofore
been demonstrated by Galileo. I see the solution now of an Experiment, which
before did not a little puzzle me. You know that if two plummets hang by two
strings of equal length, and you remove them from the perpendicular equally, I
mean in equal angles, and then let them go, they will make their turns and
returns together, and in equal times; And though the arches they describe grow
continually less and less, yet the times they spend in the greater arches, will
still be equal to the time they spend in the lesser.


B. It Is true. Do you find any Experiment to the contrary?


A. Yes; For if you remove one of the plummets from the perpendicular, so as
(for example) to make an angle with the perpendicular of 80 degrees, and the
other so as to make an angle of 60 degrees, they will not make their turns and
returns in equal times.


B. And what say you is the cause of this?


A. Because the arches are the spaces which these two motions describe, they
must be in double proportion to their own times; which cannot be, unless they
be let go from equal altitudes, that is, from equal angles.


B. It Is right; and the Experiment does not cross, but confirm the equality of
the times in all the arches they describe, even from 90 degrees to the least
part of one degree.


A. But is it not too bold, if not extravagant, an assertion, to say the Earth
is moved as a man shakes a Basen or a Seive? Does not the Earth move from West
to East every day once, upon his own Center, and in the Ecliptic Circle once a
year? And now you give it another odd motion; How can all these consist in one
and the same body?


B. Well enough. If you be a Shipboard under sail, do not you go with the Ship?
Cannot you also walk upon the Deck? Cannot every drop of blood move at the same
time in your veins? How many motions now do you assign to one and the same drop
of blood? Nor is it so extravagant a thing to attribute to the Earth this kind
of motion; but that I believe if we certainly knew what motion it is that
causes the descent of bodies, we should find it either the same, or more
extravagant. But seeing it can be nothing above that works this effect, it
must be the Earth it self that does it; and if the Earth, then you can imagine
no other motion to do it withal, but this; And you will wonder more, when by
the same motion I shall give you a probable account of the causes of very many
other works of Nature.


A. But what part of the Heaven do you suppose the Poles of your pricked Circle
point to?


B. I suppose them to be the same with the Poles of the Ecliptic. For, seeing
the Axis of the Earth in this Nation, and in the annual motion keeps parallel
to it self, the Axis must in both motions be parallel as to sense. For, the
Circle which the Earth describes, is not of visible magnitude at the distance
it is from the Sun.


A. Though I understand well enough how the Earth may make a stone descend very
swiftly under the Ecliptic, or not far from it, where it throws off the Air
perpendicularly; yet about the Poles of the Circle methinks it should cast off
the Air very weakly. I hope you will not say that bodies descend faster in
places remote from the Poles, than nearer to them.


B. No; but I ascribe it to the like motion in the Sun and Moon. For such
motions meeting, must needs cast the stream of the Air toward the Poles; And
then there will be the same necessity for the descent there, that there is in
other places, though perhaps a little more slowly. For you may have observed
that when it snows in the South Parts, the flakes of Snow are not so great as
in the North; which is a probable sign they fall in the South from a greater
height, and consequently disperse themselves more, as water does that falls
down from a high and steep Rock.


A. It Is not improbable.


B. In natural causes all you are to expect is but probability; which is better
yet then making Gravity the cause, when the cause of Gravity is that you desire
to know; and better then saying the Earth draws it, when the Question is, how
it draws?


A. Why does the Earth cast off Air more easily than it does Water, or any
other heavy bodies?


B. It is indeed the Earth that casts off that Air which is next unto it. But
it is that Air which casts off the next Air; and so continually Air moves
Air; which it can more easily do then any other thing, because like bodies are
more susceptible of one another motions; as you may see in two Lutestrings
equally strained, what motion one string being stricken communicates to the
Air, the same will the other receive from the Air; but strained to a differing
note, will be less, or not at all moved. For there is no body but Air that has
not some internal, though invisible motion of its parts. And it is that
internal motion which distinguishes all natural bodies one from another.


A. What is the cause why certain Squibs, though their substance be either Wood
or other heavy matter, made hollow and filled with Gunpowder, which is also
heavy, do nevertheless when the Gunpowder is kindled, fly upwards?


B. The same that keeps a man that swims from sinking, though he be heavier
then so much water; He keeps himself up, and goes forward by beating back the
water with his Feet; and so does a Squib, by beating down the Air with the
stream of the fired Gunpowder, that proceeding from its Tail makes it recoil.


A. Why does any Brass or Iron Vessel, if it be hollow, flote upon the water,
being so very heavy?


B. Because the Vessel and the Air in it, taken as one body, is more easily
cast off than a body of water equal to it.


A. How comes it to pass, that a Fish (especially such a broad Fish as a Turbut
or a Plaice, which are broad and thin) in the bottom of the Sea, perhaps a mile
deep, is not pressed to death with the weight of water that lies upon the back
of it?


B. Because all heavy bodies descend toward one point, which is the Center of
the Earth, and consequently the whole Sea descending at once does arch it self
so, as that the upper parts cannot press the parts next below them.


A. It is evident; Nor can there be possibly any weight, as some suppose there
is, of a Cylinder of Air, or Water, or of any other liquid thing, while it
remains in its own Element, or is sustained and enclosed in a Vessel, by which
one part cannot press the other.


CHAP. II. Problems of Tides.
A. WHat makes the Flux and Reflux of the Sea twice in a natural day?


B. We must come again to our Basen of water; wherein you have seen, whilst it
was moved, how the water mounteth up by the sides, and withal goes circling
round about. Now if you should fasten to the inside of the Basen some bar from
the bottom to the top, you would see the water, instead of going on, go back
again from that bar, ebbing, and the water on the other side of the bar to do
the same, but in counter-time; and consequently to be highest where the
contrary streams meet together, and then return again, marking out four
quarters of the Vessel, two by their meeting, which are the high waters, and
two by their retiring, which are the low waters.


A. What bar is that you find in the Ocean, that stops the current of the
water, like that you make in the Basen?


B. You know that the main Ocean lies East and West, between India and the
Coast of America; and again, on the other side, between America and India. If
therefore the Earth have such a motion as I have supposed, it must needs carry
the current of the Sea East and West; In which course, the bar that stops it
is the South part of America, which leaves no passage for the water, but the
narrow Straight of Magellan. The Tide rises therefore upon the Coast of
America; And the rising of the same in this part of the world proceeds from
the swelling chiefly of the water there; and partly also from the North Sea,
which lies also East and West, and has a passage out of the South Sea by the
Straight of Anian, between America and Asia.


A. Does not the Mediterranean-Sea lie also East and West? why are there not
the like Tides there?


B. So there are, proportionable to their lengths, and quantity of water.


A. At Genoa, at Ancona there are none at all, or not sensible.


B. At Venice there are, and in the bottom of the Streights; and a current all
along both the Mediterranean-Sea, and the Gulf of Venice; And it is the current
that makes the Tides unsensible at the sides* but the check makes them visible
at the bottom.


A. How comes it about that the Moon has such a stroke in the business, as so
sensibly to increase the Tides at Full and Change?


B. The motion I have hitherto supposed but in the Earth, I suppose also in the
Moon, and in all those great Bodies that hang in the Air constantly, I mean the
Stars, both fixed and errant. And for the Sun and Moon, I suppose the Poles of
their motion to be the Poles of the Aequinoctial; which supposed, it will
follow, (because the Sun, the Earth and the Moon at every Full and Change are
almost in one straight line) that this motion of the Earth will be made swifter
than in the Quarters. For this motion of the Sun and Moon being communicated to
the Earth, that has already the like motion, makes the same greater; and much
greater when they are all three in one straight line, which is only at the Full
and Change, whose Tides are therefore called Spring Tides.


A. But what then is the cause that the Spring-Tides themselves are twice a
year, namely when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, greater than at any other
times?


B. At other times of the year, the Earth being out of the Aequinoctial, the
motion thereof, by which the Tides are made, will be less augmented, by so much
as a motion in the obliquity of 23 degrees or thereabout (which is the distance
between the Aequinoctial and Ecliptic Circles) is weaker then the motion which
is without obliquity.


A. All this is reasonable enough, if it be possible that such motions as you
suppose in these bodies, be really there. But that is a thing I have some
reason to doubt of; For, the throwing off of Air, consequent to these motions,
is the cause, you say, that other things come to the Earth; And therefore the
like motions in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, casting off the Air, should also
cause all other things to come to every one of them. From whence it will
follow, that the Sun, Moon, and Earth, and all other bodies but Air, should
presently come together into one heap.


B. That does not follow: For if two bodies cast off the Air, the motion of
that Air will be repressed both ways, and diverted into a course toward the
Poles on both sides; and then the two bodies cannot possibly come together.


A. It Is true. And besides, this driving off the Air on both sides, North and
South, makes the like motion of Air there also. And this may answer to the
Question, How a stone could fall to the Earth under the Poles of the Ecliptic,
by the only casting off of Air?


B. It follows from hence, that there is a certain and determinate distance of
one of these bodies (the Stars) from another, without any very sensible
variation.


A. All this is probable enough, if it be true that there is no Vacuum, no
place empty in all the World. And supposing this motion of the Sun and Moon to
be in the plain of the Aequinoctial, methinks that this should be the cause of
the Diurnal motion of the Earth; And because this motion of the Earth is (you
say) in the plain of the Aequinoctial, the same should cause also a motion in
the Moon on her own Center, answerable to the Diurnal motion of the Earth.


B. Why not? what else can you think makes the Diurnal motion of the Earth, but
the Sun? And for the Moon, if it did not turn upon its own Center, we should
see sometimes one, sometimes another face of the Moon, which we do not.


CHAP. III. Problems of Vacuum.
WHat convincing Argument is there to prove, that in all the world there is no
empty place?


B. Many; but I will name but one; and that is, the difficulty of separating
two bodies hard and flat laid one upon another; I say, the difficulty, not the
impossibility. It is possible, without introducing Vacuum, to pull assunder any
two bodies, how hard and flat soever they be, if the force used be greater than
the resistance of the hardness. And in case there be any greater difficulty to
part them, (besides what proceeds from their hardness) then there is to pull
them further assunder when they are parted, that difficulty is Argument enough
to prove there is no Vacuum.


A. These Assertions need demonstration. And first, how does the difficulty of
separation argue the Plenitude of all the rest of the world?


B. If two flat polished Marbles lie one upon another, you see they are hardly
separated in all points at one and the same instant; and yet the weight of
either of them it is enough to make them slide off one from the other. Is not
the cause of this, that the Air succeeds the Marble that so slides, and fills
up the place it leaves.


A. Yes certainly. What then?


B. But when you pull the whole Superficies assunder, not without great
difficulty, what is the cause of that difficulty?


A. I think as most men do, that the Air cannot fill up the space between in an
instant; For the parting is in an instant.


B. Suppose there be Vacuum in that Air into which the Marble you pull off is
to succeed, shall there be no Vacuum in the Air that was round about the two
Marbles when they touched? Why cannot that Vacuum come into the place between?
Air cannot succeed in an instant, because a body; and consequently cannot be
moved through the least space in an instant. But emptiness is not a body, nor
is moved, but made by the act it self of separation. There is therefore (if you
admit Vacuum) no necessity at all for the Air to fill the space left, in an
instant. And therefore, with what ease the Marble coming off presses out the
Vacuum of the Air behind it, with the same ease will the Marbles be pulled
assunder. Seeing then, if there were Vacuum, there would be no difficulty of
Separation; it follows, because there is difficulty of separation, that there
is no Vacuum.


A. Well now, supposing the world full, how do you prove it possible to pull
those Marbles assunder?


B. Take a piece of soft wax; Do not you think the one half touches the other
half as close as the smoothest Marbles? yet you can pull them assunder. But
how? still as you pull, the wax grows continually more and more slender; there
being a perpetual parting or discession of the outermost part of the wax one
from another; which the Air presently fills, and so there is a continual
lessening of the wax, till it be no bigger than a hair, and at last separation.
If you can do the same to a Pillar of Marble, till the outside give way, the
effect will be the same, but much quicker, after it once begins to break in the
Superficies; because the force that can master the first resistance of the
hardness, will quickly dispatch the rest.


A. It seems so by the brittleness of some hard bodies. But I shall afterward
put some Questions to you, touching the nature of hardness. But now to return
to our subject,


What reason can you render (without supposing Vacuum) of the effects produced
in the Engine they use at Gresham College?

B. That Engine produces the same effects, that a strong wind would produce in
a narrow room.


A. How comes the wind in? You know the Engine is a hollow round pipe of brass;
into which is thrust a Cylinder of wood covered with Leather, and fitted to the
Cylinder so exactly as no Air can possibly pass between the leather and the
brass?


B. I know it; and that they may thrust it up, there is a hole left in the
Cylinder to let the Air out before it; which they can stop when they please.
There is also in the bottom of the Cylinder a passage into a hollow Globe of
Glass; which passage they can also open and shut at pleasure. And at the top of
that Globe there is a wide mouth to put in what they please to try conclusions
on; and that also to be opened and shut as shall be needful. It Is of the nature
of a Pop-gun which Children use, but great, costly, and more ingenious. They
thrust forward, and pull back the wooden Cylinder (because it requires much
strength) with an Iron screw. What is there in all this to prove the
possibility of Vacuum.


A. When this wooden Cylinder covered with leather, fit and close is thrust
home to the bottom, and the holes in the hollow Cylinder of Brass close
stopped, how can it be drawn back, as with the screw they draw it, but that the
space it leaves must needs be empty. For it is impossible that any Air can pass
into the place to fill it?


B. Truly I think it close enough to keep out Straw and Feathers, but not to
keep out Air, nor yet matter. For suppose they were not so exactly close but
that there were round about a distance for a small hair to lie between, Then
will the pulling back of the Cylinder of wood force so much Air in, as in
retiring it forces back, and that without any sensible difficulty. And the Air
will so much more swiftly enter as the passage is left more narrow. Or if they
touch, and the contract be in some points, and not in all, the Air will enter
as before in case the force be augmented accordingly. Lastly, though they touch
exactly, if either the Leather yield, or the Brass (which it may do to the
force of a strong screw) the Air will again enter. Do you think it possible to
make two superficies so exquisitly touch in all points as you suppose, or
Leather so hard as not to yield to the force of a screw? The Body of Leather
will give passage both to Air and Water, as you will confess when you ride in
Rainy and Windy weather. You may therefore be assured that in drawing out their
wooden-leather Cylinder they force in as much Air as will fill the place it
leaves, and that with as much swiftness as is answerable to the strength that
drives it in. The effect therefore of their pumping is nothing else but a
vehement Wind, a very vehement Wind coming in on all sides of the Cylinder at
once into the hollow of the Brass Pipe, and into the hollow of the Glass Globe
joined to it.


A. I see the reason already of one of their wonders, which is, that the
Cylinder they pump with, if it be left to it self, after it is pulled back will
swiftly go up again. You will say the Air comes out again with the same
violence by reflection; and I believe it?


B. This is argument enough that the place was not empty. For what can fetch or
drive up the Sucker, as they call it, if the place within were empty; for that
there is any weight in the Air to do it, I have already demonstrated to be
impossible.

Besides, you know, when they have sucked out (as they think) all the Air from
the Glass Globe, they can nevertheless both see through it what is done, and
hear a sound from within when there is any made. Which (if there were no other,
but there are many other,) is argument enough that the place is still full of
Air.


A. What say you to the swelling of a Bladder even to bursting, if it be a
little blown when it is put into the Receiver, (for so they call the Globe of
Glass?)


B. The stream of Air that from every side meeting together, and turning in an
infinite number of small points, do pierce the Bladder in innumerable places
with great violence at once, like so many invisible small wimbles; especially
if the Bladder be a little blown before it be put in, that it may make a little
resistance. And when the Air has once pierced it, it is easy to conceive, that
it must afterward by the same violent motion be extended till it break. If
before it break you let in fresh Air upon it, the violence of the motion will
thereby be tempered, and the Bladder be less extended. For that also they have
observed. Can you imagine how a Bladder should be extended, and broken, by
being too full of Emptiness.


A. How come living creatures to be killed in this Receiver, in so little a
time as 3 or 4 minutes of an hour?


B. If they suck into their lungs so violent a wind thus made, you must needs
think it will presently stop the passage of their blood; and that is death;
though they may recover if taken out before they be too cold. And so likewise
will it put out fire; but the Coals taken out whilst they are hot, will revive
again. It Is an ordinary thing in many Coal-pits, (whereof I have seen the
experience,) that a wind proceeding from the sides of the Pit every way, will
extinguish any fire let down into it, and kill the workmen, unless they be
quickly taken out.


A. If you put a vessel of water into the Receiver, and then suck out the Air,
the water will boil. What say you to that?


B. It is like enough it will dance in so great a bustling of the Air; but I
never heard it would be hot. Nor can I imagine how Vacuum should make any thing
dance. I hope you are by this time satisfied, that no experiment made with the
Engine at Gresham College, is sufficient to prove that there is, or that there
may be Vacuum.


A. The World you know is finite, and consequently, all that infinite space
without it, is empty. Why may not some of that Vacuum be brought in, and
mingled with the Air here?


B. I know nothing in matters without the World.


A. What say you to Torricellioes Experiment in Quicksilver, which is this.
There is a Basin at A filled with Quicksilver, suppose to B, And CD a hollow
glass pipe filled with the same. Which if you stop with your finger at B, and
so set it upright, and then if you take away your finger, the Quicksilver will
fall from C downwards, but not to the bottom. For it will stop by the way,
suppose at D. Is it not therefore necessary that that space between C and D be
left empty? Or will you say the Quick silver does not exactly touch the sides
of the glass pipe?


B. I Will say neither. If a man thrust down into a vessel of Quicksilver a
blown Bladder, will not that Bladder come up to the top?


A. Yes certanly, or a Bladder of Iron, or of any thing else but Gold.


B. You see then that Air can pierce Quicksilver.


A. Yes, with so much force as the weight of Quicksilver comes to.


B. When the Quicksilver is fallen to D, there is so much the more in the
basin. And that takes up the place which so much Air took up before. Whither
can this Air go if all the World without that glass pipe B C were full? There
must needs be the same or as much Air come to that space (which only is empty)
between C and D. By what force? By the weight of the Quicksilver between D and
B. Which Quicksilver weighs now upward; or else it could never have raised
that part higher, which was at first in the Basin. So you see the weight of
Quicksilver can press the Air through Quicksilver up into the pipe, till it
come to an equality of force as in D. Where the weight of the Quicksilver is
equal to the force which is required in Air to go through it.


A. If a man suck a Vial that has nothing in it but Air, and presently dip the
mouth of it into water, the water will ascend into the Vial. Is not that an
argument that part of the Air had been sucked out, and part of the room within
the Vial left empty?


B. No. If there were empty space in the World, why should not there be also
some empty space in the Vial before it was sucked? And then why does not the
water rise to fill that, when a man sucks the Vial he draws nothing out neither
into his Belly not into his Lungs, nor into his Mouth; only he sets the Air
within the glass into a circular motion, giving it at once an endeavor to go
forth by the sucking, and an endeavor to go back by not receiving it into his
mouth. And so with a great deal of labor glues his lips to the neck of the
Vial. Then taking it off, and dipping the neck of the Vial into the water
before the circulation cease, the Air with the endeavor it has now gotten,
pierces the water and goes out. And so much Air as goes out, so much matter
comes up into the room of it.


CHAP. IIII. Problems of Heat and Light.
A. WHat is the cause of Heat?


B. How know you, that any thing is Hot but your self?


A. Because I perceive by sense it Heats me.


B. It is no good argument, The thing Heats me; therefore it is Hot. But what
alteration do you find in your body at any time by being Hot?


A. I find my skin more extended in Summer than in Winter; and am sometimes
fainter and weaker then ordinary, as if my Spirits were exhaled; and I sweat.


B. Then that is it you would know the cause of. I have told you before that by
the motion I suppose both in the Sun, and in the Earth, the Air is dissipated,
and consequently that there would be an infinite number of small empty places
but that the World being full, there comes from the next parts other Air into
the spaces, they would else make empty. When therefore this motion of the Sun
is excercised upon the Superficies of the Earth, if there do not come out of
the Earth it self some corporal substance to supply that tearing of the Air, we
must return again to the admission of Vacuum. If there do, then you see how by
this motion fluid bodies are made to exhale out of the Earth. The like happens
to a man's body or hand, which when he perceives, he says he is Hot. And so of
the Earth when it sends forth Water and Earth together in Plants, we say it
does it by Heat from the Sun.


A. It Is very probable, and no less probable, that the same action of the Sun,
is that which from the Sea and moist places of the Earth, but especially from
the Sea fetches up the water into the Clouds. But there be many ways of
Heating besides the action of the Sun or of Fire. Two pieces of Wood will take
Fire if in Torning they be pressed together.


B. Here again you have a manifest laceration of the Air by the reciprocal and
contrary motions of the two pieces of wood, which necessarily causes a coming
forth of whatsoever is Aereal or fluid within them, and (the motion pursued) a
dissipation also of the other more solid parts into Ashes.


A. How comes it to pass that a man is warmed even to sweating almost with
every extraordinary labor of his body?


B. It is easy to understand, how by that labor all that is liquid in his
body is tossed up and down, and thereby part of it also cast forth.


A. There be some things that make a man Hot without sweat or other
evaporation, as Caustiques, Nettles and other things.


B. No doubt. But they touch the part they so Heat, and cannot work that effect
at any distance.


A. How does Heat cause light, and that partially in some bodies more, in some
less, though the Heat be equal?


B. Heat does not cause Light at all. But in many Bodies, the same cause, that
is to say, the same motion causes both together; so that they are not to one
another as cause and effect, but are concomitant Effects, sometimes of one and
the same motion.


A. How?


B. You know the rubbing or heard pressing of the Eye, or a stroke upon it
makes an apparition of Light without and before it, which way soever you look.
This can proceed from nothing else but from the restitution of the Organ
pressed or stricken, unto its former ordinary situation of parts. Does not the
Sun by his thrusting back the Air upon you eyes press them? Or does not those
bodies whereon the Sun shines (though by reflection) do the same, though not so
strongly? And do not the Organs of Sight, the Eye, the Heart, and Brains resist
that pressure by an endeavor of restitution outward? Why then should there
not be without and before the Eye, an apparition of Light in this case as well
as in the other?


A. I grant there must. But what is that which appears after the pressing of
the eye? For there is nothing without, that was not there before; or if there
were, methinks another should see it better, or as well as he; or if in the
dark, methinks it should enlighten the place.


B. It is a fancy, such as is the appearance of your face in a Looking-glass;
such as is a Dream; such as is a Ghost; such as is a spot before the Eye that
has stared upon the Son or Fire. For all these are of the Regiment of Fancy,
without any body concealed under them, or behind them, by which they are
produced.


A. And when you look toward the Sun or Moon, why is not that also which
appears before your Eyes at that time a fancy?


B. So it is. Though the Sun it self be a real Body, yet that bright Circle of
about a foot Diameter cannot be the Sun, unless there be two Suns, a greater
and a lesser. And because you may see that which you call the Sun, both above
you in the Sky, and before you in the Water, and two Suns (by distorting your
Eye) in two places of the Sky, one of them must needs be Fancy. And if one,
both. All sense is Fancy though the cause be always in a real Body.


A. I see by this that those things which the Learned call the Accidents of
Bodies, are indeed nothing else but diversity of Fancy; and are inherent in the
Sentient, and not in the Objects, except Motion and Quantity. And I perceive by
your Doctrine you have been tampering with Leviathan. But how comes Wood with a
certain degree of Heat to shine, and Iron also with a greater degree; but no
Heat at all to be able to make water shine?


B. That which shines has the same Motion in its parts that I have all this
while supposed in the Sun and Earth. In which Motion there must needs be a
competent degree of swiftness, to move the sense, that is, to make it visible.
All Bodies that are not fluid will shine with Heat, if the Heat be very great.
Iron will shine and Gold will shine; but water will not, because the parts are
carried away before they attain to that degree of swiftness; which is requisite.


A. There are many fluid Bodies, whose parts evaporate, and yet they make a
flame, as Oil, and Wine, and other strong drinks:


B. As for Oil I never saw any inflamed by it self; how much soever Heated,
therefore I do not think they are the parts of the Oil, but of the combustible
body oyled that shine, but the parts of Wine and strong Drinks have partly a
strong Motion of themselves, and may be made to shine, but not with boiling,
but by adding to them as they rise the flame of some other body.


A. How can it be known that the particles of Wine have such a Motion as you
suppose?


B. Have you ever been so much distempered with drinking Wine, as to think the
Windows and Table move?


A. I confess (though you be not my Confessor,) I have, but very seldom, and I
remember the window seemed to go and come in a kind of circling Motion, such as
you have described. But what of that?


B. Nothing, but that it was the Wine that caused it; which having a good
degree of that Motion before, did when it was Heated in the Veins, give that
concussion (which you thought was in the window,) to the Veins themselves, and
(by the continuation of the parts of man's Body) to the Brain; and that was it
which made the window seem to move.


A. What is Flame? For I have often thought the Flame that comes out of a small
heap of Straw, to be more (before it has done Flaming,) then a hundred times
the Straw it self.


B. It was but your Fancy. If you take a stick in your hand by one end, the
other end burning, and move it swiftly, the burning end, if the Motion be
circular, shall seem a circle; if straight, a straight line of Fire, longer or
shorter, according to the swiftness of the Motion, or to the space it moves in.
You know the cause of that.


A. I think it is, because the impression of that visible Object, which was
made at the first instant of the Motion did last till it was ended. For then it
will follow that it must be visible all the way, the impressions in all points
of the time being equal.


B. The cause can be no other. The smallest spark of Fire flying up seems a
line drawn upward; and again by that swift circular Motion which we have
supposed for the cause of Light, seems also broader then it is. And
consequently the Flame of every thing must needs seem much greater then it is.


A. What are those sparks that fly out of the Fire?


B. They are small pieces of the wood or Coals, or other Fuel loosened and
carried away with the Air that comes up with them. And being extiguished
before their parts be quite dissipated into others, are so much Soot, and
black, and may be fired again.


A. A Spark of Fire may be stricken out of a cold stone. It is not therefore
Heat that makes this shining.


B. No It Is the Motion that makes both the Heat and shining; and the stroke
makes the Motion. For every of those Sparks, is a little parcel of the stone,
which swiftly moved, imprinteth the same Motion into the matter prepared, or
(...) receive it.


A. How comes the Light of the Sun to burn almost any combustible matter by
rerefraction through a unequal glass, and by reflection from a concave?


B. The Air moved by the Sun presses the unequal glass in such manner as the
action continued through it, proceeds not in the same straight line by which
it proceeded from the Sun, but tends more toward the center of the body it
enters. Also when the action is continued through the unequal body it bends
again the same way. By which means the whole action of the Sunbeams are
enclosed within a very small compass; in which place therefore there must be a
very vehement Motion; and consequently if there be in that place combustible
matter, such as is not very hard kindle, the parts of it will be dissipated,
and receive that Motion which works on the Eye as other Fire does.

The same reason is to be given for burning by Reflection. For there also the
Beams are collected into almost a point.


A. Why may not the Sunbeams be such a Body as we call Fire, and pass through
the pores of the glass so disposed as to carry them to a point, or very near?


B. Can there be a glass that is all pores; If there cannot, then cannot this
effect be produced by the passing of Fire through the pores. You have seen men
llght their Tobacco at the Sun with a burning glass, or with a ball of Cristal,
held which way they will indifferently. Which must be impossible, unless the
ball were all pores. Again, neither you nor I can conceive any other Fire then
we have seen, nor then such as water will put out. But not only a solid Globe
of Glass or Cristal will serve for a burning Glass, but also a hollow one
filled with water. How then does the Fire from the Sun pass through the glass
of water without being put out before it come to the matter they would have it
burn?


A. I know not. There comes nothing from the Sun. If there did, there is come
so much from it already, that at this day we had had no Sun,


CHAP. V. Problems of Hard and Soft.
A. WHat call you Hard, and what Soft.


B. That body whereof no one part is easily put out of its place, without
removing the whole, is that which I and all men call Hard; and the contrary
Soft. So that they, are but degrees one of another.


A. What is the cause that makes one body Harder then another, or (seeing you
say they are but degrees of one another) what makes one body Softer then
another, and the same body sometimes Harder, sometimes Softer?


B. The same Motion which we have supposed from the beginning for the cause of
so many other effects. Which Motion not being upon the center of the part
moved, but the part it self going in another circle to and again, it is not
necessary that the Motion be perfectly circular. For it is not circulation, but
the reciprocation, I mean the to and again that does cast off, and lacerrate
the Air, and consequently produce the forementioned effects.


For the cause therefore of Hardness, I suppose the reciprocation of Motion in
those things which are Hard, to be very swift, and in very small circles.

A. This is somewhat hard to believe. I would you could supply it with some
visible experience.


B. When you see (for example) a Cross-bow bent, do you think the parts of it
stir?


A. No. I am sure they do not.


B. How are you sure? You have no argument for it, but that you do not see the
Motion. When I see you sitting still, must I believe there is no Motion in your
parts within, when there are so many arguments to convince me there is.


A. What argument have you to convince me that there is Motion in a Cross-bow
when it stands bent?


B. If you cut the string, or any way set the Bow at liberty it will have then
a very visible Motion. What can be the cause of that?


A. Why the setting of the Bow at liberty.


B. If the Bow had been crooked before it was bent, and a string tied to both
ends, and then cut asunder, the Bow would not have stirred. Where lies the
difference?


A. The Bow bent has a Spring; unbent it has none, how crooked soever.


B. What mean you by Spring?


A. An endeavor of restitution to it is former posture.


B. I understand Spring as well as I do endeavor.


A. I mean a Prnciple or beginning of Motion in a contrary way to that of the
force which bent it.


B. But the beginning of Motion is also Motion, how insensible soever it be.
And you know that nothing can give a beginning of Motion to it self. What is it
therefore that gives the Bow (which you say you are sure was at rest when it
stood bent) its first endeavor to return to its former posture?


A. It was he that bent it.


B. That cannot be. For he gave it an endeavor to come forward, and the Bow
endeavors to go backward.


A. Well, grant that endeavor be Motiou, and Motion in the Bow unbent, how do
you derive from thence, that being set at liberty it must return to its former
posture?


B. Thus There being within the Bow a swift (though invisible) Motion of all
the parts, and consequently of the whole; the bending causes that Motion,
which was along the Bow (that was beaten out when it was hot into that length)
to operate a cross the length in every part of it, and the more by how much it
is more bent; and consequently endeavors to unbend it all the while it stands
bent. And therefore when the force which kept it bent is removed, it must of
necessity return to the posture it had before.


A. But has that endeavor no effect at all before the impediment be removed?
For if endeavor be Motion, and every Motion have some effect more or less,
methinks this endavour should in time produce something.


B. So it does. For in time (in a long time) the course of this internal Motion
will lie along the Bow, not according to the former, but to the new acquired
posture. And then it will be as uneasy to return it to its former posture, as
it was before to bend it.


A. That Is true. For Bows long bent lose their appetite to restitution, long
custom becoming nature. But from this internal reciprocation of the parts, how
do you infer the Hardness of the whole Body.


B. If you apply force to any single part of such a body, you must needs
disorder the Motion of the next parts to it before it yield, and there
disordered, the Motion of the next again must also be disordered; and
consequently no one part can yield without force sufficient to disorder all.
But then the whole body must also yield. Now when a body is of such a nature as
no single part can be removed without removing the whole, men say that body is
Hard.


A. Why does the Fire melt diverse Hard bodies, and yet not all?


B. The hardest bodies are those wherein the Motion of the parts are the most
swift, and yet in the least circles.

Wherefore if the Fire, the Motion of whose parts are swift, and in greater
circiles, he made so swit, as to be strong enough to master the Motion of the
parts of the Hard body, it will make those parts to move in a greater compass,
and thereby weaken their resistance, that is to say, Soften them, which is a
degree of liquefaction. And when the Moton is so weakened, as that the parts
lose their coherence by the force of their own weight, then we count the body
melted.


A. Why are the Hardest things the most brittle, insomuch that what force
soever is enough to bend them, is enough also to break them?


B. In bending a Hard body, as (for example) a Rod of Iron, you do not enlarge
the space of the internal Motion of the parts of Iron, as the Fire does; but
you master and interrupt the Motion, and that chiefly in one place. In which
place the Motion that makes the Iron Hard being once overcome, the prosecution
of that bending must needs suddenly master the Motions of the parts next unto
it, being almost mastered before.


A. I have seen a small piece of glass, the figure whereof is this A A B C.
Which piece of glass if you bend toward to top, as in C, the whole body will
shatter asunder into a Million of pieces, and be like to so much dust. I would
fain see you give a probable reason of that.


B. I have seen the Experiment. The making of the glass, is thus, They dip an
Iron Rod into the molten glass that stands in a Vessel within the Furnace. Upon
which Iron Rod taken out, there will hang a drop of molten but tough Metal of
the figure you have described, which they let fall into the water. So that the
main drop comes first to the water, and after it the tail, which though
straight whilst it hung on the end of the Rod, yet by falling into the water
becomes crooked. Now you know the making of it, you may consider what must be
the consequence of it. Because the main drop A comes first to the water, it is
therefore first quenched, and consequently that the Motion of the parts of that
drop, which by the Fire were made to be moved in a larger compass, is by the
water made to shrink into lesser circles toward the other end B, but with the
same or not much less swiftness.


A. Why so?


B. If you take any long piece of Iron, Glass, or other uniform and continued
body; and having Heated one end thereof, you hold the other end in your hand,
and so quench it suddenly, though before, you held it easily enough, yet now it
will burn your fingers.


A. It will so.


B. You see then how the Motion of the parts from A toward C is made more
violent and in less compass by quenching the other parts first. Besides, the
whole Motion that was in all the parts of the main drop A, is now united in the
small end B C. And this I take to be the cause why that small part B C is so
exceeding stiff. Seeing also this Motion in every small part of the glass, is
not only circular, but proceeds also all along the glass from A to B, the whole
Motion compounded will be such as the Motion of Spinning any Soft matter unto
Thread, and will dispose the whole body of the glass in Threads, which in other
Hard bodies are called the grain.


Therefore if you bend this body (for example) in C (which to do will require
more force then a man would think that has not tried) those threads of Glass
must needs be all bent at the same time, and stand so, till by the breaking of
the Glass at C, they be all at once set at liberty. And then all at once being
suddenly unbent, like so many brittle, and over-bent Bows, their Strings
breaking, be shivered in pieces.

A. It Is like enough to be so. And if nature have betrayed her self in any
thing, I think it is in this, and in that other experience of the Cross-bow;
which strongly and evidently demonstrates the internal reciprocation of the
Motion, which you suppose to be in the internal parts of every Hard body. And I
have observed somewhat in Looking-glasses which much confirms that there is
some such Motion in the internal parts of Glass, as you have supposed for the
cause of Hardness. For let the Glass be A B, and let the Object at C be a
Candle, and the Eye at D. Now by diverse Reflections and Refractions in the two
superficies of the Glass, if the Lines of Vision be very oblique, you shall see
many images of the Candle, as E, F, G, in such order and position as is here
described. But if you remove your Eye to C, and the Candle to D, they will
appear in a situation manifestly different from this. Which you will yet more
plainly perceive if the Looking-Glass be colored, as I have obseved in Red and
Blew Glasses; and could never conceive any probable cause of it, till now you
tell me of this secret Motion of the parts across the grain of the Glass,
acquired by cooling it this or that way.


B. There be very many kinds of Hard bodies, Metals, Stones, and other kinds in
the bowels of the Earth, that have been there ever sense the beginning of the
World; and I believe also many different sorts of Juices that may be made Hard.
But for one general cause of Hardness it can be no other then such an internal
Motion of parts as I have already described, whatsoever may be the cause of the
several concomitant qualities of their Hardness in particular.


A. We see water Hardened every Frosty day. It Is likely therefore you may give
a pribable cause of Ice. What is the cause of Freezing of the Ocean toward the
Poles of the Earth?


B. You know the Sun being always between the Tropicks, and (as we have
supposed) always casting off the Air; and the Earth likewise casting it off
from it is self, there must needs on both sides be a great Stream of Air toward
the Poles, shaving the superficies of the Earth and Sea, in the Northern and
Southern Climates. This shaving of the Earth and Sea by the Stream of Air must
needs contract and make to shrink those little Circles of the internal parts of
Earth and Water, and consequently Harden them, first at the superficies, into a
thin skin, which is the first Ice; and afterward the same Motion continuing,
and the first Ice cooperating, the Ice becomes thicker. And this I conceive to
be the cause of the Freezing of the Ocean.


A. If that be the cause, I need not ask how a Bottle of water is made to
Freeze in warm weather with Snow, or Ice mingled with Salt. For when the Bottle
is in the midst of it, the Wind that goes out both of the Salt and of the Ice
as they dissolve, must needs shave the superficies of the Bottle, and the
Bottle work accordingly on the water without it, and so give it first a thin
skin, and at last thicken it into a solid piece of Ice. But how comes it to
pass that water does not use to Freeze in a deep Pit?


B. A deep Pit is a very thick Bottle, and such as the Air cannot come at but
only at the top, or where the Earth is very loose and spungy.


A. Why will not Wine Freeze as well as Water?


B. So it will when the Frost is great enough. But the internal Motion of the
parts of Wine and other Heating Liquors is in greater Circles and stronger then
the Motion of the parts of water; and therefore less easily to be Frozen,
especally quite through, because those parts that have the strongest Motion
retire to the center of the Vessel.


CHAP. VI. Problems of Rain, Wind, and other WEATHER.
A. WHat is the original cause of Rain? and how is it generated?


B. The motion of the Air (such as I have described to you already) tending to
the disunion of the parts of the Air, must needs cause a continual endeavor
(there being no possibility of Vacuum) of whatsoever fluid parts there are upon
the face of the Earth and Sea, to supply the place which would else be empty.

This makes the water, and also very small and loose parts of the Earth and Sea
to rise, and mingle themselves with the Air, and to become mist and Clouds. Of
which the greatest quantity arise there, where there is most water, namely,
from the large parts of the Ocean; which are the South Sea, the Indian Sea, and
the Sea that divides Europe and Africa from America; over which the Sun, for
the greatest part of the year is perpendicular, and consequently raises a
greater quantity of water. Which afterward gathered into Clouds, falls down in
Rain.


A. If the Sun can thus draw up the water; though but in small drops, why can
it not as easily hold it up?


B. It is likely it would also hold them up, if they did not grow greater by
meeting together, nor were carried away by the Air toward the Poles.


A. What makes them gather together?


B. It is not improbable that they are carried against Hills, and there stopped
till more overtake them. And when they are carried toward the North or South
where the force of the Sun is more oblique and thereby weaker, they descend
gently by their own weight. And because they tend all to the center of the
Earth, they must needs be united in their way for want of room, and so grow
bigger. And then it Rains.


A. What is the reason it Rains so seldom, but Snows so often upon very high
Mountains?


B. Because perhaps when the water is drawn up higher then the highest
Mountains, where the course of the Air between the Equator and the Poles is
free from stopping, the Stream of the Air Freezeth it into Snow. And it is in
those places only where the Hills shelter it from that Stream, that it falls in
Rain.


A. Why is there so little Rain in Egypt, and yet so much in other parts nearer
the Aequinoctial, as to make the Nile overflow the Country?


B. The cause of the falling of Rain, I told you was the the stopping, and
consequently the collection of Clouds about great Mountains, especially when
the Sun is near the Aequinoctial, and thereby draws up the water more potently,
and from greater Seas. If you consider therefore that the Mountains in which
are the springs of Nile, lie near the Aequinoctial and are exceeding great, and
near the Indian Sea, you will not think it strange there should be great store
of Snow. This as it melts makes the Rain of Nile to rise, which in April and
May going on toward Egypt arrived there about the time of the Solstice, and
overflow the Country.


A. Why should not the Nile then overflow that Country twice a year? For it
comes twice a year to the Aequinoctial.


B. From the Autumnal Aequinox, the Sun goes on toward the Southern Tropique.
And therefore cannot dissolve, the Snow on that side of the Hills that look
toward Egypt.


A. But then there ought to be such another Innundation Southward.


B. No doubt but there is a greater descent of water there in their Summer then
at other times; as there must be wheresoever there is much Snow melted. But
what should that innundate, unless it should overflow the Sea that comes close
to the foot of those Mountains? And for the cause why it seldom Rains in Egypt,
it may be this, That there are no very high Hills near it to collect the
Clouds. The Mountains whence Nile rises being near 2000 Miles off. The nearest
on one side are the Mountains of Nubia, and on the other side Sina, and the
Mountains of Arrabia.


A. Whence think you proceed the Winds?


B. From the Motion (I think) especially of the Clouds, partly also from
whatsoever is moved in the Air.


A. It is manifest, that the Clouds are moved by the Winds; so that there were
Winds before any clouds could be moved. Therefore I think you make the Effect
before the Cause.


B. If nothing could move a Cloud but Wind, your objection were good. But you
allow a Cloud to descend by it is own weight. But when it so descends, it must
needs move the Air before it, even to the Earth, and the Earth again repel it,
and so make lateral Winds every way. Which will carry forwards other Clouds if
there be any in their way, but not the Cloud that made them The Vapor of the
water rising into Clouds, must needs also as they rise, raise a Wind?


A. I grant it. But how can the slow motion of a Cloud make so swift a Wind as
it does?


B. It is not one or two little Clouds, but many and great ones that do it.
Besides, when the Air is driven into places already covered; it cannot but be
much the swifter for the narrowness of the passage


A. Why does the South Wind more often then any other bring Rain with it?


B. Where the Sun has most power, and where the Seas are greatest, that is in
the South, there is most water in the Air; which a South wind can only bring to
us. But I have seen great showers of Rain sometimes also when the wind has
been North, but it was in Summer, and came first, I think, from the South or
West, and was but brought back from the North.


A. I have seen at Sea very great Waves when there was no Wind at all. What was
it then that troubled the Water?


B. But had you not Wind enough presently after?


A. We had a Storm within a little more then a quarter of an hour after.


B. That Storm was then coming and had moved the Water before it. But the Wind
you could not perceive, for it came downwards with the descending of the
Clouds, and pressing the Water bounded above your Sail till it came very near.
And that was it that made you think there was no Wind at all.


A. How comes it to pass that a Ship should go against the Wind which moves it,
even almost point blank, as if it were not driven but drawn?


B. You are to know first, that what Body soever is carried against another
Body, whether perpendicularly, or obliquely, it drives it in a perpendicular to
the superficies it lights on. As for Example, a Bullet shot against a flat
wall, makes the Stone (or other matter it hits) to retire in a perpendicular
to that flat; or, if the Wall be round, toward the center, that is to say,
perpendicularly. For if the way of the motion be oblique to the Wall, the
motion is compounded of two motions, one parrallel to the Wall, and the other
perpendicular. By the former whereof the Bullet is carried along the Wall side,
by the other it approaches to it. Now the former of these motions can have no
effect upon it; all the battery is from the motion perpendicular, in which it
approaches. And therefore the part it hits must also retire perpendicularly.
If it were not so, a Bullet with the same swiftness would execute as much
obliquely shot, as perpendicularly; which you know it does not.


A. How do you apply this to a Ship?


B. Let A. B. be the Ship, the head of it A. If the Wind blow just from A.
toward B. it is true, the Ship cannot go forward howsoever the sail be set. Let
C. D. be perpendicular to the Ship, and let the Sail E. C. be never so little
oblique to it, and F. C. perpendicular to E. C. and then you see the Ship will
gain the space D. F. to the headward.


A. It will so, but when it is very near to the Wind it will go forward very
slowly, and make more way with her side to the Leeward.


A. It will indeed go slower in the proportion of the Line A. E. to the Line C.
E. But the Ship will not go so fast as you think sideward: One is the force of
that Wind which lights on the side of the Ship it self; the other is, the
bellying of the Sail; for the former, it is not much because the Ship does not
easily put from her the Water with her side; and bellying of the Sail, gives
some little hold for the Wind to drive the Ship a stern.


A. For the motion sideward I agree with you; but I had thought the bellying of
the Sail, had made the Ship go faster.


B. But it does not; only in a fore-wind it hinders least.


A. By this reason a broad thin Board should make the best Sail.


B. You may easily foresee the great incommodities of such a Sail. But I have
seen tried in little what such a Wind can do in such a case. For I have seen a
Board set upon four truckles, with a staff set up in the midst of it for a
Mast, and another very thin and broad Board fastened to that staff in the stead
of a Sail; and so set as to receive the Wind very obliquely, I mean so as to be
within a point of the Compass directly opposite to it; and so placed upon a
reasonable smooth pavement where the Wind blew somewhat strongly. The event was
first, that it stood doubting whether it should stir at all or no, but that was
not long; and then it ran a head extreme swiftly, till it was overthrown by a
Rub.


A. Before you leave the Ship tell me how it comes about that so small a thing
as a Rudder, can so easily turn the greatest Ship?


B. It Is not the Rudder only, there must also be a stream to do it; you shall
never turn a Ship with a Rudder in a standing pooll, nor in a natural current.

You must make a stream from head to stern, either with Oars or with Sails:
when you have made such a stream, the turning of the Rudder obliquely holds the
Water from passing freely; and the Ship or Boat cannot go on directly, but as
the Rudder inclines to the stern, so will the Ship turn. But this is too well
known to insist upon: you have observed, that the Rudders of the greatest Ships
are not very broad, but go deep into the Water, whereas Western Barges, though
but small Vessels, have their Rudders much broader, which argues that the
holding of Water from passing is the office of a Rudder: and therefore to a
Ship that draws much Water the Rudder is made deep accordingly, and in Barges
that draw little Water, the Rudders as less deep, must so much the more be
extended in breadth.


A. What makes Snow?


B. The same cause which (speaking of Hardness) I supposed for the cause of
Ice. For the Stream of Air proceeding from. That both the Earth and the Sun
cast off the Air, and consequently makes a stream of Air from the Aequinoctial
toward the Poles, passing amongst the Clouds, shaving those small drops of
Water whereof the Clouds consist, and congeals them as they do the Water of the
Sea, or of a River. And these small frozen drops are that which we call Snow.


A. But then how are great drops frozen into Hailstones, and that especially
(as we see they are) in Summer?


B. It is especially in Summer; and hot weather, that the drops of Water which
make the Clouds, are great enough; but it is then also that Clouds are sooner
and more plentifully carried up. And therefore the current of the Air
strengthened between the Earth and the Clouds, becomes more swift; and thereby
freezeth the drops of Water, not in the Cloud it self, but as they are falling.
Nor does it freeze them thoroughly, the time of their falling not permitting it,
but gives them only a thin coat of Ice; as is manifest by their sudden
dissolving.


A. Why are not somteimes also whole Clouds when pregnant and ready to drop,
frozen into one piece of Ice?


B. I belive they are so whenever it Thunders.


A. But upon what ground do you believe it?


B. From the manner or kind of noise they make, namely a crack; which I see not
how it can possibly be made by Water or any other soft Bodies whatsoever.


A. Yes, the Powder they call Aurum Fulminans, when thoroughly warm, gives just
such another crack as Thunder.


B. But why may not every small grain of that Aurum Fulminans by it self be
heard, though a heap of them together be soft, as is any heap of Sand. Salts of
all sorts are of the nature of Ice. But Gold is dissolved into Aurum Fulminans
by Nitre and other Salts. And the least grain of it gives a little crack in the
fire by it self. And therefore when they are so warmed by degrees, the crack
cannot choose but be very great.


A. But before it be Aurum Fulminans they use to wash away the Salt (which they
call dulcifying it,) and then they dry it gently by degrees.


B. That is, they exhale the pure Water that is left in the Powder, and leave
the Salt behind to Harden with drying. Other Powder made of Salts without any
Gold in them will give a crack as great as Aurum Fulminans. A very great
Chemist of our times has written, that Salt of Tarter, Saltpeter, and a
little Brimstone ground together into a Powder, and dried, a few grains of that
Powder will be made by the fire to give as great a Clap as a Musket.


A. Me thinks it were worth your trial to see what effect a Quart or a Pint of
Aurum Fulminans would produce, being put into a great Gun made strong enough on
purpose, and the Breech of the Gun set in hot Cinders, so as to heat by
degrees, till the Powder fly.


B. I pray you try it your self; I cannot spare so much Money.


A. What is it that breaks the Clouds when they are frozen?


B. In very hot weather the Sun raises from the Sea and all moist places
abundance of Water, and to a great height. And whilst this Water hangs over us
in Clouds, or is again descending, it raises other Clouds, and it hapens very
often that they press the Air between them, and squeeze it through the Clouds
themselves very violently; which as it passes shaves and hardens them in the
manner declared.


A. That has already been granted, my question is what breaks them?


B. I must here take in one supposition more.


A. Then your Basen (it seems) holds not all you have need of.


B. It may for all this, for the supposition I add is no more but this; that
what internal motion I ascribe to the Earth, and other the Concrete parts of
the World, is to be supposed also in every of their parts how small soever; for
what reason is there to think, in case the whole Earth have in truth the motion
I have ascribed to it, that one part of it taken away, the remaining part
should love that motion. If you break a Lodestone both parts will retain their
virtue, though weakened according to the diminution of their quantity; I
suppose therefore in every small part of the Earth, the same kind of motion,
which I have supposed in the whole: and so I recede not yet from my Basen.


A. Let it be supposed, and withal, that abundance of Earth (which I see you
aim at,) be drawn up together with the Water. What then?


B. Then if many pregnant Clouds, some ascending and some descending meet
together, and make concavities between, and by the pressing out of the Air, as
I have said before, become Ice; those Atoms (as I may call them) of Earth will
be by the straining of the Air through the water of the Clouds, be left behind,
and remain in the Cavities of the Clouds, and be more in number then for the
proportion of the Air therein. Therefore for want of liberty they must needs
justle one another, and become (as they are more and more streightened of room)
more and more swift, and consequently at last break the Ice suddenly and
violently, now in one place, and by and by in another; and make thereby so many
claps of Thunder, and so many Flashes of Lightning. For the Air Recoiling upon
our Eyes, is that which makes those Flashes to our Fancy.


A. But I have seen Lightning in a very clear Evening, when there has been
neither Thunder nor Clouds.


B. Yes in a clear evening; because the Clouds and the Rain were below the
Horison, perhaps 40 or 50 Miles off; so that you could not see the Clouds nor
hear the Thunder.


A. If the Clouds be indeed Frozen into Ice, I shall not wonder if they be
sometimes also so situated, as (like Looking-Glasses) to make us see sometimes
three or more Suns by Refraction and Reflection.


CHAP. VII. Problems of Motion Perpendicular, Oblique; of Pression and
Percussion; Reflection and Refraction; Attraction and Repulsion.
IF a Bullet from a certain point given, be shot against a wall Perpendicularly
and again from the same Point Oblique, What will be the proportion of the
Forces wherewith they urge the wall?

For Example, let the wall be A B, a point given E, a Gun C E that carries the
Bullet Perpendicularly to F, and another Gun D E that carries the like Bullet
with the same swiftness Oblique to G; In what proportion will their Forces be
upon the Wall?


B. The force of the stroke Perpendicular from E to F will be greater then the
Oblique force from E to G, in the proportion of the line E G to the line E F.


A. How can the difference be so much? Can the Bullet lose so much of its force
in the way from E to G?


B. No we will suppose it loses nothing of its swiftness. But the cause is,
That their swiftness being equal, the one is longer in coming to the wall then
the other, in Proportion of Time, as E G to E F. For though their swiftness be
the same* considered in themselves, yet the swiftness of their approach to the
wall is greater in E F then in E G, in proportion of the lines themselves.


A. When a Bullet enters not, but rebounds from the wall, does it make the same
Angle going off, which it did falling on, as the Sunbeams do?


B. If you measure the Angles close by the wall there difference will not be
ensible; otherwise it will be great enough, For the Motion of the Bullet grows
continually weaker. But it is not so with the Sunbeams which press continually
and equally.


A. What is the cause of Reflection? When a body can go no further on, it has
lost its Motion. Whence then comes the Motion by which it reboundeth?


B. This Motion of rebounding or reflecting proceeds from the resistance.
There is a difference to be considered between the Reflection of Light, and of
a Bullet, answerable to their different Motions, pressing and striking. For the
action which makes Reflection of Light, is the Pressure of the Air upon the
Reflecting Body, caused by the Sun, or other shining body, and is but a
contrary endeavor; as if two men should press with their breasts upon the two
ends of a Staff, though they did not remove one another, yet they would find in
themselves a great disposition to press backward upon whatsoever is behind
them, though not a total going out of their places. Such is the way of
Reflecting Light. Now, when the falling on of the Sunbeams is Oblique, the
action of them is nevertheless Perpendicular to the Superficies it falls on.
And therefore the Reflecting Body, by resisting, turns back that Motion
Perpendicularly, as from F to E, but takes nothing from the force that goes on
parallel in the line of E H; because the Motion never presses. And thus of the
two Motions from F to E, and from E to H is a compounded Motion in the line F
H, which makes an Angle in B G, equal to the Angle F G E.


But in Percussion (which is the Motion of the Bullet against a wall,) the
Bullet no sooner goes off then it loses of its swiftness, and inclines to
the Earth by its weight. So that the Angles made in falling on and going off,
cannot be equal, unless they be measured close to the point where the stroke is
made.

A. If a man set a Board upright upon its edge, though it may very easily be
cast down with a little Pressure of ones finger, yet a Bullet from a Musket
shall not throw it down but go through it. What is the cause of that?


B. In pressing with your finger you spend time to throw it down. For the
Motion you give to the part you touch is communicated to every other part
before it fall. For the whole cannot fall till every part be moved. But the
stroke of a Bullet is so swift, as it breaks through before the Motion of the
part it hits can be communicated to all the other parts that must fall with it.


A. The stroke of a Hammer will drive a Nail a great way into a piece of Wood
on a sudden. What weight laid upon the head of a Nail, and in how much time
will do the same? It is a question I have heard propounded amonst Naturalists,


B. The different manner of the operation of weight from the operation of a
stroke, makes it uncalculable. The suddenness of the stroke upon one point of
the wood takes away the time of resistance from the rest. Therefore the Nail
enters so far as it does. But the weight not only gives them time, but also
augments the resistance; but how much, and in how much time, is (I think)
impossible to determine.


A. What is tbe difference between Reflection and Recoiling?


B. Any Reflection may (and not unproperly) be called recoiling; but not
contrariwise every Recoiling Reflection. Reflection is always made by the
Re-action of a Body pressed or stricken; but Recoiling not always. The Recoiling
of a Gun is not caused by its own pressing upon the Gunpowder, but by the
force of the Powder it self, inflamed and moved every way alike:


A. I had thought it had been by the sudden re-entring of the Air after the
flame and Bullet were gone out. For it is impossible that so much room as is
left empty by the discharging of the Gun, should be so suddenly filled with the
Air that enters at the Touchhole.


B. The flame is nothing but the Powder it self, which scattered into its
smallest parts seems, of greater bulk by much, then in truth it is, because
they shine. And as the parts scatter more and more, so still more Air gets
between them, entering not only at the Touchhole, but also at the mouh of the
Gun. which two ways being opposite, it will be much too weak to make the Gun
Recoil.


A. I have heard that a great Gun charged too much or too little, will Shoot
(not above, nor below but) besides the mark; and charged with one certain
charge between both will hit it.


B. How that should be I cannot imagine. For when all things in the cause are
equal, the effects cannot be unnequal. As soon as Fire is given, and before the
Bullet be out, the Gun begins to Recoil. If then there be any unevenness or rub
in the ground more on one side then on the other, it shall shoot besides the
mark, whether too much, or too little, or justly charged; because if the line
wherein the Gun Recoileth decline, the way of the Bullet will also decline to
the contrary side of the mark. Therefore I can imagine no cause of this event,
but either in the ground it Recoils on, or in the unequal weight of the parts
of the Breech.


A. How comes Refractin?


B. When the action is in a line Perpendicular to the superficies of the Body
wrought upon, there will be no Refraction at all. The action will proceed still
in the same straight Line, whether it be Pression as in Light, or in Percussion
as in the shooting of a Bullet. But when the Pression is Oblique, then will the
Refraction be that way which the Nature of the Bodies through which the Action
proceeds shall determine.


H. How is light Refracted?


B. If is pass through a Body of less, into a Body of greater resistance, and
to the Point of the Superficies it falls on, you draw a Line Perpendicular to
the same superficies, the Action will proceed not in the same Line by which it
fell on, but in another Line bending toward that Perpendiculare.


A. What is the reason of that?


B. I told you before, that the falling on works only in the Perpendicular;
But as soon as the Action proceeds further inward then a mere touch, it
works partly in the Perpendicular, and partly forward, and would proceed in
the same line in which it fell on, but for for the greater resistance which now
weakneth the Motion forward, and makes it to incline toward the Perpendicular.


A. In transparent Bodies it may be so; but there be Bodies through which the
Light cannot pass at all.


B. But the Action by which Light is made, passes through all Bodies. For this
Action is Pression; and whatsoever is pressed, presses that which is next
behind, and so continually. But the cause why there is no Light seen through
it, is the uneveness of the parts within, whereby the Action is by an infinite
number of Reflections so diverted and weakened, that before it has proceeded
through, it has not strength left towork upon the Eye strongly enough to
produce sight.


A. If the Body being transparent the Action proceed quite through, into a Body
again of less resistance, as out of Glass into the Air, which way shall it then
proceed in the Air?


B. From the Point where it goes forth, draw a Perpendicular to the
superficies of the Glass, the Action now freed from the resistance it suffered,
will go from that Perpendicular, as much as it did before come toward it.


A. When a Bullet from out of the Air enters into a Wall of Earth, will that
also be Refracted toward the Perpendicular?


B. If the Earth be all of one kind, it will. For the parallel Motion, will
there also at the first entrance be resisted, which it was not before it entered.


A. How then comes a Bullet, when shot very Obliquely into any broad Water, and
having entered, yet to rise, again into the Air?


B. When a Bullet is shot very Obliquely, though the Motion be never so swift,
yet approach downwards to the Water is very slow, and when it comes to it, it
casts up much Water before it, which with its weight presses downwards
again, and makes the Water to rise under the Bullet with force enough to
master the weak Motion of the Bullet downwards, and to make it rise in such
manner as Bodies use to rise by Reflection.


A. By what Motion (seeing you ascribe all Effects to Motion) can a Lodestone
draw Iron to it?


B. By the same Motion hitherto supposed. But though all the smallest parts of
the Earth have this Motion, yet it is not supposed that their Motions are in
equal Circles; nor that they keep just time with one another; nor that they
have all the same Poles. If they had, all Bodies would draw one another alike.
For such an agreement of Motion, of Way, of Swiftness, of Poles, cannot be
maintained without the conjunction of the Bodies themselves in the Center of
their common Motion, but by violence.


If therefore the Iron have but so much of the Nature of the Lodestone as
redily to receive from it the like Motion, as one String of a Lute does from
another String strained to the same Note (as it is like enough it has, the
Lodestone being but one kind of Iron Ore) it must needs after that Motion
received from it, (unless the greatness of the weight hinder) come nearer to
it, because at distance their Motions will differ in time, and oppose each
other whereby they will be forced to a common Center. If the Iron be lifted up
from the Earth, the Motion of the Lodestone must be stronger, or the Body of
it nearer, to overcome the Weight; and then the Iron will leap up to the
Lodestone as as Swiftly as from the same distance, it would fall down to the
Earth; but if both the Stone and the Iron be set floating upon the Water, the
attraction will begin to be manifest at a greater distance, because the
hindrance of the weight is in part removed.

A. But why does the Lodestone if it float on a Calm Water, never fail to
place it self at last in the Meridian just North and South.


B. Not so, just in the Meridian, but almost in all places with some
variations. But the cause I think is, that the Axis of this Magnetical Motion
is parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptique, which is the Axis of the like Motion
in the Earth, and consequently that it cannot freely exercise its Natural
Motion in any other Situation.


A. Whence may this consent of Motion in the Lodestone and the Earth proceed?
Do you think (as some have written) that the Earth is a great Lodestone?


B. Dr. Gilbert that was the first that wrote any thing of this Subject
rationally, inclines to that opinion. Decartes thought the Earth (excepting
this upper crust of a few Miles depth) to be of the same Nature with all other
Stars, and bright. For my part I am content to be ignorant; but I believe the
Load stone has given its virtue by a long habitude in the Mine, the Vein of it
lying in the plain of some of the Meridians, or rather of some of the great
Circles that pass through the Poles of the Ecliptique, which are the same with
the Poles of the like Motion supposed in the Earth.


A. If that be true* I need not ask why the filings of Iron laid on a
Lodestone equally distant from its Poles will lie parallel to the Axis, but
one each side incline to the Pole that is next it. Nor why by drawing a
Load-ston all a long a Needle of Iron, the Needle will receive the same Poles
Nor why when the Lodestone and Iron (or two Load-stones) are put together
floating upon Water, will fall one of them a Stern of the other, that their
like parts may look the same way, and their unlike touch, in which Action they
are commonly said to Repel one another. For all this may be derived from the
union of their Motions. One thing more I desire to know, and that is; What are
those things they call Spirits? I mean Ghosts, Fairies, Hobgoblins, and the
like Apparitions.


B. They are no part of the Subject of Natural Philosophy.


A. That which in all Ages, and all places is commonly seen (as those have
been, unless a great part of Mankind by Liars) cannot, I think, be supernatural.


B. All this that I have hitherto said, though upon better ground than can be
had for a discourse of Ghosts, you ought to take but for a Dream.


A. I do so. But there be some Dreams more like sense then others. And that
which is like sense pleases me as well (in natural Philosophy) as if it were
the very truth.


B. I was Dreaming also once of these things; but was weakened by their noise.
And they never came into any Dream of mine since, unless Apparitionrs in Dreams
and Ghoasts be all one.


CHAP. VIII. The Delphique Problem or Duplication of the Cube.
A. HAve you seen a Printed Paper sent from Paris, containing the Duplication
of the Cube, written in French?


B. Yes. It was I that Writ it, and sent it thither to be Printed, on purpose
to see what objections would be made to it by our Professors of Algebra here.


A. Then you have also seen the confutations of it by Algebra.


B. I have seen some of them; and have one by me. For there was but one that
was rightly Calculated, and that is it which I have kept.


A. Your Demonstration then is confuted though but by one.


B. That does not follow. For though an Arithmetical Calculation be true in
Numbers, yet the same may be, or rather must be false, if the Units be not
constantly the same.


A. Is their Calculation so inconstant, or rather so foolish as you make it?


B. Yes. For the same number is sometimes so many Lines, sometimes so many
Plains, and sometimes so many Solids; as you shall plainly see, if you will
take the pains to examine first a Demonstration I have to prove the said
Duplication, and after that, the Algebrique Calculation which is pretended to
confute it. And not only that this one is false, but also any other
Arithmetical account used in Geometry, unless the numbers be always so many
Lines, or always so many superficies, or always many solids.


A. Let me see the Geometrical Demonstration.


B. There it is: Read it.


To find a Cube double to a Cube given.

LEt the side of the Cube given be V D. Produce V D to A, till A D be double to
D V. Then make the square of A D, namely A B C D. Divide A B and C D in the
middle at E and F. Draw E F. Draw also A C cutting E F in I. Then in the sides
B C and A D take B R and A S each of them equal to A I or I C.

Lastly, divide S D in the middle at T, and upon the Center T, with the
distance T V, describe a semicircle cutting A D in Y, and D C in X.

I say the Cube of D X is double to the Cube of D V. For the three lines D Y, D
X, D V are in continual proportion. And Cntinuing the semicircle V X Y till it
cut the line R S drawn and produced in Z, the line S Z, will be equal to D X.
And drawing X Z it will pass through T. And the four lines T V, T X, T Y and T
Z will be equal. And therefore joining Y X and Y Z, the Figure V X Y Z will be
a Rectangle.

Produce C D to P so as D P be equal to A D. Now if Y Z produced fall on P,
there will be three Rectangle equiangled Triangles, D P Y, D Y X, and D X V;
and consequently four continual proportionals, D P, D Y, D X* and D V, whereof
D X is the least of the means. And therefore the Cube of D X will be double to
the Cube of D V.

A. That Is true; and the Cube of D Y will be double to the Cube of D X; and the
Cube of D P double to the Cube of D Y. But that Y Z produced, falls upon P, is
the thing they deny, and which you ought to demonstrate.


B. If Y Z produced fall not on P, then draw P Y, and from V let fall a
perpendicular upon P Y, suppose at u. Divide P V in the midst at a, and join a
u; which done a u will be equal to a V or a P. For because V u P is a right
Angle, the point u will be in the semicircle whereof P V is the Diameter.

Therefore drawing V R, the Angle u V R will be a right Angle.


A. Why so?


B. Because T V and T Y are equal; and T D, T Sequal; S V will also be equal to
D V. And because D P and R S are equal and parallel, R Y will be equal and
parallel to P V. And therefore V R and P Y that join them will be equal and
parallel. And the Angles P u V, R V u will be alternate, and consequently
equal. But P u V is a right Angle; therefore also R V u will be a right Angle.


A. Hitherto all is evident. Proceed.


B. From the point Y raise a perpendicular cutting V R wheresoever in t, and
then (because P Y and V R are parallel) the Angle Y t V will be a right Angle.
And the figure u Y t V a Rectangle, and u t equal to Y V. But Y V is equal to Z
X; and therefore Z X is equal to u t. And u t must pass through the point T
(For the Diameters of any Rectangle, divide each other in the middle) therefore
Z and u are the same point, and X and t the same point. Therefore Y Z produced
falls upon P. and D X is the lesser of the two means between A D and D V. And
the Cube of D X double to the Cube of D V which was to be demostraten.


A I cannot imagine what fault there can be in this Demonstration, and yet
there is one thing which seems a little strange to me. And it is this. You take
B R, which is half the Diagonal, and which is the sine of 45 degrees, and which
is also the mean proportional between the two Extremes. And yet you bring none
of these proprieties into your Demonstration. So that though you argue from the
Construction, yet you do not argue from the Cause. And this perhaps your
adversaries will object (at least) against the Art of you Demonstratieon, or
enqure by what luck you pitched upon half the Diagonal for your Foundation.


B. I see you let nothing pass. But for answer you must know, That if a man
argue from the negative of the truth, though he know not that it is the truth
which is denied, yet he will fall at last, after many consequences, into one
absurdity or another. For though false do often produce Truth, yet it produces
also absurdity, as it has done here. But Truth produces nothing but Truth.
Therefore in Demonstrations that tend to absurdity, it is no good Logic to
require all along the operation of the cause.


A. Have you drawn from hence no Corollaries?


B. No. I leave that for others that will; unless you take this for a
Corollary, That, what Arithmetical Calculation soever contradicts it, is false.


A. Let me see now the Algebrical Demonstration against it.


B. Here it is.

Let A B or A D be equal to 2

Then D F or D V is equal to 1

And B R or A S is equal to the square root of 2

And A V equal to 3 want the square root of 2.

The Cube of A B is equal to 8

The Cube of D Y is equal to 45 want the Square Root of 1682 that is almost
equal to 4

For 45 want the Square Root of 6681 is equal to 4

Therefore D Y is a little less then the greater of the two Means between AD
and DV.


A. There is I see some little difference between this Arithmetical and your
Geometrical Demonstration. And though it be insensible, yet if his Calculation
be true, yours must needs be false, which I am sure cannot be.


B. His Calculation is so true, that there is never a Proposition in it false,
till he come to the conclusion, that the Cube of D Y. is equal to 45, want the
square Root of 1682. But that, and the rest, is false.


A. I shall easily see that A D. is certainly 2, whereof D V. is 1, and A V. is
certainly 3, whereof D V. is 1.


B. Right.


A. And B R. is without doubt the square Root of 2.


B. Why, what is 2?


A. 2, is the Line A D. as being double to D V. which is 1.


B. And so, the Line B R. is the square Root of the Line A D.


A. Out upon it it, it is absurd. Why do you grant it to be true in Arithmetic?


B. In Arithmetic the numbers consist of so many Units; and are never
considered there as nothings. And therefore every one Line has some Latitude,
and if you allow to BY. the Semi-diagonal the same Latitude you do to AB. or to
BR. you will quickly see the Square of half the Diagonal to be equal to twice
the Square of half AB.


A. Well, but then your Demonstration is not confuted; for the Point Y, will
have Latitude enough to take in that little difference which is between the
Root of 1681 and the Root of 1682. This putting off an Vuit sometimes for one
Line, sometimes for one Square, must needs mar the reckoning. Again he says
the Cube of AB. is equal to 8. but seeing AB. is 2, the Cube of AB. must be
just equal to four of its own sides; so that the Unit which was before
sometimes a Line, sometimes a Square, is now a Cube.


B. It can be no otherwise when you so apply Arithmetic to Geometry, as to
mumber the Lines of a Plain, or the Plains of a Cube.


A. In the next place, I find that the Cube of DIE. is equal to 45, want the
Square Root of 1622. What is that 45? Lines, or Squares, or Cubes?


B. Cubes, Cubes of DV.


A. Then if you add to 45 Cubes of DV. the Square Root of 1682, the sum will be
45 Cubes of DV. And if you add to the Cube of DIE. the same Root of 1682, the
sum will be the Cube of DIE. plus the Square Root of 1682. And these two sums
must be equal.


B. They must so.


A. But the Square Root of 1682, being a Line, adds nothing to a Cube;
therefore the Cube alone of DIE. which he says is equal almost to 4. Cubes of
DV. is equal to 45 Cubes of the same DV.


B. All these impossibilities do necessarily follow the confounding of
Arithmetic and Geometry.


A. I pray you let me see the Operation by which the Cube of DIE. (that is the
Cube of 3, want the Root of 2,) is found equal to 45, want the Square Root of
1682.


A detection of the absurd use of Arithmetic as it is now applied to Geometry.

B. Here it is.

3 -- r. 2.

3 -- r. 2.

-- r. 18 2:

9 -- r. 18

9 -- r. 72 2.

3 -- r. 2.

-- r. 16212 -- r. 8.

27 -- r. 6486

27 -- r. 658 -- r. 16218 -- r. 8.


A. Why for two Roots of 18 do you put the Root of 72.


B. Because 2 Roots of 18 is equal to one Root of 4 times 18, which is 72.


A. Next we have, That the Root of 2 Multiplied into 2, makes the Root of 8.
How is that true?


B. Does it not make 2 Roots of 2? And is not BR. the Root of 2, and 2 BR equal
to the Diagonal? And is not the diagonal the root of a square equal to 8
squares of DV?


A. It Is true. But here the root of 8 is put for the Cube of the root of 2. Can
a line be equal to a Cube?


B. No. But here we are in Arithmetic again, and 8 is a Cubique number.


A. How does the root of 2 multiplied into the root of 72 make 12?


B. Because it makes the root of 2 times 72, that is to say the root of 144
which is 12.


A. How does 9 roots of 2 make the root of 162?


B. Because it makes the root of 2 squares of 9, that is the root of 162.


A. How does 3 roots of 72 make the root of 648?


B. Because it makes the root of 9 times 72, that is of 648.


A. For the total Sum I see 27 and 18 which make 45. Therefore the root of 648
together with the root of 162^ and of 8, which are to be deducted from 45,
ought to be equal to the root of 1682.


B. So they are. For 648 multiplied by 162 makes 104976 of which the double
root is -- 648 and 648 and 162 added together make -- 810.

Therefore the root of 948, added to the root of 162 makes the root of -- 1459

Again 1458 into 8 is 11664. The double root whereof is -- 216.

The Sum of 1458 and 8 added together is -- 1466.

The Sum of 1466 and 216 is 1682, and the root, the root of -- 1682.


A. I see the Calculation in numbers is right, though false in lines. The
reason whereof can be no other then some difference between multiplying numbers
into lines or plains, and multiplying lines into the same lines or plains.


B. The difference is manifest. For when you multiply a number into lines, the
product is lines; as the number 2 multiplied into 3 lines is no more then 3
lines 2 times told. But if you multiply lines into lines you make plains, and
if you multiply lines into plains you make solid bodies. In Geometry there are
but three dimensions, Length, Superficies, and Body. In Arithmetic there is
but one, and that is Number or Length which you will. And though there be some
Numbers called Plain, others Solid, others Plano-solid, others Square, others
Cubique, others Square-square, others Quadrato-cubique, others Cubi-cubique
etc. yet are all these but one dimension, namely Number, or a file of things
Numbered.


A. But seeing this way of Calculation by Numbers is so apparently false, what
is the reason this Calculation came so near the truth.


B. It is because in Arithmetic Units are not Nothings, and therefore have
breadth. And therefore many Lines set together make a superficies though their
breadth be insensible. And the greater the number is into which you divide your
Line, the less sensible will be your error.


A. Archimedes, to find a straight Line equal to the circumferrence of a
Circle, used this may of extracting Roots. And it is the way also by which the
Table of Sines, Secants and Tangents have been calculated, Are they all Cut?


B. As for Archimedes, there is no man that does more admire him then I do. But
there is no man that cannot Err. His reasoning is good. But he ads all other
Geometricans before and after him, have had two Principles that cross one
another when they are applied to one and the same Science. One is, that a Point
is no part of a Line which is true in Geometry, where a part of a Line when it
is called a Point, is not reckoned; another is, that a Unit is part of a Number
which is also true; but when they reckon by Arethmetick in Geometry, there a
Unit is sometimes part of a Line, sometimes a part of a Square, and sometimes
part of a Cube.

As for the Table of Sines, Secants and Tangents, I am not the first that find
fault with them. Yet I deny not but they are true enough for the reckoning of
Acres in a Map of Land.


A. What a deal of Labor has been lost by them that being Professors of
Geometry have read nothing else to their Auditors but such stuff as this you
have here seen. And some of them have written great Books of it in strange
characters, such as in troublesome times, a man would suspect to be a Cipher.


B. I think you have seen enough to satisfy you, that what I have written
heretofore concerning the Quadrature of the Circle, and of other Figures made
in imitation of the Parabola, has not been yet confuted.


A. I see you have wrested out of the hands of our Antagonists this weapon of
Algebra, so as they can never make use of it again. Which I consider as a thing
of much more consequence to the science of Geometry, then either of the
Duplication of the Cube, or the finding of two mean Proportionals, or the
Quadrature of a Circle, or all these Problems put together.


FINIS.
Books Written by this Author, and Printed for William Crook.
1 DE Mirabilibus Pecci, in Quarto Latin, in Octavo in English and Lantin. 2
Three Papers to the Royal Society against Dr. Wallis. 3 Lumathematica. 4 Prima
partis Doctrinae Wallisianae de Motu Censura Brevis. 5 Resetum Geometricum,
sive propositiones aliquot frustra antehac tentatae. 6 Principia and Poblemata
aliquot Geometrica, ante desperata, nunc breviter explicata and demonstrata. 7
Quadratura Circuli Cubatio Sphaere duplicatio Cubi Breviter demonstrata. 8
Consideration on his Loyalty, Reputation, Religion and Manners; by himself. 9
De Principio and Ratione Geometri. 20 The Travels of Vlises Translated from
Homer. 11 Epistol. ad Dr. Wood. 12 The Translation of all Homers Works into
English. 13 The Epitome of the Civil Wars of Enland from 1640 to 1660. 14
Aristotle's Rhetoric Translated into English by him, with his own Rhetoric to
it. 15 A Dialogue betwixt a Student in the Common-Laws of England, and a
Philosopher in which is set forth the Errors in some Practice. 16 A Narration
of Heresy and the Punnishment thereof. 17 Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy.
18 A Poem in Latin of his Life. 19 -- idem the same in English. 20 His Life
written in Latin, part by himself and the rest by Dr. R. B. wherein is
contained the most material parts of his Life. 21 Seven Philosophical Problems,
and two Propositions of Geometry. With an Apology for Himself, and his
Writings. Dedicated to the King, in the year 1662.

