TRACTS OF MR. THOMAS HOBBS OF Malmsbury.

CONTAINING I. Behemoth, the History of the Causes of the Civil Wars of
England, from 1640. to 1660. printed from the Author's own Copy: Never printed
(but with a thousand faults) before. II. An Answer to Archbishop Bramhall's
Book, called the Catching of the Leviathan: Never printed before. III. An
Historical Narration of Heresy, and the Punishment thereof: Corrected by the
true Copy. IV. Philosophical Problems, dedicated to the King in 1662. but never
printed before.


LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar.
MDCLXXXII.

Behemoth, THE HISTORY Of the Causes of the Civil-Wars OF ENGLAND, And of the
Councels and Artifices by which they were carried on, from the year 1640. to
the year 1660.

Written by THOMAS HOBBS of Malmsbury.

Printed from the Author's true Copy.

Bella per Angliacos plusquam civilia campos,
Jusque datum sceleri loquimur --
LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar.
MDCLXXXII.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
MY Duty, as well to the Public as to the Memory of Mr. Hobbs, has obliged me
to procure, with my utmost diligence, that these Tracts should come forth with
the most correct exactness.

I am compelled by the force of Truth to declare, how much both the World, and
the Name of Mr. Hobbs have been abused by the several spurious Editions of the
History of the Civil Wars; wherein, by various and unskilful Transcriptions,
are committed above a thousand faults, and in above a hundred places whole
Lines left out, as I can make appear.

I must confess Mr. Hobbs, upon some considerations, was averse to the
publishing thereof; but since it is impossible to suppress it; no Book being
more commonly sold by all Booksellers, I hope I need not fear the Offense of
any Man, by doing Right to the World and this Work. Which I now Publish from
the Original Manuscript, done by his own Amanuensis, and given me by himself
above twelve years since.

To this I have joined the Treatise against Archbishop Bramhall, to prevent
the like prejudice, which must certainly have fallen on it, (there being so many
false Copies abroad) if not thus prevented; as also the Discourse of Heresy
from a more correct Copy; and have likewise annexed his Physical Problems, as
they were translated by himself, and presented to His Majesty, with the Epistle
prefixed, in the Year 1662. at the same time they came forth in Latin.

These things premised, there remains nothing but to wish for my self good
sale, to the Buyer much pleasure and satisfaction.

Your Humble Servant, William Crook.

Behemoth, OR THE EPITOME OF THE Civil Wars OF ENGLAND. PART I.
A. IF in time, as in place there were degrees of high and low, I verily
believe that the highest of time, would be that which passed between 1640. and
1660. for he that thence, as from the Devils Mountain, should have looked upon
the World, and observed the Actions of Men, especially in England, might have
had a Prospect of all kinds of Injustice, and of all kinds of Folly that the
World could afford, and how they were produced by their Hypocrisy and
self-conceit, whereof the one is double Iniquity, and the other double Folly.


B. I should be glad to behold that Prospect. You that have lived in that time,
and in that part of your Age, wherein Men use to see best into good and evil; I
pray you set me (that could not see so well) upon the same Mountain by the
Relation of the Actions you then saw, and of their Causes, Pretensions,
Justice, Order, Artifice, and Event.


A. In the Year 1640. the Government of England was Monarchical, and the King
that reigned, Charles the first of that name, holding the Sovereignty, by right
of a descent continued above 600 years, and from a much longer descent, King of
Scotland, and from the time of his Ancestors Henry the second, King of Ireland,
a Man that wanted no virtue, either of Body or Mind; nor endeavored any thing
more, than to discharge his Duty toward God, in the well governing of his
Subjects.


B. How could he then miscarry, having in every County so many Trained Soldiers
as would (put together) have made an Army of 60000 Men, and diverse Magazines of
Ammunition in places fortified?


A. If those Soldiers had been (as they and all other of his Subjects ought to
have been) at his Majesty's command, the Peace and Happiness of the three
Kingdoms had continued, as it was left by King James; but the People were
corrupted generally, and disobedient persons esteemed the best Patriots.


B. But sure there were Men enough besides those, that were ill-affected, to
have made an Army sufficient to have kept the People from uniting into a Body
able to oppose him.


A. Truly I think, if the King had had Money, he might have had Soldiers enough
in England; for there were very few of the Common People that cared much for
either of the Causes, but would have taken any side for pay and plunder; but
the Kings Treasure was very low, and his Enemies that pretended the Peoples
ease from Taxes, and other specious things, had the command of the Purses of
the City of London, and of most Cities and Corporate Towns in England, and of
many particular persons besides.


B. But how came the People to be so corrupted? and what kind of People were
they that did so seduce them?


A. The Seducers were of diverse sorts. One sort were Ministers, Ministers (as
they called themselves) of Christ; and sometimes in their Sermons to the
People, God's Ambassadors, pretending to have a right from God to govern every
one his Parish, and their Assembly the whole Nation.

Secondly, there were a very great number, though not comparable to the other,
which notwithstanding that the Popes power in England, both Temporal and
Ecclesiastical had been by Act of Parliament abolished, did still retain a
belief, that we ought to be governed by the Pope, whom they pretended to be the
Vicar of Christ, and in the Right of Christ to be the Governor of all
Christian People; and these were known by the Name of Papists, as the Ministers
I mentioned before were commonly called Presbyterians.

Thirdly, There were not a few, who in the beginning of the Troubles were not
discovered, but shortly after declared themselves for a Liberty in Religion,
and those of different Opinions one from another; some of them (because they
would have all Congregations free and independent upon one another) were called
Independents: Others that held Baptism to Infants, and such as understood not
into what they are baptized to be ineffectual, were called therefore
Anabaptists. Others that held that Christ's Kingdom was at this time to begin
upon the Earth, were called Fifth-monarchy-men; besides diverse other Sects, as
Quakers, Adamites, etc. whose Names and peculiar Doctrines I do not well
remember; and these were the Enemies which arose against his Majesty from the
private Interpretation of the Scripture, exposed to every Man's scanning in his
Mother Tongue.

Fourthly, There were an exceeding great number of Men of the better sort, that
had been so educated, as that in their Youth, having read the Books written by
famous Men of the ancient Grecian and Roman Commonwealths, concerning their
Polity, and great Actions; in which Books the Popular Government was extolled
by that glorious Name of Liberty, and Monarchy disgraced by the Name of
Tyranny, they became thereby in love with their Forms of Government; and out of
these Men were chosen the greatest part of the House of Commons; or if they
were not the greatest part, yet by advantage of their Eloquence, were always
able to sway the rest.

Fifthly, The City of London, and other great Towns of Trade, having in
admiration the prosperity of the Low Countries, after they had revolted from
their Monarch the King of Spain, were inclined to think, that the like change
of Government here, would to them produce the like prosperity.

Sixthly, There were a very great number that had either wasted their Fortunes,
or thought them too mean for the good Parts they thought were in themselves,
and more there were that had able Bodies, but saw no means how honestly to get
their Bread: These longed for a War, and hoped to maintain themselves hereafter
by the lucky choosing of a Party to side with, and consequently did, for the
most part, serve under them that had greatest plenty of Money.

Lastly, The People in general were so ignorant of their duty, as that not one
perhaps of 10000 knew what right any man had to command him, or what necessity
there was of King or Commonwealth, for which he was to part with his Money
against his will, but thought himself to be so much Master of whatsoever he
possessed, that it could not be taken from him upon any pretense of common
safety without his own consent. King they thought was but a Title of the
highest Honor which Gentleman, Knight, Baron, Earl, Duke were but steps to
ascend to, with the help of Riches, and had no Rule of Equity, but Presidents
and Custom, and he was thought wisest and fittest to be chosen for a Parliament
that was most averse to the granting of Subsidies, or other public Payments.


B. In such a constitution of People, methinks the King is already outed of his
Government, so as they need not have taken Arms for it; for I cannot imagine
how the King should come by any means to resist them.


A. There was indeed very great difficulty in the business; but of that Point
you will be better informed in the pursuit of this Narration.


B. But I desire to know first the several Grounds of the Pretenses, both of
the Pope, and of the Presbyterians, by which they claim a Right to govern us,
as they do, in chief, and after that from whence, and when crept in the
Pretenses of that long Parliament for a Democracy.


A. As for the Papists, they challenge this Right from a Text in Deuteronomy. 17. and
other like Texts, according to the old Latin Translation in these words. And he
that out of pride shall refuse to obey the Commandment of that Priest, which
shall at that time minister before the Lord thy God; that Man shall, by the
Sentence of the Judge, be put to death. And because, as the Jews were the
People of God then, so is all Christendom the People of God now; they infer
from thence, that the Pope, whom they pretend to be the High Priest of all
Christian People, ought also to be obeyed in all his Decrees, by all
Christians, upon pain of death. Again; whereas in the New Testament Christ
says, All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; go therefore and
teach all Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, and teach them to observe all these things that I have
commanded you. From thence they infer, that the Command of the Apostles was to
be obeyed, and by consequence the Nations were bound to be governed by them,
and especially by the Prince of the Apostles St. Peter, and by his Successors
the Popes of Rome.


B. For the Text in the Old Testament, I do not see how the Commandment of God
to the Jews to obey their Priests, can be interpreted to have the like force in
the Case of other Nations Christian, more than upon Nations Unchristian; for
all the World are Gods People; unless we also grant, that a King cannot of an
Infidel be made Christian, without making himself subject to the Laws of that
Apostle, or Priest, or Minister that shall convert him. The Jews were a
peculiar People of God, a Sacerdotal Kingdom, and bound to no other Law, but
what first Moses, and afterward every High Priest did go and receive
immediately from the mouth of God in Mount Sinai, in the Tabernacle of the Ark,
and in the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple. And for the Text in St. Matthew, I
know the Words in the Gospel are not Go teach, but Go and make Disciples; and
that there is a great difference between a Subject and a Disciple, and between
Teaching and Commanding. And if such Texts as these must be so interpreted, why
do not Christian Kings lay down their Titles of Majesty and Sovereignty, and
call themselves the Popes Lieutenants? But the Doctors of the Romish Church
seem to decline that Title of Absolute Power, in their distinction of Power
Spiritual and Temporal; but this distinction I do not very well understand.


A. By Spiritual Power they mean the Power to determine Points of Faith, and to
be Judges in the Inner Court of Conscience, of Moral Duties, and of a Power to
punish those Men that obey not their Precepts by Ecclesiastical Censure, that
is, by Excommunication: and this Power, they say, the Pope has immediately
from Christ, without dependence upon any King, or Sovereign Assembly, whose
Subjects they be that stand Excommunicate. But for the Power Temporal, which
consists in judging and punishing those Actions that are done against the Civil
Laws, they say, they do not pretend to it directly, but only indirectly, that
is to say, so far forth as such Actions tend to the hindrance or advancement of
Religion and good Manners, which they mean when they say, in ordine ad
spiritualia.


B. What Power then is left to Kings, and other Civil Sovereigns, which the
Pope may not pretend to be his in ordine ad spiritualia?


A. None, or very little: and this Power the Pope pretends to in all
Christendom, but some of his Bishops also in their several Diocesses, Jure
Divino, that is, immediately from Christ, without deriving it from the Pope.


B. But what if a Man refuse obedience to this pretended Power of the Pope and
his Bishops? What harm can Excommunication do him, especially if he be the
Subject of another Sovereign?


A. Very great harm; for by the Pope's or Bishop's signification of it, to the
Civil Power, he shall be punished sufficiently.


B. He were in an ill Case then, that adventured to write, or speak in defense
of the Civil Power, that must be punished by him, whose Rights he defended;
like Vzza that was slain, because he would needs, unbidden, put forth his Hand
to keep the Ark from falling. But what if a whole Nation should revolt from the
Pope at once? what effect could Excommunication have upon the Nation?


A. Why, they should have no more Mass said, at least by any of the Popes
Priests: Besides, the Pope would have no more to do with them, but cast them
off, and so they would be in the same Case, as if a Nation should be cast off
by their King, and left to be governed by themselves, or whom they would.


B. This would not be taken so much for a punishment to the People, as to the
King; and therefore when a Pope Excommunicates a whole Nation, methinks he
rather Excommunicates himself, than them. But I pray you tell me, what were the
Rights that the Pope pretended to in the Kingdoms of other Princes?


A. First, An Exemption of all Priests, Friars and Monks in Criminal Causes
from the Cognizance of Civil Judges. Secondly, Collation of Benefices, on whom
he pleased, Native or Stranger, and exaction of Tenths, First Fruits, and other
Payments. Thirdly, Appeals to Rome in all Causes where the Church could pretend
to be concerned. Fourthly, To be the Supreme Judge, concerning Lawfulness of
Marriage, ( i. e. concerning the Hereditary Succession of Kings) and to have
the Cognizance of all Causes concerning Adultery and Fornication.


B. Good! A Monopoly of Women.


A. Fifthly, A Power of absolving Subjects of their Duties, and of their Oaths
of Fidelity to their lawful Sovereigns, when the Pope should think fit, for the
extirpation of Heresy.


B. This Power of absolving Subjects of their Obedience, as also that other of
being Judge of Manners and Doctrine, is as absolute a Sovereignty as is
possible to be, and consequently there must be two Kingdoms in one and the same
Nation, and no Man be able to know which of his Masters he must obey.


A. For my part I should rather obey that Master that had the Right of making
Laws, and of inflicting Punishments, than him that pretends only to a Right
of making Canons, that is to say, Rules, and no Right of Co-action, or
otherwise punishing, but by Excommunication.


B. But the Pope pretends also that his Canons are Laws; and for punishing, can
there be greater than Excommunication; supposing it true (as the Pope says it
is) that he that dies Excommunicate is damned? Which supposition, it seems, you
believe not, else you would rather have chosen to obey the Pope, that would
cast you Body and Soul into Hell, than the King that can only kill the Body.


A. You say true; for it were very uncharitable in me to believe, that all
English men (except a few Papists) that have been born and called Heretics,
ever since the Reformation of Religion in England should be damned.


B. But for those that die Excommunicate in the Church of England, at this day,
do you not think them also damned?


A. Doubtless he that dies in sin without repentance, is damned, and he that is
Excommunicate for disobedience to the Kings Laws, either Spiritual or Temporal,
is Excommunicate for sin; and therefore, if he die Excommunicate, and without
desire of reconciliation, he dies impenitent. You see what follows; but to die
in disobedience to the Precepts and Doctrines of those Men that have no
Authority or Jurisdiction over us is quite another Case, and brings no such
danger with it.


B. But what is this Heresy which the Church of Rome so cruelly persecutes, as
to depose Kings that do not, when they are bidden, turn all Heretics out of
their Dominions?


A. Heresy is a word, which when it is used without passion, signifies a
private Opinion: So the different Sects of the old Philosophers, Academians,
Peripateticks, Epicureans, Stoics, etc. were called Heresies: but in the
Christian Church there was in the signification of that word comprehended a
sinful opposition to him that was chief Judge of Doctrines, in order to the
salvation of Men's Souls; and consequently Heresy may be said to bear the same
relation to the Power Spiritual, that Rebellion does to the Power Temporal, and
is suitably to be persecuted by him that will preserve a Power Spiritual and
Dominion over Men's Consciences.


B. It would be very well (because we are all of us permitted to read the Holy
Scriptures, and bound to make them the Rule of our Actions, both public and
private) that Heresy were by some Law defined, and the particular Opinions set
forth, for which a man were to be condemned and punished as a Heretic; for
else, not only Men of mean capacity, but even the wisest and devoutest
Christian may fall into Heresy without any will to oppose the Church; for the
Scriptures are hard, and the Interpretations different of different men.


A. The meaning of the word Heresy is by Law declared in an Act of Parliament
in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, wherein it is ordained, That the persons
who had by the Queens Letters Patents the Authority Spiritual (meaning the High
Commission) shall not have Authority to adjudge any Matter or Cause to be
Heresy, but only such as heretofore have been adjudged to be Heresy by the
Authority of the Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four General Councils,
or by any other General Council, where the same was declared Heresy by the
express and plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures, or such as hereafter
shall be adjudged Heresy by the High Court of Parliament of this Realm, with
the Assent of the Clergy in their Convocation.


B. It seems therefore if there arise any new error that has not yet been
declared Heresy, (and many such may arise) it cannot be judged Heresy without
a Parliament; for how foul soever the error be, it cannot have been declared
Heresy, neither in the Scriptures, nor in the Councils, because it was never
before heard of, and consequently there can be no error (unless it fall within
the compass of Blasphemy against God, or Treason against the King) for which a
man can in Equity be punished. Besides, who can tell what is declared by the
Scripture, which every man is allowed to read and interpret to himself? Nay
more, what Protestant, either of the Laity or Clergy, (if every General Council
can be a competent Judge of Heresy) is not already condemned? for diverse
Councils have declared a great many of our Doctrines to be Heresy, and that
(as they pretend) upon the Authority of the Scriptures.


A. What are those Points that the first four General Councils have declared
Heresy?


B. The first General Council held at Nicaea declared all to be Heresy, which
was contrary to the Nicene Creed, upon occasion of the Heresy of Arrius, which
was the denying the Divinity of Christ. The second General Council held at
Constantinople declared Heresy the Doctrine of Macedonius; which was, that the
Holy Ghost was created. The third Council assembled at Ephesus condemned the
Doctrine of Nestorius, that there were two Persons in Christ. The fourth held
at Chalcedon, condemned the error of Eutyches, that there was but one Nature in
Christ. I know of no other Points condemned in these four Councils, but such as
concern Church Government, or the same Doctrines taught by other Men in other
words: and these Councils were all called by the Emperors, and by them their
Decrees confirmed, at the Petition of the Councils themselves.


A. I see by this, that both the calling of the Council, and the Confirmation
of their Doctrine and Church Government had no obligatory force, but from the
Authority of the Emperor. How comes it then to pass, that they take upon them
now a Legislative Power, and say their Canons are Laws? That Text, All Power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth, had the same force then as it has now, and
conferred a Legislative Power on the Councils, not only over Christian Men, but
over all Nations in the World,


B. They say no; for the Power they pretend to is derived from this, that when
a King was converted from Gentilisme to Christianity, he did by that very
submission to the Bishop that converted him, submit to the Bishops Government,
and became one of his Sheep; which Right therefore he could not have over any
Nation that was not Christian.


A. Did Sylvester (which was Pope of Rome in the time of Constantine the great
converted by him) tell the Emperor his new Disciple before hand, that if he
became a Christian he must be the Popes Subject?


B. I believe not; for it is likely enough, if he had told him so plainly, or
but made him suspect it, he would either have been no Christian at all, or but
a counterfeit one.


A. But, if he did not tell him so, and that plainly, it was foul play, not
only in a Priest, but in any Christian; and for this derivation of their Right
from the Emperors consent, it proceeds only from this, that they dare not
challenge a Legislative Power, nor call their Canons Laws in any Kingdom in
Christendom, farther than the Kings make them so. But in Peru, when Atabalipa
was King, the Friar told him, that Christ being King of all the World, had
given the disposing of all the Kingdoms therein to the Pope, and that the Pope
had given Peru to the Roman Emperor Charles the 5 th, and required Atabalipa to
resign it; and for refusing it, seized upon his person by the Spanish Army
there present, and murdered him; you see by this how much they claim, when they
have power to make it good.


B. When began the Popes to take this Authority upon them first?


A. After the Inundation of Northern People had overflowed the Western parts of
the Empire, and possessed themselves of Italy, the People of the City of Rome
submitted themselves, as well in Temporals as Spirituals to their Bishop; and
then first was the Pope a Temporal Prince, and stood no more in so great fear
of the Emperors which lived far off at Constantinople. In this time it was that
the Pope began, by pretense of his Power Spiritual, to encroach upon the
Temporal Rights of all other Princes of the West, and so continued gaining upon
them, till his Power was at the highest in that 300 years or thereabout, which
passed between the 8 th and 11 th Century, that is, between the time of Pope
Leo the third, and Pope Innocent the third. For in this time Pope Zachary the
first deposed Chilperic then King of France, and gave the Kingdom to one of his
Subjects, Pepin, and Pepin took from the Lombards a great part of their
Territory, and gave it to the Church. Shortly after, the Lombards having
recovered their Estate, Charles the Great retook it, and gave it to the Church
again, and Pope Leo the third made Charles Emperor.


B. But what Right did the Pope then pretend for the creating of an Emperor?


A. He pretended the Right of being Christ's Vicar, and what Christ could give,
his Vicar might give; and you know that Christ was King of all the World.


B. Yes, as God; and so he gives all the Kingdoms of the World, which
nevertheless proceed from the consent of People, either for fear or hope.


A. But this Gift of the Empire was in a more special manner, in such a manner
as Moses had the Government of Israel given him, or rather as Joshuah had it
given him, to go in and out before the People, as the High Priest should direct
him; and so the Empire was understood to be given him, on condition to be
directed by the Pope; for when the Pope invested him with the Regal Ornaments,
the People all cried out, Deus dat, that is to say, it is God that gives it; and
the Emperor was contented so to take it. And from that time all, or most of the
Christian Kings, do put into their Titles the words Dei gratia, that is, by the
Gift of God, and their Successors use still to receive the Crown and Scepter
from a Bishop.


B. It Is certainly a very good Custom for Kings to be put in mind, by whose
Gift they Reign; but it cannot from that Custom be inferred, that they receive
the Kingdom by mediation of the Pope, or by any other Clergy: for the Popes
themselves received the Papacy from the Emperor. The first that ever was
elected Bishop of Rome after Emperors were Christians, and without the Emperors
consent, excused himself by Letters to the Emperor with this; That the People
and Clergy of Rome forced him to take it upon him, and prayed the Emperor to
confirm it; which the Emperor did; but with reprehension of their proceedings,
and prohibition of the like for the time to come: The Emperor was Lotharius,
and the Pope Calixtus the first.


A. You see by this the Emperor never acknowledged this Gift of God was the
Gift of the Pope, but maintained, the Popedom was the Gift of the Emperor, but
in process of time, by the negligence of the Emperors, (for the greatness of
Kings makes them that they cannot easily descend into the obscure and narrow
Mines of an ambitious Clergy) they found means to make the People believe,
there was a Power in the Pope and Clergy, which they ought to submit unto,
rather than to the Commands of their own Kings, whenever it should come into
controversy. And to that end devised and decreed many new Articles of Faith,
to the diminution of the Authority of Kings, and to the disjunction of them and
their Subjects, and to a closer adherence of their Subjects to the Church of
Rome. Articles either not at all found in, or not well founded upon the
Scriptures. As first; that it should not be lawful for a Priest to marry.


B. What influence could that have upon the Power of Kings?


A. Do you not see, that by this the King must of necessity either want the
Priesthood, and therewith a great part of the Reverence due to him from the
most religious part of his Subjects, or else want lawful Heirs to succeed him:
by which means, being not taken for the Head of the Church, he was sure in any
Controversy between him and the Pope, that his Subjects would be against him.


B. Is not a Christian King as much a Bishop now, as the Heathen Kings were of
old; for among them Episcopus was a Name common to all Kings? Is not he a
Bishop now, to whom God has committed the charge of all the Souls of his
Subjects, both of the Laity and the Clergy? And though he be in relation to our
Savior, who is the chief Pastor, but a Sheep, yet compared to his own
Subjects, they are all Sheep, both Laique and Clerique, and he only Shepherd.
And seeing a Christian Bishop is but a Christian endued with power to govern
the Clergy, it follows, that every Christian King is not only a Bishop, but an
Archbishop, and his whole Dominion his Diocese. And though it were granted,
that Imposition of Hands is necessary from a Priest, yet seeing Kings have the
Government of the Clergy, that are his Subjects, even before Baptism; the
Baptism it self wherein he is received as a Christian, is a sufficient
Imposition of Hands, so that whereas before he was a Bishop, now he is a
Christian Bishop.


A. For my part I agree with you: This Prohibition of Marriage to Priests came
in about the time of Pope Gregory the 7 th, and William the first King of
England; by which means the Pope had in England, what with Secular, and what
with Regular Priests, a great many lusty Batchelors at his service. Secondly,
That Auricular Confession to a Priest was necessary to Salvation. It Is true,
that before that time, Confession to a Priest was usual, and performed for the
most part (by him that confessed) in writing, but that use was taken away about
the time of King Edward the third, and Priests commanded to take Confessions
from the Mouth of the Confitent: and Men did generally believe, that without
Confession and Absolution before their departure out of the World, they could
not be saved; and having Absolution from a Priest, that they could not be
damned. You understand by this, how much every Man would stand in awe of the
Pope and Clergy, more than they would of the King; and what Inconvenience it is
to a State for their Subjects to confess their secret Thoughts to Spies.


B. Yes, as much as Eternal Torture is more terrible than Death; so much they
would fear the Clergy more than the King.


A. And though perhaps the Roman Clergy will not maintain, that a Priest has
power to remit sins absolutely, but only with a condition of repentance, yet
the People were never so instructed by them; but were left to believe, that
whenever they had Absolution, their precedent sins were all discharged, when
their Penance, which they took for Repentance, was performed. Within the same
time began the Article of Transubstantiation; for it had been disputed a long
time before in what manner a Man did eat the Body of our Savior Jesus Christ,
as being a Point very difficult for a Man to conceive and imagine clearly; but
now it was made very clear, that the Bread was transubstantiated into Christ's
Body, and so was become no more Bread but Flesh.


B. It seems then that Christ had many Bodies, and was in as many places at
once, as there were Communicants. I think the Priests then were so wanton, as
to insult upon the dullness, not only of Common People, but also of Kings and
their Counselors.


A. I am now in a Narration, not in a Disputation, and therefore I would have
you at this time to consider nothing else, but what effect this Doctrine would
work upon Kings and their Subjects, in relation to the Clergy, who only were
able of a piece of Bread to make our Savior's Body, and thereby at the hour of
death to save their Souls.


B. For my part, it would have an effect on me to make me think them Gods, and
to stand in awe of them, as of God himself, if he were visibly present.


A. Besides these and other Articles tending to the upholding of the Popes
Authority, they had many fine Points in their Ecclesiastical Polity, conducing
to the same end; of which I will mention only such as were established within
the same time. For then it was the Order came up of Preaching Friars, that
wandered up and down with power to preach in what Congregation they pleased, and
were sure enough to instill into the People nothing that might lessen the
Obedience to the Church of Rome; but on the contrary, whatsoever might give
advantage to it against the Civil Power. Besides, they privately insinuated
themselves with Women and Men of weak Judgment, confirming their adherence to
the Pope, and urging them in the time of their sickness, to be beneficial to it
by contribution of Money, or building Religious Houses, or Pious Works, and
necessary for the remission of their sins.


B. I do not remember that I have read of any Kingdom or State in the World,
where liberty was given to any private Man to call the People together, and
make Orations frequently to them, or at all, without first making the State
acquainted, except only in Christendom. I believe the Heathen Kings foresaw,
that a few such Orators would be able to make a great Sedition. Moses did
indeed command to read the Scriptures, and expound them in the Synagogues every
Sabbath Day; but the Scriptures then were nothing else but the Laws of the
Nation delivered unto them by Moses himself; and I believe it would do no hurt,
if the Laws of England also were often read and expounded in the several
Congregations of Englishmen, at times appointed, that they may know what to
do; for they know already what to believe.


A. I think that neither the preaching of Friars nor Monks, nor of Parochial
Priests, tended to teach Men what, but whom to believe: for the Power of the
Mighty has no foundation, but in the opinion and belief of the People; and the
end which the Pope had in multiplying Sermons, was no other, but to prop and
enlarge his own Authority over all Christian Kings and States.

Within the same time, that is, between the time of the Emperor Charles the
Great, and of King Edward the third of England, began their second Polity,
which was to bring Religion into an Art, and thereby to maintain all the
Decrees of the Roman Church by disputation; not only from the Scriptures, but
also from the Philosophy of Aristotle, both Moral and Natural; and to that end
the Pope exhorted the said Emperor by Letter to erect Schools of all kinds of
Literature, and from thence began the Institution of Universities; for not long
after the Universities began in Paris and in Oxford. It is true, that there
were Schools in England before that time, in several places, for the
instruction of Children in the Latin Tongue, that is to say, in the Tongue of
the Church; but for an University of Learning, there was none erected till that
time; thoogh it be not unlikely there might be then some that taught
Philosophy, Logic, and other Arts in diverse Monasteries, the Monks having
little else to do, but to study. After some Colleges were built to that
purpose, it was not long time before many more were added to them, by the
devotion of Princes and Bishops, and other wealthy Men: and the Discipline
therein was confirmed by the Popes that then were, and abundance of Scholars
sent thither by their Friends to study, as to a place, from whence the way was
open and easy to Preferment both in Church and Commonwealth. The profit the
Church of Rome expected from them, and in effect received, was the maintenance
of the Popes Doctrine, and of his Authority over Kings, and their Subjects, by
School-Divines, who striving to make good many Points of Faith
incomprehensible, and calling in the Philosophy of Aristotle to their
assistance, wrote great Books of School Divinity, which no man else, nor they
themselves were able to understand; as any man may perceive that shall consider
the Writings of Peter Lombard, or Scotus, or of him that wrote Commentaries
upon him, or of Suarez, or any other School-Divine of later times; which kind
of Learning nevertheless has been much admired by two sorts of Men, otherwise
prudent enough; the one of which sorts were of those that were already devoted,
and really affectionate to the Roman Church: for they believed the Doctrine
before, but admired the Arguments because they understood them not, and yet
found the Conclusions to their mind. The other sort were negligent Men, that
had rather admire with others, than take the pains to examine. So that all
sorts of People were fully resolved, that both the Doctrine was true, and the
Pope's Authority, no more than what was due to him.


B. I see that a Christian King, or State, how well soever provided he be of
Money and Arms, (where the Church of Rome has such Authority) will have but a
hard match of it, for want of Men: for their Subjects will hardly be drawn into
the Field, and fight with courage against their Consciences.


A. It is true, that great Rebellions have been raised by Churchmen in the
Popes quarrel against Kings, as in England against King John, and in France
against King Henry the 4 th, wherein the Kings had a more considerable part on
their sides, than the Pope had on his, and shall always have so, if they have
Money; for there are but few whose Consciences are so tender as to refuse Money
when they want it: But the great mischief done to Kings upon pretense of
Religion is, when the Pope gives power to one King to invade another.


B. I wonder how King Henry the 8 th could then so utterly extinguish the
Authority of the Pope in England, and that without any Rebellion at home, or
any Invasion from abroad.


A. First, the Priests, Monks and Friars being in the height of their power,
were now for the most part grown insolent and licentious, and thereby the force
of their Arguments was now taken away by the scandal of their Lives, which the
Gentry and Men of good Education easily perceived; and the Parliament
consisting of such persons, were therefore willing to take away their Power;
and generally the Common People, which from a long Custom had been in love with
Parliaments, were not displeased therewith. Secondly, the Doctrine of Luther
beginning a little before, was now by a great many men of the greatest
Judgments so well received; as that there was no hope to restore the Pope to
his Power by Rebellion. Thirdly, the Revenue of Abbeys, and all other Religious
Houses falling hereby into the Kings Hands, and by him being disposed of to the
most Eminent Gentlemen in every County, could not but make them do their best
to confirm themselves in the possession of them. Fourthly, King Henry was of a
Nature quick and severe in the punishing of such as should be the first to
oppose his Designs. Lastly, (as to Invasion from abroad) in case the Pope had
given the Kingdom to another Prince, it had been in vain; for England is
another manner of Kingdom than Navarre. Besides, the French and Spanish Forces
were employed at that time one against another: and though they had been at
leisure, they would have found perhaps no better success, than the Spaniards
found afterward in 1588. Nevertheless, notwithstanding the Insolence, Avarice
and Hypocrisy of the then Clergy, and notwithstanding the Doctrine of Luther,
if the Pope had not provoked the King by endeavoring to cross his Marriage
with his second Wife, his Authority might have remained in England, till there
had risen some other quarrel.


B. Did not the Bishops that then were, and had taken an Oath, wherein was,
amongst other things, that they should defend and maintain the Regal Rights of
St. Peter; the words are, Regalia Sancti Petri, which nevertheless some have
said are Regulas Sancti Petri, that is to say, St. Peter's Rules or Doctrine;
and that the Clergy afterward did read it (being perhaps written in Shorthand)
by a mistake to the Pope's advantage Regalia: Did not I say the Bishops oppose
that Act of Parliament against the Pope, and against the taking of the Oath of
Supremacy?


A. No, I do not find the Bishops did many of them oppose the King; for having
no power without him, it had been great imprudence to provoke his anger. There
was besides a Controversy in those times between the Pope and the Bishops,
most of which did maintain, that they exercised their Jurisdiction Episcopal in
the Right of God, as immediately as the Pope himself did exercise the same over
the whole Church. And because they saw that by this Act of the King in
Parliament they were to hold their Power no more of the Pope, and never thought
of holding it of the King, they were perhaps better content to let that Act of
Parliament pass. In the Reign of King Edward the 6 th the Doctrine of Luther
had taken so great root in England, that they threw out also a great many of
the Popes new Articles of Faith; which Queen Mary succeeding him restored
again, together with all that had been abolished by Henry the 8 th, saving
(that which could not be restored) the Religious Houses; and the Bishops and
Clergy of King Edward were partly burnt for Heretics, partly fled, and partly
recanted: and they that fled betook themselves to those places beyond Sea,
where the Reformed Religion was either protected, or not persecuted; who after
the decease of Queen Mary returned again to favor and preferment under Queen
Elizabeth, that restored the Religion of her Brother King Edward: And so it
has continued till this day, excepting the Interruption made in this late
Rebellion of the Presbyterians and other Democratical Men. But though the
Romish Religion were now cast out by the Law, yet there were abundance of
people, and many of them of the Nobility, that still retained the Religion of
their Ancestors, who as they were not much molested in Points of Conscience, so
they were not by their own Inclination very troublesome to the Civil
Government; but by the secret practice of the Jesuits and other Emissaries of
the Roman Church, they were made less quiet, than they ought to have been; and
some of them to venture upon the most horrid Act that ever had been heard of
before: I mean the Gunpowder-Treason. And upon that account, the Papists of
England have been looked upon as Men that would not be sorry for any disorders
here, that might possibly make way to the restoring of the Popes Authority; and
therefore I named them for one of the distempers of the State of England, in
the time of our late King Charles.


B. I see that Monsieur du Plessis, and Dr. Morton, Bishop of Durham, writing
of the progress of the Popes Power, and intituling their Books, one of them,
The Mystery of Iniquity, the other, The Grand Imposture, were both in the
right: for I believe there was never such another cheat in the World; and I
wonder that the Kings and States of Christendom never perceived it.


A. It is manifest they did perceive it. How else durst they make War against
the Pope, and some of them take him out of Rome it self, and carry him away
Prisoner? But if they would have freed themselves from his Tyranny, they should
have agreed together, and made themselves every one (as Henry the 8 th did)
Head of the Church within their own respective Dominions; but not agreeing,
they let his power continue, every one hoping to make use of it (when there
should be cause) against his Neighbor.


B. Now, as to that other distemper by Presbyterians, how came their power to
be so great, being of themselves, for the most part, but so many poor Scholars?


A. This Controversy between the Papist and the Reformed Churches, could not
choose but make every man, to the best of his power, examine by the Scriptures
which of them was in the right; and to that end they were translated into
Vulgar Tongues, whereas before the Translation of them was not allowed, nor any
Man to read them, but such as had express license so to do: for the Pope did
concerning the Scriptures the same that Moses did concerning Mount Sinai: Moses
suffered no man to go up to it to hear God speak, or gaze upon him, but such as
he himself took with him; and the Pope suffered none to speak with God in the
Scriptures, that had not some part of the Pope's Spirit in him, for which he
might be trusted.


B. Certainly Moses did therein very wisely, and according to God's own
Commandment.


A. No doubt of it, and the event it self has made it since appear so: for
after the Bible was translated into English, every Man, nay every Boy and
Wench, that could read English, thought they spoke with God Almighty, and
understood what he said, when by a certain number of Chapters a day, they had
read the Scriptures once or twice over, the Reverence and Obedience due to the
Reformed Church here, and to the Bishops and Pastors therein, was cast off, and
every Man became a Judge of Religion, and an Interpreter of the Scriptures to
himself.


B. Did not the Church of England intend it should be so? What other end could
they have in recommending the Bible to me, if they did not mean I should make
it the Rule of my Actions? Else they might have kept it, though open to
themselves, to me sealed up in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and fed me out of it in
such measure as had been requisite for the salvation of my Soul, and the
Churches Peace.


A. I confess this License of Interpreting the Scripture was the cause of so
many several Sects as have lain hid, till the beginning of the late Kings
Reign, and did then appear to the disturbance of the Commonwealth. But to
return to the Story; those persons that fled for Religion in the time of Queen
Mary, resided, for the most part, in places where the Reformed Religion was
professed, and governed by an Assembly of Ministers, who also were not a little
made use of (for want of better Statesmen) in Points of Civil Government,
which pleased so much the English and Scotch Protestants that lived amongst
them, that at their return they wished there were the same Honor and Reverence
given to the Ministry in their own Countries; in Scotland, (King James being
then young) soon (with the help of some of the powerful Nobility) they brought
it to pass. Also they that returned into England, in the beginning of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, endeavored the same here; but could never effect it, till
this last Rebellion, nor without the help of the Scots: and it was no sooner
effected, but they were defeated again by the other Sects, which, by the
preaching of the Presbyterians, and private Interpretation of Scripture, were
grown numerous.


B. I know indeed, that in the beginning of the late War, the Power of the
Presbyterians was so very great, that, not only the Citizens of London were,
almost all of them, at their devotion, but also the greatest part of all other
Cities and Market Towns of England. But you have not yet told me by what Art
and what Degrees they became so strong.


A. It was not their own Art alone that did it, but they had the concurrence of
a great many Gentlemen that did no less desire a Popular Government in the
Civil State, than these Ministers did in the Church: and as these did in the
Pulpit draw the People to their Opinions, and to a dislike of the
Church Government, Canons, and Common Prayer Book, so did the other make them
in love with Democracy by their Harangues in the Parliament, and by their
Discourses and Communication with People in the Country, continually extolling
of Liberty, and inveighing against Tyranny, leaving the People to collect of
themselves, that this Tyranny was the present Government of the State; and as
the Presbyterians brought with them into their Churches their Divinity from the
Universities, so did many of the Gentlemen bring their Politics from thence
into the Parliament, but neither of them did this very boldly in the time of
Queen Elizabeth. And though it be not likely that all of them did it out of
malice, but many of them out of error; yet certainly the Chief Leaders were
ambitious Ministers and ambitious Gentlemen; the Ministers envying the
Authority of Bishops, whom they thought less learned; and the Gentlemen envying
the Privy Council, whom they thought less wise than themselves. For it is a hard
matter for Men who do all think highly of their own Wits (when they have also
acquired the Learning of the University) to be persuaded, that they want any
ability requisite for the Government of a Commonwealth, especially having read
the glorious Histories, and the sententious Politiques of the ancient popular
Governments of the Greeks and Romans, amongst whom Kings were hated, and
branded with the name of Tyrants, and Popular Government (though no Tyrant was
ever so cruel as a Popular Assembly) passed by the Name of Liberty. The
Presbyterian Ministers, in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, did
not (because they durst not) publicly preach against the Discipline of the
Church; but not long after (by the favor perhaps of some great Courtier) they
went abroad preaching into most of the Market Towns of England, as the
preaching Friars had formerly done, upon working days in the Morning: in which
Sermons these, and others of the same Tenets, that had charge of Souls, both by
the manner and matter of their preaching, applied themselves wholly to the
winning of the People to a liking of their Doctrines, and good opinion of their
persons.

And first for the manner of their preaching, they so framed their countenance
and gesture at the entrance into the Pulpit, and their pronuntiation, both in
their Prayer and Sermon, and used the Scripture phrase, whether understood by
the People or not, as that no Tragoedian in the World could have acted the part
of a right godly Man better than these did; in so much as a Man unacquainted
with such Art, could never suspect any ambitious plot in them, to raise
Sedition against the State, (as they then had designed) or doubt that the
vehemence of their Voice, (for the same words with the usual pronuntiation had
been of little force) and forcedness of their Gesture and Looks, could arise
from any thing else, but zeal to the Service of God. And by this Art they came
into such credit, that numbers of Men used to go forth of their own Parishes
and Towns, on working-days, leaving their Calling, and on Sundays, leaving
their own Churches to hear them preach in other places, and to despise their
own, and all other Preachers that acted not so well as they: and as for those
Ministers that did not usually preach, but in stead of Sermons did read to the
People such Homilies as the Church had appointed, they esteemed and called them
Dumb Dogs.

Secondly, For the matter of their Sermons, because the anger of the People in
the late Roman Usurpation, was then fresh, they saw there could be nothing more
gracious with them, than to preach against such other Points of the Romish
Religion, as the Bishops had not yet condemned; that so receding farther from
Popery than they did, they might with glory to themselves leave a suspicion on
the Bishops, as Men not yet well purged from Idolatry*

Thirdly, Before their S^^^ons, their Prayer was, or seemed to be extempore,
which they pretended to be dictated by the Spirit of God within them, and many
of the People believed, or seemed to believe it: for any man might see, that
had judgment, that they did not take care beforehand what they should say in
their Prayers. And from hence came a dislike of the Common Prayer Book, which
is a set form premeditated, that Men might see to what they were to say Amen.

Fourthly, They did never in their Sermons, or but lightly inveigh against the
Lucrative vices of Men of Trade or Handicraft; such as are Feigning, Lying,
Cozening, Hypocrisy, or other uncharitableness, except want of Charity to
their Pastors and to the Faithful; which was a great ease to the generality of
Citizens, and the Inhabitants of Market Towns, and no little profit to
themselves.

Fifthly, By preaching up an Opinion, that Men were to be assured of their
Salvation by the Testimony of their own private Spirit, meaning the Holy Ghost
dwelling within them. And from this Opinion the People that found in themselves
a sufficient hatred toward the Papists, and an ability to repeat the Sermons
of these Men at their coming home, made no doubt but that they had all that was
necessary, how fraudulently and spightfully soever they behaved themselves to
their Neighbors that were not reckoned amongst the Saints, and sometimes to
those also.

Sixthly, They did indeed with great earnestness and severity inveigh often
against two sins, Carnal Lusts, and Vain Swearing, which without question was
very well done: but the common People were thereby inclined to believe, that
nothing else was sin, but that which was forbidden in the Third and Seventh
Commandment: for few Men do understand by the name of Lust any other
concupiscence, than that which is forbidden in that Seventh Commandment; for
Men are not ordinarily said to lust after another Man's Cattle, or other Goods,
or Possessions, and therefore never made much scruple of the Acts of fraud and
malice, but endeavored to keep themselves from uncleanness only, or at least
from the scandal of it. And whereas they did, both in their Sermons and
Writings, maintain and inculcate, that the very first motions of the mind, that
is to say, the delight Men and Women took in the sight of one another's Form,
though they checked the proceeding thereof, so that it never grew up to be a
design, was nevertheless a sin, they brought young men into desperation, and to
think themselves damned, because they could not (which no Man can, and is
contrary to the constitution of Nature) behold a delightful Object without
delight: and by this means they became Confessors to such as were thus troubled
in Conscience, and were obeyed by them as their Spiritual Doctors in all Cases
of Conscience.


B. Yes, diverse of them did preach frequently against oppression.


A. It Is true, I had forgot that: but it was before such as were free enough
from it, I mean the common People, who would easily believe themselves
oppressed, but never Oppressors. And therefore you may reckon this amongst
their Artifices to make the People believe they were oppressed by the King, or
perhaps by the Bishops, or both; and incline the meaner sort to their Party
afterward, when there should be occasion. But this was but sparingly done in
the time of Queen Elizabeth, whose fear and jealousy they were afraid of. Nor
had they as yet any great power in the Parliament House, whereby to call in
question her Prerogative by Petitions of Right, and other Devices, as they did
afterward, when Democratical Gentlemen had received them into their Councels,
for the design of changing the Government from Monarchical to Popular, which
they called Liberty.


B. Who would think that such horrible designs as these could so easily and so
long remain covered with the Cloak of Godliness: for that they were most
impious Hypocrites is manifest enough by the War these proceedings ended in,
and by the impious Acts in that War committed. But when began first to appear
in Parliament the Attempt of Popular Government, and by whom?


A. As to the time of attempting the change of Government from Monarchical to
Democratical, we must distinguish. They did not challenge the Sovereignty in
plain terms, and by that Name, till they had slain the King, nor the Rights
thereof altogether by particular Heads, till the King was driven from London by
Tumults, raised in that City against him, and retired for the security of his
Person to York, where he bad not been many days, when they sent unto him 19
Propositions, whereof above a dozen were Demands of several Powers, essential
parts of the Power Sovereign. But before that time they had demanded some of
them (in a Petition which they called a Petition of Right) which nevertheless
the King had granted them in a former Parliament, though he deprived himself
thereby, not only of the Power to levy Money without their consent, but also of
his ordinary Revenue by Custom of Tonnage and Poundage, and of the Liberty to
put into Custody such Men as he thought likely to disturb the Peace, and raise
Sedition in the Kingdom. As for the Men that did this, it is enough to say they
were the Members of the last Parliament, and of some other Parliaments in the
beginning of King Charles, and the end of King James his Reign; to name them
all is not necessary, farther than the Story shall require. Most of them were
Members of the House of Commons; some few also of the Lords; but all such as
had a great opinion of their sufficiency in Politics, which they thought was
not sufficiently taken notice of by the King.


B. How could the Parliament when the King had a great Navy, and a great number
of Trained Soldiers, and all the Magazines of Ammunition in his power, be able
to begin the War?


A. The King had these things indeed in his right, but that signifies little;
when they that had the Custody of the Navy and Magazines, and with them all the
Trained Soldiers, and in a manner all his Subjects, were by the preaching of
Presbyterian Ministers, and the seditious whisperings of false and ignorant
Politicians, made his Enemies: And when the King could have no Money but what
the Parliament should give him, which you may be sure should not be enough to
maintain his Regal Power, which they intended to take from him.

And yet I think they would never have adventured into the Field, but for that
unlucky business of imposing upon the Scots (who were all Presbyterians) our
Book of Common Prayer; for I believe the English would never have taken well
that the Parliament should make War upon the King upon any provocation, unless
it were in their own defense, in case the King should first make War upon them;
and therefore it behooved them to provoke the King, that he might do something
that might look like Hostility. It happened in the Year 1637. that the King by
the Advice, as it is thought, of the Archbishop of Canterbury, sent down a
Book of Common Prayer into Scotland, not differing in substance from ours, nor
much in words, besides the putting of the word Presbyter for that of Minister,
commanding it to be used (for conformity to this Kingdom) by the Ministers
there, for an ordinary Form of Divine Service: This being read in the Church at
Edinburgh, caused such a Tumult there, that he that read it had much ado to
escape with his life, and gave occasion to the greatest part of the Nobility
and others to enter by their own Authority, into a Covenant amongst themselves,
which impudently they called a Covenant with God, to put down Episcopacy,
without consulting with the King; which they presently did, animated thereto by
their own confidence, or by assurance from some of the Democratical
Englishmen, that in former Parliaments had been the greatest opposers of the
King's Interest, that the King would not be able to raise an Army to chastise
them without calling a Parliament, which would be sure to favor them: For the
thing which those Domocraticals chiefly then aimed at, was to force the King to
call a Parliament, which he had not done of ten years before, as having found
no help, but hinderance to his Designs in the Parliaments he had formerly
called. Howsoever contrary to their expectation, by the help of his better
affected Subjects of the Nobility and Gentry, he made a shift to raise a
sufficient Army to have reduced the Scots to their former obedience, if it had
proceeded to battle: and with this Army he marched himself into Scotland, where
the Scotch Army was also brought into the Field against him, as if they meant
to fight: but then the Scoth sent to the King for leave to treat by
Commissioners on both sides; and the King willing to avoid the destruction of
his own Subjects, condescended to it. The Issue was peace, and the King
thereupon went to Edinburgh, and passed an Act of Parliament there to their
satisfaction.


B. Did he not then confirm Episcopacy?


A. No, but yielded to the abolishing of it: but by this means the English were
crossed in their hope of a Parliament, but the said Democraticals, formerly
opposers of the King's Interest, ceased not to endeavor still to put the two
Nations into a War; to the end the King might buy the Parliaments help at no
less a price than Sovereignty it self.


B. But what was the cause that the Gentry and Nobility of Scotland were so
averse from the Episcopacy? for I can hardly believe that their Consciences
were extraordinarily tender, nor that they were so very great Divines, as to
know what was the true Church Discipline established by our Savior and his
Apostles; nor yet so much in love with their Ministers as to be overrul'd by
them in the Government either Ecclesiastical or Civil; for in their lives they
were just as other Men are, pursuers of their own Interests and Preferments,
wherein they were not more opposed by the Bishops than by their Presbyterian
Ministers.


A. Truly I do not know; I cannot enter into other Men's thoughts farther than I
am led by the consideration of Humane Nature in general: But upon this
consideration I see first, that Men of ancient Wealth and Nobility are not apt
to brook, that poor Scholars should (as they must when they are made Bishops)
be their fellows. Secondly, That from the Emulation of Glory between the
Nations they might be willing to see this Nation afflicted by Civil War, and
might hope by aiding the Rebels here, to acquire some power over the English,
at least so far as to establish here the Presbyterian Discipline; which was
also one of the Points they afterward openly demanded. Lastly, They might hope
for, in the War, some great Sum of Money, as a reward of their assistance,
besides great booty, which they afterward obtained. But whatsoever was the
cause of their hatred to Bishops, the pulling of them down was not all they
aimed at: If it had, (now that Episcopacy was abolished by Act of Parliament)
they would have rested satisfied, which they did not: for after the King was
returned to London, the English Presbyterians and Democraticals, by whose
favor they had put down Bishops in Scotland, thought it reason to have the
assistance of the Scotch, for the pulling down of Bishops in England. And in
order thereunto, they might perhaps deal with the Scots secretly, to rest
unsatisfied with that Pacification, which they were before contented with.
Howsoever it was, not long after the King was returned to London, they sent up
to some of their Friends at Court a certain Paper containing (as they
pretended) the Articles of the said Pacification, a false and scandalous Paper,
which was by the King's Command burnt (as I have heard) publicly; and so both
parts returned to the same condition they were in, when the King went down with
his Army.


B. And so there was a great deal of Money cast away to no purpose: But you
have not told me who was General of that Army.


A. I told you the King was there in Person: He that commanded under him was
the Earl of Arundel, a Man that wanted not either Valor or Judgment. But to
proceed to Battle, or to Treaty, was not in his power, but in the King's.


B. He was a Man of a most Noble and Loyal Family, and whose Ancestors had
formerly given a great overthrow to the Scots, in their own Country, and in all
likelihood he might have given them the like now, if they had fought.


A. He might indeed: but it had been but a kind of superstition to have made
him General upon that account, though many Generals heretofore have been chosen
for the good luck of their Ancestors in like occasions. In the long War between
Athens and Sparta, a General of the Athenians by Sea won many Victories against
the Spartans; for which cause, after his death, they chose his Son for General
with ill success. The Romans that conquered Carthage by the Valor and Conduct
of Scipio, when they were to make War again in Africa against Caesar, chose
another Scipio for General, a Man valiant and wise enough, but he perished in
the Employment. And to come home to our own Nation, the Earl of Essex made a
fortunate Expedition to Cadiz, but his Son, sent afterward to the same place,
could do nothing. It Is but a foolish superstition to hope that God has entailed
success in War upon a Name or Family.


B. After the Pacification broken, what succeeded next?


A. The King sent Duke Hamilton with Commission and Instructions into Scotland,
to call a Parliament there, and to use all the means he could otherwise; but
all was to no purpose: for the Scotch were now resolved to raise an Army, and
to enter into England, to deliver (as they pretended) their Grievances to his
Majesty in a Petition, because the King (they said) being in the hands of evil
Counselors, they could not otherwise obtain their Right: but the truth is,
they were animated to it by the Democratical, and Presbyterian English, with a
promise of reward, and hope of plunder. Some have said, that Duke Hamilton also
did rather encourage them to, than deter them from the Expedition, as hoping by
the disorder of the two Kingdoms, to bring to pass that which he had formerly
been accused to endeavor, to make himself King of Scotland. But I take this to
have been a very uncharitable censure upon so little ground, to judge so hardly
of a Man that afterward lost his life in seeking to procure the Liberty of the
King his Master.

This resolution of the Scots to enter England being known, the King wanting
Money to raise an Army against them, was now (as his Enemies here wished)
constrained to call a Parliament to meet at Westminster the 13 th day of April
1640.


B. Methinks a Parliament of England, if upon any occasion, should furnish the
King with Money now in a War against the Scots, out of an inveterate
dissaffection to that Nation that had always anciently taken part with their
Enemies the French, and which always esteemed the Glory of England for an
abatement of their own.


A. It Is indeed commonly seen, that neighbor Nations envy one another Honor,
and that the less potent bears the greater malice; but that hinders them not
from agreeing in those things, which their common ambition leads them to. And
therefore the King found not the more, but the less help from this Parliament,
and most of the Members thereof, in their ordinary Discourses, seemed to wonder
why the King should make a War upon Scotland: and in that Parliament sometimes
called them Their Brethren the Scots. But in stead of taking the Kings
business, which was the raising of Money, into their Consideration, they fell
upon the redressing of Grievances, and especially such ways of levying Money as
in the late Intermission of Parliaments the King had been forced to use, such
as were Ship Money, for Knighthood, and such other Vails (as one may call them)
of the Regal Office, which Lawyers had found justifiable by the Ancient Records
of the Kingdom. Besides, they fell upon the Actions of diverse Ministers of
State, though done by the King's own Command and Warrant; in so much, that
before they were to come to the business for which they were called, the Money
which was necessary for this War (if they had given any, as they never meant to
do) had come too late. It is true, there was mention of a Sum of Money to be
given the King, by way of bargain, for the relinquishing of his Right to
Ship Money, and some other of his Prerogatives, but so seldom, and without
determining any Sum, that it was in vain for the King to hope for any success;
and therefore upon the 5 th of May following he dissolved it.


B. Where then had the King Money to raise and pay his Army?


A. He was forced the second time to make use of the Nobility and Gentry, who
contributed some more, some less, according to the greatness of their Estates;
but amongst them all they made up a very sufficient Army.


B. It seems then that the same Men that crossed his business in the
Parliament, now out of Parliament advanced it all they could. What was the
reason of that?


A. The greatest part of the Lords in Parliament, and of the Gentry throughout
England, were more affected to Monarchy than to a Popular Government, but so,
as not to endure to hear of the King's Absolute Power, which made them in time
of Parliament easily to condescend to abridge it, and bring the Government to a
mixed Monarchy, as they called it, wherein the absolute Sovereignty should be
divided between the King, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons.


B. But how if they cannot agree?


A. I think they never thought of that; but I am sure they never meant the
Sovereignty should be wholly, either in one, or both Houses. Besides, they were
loath to desert the King, when he was invaded by Foreigners; for the Scots were
esteemed by them as a Foreign Nation.


B. It is strange to me, that England and Scotland being but one Island, and
their Language almost the same, and being governed by one King, should be
thought Foreigners to one another. The Romans were Masters of many Nations,
and to oblige them the more to obey, the Edicts and Laws sent unto them from
the City of Rome, they thought fit to make them all Romans; and out of diverse
Nations, as Spain, Germany, Italy and France, to advance some that they thought
worthy, even to be Senators of Rome, and to give every one of the Common People
the Privileges of the City of Rome, by which they were protected from the
Contumelies of other Nations, where they resided. Why were not the Scotch and
English in like manner united into one People?


A. King James, at his first coming to the Crown of England, did endeavor it,
but could not prevail. But for all that, I believe the Scotch have now as many
Privileges in England, as any Nation had in Rome, of those which were so as
you say made Romans; for they are all naturalized, and have right to buy Land
in England to themselves and their Heirs.


B. It Is true of them that were born in Scotland after the time that King James
was in possession of the Kingdom of England.


A. There be very few now that were born before. But why have they a better
Right that were born after, than they that were born before?


B. Because they were born Subjects to the King of England, and the rest not.


A. Were not the rest born Subjects to King James? And was not he King of
England?


B. Yes, but not then.


A. I understand not the subtilty of that distinction. But upon what Law is
that distinction grounded? Is there any Statute to that purpose?


B. I cannot tell; I think not: but it is grounded upon Equity.


A. I see little Equity in this; that those Nations that are bound to equal
obedience to the same King, should not have equal privileges. And now seeing
there be so very few born before King James's coming in; what greater
privilege had those ingrafted Romans by their Naturalization in the State of
Rome, or in the State of England the English themselves, more than the Scotch.


B. Those Romans, when any of them were in Rome, had their Voice in the making
of Laws.


A. And the Scotch have their Parliaments, wherein their assent is required to
the Laws there made, which is as good. Have not many of the Provinces of France
their several Parliaments and several Constitutions? and yet they are all
equally natural Subjects to the King of France: and therefore for my part, I
think they were mistaken, both English and Scotch, in calling one another
Foreigners. Howsoever that be, the King had a very sufficient Army, wherewith
he marched toward Scotland, and by that time he was come to York, the Scotch
Army was drawn up to the Frontiers, and ready to march into England; which also
they presently did, giving out all the way, that their March should be without
damage to the Country, and that their Errand was only to deliver a Petition to
the King, for the redress of many pretended Injuries they had received from
such of the Court, whose Counsel the King most followed; so they passed through
Northumberland quietly, till they came to a Ford in the River of Tine, a little
above New Castle, where they found some little opposition from a Party of the
King's Army sent thither to stop them, whom the Scotch easily mastered, and as
soon as they were over, seized upon New Castle, and coming farther on, upon the
City of Duresme, and sent to the King to desire a Treaty, which was granted,
and the Commissioners on both sides met at Rippon. The Conclusion was, that all
should be referred to the Parliament, which the King should call to meet at
Westminster on the third of November following, being in the same Year 1640.
and thereupon the King returned to London.


B. So the Armies were disbanded.


A. No; the Scotch Army was to be defrayed by the Counties of Northumberland
and Duresme, and the King was to pay his own, till the disbanding of both
should be agreed upon in Parliament.


B. So in effect both the Armies were maintained at the King's charge, and the
whole Controversy to be decided by a Parliament almost wholly Presbyterian,
and as partial to the Scotch as themselves could have wished.


A. And yet for all this they durst not presently make War upon the King, there
was so much yet left of reverence to him in the Hearts of the People, as to
have made them odious, if they had declared what they intended: they must have
some color or other to make it believed, that the King made War first upon the
Parliament, and besides they had not yet sufficiently disgraced him in Sermons
and Pamphlets, nor removed from about him those they thought could best counsel
him. Therefore they resolved to proceed with him like skilful Hunters; first to
single him out by Men disposed in all parts to drive him into the open Field,
and then in case he should but seem to turn head, to call that a making of War
against the Parliament.

And first they called in question such as had either preached or written in
defense of any of those Rights, which belonging to the Crown, they meant to
usurp, and take from the King to themselves: Whereupon some few Preachers and
Writers were imprisoned, or forced to fly. The King not protecting these, they
proceeded to call in question some of the King's own Actions in his Ministers,
whereof they imprisoned some, and some went beyond Sea. And whereas certain
persons having endeavored by Books and Sermons to raise Sedition, and
committed other crimes of high nature, had therefore been censured by the
King's Council in the Star Chamber, and imprisoned; the Parliament by their own
Authority, to try, it seems, how the King and the People would take it, (for
their persons were inconsiderable) ordered their setting at liberty; which was
accordingly done, with great applause of the People that flocked about them in
London, in manner of a Triumph. This being done without resistance, the King's
Right to Ship Money --


B. Ship Money! what is that?


A. The Kings of England, for the defense of the Sea, had power to tax all the
Counties of England whether they were Maritime or not, for the building and
furnishing of Ships; which Tax the King had then lately found cause to impose,
and the Parliament exclaimed against it as an oppression: and one of their
Members that had been taxed but 20 s. (mark the oppression; a Parliament Man of
500 l. a year Land taxed at 20 s.) they were forced to bring it to a Trial at
Law, he refusing payment, and he was cast. Again, when all the Judges of
Westminster were demanded their Opinions concerning the Legality of it, of
Twelve that there are, it was judged legal by Ten; for which though they were
not punished, yet they were afrighted by the Parliament.


B. What did the Parliament mean, when they did exclaim against it as illegal?
Did they mean it was against Statute Law, or against the Judgments of Lawyers
given heretofore, which are commonly called Reports; or did they mean it was
against Equity, which I take to be the same with the Law of Nature?


A. It is a hard matter, or rather impossible, to know what other Men mean,
especially if they be crafty: but sure I am Equity was not their ground for
this pretense of immunity from contributing to the King, but at their own
pleasure: for when they have laid the burden of defending the whole Kingdom,
and governing it, upon any person whatsoever, there is very little equity he
should depend on others for the means of performing it, or if he do, they are
his Sovereign, not he theirs. And as for the Common Law contained in Reports,
they have no force, but what the King gives them. Besides, it were more
unreasonable, that a corrupt or foolish Judge his unjust Sentence, should by
any time, how long soever, obtain the Authority and Force of a Law. But amongst
the Statute Laws there is one called Magna Charta, or the Great Charter of the
Liberties of Englishmen, in which there is one Article, wherein a King
heretofore has granted, That no Man shall be distrained, that is, have his
Goods taken from him, otherwise than by the Law of the Land.


B. Is not that a sufficient ground for their purpose?


A. No, that leaves us in the same doubt, which you think it clears: for where
was that Law of the Land then? Did they mean another Magna Charta, that was
made by some King more ancient yet? No, that Statute was made, not to exempt
any Man from payments to the Public, but for securing of every Man from such
as abused the King's Power by surreptitious obtaining the King's Warrants, to
the oppressing of those against whom he had any Suit in Law: but it was
conducing to the ends of some rebellious Spirits in this Parliament to have it
interpreted in the wrong sense, and suitable enough to the understanding of the
rest, or most part of them to let it pass?


B. You make the Members of that Parliament very simple Men, and yet the People
chose them for the wisest of the Land.


A. If Craft be wisdom, they were wise enough; but wise, as I define it, is he
that knows how to bring his business to pass (without the assistance of knavery
and ignoble shifts) by the sole strength of his good contrivance: A Fool may
win from a better Gamester by the advantage of false Dice, and packing of Cards.


B. According to your definition there be few wise Men now adays; such Wisdom
is a kind of Gallantry that few are brought up to, and most think folly. Fine
Clothes, Great Feathers, Civility toward Men that will not swallow Injuries,
and Injury toward them that will, is the present Gallantry: but when the
Parliament afterward, having gotten the power into their hands, levied Money
for their own use; what said the People to that?


A. What else, but that it was legal, and to be paid, as being imposed by
consent of Parliaments?


B. I have heard often that they ought to pay what was imposed by consent of
Parliaments to the use of the King; but to their own use never before. I see by
this it is easier to gull the Multitude, than any one man amongst them: for
what one man that has not his natural Judgment depraved by accident, could be
so easily cozened in a matter that concerns his purse, had he not been
passionately carried away by the rest to change of Government, or rather to a
Liberty of every one to govern himself?


A. Judge then what kind of men such a multitude of ignorant People were like
to elect for their Burgesses and Knights of Shires.


B. I can make no other Judgment, but that they, who were then elected, were
just such as had been elected for former Parliaments, and as are like to be
elected for Parliaments to come: for the Common People have been, and always
will be ignorant of their duty to the Public, as never meditating any thing
but their particular Interest, in other things following their immediate
Leaders, which are either the Preachers, or the most potent of the Gentlemen
that dwell amongst them; as common Soldiers for the most part follow their
immediate Captains, if they like them; if you think the late miseries have made
them wiser, that will quickly be forgot, and then we shall be no wiser than we
were.


A. Why may not men be taught their duty, that is, the Science of just and
unjust, as diverse other Sciences have been taught from true Principles and
evident Demonstration? and much more easily than any of those Preachers and
Democratical Gentlemen could teach Rebellion and Treason.


B. But who can teach what none have learned? Or if any man has been so
singular, as to have studied the Science of Justice and Equity; how can he
teach it safely, when it is against the Interest of those, that are in
possession of the Power to hurt him?


A. The Rules of Just and Unjust sufficiently demonstrated, and from Principles
evident to the meanest capacity, have not been wanting, and notwithstanding the
obscurity of their Author, have shined, not only in this, but also in Foreign
Countries to men of good education; but they are few in respect of the rest of
men, whereof many cannot read; many, though they can, have no leisure, and of
them that have leisure, the greatest part have their minds wholly employed and
taken up by their private businesses, or pleasures: So that it is impossible,
that the Multitude should ever learn their duty, but from the Pulpit and upon
Holy Days: but then, and from thence it is, that they learned their
disobedience. And therefore the Light of that Doctrine has been hitherto
covered, and kept under here by a cloud of Adversaries, which no private man's
Reputation can break through, without the Authority of the Universities; but
out of the Universities came all those Preachers that taught the contrary. The
Universities have been to this Nation, as the Wooden Horse was to the Trojans.


B. Can you tell me why, and when the Universities here and in other places
first began?


A. It seems, for the time, they began in the Reign of the Emperor Charles the
Great; before which time, I doubt not but that there were many Grammar Schools
for the Latin Tongue, which was the natural Language of the Roman Church; but
for Universities, that is to say, Schools for the Sciences in general, and
especially for Divinity; it is manifest, that the Institution of them was
recommended by the Pope's Letter to the Emperor Charles the Great, and
recommended farther by a Council held in his time, I think, at Chalon sur
Saone; and not long after was erected an University at Paris; and the College
called Vniversity-Colledge at Oxford: And so by degrees several Bishops,
Noblemen and Rich-men, and some Kings and Queens contributing thereunto, the
Universities obtained at last their present splendour.


B. But what was the Pope's design in it?


A. What other design was he like to have, but what you heard before, the
advancement of his own Authority in the Countries where the Universities were
erected? There they learned to dispute for him, and with unintelligible
distinctions to blind men's Eyes, whilst they incroached upon the Right of
Kings; and it was an evident Argument of that Design, that they fell in hand
with the work so quickly. For the first Rector of the University of Paris, as I
have read somewhere, was Peter Lombard, who first brought in them the Learning
called School Divinity; and was seconded by John Scot of Duns, who lived in, or
near the same time, whom any ingenious Reader, not knowing what was the Design,
would judge to have been two the most egregious Blockheads in the World, so
obscure and senseless are their Writings. And from these the Schoolmen that
succeeded, learnt the trick of imposing what they list upon their Readers, and
declining the force of true Reason by Verbal Forkes, I mean Distinctions that
signify nothing, but serve only to astonish the multitude of ignorant Men. As
for the understanding Readers, they were so few, that these new sublime Doctors
cared not what they thought. These School men were to make good all the
Articles of Faith, which the Popes from time to time should command to be
believed: amongst which there were very many inconsistent with the Rights of
Kings, and other Civil Sovereigns, as asserting to the Pope all Authority
whatsoever they should declare to be necessary, in ordine ad spiritualia, that
is to say, in order to Religion.

From the Universities also it was, That all Preachers proceeded, and were
poured out into City and Country to terrify the People into an absolute
obedience to the Pope's Canons and Commands, which for fear of wakening Kings
and Princes too much, they durst not yet call Laws.

From the Universities it was, That the Philosophy of Aristotle was made an
Ingredient to Religion, as serving for a Salve to a great many of absurd
Articles, concerning the Nature of Christ's Body, and the Estate of Angels and
Saints in Heaven; which Articles they thought fit to have believed, because
they bring some of them profit, and others reverence to the Clergy, even to the
meanest of them: for when they shall have made the People believe that the
meanest of them can make the Body of Christ, who is there that will not both
show them reverence, and be liberal to them, or to the Church, especially in
the time of their sickness, when they think they make and bring unto them their
Savior?


B. But, what advantage to them in these Impostures was the Doctrine of
Aristotle?


A. They have made more use of his obscurity than of his Doctrine: for none of
the Ancient Philosophers Writings are comparable to those of Aristotle for
their aptness to puzzle, and entangle men with words, and to breed Disputation,
which must at last be ended in the Determination of the Church of Rome; and yet
in the Doctrine of Aristotle they made use of many Points; as first the
Doctrine of separated Essences.


B. What are separated Essences?


A. Separated Beings.


B. Separated from what?


A. From every thing that is.


B. I cannot understand the Being of any thing, which I understand not to be:
but what can they make of that?


A. Very much in questions concerning the Nature of God, and concerning the
Estate of Man's Soul after death, in Heaven, Hell and Purgatory; by which you,
and every man knows, how great obedience, and how much Money they gain from the
Common People. Whereas Aristotle holds the Soul of Man to be the first giver
of motion to the Body, and consequently to it self; they make use of that in
the Doctrine of Free Will; what, and how they gain by that, I will not say.

He holds forth, that there be many things that come to pass in this World
from no necessity of Causes, but mere Contingency, Casualty and Fortune.


B. Methinks, in this they make God stand idle, and to be a mere Spectator of
the Games of Fortune; for what God is the cause of must needs come to pass, and
in my opinion, nothing else. But because there must be some ground for the
Justice of the Eternal Torment of the damned; perhaps it is this, that men's
Wills and Propensions are not (they think) in the Hands of God, but of
themselves; and in this also I see somewhat conducing to the Authority of the
Church.


A. This is not much, nor was Aristotle of such credit with them, but that when
his Opinion was against theirs, they could slight him. Whatsoever he says is
impossible in nature, they can prove well enough to be possible, from the
Almighty Power of God, who can make many Bodies to be in one and the self-same
place, and one Body to be in many places at the same time, if the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation require it, though Aristotle deny it. I like not the Design
of drawing Religion into an Art, whereas it ought to be a Law; and though not
the same in all Countries, yet in every Country undisputable; nor that they
teach it not as Arts ought to be taught, by showing first the meaning of their
Terms, and then deriving from them the truth they would have us believe; nor
that their Terms are, for the most part, unintelligible, though to make it seem
rather want of Learning in the Reader, than want of fair dealing in themselves:
They are, for the most part, Latin and Greek words, wryed a little at the
point, toward the Native Language of the several Countries, where they are
used: But that which is most intolerable is, that all Clerks are forced to make
as if they believed them, if they mean to have any Church-preferment, the Keys
whereof are in the Pope's Hands; and the Common People, whatsoever they believe
of those subtle Doctrines, are never esteemed better Sons of the Church for
their Learning. There is but one way there to Salvation, that is, extraordinary
Devotion and Liberality to the Church, and readiness for the Churches sake, if
it be required, to fight against their Natural and Lawful Sovereigns.


B. I see what use they make of Aristotle's Logic, Physics, and Metaphysics;
but I see not yet how his Politics can serve their turn.


A. Nor I. It has (I think) done them no good, though it has done us here much
hurt by accident: for men grown weary at last of the Insolence of the Priests,
and examining the truth of these Doctrines that were put upon them, began to
search the sense of the Scriptures, as they are in the learned Languages, and
consequently studying Greek and Latin, became acquainted with the Democratical
Principles of Aristotle and Cicero, and from the love of their Eloquence, fell
in love with their Politics, and that more and more, till it grew into the
Rebellion we now talk of, without any other advantage to the Roman Church, but
that it was a weakening to us, whom since we broke out of their Net, in the
time of Henry the 8 th, they have continually endeavored to recover.


B. What have they gotten by the teaching of Aristotle's Ethics.


A. It is some advantage to them, that neither the Morals of Aristotle, nor of
any other, have done them any harm, nor us any good. Their Doctrines have
caused a great deal of dispute concerning Virtue and Vice, but no knowledge of
what they are, nor any method of obtaining Virtue, nor of avoiding Vice.

The end of Moral Philosophy is to teach men of all sorts their duty, both to
the Public and to one another. They estimate Virtue, partly by a Mediocrity of
the Passions of men, and partly by that that they are praised; whereas it is
not the Much, or Little Praise that makes an Action virtuous, but the Cause;
nor much or little blame that makes an Action vicious, but its being
unconformable to the Laws, in such men as are subject to the Law, or its being
unconformable to Equity or Charity in all men whatsoever.


B. It seems you make a difference between the Ethics of Subjects, and the
Ethics of Sovereigns.


A. So I do. The Virtue of a Subject is comprehended wholly in obedience to the
Laws of the Commonwealth. To obey the Laws is Justice and Equity, which is the
Law of Nature, and consequently is Civil Law in all Nations of the World: and
nothing is Injustice or Iniquity otherwise than it is against the Law. Likewise
to obey the Laws is the Prudence of a Subject; for without such obedience the
Commonwealth (which is every Subject's safety and protection) cannot subsist.
And though it be prudence also in private men, justly and moderately to enrich
themselves, yet craftily to withold from the Public, or defraud it of such
part of their wealth, as is by Law required, is no sign of prudence, but of
want of knowledge of what is necessary for their own defense.

The Virtues of Sovereigns are such as tend to the maintenance of peace at
home, and to the resistance of Foreign Enemies. Fortitude is a Royal Virtue,
and though it be necessary in such private men as shall be Soldiers, yet for
other men, the less they dare, the better it is, both for the Commonwealth,
and for themselves. Frugality (though perhaps you will think it strange) is
also a Royal Virtue: for it increases the Public Stock, which cannot be too
great for the Public Use, nor any man too sparing of what he has in trust for
the good of others. Liberality also is a Royal Virtue: for the Commonwealth
cannot be well served without extraordinary diligence and service of Ministers,
and great fidelity to their Sovereigns, who ought therefore to be encouraged,
and especially those that do him service in the Wars. In sum, all Actions and
Habits are to be esteemed good or evil by their causes and usefulness, in
reference to the Commonwealth, and not by their Mediocrity, nor by their being
commended: for several men praise several Customs, and that which is Virtue
with one is blamed by others, and contrarily what one calls Vice, another calls
Virtue, as their present affections lead them.


B. Methinks you should have placed among the Virtues that, which in my opinion
is the greatest of all Virtues, Religion.


A. So I have, though, it seems, you did not observe it. But whither do we
digress from the way we were in?


B. I think you have not digressed at all: for I suppose your purpose was, to
acquaint me with the History, not so much of those Actions that passed in the
time of the late Troubles, as of their Causes, and of the Councels and Artifice
by which they were brought to pass. There be diverse men that have written the
History, out of whom I might have learned what they did, and somewhat also of
the Contrivance; but I find little in them of what I would ask. Therefore since
you were pleased to enter into this discourse at my request, be pleased also to
inform me after my own method: and for the danger of confusion that may arise
from that, I will take care to bring you back to the place from whence I drew
you; for I well remember where it was.


A. Well then: To your question concerning Religion; in as much as I told you,
that all Virtue is comprehended in Obedience to the Laws of the Commonwealth,
whereof Religion is one, I have placed Religion amongst the Virtues.


B. Is Religion then the Law of a Commonwealth?


A. There is no Nation in the World, whose Religion is not established, and
receives not its Authority from the Laws of that Nation. It is true, that the
Law of God receives no evidence from the Laws of Men; but because Men can never
by their own wisdom come to the knowledge of what God has spoken and commanded
to be observed, nor be obliged to obey the Laws, whose Author they know not,
they are to acquiesce in some Humane Authority or other. So that the Question
will be, whether a Man ought in matter of Religion, that is to say, when there
is question of his duty to God and the King, to rely upon the preaching of
their Fellow Subjects, or of a Stranger, or upon the Voice of the Law?


B. There is no great difficulty in that Point: for there is none that preach
here, or any where else, at least ought to preach, but such as have Authority
so to do from him, or them that have the Sovereign Power; so that if the King
gives us leave, you or I may as lawfully preach as them that do; and I believe
we should perform that Office a great deal better than they that preached us
into the Rebellion.


A. The Church Morals are in many Points very different from these that I have
here set down, for the Doctrine of Virtue and Vice; and yet without any
conformity with that of Aristotle. For in the Church of Rome the principal
Virtues are to obey their Doctrine, though it be Treason, and that is to be
Religious: To be beneficial to the Clergy, that is their Piety and Liberality,
and to believe upon their word that which a man knows in his Conscience to be
false, which is the Faith they require. I could name a great many more such
Points of their Morals, but that I know you know them already, being so well
versed in the Cases of Conscience written by their Schoolmen, who measure the
goodness and wickedness of all Actions, by their congruity with the Doctrine of
the Roman Clergy.


B. But what is the Moral Philosophy of the Protestant Clergy in England?


A. So much as they show of it in their Life and Conversation is for the most
part very good, and of very good example, much better than their Writings.


B. It happens many times that men live honestly for fear, who, if they had
power, would live according to their own Opinions; that is, if their Opinions
be not right, unrighteously.


A. Do the Clergy in England pretend as the Pope does, or as the Presbyterians
do, to have a Right from God immediately to govern the King and his Subjects in
all Points of Religion and Manners; if they do, you cannot doubt but that if
they had number and strength, which they are never like to have, they would
attempt to obtain that Power, as the others have done.


B. I would be glad to see a Systeme of the present Morals written by some
Divine of good Reputation and Learning, and of the late King's Party.


A. I think I can recommend unto you the best that is extant, and such a one as
(except a few passages that I mislike) is very well worth your reading. The
Title of it is, The whole Duty of Man laid down in a plain and familiar way;
and yet I dare say, that if the Presbyterian Ministers, even those of them
which were the most diligent Preachers of the late Sedition, were to be tried
by it, they would go near to be found Not Guilty. He has divided the Duty of
Man into three great Branches, which are his Duty to God, to Himself, and to
his Neighbor. In his Duty to God he puts the acknowledgement of him in his
Essence and his Attributes, and in the believing of his Word: His Attributes
are Omnipotence, Omniscience, Infiniteness, Justice, Truth, Mercy, and all the
rest that are found in Scripture. Which of these did not those seditious
Preachers acknowledge equally with the best of Christians? The Word of God are
the Books of Holy Scripture received for Canonical in England.


B. They receive the Word of God, but it is according to their own
Interpretation.


A. According to whose Interpretation was it received, by the Bishops, and the
rest of the Loyal Party, but their own? He puts for another Duty Obedience and
Submission to Gods Will. Did any of them, nay did any man living, do any thing
at any time against God's Will?


B. By God's Will I suppose he means there his revealed Will, that is to say,
his Commandments, which I am sure they did most horribly break, both by their
preaching and otherwise.


A. As for their Actions, there is no doubt but all men are guilty enough (if
God deal severely with them) to be damned. And for their preaching, they will
say they thought it agreeable to Gods revealed Will in the Scriptures; if they
thought it so, it was not disobedience, but error; and how can any man prove
they thought otherwise?


B. Hypocrisy has this great Prerogative above other sins, that it cannot be
accused,


A. Another Duty he sets down is, to Honor him in his House, that is, the
Church, in his Possessions, in his Day, in his Word and Sacraments.


B. They perform this Duty as well (I think) as any other Ministers, I mean the
Loyal Party, and the Presbyterians have always had an equal care to have God's
House free from Profanation; To have Tithes duly paid, and Offerings accepted;
To have the Sabbath Day kept holy, the Word preached, and the Lords Supper and
Baptism duly administered. But is not keeping of the Feasts and of the Fasts one
of those Duties that belong to the Honor of God? If it be, the Presbyterians
fail in that.


A. Why so? They kept some Holy Days, and they had Fasts amongst themselves,
though not upon the same days that the Church ordains, but when they thought
fit; as when it pleased God to give the King any notable Victory; and they
governed themselves in this Point by the Holy Scripture, as they pretend to
believe; and who can prove they do not believe so?


B. Let us pass over all other Duties, and come to that Duty which we owe to
the King, and consider whether the Doctrine taught by those Divines which
adhered to the King be such, in that Point, as may justify the Presbyterians,
that incited the People to Rebellion: for that is the thing you call in question.

Concerning our Duty to our Rulers, he has these words: An Obedience we must
pay, either active or passive; the active, in the case of all lawful Commands,
that is, whenever the Magistrate commands something which is not contrary to
some Command of God, we are then bound to act according to that Command of the
Magistrate, to do the things he requires: but when he enjoins any thing
contrary to what God has commanded, we are not then to pay him this Active
Obedience; we may, nay we must refuse thus to act, (yet here we must be very
well assured, that the thing is so contrary, and not pretend Conscience for a
Cloak of stubbornness) we are in that Case to obey God, rather than Men: but
even this is a season for the Passive Obedience, we must patiently suffer what
he inflicts on us for such refusal, and not, to secure our selves, rise up
against him.


B. What is there in this to give color to the late Rebellion.


A. They will say they did it in obedience to God, in as much as they did
believe it was according to the Scripture: out of which they will bring
Examples perhaps of David and his adherents, that resisted King Saul, and of
the Prophets afterward, that vehemently from time to time preached against the
Idolatrous Kings of Israel and Judah. Saul was their lawful King, and yet they
paid him neither Active nor Passive Obedience; for they did put themselves into
a posture of defense against him, though David himself spared his Person; and
so did the Presbyterians put into their Commissions to their General, that they
should spare the King's Person. Besides, you cannot doubt but that they who in
the Pulpit did animate the People to take Arms in defense of the then
Parliament, alleged Scripture* that is, the Word of God for it. If it be
lawful then for Subjects to resist the King, when he commands any thing that is
against the Scripture, that is contrary to the Command of God, and to be Judge
of the meaning of the Scripture, it is impossible that the Life of any King, or
the Peace of any Christian Kingdom can be long secure. It is this Doctrine that
divides a Kingdom within it self, whatsoever the Men be, Loyal, or Rebels, that
write or preach it publicly. And thus you see, that if those seditious
Ministers be tried by this Doctrine, they will come off well enough.


B. I see it; and wonder at People that having never spoken with God Almighty,
nor knowing one more than another what he has said, when the Laws and the
Preacher disagree, should so keenly follow the Minister, for the most part an
Ignorant, though a ready Tongued Scholar, rather than the Laws that were made
by the King, with the consent of the Peers and the Commons of the Land.


A. Let us examine his words a little nearer: First, Concerning Passive
Obedience. When a Thief has broken the Laws, and according to the Law is
therefore executed, can any man understand, that this suffering of his is an
obedience to the Law? Every Law is a Command to do, or to forbear, neither of
these is fulfilled by suffering. If any Suffering can be called Obedience, it
must be such as is voluntary; for no involuntary Action can be counted a
submission to the Law. He that means that his suffering should be taken for
obedience, must not only not resist, but also not fly, nor hide himself to
avoid his punishment; and who is there amongst them that discourses of Passive
Obedience, when his Life is in extreme danger, that will voluntarily present
himself to the Officers of Justice? Do not we see that all men when they are
led to Execution are both bound and guarded, and would break loose, if they
could, and get away? Such is their Passive Obedience. Christ says, The Scribes
and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair; all therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do, Mat 23.3. which is a doing an Active Obedience:
and yet the Scribes and Pharisees appear not by the Scripture to have been such
godly men, as never to command any thing against the revealed Will of God.


B. Must Tyrants also be obeyed in every thing actively? Or is there nothing
wherein a lawful King's Command may be disobeyed? What if he should command me
with my own hands to execute my Father, in case he should be condemned to die
by the Law?


A. This is a Case that need not be put. We never have read, nor heard of any
King, or Tyrant so inhumane as to command it. If any did, we are to consider
whether that Command were one of his Laws: for by disobeying Kings, we mean the
disobeying of his Laws, those his Laws that were made before they were applied
to any particular person: for the King, though as a Father of Children, and a
Master of Domestic Servants, yet he commands the People in general never but
by a precedent Law, and as a Politic, not a Natural Person. And if such a
Command as you speak of were contrived into a general Law, (which never was,
nor never will be) you were bound to obey it, unless you depart the Kingdom
after the Publication of the Law, and before the Condemnation of your Father.


B. Your Author says farther, in refusing Active Obedience to the King that
commanded any thing contrary to God's Law, we must be very well assured that
the thing is so contrary. I would fain know how it is possible to be assured?


A. I think you do not believe that any of those Refusers do, immediately from
God's own mouth, receive any command contrary to the Command of the King, who
is God's Lieutenant, nor any other way than you and I do, that is to say, than
by the Scriptures. And because men do, for the most part, rather draw the
Scripture to their own sense, than follow the true sense of the Scripture,
there is no other way to know certainly, and in all Cases, what God commands,
or forbids us to do, but by the Sentence of him or them that are constituted by
the King to determine the sense of the Scripture upon hearing of the particular
Case of Conscience, which is in question. And they that are so constituted are
easily known in all Christian Commonwealths, whether they be Bishops, or
Ministers, or Assemblies that govern the Church under him, or them that have
the Sovereign Power.


B. Some doubts may be raised from this that you now say: for if Men be to
learn their Duty from the Sentence which other Men shall give, concerning the
meaning of the Scriptures, and not from their own Interpretation, I understand
not to what end they were translated into English, and every man, not only
permitted, but also exhorted to read them. For what could that produce but
diversity of opinion, and consequently (as Man's Nature is) Disputation, breach
of Charity, Disobedience, and at last Rebellion? Again, since the Scripture was
allowed to be read in English, why were not the Translations such as might make
all that is read understood even by mean Capacities? Did not the Jews, such as
could read, understand their Law in the Jewish Language, as well as we do our
Statute Laws in English? And as for such places of the Scripture, as had
nothing of the Nature of a Law, it was nothing to the Duty of the Jews, whether
they were understood or not, seeing nothing is punishable, but the
Transgression of some Law.

The same Question I may ask concerning the New Testament: for I believe, that
those Men to whom the Original Language was natural, did understand
sufficiently what Commands and Counsels were given them by our Savior and his
Apostles, and his immediate Disciples. Again; how will you answer that Question
which was put by St. Peter and St. John, Acts 4.19. when by Annas the High
Priest, and others of the Council of Jerusalem, they were forbidden to teach
any more in the Name of Jesus? Whether is it right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God?


A. The Case is not the same. Peter and John had seen, and daily conversed with
our Savior, and by the Miracles he wrought, did know he was God, and
consequently knew certainly, that their disobedience to the Highpriests
present Command was just. Can any Minister now say, that he has immediately,
from God's own Mouth, received a Command to disobey the King, or know
otherwise, than by the Scripture, that any Command of the King, that has the
Form and Nature of a Law, is against the Law of God; which in diverse places
directly and evidently commands to obey him in all things. The Text you cite
does not tell us, that a Minister's Authority, rather than a Christian King's,
shall decide the Questions that arise from the different Interpretations of the
Scripture. And therefore, where the King is Head of the Church, and by
consequence (to omit, that the Scripture it self was not received, but by the
Authority of Kings and States) Chief Judge of the rectitude of all
Interpretations of the Scripture. To obey the Kings Laws and public Edicts is
not to disobey, but to obey God. A Minister ought not to think, that his skill
in the Latin, Greek or Hebrew Tongues, if he have any, gives him a Privilege
to impose upon all his Fellow Subjects his own sense, or what he pretends to be
his sense of every obscure place of Scripture; nor ought he, as often as he has
found out some fine Interpretation, not before thought on by others, to think
he had it by Inspiration: for he cannot be assured of that; no, nor that his
Interpretation, as fine as he thinks it, is not false; and then all his
stubbornness and contumacy toward the King, and his Laws, is nothing but Pride
of Heart and Ambition, or else Imposture. And whereas you think it needless, or
perhaps hurtful to have the Scriptures in English, I am of another mind. There
are so many places of Scripture easy to be understood, that teach both true
Faith, and good Morality, and that as fully as is necessary to salvation; of
which no Seducer is able to dispossess the mind of any ordinary Readers, that
the reading of them is so profitable, as not to be forbidden without great
damage to them and the Commonwealth.


B. All that is required, both in Faith and Manners, for Man's Salvation, is (I
confess) set down in Scripture, as plainly as can be. Children obey your
Parents in all things. Servants obey your Masters. Let all Men be subject to
the Higher Powers, whether it be the King, or those that are sent by him. Love
God with all your Soul, and your Neighbor as your self, are words of the
Scripture, which are well enough understood: but neither Children, nor the
greatest part of Men do understand why it is their Duty to do so. They see not
that the safety of the Commonwealth, and consequently their own, depends upon
their doing it. Every man by nature, without discipline, does in all his
Actions look upon, as far as he can see, the benefit that shall redound to
himself from his obedience. He reads that Covetousness is the root of all evil,
but he thinks, and sometimes finds it is the root of his Estate. And so in
other Cases the Scripture says one thing, and they think another, weighing the
Commodities or Incommodities of this present life only, which are in their
sight, never putting into the Scales the Good and Evil of the Life to come,
which they see not.


A. All this is no more than happens where the Scripture is sealed up in Greek
and Latin, and the People taught the same things out of them by Preachers.

But they that are of a Condition and Age fit to examine the sense of what they
read, and that take a delight in searching out the Grounds of their Duty,
certainly cannot choose but by their reading of the Scriptures, come to such a
sense of their Duty, as not only to obey the Laws themselves, but also to
induce others to do the same: for commonly Men of Age and Quality, are followed
by their inferior Neighbors, that look more upon the Example of those Men whom
they reverence, and whom they are unwilling to displease, than upon Precepts
and Laws.


B. These Men of the Condition and Age you speak of are, in my opinion, the
unfittest of all others to be trusted with the reading of the Scriptures. I
know you mean such as have studied the Greek or Latin, or both Tongues, and
that are withal such as love knowledge, and consequently take delight in
finding out the meaning of the most hard Texts, or in thinking they have found
it, in case it be new, and not found out by others. These are therefore they,
that pretermitting the easy places, which teach them their Duty, fall to
scanning only of the Mysteries of Religion; such as are, How it may be made out
with wit, that there be three that bear Rule in Heaven, and those three but
One? How the Deity could be made Flesh? How that Flesh could be really present
in many places at once? Where Is the Place, and what the Torments of Hell, and
other Metaphysical Doctrines? Whether the Will of Man be free, or governed by
the Will of God? Whether Sanctity comes by Inspiration or Education? By whom
Christ now speaks to us? Whether by the King, or by the Clergy, or by the Bible
to every man that reads it and interprets it to himself, or by a private Spirit
to every private Man? These and the like Points are the study of the Curious,
and the cause of all our late mischief, and the cause that makes the plainer
sort of Men, whom the Scripture had taught belief in Christ, Love toward God,
Obedience to the King, and sobriety of behavior, forget it all, and place
their Religion in the disputable Doctrines of these your wise Men.


A. I do not think these men fit to interpret the Scripture to the rest, nor do
I say that the rest ought to take their Interpretation for the Word of God.
Whatsoever is necessary for them to know is so easy, as not to need
Interpretation. Whatsoever is more does them no good. But in case any of those
unnecessary Doctrines shall be authorized by the Laws of the King, or other
State, I say it is the Duty of every Subject not to speak against them, in as
much as it is every man's Duty to obey Him or Them that have the Sovereign
Power; and the Wisdom of all such Powers to punish such as shall publish, or
teach their private Interpretations, when they are contrary to the Law, and
likely to incline men to Sedition or Disputing against the Law.


B. They must punish then the most of those that have had their breeding in the
Universities: for such curious Questions in Divinity are first started in the
Universities, and so are all those Politic Questions concerning the Rights of
Civil and Ecclesiastic Government, and there they are furnished with Arguments
for Liberty out of the Works of Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, Seneca, and out of
the Histories of Rome and Greece, for their Disputation against the necessary
Power of their Sovereigns. Therefore I despair of any lasting Peace amongst our
selves, till the Universities here shall bend and direct their Studies to the
settling of it, that is, to the teaching of absolute Obedience to the Laws of
the King, and to his Public Edicts under the Great Seal of England: for I make
no doubt, but that solid Reason backed with the Authority of so many Learned
Men, will more prevail for the keeping of us in peace within our selves, than
any Victory can do over the Rebels: but I am afraid that it is impossible to
bring the Universities to such a compliance with the Actions of State, as is
necessary for the business.


A. Seeing the Universities have heretofore from time to time maintained the
Authority of the Pope, contrary to all Laws Divine, Civil and Natural, against
the Right of our Kings, why can they not as well, when they have all manner of
Laws and Equity on their side, maintain the Rights of him that is both
Sovereign of the Kingdom, and Head of the Church?


B. Why then were they not in all Points for the King's Power presently after
that King Henry the 8 th was in Parliament declared Head of the Church, as much
as they were before for the Authority of the Pope?


A. Because the Clergy in the Universities, by whom all things there are
governed, and the Clergy without the Universities, as well Bishops as inferior
Clerks did think, that the pulling down of the Pope was the setting up of them
(as to England) in his place, and made no question the greatest part of them,
but that their Spiritual Power did depend, not upon the Authority of the King,
but of Christ himself, derived to them by a successive Imposition of Hands from
Bishop to Bishop, notwithstanding they knew that this derivation passed through
the Hands of Popes and Bishops, whose Authority they had cast off. For though
they were content that the Divine Right, which the Pope pretended to in
England, should be denied him; yet they thought it not so fit to be taken from
the Church of England, whom they now supposed themselves to represent.

It seems they did not think it reasonable that a Woman, or a Child, or a Man
that could not construe the Hebrew, Greek or Latin Bible, nor know perhaps the
Declensions and Conjugations of Greek or Latin Nouns and Verbs, should take
upon him to govern so many learned Doctors in matters of Religion, meaning
matters of Divinity; for Religion has been for a long time, and is now by most
People taken for the same thing with Divinity, to the great advantage of the
Clergy.


B. And especially now amongst the Presbyterians; for I see few that are by
them esteemed very good Christians, besides such as can repeat their Sermons,
and wrangle for them about the Interpretation of the Scripture, and fight for
them also with their Bodies or Purses, when they shall be required. To believe
in Christ is nothing with them, unless you believe as they bid you: Charity is
nothing with them, unless it be Charity and Liberality to them, and partaking
with them in faction. How we can have peace while this is our Religion, I
cannot tell. Haeret lateri lethalis arundo. The seditious Doctrine of the
Presbyterians has been stuck so hard in the Peoples Heads and Memories, (I
cannot say into their Hearts; for they understand nothing in it, but that they
may lawfully rebel) that I fear the Commonwealth will never be cured.


A. The two great Virtues that were severally in Henry the 7 th and Henry the 8
th, when they shall be jointly in one King, will easily cure it. That of Henry
the 7 th was, without much noise of the People to fill his Coffers; that of
Henry the 8 th was an early severity; but this without the former cannot be
exercised.


B. This that you say looks (methinks) like an Advice to the King, to let them
alone till he have gotten ready Money enough to levy and maintain a sufficient
Army, and then to fall upon them, and destroy them.


A. God forbid that so horrible, unchristian and inhumane a design should ever
enter into the King's Heart. I would have him have Money enough, readily to
raise an Army able to suppress any Rebellion, and to take from his Enemies all
hope of success, that they may not dare to trouble him in the Reformation of
the Universities, but to put none to death without the actual committing such
crimes, as are already made Capital by the Laws. The Core of Rebellion, as you
have seen by this, and read of other Rebellions, are the Universities, which
nevertheless are not to be cast away, but to be better disciplined; that is to
say, that the Politics there taught be made to be (as true Politics should
be) such as are fit to make men know, that it is their Duty to obey all Laws
whatsoever that shall by the Authority of the King be enacted, till by the same
Authority they shall be repealed; such as are fit to make men understand, that
the Civil Laws are God's Laws, as they that make them are by God appointed to
make them; and to make men know, that the People and the Church are one thing,
and have but one Head, the King; and that no man has Title to govern under him,
that has it not from him. That the King owes his Crown to God only, and to no
Man, Ecclesiastic, or other; and that the Religion they teach there be a quiet
waiting for the coming again of our Blessed Savior; and in the mean time a
resolution to obey the King's Laws, which also are God's Laws, To injure no
man, to be in charity with all men, to cherish the Poor and Sick, and to live
soberly and free from scandal. Without mingling our Religion with Points of
Natural Philosophy, as freedom of Will, Incorporeal Substance, everlasting
Nows, Ubiquities, Hypostases, which the People understand not, nor will ever
care for. When the Universities shall be thus disciplined, there will come out
of them, from time to time, well principled Preachers, and they that are now
ill principled from time to time fall away.


B. I think it a very good course, and perhaps the only one, that can make our
peace amongst our selves constant. For if men know not their Duty, what is
there that can force them to obey the Laws? An Army you will say; but what shall
force the Army? Were not the Train'd-Bands an Army? Were they not the
Janisaries, that not very long ago slew Osman in his own Palace at
Constantinople? I am therefore of your opinion, both that men may be brought to
a love of obedience by Preachers and Gentlemen that imbibe good Principles in
their Youth at the Universities, and also, that we never shall have a lasting
Peace, till the Universities themselves be in such manner (as you have said)
reformed; and the Ministers know they have no Authority but what the Supreme
Civil Power gives them; and the Nobility and Gentry know, that the Liberty of a
State is not an exemption from the Laws of their own Country, whether made by
an Assembly, or by a Monarch; but an exemption from the constraint and
insolence of their Neighbors.

And now I am satisfied in this Point, I will bring you back to the place, from
whence my curiosity drew you to this long digression.

We were upon the Point of Ship Money, one of those grievances which the
Parliament exclaimed against as Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government, thereby to
single out (as you called it) the King from his Subjects, and to make a Party
against him, when they should need it. And now you may proceed, if it please
you, to such other Artifices as they used to the same purpose.


A. I think it were better to give over here our Discourse of this business,
and refer it to some other day that you shall think fit.


B. Content, That day, I believe, is not far off.


Behemoth. PART II.
A. YOU are welcome; yet if you had stayed somewhat longer, my memory would
have been so much the better provided for you.


B. Nay, I pray you give me now what you have about you; for the rest I am
content you take what time you please.


A. After the Parliament had made the People believe, that the exacting of
Ship Money was unlawful, and the People thereby inclined to think it
Tyrannical; in the next place, to increase their disaffection to his Majesty,
they accused him of a purpose, to introduce and authorize the Roman Religion in
this Kingdom, than which nothing was more hateful to the People; not because it
was erroneous, (which they had neither Learning nor Judgment enough to examine)
but because they had been used to hear it inveighed against in the Sermons and
Discourses of the Preachers, whom they trusted to: and this was indeed the most
effectual calumny to alienate the People's affections from him, that could
possibly be invented. The color they had for this slander was first, that
there was one Rosetti Resident (at and a little before that time) from the
Pope, with the Queen, and one Mr. George Con Secretary to the Cardinal
Francisco Barbarini, Nephew to Pope Urban the 8 th, sent over under favor and
protection of the Queen (as was conceived) to draw as many Persons of Quality
about the Court, as he should be able, to reconcile themselves to the Church of
Rome; with what success I cannot tell; but it is likely he gained some,
especially of the weaker Sex, if I may say they were gained by him, when, not
his Arguments, but hope of favor from the Queen in all probability prevailed
upon them.


B. In such a conjuncture as that was it had perhaps been better they had not
been sent.


A. There was exception also taken at a Covent of Friars Capucins in
Somerset House, though allowed by the Articles of Marriage: and it was
reported, that the Jesuits also were shortly after to be allowed a Covent in
Clerkenwel: and in the mean time, the principal Secretary, Sir Francis
Windebank, was accused for having by his Warrant set at liberty some English
Jesuits, that had been taken and imprisoned, for returning into England after
banishment, contrary to the Statute which had made it Capital. Also the resort
of English Catholics to the Queens Chapel gave them color to blame the Queen
her self, not only for that, but also for all the favors that had been shown
to the Cotholicks; in so much that some of them did not stick to say openly,
that the King was governed by her.


B. Strange injustice! The Queen was a Catholic by profession, and therefore
could not but endeavor to do the Catholics all the good she could, she had
not else been truly that which she professed to be: but it seems they meant to
force her to Hypocrisy, being Hypocrites themselves. Can any man think it a
crime in a devout Lady, of what Sect soever, to seek the favor and benediction
of that Church whereof she is a Member?


A. To give the Parliament another color for their Accusation on foot of the
King, as to introducing of Popery, there was a great Controversy between the
Episcopal and Presbyterian Clergy about Free Will. The Dispute began first in
the Low Countries, between Gomar and Armin, in the time of King James, who
foreseeing it might trouble the Church of England, did what he could to compose
the difference: and an Assembly of Divines was thereupon got together at Dort,
to which also King James sent a Divine or two, but it came to nothing; the
Question was left undecided, and became a Subject to be disputed of in the
Universities here. All the Presbyterians were of the same mind with Gomar, but
a very great many others not, and those were called here Arminians, who because
the Doctrine of Free Will had been exploded as a Papistical Doctrine, and
because the Presbyterians were far the greater number, and already in favor
with the People, were generally hated; it was easy therefore for the
Parliament to make that calumny pass currently with the People, when the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Laud, was for Arminius, and had a little before,
by his Power Ecclesiastical, forbidden all Ministers to preach to the People of
Predestination: and when all Ministers that were gracious with him, and hoped
for any Church-preferment fell to preaching, and writing for Free Will, to the
uttermost of their power, as a proof of their ability and merit. Besides, they
gave out some of them, that the Archbishop was in heart a Papist; and in Case
he could effect a Toleration here of the Roman Religion, was to have a
Cardinals Hat, which was, not only false, but also without any ground at all
for a suspicion.


B. It is a strange thing, that Scholars, obscure men, that could receive no
clarity but from the flame of the State, should be suffered to bring their
unnecessary Disputes, and together with them their quarrels, out of the
Universities into the Commonwealth; and more strange, that the State should
engage in their Parties, and not rather put them both to silence. A State can
constrain obedience, but convince no error, nor alter the mind of them that
believe they have the better reason. Suppression of Doctrines does but unite
and exasperate; that is, increase both the malice and power of them that have
already believed them. But what are the Points they disagree in? Is there any
Controversy between Bishop and Presbyterian concerning the Divinity or
Humanity of Christ? Do either of them deny the Trinity, or any Article of the
Creed? Does either Party preach openly, or write directly against Justice,
Charity, Sobriety, or any other Duty necessary to Salvation; except only the
Duty to the King, and not that neither, but when they have a mind, either to
rule, or destroy the King? Lord have mercy upon us! Can no body be saved that
understands not their Disputations? Or is there more requisite, either of
Faith, or Honesty, for the Salvation of one man than another? What needs so
much preaching of Faith to us that are no Heathens, and that believe already
all that Christ and his Apostles have told us is necessary to salvation, and
more too? Why is there so little preaching of Justice? I have indeed heard
Righteousness often recommended to the People, but I have seldom heard the word
Justice in their Sermons; nay, though in the Latin and Greek Bible the word
Justice occur exceeding often; yet in the English, (though it be a word that
every man understands) the word Righteousness (which few understand to signify
the same, but take it rather for Rightness of Opinion than of Action or
Intention) is put in the place of it.


A. I confess I know very few Controversies amongst Christians of Points
necessary to salvation. They are the Questions of Authority and Power over the
Church, or of Profit, or of Honor to Church men, that for the most part raise
all the Controversies. For what man is he, that will trouble himself, and
fall-out with his Neighbors for the saving of my Soul, or the Soul of any
other than himself? When the Presbyterian Ministers and others did so furiously
preach Sedition, and animate Men to Rebellion in these late Wars; who was there
that had not a Benefice, or having one, feared not to lose it, or some other
part of his maintenance by the alteration of the Government, that did
voluntarily, without any eye to reward, preach so earnestly against Sedition,
as the other Party preached for it? I confess, that for ought I have observed
in History, and other Writings of the Heathens, Greek and Latin, that those
Heathens were not at all behind us in Point of Virtue and Moral Duties,
notwithstanding that we have had much preaching, and they none at all. I
confess also, that considering what harm may proceed from a liberty that men
have upon every Sunday, and oftener, to Harangue all the People of a Nation at
one time, whilst the State is ignorant of what they will say, and that there is
no such thing permitted in all the World out of Christendom, nor therefore any
Civil Wars about Religion, I have thought much preaching an inconvenience,
nevertheless I cannot think that preaching to the People the Points of their
Duty, both to God and Man, can be too frequent; so it be done by grave,
discreet and ancient Men that are reverenced by the People; and not by light
quibling young men, whom no Congregation is so simple, as to look to be taught
by, (as being a thing contrary to nature) or to pay them any reverence, or to
care what they say, except some few that may be delighted with their jingling:
I wish with all my heart there were enough of such discreet and ancient men, as
might suffice for all the Parishes of England, and that they would undertake
it. But this is but a wish; I leave it to the Wisdom of the State to do what it
pleases.


B. What did they next?


A. Whereas the King had sent Prisoners into places remote from London, three
Persons that had been condemned for publishing seditious Doctrine, some in
writing, some in public Sermons, the Parliament (whether with his Majesty's
consent or no, I have forgotten) caused them to be released, and to return to
London; meaning (I think) to try how the People would be pleased therewith, and
by consequence, how their endeavors to draw the Peoples affections from the
King had already prospered. When these three came through London, it was a kind
of Triumph, the People flocking together to behold them, and receiving them
with such Acclamations, and almost Adoration, as if they had been let down from
Heaven. In so much as the Parliament was now sufficiently assured of a great
and tumultuous Party, whenever they should have occasion to use it. On
confidence whereof they proceeded to their next Plot, which was to deprive the
King of such Ministers as by their Wisdom, Courage and Authority they thought
most able to prevent, or oppose their farther Designs against the King.

And first the House of Commons resolved to impeach the Earl of Strafford, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland of High Treason.


B. What was that Earl of Strafford before he had that place? And how had he
offended the Parliament, or given them cause to think he would be their Enemy?
for I have heard that in former Parliaments he had been as Parliamentary as any
other.


A. His name was Sir Thomas Wentworth, a Gentleman, both for Birth and Estate
very considerable in his own Country, which was Yorkshire, but more
considerable for his Judgment in the public Affairs, not only of that
Country, but generally of the Kingdom, and was therefore often chosen for the
Parliament, either as Burgess for some Borough, or Knight of the Shire. For
his Principles of Politics, they were the same that were generally proceeded
upon by all men else that were thought fit to be chosen for the Parliament,
which are commonly these. To take for the Rule of Justice and Government the
Judgments and Acts of former Parliaments, which are commonly called Presidents.
To endeavor to keep the People from being subject to Extra-parliamentary Taxes
of Money, and from being with Parliamentary Taxes too much oppressed. To
preserve to the People their Liberty of body from the Arbitrary Power of the
King out of Parliament. To seek redress of Grievances.


B. What Grievances?


A. The Grievances commonly were such as these. The King's too much Liberality
to some Favorite. The too much power of some Minister or Officer of the
Commonwealth. The misdemeanour of Judges Civil or Spiritual, but especially
all unparliamentary raising of Money upon the Subjects. And commonly of late,
till such Grievances be redressed, they refuse, or at least make great
difficulty to furnish the King with Money necessary for the most urgent
occasions of the Commonwealth.


B. How then can a King discharge his Duty as he ought to do, or the Subject
know which of his Masters he is to obey; for here are manifestly two Powers,
which, when they chance to differ, cannot both be obeyed?


A. It Is true; but they have not often differed so much to the danger of the
Commonwealth, as they have done in this Parliament 1640. In all the
Parliaments of the late King Charles, before the Year 1640. my Lord of
Strafford did appear in opposition to the King's demands, as much as any man,
and was, for that cause, very much esteemed and cried up by the People as a
good Patriot, and one that courageously stood up in defense of their Liberties;
and for the same cause was so much the more hated, when afterward he
endeavored to maintain the Royal and just Authority of his Majesty.


B. How came he to change his mind so much, as it seems he did?


A. After the dissolution of the Parliament holden in the Year 1627. and 1628.
the King finding no Money to be gotten from Parliaments, which he was not to
buy with the Blood of such Servants and Ministers as he loved best, abstained a
long time from calling any more, and had abstained longer, if the Rebellion of
the Scotch had not forced him to it. During that Parliament the King made Sir
Thomas Wentworth a Baron, recommended to him for his great ability, which was
generally taken notice of by the disservice he had done the King in former
Parliaments, but which might be useful also for him in the times that came on;
and not long after he made him of the Council, and after that again Lieutenant
of Ireland, which Place he discharged with great satisfaction and benefit to
his Majesty, and continued in that Office, till by the Envy and Violence of the
Lords and Commons of that unlucky Parliament of 1640. he dyed. In which Year he
was made General of the King's Forces against the Scots that then entered into
England, and the Year before Earl of Strafford. The Pacification being made,
and the Forces on both sides disbanded, and the Parliament at Westminster now
sitting, it was not long before the House of Commons accused him to the House
of Lords for High Treason.


B. There was no great probability of his being a Traitor to the King, from
whose favor he had received his Greatness, and from whose Protection he was to
expect his safety. What was the Treason they laid to his charge?


A. Many Articles were drawn up against him, but the sum of them was contained
in these two. First, That he had traitorously endeavored to subvert the
fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm; and in stead thereof to introduce
an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law. Secondly, That he had
labored to subvert the Rights of Parliaments, and the ancient course of
Parliamentary Proceedings.


B. Was this done by him without the knowledge of the King?


A. No.


B. Why then, if it were Treason, did not the King himself call him in question
by his Attorney? What had the House of Commons to do, without his Command, to
accuse him to the House of Lords? They might have complained to the King, if he
had not known it before. I understand not this Law.


A. Nor I.


B. Had this been by any former Statutes made Treason?


A. Not that I ever heard of; nor do I understand how any thing can be Treason
against the King, that the King hearing and knowing does not think Treason. But
it was a piece of that Parliaments Artifice to put the word Traitorously to any
Article exhibited against any Man, whose Life they meant to take away.


B. Was there no particular instance of action, or words out of which they
argued that endeavor of his to subvert the fundamental Laws of Parliament
whereof they accused him?


A, Yes; they said he gave the King counsel to reduce the Parliament to their
Duty by the Irish Army, which not long before my Lord of Strafford himself had
caused to be Levied there for the King's Service; but it was never proved
against him, that he advised the King to use it against the Parliament.


B. What are those Laws that are called fundamental? for I understand not how
one Law can be more fundamental than another, except only that Law of Nature
that binds us all to obey him, whosoever he be, whom lawfully, and for our own
safety we have promised to obey; nor any other fundamental Law to a King, but
Salus Populi, the safety and well-being of his People.


A. This Parliament in the use of their words, when they accused any man, never
regarded the signification of them, but the weight they had to aggravate their
accusation to the ignorant multitude, which think all faults heinous, that are
expressed in heinous terms, if they hate the Person accused, as they did this
man; not only for being of the King's Party, but also for deserting the
Parliaments Party as an Apostate.


B. I pray you tell me also what they meant by Arbitrary Government, which they
seemed so much to hate? Is there any Governor of a People in the World that is
forced to govern them, or forced to make this and that Law, whether he will or
no? I think not; or if any be, he that forces him does certainly make Laws, and
govern arbitrarily.


A. That Is true; and the true meaning of the Parliament was, that not the King,
but they themselves should have the Arbitrary Government, not only of England,
but of Ireland, and (as it appeared by the event) of Scotland also.


B. How the King came by the Government of Scotland and Ireland by descent from
his Ancestors, every body can tell; but if the King of England and his Heirs
should chance (which God forbid) to fail, I cannot imagine what Title the
Parliament of England can acquire thereby to either of those Nations.


A. Yes; they will say they had been conquered anciently by the English Subjects
Money.


B. Like enough, and suitable to the rest of their impudence.


A. Impudence in Democratical Assemblies does almost all that is done; it is the
Goddess of Rhetoric, and carries proof with it: for what ordinary man will not
from so great boldness of affirmation conclude, there is great probability in
the thing affirmed. Upon this Accusation he was brought to his Trial in
Westminster Hall, before the House of Lords, and found guilty, and presently
after declared Traitor by a Bill of Attainder, that is, by Act of Parliament.


B. It is a strange thing that the Lords should be induced, upon so light
grounds, to give a Sentence, or give their Assent to a Bill so prejudicial to
themselves and their Posterity.


A. 'Twas not well done, and yet (as it seems) not ignorantly; for there is a
Clause in the Bill, that it should not be taken hereafter for an example, that
is, for a prejudice in the like Case hereafter.


B. That Is worse than the Bill it self, and is a plain Confession that their
Sentence was unjust: for what harm is there in the Examples of just Sentences?
Besides, if hereafter the like Case should happen, the Sentence is not at all
made weaker by such a Provision.


A. Indeed I believe that the Lords, most of them, were not of themselves
willing to condemn him of Treason, they were awed to it by the clamor of Common
People that came to Westminster, crying out Justice, Justice against the Earl
of Strafford; the which were caused to flock thither by some of the House of
Commons that were well assured, after the triumphant welcome of Prin, Burton
and Bastwick, to put the People into tumult, upon any occasion they desired.
They were awed unto it partly also by the House of Commons it self, which if it
desired to undo a Lord, had no more to do, but to vote him a Delinquent.


B. A Delinquent; what is that? A Sinner is it not? Did they mean to undo all
Sinners?


A. By Delinquent they meant only a Man to whom they would do all the hurt they
could: but the Lords did not yet, I think, suspect they meant to cashiere their
whole House.


B. It Is a strange thing the whole House of Lords should not perceive, that the
ruin of the King's Power, and the weakening of it was the ruin, or weakening of
themselves: for they could not think it likely, that the People ever meant to
take the Sovereignty from the King to give it to them, who were few in number,
and less in power than so many Commoners, because less beloved by the People.


A. But it seems not so strange to me; for the Lords for their personal
abilities, as they were no less, so also they were no more skilful in the
Public Affairs, than the Knights and Burgesses: for there is no reason to
think, that if one that is to day a Knight of the Shire in the Lower House, be
to morrow made a Lord, and a Member of the Higher House, is therefore wiser
than he was before. They are all of both Houses prudent and able Men as any in
the Land, in the business of their private Estates, which require nothing but
diligence and natural Wit to govern them; but for the Government of a
Commonwealth, neither wit, nor prudence, nor diligence is enough without
infallible Rules, and the true Science of Equity and Justice.


B. If this be true, it is impossible any Commonwealth in the World, whether
Monarchy, Aristocratie or Democratie should continue long without change, or
Sedition tending to change, either of the Government or of the Governors.


A. It Is true; nor have any the greatest Commonwealths in the World been long
free from Sedition. The Greeks had for a while their petty Kings, and then by
Sedition came to be petty Commonwealths, and then growing to be greater
Commonwealths, by Sedition again became Monarchies, and all for want of Rules
of Justice for the Common People to take notice of, which if the People had
known in the beginning of every of these Seditions, the Ambitious Persons could
never had the hope to disturb their Government, after it had been once settled;
for Ambition can do little without hands, and few hands it would have, if the
Common People were as diligently instructed in the true Principles of their
Duty, as they are terrified and amazed by Preachers with fruitless and
dangerous Doctrines concerning the Nature of Man's Will, and many other
Philosophical Points that tend not at all to the salvation of the Soul in the
World to come, nor to their ease in this life, but only to the direction
toward the Clergy of that Duty which they ought to perform to the King.


B. For ought I see all the States of Christendom will be subject to these
fits of Rebellion, as long as the World lasts.


A. Like enough, and yet the fault (as I have said) may be easily mended, by
mending the Universities.


B. How long had the Parliament now sitten?


A. It began November the third 1640. My Lord of Strafford was impeached of
Treason before the Lords November the 12 th, sent to the Tower November the 22
d, his Trial began March the 22 d, and ended April the 13 th. After his Trial
he was voted guilty of High Treason in the House of Commons, and after that in
the House of Lords May the 6 th, and on the 12 th of May beheaded.


B. Great Expedition; but could not the King for all that have saved him by a
Pardon?


A. The King had heard all that passed at his Trial, and had declared he was
unsatisfied concerning the Justice of their Sentence, and (I think)
notwithstanding the danger of his own Person from the fury of the People, and
that he was counseled to give way to his Execution, not only by such as he most
relied on, but also by the Earl of Strafford himself, he would have pardoned
him, if that could have preserved him against the Tumult raised and
countenanced by the Parliament it self, for the terrifying of those they
thought might favor him: and yet the King himself did not stick to confess
afterward, that he had done amiss in that he did not rescue him.


B. 'Twas an Argument of good Disposition in the King; but I never read that
Augustus Caesar acknowledged that he had done a fault in abandoning Cicero to
the fury of his Enemy Antonius. Perhaps because Cicero having been of the
contrary Faction to his Father, had done Augustus no service at all out of
favor to him, but only out of enmity to Antonius, and out of love to the
Senate, that is indeed out of love to himself that swayed the Senate; as it is
very likely the Earl of Strafford came over to the King's Party for his own
ends, having been so much against the King in former Parliaments.


A. We cannot safely judge of men's Intentions; but I have observed often, that
such as seek preferment by their stubbornness, have missed of their aim; and on
the other side, that those Princes, that with preferment are forced to buy the
obedience of their Subjects, are already, or must be soon after in a very weak
condition: for in a Market where Honor and Power is to be bought with
stubbornness, there will be a great many as able to buy, as my Lord Strafford
was.


B. You have read, that when Hercules fighting with the Hydra had cut off any
one of his many heads, there still arose two other heads in its place, and yet
at last he cut them off all.


A. The Story is told false: for Hercules at first did not cut off those heads,
but bought them off, and afterward, when he saw it did him no good, then he
cut them off, and got the Victory.


B. What did they next?


A. After the first Impeachment of the Earl of Strafford, the House of Commons
upon December the 18 th accused the Archbishop of Canterbury also of High
Treason, that is, of Design to introduce Arbitrary Government, etc. for which
he was February the 18 th sent to the Tower, but his Trial and Execution were
deferred a long time till January the 10 th 1643. for the Entertainment of the
Scots, that were come into England to aid the Parliament.


B. Why did the Scots think there was so much danger in the Archbishop of
Canterbury? He was not a Man of War, nor a Man able to bring an Army into the
Field; but he was perhaps a very great Politician.


A. That did not appear by any remarkable event of his Counsels. I never heard
but he was a very honest man for his Morals, and a very zealous promoter of the
Church Government by Bishops, and that desired to have the Service of God
performed, and the House of God adorned, as suitably as was possible to the
Honor we ought to do to the Divine Majesty. But to bring, as he did, into the
State his former Controversies, I mean his squablings in the University about
Free Will, and his standing upon Punctilio's, concerning the Service Book and
its Rubricks, was not (in my opinion) an Argument of his sufficiency in Affairs
of State. About the same time they passed an Act (which the King consented to)
for a Triennial Parliament, wherein was Enacted, That after the present
Parliament there should be a Parliament called by the King within the space of
three years, and so from three years to three years, to meet at Westminster
upon a certain day named in the Act.


B. But what if the King did not call it, finding it perhaps inconvenient, or
hurtful to the safety or peace of his People, which God has put into his
charge? For I do not well comprehend how any Sovereign can well keep a People
in order when his Hands are tied, or when he has any other obligation upon
him, than the benefit of those he governs; and at this time, for any thing you
have told me, they acknowledged the King for their Sovereign.


A. I know not; but such was the Act. And it was farther Enacted, That if the
King did it not by his own Command, then the Lord Chancellor or the Lord Keeper
for the time being, should send out the Writs of Summons; and if the Chancellor
refused, then the Sheriffs of the several Counties should, of themselves, in
their next County-Courts, before the day set down for the Parliaments meeting,
proceed to the Election of the Members for the said Parliament.


B. But what if the Sheriffs refused?


A. I think they were to be sworn to it: but for that, and other particulars, I
refer you to the Act.


B. To whom should they be sworn, when there is no Parliament?


A. No doubt but to the King, whether there be a Parliament sitting or no.


B. Then the King may release them of their Oath.


A. Besides, they obtained of the King the putting down the Star Chamber, and
the High-Commission-Courts.


B. Besides, if the King upon the refusal should fall upon them in anger; who
shall (the Parliament not sitting) protect either the Chancellor or the
Sheriffs in their disobedience.


A. I pray you do not ask me any reason of such things I understand no better
than you. I tell you only an Act passed to that purpose, and was signed by the
King in the middle of February, a little before the Archbishop was sent to the
Tower. Besides this Bill, the two Houses of Parliament agreed upon another,
wherein it was Enacted, That the present Parliament should continue till both
the Houses did consent to the Dissolution of it; which Bill also the King
signed the same day he signed the Warrant for the Execution of the Earl of
Strafford.


B. What a great Progress made the Parliament toward the ends of the most
seditious Members of both Houses in so little time? They sat down in November,
and now it was May, in this space of time, which is but half a year, they won
from the King the adherence which was due to him from his People; they drove
his faithfulest Servants from him; beheaded the Earl of Strafford; imprisoned
the Archbishop of Canterbury; obtained a Triennial Parliament after their own
Dissolution, and a continuance of their own sitting, as long as they listed;
which last amounted to a total Extinction of the King's Right, in case that
such a Grant were valid, which I think it is not, unless the Sovereignty it
self be in plain terms renounced, which it was not. But what Money by way of
Subsidy, or otherwise, did they grant the King in recompense of all these his
large Concessions?


A. None at all; but often promised they would make him the most glorious King
that ever was in England* which were words that passed well enough for well
meaning with the Common People.


B. But the Parliament was contented now: for I cannot imagine what they should
desire more from the King, than he had now granted them.


A. Yes; they desired the whole and absolute Sovereignty, and to change the
Monarchical Government into an Oligarchie, that is to say, to make the
Parliament, consisting of a few Lords, and about 400 Commoners, absolute in the
Sovereignty, for the present, and shortly after to lay the House of Lords
aside: for this was the Design of the Presbyterian Ministers, who taking
themselves to be by Divine Right the only lawful Governors of the Church,
endeavored to bring the same form of Government into the Civil State. And as
the Spiritual Laws were to be made by their Synods, so the Civil Laws should be
made by the House of Commons, who as they thought would no less be ruled by
them afterward, than they formerly had been, wherein they were deceived, and
found themselves out-gone by their own Disciples, though not in Malice, yet in
Wit.


B. What followed after this?


A. In August following, the King supposing he had now sufficiently obliged the
Parliament to proceed no farther against him, took a Journey into Scotland to
satisfy his Subjects there, as he had done here, intending perhaps so to gain
their good Wills, that in case the Parliament here should Levy Arms against
him, they should not be aided by the Scots; wherein he also was deceived; for
though they seemed satisfied with what he did, (whereof one thing was his
giving way to the abolition of Episcopacy) yet afterward they made a League
with the Parliament, and for Money (when the King began to have the better of
the Parliament) invaded England in the Parliaments quarrel, but this was a year
or two after.


B. Before you go any farther, I desire to know the Ground and Original of that
Right, which either the House of Lords, or House of Commons, or both together,
now pretend to.


A. It is a Question of things so long past, that they are now forgotten. Nor
have we any thing to conjecture by, but the Records of our own Nation, and some
small and obscure fragments of Roman Histories: And for the Records, seeing
they are of things done only, sometimes justly, sometimes unjustly, you can
never by them know what Right they had, but only what Right they pretended.


B. Howsoever let me know what light we have in this matter from the Roman
Histories.


A. It would be too long, and an useless digression to cite all the Ancient
Authors that speak of the forms of those Commonwealths, which were amongst our
first Ancestors the Saxons, and other Germans, and of other Nations, from whom
we derive the Titles of Honor now in use in England; nor will it be possible
to derive from them any Argument of Right, but only Examples of Fact, which by
the Ambition of potent Subjects have been oftener unjust, than otherwise. And
for those Saxons or Angles, that in Ancient times by several Invasions made
themselves Masters of this Nation; they were not in themselves one Body of a
Commonwealth, but only a League of diverse petty German Lords and States, such
as was the Grecian Army in the Trojan War, without other obligation, than that
which proceeded from their own fear and weakness. Nor were those Lords, for the
most part the Sovereigns at home in their own Country, but chosen by the People
for the Captains of the Forces they brought with them. And therefore it was not
without Equity, when they had conquered any part of the Land. and made some one
of them King thereof, that the rest should have greater privileges than the
Common People and Soldiers, amongst which privileges a man may easily
conjecture this to be one; That they should be made acquainted, and be of
Council with him that has the Sovereignty in matter of Government, and have
the greatest and most honorable Offices, both in Peace and War. But because
there can be no Government where there is more than one Sovereign, it cannot be
inferred, that they had a Right to oppose the King's Resolutions by force, nor
to enjoy those Honors and Places longer than they should continue good
Subjects. And we find that the Kings of England did, upon every great occasion,
call them together, by the name of discreet and wise Men of the Kingdom, and
hear their Counsel, and make them Judges of all Causes that, during their
sitting, were brought before them. But as he summoned them at his own pleasure,
so had he also ever the power at his pleasure to dissolve them. The Normans
also that descended from the Germans, as we did, had the same Customs in this
particular; and by this means this privilege of the Lords to be of the King's
Great Council, and when they were assembled to be the Highest of the King's
Courts of Justice, continued still after the Conquest to this day. But though
there be amongst the Lords diverse Names or Titles of Honor, yet they have
their Privilege by the only Name of Baron, a Name received from the Ancient
Gauls, amongst whom that Name signified the King's Man, or rather one of his
Great Men: By which it seems to me, that though they gave him Counsel, when he
required it, yet they had no Right to make War upon him, if he did not follow
it.


B. When began first the House of Commons to be part of the King's Great
Council?


A. I do not doubt but that before the Conquest some discreet Men, and known to
be so by the King, were called by special Writ to be of the same Council,
though they were not Lords; but that is nothing to the House of Commons: The
Knights of Shires and Burgesses were never called to Parliament for ought that
I know, till the beginning of the Reign of Edward the first, or the latter end
of the Reign of Henry the third, immediately after the misbehaviour of the
Barons; and for ought any man knows were called on purpose to weaken that Power
of the Lords, which they had so freshly abused. Before the time of Henry the
third the Lords were descended most of them from such as in the Invasions and
Conquests of the Germans were Peers and Fellow-Kings, till one was made King of
them all; and their Tenants were their Subjects, as it is at this day with the
Lords of France: but after the time of Henry the third, the Kings began to make
Lords in the place of them whose Issue failed, Titulary only, without the Lands
belonging to their Title; and by that means their Tenants being no longer bound
to serve them in the Wars, they grew every day less and less able to make a
Party against the King, though they continued still to be his Great Council.
And as their Power decreased, so the Power of the House of Commons increased;
but I do not find they were part of the King's Council at all, nor Judges over
other men; though it cannot be denied, but a King may ask their advice, as well
as the advice of any other; but I do not find that the end of their summoning
was to give advice, but only in case they had any Petitions for redress of
Grievances, to be ready there with them, whilst the King had his Great Council
about him.

But neither they nor the Lords could present to the King as a Grievance; That
the King took upon him to make the Laws; To choose his own Privy-Councellors;
To raise Money and Soldiers; To defend the Peace and Honor of the Kingdom; To
make Captains in his Army; To make Governors of his Castles, whom he pleased;
for this had been to tell the King, that it was one of their Grievances that he
was King.


B. What did the Parliament do whilst the King was in Scotland?


A. The King went in August, after which the Parliament September the 8 th
adjourned, till the 20 th of October, and the King returned about the end of
November following, in which time the most seditious of both Houses, and which
had designed the change of Government, and to cast off Monarchy, (but yet had
not wit enough to set up any other Government in its place, and consequently
left it to the chance of War) made a Cabal amongst themselves, in which they
projected how by seconding one another to govern the House of Commons, and
invented how to put the Kingdom, by the power of that House, into a Rebellion,
which they then called a posture of Defense against such dangers from abroad as
they themselves should feign and publish. Besides, whilst the King was in
Scotland, the Irish Papists got together a great Party, with an intention to
Massacre the Protestants there, and had laid a Design for the seizing of Dublin
Castle in October the 20 th, where the King's Officers of the Government of
that Country made their Residence, and had effected it, had it not been
discovered the night before. The manner of the Discovery, and the Murders they
committed in the Country afterward, I need not tell you, since the whole Story
of it is extant.


B. I wonder they did not expect and provide for a Rebellion in Ireland, as
soon as they began to quarrel with the King in England: for was there any body
so ignorant, as not to know, that the Irish Papists did long for a change of
Religion there, as well as the Presbyterians in England? Or that in general the
Irish Nation did hate the name of Subjection to England? Or would longer be
quiet than they feared an Army out of England to chastise them? What better
time then could they take for their Rebellion than this, wherein they were
encouraged, not only by our weakness, caused by this division between the King
and his Parliament, but also by the Example of the Presbyterians, both of the
Scotch and English Nation? But what did the Parliament do upon this occasion in
the King's absence?


A. Nothing but consider what use they might make of it to their own ends,
partly by imputing it to the King's evil Counselors, and partly by occasion
thereof to demand of the King the power of pressing and ordering of Soldiers;
which power whosoever has, has also, without doubt, the whole Sovereignty.


B. When came the King back?


A. He came back the 25 th of November, and was welcomed with the Acclamations
of the Common People, as much, as if he had been the most beloved of all the
Kings that were before him, but found not a Reception by the Parliament
answerable to it. They presently began to pick new quarrels against him out of
every thing he said to them. December the second the King called together both
Houses of Parliament, and then did only recommend unto them the raising of
Succors for Ireland.


B. What quarrel could they pick out of that?


A. None: but in order thereto, as they may pretend, they had a Bill in
agitation to assert the Power of Levying and Pressing Soldiers to the two
Houses of the Lords and Commons; which was as much as to take from the King the
Power of the Militia, which is in effect the whole Sovereign Power: for he that
has the power of Levying and Commanding of the Soldiers, has all other Rights
of Sovereignty, which he shall please to claim. The King hearing of it called
the Houses of Parliament together again, on December the 14 th, and then
pressed again the business of Ireland, (as there was need; for all this while
the Irish were murdering of the English in Ireland, and strengthening
themselves against the Forces they expected to come out of England) and withal
told them, he took notice of the Bill in agitation for pressing of Soldiers,
and that he was contented it should pass with a Salvo Jure both for him and
them, because the present time was unseasonable to dispute it in.


B. What was there unreasonable in this?


A. Nothing. What Is unreasonable is one question, what they quarreled at is
another. They quarreled at this; That his Majesty took notice of the Bill,
while it was in debate in the House of Lords, before it was presented to him in
the course of Parliament, and also that he showed himself displeased with those
that propounded the said Bill: both which they declared to be against the
Privileges of Parliament, and petitioned the King to give them reparation
against those by whose evil Counsel he was induced to it, that they might
receive condign punishment.


B. This was cruel proceeding. Do not the Kings of England use to sit in the
Lords House when they please? And was not this Bill in debate then in the House
of Lords? It is a strange thing that a Man should be lawfully in the company of
Men, where he must needs hear and see what they say and do; and yet must not
take notice of it, so much as to the same company: for though the King was not
present at the Debate it self, yet it was lawful for any of the Lords to make
him acquainted with it. Any one of the House of Commons, though not present at
a Proposition, or Debate in the House, nevertheless hearing of it from some of
his Fellow Members, may certainly, not only take notice of it, but also speak
to it in the House of Commons: but to make the King give up his Friends and
Counselors to them, to be put to death, banishment or imprisonment for their
good will to him, was such a Tyranny over a King, no King ever exercised over
any Subject, but in Cases of Treason or Murder, and seldom then.


A. Presently hereupon began a kind of War between the Pens of the Parliament
and those of the Secretaries, and other able men that were with the King: For
upon the 15 th of December they sent to the King a Paper called A Remonstrance
of the State of the Kingdom, and with it a Petition, both which they caused to
be published. In the Remonstrance they complained of certain mischievous
Designs of a Malignant Party then, before the beginning of the Parliament,
grown ripe; and did set forth what means had been used for the preventing of it
by the wisdom of the Parliament, what rubs they had found therein, what course
was fit to be taken for restoring and establishing the Ancient Honor,
Greatness and Safety of the Crown and Nation.

1 st. And of these Designs the Promoters and Actors were, they said, Jesuited
Papists.

2 ly. The Bishops and that part of the Clergy that cherish formality as a
support of their own Ecclesiastical Tyranny and Usurpation.

3 ly. Counselors and Courtiers, that for private ends (they said) had engaged
themselves to farther the Interests of some Foreign Princes.


B. It may very well be that some of the Bishops, and also some of the Court,
may have, in pursuit of their private Interest, done something indiscreetly,
and perhaps wickedly; therefore I pray you tell me in particular what their
crimes were: for methinks the King should not have connived at any thing
against his own Supreme Authority.


A. The Parliament were not very keen against them that were against the King;
they made no doubt but all they did was by the King's Command, but accused
thereof the Bishops, Counselors and Courtiers, as being a more mannerly way of
accusing the King himself, and defaming him to his Subjects: For the truth is,
the Charge they brought against them was so general as not to be called an
Accusation, but Railing. As first, they said they nourished Questions of
Prerogative and Liberty between the King and his People, to the end that
seeming much addicted to his Majesty's Service, they might get themselves into
Places of greatest Trust and Power in the Kingdom.


B. How could this be called an Accusation in which there is no Fact for any
Accusers to apply their Proofs to, or their Witnesses: for granting that these
Questions of Prerogative had been moved by them, who can prove that their end
was to gain to themselves and Friends the Places of Trust and Power in the
Kingdom?


A. A second Accusation was, That they endeavored to suppress the purity and
power of Religion.


B. That Is Canting; it is not in man's power to suppress the power of Religion.


A. They meant that they suppress the Doctrine of the Presbyterians, that is to
say, the very foundation of the then Parliaments treacherous pretensions.

A third; That they cherished Arminians, Papists, and Libertines, (by which
they meant the common Protestants, which meddle not with Disputes) to the end
they might compose a Body fit to act according to their Counsels and
Resolutions.

A Fourth; That they endeavored to put the King upon other courses of raising
Money, than by the ordinary way of Parliaments: Judge whether these may be
properly called Accusations, or not rather spiteful Reproaches of the King's
Government.


B. Methinks this last was a very great fault; for what good could there be in
putting the King upon an odd course of getting Money, when the Parliament was
willing to supply him as far as to the security of the Kingdom, or to the
Honor of the King should be necessary?


A. But I told you before they would give him none, but with a condition he
should cut off the Heads of whom they pleased, how faithfully soever they had
served him: and if he would have sacrificed all his Friends to their Ambition,
yet they would have found other excuses for denying him Subsidies: for they
were resolved to take from him the Sovereign Power to themselves, which they
could never do without taking great care that he should have no Money at all.
In the next place they put into the Remonstrance as faults of them whose
Counsel the King followed, all those things which since the beginning of the
King's Reign were by them misliked, whether faults or not, and whereof they
were not able to judge for want of knowledge of the Causes and Motives that
induced the King to do them, and were known only to the King himself, and such
of his Privy Council as he revealed them to.


B. But what were those particular pretended faults?


A. 1. The Dissolution of his first Parliament at Oxford. 2. The Dissolution of
his second Parliament, being in the second year of his Reign. 3. The
Dissolution of his Parliament in the fourth year of his Reign. 4. The fruitless
Expedition against Cales. 5. The Peace made with Spain, whereby the Palatines
Cause was deserted, and left to chargeable and hopeless Treaties. 6. The
sending of Commissions to raise Money by way of Loan. 7. Raising of Ship Money.
8. Enlargement of Forests contrary to Magna Charta. 9. The Design of
engrossing all the Gunpowder into one hand, and keeping it in the Tower of
London. 10. A Design to bring in the use of Brass Money. 11. The Fines,
Imprisonments, Stigmatizings, Mutilations, Whippings, Pillories, Gags,
Confinements and Banishments by Sentence in the Court of Star Chamber. 12. The
displacing of Judges. 13. Illegal Acts of the Council Table. 14. The Arbitrary
and Illegal Power of the Earl Marshal's Court. 15. The abuses in Chancery,
Exchequer Chamber, and Court of Wards. 16. The selling of Titles of Honor of
Judges and Sergeants Places, and other Offices. 17. The Insolence of Bishops
and other Clerks in Suspensions, Excommunications, Deprivations and
Degradations of diverse painful, and learned, and pious Ministers.


B. Were there any such Ministers degraded, deprived, or excommunicated?


A. I cannot tell; but I remember I have heard threatened diverse painful,
unlearned and seditious Ministers. 18. The Excess of severity of the
High Commission Court. 19. The Preaching before the King against the Property
of the Subject, and for the Prerogative of the King above the Law, and diverse
other petty quarrels they had to the Government, which though they were laid
upon this Faction, yet they knew they would fall upon the King himself in the
Judgment of the People, to whom by printing it was communicated.

Again, after the Dissolution of the Parliament May the 5 th 1640. they find
other faults, as the Dissolution it self; The Imprisoning some Members of both
Houses; A forced Loan of Money attempted in London; The Continuance of the
Convocation, when the Parliament was ended, and the favor showed to Papists by
Secretary Windebank, and others.


B. All this will go current with common People for misgovernment, and for
faults of the King's, though some of them were misfortunes, and both the
misfortunes and the misgovernment (if any were) were the faults of the
Parliament, who by denying to give him Money, did both frustrate his Attempts
abroad, and put him upon those extraordinary ways (which they call Illegal) of
raising Money at home.


A. You see what a heap of evils they have raised to make a show of ill
government to the People, which they second with an enumeration of the many
Services they have done the King in overcoming a great many of them, though not
all, and in diverse other things; and say, that though they had contracted a
Debt to the Scots of 2200 l. and granted six Subsidies, and a Bill of
Pole Money worth six Subsidies more, yet that God had so blessed the endeavors
of this Parliament, that the Kingdom was a gainer by it: and then follows the
Catalogue of those good things they had done for the King and Kingdom. For the
Kingdom they had done (they said) these things. They had abolished Ship Money;
They had taken away Coat and Conduct-Money, and other Military Charges, which
they said amounted to little less than the Ship Money. That they suppressed all
Monopolies, which they reckoned above a Million yearly saved by the Subject.
That they had quelled living Grievances, meaning evil Counselors and Actors,
by the death of my Lord of Strafford, by the flight of the Chancellor Finch,
and of Secretary Windebank, by the Imprisonment of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and of Judge Bartlet, and the Impeachment of other Bishops and
Judges. That they had passed a Bill for a Triennial Parliament, and another for
the Continuance of the present Parliament, till they should think fit to
dissolve themselves.


B. That is to say for ever if they be suffered. But the sum of all these
things which they had done for the Kingdom is, that they had left it without
Government, without Strength, without Money, without Law, and without good
Council.


A. They reckoned also putting down of the High Commission, and the abating of
the power of the Council Table, and of the Bishops and their Courts; The taking
away of unnecessary Ceremonies in Religion; Removing of Ministers from their
Livings, that were not of their Faction, and putting in such as were.


B. All this was but their own, and not the Kingdoms Business.


A. The good they had done the King was first (they said) The giving of 25000
l. a month for the relief of the Northern Counties.


B. What need of relief had the Northern more than the rest of the Counties of
England?


A, Yes; in the Northern Counties were quartered the Scotch Army, which the
Parliament called in to oppose the King, and consequently their Quarter was to
be discharged.


B. True; but by the Parliament that called them in.


A. But they say no; and that this Money was given to the King, because he is
bound to protect his Subjects.


B. He is no farther bound to that, than they to give him Money wherewithal to
do it. This is very great impudence to raise an Army against the King, and with
that Army to oppress their Fellow Subjects, and then require that the King
should relieve them; that is to say, be at the charge of paying the Army that
was raised to fight against him.


A. Nay farther; They put to the King's Account the 300000 l. given to the
Scots, without which they would not have invaded England; besides many other
things that I now remember not.


B. I did not think there had been so great impudence and villainy in mankind.


A. You have not observed the World long enough to see all that is ill. Such was
their Remonstrance, as I have told you: With it they sent a Petition containing
three Points. 1. That his Majesty would deprive the Bishops of their Votes in
Parliament, and remove such Oppressions in Religion, Church Government and
Discipline, as they had brought in. 2. That he would remove from his Council
all such as should promote the Peoples Grievances, and employ in his Great and
Public Affairs such as the Parliament should confide in. 3. That he would not
give away the Lands Escheated to the Crown by the Rebellion in Ireland.


B. This last Point, methinks, was not wisely put in at this time, it should
have been reserved, till they had subdued the Rebels, against whom there were
yet no Forces sent over. It Is like selling the Lions Skin before they had
killed him. But what answer was made to the other two Propositions?


A. What answer should be made but a Denial? About the same time the King
himself exhibited Articles against six Persons of the Parliament, five whereof
were of the House of Commons, and one of the House of Lords, accusing them of
High Treason, and upon the 4 th of January went himself to the House of Commons
to demand those five of them: but private notice having been given by some
Treacherous Person about the King, they had absented themselves; and by that
means frustrated his Majesty's Intentions; and after he was gone, the House
making a heinous matter of it, and a high breach of their Privileges,
adjourned themselves into London, there to sit as a General Committee,
pretending they were not safe at Westminster, for the King, when he went to the
House to demand those Persons, had somewhat more attendance with him (but not
otherwise armed than his Servants used to be) than he ordinarily had: and would
not be pacified, though the King did afterward wave the prosecution of those
persons, unless he would also discover to them those that gave him Counsel to
go in that manner to the Parliament House, to the end they might receive
condign punishment, which was the word they used in stead of cruelty.


B. This was a harsh demand. Was it not enough that the King should forbear his
Enemies, but also that he must betray his Friends? If they thus tyrannize over
the King, before they have gotten the Sovereign Power into their hands; how
will they tyrannize over their Fellow Subjects, when they have gotten it?


A. So as they did.


B. How long staid that Committee in London?


A. Not above two or three days, and then were brought from London to the
Parliament House by Water, in great triumph, guarded with a tumultuous number
of Armed Men, there to sit in security in despite of the King, and make
traitorous Acts against him, such, and as many as they listed, and under favor
of these tumults to frighten away from the House of Peers all such as were not
of their own Faction. For at this time the Rabble was so insolent, that scarce
any of the Bishops durst go to the House, for fear of violence upon their
persons: in so much as twelve of them excused themselves of coming thither; and
by way of Petition to the King remonstrated, That they were not permitted to go
quietly to the performance of that Duty, and protesting against all
Determinations, as of none effect, that should pass in the House of Lords
during their forced absence; which the House of Commons taking hold of, sent up
to the Peers one of their Members to accuse them of High Treason; whereupon ten
of them were sent to the Tower, after which time there were no more words of
their High Treason; but there passed a Bill by which they were deprived of
their Votes in Parliament, and to this Bill they got the Kings Assent: and in
the beginning of September after, they voted that the Bishops should have no
more to do in the Government of the Church, but to this they had not the King's
Assent, the War being now begun.


B. What made the Parliament so averse to Episcopacy, and especially the House
of Lords, whereof the Bishops were Members? for I see no reason why they should
do it to gratify a number of poor Parish Priests, that were Presbyterians, and
that were never likely any way to serve the Lords, but on the contrary to do
their best to pull down their power, and subject them to their Synods and
Classes.


A. For the Lords very few of them did perceive the intention of the
Presbyterians, and besides that, they durst not (I believe) oppose the Lower
House.


B. But why were the Lower House so earnest against them?


A. Because they meant to make use of their Tenants, and with pretended
Sanctity to make the King and his Party odious to the People, by whose help
they were to set up Democracy, and depose the King, or to let him have the
Title only so long as he should act for their purposes: but not only the
Parliament, but in a manner all the People of England were their Enemies upon
the account of their behavior, as being (they said) too imperious. This was
all that was colourably laid to their charge; the main cause of pulling them
down was the envy of the Presbyterians that incensed the People against them,
and against Episcopacy it self.


B. How would the Presbyterians have the Church to be governed?


A. By National and Provincial Synods.


B. Is not this to make the National Assembly an Archbishop, and the
Provincial Assemblies so many Bishops?


A. Yes; but every Minister shall have the delight of sharing the Government,
and consequently of being able to be revenged on them that do not admire their
Learning, and help to fill their Purses, and win to their Service them that do.


B. It Is a hard Case, that there should be two Factions to trouble the
Commonwealth, without any Interest in it of their own, other than every
particular man may have, and that their quarrels should be only about Opinions,
that is, about who has the most Learning, as if their Learning ought to be the
Rule of governing all the World. What is it they are learned in? Is it
Politics and Rules of State? I know it is called Divinity, but I hear almost
nothing preached but matter of Philosophy. For Religion in it self admits no
controversy. It Is a Law of the Kingdom, and ought not to be disputed. I do not
think they pretend to speak with God and know his Will by any other way than
reading the Scriptures, which we also do.


A. Yes; some of them do, and give themselves out for Prophets by extraordinary
Inspiration; but the rest pretend only (for their Advancement to Benefices and
Charge of Souls) a greater skill in the Scriptures than other men have, by
reason of their breeding in the Universities, and knowledge there gotten of the
Latin Tongue, and some also of the Greek and Hebrew Tongues, wherein the
Scripture was written; besides their knowledge of Natural Philosophy, which is
there publicly taught.


B. As for the Latin, Greek and Hebrew Tongues, it was once (to the Detection
of Roman fraud, and to the ejection of the Romish Power) very profitable, or
rather necessary; but now that is done, and we have the Scripture in English,
and preaching in English, I see no great need of Latin, Greek and Hebrew. I
should think my self better qualified by understanding well the Languages of
our Neighbors, French, Dutch and Italian. I think it was never seen in the
World before the power of Popes was set up, that Philosophy was much conducing
to Power in a Commonwealth.


A. But Philosophy, together with Divinity, have very much conduced to the
advancement of the Professors thereof to Places of the greatest Authority, next
to the Authority of Kings themselves, in most of the ancient Kingdoms of the
World, as is manifestly to be seen in the History of those times.


B. I pray you cite me some of the Authors and Places.


A. First, what were the Druids of old time in Britany and France? What
Authority these had you may see in Caesar, Strabo and others, and especially in
Diodorus Siculus, the greatest Antiquary perhaps that ever was, who speaking of
the Druids* (which he calls Sarovides) in France, says thus. There be also
amongst them certain Philosophers and Theologians, that are exceedingly
honored, whom they also use as Prophets; these Men by their skill in Augury,
and Inspection into the Bowels of Beasts sacrificed, foretell what is to come,
and have the Multitude obedient to them. And a little after; It is a Custom
amongst them, that no man may sacrifice without a Philosopher; because (say
they) men ought not to present their thanks to the Gods, but by them that know
the Divine Nature, and are as it were of the same Language with them, and that
all good things ought by such as these to be prayed for.


B. I can hardly believe that those Druids were very skilful, either in Natural
Philosophy or Moral.


A. Nor I; for they held and taught the Transmigration of Souls from one Body
to another, as did Pythagoras; which Opinion, whether they took from him, or he
from them, I cannot tell.

What were the Magi in Persia, but Philosophers and Astrologers? You know how
they came to find our Savior by the conduct of a Star, either from Persia it
self, or from some Country more Eastward than Judea. Were not these in great
Authority in their Country? And are they not in most part of Christendom
thought to have been Kings?

Egypt has been thought by many the most ancient Kingdom and Nation of the
World, and their Priests had the greatest power in Civil Affairs, that any
Subjects ever had in any Nation. And what were they but Philosophers and
Divines? concerning whom the same Diodorus Siculus says thus. The whole
Country (of Egypt) being divided into three parts, the Body of the Priests
have one, as being of most credit with the People, both for their Devotion
toward the Gods, and also for their understanding gotten by Education; and
presently after: for generally these men in the greatest Affairs of all* are
the King's Counselors, partly executing, and partly informing and advising;
foretelling him also (by their skill in Astrology, and Art in the Inspection of
Sacrifices) the things that are to come, and reading to him out of their Holy
Books, such of the Actions there recorded, as are profitable for him to know.
It Is not there as in Greece, one man or one woman that has the Priesthood, but
they are many that attend the Honors and Sacrifices of the Gods, and leave the
same employment to their posterity, which next to the King has the greatest
Power and Authority.

Concerning the Judicature amongst the Egyptians, he says thus: from out of
the most eminent Cities Hieropolis, Thebes and Memphis they choose Judges,
which are a Council not inferior to that of Areopagus in Athens, or that of the
Senate in Lacedaemon. When they are met, being in number 30, they choose one
from amongst themselves to be Chief Justice, and the City, whereof he is,
sends another in his place. This Chief Justice wore about his Neck hung in a
Gold Chain, a Jewel of precious Stones, the name of which Jewel was Truth,
which when the Chief Justice had put on, then began the Pleading, etc. and when
the Judges had agreed on the Sentence, then did the Chief Justice put this
Jewel of Truth to one of the Pleas. You see now what power was acquired in
Civil matters by the Conjuncture of Philosophy and Divinity.

Let us come now to the Commonwealth of the Jews. Was not the Priesthood in a
Family (namely the Levites) as well as the Priesthood of Egypt? Did not the
High Priest give Judgment by the Breastplate of Urim and Thummim? Look upon the
Kingdom of Assyria, and the Philosophers and Chaldaeans. Had they not Lands and
Cities belonging to their Family, even in Abraham's time, who dwelt (you know)
in Vr of the Chaldaeans; of these the same Author says thus: The Chaldaeans are
a Sect in Politics like to that of the Egyptian Priests; for being ordained
for the Service of the Gods, they spend the whole time of their life in
Philosophy, being of exceeding great reputation in Astrology, and pretending
much also to Prophecy, foretelling things to come by Purifications and
Sacrifices, and to find out by certain Incantations the preventing of harm, and
the bringing to pass of good. They have also skill in Augury, and in the
Interpretation of Dreams and Wonders, nor are unskilful in the Art of
foretelling by the Inwards of Beasts sacrificed, and have their Learning, not
as the Greeks: for the Philosophy of the Chaldaeons goes to their Family by
Tradition, and the Son receives it from his Father.

From Assyria let us pass into India, and see what esteem the Philosophers had
there. The whole Multitude (says Diodorus) of the Indians is divided into seven
parts; whereof the first is the Body of Philosophers, for number the least, but
for eminence the first; for they are free from Taxes, and as they are not
Masters of others, so are no others Masters of them. By private men they are
called to the Sacrifices, and to the care of burials of the dead, as being
thought most beloved of the Gods, and skilful in the Doctrine concerning Hell,
and for this Employment receive Gifts and Honors very considerable. They are
also of great use to the People of India; for being taken at the beginning of
the year into the Great Assembly, they foretell them of great Drouths, great
Rains, also of Winds and of Sicknesses, and of whatsoever is profitable for
them to know beforehand.

The same Author concerning the Laws of the Aethiopians says thus: The Laws of
the Aethiopians seem very different from those of other Nations, and especially
about the Election of their Kings: for the Priests propound some of the Chief
Men amongst them, named in a Catalogue, and whom the God (which according to a
certain Custom is carried about to Feastings) does accept of, him the Multitude
elect for their King, and presently adore and honor him as a God, put into the
Government by Divine Providence. The King being chosen, he has the manner of
his life limited to him by the Laws, and does all other things according to the
Custom of the Country, neither rewarding, nor punishing any man, otherwise
than from the beginning is established amongst them by Law; nor use they to put
any man to death, though he be condemned to it, but to send some Officer to him
with a Token of death; who seeing the Token, goes presently to his House, and
kills himself presently after: But the strangest thing of all is, that which
they do concerning the death of their Kings: for the Priests that live in
Meroe, and spend their time about the Worship and Honor of the Gods, and are
in greatest Authority; when they have a mind to it, send a Messenger to the
King, to bid him die, for that the Gods have given such order, and that the
Commandments of the Immortals are not by any means to be neglected by those
that are by Nature Mortal; using also other Speeches to him, which men of
simple Judgment, and that have not reason enough to dispute against those
unnecessary Commands, as being educated in an old and undelible Custom, are
content to admit of. Therefore in former times the Kings did obey the Priests,
not as mastered by Force and Arms, but as having their reason mastered by
Superstition. But in the time of Ptolomy the second, Ergamenes, King of the
Aethiopians, having had his breeding in Philosophy after the manner of the
Greeks, being the first that durst dispute their power, took heart as befitted
a King, came with Soldiers to a place called Abaton, where was then the Golden
Temple of the Aethiopians, killed all the Priests, abolished the Custom, and
rectified the Kingdom according to his will.


B. Though they that were killed were most damnable Impostors, yet the Act was
cruel.


A. It was so: but were not the Priests cruel to cause their Kings, whom a
little before they adored as Gods, to make away themselves? The King killed
them for the safety of his Person; they him out of Ambition or love of Change.
The King's Act may be colored with the good of his People; The Priests had no
pretense against their Kings, who were certainly very godly, or else would
never have obeyed the Command of the Priests by a Messenger unarmed, to kill
themselves. Our late King, the best King perhaps that ever was, you know, was
murdered, having been first persecuted by War, at the incitement of
Presbyterian Ministers, who are therefore guilty of the death of all that fell
in that War, which were, I believe, in England, Scotland and Ireland near
100000 persons. Had it not been much better that those seditious Ministers,
which were not perhaps 1000, had been all killed, before they had preached. It
had been (I confess) a great Massacre, but the killing of 100000 is a greater.


B. I am glad the Bishops were out at this business; as ambitious as some say
they are, it did not appear in that business, for they were Enemies to them
that were in it.


A. But I intend not by these Quotations to commend either the Divinity, or the
Philosophy of those Heathen People; but to show only what the reputation of
those Sciences can effect among the People. For their Divinity was nothing but
Idolatry, and their Philosophy (excepting the knowledge which the Egyptian
Priests, and from them the Chaldaeans, had gotten by long observation and study
in Astronomy, Geometry and Arithmetic) very little; and that in great part
abused in Astrology and Fortune-telling. Whereas the Divinity of the Clergy in
this Nation, considered apart from the mixture (that has been introduced by the
Church of Rome, and in part retained here) of the babbling Philosophy of
Aristotle, and other Greeks, that has no affinity with Religion, and serves
only to breed disaffection, dissension, and finally Sedition and Civil War (as
we have lately found by dear experience, in the differences between the
Presbyterians and Episcopals) is the true Religion: but for these differences
both Parties as they came in power, not only suppressed the Tenets of one
another; but also whatsoever Doctrine looked with an ill aspect upon their
Interest, and consequently all true Philosophy, especially Civil and Moral,
which can never appear propitious to ambition, or to an exemption from their
obedience due to the Sovereign Power.

After the King had accused the Lord Kimbolton, a Member of the Lords House,
and Hollis, Haslerigg, Hampden, Pim and Stroud, five Members of the Lower
House, of High Treason; and after the Parliament had voted out the Bishops from
the House of Peers; they pursued especially two things in their Petitions to
his Majesty: The one was, That the King would declare who were the persons that
advised him to go, as he did, to the Parliament House, to apprehend them, and
that he would leave them to the Parliament to receive condign punishment; and
this they did to stick upon his Majesty the dishonor of deserting his Friends,
and betraying them to his Enemies. The other was, That he would allow them a
Guard out of the City of London, to be commanded by the Earl of Essex; for
which they pretended they could not else sit in safety: which pretense was
nothing but an upbraiding of his Majesty for coming to Parliament better
accompanied than ordinary, to seize the said five seditious Members.


B. I see no reason in petitioning for a Guard, they should determine it to the
City of London in particular, and the Command by name to the Earl of Essex;
unless they meant the King should understand it for a Guard against himself.


A. Their meaning was, that the King should understand it so, and (as I verily
believe) they meant he should take it for an affront: and the King himself
understanding it so, denied to grant it; though he were willing, if they could
not otherwise be satisfied, to Command such a Guard to wait upon them, as he
would be responsible for to God Almighty. Besides this, the City of London
petitioned the King (put upon it, no doubt, by some Members of the Lower House)
to put the Tower of London into the Hands of persons of Trust, meaning such as
the Parliament should approve of, and to appoint a Guard for the safety of his
Majesty and the Parliament. This Method of bringing Petitions in a Tumultuary
manner by great multitudes of clamorous people, was ordinary with the House of
Commons, whose Ambition could never have been served by way of prayer and
request, without extraordinary terror.

After the King had waved the prosecution of the five Members, but denied to
make known who had advised him to come in person to the House of Commons, they
questioned the Attorney General, who by the King's Command had exhibited the
Articles against them, and voted him a breaker of the Privilege of Parliament,
and no doubt had made him feel their cruelty, if he had not speedily fled the
Land.

About the end of January, they made an Order of both Houses of Parliament to
prevent the going over of Popish Commanders into Ireland; not so much fearing
that, as that by this the King himself choosing his Commanders for that
Service, might aid himself out of Ireland against the Parliament. But this was
no great matter in respect of a Petition they sent his Majesty about the same
time, that is to say, about the 27 th or 28 th of January 1641. wherein they
desired in effect the absolute Sovereignty of England, though by the name of
Sovereignty they challenged it not, whilst the King was living: For to the end
that the fears and dangers of this Kingdom might be removed, and the
mischievous designs of those who are Enemies to the peace of it, might be
prevented, they pray; That his Majesty would be pleased to put forthwith,
first, The Tower of London; 2. All other Forts; 3. The whole Militia of the
Kingdom, into the Hands of such persons as should be recommended to him by both
the Houses of Parliament. And this they style a necessary Petition.


B. Were there really any such fears and dangers generally conceived here? or
did there appear any Enemies at that time with such Designs as are mentioned in
the Petition?


A. Yes: But no other fear of danger, but such as any discreet and honest man
might justly have of the Designs of the Parliament it self, who were the
greatest Enemies to the peace of the Kingdom that could possibly be. It Is also
worth observing, that this Petition began with these words: Most Gracious
Sovereign: So stupid they were as not to know, that he that is Master of the
Militia, is Master of the Kingdom, and consequently is in possession of a most
absolute Sovereignty. The King was now at Windsor, to avoid the Tumults of the
Common People before the Gates of White Hall, together with their clamors and
affronts there. The 9 th of February after he came to Hampton Court, and thence
he went to Dover with the Queen and the Princess of Orange, his Daughter, where
the Queen with the Princess of Orange embarked for Holland; but the King
returned to Greenwich, whence he sent for the Prince of Wales and the Duke of
York, and so went with them toward York.


B. Did the Lords join with the Commons in this Petition for the Militia?


A. It appears so by the Title: but I believe they durst not but do it. The
House of Commons took them but for a Cipher; Men of Title only without real
Power. Perhaps also the most of them thought, that the taking of the Militia
from the King would be an addition to their own power; but they were very much
mistaken, for the House of Commons never intended they should be sharers in it.


B. What answer made the King to this Petition?


A. That when he shall know the extent of Power, which is intended to be
established in those persons, whom they desire to be the Commanders of the
Militia in the several Counties, and likewise to what time it shall be limited;
That no Power shall be executed by his Majesty alone without the advice of
Parliament, then he will declare, that (for the securing them from all Dangers
or Jealousies of any) his Majesty will be content to put into all the places,
both Forts and Militia in the several Counties, such persons as both the Houses
of Parliament shall either approve, or recommend unto him; so that they declare
before unto his Majesty the Names of the persons whom they approve or
recommend; unless such persons shall be named, against whom he shall have just
and unquestionable exceptions.


B. What power, for what time, and to whom did the Parliament grant, concerning
the Militia?


A. The same power which the King had before planted in his Lieutenants and
Deputy Lieutenants in the several Counties, and without other limitation of
time but their own pleasure.


B. Who were the men that had this power?


A. There is a Catalogue of them printed. They are very many; and most of them
Lords; nor is it necessary to have them named: for to name them is, in my
opinion, to brand them with the mark of Disloyalty, or of Folly. When they had
made a Catalogue of them, they sent it to the King, with a new Petition for the
Militia. Also presently after they sent a Message to his Majesty, praying him
to leave the Prince at Hampton Court, but the King granted neither.


B. Howsoever it was well done of them to get Hostages (if they could) of the
King before he went from them.


A. In the mean time, to raise Money for the reducing of Ireland, the
Parliament invited men to bring in Money by way of Adventure, according to
these Propositions. 1. That two millions and five hundred thousand Acres of
Land in Ireland should be assigned to the Adventurers in this proportion. l.
For an Adventure of 200 -- 1000 Acres in Vlster. 300 -- 1000 Acres in Conaught.
450 -- 1000 Acres in Munster. 600 -- 1000 Acres in Lemster. All according to
English measure, and consisting of Meadow, Arable and profitable Pasture; Bogs,
Woods and barren Mountains being cast in over and above. 2. A Revenue was
reserved to the Crown from 1 d. to 3 d. on every Acre. 3. That Commissions
should be sent by the Parliament to erect Manors, settle Wastes and Commons,
maintain preaching Ministers, to create Corporations, and to regulate
Plantations. The rest of the Propositions concern only the times and manner of
payment of the Sums subscribed by the Adventurers. And to these Propositions
his Majesty assented; but to the Petition of the Militia his Majesty denied his
Assent.


B. If he had not I should have thought it a great wonder. What did the
Parliament after this?


A. They sent him another Petition, which was presented to him when he was at
Theobalds in his way to York; wherein they tell him plainly, That unless he be
pleased to assure them by those Messengers then sent, that he would speedily
apply his Royal Assent to the satisfaction of their former desires, they shall
be enforced, for the safety of his Majesty and his Kingdoms, to dispose of the
Militia by the Authority of both Houses, etc. They petition his Majesty also to
let the Prince stay at St. James's, or some other of his Majesty's Houses near
London. They tell him also, that the power of raising, ordering and disposing
of the Militia cannot be granted to any Corporation without the Authority and
Consent of Parliament, and that those parts of the Kingdom, which have put
themselves into a posture of defense, have done nothing therein, but by
direction of both Houses, and what is justifiable by the Laws of this Kingdom.


B. What answer made the King to this?


A. It was a putting of themselves into Arms, and under Officers such as the
Parliament should approve of. 4. They Voted, That his Majesty should be again
desired, that the Prince might continue about London. Lastly, They Voted a
Declaration to be sent to his Majesty by both the Houses; wherein they accuse
his Majesty of a Design of altering Religion, though not directly him, but them
that counseled him; whom they also accused of being the Inviters and Fomenters
of the Scotch War, and Framers of the Rebellion in Ireland; and upbraid the
King again for accusing the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members, and of being
privy to the purpose of bringing up his Army, which was raised against the
Scots, to be employed against the Parliament. To which his Majesty sent his
Answer from Newmarket. Whereupon it was resolved by both Houses, that in this
Case of extreme Danger, and of his Majesty's refusal, the Ordinance agreed upon
by both Houses for the Militia, does oblige the People by the fundamental Laws
of this Kingdom; and also, that whosoever shall execute any power over the
Militia, by color of any Commission of Lieutenancy, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament, shall be accounted a Disturber of the peace of the
Kingdom. Whereupon his Majesty sent a Message to both Houses from Huntington,
requiring obedience to the Laws established, and prohibiting all Subjects, upon
pretense of their Ordinance, to execute any thing concerning the Militia, which
is not by those Laws warranted. Upon this the Parliament vote a standing to
their former Votes; as also, that when the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
which is the Supreme Court of Judicature in the Kingdom, shall declare what the
Law of the Land is; to have this not only questioned, but contradicted, is a
high breach of the Privilege of Parliament.


B. I thought that he that makes the Law, ought to declare what the Law is; for
what is it else to make a Law, but to declare what it is? So that they have
taken from the King, not only the Militia, but also the Legislative Power.


A. They have so; but I make account that the Legislative Power (and indeed all
power possible) is contained in the power of the Militia. After this they seize
such Money as was due to his Majesty upon the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, and
upon the Bill of Subsidies, that they might disable him every way they possibly
could. They sent him also many other contumelious Messages and Petitions, after
his coming to York; amongst which one was; That whereas the Lord Admiral, by
indisposition of Body, could not command the Fleet in person, he would be
pleased to give Authority to the Earl of Warwick to supply his place; when they
knew the King had put Sir John Pennington in it before.


B. To what end did the King entertain so many Petitions, Messages,
Declarations and Remonstrances, and vouchsafe his Answers to them, when he
could not choose but clearly see, they were resolved to take from him his Royal
Power, and consequently his Life? For it could not stand with their safety to
let either him or his Issue live, after they had done him so great Injuries.


A. Besides this, the Parliament had at the same time a Committee residing at
York, to spy what his Majesty did, and to inform the Parliament thereof, and
also to hinder the King from gaining the People of that County to his Party: So
that when his Majesty was courting the Gentlemen there, the Committee was
instigating of the Yeomanry against him. To which also the Ministers did very
much contribute: So that the King lost his opportunity at York,


B. Why did not the King seize the Committee into his Hands, or drive them out
of Town?


A. I know not: but I believe he knew the Parliament had a greater Party than
he, not only in Yorkshire, but also in York.

Toward the end of April, the King, upon Petition of the People of Yorkshire,
to have the Magazine of Hull to remain still there, for the greater security of
the Northern parts, thought fit to take it into his own Hands. He had a little
before appointed Governor of that Town the Earl of New Castle; but the
Townsmen having been already corrupted by the Parliament, refused to receive
him, but refused not to receive Sir John Hotham, appointed to be Governor by
the Parliament. The King therefore coming before the Town, guarded only by his
own Servants, and a few Gentlemen of the Country thereabouts, was denied
entrance by Sir John Hotham that stood upon the Wall: for which Act he
presently caused Sir John Hotham to be proclaimed Traitor, and sent a Message
to the Parliament, requiring Justice to be done upon the said Hotham, and that
the Town and Magazine might be delivered into his hands. To which the
Parliament made no answer, but in stead thereof published another Declaration,
in which they omitted nothing of their former slanders against his Majesty's
Government, but inserted certain Propositions declarative of their own
pretended Right, viz. 1. That whatsoever they declare to be Law, ought not to
be questioned by the King. 2. That no Precedents can be limits to bound their
proceedings. 3. That a Parliament for the public good may dispose of any
thing, wherein the King or Subject has a Right; and that they, without the
King, are this Parliament, and the Judge of this public good, and that the
King's Consent is not necessary. 4. That no Member of either House ought to be
troubled for Treason, Felony, or any other Crime, unless the Cause be first
brought before the Parliament that they may judge of the Fact, and give leave
to proceed, if they see cause. 5. That the Sovereign Power resides in both
Houses, and that the King ought to have no Negative Voice. 6, That the Levying
of Forces against the personal Commands of the King, (though accompanied with
his presence) is not Levying War against the King; but the Levying of War
against his Politic Person, viz. his Laws, etc. 7. That Treason cannot be
committed against his Person, otherwise than as he is entrusted with the
Kingdom, and discharges that Trust; and that they have a power to judge whether
he have discharged this Trust or not. 8. That they may dispose of the King when
they will.


B. This is plain dealing, and without Hypocrisy. Could the City of London
swallow this?


A. Yes; and more too, if need be. London, you know, has a great Belly, but no
Pallat, nor Taste of Right and Wrong. In the Parliament Roll of Hen. 4. amongst
the Articles of the Oath the King at his Coronation took, there is one runs
thus: Concedes just as Leges and Consuetudines esse tenendas; and promittes per
te eas esse protegendas, and ad honorem Dei corroborandas, quas vulgus
elegerit. Which the Parliament urged for their Legislative Authority, and
therefore interpret quas vulgus elegerit, which the People shall choose; as if
the King should swear to protect and corroborate Laws, before they were made,
whether they be good or bad; whereas the words signify no more, but that he
shall protect and corroborate such Laws as they have chosen, that is to say,
the Acts of Parliament then in being. And in the Records of the Exchequer it is
thus: Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs which the
Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend and uphold them? etc.
And this was the Answer his Majesty made to that Point.


B. And I think this Answer very full and clear: but if the words were to be
interpreted in the other sense, yet I see no reason why the King should be
bound to swear to them: for Hen. 4. came to the Crown by the Votes of a
Parliament, not much inferior in wickedness to this Long Parliament, that
deposed and murdered their Lawful King; saving that it was not the Parliament
it self, but the Usurper that murdered King Richard the second.


A. About a week after, in the beginning of May, the Parliament sent the King
another Paper, which they styled the humble Petition and Advice of both Houses,
containing 19 Propositions; which when you shall hear, you shall be able to
judge what power they meant to leave to the King, more than to any one of his
Subjects. The first of them is this.

1. That the Lords, and others of his Majesty's Privy Council, and all great
Officers of State, both at home and abroad, be put from their Employments, and
from his Council; save only such as should be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, and none put into their places, but by approbation of the said
Houses. And that all Privy-Councellors take an Oath for the due execution of
their places, in such form as shall be agreed upon by the said Houses.

2. That the great Affairs of the Kingdom be debated, resolved and transacted
only in Parliament, and such as shall presume to do any thing to the contrary,
be reserved to the censure of the Parliament, and such other matters of State,
as are proper for his Majesty's Privy Council, shall be debated, and concluded
by such as shall from time to time be chosen for that place by both Houses of
Parliament, and that no public Act concerning the Affairs of the Kingdom,
which are proper for his Privy Council, be esteemed valid, as proceeding from
the Royal Authority; unless it be done by the Advice and Consent of the Major
part of the Council, attested under their Hands: and that the Council be not
more than 25, nor less than 15; and that when a Counselors place falls void in
the Interval of Parliament, it shall not be supplied without the Assent of the
Major part of the Council; and that such choice also shall be void, if the next
Parliament after confirm it not.

3. That the Lord High Steward of England, Lord High Constable, Lord
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal,
Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chief Governor of
Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards, Secretaries of
State, two Chief Justices and Chief Baron be always chosen with the Approbation
of both Houses of Parliament, and in the Intervals of Parliament, by the Major
part of the Privy Council.

4. That the Government of the King's Children shall be committed to such as
both Houses shall approve of, and in the Intervals of Parliament, such as the
Privy Council shall approve of; that the Servants then about them, against whom
the Houses have just exception, should be removed.

5. That no Marriage be concluded or treated of for any of the King's Children,
without consent of Parliament.

6. That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests and Popish Recusants be
strictly put in execution.

7. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Peers be taken away, and
that a Bill be passed for the education of the Children of Papists in the
Protestant Religion.

8. That the King will be pleased to reform the Church Government and Lyturgy
in such manner as both Houses of Parliament shall advise.

9. That he would be pleased to rest satisfied with that Course that the Lords
and Commons have appointed for ordering the Militia, and recall his
Declarations and Proclamations against it.

10. That such Members as have been put out of any Place, or Office, since this
Parliament began, may be restored, or have satisfaction.

11. That all Privy-Councellors and Judges take an Oath, the form whereof shall
be agreed on, and settled by Act of Parliament for the maintaining the Petition
of Right, and of certain Statutes made by the Parliament.

12. That all the Judges and Officers placed by Approbation of both Houses of
Parliament, may hold their places quam diu been se gesserint.

13. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether they
be within the Kingdom, or fled out of it; and that all persons cited by either
House of Parliament may appear and abide the Censure of Parliament.

14. That the General Pardon offered by his Majesty be granted with such
Exceptions, as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament.


B. What a spiteful Article was this! All the rest proceeded from Ambition,
which many times well-natur'd men are subject to; but this proceeded from an
inhumane and devilish cruelty.


A. 15. That the Forts and Castles be put under the Command of such persons as,
with the Approbation of the Parliament, the King shall appoint.

16. That the extraordinary Guards about the King be discharged; and for the
future none raised, but according to the Law in case of actual Rebellion, or
Invasion.


B. Methinks these very Propositions sent to the King are an actual Rebellion.


A. 17. That his Majesty enter into a more strict Alliance with the United
Provinces, and other Neighbor Protestant Princes and States.

18. That his Majesty be pleased by Act of Parliament to clear the Lord
Kimbolton, and the five Members of the House of Commons, in such manner as that
future Parliaments may be secured from the consequence of that evil President.

19. That his Majesty be pleased to pass a Bill for restraining Peers made
hereafter, from sitting, or voting in Parliament, unless they be admitted with
consent of both Houses of Parliament.

These Propositions granted; they promise to apply themselves to regulate his
Majesty's Revenue to his best advantage, and to settle it to the support of his
Royal Dignity in Honor and Plenty; and also to put the Town of Hull into such
Hands, as his Majesty shall appoint, with consent of Parliament.


B. Is not that to put it into such hands as his Majesty shall appoint by the
consent of the Petitioners, which is no more than to keep it in their hands as
it is? Did they want, or think the King wanted common sense, so as not to
perceive that their promise herein was worth nothing?


A. After the sending of these Propositions to the King, and his Majesty's
refusal to grant them, they began, on both sides, to prepare for War. The King
raising a Guard for his Person in Yorkshire, and the Parliament thereupon
having Voted, that the King intended to make War upon his Parliament, gave
order for the mustering and exercising the People in Arms, and published
Propositions to invite and encourage them to bring in either ready Money or
Plate, or to promise under their hands to furnish and maintain certain numbers
of Horse, Horsemen and Arms for the defense of the King and Parliament,
(meaning by King as they had formerly declared, not his Person, but his Laws)
promising to repay their Money with Interest of 8 l. in the 100 l. and the
value of their Plate with 12 d. the Ounce for the fashion. On the other side
the King came to Nottingham, and there did set up his Standard Royal, and sent
out Commissions of Array to call those to him, which by the Ancient Laws of
England were bound to serve him in the Wars. Upon this occasion there passed
diverse Declarations between the King and Parliament concerning the Legality of
this Array, which are too long to tell you at this time.


B. Nor do I desire to hear any Mooting about this Question: for I think that
general Law of Salus Populi, and the Right of defending himself, against those
that had taken from him the Sovereign Power, are sufficient to make legal
whatsoever he should do, in order to the recovery of his Kingdom, or to the
punishing of the Rebels.


A. In the mean time the Parliament raised an Army, and made the Earl of Essex
General thereof; by which Act they declared what they meant formerly, when they
petitioned the King for a Guard to be commanded by the said Earl of Essex; and
now the King sends out his Proclamations forbidding obedience to the Orders of
the Parliament concerning the Militia; and the Parliament send out Orders
against the Execution of the Commissions of Array. Hitherto, (though it were a
War before) yet there was no Blood shed; they shot at one another nothing but
paper.


B. I understand now how the Parliament destroyed the Peace of the Kingdom; and
how easily by the help of seditious Presbyterian Ministers, and of Ambitious
Ignorant Orators, they reduced this Government into Anarchy: but I believe it
will be a harder Task for them to bring in Peace again, and settle the
Government either in themselves, or any other Governor or form of Government.
For granting that they obtained the Victory in this War, they must be beholding
for it to the Valor, good Conduct, or Felicity of those to whom they give the
Command of their Armies; especially to the General, whose good success will,
without doubt, draw with it the Love and Admiration of the Soldiers; so that it
will be in his power, either to take the Government upon himself, or to place
it where himself thinks good. In which case, if he take it not to himself, he
will be thought a Fool; and if he do, he shall be sure to have the envy of his
subordinate Commanders who look for a share, either in the present Government,
or in the Succession to it: for they will say, has he obtained this power by
his own, without our Danger, Valor and Counsel? and must we be his Slaves whom
we have thus raised? Or is not there as much Justice on our side against him,
as was on his side against the King?


A, They will, and did; in so much that the reason why Cromwell, after he had
gotten into his own hands the absolute power of England, Scotland and Ireland
by the Name of Protector, did never dare to take upon him the Title of King,
nor was ever able to settle it upon his Children. His Officers would not suffer
it, as pretending after his death to succeed him; nor would the Army consent to
it, because he had ever declared to them, against the Government of a single
person.


B. But to return to the King. What Means had he to pay? What Provision had he
to Arm, nay Means to Levy an Army able to resist the Army of the Parliament,
maintained by the great Purse of the City of London, and Contributions of
almost all the Towns Corporate in England, and furnished with Arms as fully as
they could require?


A. It Is true, the King had great disadvantages, and yet by little and little
he got a considerable Army, with which he so prospered, as to grow stronger
every day, and the Parliament weaker, till they had gotten the Scotch with an
Army of 21000 Men to come into England to their Assistance. But to enter into
the particular Narration of what was done in the War, I have not now time.


B. Well then, we will talk of that at next meeting.


Behemoth. PART III.
B. WE left at the Preparations on both sides for War: which when I considered
by my self, I was mightily puzzled to find out what possibility there was for
the King to equal the Parliament in such a course, and what hopes he had of
Money, Men, Arms, Fortified places, Shipping, Council and Military Officers
sufficient for such an Enterprise against the Parliament, that had Men and
Money as much at command, as the City of London, and other Corporation Towns
were able to furnish, which was more than they needed. And for the Men they
should set forth for Soldiers, they were almost all of them spightfully bent
against the King and his whole Party, whom they took to be either Papists, or
Flatterers of the King, or that had designed to raise their Fortunes by the
plunder of the City, and other Corporation Towns. And though I believe, not
that they were more valiant than other Men, nor that they had so much
experience in the War, as to be accounted good Soldiers; yet they had that in
them, which in time of Battle is more conducing to Victory than Valor and
Experience both together, and that was spite.

And for Arms, they had in their hands the Chief Magazines, the Tower of
London, and the Town of Kingston upon Hull, besides most of the Powder and Shot
that lay in several Towns, for the use of the Trained Bands.

Fortified places there were not many then in England, and most of them in the
hands of the Parliament.

The King's Fleet was wholly in their Command under the Earl of Warwick.

Counselors they needed no more than such as were of their own Body; so that
the King was every way inferior to them, except it were perhaps in Officers.


A. I cannot compare their Chief Officers, for the Parliament the Earl of Essex
(after the Parliament had voted the War) was made General of all their Forces,
both in England and Ireland, from whom all other Commanders were to receive
their Commissions.


B. What moved them to make General the Earl of Essex? And for what cause was
the Earl of Essex so displeased with the King, as to accept that Office?


A. I do not certainly know what to answer to either of those Questions: but
the Earl of Essex had been in the Wars abroad, and wanted neither Experience,
Judgment nor Courage to perform such an undertaking. And besides that, you have
heard, I believe, how great a Darling of the People his Father had been before
him, and what Honor he had gotten by the Success of his Enterprise upon Cales,
and in some other Military Actions. To which I may add, that this Earl himself
was not held by the people to be so great a Favorite at Court, as that they
might not trust him with their Army against the King. And by this you may
perhaps conjecture the Cause for which the Parliament made choice of him for
General.


B. But why did they think him discontented with the Court?


A. I know not that; nor indeed that he was so. He came to the Court as other
Noblemen did, when occasion was, to wait upon the King, but had no Office,
till a little before this time, to oblige him to be there continually: but I
believe verily, that the unfortunateness of his Marriages had so
discountenanced his Conversation with Ladies, that the Court could not be his
proper Element, unless he had had some extraordinary favor there to balance
that Calamity: but for particular discontent from the King, or intention of
revenge for any supposed disgrace, I think he had none, nor that he was any
ways addicted to Presbyterian Doctrines, or other Fanatic Tenets in Church or
State; saving only, that he was carried away with the Stream (in a manner) of
the whole Nation, to think that England was not an absolute, but a mixed
Monarchy; not considering that the Supreme Power must always be absolute,
whether it be in the King, or in the Parliament.


B. Who was General of the King's Army?


A. None yet, but himself; nor indeed had he yet any Army; but there coming to
him at that time his two Nephews, the Princes Rupert and Maurice, he put the
Command of his Horse into the Hands of Prince Rupert, a Man than whom no man
living has a better Courage, nor was more active and diligent in prosecuting
his Commissions; and though but a young man then, was not without experience in
the conducting of Soldiers; as having been an Actor in part of his Fathers Wars
in Germany.


B. But how could the King find Money to pay such an Army as was necessary for
him against the Parliament?


A. Neither the King nor Parliament had much Money at that time, in their own
Hands, but were fain to rely upon the Benevolence of those that took their
parts. Wherein (I confess) the Parliament had a mighty great advantage. Those
that helped the King in that kind were only Lords and Gentlemen, which not
approving the proceedings of the Parliament, were willing to undertake the
payment every one of a certain number of Horse, which cannot be thought any
very great assistance, the persons that paid them being so few: For other
Moneys that the King then had, I have not heard of any, but what he borrowed
upon Jewels in the Low Countries. Whereas the Parliament had a very plentiful
Contribution, not only from London, but generally from their Faction in all
other places of England, upon certain Propositions (published by the Lords and
Commons in June 1642. at what time they had newly voted, that the King intended
to make War upon them) for bringing in of Money or Plate to maintain Horse and
Horsemen, and to buy Arms for the preservation of the public Peace, and for
the defense of the King, and both Houses of Parliament: For the re-payment of
which Money and Plate they were to have the Public Faith.


B. What Public Faith is there, when there is no Public? What is it that can
be called Public in a Civil War without the King?


A. The Truth is, the Security was nothing worth, but served well enough to
gull those seditious Blockheads, that were more fond of Change, than either of
their Peace or Profit.

Having by this means gotten Contributions from those that were the
well-affected to their Cause, they made use of it afterward to force the like
Contribution from others: For in November following they made an Ordinance for
Assessing also of those, that had not contributed then, or had contributed, but
not proportionably to their Estates. And yet this was contrary to what the
Parliament promised and declared in the Propositions themselves; for they
declared in the first Proposition, That no man's affection should be measured
by the proportion of his Offer, so that he expressed his good will to the
Service in any proportion whatsoever.

Besides this, in the beginning of March following, they made an Ordinance to
Levy weekly a great Sum of Money upon every County, City, Town, Place and
Person of any Estate almost in England; which weekly Sum (as may appear by the
Ordinance it self printed and published in March 1642. by Order of both Houses)
comes to almost 33000 l. and consequently to above 1700000 l. for the year.
They had besides all this the profits of the Kings Lands and Woods, and
whatsoever was remaining unpaid of any Subsidy formerly granted him, and the
Tonnage and Poundage usually received by the King; besides the profit of the
Sequestrations of great Persons, whom they pleased to vote Delinquents, and the
profits of the Bishops Lands, which they took to themselves a year or a little
more after.


B. Seeing then the Parliament had such advantage of the King in Money, and
Arms, and Multitude of Men, and had in their Hands the King's Fleet; I cannot
imagine what hope the King could have, either of Victory, (unless he resigned
into their Hands the Sovereignty) or subsisting: for I cannot well believe he
had any advantage of them, either in Counselors, Conductors, or in the
Resolutions of his Soldiers.


A. On the contrary, I think he had also some disadvantage in that: for though
he had as good Officers at least, as any then served the Parliament, yet I
doubt he had not so useful Council as was necessary; and for his Soldiers,
though they were men as stout as theirs, yet because their Valor was not
sharpened so with malice, as theirs was of the other side, they fought not so
keenly as their Enemies did: amongst whom there were a great many London
Apprentices, who for want of Experience in the War, would have been fearful
enough of Death and Wounds approaching visibly in glistering Swords; but for
want of Judgment scarce thought of such death as comes invisibly in a Bullet,
and therefore were very hardly to be driven out of the Field.


B. But what fault do you find in the King's Counselors, Lords, and other
Persons of Quality and Experience?


A. Only that fault, which was generally in the whole Nation, which was, that
they thought the Government of England was not an absolute, but a mixed
Monarchy; and that if the King should clearly subdue this Parliament, that his
Power would be what he pleased, and theirs as little as he pleased, which they
counted Tyranny. This opinion, though it did not lessen their endeavor to gain
the Victory for the King in a Battle, when a Battle could not be avoided, yet
it weakened their endeavor to procure him an absolute Victory in the War. And
for this Cause, notwithstanding that they saw that the Parliament was firmly
resolved to take all Kingly Power whatsoever out of his Hands; yet their
Counsel to the King was upon all occasions, to offer Propositions to them of
Treaty and Accommodation, and to make and publish Declarations, which any man
might easily have foreseen would be fruitless; and not only so, but also of
great disadvantage to those Actions by which the King was to recover his Crown,
and preserve his Life: for it took off the Courage of the best and forwardest
of his Soldiers, that looked for great benefit by their Service out of the
Estates of the Rebels, in case they could subdue them; but none at all if the
business should be ended by a Treaty.


B. And they had reason: for a Civil War never ends by Treaty without the
Sacrifice of those, who were on both sides the sharpest. You know well enough
how things passed at the Reconciliation of Augustus and Antonius in Rome: but I
thought, that after they once began to Levy Soldiers one against another, that
they would not any more have returned of either side to Declarations, or other
Paper War, which if it could have done any good, would have done it long before
this.


A. But seeing the Parliament continued writing, and set forth their
Declarations to the People against the Lawfulness of the King's Commission of
Array, and sent Petitions to the King as fierce and rebellious as ever they had
done before, demanding of him, That he would disband his Soldiers, and come up
to the Parliament, and leave those whom the Parliament called Delinquents
(which were none but the King's best Subjects) to their Mercy, and pass such
Bills, as they should advise him; would you not have the King set forth
Declarations and Proclamations against the Illegality of their Ordinances, by
which they Levied Soldiers against him, and answer those insolent Petitions of
theirs?


B. No; it had done him no good before, and therefore was not likely to do him
any afterward: for the common people, whose hands were to decide the
Controversy, understood not the Reasons of either Party; and for those, that
by Ambition were once set upon the Enterprise of changing the Government, they
cared not much what was Reason and Justice in the Cause, but what strength they
might procure by reducing the Multitude with Remonstrances from the Parliament
House, or by Sermons in the Churches. And to their Petitions I would not have
had any Answer made at all, more than this; that if they would disband their
Army, and put themselves upon his Mercy, they should find him more Gracious
than they expected.


A. That had been a gallant Answer indeed, if it had proceeded from him, after
some extraordinary great Victory in Battle, or some extraordinary assurance of
a Victory at last in the whole War.


B. Why? What could have happened to him worse than at length he suffered,
notwithstanding his gentle Answers, and all his reasonable Declarations?


A. Nothing; but who knew that?


B. Any man might see, that he was never like to be restored to his Right
without Victory; and such his stoutness being known to the People, would have
brought to his assistance many more hands than all the Arguments of Law, or
force of Eloquence couched in Declarations, and other Writings could have done
by far: and I wonder what kind of Men they were that hindered the King from
taking this Resolution?


A. You may know by the Declarations themselves, which are very long and full
of quotations of Records, and of Cases formerly Reported; that the Penners of
them were either Lawyers by profession, or such Gentlemen as had the Ambition
to be thought so. Besides, I told you before, that those which were then
likeliest to have their Counsel asked in this business, were averse to absolute
Monarchy, as also to absolute Democracy or Aristocracy; all which Governments
they esteemed Tyranny, and were in love with Monarchy, which they used to
praise by the Name of mixed Monarchy, though it were indeed nothing else but
pure Anarchy. And those Men, whose Pens the King most used in these
Controversies of Law and Politics, were such (if I have not been misinformed)
as having been Members of this Parliament, had declaimed against Ship Money,
and other Extraparliamentary Taxes, as much as any; but when they saw the
Parliament grow higher in their Demands, than they thought they would have
done, went over to the King's Party.


B. Who were those?


A. It is not necessary to name any man, seeing I have undertaken only a short
Narration of the follies and other faults of men, during this trouble; but not
(by naming the persons) to give you, or any man else occasion to esteem them
the less, now that the faults on all sides have been forgiven.


B. When the business was brought to this height by Levying of Soldiers and
seizing of the Navy, and Arms, and other Provisions on both sides, that no man
was so blind as not to see, they were in an estate of War one against another;
why did not the King (by Proclamation or Message) according to his undoubted
Right, dissolve the Parliament, and thereby diminish, in some part, the
Authority of their Levies, and of other their unjust Ordinances?


A. You have forgotten that I told you, that the King himself by a Bill that he
passed at the same time, when he passed the Bill for the Execution of the Earl
of Strafford, had given them Authority to hold the Parliament till they should,
by consent of both Houses, dissolve themselves. If therefore he had by any
Proclamation, or Message to the Houses, dissolved them, they would, to their
former defamations of his Majesty's Actions, have added this, that he was a
breaker of his word; and not only in contempt of him have continued their
Session, but also have made advantage of it, to the increase and strengthening
of their own Party.


B. Would not the King's raising of an Army against them be interpreted, as a
purpose to dissolve them by force? And was it not as great a breach of promise
to scatter them by force, as to dissolve them by Proclamation? Besides, I
cannot conceive, that the passing of that Act was otherwise intended than
conditionally; so long as they should not ordain any thing contrary to the
Sovereign Right of the King; which Condition they had already by many of their
Ordinances broken. And I think, that even by the Law of Equity, which is the
unalterable Law of Nature, a man that has the Sovereign Power, cannot, if he
would, give away the Right of any thing which is necessary for him to retain
for the good Government of his Subjects, unless he do it in express words,
saying, That he will have the Sovereign Power no longer. For the giving away
that, which by consequence only draws the Sovereignty along with it, is not (I
think) a giving away of the Sovereignty; but an error, such as works nothing
but an invalidity in the Grant it self. And such was the King's passing of this
Bill for the continuing of the Parliament as long as the two Houses pleased.
But now that the War was resolved on, on both sides; what needed any more
dispute in writing?


A. I know not what need they had, but on both sides they thought it needful to
hinder one another, as much as they could, from Levying of Soldiers? and
therefore the King did set forth Declarations in print to make the People know,
that they ought not to obey the Officers of the new Militia, set up by
Ordinance of Parliament, and also to let them see the Legality of his own
Commissions of Array. And the Parliament on their part did the like to justify
to the People the said Ordinance, and to make the Commission of Array appear
unlawful.


B. When the Parliament were Levying of Soldiers, was it not lawful for the
King to Levy Soldiers to defend himself and his Right, though there had been no
other Title for it, but his own Preservation, and that the Name of Commission
of Array had never before been heard of?


A. For my part (I think) there cannot be a better Title for War, than the
defense of a man's own Right; but the People, at that time, thought nothing
lawful for the King to do, for which there was not some Statute made by
Parliament. For the Lawyers, I mean the Judges of the Courts at Westminster,
and some few others, though but Advocates, yet of great reputation for their
skill in the Common Laws and Statutes of England, had infected most of the
Gentry of England with their Maxims and Cases prejudged, which they call
Presidents; and made them think so well of their own knowledge in the Law, that
they were very glad of this occasion to show it against the King, and thereby
to gain a Reputation with the Parliament of being good Patriots, and wise
Statesmen.


B. What was this Commission of Array?


A. King William the Conqueror had gotten into his hands by Victory all the
Land in England, of which he disposed some part, as Forests and Chases for his
Recreation, and some part to Lords and Gentlemen that had assisted him, or were
to assist him in the Wars: upon which he laid a charge of Service in his Wars,
some with more men, and some with less, according to the Lands he had given
them, whereby, when the King sent men unto them with Commission, to make use of
their Service, they were obliged to appear with Arms, and to accompany the King
to the Wars for a certain time, at their own charges: and such were the
Commissions by which this King did then make his Levies.


B. Why then was it not legal?


A. No doubt but it was legal: but what did that amount to with men that were
already resolved to acknowledge for Law nothing that was against their Design
of abolishing Monarchy, and placing a Sovereign and absolute arbitrary Power in
the House of Commons.


B. To destroy Monarchy, and set up the House of Commons are two businesses,


A. They found it so at last, but did not think it so then.


B. Let us now come to the Military part.


A. I intended only the Story of their Injustice, Impudence and Hypocrisy;
therefore for the proceeding of the War, I refer you to the History thereof
written at large in English. I shall only make use of such a thread as is
necessary for the filling up of such knavery and folly also, as I shall observe
in their several Actions.

From York the King went to Hull, where was his Magazine of Arms for the
Northern parts of England, to try if they would admit him. The Parliament had
made Sir John Hotham Governor of the Town, who caused the Gates to be shut,
and presenting himself upon the Walls, flatly denied him entrance; for which
the King caused him to be proclaimed Traitor; and sent a Message to the
Parliament to know if they owned the Action.


B. Upon what Grounds?


A. Their pretense was this, that neither this, nor any other Town in England
was otherwise the King's, than in trust for the People of England.


B. But what was that to the Parliament?


B. Yes, say they; for we are the Representatives of the People of England.


B. I cannot see the force of this Argument. We represent the People, ergo all
that the People has is ours. The Major of Hull did represent the King; is
therefore all that the King had in Hull the Major's? The People of England may
be represented with Limitations, as to deliver a Petition or the like: Does it
follow, that they who deliver the Petition have right to all the Towns in
England? When began this Parliament to be a Representative of England? Was it
not November 3. 1640.? Who was it the day before, that is November 2. that had
the Right to keep the King out of Hull, and possess it for themselves? for
there was then no Parliament. Whose was Hull then?


A. I think it was the King's, not only because it was called the King's Town
upon Hull; but because the King himself did then and ever represent the Person
of the People of England. If he did not, who then did, the Parliament having no
being?


B. They might perhaps say, the People had then no Representative.


A. Then there was no Commonwealth; and consequently all the Towns of England
being the Peoples, you and I, and any man else might have put in for his share.
You may see by this what weak People they were, that were carried into the
Rebellion by such reasoning as the Parliament used, and how impudent they were
that did put such fallacies upon them.


B. Surely they were such as were esteemed the wisest Men in England, being
upon that account chosen to be of the Parliament.


A. And were they also esteemed the wisest Men of England that chose them?


B. I cannot tell that: for I know it is usual with the Freeholders in the
Counties, and the Tradesmen in the Cities and Buroughs, to choose, as near as
they can, such as are most repugnant to the giving of Subsidies.


A. The King in the beginning of August, after he had summoned Hull, and tried
some of the Counties thereabout, what they would do for him, sets up his
Standard at Nottingham; but there came not in thither men enough to make an
Army sufficient to give battle to the Earl of Essex. From thence he went to
Shrewsbury, where he was quickly furnished; and appointing the Earl of Lindsey
to be General, he resolved to march toward London. The Earl of Essex was now
at Worcester with the Parliaments Army, making no offer to stop him in his
passage; but as soon as he was gone by, marched close after him.

The King therefore, to avoid being enclosed between the Army of the Earl of
Essex and the City of London, turned upon him, and gave him battle at Edgehill;
where though he got not an entire Victory, yet he had the better, if either had
the better, and had certainly the fruit of a Victory, which was to march on in
his intended way toward London; in which, the next morning he took Banbury
Castle, and from thence went to Oxford, and thence to Brainford, where he gave
a great defeat to three Regiments of the Parliaments Forces, and so returned to
Oxford.


B. Why did not the King go on from Brainford?


A. The Parliament upon the first notice of the King's marching from
Shrewsbury, caused all the Train'd-Bands, and the Auxiliaries of the City of
London, (which was so frighted as to shut up all their Shops) to be drawn
forth; so that there was a most complete and numerous Army ready for the Earl
of Essex that was crept into London just at the time to head it; and this was
it that made the King retire to Oxford. In the beginning of February after,
Prince Rupert took Cirencester from the Parliament with many Prisoners and many
Arms: for it was newly made a Magazine. And thus stood the business between the
King's and the Parliaments greatest Forces. The Parliament in the mean time
caused a Line of Communication to be made about London and the Suburbs, of
twelve miles in compass, and constituted a Committee for the Association, and
the putting into a posture of defense of the Counties of Essex, Cambridge,
Suffolk, and some others, and one of these Commissioners was Oliver Cromwell,
from which Employment he came to his following greatness.


B. What was done, during this time, in other parts of the Country?


A. In the West the Earl of Stamford had the Employment of putting in execution
the Ordinance of Parliament for the Militia; and Sir Ralph Hopton for the King
executed the Commission of Array. Between these two was fought a Battle at
Liscard in Cornwall, wherein Sir Ralph Hopton had the Victory, and presently
took a Town called Saltash with many Arms, and much Ordnance, and many
Prisoners. Sir William Waller in the mean time seized Winchester and Chichester
for the Parliament.

In the North, for the Commission of Array my Lord of New Castle, and for the
Militia of the Parliament was my Lord Fairfax. My Lord of New Castle took from
the Parliament Tadcaster, in which were a great part of the Parliaments Forces
for that Country, and had made himself in a manner Master of all the North.
About this time, that is to say, in February, the Queen landed at Barlington,
and was conducted by my Lord of New Castle, and the Marquess of Montrosse, to
York, and not long after to the King. Diverse other little advantages, besides
these, the King's Party had of the Parliaments in the North.

There happened also between the Militia of the Parliament, and the Commission
of Array in Staffordshire, under my Lord Brook for the Parliament, and my Lord
of Northampton for the King, great contention, wherein both these Commanders
were slain; for my Lord Brook besieging Litchfield-Close, was killed with a
Shot; notwithstanding which they gave not over the Siege till they were Masters
of the Close; but presently after my Lord of Northampton besieged it again for
the King; which to relieve Sir William Brereton and Sir John Gell, advanced
toward Litchfield, and were met at Hopton Heath by the Earl of Northampton,
and routed; the Earl himself was slain; but his Forces (...) Victory, returned
to the Siege again, and shortly after seconded by Prince Rupert, who was then
abroad in that Country, carried the Place. These were the chief Actions of
this year 1642. wherein the King's Party had not much the worse.


B. But the Parliament had now a better Army; in so much, that if the Earl of
Essex had immediately followed the King to Oxford, (not yet well fortified) he
might, in all likelihood, have taken it: for he could not want either Men, or
Ammunition, whereof the City of London (which was wholly at the Parliaments
Devotion) had store enough.


A. I cannot judge of that; but this is manifest, considering the estate the
King was in at his first marching from York, when he had neither Money, nor
Men, nor Arms enough to put them in hope of Victory; that this year (take it
all together) was very prosperous.


B. But what great folly or wickedness do you observe in the Parliaments
Actions for this first year?


A. All that can be said against them in that Point, will be excused with the
pretext of War, and come under one name of Rebellion; saving, that when they
summoned any Town, it was always in the name of King and Parliament, the King
being in the contrary Army, and many times beating them from the Siege. I do
not see how the right of War can justify such Impudence as that. But they
pretended that the King was always virtually in the two Houses of Parliament,
making a distinction between his Person Natural and Politic, which made the
Impudence the greater, besides the folly of it: for this was but an University
quibble, such as Boys make use of in maintaining (in the Schools) such Tenants,
as they cannot otherwise defend.

In the end of this year they solicited also the Scots to enter England with an
Army, to suppress the Power of the Earl of New Castle in the North: which was a
plain Confession, that the Parliaments Forces were at this time inferior to the
King's; and most men thought, that if the Earl of New Castle had then marched
Southward, and joined his Forces with the King's, that most of the Members of
Parliament would have fled out of England.

In the beginning of 1643. the Parliament seeing the Earl of New Castle's Power
in the North grown so formidable, sent to the Scots to hire them to an Invasion
of England, and (to complement them in the mean time) made a Covenant amongst
themselves, such as the Scots had before taken against Episcopacy, and
demolished Crosses and Church windows (such as had in them any Images of
Saints) throughout all England. Also in the middle of the year they made a
solemn League with the Nation, which was called the Solemn League and Covenant.


B. Are not the Scots as properly to be called Foreigners as the Irish? Seeing
then they persecuted the Earl of Strafford even to death, for advising the King
to make use of Irish Forces against the Parliament, with what face could they
call in a Scoth Army against the King?


A. The King's Party might easily here have discerned their Design to make
themselves absolute Masters of the Kingdom, and to dethrone the King. Another
great Impudence, or rather a bestial incivility it was of theirs, that they
voted the Queen a Traitor, for helping the King with some Ammunition and
English Forces from Holland.


B. Was it possible that all this could be done, and men not see that Papers
and Declarations must be useless; and that nothing could satisfy them but the
deposing of the King, and setting up of themselves in his place?


A. Yes; very possible. For who was there of them, though knowing that the King
had the Sovereign Power, that knew the Essential Rights of Sovereignty? They
dreamt of a mixed Power of the King and the two Houses. That it was a divided
Power, in which there could be no peace, was above their understanding.
Therefore they were always urging the King to Declarations and Treaties, (for
fear of subjecting themselves to the King in an absolute obedience) which
increased the hope and courage of the Rebels, but did the King little good: for
the People either understand not, or will not trouble themselves with
Controversies in writing, but rather by his Compliance and Messages go away
with an opinion, that the Parliament was likely to have the Victory in the War.
Besides, seeing the Penners and Contrivers of these Papers were formerly
Members of the Parliament, and of another mind, and now revolted from the
Parliament, because they could not bear that sway in the House, which they
expected, men were apt to think they believed not what they writ.

As for Military Actions (to begin at the Head Quarters) Prince Rupert took
Brimingiam, a Garrison of the Parliaments. In July after the King's Forces had
a great Victory over the Parliaments near Devizes on Roundway-down, where they
took 2000 Prisoners, four Brass Pieces of Ordnance, 28 Colors, and all their
Baggage; and shortly after Bristol was surrendered to Prince Rupert for the
King: and the King himself marching into the West, took from the Parliament
many other considerable places.

But this good fortune was not a little allayed by his besieging of Gloucester,
which after it was reduced to the last gasp, was relieved by the Earl of Essex,
whose Army was before greatly wasted, but now suddenly recruited with the
Train'd-Bands and Apprentices of London.


B. It seems, not only by this, but also by many Examples in History, that
there can hardly arise a long or dangerous Rebellion, that has not some such
overgrown City, with an Army or two in its belly to foment it.


A. Nay more; those great Capital Cities, when Rebellion is upon pretense of
Grievances, must needs be of the Rebel-party, because the Grievances are but
Taxes, to which Citizens, that is, Merchants, whose profession is their private
gain, are naturally mortal Enemies; their only glory being to grow excessively
rich by the wisdom of buying and selling.


B. But they are said to be of all Callings the most beneficial to the
Commonwealth, by setting the poorer sort of People on work.


A. That is to say, by making poor People sell their labor to them, at their
own prizes; so that poor People, for the most part, might get a better Living
by working in Bridewel, than by spinning, weaving, and other such labor, as
they can do; saving that by working slightly they may help themselves a little,
to the disgrace of our Manufacture. And as most commonly they are the first
Encouragers of Rebellion, presuming of their strength; so also are they, for
the most part, the first to repent, deceived by them that command their
strength.

But to return to the War; though the King withdrew from Gloucester, yet it was
not to fly from, but to fight with the Earl of Essex, which presently after he
did at Newbury, where the Battle was bloody, and the King had not the worst,
unless Cirencester be put into the Scale, which the Earl of Essex had in his
way a few days before surprised.

But in the North and the West the King had much the better of the Parliament,
for in the North, at the very beginning of the year March 29 th the Earls of
New Castle and Cumberland defeated the Lord Fairfax (who commanded in those
parts for the Parliament) at Bramham-Moore, which made the Parliament to hasten
the assistance of the Scots.

In June following, the Earl of New Castle routed Sir Thomas Fairfax (Son to
the Lord Fairfax) upon Adderton-Heath, and in pursuit of them to Bradford, took
and killed 2000 Men, and the next day took the Town and 2000 Prisoners more,
(Sir Thomas himself hardly escaping) with all their Arms and Ammunition. And
besides this, made the Lord Fairfax quit Halifax and Beverly. Lastly, Prince
Rupert relieved Newark, besieged by Sir John Meldrun, for the Parliament, with
7000 Men, whereof 1000 were slain; the rest upon Articles departed, leaving
behind them their Arms, Bag and Baggage.

To balance in part this success, the Earl of Manchester, whose
Lieutenant General was Oliver Cromwell, got a Victory over the Royalists near
Horncastle, of whom he slew 400, took 800 Prisoners, and 1000 Arms, and
presently after took and plundered the City of Lincoln.

In the West May 16 th, Sir Ralph Hopton at Stratton in Devonshire, had a
Victory over the Parliamentarians, wherein he took 1700 Prisoners, 13 Brass
Pieces of Ordnance, and all their Ammunition, which was 70 Barrels of Powder,
and their Magazine of their other Provisions in the Town.

Again at Landsdown, between Sir Ralph Hopton and the Parliamentarians, under
Sir William Waller, was fought a fierce Battle, wherein the Victory was not
very clear on either side; saving that the Parliamentarians might seem to have
the better, because presently after Sir William Waller followed Sir Ralph
Hopton to Devizes in Wiltshire, though to his Cost; for there he was
overthrown, as I have already told you.

After this the King in Person marched into the West, and took Exeter,
Dorcester, Barnstable, and diverse other places, and had he not at his return
besieged Gloucester, and thereby given the Parliament time for new Levies, 'twas
thought by many he might have routed the House of Commons. But the end of this
year was more favorable to the Parliament; for in January the Scots entered
England, and March the first crossed the Tyne, and whilst the Earl of
New Castle was marching to them, Sir Thomas Fairfax gathered together a
considerable Party in Yorkshire, and the Earl of Manchester from Lyn advanced
toward York; so that the Earl of New Castle having two Armies of the Rebels
behind him, and another before him, was forced to retreat to York, which those
three Armies joining presently besieged; and these are all the considerable
Military Actions of the Year 1643.

In the same Year the Parliament caused to be made a new Great Seal. The Lord
Keeper had carried the former Seal to Oxford. Hereupon the King sent a
Messenger to the Judges at Westminster, to forbid them to make use of it. This
Messenger was taken, and condemned at a Council of War, and hanged for a Spy.


B. Is that the Law of War?


A. I know not: but it seems, when a Soldier comes into the Enemies Quarters
without address, or notice given to the Chief Commander, that it is presumed he
comes as a Spy. The same Year, when certain Gentlemen at London received a
Commission of Array from the King, to Levy Men for his Service in that City,
being discovered, they were condemned, and some of them executed. This Case is
not much unlike the former.


B. Was not the making of a new Great Seal a sufficient proof that the War was
raised, not to remove evil Counselors from the King, but to remove the King
himself from the Government? What hope then could there be had in Messages and
Treaties?


A. The Entrance of the Scots was a thing unexpected to the King, who was made
to believe, by continual Letters from his Commissioner in Scotland, Duke
Hamilton, that the Scotch never intended any Invasion. The Duke being then at
Oxford, the King (assured that the Scotch were now entered) sent him Prisoner to
Pendennis Castle in Cornwall.

In the beginning of the Year 1644. the Earl of New Castle being (as I told
you) besieged by the joint Forces of the Scots, the Earl of Manchester, and Sir
Thomas Fairfax, the King sent Prince Rupert to relieve the Town, and as soon as
he could to give the Enemy battle. Prince Rupert passing through Lancashire,
and by the way having stormed that seditious Town of Bolton, and taken in
Stockford and Leverpool, came to York, July the first, and relieved it; the
Enemy being risen thence to a place called Marston-Moor, about four Miles off;
and there was fought that unfortunate Battle, which lost the King in a manner
all the North. Prince Rupert returned by the way he came, and the Earl of
New Castle to York, and thence with some of his Officers over the Sea to
Hamburgh.

The Honor of this Victory was attributed chiefly to Oliver Cromwell (the Earl
of Manchester Lieutenant General.) The Parliamentarians returned from the Field
to the Siege of York, which not long after, upon honorable Articles, was
surrendered; not that they were favored, but because the Parliament employed
not much time, nor many Men in Sieges.


B. This was a great and sudden abatement of the King's prosperity.


A. It wat so: but amends was made him for it within five or six weeks after.
For Sir William Waller (after the loss of his Army at Roundway-down) had
another raised for him by the City of London; who for the payment thereof,
imposed a weekly Tax of the value of one meals meat upon every Citizen. This
Army, with that of the Earl of Essex, intended to besiege Oxford; which the
King understanding, sent the Queen into the West, and marched himself toward
Worcester. This made them to divide again, and the Earl to go into the West,
and Waller to pursue the King. By this means (as it fell out) both their Armies
were defeated; for the King turned upon Waller, routed him at Copredy-Bridge,
took his Train of Artillery and many Officers; and then presently followed the
Earl of Essex into Cornwall, where he had him at such advantage, that the Earl
himself was fain to escape in a small Boat to Plymouth; his Horse brake through
the King's Quarters by night; but the Infantry were all forced to lay down
their Arms, and upon condition never more to bear Arms against the King, were
permitted to depart.

In October following was fought a second and sharp Battle at Newbury: for this
Infantry, making no Conscience of the Conditions made with the King, being now
come toward London, as far as Basingstoke, had Arms put again into their
hands; to whom some of the Train'd-Bands being added, the Earl of Essex had
suddenly so great an Army, that he attempted the King again at Newbury. And
certainly had the better of the day, but the night parting them, had not a
complete Victory. And it was observed here, that no part of the Earl's Army
fought so keenly, as they who had laid down their Arms in Cornwall. These were
the most important Fights in the Year 1644. and the King was yet (as both
himself and others thought) in as good condition as the Parliament, which
despaired of Victory by the Commanders they then used.

Therefore they voted a new modeling of the Army, suspecting the Earl of Essex,
though I think wrongfully, to be too much a Royalist; for not having done so
much as they looked for in this second Battle at Newbury. The Earls of Essex
and Manchester perceiving what they went about, voluntarily laid down their
Commissions; and the House of Commons made an Ordinance, That no Member of
either House should enjoy any Office, or Command Military or Civil; with which
oblique blow they shook off those that had hitherto served them too well: and
yet out of this Ordinance they excepted Oliver Cromwell, in whose Conduct and
Valor they had very great confidence, (which they would not have done, if they
had known him as well then as they did afterward) and made him
Lieutenant General to Sir Thomas Fairfax, their new made General. In the
Commission to the Earl of Essex there was a Clause for preservation of his
Majesty's Person, which in this new Commission was left out; though the
Parliament (as well as the General) were as yet Presbyterian.


B. It seems the Presbyterians also (in order to their ends) would fain have
had the King murdered.


A. For my part I doubt it not. For a Rightful King living, an usurping Power
can never be sufficiently secured.

In this same Year the Parliament put to death Sir John Hotham and his Son, for
tampering with the Earl of New Castle about the Rendition of Hull; and Sir
Alexander Carew, for endeavoring to deliver up Plymouth, where he was
Governor for the Parliament; and the Archbishop of Canterbury for nothing,
but to please the Scots: For the general Article of going about to subvert the
fundamental Laws of the Land, was no Accusation, but only foul words. They then
also voted down the Book of Common Prayer, and ordered the use of a Directory,
which had been newly composed by an Assembly of Presbyterian Ministers. They
were also then, with much ado, prevailed with for a Treaty with the King at
Vxbridge, where they remitted nothing of their former Demands. The King had
also at this time a Parliament at Oxford, consisting of such discontented
Members as had left the Houses at Westminster, but few of them had changed
their old Principles, and therefore that Parliament was not much worth. Nay
rather, because they endeavored nothing but Messages and Treaties, that is to
say, defeating of the Soldiers hope of benefit by the War, they were thought by
most men to do the King more hurt than good.

The Year 1645. was to the King very unfortunate; for by the loss of one great
Battle he lost all he had formerly gotten, and at length his life.

The new modeled Army, after Consultation whether they should lay Siege to
Oxford, or march Westward to the relief of Taunton, (then besieged by the Lord
Goring, and defended by Blake, famous afterward for his Actions at Sea)
resolved for Taunton, leaving Cromwell to attend the motions of the King, though
not strong enough to hinder him. The King, upon this advantage, drew his Forces
and Artillery out of Oxford. This made the Parliament to call back their
General Fairfax, and order him to besiege Oxford. The King, in the mean time,
relieved Chester, which was besieged by Sir William Brereton, and coming back
took Leicester by force; a Place of great Importance, and well provided of
Artillery and Provision.

Upon this Success it was generally thought, that the King's Party was the
stronger. The King himself thought so, and the Parliament in a manner confessed
the same, by commanding Fairfax to rise from the Siege, and endeavor to give
the King battle: for the Successes of the King, and the Divisions and
Treacheries growing now amongst themselves, had driven them to rely upon the
fortune of one day; in which at Naseby the Kings Army was utterly overthrown,
and no hope left him to raise another. Therefore, after the Battle, he went up
and down, doing the Parliament here and there some shrewd turns, but never much
increasing his number.

Fairfax, in the mean time, first recovered Leicester, and then marching into
the West subdued it all, except only a few Places; forcing, with much ado, my
Lord Hopton (upon Honorable Conditions) to disband his Army, and with the
Prince of Wales to pass over to Scilly, whence, not long after, they went to
Paris.

In April 1646. General Fairfax began to march back to Oxford. In the mean time
Rainsborough, who besieged Woodstock, had it surrendered. The King therefore,
who was now also returned to Oxford, from whence Woodstock is but six Miles,
not doubting, but that he should there by Fairfax be besieged, and having no
Army to relieve him, resolved to get away disguised to the Scotch Army about
Newark; and thither he came the fourth of May; and the Scotch Army being upon
remove homewards, carried him with them to New Castle, whither he came May 13
th.


B. Why did the King trust himself with the Scots? They were the first that
rebelled. They were Presbyterians, i. e. cruel; besides they were indigent, and
consequently might be suspected, would sell him to his Enemies for Money. And
lastly, they were too weak to defend him, or keep him in their Country.


A. What could he have done better? for he had in the Winter before sent to the
Parliament to get a Pass for the Duke of Richmond and others, to bring them
Propositions of Peace: It was denied. He sent again; it was denied again. Then
he desired he might come to them in Person: This also was denied. He sent again
and again to the same purpose; but in stead of granting it, they made an
Ordinance, That the Commanders of the Militia of London, in case the King
should attempt to come within the Line of Communication, should raise what
force they thought fit to suppress Tumults, to apprehend such as came with him,
and to secure ( i. e. to imprison) his Person from danger. If the King had
adventured to come, and had been imprisoned; What could the Parliament have
done with him? They had dethroned him by their Votes; and therefore could have
no security, whilst he lived, though in prison. It may be they would not have
put him to death by a High Court of Justice publicly, but secretly some other
way.


B. He should have attempted to get beyond Sea.


A. That had been from Oxford very difficult. Besides it was generally
believed, that the Scotch Army had promised him, that not only his Majesty, but
also his Friends that should come with him, should be in their Army safe; not
only for their Persons, but also for their Honors and Consciences. It Is a
pretty trick, when the Army, and the particular Soldiers of the Army are
different things, to make the Soldiers promise what the Army means not to
perform.

July the 11 th the Parliament sent their Propositions to the King at
New Castle; which Propositions they pretended to be the only way to a settled
and well grounded Peace. They were brought by the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of
Suffolk, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Hyppesly, Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Robinson;
whom the King asked if they had power to Treat? and when they said no, why they
might not as well have been sent by a Trumpeter? The Propositions were the same
dethroning ones, which they used to send, and therefore the King would not
assent to them. Nor did the Scots swallow them at first, but made some
exceptions against them; only, it seems, to make the Parliament perceive, they
meant not to put the King into their hands gratis. And so at last the bargain
was made between them; and upon the payment of 200000 l. the King was put into
the hands of the Commissioners, which the English Parliament sent down to
receive him.


B. What a vile Complexion has this Action compounded of feigned Religion and
very Covetousness, Cowardice, Perjury and Treachery?


A. Now the War, that seemed to justify many unseemly things, is ended; you
will see almost nothing else in these Rebels, but baseness and falseness,
besides their folly.

By this time the Parliament had taken in all the rest of the Kings Garrisons,
whereof the last was Pendennis Castle, whither Duke Hamilton had been sent
Prisoner by the King.


B. What was done during this time in Ireland and Scotland?


A. In Ireland there had been a Peace made by order from his Majesty for a
time, which by Divisions amongst the Irish was ill kept; the Popish Party (the
Pope's Nuntio being then there) took this to be the time for delivering
themselves from their subjection to the English. Besides the time of the Peace
was now expired.


B. How were they subject to the English more than the English to the Irish?
They were subject to the King of England; but so also were the English to the
King of Ireland.


A. This Distinction is somewhat too subtle for common Understandings. In
Scotland the Marquess of Montrosse for the King, with a very few Men, and
miraculous Victories, had overrun all Scotland, where many of his Forces (out
of too much security) were permitted to be absent for a while; of which the
Enemy having Intelligence, suddenly came upon them, and forced them to fly back
into the Highlands to recruit; where he began to recover strength, when he was
commanded by the King (then in the hands of the Scots at New Castle) to
disband; and he departed from Scotland by Sea.

In the end of the same year 1646. the Parliament caused the Kings Great Seal
to be broken; also the King was brought to Holmeby, and there kept by the
Parliaments Commissioners; and here was an end of that War, as to England and
Scotland, but not to Ireland. About this time also died the Earl of Essex, whom
the Parliament had discarded.


B. Now that there was peace in England, and the King in prison, in whom was
the Sovereign Power?


A. The Right was certainly in the King, but the Exercise was yet in no body;
but contended for, as in a Game at Cards, without fighting all the years 1647.
and 1648. between the Parliament and Oliver Cromwell, Lieutenant General to Sir
Thomas Fairfax.

You must know, that when King Henry the 8 th abolished the Popes Authority
here, and took upon him to be the Head of the Church, the Bishops, as they
could not resist him, so neither were they discontented with it. For whereas
before, the Pope allowed not the Bishops to claim Jurisdiction in their
Diocesses Jure Divino, that is of Right immediately from God, but by the Gift
and Authority of the Pope, now that the Pope was outed, they made no doubt but
the Divine Right was in themselves. After this the City of Geneva, and diverse
other places beyond Sea, having revolted from the Papacy, set up Presbyteries
for the Government of their several Churches; and diverse English Scholars that
went beyond Sea, during the persecution in the time of Queen Mary, were much
taken with this Government, and at their return, in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, and ever since have endeavored, to the great trouble of the Church
and Nation, to set up that Government here, wherein they might domineer, and
applaud their own Wit and Learning: and these took upon them, not only a Divine
Right, but also a Divine Inspiration: and having been connived at and
countenanced sometimes in their frequent preaching, they introduced many
strange and many pernicious Doctrines, out-doing the Reformation, (as they
pretended, both of Luther and Calvin) receding from the former Divinity or
Church-Philosophy, (for Religion is another thing) as much as Luther and Calvin
had receded from the Pope, and distracted their Auditors into a great number of
Sects, as Brownists, Anabaptists, Independents, Fifth-monarchy-men, Quakers,
and diverse others, all commonly called by the name of Fanatics: in so much as
there was no so dangerous an Enemy to the Presbyterians as this brood of their
own hatching.

These were Cromwell's best Cards, whereof he had a very great number in the
Army, and some in the House, whereof he himself was thought one, though he were
nothing certain, but applying himself always to the Faction that was strongest,
was of a color like it.

There were in the Army a great number (if not the greatest part) that aimed
only at rapine, and sharing the Lands and Goods of their Enemies; and these
also, upon the opinion they had of Cromwell's Valor and Conduct, thought they
could not any way better arrive at their ends, than by adhering to him. Lastly,
in the Parliament it self, though not the Major part, yet a considerable number
were Fanatics, enough to put in doubts, and cause delay in the resolutions of
the House, and sometimes also by advantage of a thin House, to carry a Vote in
favor of Cromwell, as they did upon the 26 th of July. For whereas on the
fourth of May precedent the Parliament had voted that the Militia of London
should be in the hands of a Committee of Citizens, whereof the Lord Major for
the time being should be one; shortly after, the Independents chancing to be
the major, made an Ordinance, by which it was put into hands more favorable to
the Army.

The best Cards the Parliament had were the City of London, and the Person of
the King. The General, Sir Tho. Fairfax, was right Presbyterian, but in the
hands of the Army, and the Army in the hands of Cromwell, but which Party should
prevail depended on the playing of the Game. Cromwell protested still obedience
and fidelity to the Parliament, but meaning nothing less, bethought him, and
resolved on a way to excuse himself of all that he should do to the contrary
upon the Army. Therefore he and his Son-in-law Commissary-General Ireton, as
good at contriving as himself, and at speaking and writing better, contrive how
to mutiny the Army against the Parliament. To this end they spread a whisper
through the Army, that the Parliament, now they had the King, intended to
disband them, to cheat them of their Arrears, and to send them into Ireland to
be destroyed by the Irish. The Army being herewith enraged, were taught by
Ireton to erect a Council amongst themselves, of two Soldiers out of every
Troop, and every Company, to Consult for the good of the Army, and to assist at
the Council of War, and to advise for the Peace and safety of the Kingdom.
These were called Adjutators, so that whatsoever Cromwell would have to be done,
he needed nothing to make them do it; but secretly to put it into the head of
these Adjutators. The effect of the first Consultation was, to take the King
from Holmeby, and to bring him to the Army.

The General hereupon, by Letter to the Parliament, excuses himself, and
Cromwell, and the Body of the Army, as ignorant of the Fact; and that the King
came away willingly with those Soldiers that brought him: assuring them withal,
that the whole Army intended nothing but Peace, nor opposed Presbytery, nor
affected Independency, nor did hold any licentious freedom in Religion.


B. It Is strange that Sir Thomas Fairfax could be so abused by Cromwell, as to
believe this which he himself here writes.


A. I cannot believe that Cornet Joyce could go out of the Army with 1000
Soldiers to fetch the King, and neither the General, nor the Lieutenant
General, nor the Body of the Army take notice of it. And that the King went
willingly appears to be false by a Message sent on purpose from his Majesty to
the Parliament.


B. Here is Perfidie upon Perfidie: first, the Perfidie of the Parliament
against the King, and then the Perfidie of the Army against the Parliament.


A. This was the first trick Cromwell played, whereby he thought himself to have
gotten so great an advantage, that he said openly, That he had the Parliament
in his Pocket, (as indeed he had) and the City too: for upon the news of it
they were, both the one and the other, in very great disorder, and the more,
because there came with it a Rumor, that the Army was marching up to London.

The King in the mean time, till his Residence was settled at Hampton Court, was
carried from place to place, not without some ostentation; but with much more
liberty, and with more respect shown him by far, than when he was in the Hands
of the Parliaments Commissioners; for his own Chaplains were allowed him, and
his Children, and some Friends permitted to see him. Besides that, he was much
complemented by Cromwell, who promised him, in a serious and seeming passionate
manner, to restore him to his Right against the Parliament.


B. How was he sure he could do that?


A. He was not sure; but he was resolved to march up to the City and Parliament
to set up the King again, (and be the second Man) unless in the attempt he
found better hope, than yet he had, to make himself the first Man by
dispossessing the King.


B. What assistance against the Parliament and the City could Cromwell expect
from the King.


A. By declaring directly for him, he might have had all the King's Party,
which were many more now since his misfortune, than ever they were before: For
in the Parliament it self there were many that had discovered the Hypocrisy
and private Aims of their Fellows. Many were converted to their Duty by their
own Natural Reason; and their Compassion for the King's Sufferings had begot
generally an Indignation against the Parliament; so that if they had been by
the Protection of the present Army brought together, and embodied, Cromwell
might have done what he had pleased in the first place for the King, and in the
second for himself: but it seems he meant first to try what he could do without
the King, and if that proved enough to rid his hands of him.


B. What did the Parliament and City do to oppose the Army?


A. First, the Parliament sent to the General to re-deliver the King to their
Commissioners. In stead of an Answer to this, the Army sent Articles to the
Parliament, and with them a charge against eleven of their Members, all of them
active Presbyterians: of which Articles these are some. 1. That the House may
be purged of those, who by the self-denying Ordinance ought not to be there. 2.
That such as abused and endangered the Kingdom might be disabled to do the like
hereafter. 3. That a day might be appointed to determine this Parliament. 4.
That they would make an Account to the Kingdom of the vast Sums of Money they
had received. 5. That the eleven Members might presently be suspended sitting
in the House. These were the Articles that put them to their Trumps, and they
answered none of them, but that of the suspension of the eleven Members, which
they said they could not do by Law, till the Particulars of the Charge were
produced: but this was soon answered with their own proceeding against the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Strafford.

The Parliament being thus somewhat awed, and the King made somewhat confident;
he undertakes the City, requiring the Parliament to put the Militia of London
into other hands.


B. What other hands? I do not well understand you.


A. I told you that the Militia of London was, on the fourth of May, put into
the hands of the Lord-Major and other Citizens, and soon after put into the
hands of other men more favorable to the Army; and now I am to tell you, that
on July the 26 th the violence of certain Apprentices and disbanded Soldiers
forced the Parliament to re-settle it as it was in the Citizens; and hereupon
the two Speakers and diverse of the Members ran away to the Army where they were
invited, and contented to sit and vote in the Council of War, in nature of a
Parliament; and out of these Citizens hands they would have the Militia taken
away, and put again into those hands, out of which it was taken the 26 th of
July.


B. What said the City to this?


A. The Londoners manned their Works, viz. the Line of Communication, raised an
Army of valiant Men within the Line, chose good Officers, all being desirous to
go out and fight, whenever the City should give them Order, and in that
posture stood expecting the Enemy.

The Soldiers in the mean time enter into an Engagement to live and die with
Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the Parliament, and the Army.


B. That Is very fine. They imitate that which the Parliament did, when they
first took up Arms against the King, stiling themselves the King and
Parliament, maintaining that the King was always virtually in his Parliament:
So the Army now making War against the Parliament, called themselves the
Parliament and the Army: but they might with more reason say, that the
Parliament (since it was in Cromwell's Pocket) was virtually in the Army.


A. Withal they send out a Declaration of the Grounds of their March toward
London; wherein they take upon them to be Judges of the Parliament, and of who
are fit to be trusted with the business of the Kingdom, giving them the name,
not of the Parliament, but of the Gentlemen at Westminster. For since the
violence they were under July the 26 th, the Army denied them to be a Lawful
Parliament. At the same time they sent a Letter to the Major and Aldermen of
London, reproaching them with those late Tumults, telling them they were
Enemies to the Peace, Treacherous to the Parliament, unable to defend either
the Parliament or themselves, and demanded to have the City delivered into
their hands, to which purpose they said they were now coming to them. The
General also sent out his Warrants to the Counties adjacent, summoning their
Trained Soldiers to join with them.


B. Were the Trained Soldiers part of the General's Army?


A. No, nor at all in pay, nor could be without an Order of Parliament. But
what might an Army do after it had mastered all the Laws of the Land? The Army
being come to Hounsloe-Heath, distant from London but ten Miles, the Court of
Aldermen was called to consider what to do. The Captains and Soldiers of the
City were willing and well provided to go forth and give them battle: but a
Treacherous Officer, that had charge of a Work on Southwerk side, had let in
within the Line a small Party of the Enemies, who marched as far as to the Gate
of London Bridge, and then the Court of Aldermen (their hearts failing them)
submitted on these conditions: To relinquish their Militia: To desert the
eleven Members: To deliver up the Forts and Line of Communication, together
with the Tower of London, and all Magazines and Arms therein to the Army: To
disband their Forces, and turn out all the Reformadoes, i. e. all Essex's old
Soldiers: To draw off their Guards from the Parliament; all which was done, and
the Army marched triumphantly through the principal Streets of the City.


B. It Is strange that the Major and Aldermen having such an Army, should so
quickly yield. Might they not have resisted the Party of the Enemy at the
Bridge with a Party of their own; and the rest of the Enemies with the rest of
their own?


A. I cannot judge of that: but to me it would have been strange, if they had
done otherwise: for I consider the most part of rich Subjects, that have made
themselves so by Craft and Trade, as Men that never look upon any thing but
their present profit, and who to every thing not lying in that way are in a
manner blind, being amazed at the very thought of plundering. If they had
understood what virtue there is to preserve their Wealth in obedience to their
Lawful Sovereign, they would never have sided with the Parliament, and so we
had had no need of arming. The Major and Aldermen therefore being assured by
this submission to save their Goods, and not sure of the same by resisting,
seem to me to have taken the wisest course; nor was the Parliament less tame
than the City; for presently, August the sixth, the General brought the
fugitive Speakers and Members to the House with a strong Guard of Soldiers, and
replaced the Speakers in their Chairs; and for this they gave the General
thanks, not only there in the House, but appointed also a day for a Holy
Thanksgiving, and not long after made him Generalissimo of all the Forces of
England, and Constable of the Tower: but in effect all this was the advancement
of Cromwell; for he was the usufructuary, though the property were in Sir Thomas
Fairfax. For the Independents immediately cast down the whole Line of
Communication, divide the Militia of London, Westminster and Southwark, which
were before united; displaced such Governors of Towns and Forts as were not
for their turn, though placed there by Ordinance of Parliament, in stead of
whom they put in Men of their own Party. They also made the Parliament to
declare null all that had passed in the Houses from July the 26 th to August
the sixth, and clapped in prison some of the Lords, and some of the most eminent
Citizens, whereof the Lord Major was one.


B. Cromwell had power enough now to restore the King: Why did he not?


A. His main end was to set himself in his place. The Restoring of the King was
but a Reserve against the Parliament, which being in his Pocket, he had no more
need of the King, who was now an Impediment to him. To keep him in the Army was
a trouble; To let him fall into the hands of the Presbyterians had been a stop
to his hopes; To murder him privately, (besides the horror of the Act) now
whilst he was no more than Lieutenant General, would have made him odious
without farthering his Design. There was nothing better for his purpose, than
to let him escape from Hampton Court (where he was too near the Parliament)
whither he pleased beyond Sea; for though Cromwell had a great Party in the
Parliament House, whilst they saw not his ambition to be their Master, yet they
would have been his Enemies, as soon as that had appeared. To make the King
attempt an escape, some of those that had him in custody, by Cromwell's
direction, told him that the Adjutators meant to murder him; and withal caused
a Rumor of the same to be generally spread, to the end it might that way also
come to the King's Ear, as it did.

The King therefore in a dark and rainy night (his Guards being retired, as it
was thought on purpose) left Hampton Court, and went to the Seaside about
Southampton, where a Vessel had been bespoken to transport him, but failed; so
that the King was forced to trust himself with Colonel Hammond, then Governor
of the Isle of Wight; expecting perhaps some kindness from him for Dr.
Hammond's sake, Brother to the Colonel, and his Majesty's much favored
Chaplain: but it proved otherwise; for the Colonel sent to his Masters of the
Parliament to receive their Orders concerning him. This going into the Isle of
Wight was not likely to be any part of Cromwell's Design, who neither knew
whither, nor which way he would go, nor had Hammond known any more than other
men, if the Ship had come to the appointed place in due time.


B. If the King had escaped into France, might not the French have assisted him
with Forces to recover his Kingdom, and so frustrated their Designs, both of
Cromwell, and all the King's other Enemies?


A. Yes much; just as they assisted his Son our present most Gracious
Sovereign, who two years before fled thither out of Cornwall.


B. It Is methinks no great Polity in Neighboring Princes to favor so often
as they do one another Rebels, especially when they rebel against Monarchy it
self. They should rather first make a League against Rebellion, and afterward
(if there be no remedy) fight one against another. Nor will that serve the turn
amongst Christian Sovereigns, till preaching be better looked to, whereby the
Interpretation of a Verse in the Hebrew, Greek or Latin Bible, is oftentimes
the cause of Civil War, and the Deposing and Assassinating of God's Anointed:
and yet converse with those Divinity Disputers as long as you will, you will
hardly find one in a hundred discreet enough to be employed in any great affair
either of War or Peace. It is not the Right of the Sovereign, though granted to
him by every man's express consent, that can enable him to do his Office; it is
the Obedience of the Subject that must do that. For what good is it to promise
Allegiance, and then by and by to cry out, (as some Ministers did in the
Pulpit) To your Tents, O Israel! Common People know nothing of Right or Wrong
by their own Meditation; they must therefore be taught the Grounds of their
Duty, and the Reasons why Calamities ever follow Disobedience to their Lawful
Sovereigns. But to the contrary our Rebels were publicly taught Rebellion in
the Pulpits; and that there was no sin, but the doing of what the Preachers
forbad, or the omission of what they advised. But now the King was the
Parliaments Prisoner, why did not the Presbyterians advance their own Interest
by restoring him?


A. The Parliament, in which there were more Presbyterians yet than
Independents, might have gotten what they would of the King, during his Life,
if they had not by an unconscionable and sottish Ambition obstructed the way to
their Ends. They sent him four Propositions to be signed and passed by him, as
Acts of Parliament, telling him when these were granted, they would send
Commissioners to treat with him of any other Articles.

The Propositions were these. First: That the Parliament should have the
Militia, and the Power of Levying Money to maintain it for 20 years, and after
that Term, the exercise thereof to return to the King, in case the Parliament
think the safety of the Kingdom concerned in it.


B, The first Article takes from the King the Militia, and consequently the
whole Sovereignty for ever.


A. The Second was: That the King should justify the Proceedings of the
Parliament against himself; and declare void all Oaths and Declarations made by
him against the Parliament.


B. This was to make him guilty of the War, and of all the Blood spilt therein.


A. The Third was: To take away all Titles of Honor conferred by the King,
since the Great Seal was carried to him in May 1642.

The Fourth was: That the Parliament should adjourn themselves when and to what
place, and for what time they pleased.

These Propositions the King refused to grant, as he had reason; but sent
others of his own, not much less advantageous to the Parliament, and desired a
Personal Treaty with the Parliament for the settling of the Peace of the
Kingdom; but the Parliament denying them to be sufficient for that purpose,
voted; That there should be no more Addresses made to him, nor Messages
received from him; but that they would settle the Kingdom without him. And this
they voted partly upon the Speeches and Menaces of the Army-Faction then
present in the House of Commons: whereof one advised these Three Points.

1. To secure the King in some Inland Castle with Guards. 2. To draw up
Articles of Impeachment against him. 3. To lay him by, and settle the Kingdom
without him.

Another said; That his denying of the four Bills was the denying Protection to
his Subjects; and that therefore they might deny him subjection: and added,
that till the Parliament forsook the Army, the Army would never forsake the
Parliament. This was threatening.

Last of all, Cromwell himself told them, It was now expected that the
Parliament should govern and defend the Kingdom, and not any longer let the
People expect their safety from a Man, whose Heart God had hardened; nor let
those that had so well defended the Parliament be left hereafter to the rage of
an irreconcilable Enemy, lest they seek their safety some other way. This again
was threatening; as also the laying his hand upon his Sword, when he spoke it.

And hereupon the Vote of Non-Addresses was made an Ordinance; which the House
would afterward have recalled, but was forced by Cromwell to keep their word.

The Scotch were displeased with it, partly because their Brethren the
Presbyterians had lost a great deal of their power in England, and partly also
because they had sold the King into their hands.

The King now published a passionate Complaint to his People of this hard
dealing with him, which made them pity him: but not yet rise in his behalf.


B. Was not this, think you, the true time for Cromwell to take possession?


A. By no means. There were yet many obstacles to be removed. He was not
General of the Army. The Army was still for a Parliament. The City of London
discontented about their Militia. The Scots expected with an Army to rescue the
King. His Adjutators were Leavelers, and against Monarchy, who though they had
helped him to bring under the Parliament, yet like Dogs that are easily taught
to fetch, and not easily taught to render, would not make him King. So that
Cromwell had these businesses following to overcome, before he could formally
make himself a Sovereign Prince.

1. To be Generalissimo. 2. To remove the King. 3. To suppress all
Insurrections here. 4. To oppose the Scots; and lastly, To dissolve the present
Parliament. Mighty businesses, which he could never promise himself to
overcome; therefore I cannot believe he then thought to be King, but only by
well serving the strongest Party, (which was always his main Polity) to
proceed as far as that and fortune would carry him.


B. The Parliament were certainly no less foolish than wicked in deserting thus
the King, before they had the Army at a better Command than they had.


A. In the beginning of 1648. the Parliament gave Commission to Philip Earl of
Pembroke (then made Chancellor of Oxford, together with some of the Doctors
there, as good Divines as he) to purge the University, by virtue whereof they
turned out all such as were not of their Faction, and all such as had approved
the use of the Common Prayer Book; as also diverse scandalous Ministers and
Scholars, (that is such as customarily and without need took the Name of God
into their Mouths, or used to speak wantonly, or use the company of lewd
Women:) And for this last I cannot but commend them.


B. So shall not I; for it is just such another piece of piety, as to turn men
out of an Hospital because they are lame. Where can a man probably learn
godliness, and how to correct his vices better than in the Universities erected
for that purpose?


A. It may be the Parliament thought otherwise: for I have often heard the
Complaints of Parents, that their Children were debauched there to drunkenness,
wantonness, gaming, and other vices consequent to these: nor is it a wonder
amongst so many Youths, if they did not corrupt one another in despite of their
Tutors, who oftentimes were little elder than themselves. And therefore* I
think the Parliament did not much reverence that Institution of Universities,
as to the bringing up of young men to virtue, though many of them learned there
to preach, and became thereby capable of preferment and maintenance; and some
others were sent thither by their Parents, to save themselves the trouble of
governing them at home, during that time wherein Children are least governable.
Nor do I think the Parliament cared more for the Clergy than other men did: but
certainly an University is an excellent Servant to the Clergy; and the Clergy,
if it be not carefully looked to, (by their Dissentions in Doctrines, and by
the advantage to publish their Dissentions) is an excellent means to divide a
Kingdom into Factions.


B. But seeing there is no place in this part of the World, where Philosophy,
and other humane Sciences are not highly valued; where can they be learned
better than in the Universities?


A. What other Sciences? Do not Divines comprehend all Civil and Moral
Philosophy within their Divinity? And as for Natural Philosophy; is it not
removed from Oxford and Cambridge to Gresham-Colledge in London, and to be
learned out of their Gazets? But we are gone from our subject.


B. No; we are indeed gone from the greater businesses of the Kingdom; to
which, if you please, let us return.


A. The first Insurrection, or rather Tumult, was that of the Apprentices, on
the ninth of April; but this was not upon the King's account, but arose from a
Customary Assembly of them for Recreation in Moorfields, whence some zealous
Officers of the Trained Soldiers would needs drive them away by force; but were
themselves routed with Stones; and had their Ensign taken away by the
Apprentices, which they carried about in the Streets, and frighted the
Lord-Major into his House, where they took a Gun called a Drake, and then they
set Guards at some of the Gates, and all the rest of the day childishly
swaggered up and down: but the next day the General himself marching into the
City quickly dispersed them. This was but a small business, but enough to let
them see that the Parliament was ill beloved of the People.

Next the Welsh took Arms against them. There were three Colonels in Wales,
Langhorne, Poyer and Powel, who had formerly done the Parliament good service,
but now were commanded to disband; which they refused to do; and the better to
strengthen themselves, declared for the King, and were about 8000.

About the same time, in Wales also, was another Insurrection headed by Sir
Nicholas Keymish, and another under Sir John Owen; so that now all Wales was in
Rebellion against the Parliament, and yet all these were overcome in a months
time by Cromwell and his Officers; but not without store of Bloodshed on both
sides.


B. I do not much pity the loss of those men that impute to the King that which
they do upon their own quarrel.


A. Presently after this, some of the People of Surrey sent a Petition to the
Parliament, for a personal Treaty between the King and Parliament; but their
Messengers were beaten home again by the Soldiers that quartered about
Westminster and the Mews. And then the Kentish Men having a like Petition to
deliver, and seeing how ill it was like to be received, threw it away, and took
up Arms. They had many gallant Officers, and for General the Earl of Norwich,
and increased daily by Apprentices and old disbanded Soldiers. In so much as
the Parliament was glad to restore to the City their Militia, and to keep
Guards upon the Thames side: and then Fairfax marched toward the Enemy.


B. And then the Londoners, I think, might easily and suddenly have mastered,
first the Parliament, and next Fairfax his 8000, and lastly Cromwell's Army; or
at least have given the Scots Army opportunity to march unfoughten to London.


A. It Is true: but the City was never good at venturing; nor were they or the
Scots principled to have a King over them, but under them. Fairfax marching
with his 8000 against the Royalists, routed a part of them at Maidstone;
another part were taking in of places in Kent farther off; and the Earl of
Norwich, with the rest, came to Black Heath, and thence sent to the City to get
passage through it, to join with those which were risen in Essex under Sir
Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle; which being denied, the greatest part of
his Kentish Men deserted him. With the rest, not above 500, he crossed the
Thames into the isle of Dogs, and so to Bow, and thence to Colchester. Fairfax
having notice of this, crossed the Thames at Gravesend; and overtaking them,
besieged them in Colchester. The Town had no defense, but a Breast-work, and
yet held out upon hope of the Scotch Army to relieve them, the space of two
months. Upon the news of the defeat of the Scots, they were forced to yield.
The Earl of Norwich was sent Prisoner to London. Sir Charles Lucas and Sir
George Lisle, two Loyal and Gallant Persons, were shot to death. There was also
another little Insurrection headed by the Earl of Holland, about Kingston; but
quickly suppressed, and he himself taken Prisoner.


B. How came the Scots to be so soon dispatched?


A. Merely, as it is said, for want of Conduct. Their Army was led by Duke
Hamilton, who was then set at liberty, when Pendennis Castle, where he was
Prisoner, was taken by the Parliamentarians. He entered England with Horse and
Foot 15000, to which came above 3000 English Royalists. Against these Cromwell
marched out of Wales with Horse and Foot 11000, and near to Preston in
Lancashire, in less than two hours defeated them: and the Cause of it is said
to be, that the Scotch Army was so ordered, as they could not all come to the
Fight, nor relieve their Fellows. After the defeat, they had no way to fly, but
farther into England; so that in the pursuit they were almost all taken, and
lost all that an Army can lose; for the few that got home, did not all bring
home their Swords. Duke Hamilton was taken, and not long after sent to London:
But Cromwell marched on to Edinburgh, and there by the help of the Faction,
which was contrary to Hamilton's, he made sure not to be hindered in his
designs; the first whereof was to take away the King's Life by the Hand of the
Parliament.

Whilst these things passed in the North, the Parliament ( Cromwell being away)
came to it self, and recalling their Vote of Non-Addresses, sent to the King
new Propositions, somewhat, but not much easier than formerly; and upon the
King's Answer to them, they sent Commissioners to treat with him, at Newport in
the Isle of Wight, where they so long dodged with him about trifles, that
Cromwell was come to London, before they had done, to the King's destruction.
For the Army was now wholly at the devotion of Cromwell, who set the Adjutators
on work again to make a Remonstrance to the House of Commons, wherein they
require first; That the King be brought to Justice. 2. That the Prince and Duke
of York be summoned to appear at a day appointed, and proceeded with, according
as they should give satisfaction. 3. That the Parliament settle the Peace and
future Government, and set a reasonable period to their own sitting, and make
certain future Parliaments Annual, or Biennial. 4. That a competent number of
the King's Chief Instruments be executed. And this to be done, both by the
House of Commons, and by a general Agreement of the People testified by their
Subscriptions. Nor did they stay for an Answer, but presently set a Guard of
Soldiers at the Parliament-house-door, and other Soldiers in Westminster Hall,
suffering none to go into the House, but such as would serve their turns. All
others were frighted away, or made Prisoners, and some upon diverse quarrels
suspended. Above 90 of them, because they had refused to vote against the
Scots; and others, because they had voted against the Vote of Non-Addresses;
and the rest were an House for Cromwell. The Fanatics also in the City, being
countenanced by the Army, pack a new Common Council, whereof any forty was to
be above the Major; and their first work was to frame a Petition for Justice
against the King, which Tichborne the Major (involving the City in the
Regicide) delivered to the Parliament.

At the same time, with the like violence, they took the King from Newport in
the Isle of Wight, to Hurst Castle, till things were ready for his Trial. The
Parliament in the mean time, to avoid perjury, by an Ordinance declared void
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and presently after made another to
bring the King to his Trial.


B. This is a piece of Law that I understood not before, that when many Men
swear singly, they may, when they are assembled (if they please) absolve
themselves.


A. The Ordinance being drawn up was brought into the House, where after three
several Readings, it was voted; That the Lords and Commons of England,
assembled in Parliament, do declare; That by the fundamental Laws of the Realm,
it is Treason in the King of England to Levy War against the Parliament. And
this Vote was sent up to the Lords; and they denying their consent, the Commons
in anger made another Vote; That all Members of Committees should proceed and
act in any Ordinance, whether the Lords concurred or no; and that the People,
under God, are the original of all just Power; and that the House of Commons
have the Supreme Power of the Nation; and that whatsoever the House of Commons
enacteth is Law. All this passed nemine contradicente.


B. These Propositions fight, not only against a King of England; but against
all the Kings of the World. It were good they thought on it: but yet (I believe)
under God the original of all Laws was in the People.


A. But the People, for them and their Heirs, by consent and Oaths, have long
ago put the Supreme Power of the Nation into the hands of their Kings, for them
and their Heirs; and consequently into the hands of this King their known and
lawful Heir.


B. But does not the Parliament represent the People?


A. Yes to some purposes; as to put up Petitions to the King, when they have
leave, and are grieved; but not to make a Grievance of the King's Power.
Besides, the Parliament never represents the People, but when the King calls
them; nor is it to be imagined that he calls a Parliament to depose himself.
Put the Case every County and Borough should have given this Parliament for a
Benevolence, a Sum of Money; and that every County, meeting in their
County Court, or elsewhere, and every Borough in their Town Hall should have
chosen certain men to carry their several Sums respectively to the Parliament.
Had not these men represented the whole Nation?


B. Yes, no doubt.


A. Do you think the Parliament would have thought it reasonable to be called
to account by this Representative?


B. No sure; and yet I must confess the Case is the same.


A. This Ordinance contained first, a Summary of the Charge against the King,
in substance this; That not content with the Encroachments of his Predecessors
upon the freedom of the People, he had designed to set up a Tyrannical
Government, and to that end had raised and maintained in the Land a Civil War
against the Parliament, whereby the Country has been miserably wasted, the
public Treasure exhausted, thousands of people murdered, and infinite other
mischiefs committed.

Secondly, A Constitution passed of a High Court of Justice, that is, of a
certain number of Commissioners, of whom any 20 had Power to try the King, and
to proceed to Sentence according to the merit of the Cause, and see it speedily
executed. The Commissioners met on Saturday Jan. 20 th in Westminster Hall, and
the King was brought before them; where sitting in a Chair, he heard the Charge
read, but denied to plead to it either Guilty or Not Guilty, till he should
know by what Lawful Authority he was brought thither. The President told him;
That the Parliament affirmed their own Authority, and the King persevered in
his refusal to plead; though many words passed between him and the President,
yet this was the substance of it all.

On Monday January 22, the Court met again, and the Solicitor moved, that if
the King persisted in denying the Authority of the Court, the Charge might be
taken pro confesso: but the King still denied their Authority.

They met again January 23, and then the Solicitor moved the Court for
Judgment; whereupon the King was required to give his final Answer, which was
again a denial of their Authority.

Lastly, They met again January 27, where the King desired to be heard before
the Lords and Commons in the Painted Chamber, and promising after that to abide
the Judgment of the Court. The Commissioners retired for half an hour to
consider of it, and then returning, caused the King to be brought again to the
Bar, and told him, that what he proposed was but another denial of the Courts
Jurisdiction; and that if he had no more to say, they would proceed. Then the
King answering, that he had no more to say; the President began a long Speech
in Justification of the Parliaments Proceedings, producing the Examples of many
Kings killed, or deposed by wicked Parliaments Ancient and Modern, in England,
Scotland, and other parts of the World: All which he endeavored to justify
from this only Principle; That the People have the Supreme Power, and the
Parliament is the People. This Speech ended, the Sentence of death was read;
and the same upon Tuesday after January 30 executed at the Gate of his own
Palace of White Hall. He that can delight in reading how villainously he was
used by the Soldiers between the Sentence and Execution, may go to the
Chronicle it self; in which he shall see what Courage, Patience, Wisdom and
Goodness was in this Prince, whom, in their Charge, the Members of that wicked
Parliament styled Tyrant, Traitor and Murderer.

The King being dead, the same day they made an Act of Parliament, that whereas
several pretenses might be made to the Crown, etc. It is Enacted by this
present Parliament, and Authority of the same; That no person presume to
declare, proclaim or publish, or any way promote Charles Stuart Son of Charles
late King of England, commonly called Prince of Wales, or any other person to
be King of England or Ireland, etc.


B. Seeing the King was dead, and his Successor barred; by what declared
Authority was the Peace maintained?


A. They had in their anger against the Lords formerly declared, the Supreme
Power of the Nation to be in the House of Commons; and now on February 5 th
they vote the House of Lords to be useless and dangerous. And thus the Kingdom
is turned into a Democracie, or rather an Oligarchie: for presently they made
an Act; That none of those Members, who were secluded for opposing the Vote of
Non-Addresses, should ever be readmitted. And these were commonly called the
secluded Members, and the rest were by some styled a Parliament, and by others
the Rump.

I think you need not now have a Catalogue, either of the Vices, or of the
Crimes, or of the Follies of the greatest part of them that composed the Long
Parliament, than which greater cannot be in the World. What greater Vices than
Irreligion, Hypocrisy, Avarice and Cruelty; which have appeared so eminently
in the Actions of Presbyterian Members, and Presbyterian Ministers? What
greater Crimes than Blaspheming and Killing God's Anointed? which was done by
the hands of the Independents; but by the folly and first Treason of the
Presbyterians, who betrayed and sold him to his Murderers. Nor was it a little
folly in the Lords, not to see that by the taking away of the King's Power,
they lost withal their own Privileges; or to think themselves either for
number or judgment any way a considerable assistance to the House of Commons.
And for those men who had skill in the Laws, it was no great sign of
understanding, not to perceive that the Laws of the Land were made by the King,
to oblige his Subjects to Peace and Justice, and not to oblige himself that
made them. And lastly and generally, all men are fools which pull down any
thing which does them good, before they have set up something better in its
place. He that would set up Democracie with an Army, should have an Army to
maintain it; but these men did it, when those men had the Army, that were
resolved to pull it down. To these Follies I might add the folly of those fine
men, which out of their reading of Tully, Seneca, or other Antimonarchiques,
think themselves sufficient Politiques, and show their discontents, when they
are not called to the management of the State, and turn from one side to
another upon every neglect they fancy from the King, or his Enemies.


Behemoth, PART IV.
A. YOU have seen the Rump in possession (as they believed) of the Supreme
Power over the two Nations of England and Ireland, and the Army their Servant,
though Cromwell thought otherwise, serving them diligently for the advancement
of his own purposes. I am now therefore to show you their Proceedings.


B. Tell me first, how this kind of Government under the Rump or Relic of a
House of Commons is to be called?


A. It Is doubtless an Oligarchy; for the Supreme Authority must needs be in one
man, or in more. If in one, it is Monarchy, the Rump therefore was no Monarchy.
If the Authority were in more than one; it was in all, or in fewer than all.
When in all, it is Democracy; for every man may enter into the Assembly, which
makes the Sovereign Court; which they could not do here. It is therefore
manifest, that the Authority was in a few, and consequently the State was an
Oligarchy.


B. Is it not impossible for a People to be well governed, that are to obey
more Masters than one?


A. Both the Rump, and all other Sovereign Assemblies, if they have but one
Voice, though they be many Men, yet are they but one Person: for contrary
Commands cannot consist in one and the same Voice, which is the Voice of the
greatest part, and therefore they might govern well enough, if they had Honesty
and Wit enough.

The first Act of the Rump was the Exclusion of those Members of the House of
Commons, which had been formerly kept out by violence, for the procuring of an
Ordinance for the King's Trial: for these men had appeared against the
Ordinance of Non-Addresses, and therefore to be excluded, because they might
else be an Impediment to their future Designs.


B. Was it not rather, because in the Authority of few, they thought the fewer
the better, both in respect of their shares, and also of a nearer approach in
every one of them to the Dignity of a King?


A. Yes certainly, that was their principal end.


B. When these were put out; why did not the Counties and Buroughs choose
others in their places?


A. They could not do that without order from the House. After this they
constituted a Council of 40 persons, which they termed a Council of State,
whose Office was to execute what the Rump should command.


B. When there was neither King, nor House of Lords, they could not call
themselves a Parliament; for a Parliament is a Meeting of the King, Lords and
Commons, to confer together about the businesses of the Commonwealth. With
whom did the Rump confer?


A. Men may give to their Assembly what name they please, what signification
soever such Name might formerly have had; and the Rump took the Name of
Parliament as most suitable to their purpose; and such a Name as being
venerable amongst the people for many hundred years, had countenanced and
sweetened Subsidies and other Levies of Money, otherwise very unpleasant to the
Subject. They took also afterward another name, which was Custodes Libertatis
Angliae, which Titles they used only in their Writs issuing out of the Courts
of Justice.


B. I do not see how a Subject that is tied to the Laws can have more liberty
in one form of Government than another.


A. Howsoever to the people that understand by liberty nothing but leave to do
what they list, it was a Title not ungrateful.

Their next work was to set forth a public Declaration; That they were fully
resolved to maintain the fundamental Laws of the Nation, as to the Preservation
of the Lives, Liberties and Proprieties of the People.


B. What did they mean by the fundamental Laws of the Nation?


A. Nothing but to abuse the people: for the only fundamental Law in every
Commonwealth is, To obey the Laws from time to time, which he shall make, to
whom the People have given the Supreme Power. How likely then are they to
uphold the fundamental Laws, that had murdered him, who was by themselves so
often acknowledged for their Lawful Sovereign? Besides, at the same time that
this Declaration came forth, they were erecting that High Court of Justice,
which took away the Lives of Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord
Capel. Whatsoever they meant by a fundamental Law, the erecting of this Court
was a breach of it, as being warranted by no former Law or Example in England.

At the same time also they Levied Taxes by Soldiers, and to Soldiers permitted
Free quarter, and did many other Actions, which if the King had done, they
would have said had been done against the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject.


B. What silly things are the common sort of people, to be cozened as they were
so grossly?


A. What sort of people, as to this matter, are not of the common sort? The
craftiest Knaves of all the Rump were no wiser than the rest whom they cozened:
for the most of them did believe, that the same things which they imposed upon
the generality, were just and reasonable; and especially the great Haranguers,
and such as pretended to Learning: for who can be a good Subject in a Monarchy,
whose Principles are taken from the Enemies of Monarchy, such as were Cicero,
Seneca, Cato, and other Politicians of Rome, and Aristotle of Athens, who
seldom spoke of Kings, but as of Wolves, and other ravenous Beasts? You may
perhaps think a man has need of nothing else to know the Duty he owes to his
Governor, and what Right he has to order him, but a good Natural Wit: but it
is otherwise: for it is a Science, and built upon sure and clear Principles,
and to be learned by deep and careful study, or from Masters that have deeply
studied it; and who was there in the Parliament, or in the Nation, that could
find out those evident Principles, and derive from them the necessary Rules of
Justice, and the necessary Connection of Justice and Peace? The People have one
day in seven the leisure to hear Instruction, and there are Ministers appointed
to teach them their Duty: but how have those Ministers performed their Office?
A great part of them, namely, the Presbyterian Ministers throughout the whole
War, instigated the People against the King; so did also Independents, and
other Fanatic Ministers. The rest, contented with their Livings, preached in
their Parishes Points of Controversy, to Religion impertinent; but to the
breach of Charity, among them* selves very effectual, or else eloquent things,
which the People either understood not, or thought themselves not concerned in.
But this sort of Preachers, as they did little good, so they did little hurt.
The mischief proceeded wholly from the Presbyterian Preachers, who by a long
practiced Histrionique faculty preached up the Rebellion powerfully.


B. To what end?


A. To the end that the State becoming popular the Church might be so too, and
governed by an Assembly, and by consequence, (as they thought) seeing Politics
are subservient to Religion, they might govern, and thereby satisfy, not only
their covetous humor with Riches, but also their malice with power to undo all
men that admired not their wisdom. Your calling the People silly things,
obliged me by this Digression to show you, that it is not want of Wit, but want
of the Science of Justice that brought them into these troubles. Persuade, if
you can, that man that has made his fortune, or made it greater, or an Eloquent
Orator, or a Ravishing Poet, or a subtle Lawyer, or but a good Hunter, or a
cunning Gamester, that he has not a good Wit; and yet there were of all these a
great many so silly as to be deceived by the Rump, and Members of the same
Rump. They wanted not Wit, but the knowledge of the Causes and Grounds upon
which one Person has a Right to govern, and the rest an Obligation to obey,
which Grounds are necessary to be taught the People, who without them cannot
live long in peace amongst themselves.


B. Let us return, if you please, to the Proceedings of the Rump.


A. In the rest of this year they voted a new Stamp for the Coin of this
Nation. They considered also of Agents to be sent to Foreign States; and
having lately received applause from the Army for their work done by the High
Court of Justice, and encouragement to extend the same farther, they perfected
the said High Court of Justice, in which were tried Duke Hamilton, the Earl of
Holland, Lord Capel, the Earl of Norwich, and Sir John Owen, whereof, as I
mentioned before the three first were beheaded. This affrighted diverse of the
King's Party out of the Land: for not only they but all that had born Arms for
the King were at that time in very great danger of their Lives. For it was put
to the question by the Army at a Council of War, whether they should be all
Massacred or no, where the No's carried it, but by two Voices. Lastly, March
the 24 th, they put the Major of London out of his Office, fined him 2000 l.
disfranchised him, and condemned him to two months Imprisonment in the Tower,
for refusing to proclaim the Act for abolishing the Kingly Power. And thus
ended the year 1648. and the Monthly Fast; God having granted that which they
fasted for, the Death of the King, and the Possession of his Inheritance. By
these their Proceedings they had already lost the Hearts of the generality of
the People, and had nothing to trust to but the Army, which was not in their
power, but in Cromwell's, who never failed, when there was occasion, to put them
upon all Exploits that might make them odious to the people, in order to his
future dissolving them, whenever it should conduce to his ends.

In the beginning of 1649. the Scots discontented with the Proceedings of the
Rump against the late King, began to Levy Soldiers, in order to a new Invasion
of England. The Irish Rebels, for want of timely resistance from England, were
grown terrible; and the English Army at home infected by the Adjutators, were
casting how to share the Land amongst the Godly, meaning themselves; and such
others as they pleased, who were therefore called Levellers. Also the Rump for
the present were not very well provided of Money, and therefore the first thing
they did was, the laying of a Tax upon the People of 90000 l. a month, for the
maintenance of the Army.


B. Was it not one of their quarrels with the King; That he had Levied Money
without the consent of the People in Parliament.


A. You may see by this what reason the Rump had to call it self a Parliament;
for the Taxes imposed by Parliament, were always understood to be by the
Peoples consent, and consequently Legal.

To appease the Scots, they sent Messengers with flattering Letters to keep
them from engaging for the present King; but in vain; for they would hear
nothing from a House of Commons (as they called it) at Westminster without a
King and Lords. But they sent Commissioners to the King, to let him know what
they were doing for him: for they were resolved to raise an Army of 17000 Foot
and 6000 Horse, for themselves.

To relieve Ireland the Rump had resolved to send eleven Regiments thither out
of the Army in England. This happened well for Cromwell: for the Levelling
Soldiers, which were in every Regiment many, and in some the major part,
finding that in stead of dividing the Land at home, they were to venture their
Lives in Ireland, flatly denied to go; and one Regiment having cashiered their
Colonel about Salisbury, was marching to join with three Regiments more of the
same Resolution; but both the General and Cromwell falling upon them at Burford,
utterly defeated them, and soon after reduced the whole Army to their
obedience. And thus another of the Impediments to Cromwell's Advancement was
soon removed. This done they came to Oxford, and thence to London: and at
Oxford, both the General and Cromwell were made Doctors of the Civil Law; and at
London feasted and presented by the City.


B. Were they not first made Masters, and then Doctors?


A. They had made themselves already Masters both of the Laws and Parliament.
The Army being now obedient, the Rump sent over those eleven Regiments into
Ireland under the Command of Dr. Cromwell, entitled Governor of that Kingdom,
the Lord Fairfax being still General of all the Forces, both here and there.

The Marquess (now Duke) of Ormond was the King's Lieutenant of Ireland, and
the Rebels had made a Confederacy amongst themselves, and these Confederates
had made a kind of League with the Lieutenant, wherein they agreed upon liberty
given them in the exercise of their Religion, to be faithful to, and assist the
King. To these also were joined some Forces raised by the Earls of Castlehaven,
and Clanricard, and my Lord Inchiquin; so that they were the greatest united
strength in the Island: but there were amongst them a great many other Papists,
that would by no means subject themselves to Protestants, and these were called
the Nuntio's Party, as the other were called the Confederate Party. These
Parties not agreeing, and the Confederate Party having broken their Articles,
the Lord Lieutenant seeing them ready to besiege him in Dublin, and not able to
defend it, did, to preserve the Place for the Protestants, surrender it to the
Parliament of England, and came over to the King at that time, when he was
carried from place to place by the Army. From England he went over to the
Prince, now King, residing then at Paris.

But the Confederates affrighted with the News that the Rump was sending over
an Army thither, desired the Prince by Letters to send back my Lord of Ormond,
engaging themselves to submit absolutely to the King's Authority, and to obey
my Lord of Ormond as his Lieutenant. And hereupon he was sent back, this was
about a year before the going over of Cromwell.

In which time by the Dissentions in Ireland between the Confederate Party, and
the Nuntio's Party, and discontents about Command, this, otherwise sufficient
power, effected nothing, and was at last defeated, August the second, by a
Sally out of Dublin, which they were besieging. Within a few days after arrived
Cromwell, who with extraordinary diligence, and horrid executions, in less than
a twelvemonth that he stayed there, subdued in a manner the whole Nation,
having killed, or exterminated a great part of them, and leaving his Son-in-law
Ireton to subdue the rest. But Ireton dyed there (before the business was quite
done) of the Plague. This was one step more toward Cromwell's exaltation to the
Throne.


B. What a miserable condition was Ireland reduced to by the Learning of the
Roman, as well as England was by the Learning of the Presbyterian Clergy.


A. In the latter end of the preceding year, the King was come from Paris to
the Hague: and shortly after came thither from the Rump their Agent Dorislaus
Doctor of the Civil Law, who had been employed in the drawing up of the Charge
against the late King: but the first night he came, as he was at Supper, a
Company of Cavaliers, near a dozen, entered his Chamber, killed him, and got
away. Not long after also their Agent at Madrid, one Ascham, one that had
written in defense of his Masters, was killed in the same manner. About this
time came out two Books, one written by Salmasius a Presbyterian, against the
Murder of the King, another written by Milton, an English Independent, in
answer to it.


B. I have seen them both. They are very good Latin both, and hardly to be
judged which is better, and both very ill reasoning, hardly to be judged which
is worse; like two Declamations Pro and Con, made for exercise only in a
Rhetoric School by one and the same Man. So like is a Presbyterian to an
Independent.


A. In this year the Rump did not much at home; save that in the beginning they
made England a Free State by an Act which runs thus. Be it enacted and declared
by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof; That the People of
England, and all the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, are, and
shall be, and are hereby constituted, made and declared a Commonwealth and
Free State, etc.


B. What did they mean by a Free State and Commonwealth? Were the People no
longer to be subject to Laws? They could not mean that: for the Parliament
meant to govern them by their own Laws, and punish such as broke them. Did they
mean that England should not be subject to any Foreign Kingdom or
Commonwealth? That needed not be enacted, seeing there was no King nor People
pretended to be their Masters. What did they mean then?


A. They meant that neither this King, nor any King, nor any single person, but
only that they themselves would be the Peoples Masters, and would have set it
down in those plain words, if the People could have been cozned with words
intelligible, as easily as with words not intelligible.

After this they gave one another Money and Estates out of the Lands and Goods
of the Loyal Party. They enacted also an Engagement to be taken by every man,
in these words: You shall promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth
of England, as it is now established, without King, or House of Lords.

They banished also from within 20 Miles of London all the Royal Party,
forbidding also every one of them to depart more than five Miles from his
Dwelling house.


B. They meant perhaps to have them ready, if need were, for a Massacre. But
what did the Scots in this time?


A. They were considering of the Officers of the Army, which they were Levying
for the King, how they might exclude from Command all such as had loyally
served his Father, and all Independents, and all such as commanded in Duke
Hamilton's Army; and these were the main things that passed this year.

The Marquess of Montrosse, that in the year 1645. had, with a few men, and in
little time, done things almost incredible against the late King's Enemies in
Scotland, landed now again in the beginning of the year 1650. in the North of
Scotland, with Commission from the present King, hoping to do him as good
Service, as he had formerly done his Father: but the Case was altered; for the
Scotch Forces were then in England in the Service of the Parliament; whereas
now they were in Scotland, and many more (for their intended Invasion) newly
raised. Besides the Soldiers which the Marquess brought over were few, and
Foreigners, nor did the Highlanders come in to him as he expected; in so much
as he was soon defeated, and shortly after taken, and (with more spightful
usage than revenge required) executed by the Covenanters at Edinburgh May 2.


B. What good could the King expect from joining with these men, who during the
Treaty, discovered so much malice to him in one of his best Servants?


A. No doubt (their Churchmen being then prevalent) they would have done as
much to this King, as the English Parliament had done to his Father, if they
could have gotten by it that which they foolishly aspired to, the Government of
the Nation. I do not believe that the Independents were worse than the
Presbyterians: both the one and the other were resolved to destroy whatsoever
should stand in the way to their Ambition: but necessity made the King pass
over both this, and many other Indignities from them, rather than suffer the
pursuit of his Right in England to cool, and be little better than extinguished.


B. Indeed I believe a Kingdom, if suffered to become an old Debt, will hardly
ever be recovered. Besides the King was sure, wheresoever the Victory lighted,
he could lose nothing in the War, but Enemies.


A. About the time of Montrosse his death, which was in May, Cromwell was yet in
Ireland, and his work unfinished: but finding, or by his Friends advertised,
that his presence in the Expedition now preparing against the Scots would be
necessary to his design, sent to the Rump to know their pleasure concerning his
return: but for all that, he knew, or thought it was not necessary to stay for
their Answer, but came away, and arrived at London the sixth of June following,
and was welcomed by the Rump. Now had General Fairfax (who was truly what he
pretended to be, a Presbyterian) been so catechis'd by the Presbyterian
Ministers here, that he refused to fight against the Brethren in Scotland; nor
did the Rump, nor Cromwell go about to rectify his Conscience in that Point;
and thus Fairfax laying down his Commission, Cromwell was now made General of
all the Forces in England and Ireland; which was another Step to the Sovereign
Power.


B. Where was the King?


A. In Scotland newly come over. He landed in the North, and was honorably
conducted to Edinburgh, though all things were not yet well agreed on between
the Scots and him: for though he had yielded to as hard Conditions, as the late
King had yielded to in the Isle of Wight, yet they had still somewhat to add,
till the King enduring no more, departed from them toward the North again. But
they sent Messengers after him to pray him to return, but they furnished these
Messengers with strength enough to bring him back, if he should have refused.
In fine, they agreed, but would not suffer either the King, or any Royalist, to
have Command in the Army.


B. The sum of all is, the King was there a Prisoner.


A. Cromwell from Barwick sends a Declaration to the Scots, telling them he had
no quarrel against the People of Scotland; but against the Malignant Party,
that had brought in the King, to the disturbance of the Peace between the two
Nations; and that he was willing, either by Conference to give and receive
satisfaction, or to decide the Justice of the Cause by Battle. To which the
Scots answering, declare; That they will not prosecute the King's Interest
before, and without his acknowledgment of the sins of his House, and his former
ways, and satisfaction given to God's People in both Kingdoms. Judge by this,
whether the present King were not in as bad a condition here, as his Father was
in the hands of the Presbyterians of England.


B. Presbyterians are every where the same: they would fain be absolute
Governors of all they converse with, and have nothing to plead for it, but
that where they Reign it is God that Reigns, and no where else: but I observe
one strange Demand, that the King should acknowledge the sins of his House; for
I thought it had been certainly held by all Divines, that no man was bound to
acknowledge any man's sins, but his own.


A. The King having yielded to all that the Church required, the Scots
proceeded in their intended War. Cromwell marched on to Edinburgh, provoking
them all he could to Battle, which they declining, and Provisions growing
scarce in the English Army, Cromwell retired to Dunbar, despairing of success;
and intending by Sea or Land to get back into England. And such was the
Condition, which this General Cromwell so much magnified for Conduct, had
brought his Army to; that all his Glories had ended in Shame and Punishment, if
Fortune, and the faults of his Enemies had not relieved him* For as he retired
the Scots followed him close all the way, till within a Mile of Dunbar. There
is a ridge of Hills, that from beyond Edinburgh goes winding to the Sea, and
crosses the Highway between Dunbar and Barwick, at a Village called
Copperspeith, where the passage is so difficult, that had the Scots sent timely
thither a very few men to guard it, the English could never have gotten home.
For the Scots kept the Hills, and needed not have fought, but upon great
advantage, and were almost two to one. Cromwell's Army was at the foot* of
those Hills, on the North side; and there was a great Ditch or Channel of a
Torrent between the Hills and it; so that he could never have got home by Land,
nor without utter ruin of the Army attempted to Ship it* nor have stayed where
he was for want of Provisions. Now Cromwell knowing the Pass was free, and
commanding a good Party of Horse and foot to possess it; it was necessary for
the Scots to let them go, whom they bragged they had impounded, or else to
fight; and therefore with the best of their Horse charged the English, and made
them at first to shrink a little: but the English Foot coming on, the Scots
were put to flight; and the flight of the Horse hindered the Foot from
engaging, who therefore fled, as did also the rest of their Horse. Thus the
folly of the Scottish Commanders brought all their odds to an even Lay, between
two small and equal Parties; wherein Fortune gave the Victory to the English,
who were not many more in number than those that were killed and taken
Prisoners of the Scots, and the Church lost their Canon, Bag and Baggage, with
10000 Arms, and almost their whole Army. The rest were got together by Lesly to
Sterling.


B. This Victory happened well for the King; for had the Scots been Victors,
the Presbyterians both here and there would have domineered again, and the King
been in the same condition his Father was in at New Castle, in the hands of the
Scottish, Army. For in pursuit of this Victory, the English at last brought the
Scots to a pretty good habit of obedience for the King, whenever he should
recover his Right.


A. In pursuit of this Victory the English marched to Edinburgh, quitted by the
Scots, fortified Leith, and took in all the Strength and Castles they thought
fit, on this side the Frith, which now was become the Bound betwixt the two
Nations: and the Scotch Ecclesiastics began to know themselves better, and
resolved in their new Army, which they meant to raise, to admit some of the
Royalists into Command, Cromwell from Edinburgh marched toward Sterling, to
provoke the Enemy to fight; but finding danger in it, returned to Edinburgh,
and besieged the Castle. In the mean time he sent a Party into the West of
Scotland to suppress Straughan and Kerr, two great Presbyterians, that were
there Levying of Forces for their new Army. And in the same time the Scots
Crowned the King at Schone.

The rest of this year was spent in Scotland, on Cromwell's part, in taking of
Edinburgh Castle, and in attempts to pass the Frith, or any other ways to get
over to the Scottish Forces; and on the Scots part in hastening their Levies
for the North.


B. What did the Rump at home during this time?


A. They voted Liberty of Conscience to the Sectaries; that is, they plucked out
the Sting of the Presbytery, which consisted in a severe imposing of odd
Opinions upon the People, impertinent to Religion, but conducing to the
advancement of the power of the Presbyterian Ministers. Also they Levied more
Soldiers, and gave the Command of them to Harrison, now made Major General, a
Fifth monarchy-man; and of these Soldiers two Regiments of Horse and one of
Foot were raised by the Fifth-monarchy-men, and other Sectaries, in
thankfulness for this their Liberty from the Presbyterian Tyranny. Also they
pulled down the late King's Statue in the Exchange; and in the Nick where it
stood, caused to be written these words. Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, etc.


B. What good did that do them, and why did they not pull down the Statues of
all the rest of the Kings?


A. What account can be given of Actions that proceed not from reason, but
spite, and such like passions? Besides this, they received Ambassadors from
Portugal and from Spain, acknowledging their Power. And in the very end of the
year they prepared Ambassadors to the Netherlands to offer them friendship. All
they did besides was persecuting and executing of Royalists.

In the beginning of the year 1651. General Dean arrived in Scotland; and on
the 11 th of April the Scottish Parliament assembled, and made certain Acts, in
order to a better uniting of themselves, and better obedience to the King, who
was now at Sterling, with the Scottish Forces he had, expecting more now in
Levying. Cromwell from Edinburgh went diverse times toward Sterling to provoke
the Scots to fight. There was no Ford there to pass over his Men; at last Boats
being come from London and New Castle, Colonel Overton (though it were long
first, for it was now July) transported 1400 Foot of his own, besides another
Regiment of Foot, and four Troops of Horse, and intrencht himself at
North-ferry on the other side, and before any help could come from Sterling,
Major General Lambert also was got over with as many more. By this time Sir
John Brown was come to oppose them with 4500 Men, whom the English there
defeated, killing about 2000, and taking Prisoners 1600. This done, and as much
more of the Army transported, as was thought fit, Cromwell comes before St.
Johnstons, (from whence the Scttuish Parliament, upon the news of his passing
the Frith, was removed to Dundee) and summons it; and the same day had news
brought him that the King was marching from Sterling toward England, which was
true; but notwithstanding the King was three days march before him, he resolved
to have the Town, before he followed him; and accordingly had it the next day,
by Surrender.


B. What hopes had the King in coming into England, having before and behind
him none, at least none Armed, but his Enemies?


A. Yes; there was before him the City of London, which generally hated the
Rump, and might easily be reckoned for 20000 well Armed Soldiers; and most men
believed they would take his part, had he come near the City.


B. What probability was there of that? Do you think the Rump was not sure of
the Service of the Major, and those that had command of the City Militia? And
if they had been really the King's Friends, what need had they to stay for his
coming up to London? They might have seized the Rump, if they had pleased,
which had no possibility of defending themselves; at least they might have
turned them out of the House.


A. This they did not; but on the contrary permitted the recruiting of
Cromwell's Army, and the raising of Men to keep the Country from coming in to
the King. The King began his March from Sterling the last of July, and August
the 22 d came to Worcester by the way of Carlisle, with a weary Army of about
13000, whom Cromwell followed, and joining with the new Levies, environed
Worcester with 40000, and on the third of September utterly defeated the King's
Army. Here Duke Hamilton, Brother of him that was beheaded, was slain.


B. What became of the King?


A. Night coming on, before the City was quite taken, he left it, it being
dark, and none of the Enemies Horse within the Town to follow him, the
plundering Foot having kept the Gates shut, lest the Horse should enter and
have a share of the Booty. The King before morning got into Warwickshire 25
Miles from Worcester, and there lay disguised a while, and afterward went up
and down in great danger of being discovered, till at last he got over into
France from Brighthemsted in Sussex.


B. When Cromwell was gone, what was farther done in Scotland?


A. Lieutenant General Monk, whom Cromwell left there with 7000, took Sterling
August 14 th, by Surrender, and Dundee the third of September, by Storm,
because it resisted; this the Soldiers plundered, and had good Booty, because
the Scots for safety had sent thither their most precious Goods from Edinburgh
and St. Johnstons. He took likewise by Surrender Aberdeen, and (the place where
the Scottish Ministers first learned to play the fools) St. Andrews. Also in
the Highlands Colonel Alured took a knot of Lords and Gentlemen, viz. four
Earls, and four Lords, and above twenty Knights and Gentlemen, whom he sent
Prisoners into England. So that there was nothing more to be feared from
Scotland; all the trouble of the Rump, being to resolve what they should do
with it. At last they resolved to unite and incorporate it into one
Commonwealth with England and Ireland. And to that end sent thither St. John's,
Vane, and other Commissioners to offer them this Union by public Declaration,
and to warn them to choose their Deputies of Shires, and Burgesses of Towns,
and send them to Westminster.


B. This was a very great favor.


A. I think so: and yet it was by many of the Scots, especially by the
Ministers, and other Presbyterians, refused. The Ministers had given way to the
Levying of Money for the payment of the English Soldiers; but to comply with
the Declaration of the English Commissioners they absolutely forbad.


B. Methinks this contributing to the pay of their Conquerors was some mark of
servitude; whereas entering into the Union made them free, and gave them equal
privilege with the English.


A. The Cause why they refused the Union, rendered by the Presbyterians
themselves, was this; That it drew with it a Subordination of the Church to the
Civil State in the things of Christ.


B. This is a downright Declaration to all Kings and Commonwealths in general,
that a Presbyterian Minister will be a true Subject to none of them in the
things of Christ, which things what they are, they will be Judges themselves.
What have we then gotten by our deliverance from the Pope's Tyranny, if these
petty men succeed in the place of it, that have nothing in them that can be
beneficial to the Public, except their silence? For their Learning, it amounts
to no more than an imperfect knowledge of Greek and Latin, and an acquired
readiness in the Scripture Language, with a Gesture and Tone suitable
thereunto; but of Justice and Charity (the Manners of Religion) they have
neither knowledge, nor practice, as is manifest by the Stories I have already
told you: Nor do they distinguish between the Godly and the Ungodly, but by
conformity of Design in Men of Judgment, or by repetition of their Sermons in
the common sort of People.


B. But this sullenness of the Scots was to no purpose: for they at Westminster
enacted the Union of the two Nations, and the abolition of Monarchy in
Scotland, and ordained punishment for those that should transgress that Act.


B. What other business did the Rump this year?


A. They sent St. John's and Strickland Ambassadors to the Hague, to offer
League to the United Provinces, who had Audience March the third. St. John's in
a Speech showed those States what advantage they might have by this League in
their Trade and Navigations, by the use of the English Ports and Harbors. The
Dutch, though they showed no great forwardness in the business, yet appointed
Commissioners to treat with them about it. But the People were generally
against it, calling the Ambassadors and their Followers (as they were) Traitors
and Murderers, and made such Tumults about their House, that their Followers
durst not go abroad, till the States had quieted them. The Rump advertised
hereof, presently recalled them. The Compliment which St. John's gave to the
Commissioners at their taking leave is worth your hearing. You have, said he,
an Eye upon the event of the Affairs of Scotland, and therefore do refuse the
friendship we have offered. Now I can assure you, many in the Parliament were
of opinion, that we should not have sent any Ambassadors to you, till we had
superated those matters between them and that King, and then expected your
Ambassadors to us. I now perceive our error, and that those Gentlemen were in
the Right. In a short time you shall see that business ended; and then you will
come and seek what we have freely offered, when it shall perplex you that you
have refused our proffer.


B. St. John's was not sure that the Scottish business would end as it did. For
though the Scots were beaten at Dunbar, he could not be sure of the event of
their entering England, which happened afterward.


A. But he guessed well: for within a Month after the Battle at Worcester an
Act passed, forbidding the Importing of Merchandise in other than English
Ships. The English also molested their Fishing upon our Coast. They also many
times searched their Ships, (upon occasion of our War with France) and made
some of them Prize. And then the Dutch sent their Ambassadors hither to desire
what they before refused; but partly also to inform themselves what Naval
Forces the English had ready, and how the People here were contented with the
Government.


B. How sped they?


A. The Rump showed now as little desire of Agreement as the Dutch did then;
standing upon Terms never likely to be granted. First; for the fishing on the
English Coast, that they should not have it without paying for it. Secondly,
that the English should have free Trade from Middleburgh to Antwerp, as they
had before their Rebellion against the King of Spain. Thirdly, they demanded
amends for the old (but never to be forgotten) business of Amboyna: So that the
War was already certain, though the Season kept them from Action till the
Spring following. The true Quarrel on the English part was, that their profer'd
friendship was scorned, and their Ambassadors affronted: On the Dutch part was,
their greediness to engross all Traffic, and a false estimate of our and
their own strength.

Whilst these things were doing, the Relics of the War, both in Ireland and
Scotland, were not neglected, though those Nations were not fully pacified till
two years after, The persecution also of Royalists still continued, amongst
whom was beheaded one Mr. Love, for holding correspondence with the King.


B. I had thought a Presbyterian Minister, whilst he was such, could not be a
Royalist, because they think their Assembly have the Supreme Power in the
things of Christ; and by consequence they are in England (by a Statute)
Traitors.


A. You may think so still: for though I called Mr. Love a Royalist, I meant it
only for that one Act, for which he was condemned. It was he, who during the
Treaty at Vxbridge, preaching before the Commissioners there, said, it was as
possible for Heaven and Hell, as for the King and Parliament to agree. Both he
and the rest of the Presbyterians are and were Enemies to the King's Enemies,
Cromwell and his Fanatics, for their own, not for the King's sake. Their
Loyalty was like that of Sir John Hotham's, that kept the King out of Hull, and
afterward would have betrayed the same to the Marquess of New Castle. These
Presbyterians therefore cannot be rightly called Loyal, but rather doubly
perfidious, unless you think, that as two Negatives make an Affirmative, so two
Treasons make Loyalty.

This year also were reduced to the obedience of the Rump the Islands of Scilly
and Man, and the Barbados, and St. Christophers. One thing fell out that they
liked not, which was, that Cromwell gave them warning to determine their
sitting, according to the Bill for Triennial Parliaments.


B. That I think indeed was harsh.


A. In the year 1652. May the 14 th began the Dutch War in this manner. Three
Dutch Men of War, with diverse Merchants from the Straights being discovered by
one Captain Young, who commanded some English Frigates, the said Young sent to
their Admiral to bid him strike his Flag, (a thing usually done in
acknowledgment of the English Dominion in the narrow Seas) which accordingly he
did. Then came up the Vice Admiral, and being called to as the other was, to
take down his Flag; he answered plainly, he would not: but after the exchange
of four or five Broadsides, and mischief done, on either part, he took it down:
but Captain Young demanded also, either the Vice Admiral himself, or his Ship,
to make good the damage already sustained; to which the Vice Admiral answered,
that he had taken in his Flag, but would defend himself and his Ship. Whereupon
Captain Young consulting with the Captains of his other Ships, lest the
beginning of the War, in this time of Treaty, should be charged upon himself,
and night also coming on, thought fit to proceed no farther.


B. The War certainly began at this time; but who began it?


A. The Dominion of the Seas belonging to the English, there can be no question
but the Dutch began it: and that the said Dominion belonged to the English, it
was confessed at first by the Admiral himself peaceably, and at last by the
Vice Admiral, taking in their Flags.

About a fortnight after, there happened another Fight upon the like occasion.
Van Tromp with 42 Men of Mar came to the back of Goodwin-Sands, (Major Bourne
being then with a few of the Parliaments Ships in the Downs, and Blake with the
rest farther Westward) and sent two Captains of his to Bourne, to excuse his
coming thither. To whom Bourne returned this Answer, That the Message was
civil, but that it might appear real he ought to depart. So Tromp departed,
meaning (now Bourne was satisfied) to sail toward Blake, and he did so; but so
did also Bourne, for fear of the worst. When Tromp and Blake were near one
another, Blake made a Shot over Tromp's Ship, as a warning to him to take in
his Flag. This he did thrice, and then Tromp gave him a Broadside, and so
began the Fight, (at the beginning whereof Bourne came in) and lasted from two
a Clock till night, the English having the better, and the Flag, as before
making the Quarrel.


B. What needs there, when both Nations were heartily resolved to fight, to
stand so much upon this Compliment of who should begin? For as to the gaining
of Friends and Confederates thereby, I think it was in vain; seeing Princes and
States in such occasions look not much upon the Justice of their Neighbors,
but upon their own Concernment in the Event.


A. It is commonly so; but in this Case the Dutch knowing the Dominion of the
narrow Seas to be a gallant Title, and envyed by all the Nations that reach the
Shore, and consequently that they were likely to oppose it, did wisely enough
in making this Point the state of the Quarrel. After this Fight, the Dutch
Ambassadors residing in England, sent a Paper to the Council of State, wherein
they styled this last Encounter a rash Action, and affirmed it was done without
the knowledge, and against the Will of their Lords the States General, and
desired them that nothing might be done upon it in heat, which might become
irreparable. The Parliament hereupon voted; first, That the States General
should pay the Charges they were at, and for the damages they sustained upon
this occasion. 2. That this being paid, there should be a Cessation of all Acts
of Hostility, and a mutual Restitution of all Ships and Goods taken. 3. And
both these agreed to, that there should be made a League between the two
Commonwealths. These Votes were sent to the Dutch Ambassadors in answer of the
said Paper; but with a Preamble setting forth the former kindnesses of England
to the Netherlands, and taking notice of their new Fleet of 150 Men of War,
without any other apparent Design than the destruction of the English Fleet.


B. What answer made the Dutch to this?


A. None. Tromp sailed presently into Zealand, and Blake with 70 Men of War to
the Orkney Islands, to seize their Busses, and to wait for five Dutch Ships
from the East Indies. And Sir George Ascue newly returned from the Barbados,
came into the Downs with 15 Men of War, where he was commanded to stay for a
Recruit out of the Thames.

Tromp being recruited now to 120 Sail, made account to get in between Sir
George Ascue and the mouth of the River, but was hindered so long by contrary
Winds, that the Merchants calling for his Convoy, he could stay no longer, and
so he went back into Holland, and thence to Orkney, where he met with the said
five East India Ships, and sent them home. And then he endeavored to engage
with Blake, but a sudden Storm forced him to Sea, and so dissipated his Fleet,
that only 42 came home in Body, the rest singly, as well as they could. Blake
also came home, but went first to the Coast of Holland with 900 Prisoners, and
six Men of War taken, which were part of twelve which he found and took
guarding their Busses. This was the first bout after the War declared.

In August following there happened a Fight between de Ruitter the Admiral of
Zealand, with 50 Men of War, and Sir George Ascue, near Plymouth, with 40,
wherein Sir George had the better, and might have got an entire Victory, had
the whole Fleet engaged. Whatsoever was the matter, the Rump (though they
rewarded him) never more employed him after his return, in their Service at
Sea: but voted, for the year to come, three Generals, Blake that was one
already, and Dean, and Monk.

About this time the Archduke Leopold besieging Dunkirk, and the French
sending a Fleet to relieve it, General Blake lighting on the French at Calais,
and taking seven of their Ships, was cause of the Towns Surrender.

In September they fought again, De Wit and Ruitter commanding the Dutch, and
Blake the English, and the Dutch were again worsted.

Again in the end of November Van Tromp with 80 Men of War, showed himself at
the back of Goodwin-Sands; where Blake, though he had with him but 40,
adventured to fight with him, and had much the worst, and (night parting the
Fray) retired into the River of Thames; whilst Van Tromp keeping the Sea, took
some inconsiderable Vessels from the English, and thereupon (as it was said)
with a Childish vanity, hung out a Broom from the Main-top mast, signifying he
meant to sweep the Seas of all English Shipping.

After this, in February, the Dutch with Van Tromp were encountered by the
English under Blake and Dean, near Portsmouth, and had the worst. And these
were all the Encounters between them in this year, in the narrow Seas. They
fought also once at Legorne, where the Dutch had the better.


B. I see no great odds yet on either side, if there were any the English had
it.


A. Nor did either of them e're the more incline to Peace. For the Hollanders,
after they had sent Ambassadors into Denmark, Sweden, Poland, and the
Hans-Towns, (whence Tar and Cordage are usually had) to signify the
Declaration of the War, and to get them to their Party, recalled their
Ambassadors from England; and the Rump, without delay, gave them their parting
Audience; without abating a Syllable of their former severe Propositions. And
presently to maintain the War for the next year, laid a Tax upon the People of
120000 l. per Mensem.


B. What was done in the mean time at home?


A. Cromwell was now quarreling (the last and greatest obstacle to his Design)
the Rump. And to that end there came out daily from the Army Petitions,
Addresses, Remonstrances, and other such Papers: some of them urging the Rump
to dissolve themselves, and make way for another Parliament. To which the Rump
unwilling to yield, and not daring to refuse, determined for the end of their
sitting the fifth of November 1654. But Cromwell meant not to stay so long. In
the mean time the Army in Ireland was taking Submissions, and granting
Transportations of the Irish, and condemning whom they pleased in a High Court
of Justice erected there for that purpose. Amongst those that were executed was
hanged Sir Phelim Oneale, who first began the Rebellion.

In Scotland the English built some Citadels for the bridling of that stubborn
Nation: and thus ended the year 1652.


B. Come we then to the year 1653.


A. Cromwell wanted now but one step to the end of his Ambition, and that was to
set his Foot upon the Neck of this Long Parliament, which he did April the 23 d
of this present year 1653. a time very seasonable. For though the Dutch were
not mastered, yet they were much weakened; and what with Prizes from the Enemy,
and squeezing the Royal Party, the Treasury was pretty full, and the Tax of
120000 l. a month began to come in; all which was his own in right of the Army.

Therefore without more ado, attended by the Major-Generals Lambert and
Harrison, and some other Officers, and as many Soldiers, as he thought fit, he
went to the Parliament House, and dissolved them, turned them out and locked up
the doors. And for this Action he was more applauded by the People, than for
any of his Victories in the War, and the Parliament Men as much scorned and
derided.


B. Now that there was no Parliament, who had the Supreme Power?


A. If by Power you mean the Right to govern, no body had it: if you mean the
Supreme Strength it was clearly in Cromwell, who was obeyed as General of all
the Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland.


B. Did he pretend that for Title?


A. No: but presently after he invented a Title, which was this; That he was
necessitated for the defense of the Cause, for which at first the Parliament
had taken up Arms (that is to say rebelled) to have recourse to extraordinary
Actions. You know the pretense of the Long Parliaments Rebellion was Salus
Populi, The safety of the Nation against a dangerous Conspiracy of Papists, and
a Malignant Party at home, and that every man is bound, as far as his Power
extends, to procure the safety of the whole Nation, (which none but the Army
were able to do; and the Parliament had hitherto neglected) was it not then the
General's Duty to do it? Had he not therefore Right? For that Law of Salus
Populi is directed only to those that have Power enough to defend the People;
that is, to them that have the Supreme Power.


B. Yes certainly, he had as good a Title as the Long Parliament, But the Long
Parliament did represent the People; and it seems to me, that the Sovereign
Power is essentially annexed to the Representative of the People.


A. Yes, if he that makes a Representative, that is, (in the present Case) the
King do call them together to receive the Sovereign Power, and he divest
himself thereof; otherwise not. Nor was ever the Lower House of Parliament the
Representative of the whole Nation, but of the Commons only; nor had that House
the power to oblige, by their Acts, or Ordinances, any Lord, or any Priest.


B. Did Cromwell come in upon the only Title of Salus Populi?


A. This is a Title that very few men understand. His way was to get the
Supreme Power conferred upon him by Parliament. Therefore he called a
Parliament, and gave it the Supreme Power, to the end that they should give it
to him again. Was not this witty? First therefore he published a Declaration of
the Causes why he dissolved the Parliament. The sum whereof was, that in stead
of endeavoring to promote the good of God's People, they endeavored (by a
Bill then ready to pass) to recruit the House, and perpetuate their own Power.
Next he constituted a Council of State of his own Creatures, to be the Supreme
Authority of England; but no longer than till the next Parliament should be
called, and met. Thirdly, he summoned 142 Persons, such as he himself, or his
Trusty Officers made choice of: the greatest part of whom were instructed what
to do, obscure Persons, and most of them Fanatics, though styled by Cromwell
men of approved fidelity and honesty. To these the Council of State surrendered
the Supreme Authority, and not long after these men surrendered it to Cromwell.
July the fourth this Parliament met, and chose for the Speaker one Mr. Rous,
and called themselves from that time forward the Parliament of England: but
Cromwell, for the more surety, constituted also a Council of State, not of such
petty fellows as most of these were, but of himself, and his principal
Officers. These did all the business, both public and private, making
Ordinances, and giving Audience to Foreign Ambassadors. But he had now more
Enemies than before, Harrison, who was the Head of the Fifth-monarchy-men,
laying down his Commission, did nothing but animate his Party against him; for
which afterward he was imprisoned. This little Parliament in the mean time
were making of Acts so ridiculous, and displeasing to the People, that it was
thought he chose them on purpose to bring all Ruling Parliaments into contempt,
and Monarchy again into credit.


B. What Acts were these?


A. One of them was; That all Marriages should be made by a Justice of Peace,
and the Banes asked three several days in the next Market: None were forbidden
to be married by a Minister, but without a Justice of Peace the Marriage was to
be void: So that diverse wary Couples (to be sure of one another, howsoever they
might repent it afterward) were married both ways. Also they abrogated the
Engagement, whereby no man was admitted to sue in any Court of Law, that had
not taken it, that is, that had not acknowledged the late Rump.


B. Neither of these did any hurt to Cromwell.


A. They were also in hand with an Act to cancel all the present Laws and
Law Books, and to make a new Code more suitable to the humor of the
Fifth-monarchy-men; of whom there were many in this Parliament. Their Tenent
being, that there ought none to be Sovereign, but King Jesus, nor any to govern
under him, but the Saints. But their Authority ended before this Act passed.


B. What is this to Cromwell?


A. Nothing yet. But they were likewise upon an Act, now almost ready for the
Question; That Parliaments henceforward, one upon the end of another, should be
perpetual.


B. I understand not this, unless Parliaments can beget one another like
Animals, or like the Phoenix.


A. Why not like the Phoenix? Cannot a Parliament at the day of their
expiration send out Writs for a new one?


B. Do you think they would not rather summon themselves anew, and to save the
labor of coming again to Westminster sit still where they were? Or if they
summon the Country to make new Elections, and then dissolve themselves, by what
Authority shall the People meet in their Country-Courts, there being no Supreme
Authority standing?


A. All they did was absurd, though they knew not that, no nor this, whose
Design was upon the Sovereignty, the Contriver of this Act, it seems, perceived
not, but Cromwell's Party in the House saw it well enough. And therefore, as
soon as it was laid, there stood up one of the Members, and made a Motion, that
since the Commonwealth was like to receive little benefit by their fitting,
they should dissolve themselves. Harrison, and they of his Sect, were troubled
hereat, and made Speeches against it: but Cromwell's Party, of whom the Speaker
was one, left the House, and with the Mace before them went to White Hall, and
surrendered their Power to Cromwell that had given it them. And so he got the
Sovereignty by an Act of Parliament, and within four days after, viz. December
the 16 th, was installed Protector of the three Nations, and took his Oath to
observe certain Rules of governing, engrossed in Parchment, and read before
him: The Writing was called the Instrument.


B. What were the Rules he swore to?


A. One was to call a Parliament every third year, of which the first was to
begin September the third following.


B. I believe he was a little superstitious in the choice of September the
third, because it was lucky to him in 1650. and 1651. at Dunbar, and Worcester;
but he knew not how lucky the same would be to the whole Nation in 1658. at
Whitehall.


A. Another was; That no Parliament should be dissolved, till it had sitten
five Months; and those Bills that they presented to him, should be passed by
him within twenty days, or else they should pass without him.

A Third; That he should have a Council of State of not above 21, nor under 13;
and that upon the Protectors death this Council should meet, and before they
parted choose a new Protector. There were many more besides, but not necessary
to be inserted.


B. How went on the War against the Dutch?


A. The Generals for the English were Blake, and Dean, and Monk, and Van Tromp
for the Dutch, between whom was a Battle fought the second of June, (which was
a month before the beginning of this little Parliament) wherein the English had
the Victory, and drove the Enemies into their Harbors, but with the loss of
General Dean, slain by a Canon-shot. This Victory was great enough to make the
Dutch send over Ambassadors into England in order to a Treaty; but in the mean
time they prepared and put to Sea another Fleet, which likewise in the end of
July was defeated by General Monk, who got now a greater Victory than before:
and this made the Dutch descend so far as to buy their Peace with the payment
of the charge of the War, and with the acknowledgment amongst other Articles,
that the English had the Right of the Flag. This Peace was concluded in March,
being the end of this year: but not proclaimed till April; the Money (it seems)
being not paid till then.

The Dutch War being now ended, the Protector sent his youngest Son Henry into
Ireland, whom also some time after he made Lieutenant there; and sent Monk
Lieutenant General into Scotland, to keep those Nations in obedience. Nothing
else worth remembering was done this year at home; saving the discovery of a
Plot of Royalists (as was said) upon the Life of the Protector, who all this
while had Intelligence of the King's Designs from a Traitor in his Court, who
afterward was taken in the manner and killed.


B. How came he into so much trust with with the King?


A. He was the Son of a Colonel that was slain in the Wars on the late King's
side. Besides, he pretended Employment from the King's Loyal and Loving
Subjects here, to convey to his Majesty Money, as they from time to time should
send him; and to make this credible, Cromwell himself caused Money to be sent to
him.

The following year 1654. had nothing of War, but was spent in Civil
Ordinances, in appointing of Judges, preventing of Plots, (for Usurpers are
jealous) and in Executing the King's Friends, and selling their Lands. The
third of September, according to the Instrument, the Parliament met, in which
there was no House of Lords; and the House of Commons was made as formerly, of
Knights and Burgesses, but not as formerly of two Burgesses for a Borough, and
two Knights for a County: for Buroughs for the most part had but one Burgess,
and some Counties six or seven Knights: Besides, there were twenty Members for
Scotland, and as many for Ireland. So that now Cromwell had nothing else to do,
but to show his Art of Government upon six Coach-Horses newly presented him,
which being as Rebellious as himself, threw him out of the Coach-box, and
almost killed him.


B. This Parliament which had seen how Cromwell had handled the two former, the
Long one and the Short one, had surely learnt the wit to behave themselves
better to him, than those had done.


A. Yes, especially now that Cromwell in his Speech at their first Meeting had
expressly forbidden them to meddle, either with the Government by a single
Person and Parliament, or with the Militia, or with perpetuating of
Parliaments, or taking away Liberty of Conscience: and told them also, that
every Member of the House, before they sat, must take a Recognition of his
Power in diverse Points. Whereupon of above 400 there appeared not above 200 at
first; though afterward some relenting, there sat about 300. Again, just at
their sitting down he published some Ordinances of his own, bearing date before
their meeting; that they might see he took his own Acts to be as valid as
theirs. But all this could not make them know themselves. They proceeded to the
Debate of every Article of the Recognition.


B. They should have debated that before they had taken it.


A. But then they had never been suffered to sit.

Cromwell being informed of their stubborn proceedings, and out of hope of any
supply from them, dissolved them.

All that passed besides in this year was the exercise of the High Court of
Justice upon some Royalists for Plots.

In the year 1655. the English, to the number of near 10000, landed in
Hispaniola in hope of the plunder of the Gold and Silver, whereof they thought
there was great abundance in the Town of Santo Domingo; but were well beaten by
a few Spaniards; and with the loss of near 1000 men, went off to Jamaica and
possessed it.

This year also the Royal Party made another attempt in the West; and
proclaimed there King Charles the Second: but few joining with them, and some
falling off, they were soon suppressed, and many of the principal Persons
executed.


B. In these many Insurrections the Royalists, though they meant well, yet they
did but disservice to the King by their Impatience. What hope had they to
prevail against so great an Army as the Protector had ready? What cause was
there to despair of seeing the King's business done better by the Dissension
and Ambition of the great Commanders in that Army; whereof many had the favor
to be as well esteemed amongst them as Cromwell himself?


A. That was somewhat uncertain. The Protector being frustrated of his hope of
Money at Santo Domingo, resolved to take from the Royalists the tenth part
yearly of their Estates. And to this end chiefly he divided England into eleven
Major-Generalships, with Commission to every Major General to make a Roll of
the Names of all suspected Persons of the King's Party, and to receive the
tenth part of their Estates within his Precinct; as also to take Caution from
them not to act against the State; and to reveal all Plots that should come to
their knowledge, and to make them engage the like for their Servants. They had
Commission also to forbid Horse-races and Concourse of People, and to receive
and account for this Decimation.


B. By this the Usurper might easily inform himself of the value of all the
Estates in England, and of the behavior and affection of every Person of
Quality; which has heretofore been taken for very great Tyranny.


A. The year 1656. was a Parliament year by the Instrument, between the
beginning of this year, and the day of the Parliaments sitting, which was
September the 17 th, these Major-Generals resided in several Provinces,
behaving themselves most tyrannically. Amongst other of their Tyrannies was the
awing of Elections, and making themselves, and whom they pleased, to be
returned Members for the Parliament, which was also thought a part of Cromwell's
Design in their Constitution: for he had need of a giving Parliament, having
lately upon a Peace made with the French, drawn upon himself a War with Spain.

This year it was that Captain Stainer set upon the Spanish Plate-Fleet, being
eight in number, near Cadiz, whereof he funk two and took two, there being in
one of them two Millions of Pieces of Eight, which amounts to 400000 l.
Sterling.

This year also it was that James Naylor appeared at Bristol, and would be
taken for Jesus Christ. He wore his Beard forked, and his Hair composed to the
likeness of that in the Volto Santo; and being questioned, would sometimes
answer, Thou say it. He had also his Disciples that would go by his Horse
side, to the midleg in dirt. Being sent for by the Parliament, he was sentenced
to stand on the Pillory, to have his Tongue bored through, and to be marked in
the Forehead with the Letter B. for Blasphemy, and to remain in Bridewel.
Lambert, a great Favorite of the Army, endeavored to save him, partly, because
he had been his Soldier, and partly to curry favor with the Sectaries of the
Army; for he was now no more in the Protector's favor, but meditating how he
might succeed him in his Power.

About two years before this there appeared in Cornwall a Prophetess much famed
for her Dreams and Visions, and hearkened to by many, whereof some were eminent
Officers; but she and some of her Accomplices being imprisoned, we heard no more
of her.


B. I have heard of another, one Lilly, that prophesied all the time of the
Long Parliament. What did they to him?


A. His Prophecies were of another kind; he was a writer of Almanacks, and a
pretender to a pretended Art of Judicial Astrology, a mere Cozener to get
maintenance from a multitude of ignorant People, and no doubt had been called
in question, if his Prophecies had been any way disadvantageous to that
Parliament.


B. I understand not how the Dreams and Prognostications of Madmen (for such I
take to be all those that foretell future Contingencies) can be of any great
disadvantage to the Commonwealth.


A. Yes, yes: know there is nothing that renders Humane Counsels difficult, but
the incertainty of future time, nor that so well directs men in their
Deliberations, as the foresight of the Sequels of their Actions; Prophecy
being many times the principal Cause of the Event foretold. If upon some
prediction the People should have been made confident, that Oliver Cromwell and
his Army should be upon a day to come utterly defeated; would not every one
have endeavored to assist, and to deserve well of the Party that should give
him that Defeat? Upon this account it was, that Fortune tellers and Astrologers
were so often banished out of Rome.

The last memorable thing of this year was a Motion made by a Member of the
House, an Alderman of London, that the Protector might be petitioned and
advised by the House, to leave the Title of Protector, and take upon him that
of King.


B. That was indeed a bold Motion, and which would, if prosperous, have put an
end to many men's ambition, and to the licentiousness of the whole Army. I think
the Motion was made on purpose to ruin both the Protector himself, and his
Ambitious Officers.


A. It may be so. In the year 1657. the first thing the Parliament did was the
drawing up of this Petition to the Protector, to take upon him the Government
of the three Nations, with the Title of King. As of other Parliaments, so of
this, the greatest part had been either kept out of the House by force; or else
themselves had forborne to sit, and became guilty of setting up this King
Oliver. But those few that sat presented their Petition to the Protector April
the ninth in the Banqueting House at White Hall, where Sir Thomas Widdrington
the Speaker used the first Arguments, and the Protector desired some time to
seek God, the business being weighty. The next day they sent a Committee to him
to receive his Answer, which Answer being not very clear, they pressed him
again for a Resolution; to which he made answer in a long Speech, that ended in
a peremptory refusal: and so retaining still the Title of Protector, he took
upon him the Government according to certain Articles contained in the said
Petition.


B. What made him refuse the Title of King?


A. Because he durst not take it at that time; the Army being addicted to their
great Officers, and amongst their great Officers many hoping to succeed him;
and the Succession having been promised to Major General Lambert, would have
mutinied against him. He was therefore forced to stay for a more propitious
Conjuncture.


B. What were those Articles?


A. The most Important of them were; First, That he would exercise the Office
of Chief Magistrate of England, Scotland and Ireland, under the Title of
Protector, and govern the same according to the said Petition and Advice: and
that he would in his lifetime name his Successor.


B. I believe the Scots, when they first rebelled, never thought of being
governed absolutely as they were by Oliver Cromwell.


A. Secondly; That he should call a Parliament every three years at farthest.
Thirdly; That those Persons which were Legally chosen Members should not be
secluded without consent of the House. (In allowing this Clause the Protector
observed not, that the Secluded Members of this same Parliament are thereby
readmitted.) Fourthly, the Members were qualified. Fifthly, The Power of the
other House was defined. Sixthly, That no Law should be made but by Act of
Parliament. Seventhly; That a constant yearly Revenue of a Million of Pounds
should be settled for the maintenance of the Army and Navy; and 300000 l. for
the support of the Government, besides other Temporary Supplies, as the House
of Commons should think fit. Eighthly; That all the Officers of State should be
chosen by the Parliament. Ninthly; That the Protector should encourage the
Ministry. Lastly; That he should cause a Profession of Religion to be agreed
on, and published. There are diverse others of less Importance.

Having signed the Articles he was presently with great Ceremony installed anew.


B. What needed that, seeing he was still but Protector?


A. But the Articles of this Petition were not all the same with those of his
former Instrument. For now there was to be another House; and whereas before
his Council was to name his Successor, he had power now to do it himself; so
that he was an absolute Monarch, and might leave the Succession to his Son, if
he would, and so successively, or transfer it to whom he pleased.

The Ceremony being ended, the Parliament adjourned to the 20 th of January
following; and then the other House also sat with their Fellows.

The House of Commons being now full, took little notice of the other House;
wherein there were not of sixty Persons, above nine Lords, but fell a
questioning all that their Fellows had done, during the time of their
Seclusion, whence had followed the avoidance of the Power newly placed in the
Protector. Therefore going to the House, he made a Speech to them ending in
these words; By the Living God I must, and do dissolve you.

In this year the English gave the Spaniard another great Blow at Santa Cruz,
not much less than that they had given him the year before at Cadiz.

About the time of the Dissolution of this Parliament the Royalists had another
Design against the Protector, which was to make an Insurrection in England, the
King being in Flanders ready to second them with an Army thence. But this also
was discovered by Treachery, and came to nothing, but the ruin of those that
were engaged in it; whereof many in the beginning of the next year were by a
High Court of Justice imprisoned, and some executed.

This year also was Major General Lambert put out of all Employment, a man
second to none but Oliver in the favor of the Army; but because he expected by
that favor, or by promise from the Protector, to be his Successor in the
Supreme Power, it would have been dangerous to let him have Command in the
Army; the Protector having designed for his Successor his eldest Son Richard.

In the year 1658. September the third, the Protector died at White Hall;
having ever since his last Establishment been perplexed with fear of being
killed by some desperate attempt of the Royalists.

Being importuned in his sickness by his Privy Council to name his Successor,
he named his Son Richard, who encouraged thereunto, not by his own Ambition,
but by Fleetwood, Desbrough, Thurloe, and other of his Council, was content to
take it upon him, and presently Addresses were made to him from the Armies in
England, Scotland and Ireland. His first business was the chargeable and
splendid Funeral of his Father.

Thus was Richard Cromwell seated in the Imperial Throne of England, Scotland
and Ireland, Successor to his Father, lifted up to it by the Officers of the
Army then in Town, and congratulated by all the parts of the Army throughout
the three Nations; scarce any Garrison omitting their particular flattering
Addresses to him.


B. Seeing the Army approved of him, how came he so soon cast off?


A. The Army was inconstant, he himself irresolute, and without any Military
Glory. And though the two principal Officers had a near relation to him; yet
neither of them, but Lambert, was the great Favorite of the Army; and by
courting Fleetwood to take upon him the Protectorship, and by tampering with
the Soldiers, had gotten again to be a Colonel. He and the rest of the
Officers had a Council at Wallingford-house, (where Fleetwood dwelt) for the
dispossessing of Richard, though they had not yet considered how the Nations
should be governed afterward; for from the beginning of the Rebellion the
Method of Ambition was constantly this; first to destroy, and then to consider
what they should set up.


B. Could not the Protector, who kept his Court at White Hall, discover what
the business of the Officers was at Wallingford-house so near him?


A. Yes; he was by diverse of his Friends informed of it, and councel'd by some
of them, who would have done it, to kill the Chief of them; but he had not
courage enough to give them such a Commission. He took therefore the Counsel of
some milder Persons, which was to call a Parliament. Whereupon Writs were
presently sent to those that were in the last Parliament of the other House,
and other Writs to the Sheriffs for the Election of Knights and Burgesses, to
assemble on the 27 th of January following. Elections were made according to
the Ancient manner, and a House of Commons now of the right English temper, and
about 400 in number, including twenty for Scotland, and as many for Ireland.
Being met, they take themselves, without the Protector and other House, to be a
Parliament, and to have the Supreme Power of the three Nations.

For the first business, they intended the Power of that other House: but
because the Protector had recommended to them, for their first business, an Act
(already drawn up) for the Recognition of his Protectoral Power; they began
with that; and voted, (after a fortnights Deliberation) that an Act should be
made, whereof this Act of Recognition should be part, and that another part
should be for the bounding of the Protector's Power, and for the securing the
Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Subject; and that all should
pass together.


B. Why did these Men obey the Protector at first, in meeting upon his only
Summons? Was not that as full a Recognition of his Power as was needful? Why by
this Example did they teach the People that he was to be obeyed, and then by
putting Laws upon him, teach them the contrary? Was it not the Protector that
made the Parliament? Why did they not acknowledge their Maker?


A. I believe it is the desire of most men to bear Rule, but few of them know
what Title one has to it more than another, besides the Right of the Sword.


B. If they acknowledged the Right of the Sword, they were neither just, nor
wise to oppose the present Government, set up and approved by all the Forces of
the three Kingdoms. The Principles of this House of Commons were, no doubt, the
very same with theirs who began the Rebellion; and would (if they could have
raised a sufficient Army) have done the same against the Protector; and the
General of their Army would, in like manner, have reduced them to a Rump: for
they that keep an Army, and cannot master it, must be subject to it as much as
he that keeps a Lion in his House. The temper of all the Parliaments, since the
time of Queen Elizabeth, has been the same with the temper of this Parliament,
and shall always be such as long as the Presbyterians and men of Democratical
Principles have the like Influence upon the Elections.


A. After they resolved concerning the other House; that during this Parliament
they would transact with it, but without intrenching upon the Right of the
Peers, to have Writs sent to them in all future Parliaments. These Votes being
passed, they proceed to another, wherein they assume to themselves the Power of
the Militia. Also to show their Supreme Power, they delivered out of prison
some of those that had been (they said) illegally committed by the former
Protector. Other Points concerning Civil Rights, and concerning Religion, very
pleasing to the People, were now also under their Consideration. So that in the
end of this year the Protector was no less jealous of the Parliament than of
the Council of Officers at Wallingford-house.


B. Thus it is when ignorant men will undertake Reformation. Here are three
Parties, the Protector, the Parliament, and the Army. The Protector against
Parliament and Army, the Parliament against Army and Protector, and the Army
against Protector and Parliament.


A. In the beginning of 1659. the Parliament passed diverse other Acts; one was
to forbid the Meetings in Council of the Army Officers without order from the
Protector, and both Houses. Another, That no man shall have any Command or
Trust in the Army, who did not first under his hand engage himself, never to
interrupt any of the Members, but that they might freely meet and debate in the
House. And to please the Soldiers, they voted to take presently into their
Consideration the means of paying them their Arrears. But whilst they were
considering this, the Protector (according to the first of those Acts) forbad
the meeting of Officers at Wallingford-house. This made the Government, which
by the disagreement of the Protector and Army was already loose, to fall in
pieces. For the Officers from Wallingford-house, with Soldiers enough, came
over to White Hall, and brought with them a Commission ready drawn (giving
power to Desborough to dissolve the Parliament) for the Protector to sign;
which also his Heart and his Party sailing him, he signed. The Parliament
nevertheless continued sitting, but at the end of the Week, the House adjourned
till the Monday after, being April the 25 th. At their coming on Monday
morning, they found the door of the House shut up, and the passages to it
filled with Soldiers, who plainly told them they must sit no longer. Richard's
Authority, and business in Town, being thus at an end, he retired into the
Country, where within a few days (upon promise of the payment of his Debts,
which his Father's Funeral had made great) he signed a Resignation of his
Protectorship.


B. To whom?


A. To no body. But after ten days Cessation of the Sovereign Power, some of
the Rumpers that were in Town together with the old Speaker Mr. William
Lenthal, resolved amongst themselves, and with Lambert, Heslerig, and other
Officers, who were also Rumpers, in all 42, to go into the House, which they
did, and were by the Army declared to be the Parliament.

There were also in Westminster Hall at that time, about their private
business, some few of those whom the Army had secluded in 1648. and were called
the Secluded Members. These knowing themselves to have been elected by the same
Authority, and to have the same Right to sit, attempted to get into the House,
but were kept out by the Soldiers. The first Vote of the Rump re-seated was;
That such persons as heretofore Members of this Parliament have not sitten in
this Parliament since the year 1648. shall not sit in this House, till farther
order of the Parliament; and thus the Rump recovered their Authority May the
seventh 1659. which they lost in April 1653.


B. Seeing there have been so many Shiftings of the Supreme Authority, I pray
you for memories sake, repeat them briefly in times and order.


A. First; from 1640. to 1648. when the King was murdered, the Sovereignty was
disputed between King Charles the first, and the Presbyterian-Parliament.
Secondly, from 1648. to 1653. the Power was in that part of the Parliament
which voted the Trial of the King, and declared themselves, without King or
House of Lords, to have the Supreme Authority of England and Ireland. For there
were in the Long Parliament two Factions, the Presbyterian and Independent, the
former whereof sought only the subjection of the King, not his destruction
directly, the latter sought directly his destruction, and this part is it which
was called the Rump. Thirdly, from April the 20 th to July the fourth the
Supreme Power was in the hands of a Council of State constituted by Cromwell.
Fourthly, from July the 4 th to December the 12 th of the same year, it was in
the hands of men called unto it by Cromwell, whom he termed Men of Fidelity and
Integrity, and made them a Parliament, which was called in contempt of one of
the Members Barebone's Parliament. Fifthly, from December the 12 th 1653. to
September the third 1658. it was in the hands of Oliver Cromwell with the Title
of Protector. Sixthly, from September the third 1658. to April the 25 th 1659.
Richard Cromwell had it as Successor to his Father. Seventhly, from April the 25
th 1659. to May the seventh of the same year, it was no where. Eighthly, from
May the seventh 1659. the Rump which was turned out of doors in 1653. recovered
it again, and shall lose it again to a Committee of Safety, and again recover
it, and again lose it to the Right Owner.


B. By whom, and by what Art came the Rump to be turned out the second time?


A. One would think them safe enough; the Army in Scotland, which when it was
in London, had helped Oliver to put down the Rump, submitted now, begged
pardon, and promised obedience. The Soldiers in Town had their pay mended, and
the Commanders every where took the old Engagement, whereby they had
acknowledged their Authority heretofore. They also received their Commissions
in the House it self from the Speaker, who was Generalissimo. Fleetwood was
made Lieutenant General with such, and so many Limitations, as were thought
necessary by the Rump, that remembered how they had been served by the General
Oliver. Also Henry Cromwell, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, having resigned his
Commission by Command, returned into England.

But Lambert, to whom (as was said) Oliver had promised the Succession, and as
well as the Rump knew the way to the Protectorship, by Oliver's own footsteps,
was resolved to proceed in it, upon the first opportunity, which presented it
self presently after.

Besides some Plots of Royalists, whom after the old fashion they again
persecuted, there was an Insurrection made against them by Presbyterians in
Cheshire, headed by Sir George Booth, one of the Secluded Members, they were in
number about 3000, and their pretense was for a Free Parliament; there was a
great talk of another Rising, or endeavor to rise in Devonshire and Cornwall,
at the same time. To suppress Sir George Booth, the Rump sent down more than a
sufficient Army under Lambert, which quickly defeated the Cheshire Party, and
recovered Chester, Leverpool, and all the other places they had seized. Diverse
also of their Commanders in and after the Battle were taken Prisoners, whereof
Sir George Booth himself was one.

This Exploit done, Lambert before his return, Caressed his Soldiers with an
Entertainment at his own House in Yorkshire, and got their consent to a
Petition to be made to the House, that a General might be set up in the Army,
as being unfit that the Army should be judged by any power extrinsick to it
self.


B. I do not see that unfitness.


A. Nor I. But it was (as I have heard) an Axiom of Sir Henry Vane's: but it so
much displeased the Rump, that they voted, That the having of more Generals in
the Army than were already settled, was unnecessary, burdensome, and dangerous
to the Common wealth.


B. This was not Oliver's method: for though this Cheshire-Victory had been as
glorious as that of Oliver at Dunbar, yet it was not the Victory that made
Oliver General, but the Resignation of Fairfax, and the profer of it to Cromwell
by the Parliament.


A. But Lambert thought so well of himself, as to expect it: therefore, at his
return to London, he and other Officers Assembling at Wallingford-house, drew
their Petition into form, and called it a Representation, wherein the Chief
Point was to have a General; but many other of less Importance were added; and
this they represented to the House October the fourth by Major General
Desborough: and this so far forth awed them, as to teach them so much good
manners as to promise to take it presently into debate. Which they did; and
October the 12 th, having recovered their Spirits, voted; That the Commissions
of Lambert, Desborough, and others of the Council at Wallingford-house, should
be void. Item, That the Army should be governed by a Commission to Fleetwood,
Monk, Haslerig, Walton, Morley and Overton, till February the 12 th following.
And to make this good against the force they expected from Lambert, they
ordered Haslerig and Morley to issue Warrants to such Officers as they could
trust, to bring their Soldiers next morning into Westminster, which was done
somewhat too late; for Lambert had first brought his Soldiers thither, and
beset the House, and turned back the Speaker, which was then coming to it: but
Haslerig's Forces marching about St. James's Park-wall, came into St.
Margaret's Churchyard; and so both Parties looked all day one upon another,
like Enemies, but offered not to fight, whereby the Rump was put out of
possession of the House; and the Officers continued their Meeting, as before,
at Wallingford-house.

There they chose from among themselves, with some few of the City, a
Committee, which they called the Committee of Safety; whereof the Chief were
Lambert and Vane, who with the advice of a General Council of Officers, had
power to call Delinquents to Trial. To suppress Rebellions; To treat with
Foreign States, etc. You see now the Rump cut off, and the Supreme Power
(which is charged with Salus Populi) transferred to a Council of Officers. And
yet Lambert hopes for it in the end. But one of their Limitations was; That
they should within six weeks present to the Army a new Model of the Government;
if they had done so, do you think they would have preferred Lambert or any other
to the Supreme Authority therein, rather than themselves?


B. I think not. When the Rump had put into Commission (amongst a few others)
for the Government of the Army, that is to say, for the Government of the three
Nations, General Monk, already Commander in Chief of the Army in Scotland, and
that had done much greater things in this War, than Lambert; how durst they
leave him out of this Committee of Safety? Or how could Lambert think that
General Monk would forgive it, and not endeavor to fasten the Rump again?


A. They thought not of him; his Gallantry had been shown on remote Stages,
Ireland and Scotland. His Ambition had not appeared here in their Contentions
for the Government, but he had complied both with Richard and the Rump. After
General Monk had signified by Letter his dislike of the Proceedings of Lambert
and his Fellows, they were much surpised, and began to think him more
considerable than they had done; but it was too late.


B. Why? His Army was too small for so great an Enterprise.


A. The General knew very well his own, and their Forces; both what they were
then, and how they might be augmented, and what generally City and Country
wished for, which was the Restitution of the King: which to bring about there
needed no more, but to come with his Army (though not very great) to London: To
the doing whereof there was no obstacle but the Army with Lambert. What could
he do in this Case? If he had declared presently for the King, or for a
Free-Parliament, all the Armies in England would have joined against him, and
assuming the Title of a Parliament, would have furnished themselves with Money.

General Monk, after he had thus quarrelled by his Letter with the
Councel-Officers, secured first those Officers of his own Army, which were
Anabaptists, and therefore not to be trusted, and put others into their places;
then drawing his Forces together, marched to Barwick. Being there he indicted a
Convention of the Scots, of whom he desired that they would take order for the
security of that Nation in his absence, and raise some maintenance for his Army
in their March. The Convention promised for the security of the Nation their
best endeavor, and raised him a Sum of Money, not great, but enough for this
purpose, excusing themselves upon their present wants. On the other side, the
Committee of Safety, with the greatest and best part of their Army, sent
Lambert to oppose him; but at the same time by diverse Messages and Mediators,
urged him to a Treaty; which he consented to, and sent three Officers to London
to Treat with as many of theirs. These six suddenly concluded (without power
from the General) upon these Articles; That the King be excluded; a Free State
settled; the Ministry and Universities encouraged, with diverse others. Which the
General liked not, and imprisoned one of his Commissioners for exceeding his
Commission. Whereupon another Treaty was agreed on of five to five. But whilst
these Treaties were in hand, Haslerig, a Member of the Rump, seized on
Portsmouth, and the Soldiers sent by the Committee of Safety to reduce it,
instead of that, entered into the Town, and joined with Haslerig. Secondly, the
City renewed their Tumults for a Free-Parliament. Thirdly, the Lord Fairfax, a
Member also of the Rump, and greatly favored in Yorkshire, was raising Forces
there behind Lambert, who being now between two Armies, his Enemies, would
gladly have fought with the General. Fourthly, there came news that Devonshire
and Cornwall were Listing of Soldiers. Lastly, Lambert's Army wanting Money, and
sure they should not be furnished from the Council of Officers, which had
neither Authority, nor Strength to Levy Money, grew discontented, and (for
their free Quarter) were odious to the Northern Countries.


B. I wonder why the Scots were so ready to furnish General Monk with Money;
for they were no Friends to the Rump?


A. I know not; but I believe the Scots would have parted with a greater Sum,
rather than the English should not have gone together by the ears amongst
themselves. The Council of Officers being now beset with so many Enemies,
produced speedily their Model of Government, which was to have a
Free-Parliament, which should meet December the 15 th, but with such
qualifications of no King, no House of Lords, as made the City more angry than
before. To send Soldiers into the West, to suppress those that were rising
there, they durst not, for fear of the City; nor could they raise any other for
want of Money. There remained nothing but to break, and quitting
Wallingford-house, to shift for themselves.

This coming to the knowledge of their Army in the North, they deserted
Lambert; and the Rump the 26 th of December repossessed the House.


B. Seeing the Rump was now re-seated, the business pretended by General Monk
for his marching to London was at an end.


A. The Rump, though seated, was not well settled, but (in the midst of so many
Tumults for a Free-Parliament) had as much need of the General's coming up now,
as before. He therefore sent them word, that because he thought them not yet
secure enough, he would come up to London with his Army; which they not only
accepted, but also entreated him to do, and voted him for his Services 1000 l.
a year.

The General marching toward London, the Country every where petitioned him
for a Free-Parliament. The Rump, to make room in London for his Army, dislodged
their own. The General for all that, had not let fall a word in all this time,
that could be taken for a Declaration of his final Design.


B. How did the Rump revenge themselves on Lambert?


A. They never troubled him; nor do I know any cause of so gentle dealing with
him: but certainly Lambert was the ablest of any Officer they had to do them
service, when they should have means, and need to employ him. After the General
was come to London, the Rump sent to the City for their part of a Tax of 100000
l. a month, for six months, according to an Act, which the Rump had made
formerly, before their disseizin by the Committee of Safety. But the City, who
were adverse to the Rump, and keen upon a Free-Parliament, could not be brought
to give their Money to their Enemies, and to purposes repugnant to their own.
Hereupon the Rump sent order to the General to break down the City Gates and
their Portcullices, and to imprison certain obstinate Citizens. This he
performed, and it was the last service he did them.

About this time the Commission, by which General Monk, with others, had the
Government of the Army put into their hands by the Rump, before the usurpation
of the Council of Officers, came to expire, which the present Rump renewed.


B. He was thereby the sixth part of the General of the whole Forces of the
Commonwealth. If I had been as the Rump, he should have been sole General. In
such Cases as this, there cannot be a greater Vice than pinching. Ambition
should be liberal.


A. After the pulling down of the City Gates, the General sent a Letter to the
Rump to let them know, that that Service was much against his Nature, and to
put them in mind how well the City had served the Parliament throughout the
whole War.


B. Yes. But for the City the Parliament could never have made the War, nor the
Rump ever have murdered the King.


A. The Rump considered not the merit of the City, nor the good Nature of the
General. They were busy. They were giving out Commissions; making of Acts for
Abjuration of the King and his Line, and for the Old Engagement and conferring
with the City to get Money. The General also desired to hear Conference between
some of the Rump, and some of the Secluded Members, concerning the Justice of
their Seclusion, and of the hurt that could follow from their readmission. And
it was granted, after long Conference, the General finding the Rump's pretenses
unreasonable and ambitious, declared himself, with the City, for a
Free-Parliament, and came to Westminster with the Secluded Members, (whom he
had appointed to meet and stay for him at White Hall) and replaced them in the
House amongst the Rumpers; so that now the same Cattle that were in the House
of Commons in 1640. (except those that were dead, and those that went from them
to the late King at Oxford) are all there again.


B. But this (methinks) was no good Service to the King, unless they had learnt
better Principles.


A. They had learnt nothing. The Major part was now again Presbyterian. It Is
true they were so grateful to General Monk, as to make him General of all the
Forces in the three Nations. They did well also to make void the Engagement;
but it was because those Acts were made to the prejudice of their Party; but
recalled none of their own Rebellious Ordinances, nor did any thing in order to
the good of the present King: but on the contrary they declared by a Vote, that
the late King began the War against his two Houses.


B. The two Houses considered as two Persons, were they not two of the King's
Subjects? If a King raise an Army against his Subject, is it lawful for that
Subject to resist with force, when (as in this Case) he might have had peace
upon his submission?


A. They knew they had acted vilely and sottishly; but because they had always
pretended to greater than ordinary wisdom and godliness, they were loath to
confess it. The Presbyterians now saw their time to make a Confession of their
Faith, and presented it to the House of Commons, to show they had not changed
their Principles, which (after six readings in the House) was voted to be
printed, and once a year to be read publicly in every Church.


B. I say again, this re-establishing of the Long Parliament was no good
service to the King.


A. Have a little patience. They were re-established with two Conditions. One
to determine their sitting before the end of March; another to send out Writs
before their rising for new Elections.


B. That qualifies.


A. That brought in the King: for few of this Long Parliament (the Country
having felt the smart of their former Service) could get themselves chosen
again. This New Parliament began to sit April the 25 th 1660. How soon these
called in the King; with what Joy and Triumph he was received; how earnestly
his Majesty pressed the Parliament for the Act of Oblivion, and how few were
excepted out of it, you know as well as I.


B. But I have not yet observed in the Presbyterians any oblivion of their
former Principles. We are but returned to the state we were in at the beginning
of the Sedition.


A. Not so: for before that time, though the Kings of England had the Right of
the Militia in virtue of the Sovereignty, and without dispute, and without any
particular Act of Parliament directly to that purpose; yet now, after this
bloody dispute, the next (which is the present) Parliament in proper and
express terms has declared the same to be the Right of the King only, without
either of his Houses of Parliament; which Act is more instructive to the
People, than any Arguments drawn from the Title of Sovereign, and consequently
fitter to disarm the Ambition of all seditious Haranguers for the time to come.


B. I pray God it prove so. Howsoever I must confess, that this Parliament has
done all that a Parliament can do for the security of our Peace: which I think
also would be enough, if Preachers would take heed of instilling evil
Principles into their Auditory. I have seen in this Revolution a circular
motion, of the Sovereign Power through two Usurpers, from the late King to this
his Son: for (leaving out the Power of the Council of Officers, which was but
temporary, and no otherwise owned by them, but in trust) it moved from King
Charles the First to the Long Parliament, from thence to the Rump, from the
Rump to Oliver Cromwell, and then back again from Richard Cromwell to the Rump,
thence to the Long Parliament, and thence to King Charles the Second, where
long may it remain.


A. Amen. And may he have as often as there shall be need such a General.


B. You have told me little of the General till now in the end: but truly, I
think, the bringing of his little Army entirely out of Scotland, up to London,
was the greatest Stratagem that is extant in History.


FINIS.
Books lately printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1682.
DIVINITY.
SIxty one Sermons preached mostly upon public occasions, whereof five
formerly Printed, by A. Littleton D. D. Folio. Brevis Demonstratio, being the
truth of Christian Religion proved by reason, in Twelves p. 10 d. The primitive
Institution, showing the Antiquity and usefulness of Catechizing, by the Author
of this Book, price 12 d. A Funeral Sermon for a drowned Man, Octavo. Mr.
Howel's Visitation Sermon, Quarto. Dr. Hascard's two Sermons, Quarto. Mr.
Maningham's Sermon, Quarto. A Sermon, preached at the Savoy, accused for
Heretical, French and English. A modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is briefly
considered the Reasons, why the Clergy are so neglected, by the Author of this
Book, Octavo. H. Grotius's Catechism: Greek, Latin and English, Octavo. The
Spirit of Prophecy, proving that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets, written
by the Directions of, and recommended to the Press by Dr. P. Gunning, Lord
Bishop of Ely, Octavo. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits, in a sincere
Discourse to the French King; written by a Roman Catholic, in Quarto. The
Justifying Faith, or the Faith by which the just do live, Octavo. Mercy
Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow Bounds which
have wont to be set to it, by Ed. Lane Vicar of Sparsholt, Quarto. Responsio
Valedictoria ad secundam Sandii Epistolam, etc. per Samuel Gardener, S. T. D.
Du Moulin's Reflections Reverberated, being a full Answer to his damning
Doctrine, also a Confutation of the railing of Edmond Hickeringgil, by Ed.
Lane, in Quarto.
The Three last New. HISTORY.
An Institution of general History, or the History of the World; being a
Complete body thereof, in two Volumes, by William Howel LL. D. and Chancellor
of Lincoln, Folio, printed 1680. Historical Collection, being an Account of the
proceedings of the four last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, wherein is
contained the complete Journals both of Lords and Commons of that time; by
Heywood Townsend Esquire, Member in those Parliaments, Folio, printed 1680. A
Chronicle of the late intestine Wars of the three Kingdoms, of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, from 1639. to 1660. written by Mr. Heath, since
continued to 1674. by J. P. in Folio. A Voyage into the Levant, being a
Relation of a Journey lately performed from England to Grand Cairo, by Sir
Henry Blunt, Twelves pr. 1 s. Some years Travel into diverse parts of Asia and
Africa the great, by Sir Tho. Herbert, the 4 th Edition. Parthenissa, written
by the Earl of Orrery, in Folio. Clelia, the whole work in five parts, written
in French, now put into English complete, in Folio. A Description of Candia,
with an Account of the last Siege and surrender of it to the Turks, in Octavo.
Calliopes Cabinet opened, wherein all Gentlemen may be informed how to order
themselves for Feasts, Funerals, and all public meetings, in Twelves, price
bound 8 d. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing the Original
Antiquity of that Dukedom, in Quarto, price 6 d. The Travels of Ulysses, by
Thomas Hobbs, in Twelves bound, price 1 s. The present State of London,
containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls, River, Bridge, etc. of that City, by J.
B. Esquire. Scarron's Comical Romance, being an Historical Account of a Company
of Stage Players, full of Variety of Wit and Pleasure, in Folio. The Wonders of
the Peak in Darbyshire, commonly called the Devil's Arse of Peak, by Tho.
Hobbs, in Octavo. The Life and Death of Mahumet, the Author of the Turkish
Religion, being an Account of his Tribe, Parents, etc. by the Author of this
Book, in Octavo. The Historian's Guide, being a Summary Account of all the
Actions, Exploits, Sieges, etc. that have happened in England for fourscore
years past, in Twelves. The Connection, being Collections of some principal
matters in the Reign of King James, being of the time that lies betwixt Mr.
Townsend's Historical Collections, and Mr. Rushworth's, price 1 s. 6 d. The
Moors Baffled, or a Discourse of Tangier, as it was under the Government of the
Earl of Tiviot; by the Author of this Book. All Homer's Works translated into
English, by Thomas Hobbs. Popish Cruelties, showed in a Narrative of Parey's
Trial and Condemnation, in Folio 1 s. An Historical Narration of Heresy, by
Tho. Hobbs, in Folio. The Life of Tho. Hobbs, in a Poem in English, in Fol.
Consideration on the Loyalty, Religion, Reputation, and Manners of Mr. Hobbs,
in Octavo, price bound 1 s. The Memoires and rare Adventures of Silvia Moliere,
all the six parts, in Twelves, price 4 s. Tho. Hobbs Angli Malmsbur. Vita,
being an Account of Mr. Hobbs, of the Books he wrote, of the times when, and
the occasions thereof, of the Books and Authors against him, of his
Conversation and Acquaintance, etc. in Octavo, printed 1681.
LAW.
The Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court Leets, Court Barons, Court
Marshals, etc. by J. Kitchen, in Octavo. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae,
Author, Francis Clark, in Twelves. Sir Simon Deiggs Parsons-Councellor, in
Octavo, third Edition, 1681. Clerks Manual, a Book of Presidents, in Octavo.
Officina Brevium, select forms of Writs and other process, etc. Of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, etc. in Folio, price 12 s. printed 1680 A Dialogue
betwixt a Student and a Philosopher, about the Common Laws of England, in
Octavo, by Thomas Hobbs.
Poetry and Plays.
Melpomene, or the Muses delight, in Octavo. The Confinement with Annot. in
Octavo. The White Devil, in Quarto. Catiline's Conspiracy, in Quarto. Rival
Kings, in Quarto. Old Troop, in Quarto. Amorous Gallant, in Quarto. Mock
Duellist, in Quarto. Wrangling Lovers, in Quarto. Tom Essence, in Quarto.
French Conjurer, in Quarto. Wits led by the Nose, in Quarto. Counterfeit
Bridegroom, in Quarto. Tunbridg-Wells, in Quarto. Man of New Market, in Quarto.
Constant Nymph, in Quarto.
Miscellanies.
The Deaf and Dumb Man's Discourse, in Octavo. The complete Measurer, in
Octavo. The American Physician, in Octavo. Lord Bacon's Apothegms, in Twelves,
6 d. bound. Hobbs's and Lany about Liberty. in Twelves. Reflections of
Philosophers, in Octavo. Hobbs Natural Philosophy, in Octavo. Fevers cured by
Jesuits Powder, in 12o 1681. Oliver Cromwell's Sermon preached 1649. Filmer of
Usury, in Twelves. Saunders's Physics, in Octavo. The Court of Curiosity,
being the Interpretation of Dreams, and a Fortune-Book, in Octavo 1681. Hobbs
his defense of his Leviathan, in Octavo. Hobbs his Physical Problems, in
Octavo. The Addresses defended, by Dr. J. H. The Remains of the three great
Wits, viz. Abraham Cowly, Sir John Berkenhead, and Samuel Butler, the Author of
Hudibrass, aprinting in Quarto. The fifteen Comforts of inconsiderate Marriage,
Twelves and price 1 s.
FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO A BOOK Published by Dr. BRAMHALL, late Bishop of Derry; CALLED
The Catching of the Leviathan.

Together With an Historical Narration Concerning HERESY, And the Punishment
thereof.

By THOMAS HOBBES of Malmesbury.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr, 1682.

TO THE READER.
AS in all things which I have written, so also in this Piece, I have
endeavored all I can to be perspicuous; but yet your own attention is always
necessary. The late Lord Bishop of Derry published a Book called The Catching
of Leviathan, in which he has put together diverse Sentences picked out of my
Leviathan, which stand there plainly and firmly proved, and sets them down
without their Proofs, and without the order of their dependence one upon
another; and calls them Atheism, Blasphemy, Impiety, Subversion of Religion,
and by other names of that kind. My request unto you is, That when he cites my
words for Erroneous, you will be pleased to turn to the place it self, and see
whether they be well proved, and how to be understood. Which labor his
Lordship might have saved you, if he would have vouchsafed, as well to have
weighed my Arguments before you, as to have showed you my Conclusions. His Book
contains two Chapters, the one concerning Religion, the other concerning
Politics. Because he does not so much as offer any refutation of any thing in
my Leviathan concluded, I needed not to have answered either of them. Yet to
the first I here answer, because the words Atheism, Impiety and the like, are
words of the greatest defamation possible. And this I had done sooner, if I had
sooner known that such a Book was extant. He wrote it ten years since, and yet
I never heard of it till about three Months since; so little talk there was of
his Lordship's Writings. If you want leisure or care of the questions between
us, I pray you condemn me not upon report. To judge and not examine is not
just. Farewell.

T. Hobbes.

CHAP. I. That the Hobbian Principles are destructive to Christianity and all
Religion.
J. D. THe Image of God is not altogether defaced by the fall of Man, but that
there will remain some practical notions of God and Goodness; which, when the
mind is free from vagrant desires, and violent passions, do shine as clearly in
the heart, as other speculative notions do in the head. Hence it is, That there
was never any Nation so barbarous or savage throughout the whole world, which
had not their God. They who did never wear clothes upon their backs, who did
never know Magistrate but their Father, yet have their God, and their Religious
Rites and Devotions to him. Hence it is, That the greatest Atheists in any
sudden danger do unwittingly cast their eyes up to Heaven, as craving aid from
thence, and in a thunder creep into some hole to hide themselves. And they who
are conscious to themselves of any secret Crimes, though they be secure enough
from the justice of men, do yet feel the blind blows of a Guilty Conscience,
and fear Divine Vengeance. This is acknowledged by T. H. himself in his lucid
Intervals. That we may know what worship of God natural reason does assign, let
us begin with his attributes, where it is manifest in the first place, That
existency is to be attributed to him. To which he adds Infiniteness,
Incomprehensibility, Unity, Vbiquity. Thus for Attributes, next for Actions.
Concerning external Actions, wherewith God is to be worshipped, the most
general precept of reason is, that they be signs of honor, under which are
contained Prayers, Thanksgivings, Oblations and Sacrifices.


T. H. Hitherto his Lordship discharges me of Atheism. What need he to say
that All Nations, how barbarous soever, yet have their Gods and Religious
Rites, and Atheists are frighted with thunder, and feel the blind blows of
Conscience? It might have been as apt a Preface to any other of his Discourses
as this. I expect therefore in the next place to be told that I deny again my
before recited Doctrine.


J. D. Yet to let us see how inconsistent and irreconcilable he is with
himself, elsewhere reckoning up all the Laws of Nature at large, even twenty in
number, he has not one word that concerns Religion, or that has the least
relation in the world to God. As if a man were like the Colt of a wild Ass in
the wilderness, without any owner or obligation. Thus in describing the Laws of
Nature, this great Clerk forgeteth the God of Nature, and the main and
principle Laws of Nature, which contains a man's duty to his God, and the
principal end of his Creation.


T. H. After I had ended the discourse he mentions of the Laws of Nature, I
thought it fittest in the last place once for all, to say they were the Laws of
God, then when they were delivered in the Word of God; but before being not
known by men for any thing but their own natural reason, they were but
Theorems, tending to peace, and those uncertain, as being but conclusions of
particular men, and therefore not properly Laws. Besides, I had formerly in my
Book De Cive, cap. 4. proved them severally one by one out of the Scriptures;
which his Lordship had read and knew. 'Twas therefore an unjust charge of his
to say, I had not one word in them that concerns Religion, or that has the
least relation in the world to God; and this upon no other ground then that I
added not to every article, This Law is in the Scripture. But why he should
call me (ironically) a great Clerk, I cannot tell. I suppose he would make men
believe I arrogated to my self all the learning of a great Clerk, Bishop, or
other inferior Minister. A Learned Bishop, is that Bishop that can interpret
all parts of Scripture truly, and congruently to the harmony of the whole; that
has learnt the History and Laws of the Church, down from the Apostles time to
his own; and knows what is the nature of a Law Civil, Divine, Natural, and
Positive; and how to govern well the Parochial Ministers of his Diocese, so
that they may both by Doctrine and Example keep the people in the belief of all
Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation, and in obedience to the Laws of their
Country. This is a Learned Bishop. A Learned Minister is he that has learned
the way by which men may be drawn from Avarice, Pride, Sensuality, Profaneness,
Rebellious Principles, and all other vices by eloquent and powerful disgracing
them, both from Scripture and from Reason; and can terrify men from vice by
discreet uttering of the punishments denounced against wicked men, and by
deducing rationally the damage they receive by it in the end. In one word, he
is a Learned Minister that can preach such Sermons as St. Chrysostom preached
to the Antiochians when he was Presbyter in that City. Could his Lordship find
in my Book that I arrogated to my self the eloquence or wisdom of St.
Chrisostom, or the ability of governing the Church? It Is one thing to know what
is to be done, another thing to know how to do it. But his Lordship was pleased
to use any artifice to disgrace me in any kind whatsoever.


J. D. Perhaps he will say that he handles the Laws of Nature there, only so
far as may serve to the constitution or settlement of a Commonwealth. In good
time, let it be so. He has devised us a trim Commonwealth, which is founded
neither upon Religion toward God, nor Justice toward Man; but merely upon
self-interest, and self-preservation. Those rays of heavenly Light, those
natural seeds of Religion, which God himself has imprinted in the heart of
man, are more efficatious toward preservation of a Society; whether we regard
the nature of the thing, or the blessing of God, then all his Pacts, and
Surrenders, and Translations of power. He who unteacheth men their duty to God,
may make them Eye-servants, so long as their interest does oblige them to obey;
but is no fit Master to teach men conscience and fidelity.


T. H. He has not yet found the place where I contradict either the Existence,
or Infiniteness, or Incomprehensibility, or Unity, or Ubiquity of God. I am
therefore yet absolved of Atheism. But I am, he says, inconsistent and
irreconcilable with my self, that is, I am, (though he says not so, he thinks)
a forgetful blockhead. I cannot help that: But my forgetfulness appears not
here. Even his Lordship where he says, Those rays of heavenly Light, those
seeds of Religion, which God himself has imprinted in the heart of man
(meaning natural reason) are more efficacious to the preservation of Society,
than all the Pacts, Surrenders, and Translating of Power, had forgotten to
except the Old Pact of the Jews, and the New Pact of Christians. But pardoning
that, did he hope to make any wise man believe, that when this Nation very
lately was an Anarchy, and dissolute multitude of men, doing every one what his
own reason or imprinted Light suggested, did again out of that same Light call
in the King, and piece again, and ask pardon for the faults, which that their
illumination had brought them into, rather than out of fear of perpetual
danger, and hope of preservation.


J. D. Without Religion, Societies are like but soapy bubbles, quickly
dissolved. It was the judgment of as wise a man as, T. H. himself (though
perhaps he will hardly be persuaded to it) that Rome ought more of its grandeur
to Religion, than either to strength or stratagems. We have not exceeded the
Spaniards in number, nor the Galls in strength, nor the Carthaginians in craft,
nor the Grecians in art, etc. but we have overcome all Nations by our Piety and
Religion.


T. H. Did not his Lordship forget himself here again, in approving this
sentence of Tully, which makes the Idolatry of the Romans, not only better than
the Idolatry of other Nations; but also better than the Religion of the Jews,
whose Law Christ himself says, he came not to destroy but to fulfill? And that
the Romans overcame both them and other Nations, by their Piety, when it is
manifest that the Romans overran the world by injustice and cruelty, and that
their Victories ought not to be ascribed to the Piety of the Romans, but to the
impiety as well of the Jews as of other Nations? But what meant he by saying
Tully was as wise a man as T. H. himself, though perhaps he will hardly be
persuaded to it? Was that any part of the controversy? No: Then it was out of
his way. God promises to assist good men in their way, but not out of their
way. It Is therefore the less wonder that his Lordship was in this place
deserted of the Light which God imprints in the hearts of rudest Savages.


J. D. Among his Laws he incerteth gratitude to men as the third precept of the
Law of Nature; but of the gratitude of mankind to their Creator, there is a
deep silence. If men had sprung up from the earth in a night like Mushroms or
Excresences, without all sense of Honor, Justice, Conscience, or Gratitude, he
could not have vilified the humane nature more then he does.


T. H. My Lord discovers here an ignorance of such method as is necessary for
lawful and strict reasoning and explication of the truth in controversy. And
not only that, but also how little able he is to fix his mind upon what he
reads in other men's Writings. When I had defined Ingratitude universally, he
finds fault that I do not mention Ingratitude toward God, as if his Lordship
knew not that an universal comprehends all the particulars. When I had defined
Equity universally, why did he not as well blame me for not telling what that
Equity is in God? He is grateful to the man of whom he receives a good turn,
that confesses or makes appear he is pleased with the benefit he receives.
So also Gratitude toward God is to confess his benefits. There is also in
Gratitude toward men a desire to requite their Benefits, so there is in our
Gratitude toward God, so far to requite them, as to be kind to Gods Ministers,
which I acknowledged in making Sacrifices a part of natural Divine Worship;
and the benefit of those Sacrifices is the nourishment of Gods Ministers. It
appears therefore that the Bishops attention in reading my Writings was either
weak in it self, or weakened by prejudice.


J. D. From this shameful omission or preterition of the main duty of mankind,
a man might easily take the height of T. H. his Religion. But he himself
puts it past all conjectures. His principles are brim full of prodigious
impiety. In these four things, Opinions of Ghosts, Ignorance of second Causes,
devotion to what men fear, and taking of things casual, for Prognostics,
consists the natural seed of Religion; the culture and improvement whereof,
he refers only to Policy. Humane and Divine Politics, are but Politics.
And again, Mankind has this from the conscience of their own weakness, and the
admiration of natural events, that the most part of men believe that there is
an invisible God, the maker of all visible things. And a little after he
tells us, That Superstition proceeds from fear without right reason, and
Atheism from an opinion of reason without fear; making Atheism to be more
reasonable than Superstition. What is now become of that Divine Worship which
natural reason did assign unto God, the honor of Existence, Infiniteness,
Incomprehensibility, Unity, Ubiquity? What is now become of that Dictate or
Precept of reason, concerning Prayers, Thanksgivings, Oblations, Sacrifices, if
uncertain Opinions, Ignorance, Fear, Mistakes, the conscience of our own
weakness, and the admiration of natural Events, be the only seeds of Religion?

He proceeds further, That Atheism it self, though it be an erroneous
opinion, and therefore a sin, yet it ought to be numbered among the sins of
imprudence or ignorance. He adds, that an Atheist is punished not as a
Subject is punished by his King, because he did not observe Laws: but as an
Enemy, by an Enemy, because he would not accept Laws. His reason is, because
the Atheist never submitted his will to the Will of God, whom he never thought
to be. And he concludes that man's obligation to obey God, proceeds from his
weakness. Manifestum est obligationem ad prestandum ipsi (Deo) obedientiam,
incumbere hominibus propter imbecilitatem. First it is impossible that should
be a sin of mere ignorance or imprudence, which is directly contrary to the
light of natural reason. The Laws of nature need no new promulgation, being
imprinted naturally by God in the heart of Man. The Law of nature was written
in our hearts by the finger of God, without our assent; or rather the Law of
Nature is the assent it self. Then if Nature dictate to us that there is a God,
and that this God is to be worshipped in such and such manner, it is not
possible that Atheism should be a sin of mere ignorance.

Secondly, a Rebellious Subject is still a Subject, De Jure, though not, De
Facto, by right, though not by deed: and so the most cursed Atheist that is,
ought by right to be the Subject of God, and ought to be punished not as a just
Enemy, but as a disloyal Traitor. Which is confessed by himself, This fourth
Sin, (that is, of those who do not by word and deed confess one God the Supreme
King of Kings) in the natural Kingdom of God is the Crime of High Treason, for
it is a denial of Divine Power, or Atheism. Then an Atheist is a Traitor to
God, and punishable as a disloyal Subject, not as an Enemy.

Lastly, it is an absurd and dishonorable assertion, to make our obedience to
God to depend upon our weakness, because we cannot help it, and not upon our
gratitude, because we owe our being and preservation to him. Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not of the Fruit thereof? And who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the Milk of the Flock? And again, Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were created. But it were much better or at least not
so ill, to be a down right Atheist, than to make God to be such a thing as he
does, and at last thrust him into the Devils Office, to be the cause of all Sin.


T. H. Though this Bishop, as I said, had but a weak attention in reading, and
little skill in examining the force of an Argument, yet he knew men, and the
art, without troubling their judgments to win their assents by exciting their
Passions. One Rule of his art was to give his Reader what he would have him
swallow, a part by it self, and in the nature of News, whether true or not.
Knowing that the unlearned, that is most men, are content to believe, rather
than be troubled with examining, Therefore (a little before) he put these words
T. H. no friend to Religion, in the Margent. And in this place, before he offer
at any confutation, he says my Principles are brim full of Prodigious
Impieties. And at the next Paragraph, in the Margent, he puts that I excuse
Atheism. This behavior becomes neither a Bishop, nor a Christian, nor any man
that pretends to good education. Fear of invisible powers, what is it else in
savage people, but the fear of somewhat they think a God? What invisible power
does the reason of a savage man suggest unto him, but those Phantasms of his
sleep, or his distemper, which we frequently call Ghosts, and the Savages
thought Gods; so that the fear of a God (though not of the true one) to them
was the beginning of Religion, as the fear of the true God was the beginning of
wisdom to the Jews and Christians? Ignorance of second causes made men fly to
some first cause, the fear of which bred Devotion and Worship. The ignorance of
what that power might do, made them observe the order of what he had done; that
they might guess by the like order, what he was to do another time. This was
their Prognostication. What Prodigious impiety is here? How confutes he it?
Must it be taken for Impiety upon his bare calumny? I said Superstition was
fear without reason. Is not the fear of a false God, or fancied Demon contrary
to right reason? And is not Atheism Boldness grounded on false reasoning, such
as is this, the wicked prosper, therefore there is no God? He offers no proof
against any of this; but says only I make Atheism to be more reasonable than
Superstition; which is not true: For I deny that there is any reason either in
the Atheist or in the Superstitious. And because the Atheist thinks he has
reason, where he has none, I think him the more irrational of the two. But all
this while he argues not against any of this; but enquires only, what is become
of my natural Worship of God, and of his Existency, Infiniteness,
Incomprehensibility, Unity, and Ubiquity. As if whatsoever reason can suggest,
must be suggested all at once. First, all men by nature had an opinion of Gods
Existency, but of his other Attributes not so soon, but by reasoning, and by
degrees. And for the Attributes of the true God, they were never suggested but
by the Word of God written. In that I say Atheism is a sin of ignorance, he
says I excuse it. The Prophet David says, The fool has said in his heart,
There is no God. Is it not then a sin of folly? It Is agreed between us, that
right reason dictates, There is a God. Does it not follow, that denying of God
is a sin proceeding from misreasoning. If it be not a sin of ignorance, it must
be a sin of malice. Can a man malice that which he thinks has no being? But may
not one think there is a God, and yet maliciously deny him? If he think there
is a God, he is no Atheist; and so the question is changed into this, whether
any man that thinks there is a God, dares deliberately deny it? For my part I
think not. For upon what confidence dares any man (deliberately I say) oppose
the Omnipotent? David says of himself, My feet were ready to slip when I saw
the prosperity of the wicked. Therefore it is likely the feet of men less holy
slip oftener. But I think no man living is so daring, being out of passion, as
to hold it as his opinion. Those wicked men that for a long time proceeded so
succesfully in the late horrid Rebellion, may perhaps make some think they were
constant and resolved Atheists, but I think rather that they forgot God, than
believed there was none. He that believes there is such an Atheist, comes a
little too near that opinion himself, Nevertheless, if words spoken in passion
signify a denial of a God, no punishment praeordained by Law, can be too great
for such an insolence; because there is no living in a Commonwealth with men,
to whose oaths we cannot reasonably give credit. As to that I say, An Atheist
is punished by God not as a Subject by his King, but as an Enemy, and to my
argument for it, namely, because he never acknowledged himself Gods Subject, He
opposes, That if nature dictate that there is a God, and to be worshipped in
such and such manner, then Atheism is not a sin of mere ignorance; as if either
I or he did hold that Nature dictates the manner of Gods Worship, or any
article of our Creed, or whether to worship with or without a Surplice.
Secondly, he answers that a Rebel is still a Subject de Jure, though not de
Facto: And it is granted. But though the King lose none of his right by the
Traitors act, yet the Traitor loses the privilege of being punished by a
praecedent Law; and therefore may be punished at the Kings will, as Ravillac
was for murdering Henry the 4th. of France. An open Enemy and a perfidious
Traitor are both enemies. Had not his Lordship read in the Roman story how
Perseus and other just enemies of that State were wont to be punished? But what
is this trifling question to my excusing of Atheism? In the seventh Paragraph
of my Book de Cive he found the words (in Latin) which he here cites. And to
the same sense I have said in my Leviathan, That the right of nature whereby
God reigns over men, is to be derived not from his creating them, as if he
required obedience, as of Gratitude; but from his irresistible Power. This he
says is absurd and dishonorable. Whereas first all power is honorable, and
greatest power is most honorable. Is it not a more noble tenure for a King to
hold his Kingdom, and the right to punish those that transgress his Laws from
his Power, than from the gratitude or gift of the Transgressor. There is
nothing therefore here of dishonor to God Almighty. But see the subtility of
his disputing. He saw he could not catch Leviathan in this place, he looks for
him in my Book de Cive, which is Latin, to try what he could fish out of that.
And says I make our obedience to God, depend upon our weakness, as if these
words signified the Dependence, and not the necessity of our submission, or
that incumbere and dependere were all one.


J. D. For T. H. his God is not the God of Christians, nor of any rational men.
Our God is every where, and seeing he has no parts, he must be wholly here,
and wholly there, and wholly every where. So Nature it self dictateth. It
cannot be said honorably of God that he is in a place; for nothing is in a
place, but that which has proper bounds of its greatness. But T. H. his God is
not wholly every where. No man can conceive that any thing is all in this
place, and all in another place at the same time, for none of these things ever
have or can be incident to sense. So far well, if by conceiving he mean
comprehending; but then follows, That these are absurd Speeches taken upon
credit, without any signification at all, from deceived Philosophers, and
deceived or deceiving Schoolmen. Thus he denies the Ubiquity of God. A
Circumscriptive, a Definitive, and a Repletive being in a place, is some
heathen language to him.


T. H. Though I believe the Omnipotence of God, and that he can do what he
will, yet I dare not say how every thing is done, because I cannot conceive nor
comprehend either the Divine substance, or the way of its operation. And I
think it Impiety to speak concerning God any thing of my own head, or upon the
Authority of Philosophers or Schoolmen, which I understand not, without
warrant in the Scripture: And what I say of Omnipotence, I say also of
Ubiquity. But his Lordship is more valiant in this place, telling us that God
is wholly here, and wholly there, and wholly every where; because he has no
parts. I cannot comprehend nor conceive this. For methinks it implies also that
the whole World is also in the whole God, and in every part of God, nor can I
conceive how any thing can be called Whole, which has no parts, nor can I find
any thing of this in the Scripture. If I could find it there, I could believe
it; and if I could find it in the public Doctrine of the Church, I could
easily abstain from contradicting it. The Schoolmen say also that the Soul of
Man (meaning his upper Soul, which they call the rational Soul) is also wholly
in the whole man, and wholly in every part of the man. What is this but to make
the humane Soul the same thing in respect of man's Body, that God is in respect
of the World? These his Lordship calls here rational men, and some of them
which applaud this Doctrine, would have the High Court of Parliament
corroborate such Doctrines with a Law. I said in my Leviathan, that it is no
honorable attribute to God, to say he is in a place, because, infinite is not
confined within a place. To which he replies, T. H. his God is not wholly every
where. I confess the consequence. For I understand in English, he that says any
thing to be all here, means that neither all nor any of the same thing is else
where. He says further, I take a Circumscriptive, a Definitive, and a Repletive
being in a place to be Heathen Language. Truly, if this Dispute were at the
Bar, I should go near to crave the assistance of the Court, lest some trick
might be put upon me in such obscurity. For though I know what these Latin
words singly signify, yet I understand not how any thing is in a Place
Definitively and not Circumscriptively. For Definitively comes from definio
which is to set bounds. And therefore to be in a Place Definitively, is when
the bounds of the place are every way marked out. But to be in a place
Circumscriptively, is when the bounds of the place are described round about.
To be in a Place Repletive, is to fill a place. Who does not see that this
dictinction is Canting and Fraud? If any man will call it Pious Fraud, he is to
prove the Piety as clearly as I have here explained the Fraud. Besides, no
Fraud can be Pious in any man, but him that has a lawful Right to govern him
whom he beguileth; whom the Bishop pretends to govern, I cannot tell. Besides
his Lordship ought to have considered that every Bishop is one of the Great
Council, trusted by the King to give their advice with the Lords Temporal, for
the making of good Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and not to offer them such
obscure Doctrines, as if, because they are not versed in School Divinity,
therefore they had no Learning at all, nor understood the English Tongue. Why
did the Divines of England contend so much heretofore to have the Bible
translated into English, if they never meant any but themselves should read it?
If a Layman be publicly encouraged to search the Scriptures for his own
Salvation, what has a Divine to do to impose upon him any strange
interpretation, unless if he make him err to Damnation, he will be damned in
his stead?


J. D. Our God is immutable without any shadow of turning by change, to whom
all things are present, nothing past, nothing to come. But T. H. his God is
measured by time, losing something that is past, and acquiring something that
does come every minute. That is as much as to say, That our God is infinite,
and his God is finite, for unto that which is actually infinite, nothing can be
added neither time nor parts. Hear himself, Nor do I understand what derogation
it can be to the divine perfection, to attribute to it Potentiality, that is in
English, Power (so little does he understand what Potentiality is) and
successive duration. And he charge it upon us as a fault; that will not have
eternity to be an endless succession of time. How, successive duration, and an
endless succession of time in God? Then God is infinite, then God is elder to
day than he was yesterday. Away with Blasphemies. Before he destroyed the
Ubiquity of God, and now he destroys his Eternity.


T. H. I shall omit both here and henceforth his preambulatory, impertinent,
and uncivil calumnies. The thing he pretends to prove is this. That it is a
derogation to the Divine Power to attribute to it Potentiality (that is in
English Power) and Successive Duration. One of his reasons is, God is infinite,
and nothing can be added to infinite, neither of time nor of parts: It is true.
And therefore I said, God is infinite and eternal, without beginning or end,
either of Time or Place; which he has not here confuted, but confirmed. He
denies Potentiality and Power to be all one, and says I little understand what
Potentiality is. He ought therefore in this place to have defined what
Potenality is: For I understand it to be the same with Potentia, which is in
English Power. There is no such word as Potentiality in the Scriptures, nor in
any Author of the Latin Tongue. It is found only in School Divinity, as a word
of Art, or rather as a word of Craft, to amaze and puzzle the Laity. And
therefore I no sooner read than intepreted it. In the next place he says, as
wondering, How an endless succession of time in God! Why not? Gods mercy
endures for ever, and surely God endures as long as his mercy, therefore
there is duration in God, and consequently endless succession of time. God who
in sundry times and diverse manners spoke in time past, etc. But in a former
dispute with me about Free Will, he has defined Eternity to be Nunc stans,
that is an ever standing now, or everlasting instant. This he thinks himself
bound in honor to defend. What reasonable soul can digest this? We read in
Scripture, that a thousand years with God, is but as yesterday. And why? but
because he sees as clearly to the end of a thousand years, as to the end of a
day. But his Lordship affirms, That both a thousand years and a day are but one
instant, the same standing Now, or Eternity. If he had showed an holy Text for
this Doctrine, or any Text of the Book of Common Prayer (in the Scripture and
Book of Common Prayer is contained all our Religion) I had yielded to him, but
School Divinity I value little or nothing at all. Though in this he contradict
also the Schoolmen, who say the Soul is eternal only a part post, but God is
eternal both a part post, and a part ante. Thus there are parts in eternity,
and eternity being, as his Lordship says, the divine substance, the divine
substance has parts, and Nunc stans has parts. Is not this darkness? I take it
to be the Kingdom of Darkness, and the teachers of it, especially of this
Doctrine. That God who is not only Optimus, but also Maximus is no greater than
to be wholly contained in the least Atome of earth, or other body, and that his
whole duration is but an instant of time, to be either grossly ignorant or
ungodly Deceivers.


J. D. Our God is a perfect, pure, simple indivisible, infinite Essence; free
from all composition of matter and form, of substance and accidents. All matter
is finite, and he who acts by his infinite Essence, needs neither Organs,
nor Faculties ( id est, no power, note that) nor accidents, to render him more
complete. But T. H. his God is a divisible God, a compounded God, that has
matter, or qualities, or accidents. Hear himself. I argue thus, The divine
substance is indivisible, but eternity is the divine substance. The Major is
evident, because God is Actus simplicissimus; the Minor is confessed by all
men, that whatsoever is attributed to God, is God. Now listen to his answer,
The Major is so far from being evident, that Actus simplicissimus signifies
nothing. The Minor is said by some men, thought by no man, whatsoever is
thought is understood. The Major was this, The divine substance is indivisible.
Is this far from being evident? Either it is indivisible or divisible. If it be
not indivisible, then it is divisible, then it is materiate, then it is
corporeal, then it has parts, then it is finite by his own confession. Habere
parts, aut esse totum aliquid, sunt attributa finitorum. Upon this silly
conceit he charge me for saying, That God is not just, but justice it self;
not eternal, but eternity it self; which he calls unseemly words to be said
of God. And he thinks he does me a great courtesy in not adding Blasphemous
and Atheistical. But his Bolts are so soon shot, and his Reasons are such vain
Imaginations, and such drowsy Fantasies, that no sad man does much regard
them. Thus he has already destroyed the Ubiquity, the Eternity, and the
Simplicity of God. I wish he had considered better with himself, before he had
desperately cast himself upon these Rocks.

But paulo majora canamus, my next charge is, That he destroys the very being
of God, and leaves nothing in his place, but an empty name. For by taking away
all incorporeal substances, he takes away God himself. The very name (says
he) of an incorporeal substance, is a Contradiction. And to say that an Angel
or Spirit, is an incorporeal substance, is to say in effect, that there is no
Angel or Spirit at all. By the same reason to say, That God is an incorporeal
substance, is to say there is no God at all. Either God is incorporeal, or he
is finite, and consists of parts, and consequently is no God. This, That there
is no incorporeal spirit, is that main root of Atheism, from which so many
lesser branches are daily sprouting up.


T. H. God is indeed a Perfect, Pure, Simple, Infinite Substance; and his Name
incommunicable, that is to say, not divisible into this and that individual
God, in such manner as the name of Man is divisible into Peter and John. And
therefore God is individual; which word amongst the Greeks is expressed by the
word Indivisible. Certain Heretics in the primitive Church, because special
and individual are called Particulars, maintained that Christ was a particular
God, differing in number from God the Father. And this was the Doctrine that
was condemned for Heresy in the first Council of Nice, by these words, God has
no parts. And yet many of the Latin Fathers in their explications of the Nicene
Creed, have expounded the word Consubstantial, by the community of nature,
which different Species have in their Genus, and different individuals in the
Species, as if Peter and John were Consubstantial, because they agree in one
humane nature; which is contrary (I confess) to the meaning of the Nice
Fathers. But that in a substance infinitely great, it should be impossible to
consider any thing as not infinite. I do not see it there condemned. For
certainly he that thinks God is in every part of the Church, does not exclude
him out of the Churchyard. And is not this a considering of him by parts? For
dividing a thing which we cannot reach nor separate one part thereof from
another, is nothing else but considering of the same by parts. So much
concerning Indivisibility from Natural Reason; for I will wade no farther, but
rely upon the Scriptures. God is no where said in the Scriptures to be
indivisible, unless his Lordship meant division, to consist only in separation
of parts, which I think he did not. St. Paul indeed says, 1 Cor. 1.13. Is
Christ divided? Not that the followers of Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, followed
some one part, some another of Christ; but that thinking differently of his
nature, they made as it were different kinds of him. Secondly, his Lordship
expounds Simplicity, by not being compounded of Matter and Form, or of
Substance and Accidents, Unlearnedly. For nothing can be so compounded. The
matter of a Chair is Wood, the form is the figure it has apt for the intended
use. Does his Lordship think the Chair compounded of the Wood and the Figure? A
man is Rational, does it therefore follow that Reason is a part of the man? It
was Aristotle deceived him, who had told him that a Rational living Creature,
is the definition of a man, and that the definition of a man was his Essence;
and therefore the Bishop and other Schoolmen, from this that the word Rational
is a part of these words Man is a Rational living Creature, concluded that the
Essence of man, was a part of the man, and a Rational man, the same thing with
a Rational Soul. I should wonder how any man, much more a Doctor of Divinity,
should be so grossly deceived, but that I know naturally the generality of men
speak the words of their Masters by rote, without having any Idea of the
things, which the words signify. Lastly, he calls God an Essence. If he mean
by Essence the same with Ens, ((...)) I approve it. Otherwise, what is Essence?
There is no such word in the Old Testament. The Hebrew Language, which has no
word answerable to the copulative est, will not bear it. The New Testament has
(...), but never for Essence, nor for Substance, but only for Riches. I come
now to his Argument in Mood and Figure, which is this, The Divine Substance is
indivisible. That Is the Major. Eternity is the Divine Substance. That Is the
Minor. Ergo, the Divine Substance is indivisible. The Major, he says, is
evident, because God is Actus simplicissimus. The Minor is confessed, he
thinks, by all men, because whatsoever is attributed to God, is God. To this I
answered, that the Major was so far from being evident, that Actus
Simplicissimus signifies nothing, and that the Minor was understood by no man.
First, what is Actus in the Major? does any man understand Actus for a
Substance, that is, for a thing subsisting by it self? Is not Actus in English,
either an Act, or an Action, or nothing? or is any of these Substances? If it
be evident, why did he not explain Actus by a definition? And as to the Minor,
though all men in the world understand that the Eternal is God, yet no man can
understand that the Eternity is God. Perhaps he and the Schoolmen mean by
Actus, the same that they do by Essentia. What is the Essence of a man, but his
Humanity? or of God, but his Deity; of Great, but Greatness; and so of all
other denominating Attributes? And the words God and Deity, are of different
signification. Damascene a Father of the Church expounding the Nicene Creed
denies plainly that the Deity was incarnate, but all true Christians hold that
God was incarnate. Therefore God and the Deity, signify diverse things; and
therefore Eternal and Eternity are not the same, no more than a wise man and
his wisdom are the same. Nor God and his justice the same thing, and
universally it is false, that the Attribute in the Abstract is the same with the
Substance, to which it is attributed. Also it is universally true of God, that
the Attribute in the Concrete, and the substance to which it is attributed, is
not the same thing. I come now to his next Period or Paragraph, wherein he
would fain prove, that by denying Incorporeal Substance, I take away Gods
Existence. The words he cites here are mine; To say an Angel or Spirit is an
Incorporeal Substance, is to say in effect there is no Angel nor Spirit at all.
It is true also, that to say that God is an Incorporeal Substance, is to say in
effect there is no God at all. What alleges he against it, but the
School Divinity which I have already answered? Scripture he can bring none,
because the word Incorporeal is not found in Scripture. But the Bishop trusting
to his Aristotelean and Scholastic Learning has hitherto made no use of
Scripture, save only of these Texts, Who has planted a Vineyard, and eats
not of the fruit thereof; or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of
the flock, and Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, honor,
and power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they were
created; thereby to prove that the right of God to govern and punish mankind is
not derived from his Omnipotence. Let us now see how he proves Incorporeity by
his own Reason without Scripture. Either God (he says) is Incorporeal or
Finite. He knows I deny both, and say he is Corporeal and Infinite, against
which he offers no proof, but only (according to his custom of disputing) calls
it the root of Atheism; and interrogates me, what real thing is left in the
world, if God be Incorporeal, but Body and Accidents? I say there is nothing
left but Corporeal Substance. For I have denied (as he knew) that there is any
reality in accidents; and nevertheless maintain Gods Existence, and that he is
a most pure, and most simple Corporeal Spirit. Here his Lordship catching
nothing, removes to the eternity of the Trinity, which these my grounds (he
says) destroy. How so? I say the Trinity, and the Persons thereof are that one
pure, simple, and eternal Corporeal Spirit; and why does this destroy the
Trinity, more than if I had called it Incorporeal? He labors here and seeks
somewhat to refresh himself in the word Person, by the same grounds (he says)
every King has as many Persons as there be Justices of Peace in his Kingdom,
and God Almighty has as many Persons as there be Kings, why not? For I never
said that all those Kings were that God; and yet God gives that name to the
Kings of the earth. For the signification of the word Person, I shall expound
it by and by in another place. Here ends his Lordships School Argument; now let
me come with my Scripture Argument. St. Paul concerning Christ, ( Col. 2.9.)
says thus, In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily. This place
Athanasius a great and zealous Doctor in the Nicene Council, and vehement enemy
of Arius the Heretic, who allowed Christ to be no otherwise God, then as men
of excellent piety were so called, expounds thus. The fullness of the Godhead
dwells in him Bodily (Greek (...)) id est (...), id est, Realiter. So there
is one Father for Corporality, and that God was in Christ in such manner as
Body is in Body. Again, there were in the primitive Church a sort of Heretics
who maintained that Jesus Christ had not a true real Body, but was only a
Phantasm or Spright, such as the Latins called Spectra. Against the head of
this Sect (whose name I think was Apelles) Tertullian wrote a Book, now extant
amongst his other Works, entitled De Carne Christi, wherein after he had
spoken of the nature of Phantasms, and showed that they had nothing of reality
in them, he concludes with these words, whatsoever is not Body, is Nothing. So
here is on my side a plain Text of Scripture, and two ancient and learned
Fathers, nor was this Doctrine of Tertullian condemned in the Council of Nice;
but the division of the Divine Substance into God the Father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost. For these words, God has no parts, were added, for
explication of the word Consubstantial, at the request of the dissenting
Fathers, and are farther explained both in Athanasius his Creed, in these
words, not three Gods but one God, and by the constant Attribute ever since of
the Individual Trinity. The same words nevertheless do condemn the
Anthropomorphites also: For though there appeared no Christians that professed
that God had an Organical Body, and consequently that the Persons were three
Individuals, yet the Gentiles were all Anthropomorphites and there condemned by
those words, God has no parts.

And thus I have answered his accusation concerning the Eternity and Existence
of the Divine Substance, and made appear that in truth, the question between
us, is whether God be a Phantasme ( id est, an Idol of the Fancy, which St.
Paul says is nothing) or a Corporeal Spirit, that is to say, something that
has Magnitude.

In this place I think it not amiss, leaving for a little while this
Theological dispute, to examine the signification of those words which have
occasioned so much diversity of opinion in this kind of Doctrine.

The word Substance, in Greek Hypostasis, Hypostan, Hypostamenon signify the
same thing, namely, a Ground, a Base, any thing that has Existence or
Subsistence in it self, any thing that upholdeth that which else would fall, in
which sense God is properly the Hypostasis, Base, and Substance that upholdeth
all the world, having Subsistence not only in himself, but from himself;
whereas other Substances have their subsistence only in themselves, not from
themselves. But Metaphorically, Faith is called a Substance, Heb. 11.1. because
it is the foundation or Base of our Hope; for Faith failing our Hope falls. And
2 Cor. 9.4. St. Paul having boasted of the liberal promise of the Corinthians
toward the Macedonians, calls that promise the ground, the Hypostasis of that
his boasting. And Heb. 1.3. Christ is called the Image of the Substance (the
Hypostasis) of his Father, and for the proper and adequate signification of the
word Hypostasis, the Greek Fathers did always oppose it to Apparition or
Phantasme; as when a man sees his face in the water, his real face is called
the Hypostasis of the fantastic face in the water. So also in speaking, the
thing understood or named, is called Hypostasis, in respect of the name, so
also a Body colored is the Hypostasis, Substance and Subject of the color;
and in like manner of all its other Accidents. Essence and all other abstract
names are words artificial belonging to the Art of Logic, and signifies only
the manner how we consider the Substance it self. And of this I have spoken
sufficiently in Page 371.372. of my Leviathan. Body [Lat.] Corpus [Grae.]
(...), is that Substance which has Magnitude indeterminate, and is the same
with Corporeal Substance; but A Body is that which has Magnitude determinate,
and consequently is understood to be totum or integrum aliquid. Pure and Simple
Body, is Body of one and the same kind, in every part throughout, and if
mingled with Body of another kind, though the total be compounded or mixed, the
parts nevertheless retain their simplicity, as when water and wine are mixed,
the parts of both kinds retain their simplicity. For water and wine cannot both
be in one and the same place at once.

Matter is the same with Body; But never without respect to a Body which is
made thereof. Form is the aggregate of all Accidents together, for which, we
give the Matter a new name; so Albedo, whiteness is the Form of Album, or white
Body. So also Humanity is the Essence of man, and Deity the Essence of Deus.

Spirit is Thin, Fluid, Transparent, Invisible Body. The word in Latin
signifies Breath, Air, Wind and the like. In Greek (...) from (...), Spiro,
Flo.

I have seen, and so have many more two waters, one of the River, the other a
Mineral Water, so like, that no man could discern the one from the other by his
sight; yet when they have been both put together, the whole substance could not
by the eye be distinguished from milk. Yet we know that the one was not mixed
with the other, so as every part of the one to be in every part of the other,
for that is impossible, unless two Bodies can be in the the same place. How
then could the change be made in every part, but only by the Activity of the
Mineral water, changing it every where to the Sense, and yet not being every
where and in every part of the water? If then such gross Bodies have so great
Activity, what shall we think of Spirits, whose kinds be as many as there be
kinds of Liquor, and Activity greater? Can it then be doubted, but that God,
who is an infinitely fine Spirit and withal intelligent, can make and change
all species and kinds of Body as he pleases; but I dare not say, that this is
the way by which God Almighty works, because it is past my apprehension, yet
it serves very well to demonstrate, that the Omnipotence of God implies no
contradiction; and is better than by pretense of magnifying the fineness of the
divine Substance, to reduce it to a Spright or Phantasm, which is Nothing.

A Person, [Lat.] Persona, signifies an intelligent Substance, that acts any
thing in his own or another Name, or by his own or another Authority. Of this
Definition there can be no other proof than from the use of that word, in such
Latin Authors as were esteemed the most skilful in their own Language, of which
number was Cicero. But Cicero, in an Epistle to Atticus, says thus, Vnus
sustineo tres Personas, Mei, Adversarii, and Judicis: That is, I that am but
one man, sustain three Persons; mine own Person, the Person of my Adversary,
and the Person of the Judge. Cicero was here the Substance intelligent, one
man; and because he pleaded for himself, he calls himself, his own Person; and
again, because he pleaded for his Adversary, he says, he sustained the Person
of his Adversary; and lastly, because he himself gave the Sentence, he says, he
sustained the Person of the Judge. In the same sense we use the word in English
vulgarly, calling him that acts by his own Authority, his own Person, and him
that acts by the Authority of another, the Person of that other. And thus we
have the exact meaning of the word Person. The Greek Tongue cannot render it;
for (...) is properly a Face, and Metaphorically, a Vizard of an Actor upon the
Stage. How then did the Greek Fathers render the word Person, as it is in the
blessed Trinity? Not well. Instead of the word Person they put Hypostasis,
which signifies Substance, from whence it might be inferred, that the three
Persons in the Trinity are three divine Substances, that is, three Gods. The
word (...), they could not use, because Face and Vizard are neither of them
honorable Attributes of God, nor explicative of the meaning of the Greek
Church. Therefore the Latin (and consequently the English) Church renders
Hypostasis every where in Athanasius his Creed by Person. But the word
Hypostatical Union is rightly retained and used by Divines, as being the Union
of two Hypostases, that is, of two Substances or Natures in the Person of
Christ. But seeing they also hold the Soul of our Savior to be a Substance,
which though separated from his Body, subsisted nevertheless in it self, and
consequently before it was separated from his Body upon the Cross, was a
distinct Nature from his Body, how will they avoid this Objection, That then
Christ had three Natures, three Hypostases, without granting, that his
Resurrection was a new vivification, and not a return of his Soul out of Heaven
into the Grave? The contrary is not determined by the Church. Thus far in
explication of the words that occur in this Controversy. Now I return again to
his Lordship's Discourse.


J. D. When they have taken away all incorporeal Spirits, what do they leave
God himself to be? He who is the Fountain of all Being, from whom and in whom
all Creatures have their Being, must needs have a real Being of his own. And
what real Being can God have among Bodies and Accidents? for they have left
nothing else in the Universe. Then T. H. may move the same Question of God,
which he did of Devils. I would gladly know in what Classis of Entities, the
Bishop ranketh God? Infinite Being and participated Being are not of the same
nature. Yet to speak according to humane apprehension, (apprehension and
comprehension differ much: T. H. confesses that natural Reason does dictate to
us, that God is Infinite, yet natural Reason cannot comprehend the Infiniteness
of God) I place him among incorporeal Substances or Spirits, because he has
been pleased to place himself in that rank, God is a Spirit. Of which place T.
H. gives his opinion, that it is unintelligible, and all others of the same
nature, and fall not under humane understanding.

They who deny all incorporeal Substances, can understand nothing by God, but
either Nature, (not Naturam naturantem, that is, a real Author of Nature, but
Naturam naturatam, that is, the orderly concourse of natural Causes, as T. H.
seems to intimate) or a fiction of the Brain, without real Being, cherished
for advantage and politic Ends, as a profitable Error, howsoever dignified
with the glorious title of the eternal Cause of all things.


T. H. To his Lordship's Question here, What I leave God to be, I answer, I
leave him to be a most pure, simple, invisible Spirit Corporeal. By Corporeal I
mean a Substance that has Magnitude, and so mean all learned men, Divines and
others, though perhaps there be some common people so rude as to call nothing
Body, but what they can see and feel. To his second Question, What real Being
he can have amongst Bodies and Accidents, I answer, The Being of a Spirit, not
of a Spright. If I should ask any the most subtle Distinguisher, what middle
nature there were between an infinitely subtle Substance, and a mere Thought or
Phantasm, by what Name could he call it? He might call it perhaps an
Incorporeal Substance, and so Incorporeal shall pass for a middle nature
between Infinitely subtle and Nothing, and be less subtle than Infinitely
subtle, and yet more subtle than a thought. It Is granted (he says) that the
Nature of God is incomprehensible. Does it therefore follow, that we may give
to the divine Substance what negative Name we please? Because he says, the
whole divine Substance is here and there and every where throughout the World,
and that the Soul of a man is here and there and every where throughout man's
Body, must we therefore take it for a Mystery of Christian Religion, upon his
or any Schoolman's word, without the Scripture, which calls nothing a Mystery
but the Incarnation of the eternal God? Or is Incorporeal a Mystery, when not
at all mentioned in the Bible, but to the contrary it is written, That the
fullness of the Deity was bodily in Christ? When the nature of the thing is
incomprehensible, I can acquiesce in the Scripture, but when the signification
of words are incomprehensible, I cannot acquiesce in the Authority of a
Schoolman.


J. D. We have seen what his Principles are concerning the Deity, they are full
as bad or worse concerning the Trinity. Hear himself. A person is he that is
represented as often as he is represented. And therefore God who has been
represented, that is, personated thrice, may properly enough be said to be
three Persons, though neither the word Person nor Trinity be ascribed to him in
the Bible. And a little after, To conclude, the doctrine of the Trinity as far
as can be gathered directly from the Scripture, is in substance this, that the
God who is always one and the same, was the Person represented by Moses, the
Person represented by his Son incarnate, and the Person represented by the
Apostles. As represented by the Apostles, the holy Spirit by which they spoke
is God. As represented by his Son that was God and Man, the Son is that God. As
represented by Moses, and the High Priests, the Father, that is to say, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is that God. From whence we may gather the
reason why those Names, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the signification of
the Godhead, are never used in the Old Testament. For they are Persons, that
is, they have their Names from representing, which could not be, till diverse
Persons had represented God, in ruling or in directing under him.

Who is so bold as blind Bayard? The Emblem of a little Boy attempting to lade
all the Water out of the Sea with a Cockle-shell, does fit T. H. as exactly as
if it had been shaped for him, who thinks to measure the profound and
inscrutable Mysteries of Religion, by his own silly, shallow conceits. What is
now become of the great adorable Mystery of the blessed undivided Trinity? It
is shrunk into nothing? Upon his grounds there was a time when there was no
Trinity. And we must blot these words out of our Creed, The Father eternal, the
Son eternal, and the Holy Ghost eternal. And these other words out of our
Bibles, Let us make man after our Image. Unless we mean that this was a
consultation of God with Moses and the Apostles. What is now become of the
eternal generation of the Son of God, if this Sonship did not begin until about
4000 years after the Creation were expired? Upon these grounds every King has
as many Persons, as there be Justices of Peace, and petty Constables in his
Kingdom. Upon this account God Almighty has as many Persons, as there have
been Sovereign Princes in the World since Adam. According to this reckoning
each one of us like so many Geryons, may have as many Persons as we please to
make Procurations. Such bold presumption requires another manner of
confutation.


T. H. As for the words recited, I confess there is a fault in the
Ratiocination, which nevertheless his Lordship has not discovered, but no
Impiety. All that he objecteth is, That it follows hereupon, that there be as
many Persons of a King, as there be petty Constables in his Kingdom. And so
there are, or else he cannot be obeyed. But I never said that a King, and every
one of his Persons are the same Substance. The fault I here made, and saw not
was this; I was to prove, That it is no contradiction (as Lucian, and Heathen
Scoffers would have it) to say of God, he was One and Three. I saw the true
definition of the word Person would serve my turn in this manner; God in his
own Person both created the World, and instituted a Church in Israel, using
therein the Ministry of Moses; the same God in the Person of his Son God and
Man redeemed the same World, and the same Church; the same God in the Person of
the Holy Ghost sanctified the same Church, and all the faithful men in the
World. Is not this a clear proof, that it is no contradiction to say that God
is three Persons and one Substance? And does not the Church distinguish the
Persons in the same manner? See the words of our Catechism. Quest. What do
thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy Belief? Answ. First, I learn to
believe in God the Father, that has made me and all the World; Secondly, In
God the Son, who has redeemed me and all Mankind; Thirdly, In God the Holy
Ghost, that has sanctified me and all the elect people of God* But at what
time was the Church sanctified? Was it not on the day of Pentecost, in the
descending of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles? His Lordship all this while
has catched nothing. It Is I that catched my self, for saying, (instead of, By
the Ministry of Moses) in the Person of Moses. But this Error I no sooner saw,
then I no less publicly corrected then I had committed it, in my Leviathan
converted into Latin, which by this time I think is printed beyond the Seas
with this alteration, and also with the omission of some such passages as
Strangers are not concerned in. And I had corrected this Error sooner, if I had
sooner found it. For though I was told by Dr. Cosins, now Bishop of Duresme,
that the place above cited was not applicable enough to the Doctrine of the
Trinity, yet I could not in reviewing the same espy the defect till of late,
when being solicited from beyond Sea to translate the Book into Latin, and
fearing some other man might do it not to my liking, I examined this passage
and others of the like sense more narrowly. But how concludes his Lordship out
of this, that I put out of the Creed these words, The Father eternal, the Son
eternal, the Holy Ghost eternal? Or these words, Let us make man after our
Image, out of the Bible. Which last words neither I nor Bellarmine put out of
the Bible, but we both put them out of the number of good Arguments to prove
the Trinity; for it is no unusual thing in the Hebrew, as may be seen by
Bellarmine's quotations, to join a Noun of the plural Number with a Verb of the
singular. And we may say also of many other Texts of Scripture alleged to
prove the Trinity, that they are not so firm as that high Article requires.
But mark his Lordship's Scholastic charity in the last words of this period,
Such bold presumption requires another manner of confutation. This Bishop, and
others of his opinion had been in their Element, if they had been Bishops in
Queen Mary's time.


J. D. Concerning God the Son, forgetting what he had said elsewhere, where he
calls him God and Man, and the Son of God incarnate, he doubts not to say,
that the word Hypostatical is canting. As if the same Person could be both God
and Man without a Personal, that is, an Hypostatical Union of the two Natures
of God and Man.


T. H. If Christian Profession be (as certainly it is in England) a Law, and if
it be of the nature of a Law to be made known to all men that are to obey it,
in such manner as they may have no excuse for disobedience from their
ignorance, then without doubt all words unknown to the people, and as to them
insignificant, are Canting. The word Substance is understood by the Vulgar well
enough, when it is said of a Body, but in other sense not at all, except for
their Riches. But the word Hypostatical is understood only by those, and but
few of those that are learned in the Greek Tongue, and is properly used, as I
have said before, of the Union of the two Natures of Christ in one Person. So
likewise Consubstantial in the Nicene Creed, is properly said of the Trinity.
But to an English man that understands neither Greek nor Latin, and yet is as
much concerned as his Lordship was, the word Hypostatical is no less Canting
than Eternal now.


J. D. He allows every man who is commanded by his lawful Sovereign, to deny
Christ with his tongue before men.


T. H. I allow it in some Cases, and to some men, which his Lordship knew well
enough, but would not mention. I alleged for it, in the place cited, both
Reason and Scripture, though his Lordship thought it not expedient to take
notice of either. If it be true that I have said, why does he blame it? If
false, why offers he no Argument against it, neither from Scripture nor from
Reason? Or why does he not show that the Text I cite is not applicable to the
Question, or not well interpreted by me. First, He barely cites it, because he
thought the words would sound harshly, and make a Reader admire them for
Impiety. But I hope I shall so well instruct my Reader ere I leave this place,
that this his petty Art will have no effect. Secondly, The Cause why he omitted
my Arguments was, That he could not answer them. Lastly, The Cause why he
urges neither Scripture nor Reason against it was, That he saw none
sufficient. My Argument from Scripture was this, ( Leviathan, page 271.) taken
out of 2 Kings 5.17. where Naaman the Syrian says to Elisha the Prophet, Thy
servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifice to other
Gods, but unto the Lord. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that when
my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my
hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon: when I bow my self in the house
of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing, and he said unto him, Go
in peace. What can be said to this? Did not Elisha say it from God? Or is not
this Answer of the Prophet a permission? When St. Paul and St. Peter commanded
the Christians of their time to obey their Princes, which then were Heathens
and Enemies of Christ, did they mean they should lose their Lives for
disobedience? Did they not rather mean they should preserve both their Lives
and their Faith, (believing in Christ as they did) by this denial of the
tongue, having no command to the contrary? If in this Kingdom a Mohammedan
should be made by terror to deny Mahomet and go to Church with us, would any
man condemn this Mohammedan? A denial with the mouth may perhaps be prejudicial
to the power of the Church, but to retain the Faith of Christ steadfastly in his
Heart, cannot be prejudicial to his Soul that has undertaken no charge to
Preach to Wolves, whom they know will destroy them. About the time of the
Council of Nice, there was a Canon made (which is extant in the History of the
Nicene Council) concerning those that being Christians had been seduced, not
terrified, to a denial of Christ, and again repenting, desired to be readmitted
into the Church; in which Canon it was ordained that those men should be no
otherwise readmitted than to be in the number of the Catechized, and not to be
admitted to the Communion till a great many years penitence. Surely the Church
then would have been more merciful to them that did the same upon terror of
present death and torments.

Let us now see what his Lordship might, though but colourably, have alleged
from Scripture against it. There be three Places only that seem to favor his
Lordship's opinion. The first is where Peter denied Christ, and Weepeth. The
second is, Acts 5.29. Then Peter and the other Apostles answered and said, we
ought to obey God rather than men. The third is, Luke 12.9. But he that denies
me, shall be denied before the Angels of God.


T. H. For answer to these Texts, I must repeat what I have written, and his
Lordship read in my Leviathan, page 362. For an unlearned man that is in the
power of an Idolatrous King, or State, if commanded on pain of Death to worship
before an Idol, doing it, he detesteth the Idol in his Heart, he does well;
though if he had the fortitude to suffer Death, rather than worship it, he
should do better. But if a Pastor, who as Christ's Messenger has undertaken to
teach Christ's Doctrine to all Nations should do the same, it were not only a
sinful Scandal in respect of other Christian Men's Consciences, but a perfidious
forsaking of his Charge. In which words I distinguish between a Pastor and one
of the Sheep of his Flock. St. Peter sinned in denying Christ; and so does
every Pastor that having undertaken the Charge of Preaching the Gospel in the
Kingdom of an Infidel, where he could expect at the undertaking of his Charge
no less than Death. And why, but because he violates his Trust in doing
contrary to his Commission. St. Peter was an Apostle of Christ, and bound by
his voluntary undertaking of that Office, not only to Confess Christ, but also
to Preach him before those Infidels whom he knew would (like Wolves) devour
him. And therefore when Paul and the rest of the Apostles were forbidden to
preach Christ they gave this Answer, We ought to obey God rather than Men. And
it was to his Disciples only which had undertaken that Office, that Christ
says, he that denies me before Men, shall be denied before the Angels of God.
And so I think I have sufficiently answered this place, and showed that I do
not allow the denying of Christ, upon any color of Torments, to his Lordship,
nor to any other that has undertaken the Office of a Preacher. Which if he
think right, he will perhaps in this case put himself into the number of those
whom he calls merciful Doctors, whereas now he extends his severity beyond the
bounds of common equity. He has read Cicero, and perhaps this Story in him. The
Senate of Rome would have sent Cicero to treat of Peace with Marcus Antonius,
but when Cicero had showed them the just fear he had of being killed by him, he
was excused; and if they had forced him to it, and he by terror turned Enemy to
them, he had in equity been excusable. But his Lordship I believe did write
this more valiantly than he would have acted it.


J. D. He Deposes Christ from his true Kingly Office, making his Kingdom not
to Commence or begin before the day of Judgment. And the Regiment wherewith
Christ Governs his Faithful in this Life, is not properly a Kingdom, but a
Pastoral Office, or a right to Teach. And a little after, Christ had not Kingly
Authority committed to him by his Father in this World, but only Consiliary and
Doctrinal.


T. H. How do I take away Christ's Kingly Office? He neither draws it by
Consequence from my Words, nor offers any Argument at all against my Doctrine.
The words he cites are in the Contents of Chap. 17. de Cive. In the Body of the
Chapter it is thus. The time of Christ's being upon the Earth is called in
Scripture the Regeneration often, but the Kingdom never. When the Son of God
comes in Majesty, and all the Angels with him, then he shall sit on the seat of
Majesty. My Kingdom is not of this World. God sent not his Son that he should
Judge the World. I came not to Judge the World, but to save the World. Man, who
made me a Judge or Divider amongst you? Let thy Kingdom come. And other words
to the same purpose; out of which it is clear that Christ took upon him no
Regal Power upon Earth before his Assumption. But at his Assumption his
Apostles asked him if he would then restore the Kingdom to Israel, and he
Answered, it was not for them to know. So that hitherto Christ had not taken
that Office upon him, unless his Lordship think that the Kingdom of God, and
the Kingdom of Christ be two distinct Kingdoms. From the Assumption ever since,
all true Christians say daily in their Prayers, Thy Kingdom come. But his
Lordship had perhaps forgot that. But when then begins Christ to be a King?
I say it shall be then when he comes again in Majesty with all the Angels. And
even then he shall Reign (as he is Man) under his Father. For St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 15.25, 26. He must Reign till he has put all Enemies under his feet; the
last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. But when shall God the Father
Reign again? St. Paul says in the same Chapter verse 28. When all things shall
be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that
put all things under him, that God may be all in all. And verse 24. Then comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father;
when he shall have put down all Rule, Authority and Power. This is at the
Resurrection. And by this it is manifest, that his Lordship was not so well
versed in Scripture, as he ought to have been.


J. D. He takes away his Priestly or Propitiatory Office; And although this
Act of our Redemption be not always in Scripture called a Sacrifice and
Oblation, but sometimes a Price, yet by Price we are not to understand any
thing, by the value whereof he could claim right to a Pardon for us from his
Offended Father, but that Price which God the Father was pleased in mercy to
demand. And again, Not that the Death of one Man, though without sin, can
satisfy for the Offenses of all Men in the rigor of Justice, but in the mercy
of God, that ordained such Sacrifices for sin, as he was pleased in mercy to
accept. He knows no difference between one who is mere man, and one who was
both God and man; between a Levitical Sacrifice, and the All-sufficient
Sacrifice of the Cross; between the Blood of a Calf, and the precious Blood of
the Son of God.


T. H. Yes, I know there is a difference between Blood and Blood, but not any
such as can make a difference in the Case here questioned. Our Savior's Blood
was most precious, but still it was Humane Blood; and I hope his Lordship did
never think otherwise, or that it was not accepted by his Father for our
Redemption.


J. D. And touching the Prophetical Office of Christ, I do much doubt whether
he do believe in earnest, that there is any such thing as Prophecy in the
World. He makes very little difference between a Prophet and a Madman, and a
Demoniack. And if there were nothing else (says he) that bewrayed their
madness, yet that very arrogating such inspiration to themselves, is Argument
enough. He makes the pretense of Inspiration in any man to be, and always to
have been, on opinion pernicious to Peace, and tending to the dissolution of
all Civil Government. He subjecteth all Prophetical Revelations from God, to
the sole Pleasure and Censure of the Sovereign Prince, either to Authorize
them, or to Exauctorate them. So as two Prophets prophesying the same thing at
the same time, in the Dominions of two different Princes, the one shall be a
true Prophet, the other a false. And Christ who had the approbation of no
Sovereign Prince, upon his grounds, was to be reputed a false Prophet every
where. Every man therefore ought to consider who is the Sovereign Prophet, that
is to say, who it is that is Gods Vicegerent upon Earth, and has next under
God the Authority of governing Christian Men, and to observe for a Rule that
Doctrine which in the Name of God he has Commanded to be taught, and thereby
to examine and try out the truth of those Doctrines which pretended Prophets,
with miracle, or without, shall at any time advance, etc. And if he disavow
them then no more to obey their Voice; or if he Approve them, then to obey them
as Men, to whom God has given a part of the Spirit of their Sovereign. Upon
his Principles the case holds as well among Jews and Turks and Heathens, as
Christians. Then he that Teaches Transubstantiation in France, is a true
Prophet; he that Teaches it in England, a false Prophet. He that Blasphemeth
Christ in Constantinople, a true Prophet; he that does the same in Italy, a
false Prophet. Then Samuel was a false Prophet to Contest with Saul a Sovereign
Prophet: So was the Man of God who submitted not to the more Divine and
Prophetic Spirit of Jeroboam. And Elijah for Reproving Ahab. Then Michaiah had
but his deserts, to be clapped up in Prison, and fed with Bread of Affliction,
and Water of Affliction, for daring to Contradict God's Vicegerent upon Earth.
And Jeremiah was justly thrown into a Dungeon, for Prophesying against Zedekiah
his Liege Lord. If his Principles were true, it were strange indeed, that none
of all these Princes, nor any other that ever was in the World, should
understand their own Privileges. And yet more strange, that God Almighty
should take the part of such Rebellious Prophets, and justify their Prophesies
by the Event, if it were true that none but the Sovereign in a Christian (the
Reason is the same for Jewish) Commonwealth can take notice, what is or what is
not the Word of God.


T. H. To remove his Lordships doubt in the first place, I confess there was
true Prophecy and true Prophets in the Church of God, from Abraham down to our
Savior the greatest Prophet of all, and the last of the Old Testament, and
first of the New. After our Savior's time, till the Death of St. John the
Apostle, there were true Prophets in the Church of Christ, Prophets to whom God
spoke Supernaturally, and Testified the truth of their Mission by Miracles. Of
those that in the Scripture are called Prophets without Miracles, and for this
cause only, that they spoke in the Name of God to Men, and in the name of Men
to God, there are, have been, and shall be in the Church Innumerable. Such a
Prophet was his Lordship, and such are all Pastors in the Christian Church. But
the Question here is of those Prophets that from the Mouth of God foretell
things Future, or do other Miracle. Of this kind I deny there has been any
since the Death of St. John the Evangelist. If any Man find fault with this, he
ought to Name some Man or other whom we are bound to acknowledge that they have
done a Miracle, cast out a Devil, or cured any Disease by the sole Invocation
of the Divine Majesty. We are not bound to trust to the Legend of the Roman
Saints, nor to the History written by Sulpitius of the Life of St. Martin, or
to any other Fables of the Roman Clergy, nor to such things as were pretended
to be done by some Divines here in the time of King James. Secondly, he says I
make little difference between a Prophet and a Madman, or Demoniack; To which
I say he accuses me falsely. I say only thus much, That I see nothing at all in
the Scripture that requires a belief, that Demoniacks were any other thing
than Madmen. And this is also made very probable out of Scripture by a worthy
Divine Mr. Meade. But concerning Prophets, I say only that the Jews both under
the Old Testament and under the New, took them to be all one with Madmen and
Demoniacks. And prove it out of Scripture by many places both of the Old and
New Testament. Thirdly, that the pretense or arrogating to ones self Divine
Inspiration, is argument enough to show a Man is Mad, is my opinion; but his
Lordship understands not Inspiration in the same sense that I do. He
understands it properly of God's breathing into a Man, or pouring into him the
Divine Substance, or Divine Graces, and in that sense, he that arrogateth
Inspiration into himself, neither understands what he says, nor makes others
to understand him, which is properly Madness in some degree. But I understand
Inspiration in the Scripture Metaphorically, for Gods guidance of our minds to
Truth and Piety. Fourthly, whereas he says, I make the pretense of Inspiration
to be pernicious to Peace. I answer, that I think his Lordship was of my
Opinion, for he called those Men which in the late Civil War pretended the
Spirit, and New Light, and to be the only faithful men Phanaticks; for he
called them in his Book, and did call them in his Life time Phanaticks. And
what is a Phanatick but a Madman, and what can be more pernicious to Peace than
the Revelations that were by these Phanaticks pretended? I do not say there
were Doctrines of other Men, not called Phanaticks as pernicious to Peace, as
theirs were, and in great part a cause of those troubles. Fifthly, from that I
make Prophetical Revelations subject to the examination of the Lawful
Sovereign, he infers, that two Prophets prophesying the same thing at the
same time, in the Dominions of two different Princes, the one shall be a true
Prophet, the other a false. This consequence is not good, for seeing they teach
different Doctrines, they cannot both of them confirm their Doctrine with
Miracles. But this I prove (in the page 232 he cites) that, whether either of
their Doctrines shall be Taught Publicly or not, it is in the power of the
Sovereign of the Place only to determine. Nay, I say now further, if a Prophet
come to any private Man in the Name of God, that Man shall be Judge whether he
be a true Prophet or not, before he obey him. See 1 John 4.1. Sixthly, whereas
he says, that upon my grounds Christ was to be reputed a false Prophet every
where, because his Doctrine was received no where. His Lordship had Read my
Book more negligently than was fit for one that would confute it. My ground is
this, that Christ in right of his Father was King of the Jews, and consequently
Supreme Prophet, and Judge of all Prophets. What other Princes thought of his
Prophesies, is nothing to the purpose. I never said that Princes can make
Doctrines or Prophesies true or false, but I say every Sovereign Prince has a
right to prohibit the public Teaching of them, whether false or true. But
what an oversight is it in a Divine to say, that Christ had the Approbation of
no Sovereign Prince, when he had the Approbation of God, who was King of the
Jews, and Christ his Viceroy, and the whole Scripture Written ( Joh. 20.31.)
to prove it? When his Miracles declared it; when Pilate confessed it; and when
the Apostles Office was to Proclaim it? Seventhly, If we must not consider in
points of Christian Faith who is the Sovereign Prophet, that is, who is next
under Christ our Supreme Head and Governor, I wish his Lordship would have
cleared, ere he dyed, these few Questions, Is there not need of some Judge of
Controverted Doctrines? I think no man can deny it, that has seen the Rebellion
that followed the Controversy here between Gomar and Arminius. There must
therefore be a Judge of Doctrines. But (says the Bishop) not the King. Who
then? Shall Dr. Bramhall be this Judge? As profitable an Office as it is, he
was more modest than to say that. Shall a private Layman have it? No man ever
thought that. Shall it be given to a Presbyterian Minister? No; it is
unreasonable. Shall a Synod of Presbyterians have it? No; For most of the
Presbyters in the Primitive Church were undoubtedly subordinate to Bishops, and
the rest were Bishops. Who then? A Synod of Bishops? Very well. His Lordship
being too Modest to undertake the whole Power, would have been contented with
the six and twentieth part. But suppose it in a Synod of Bishops, who shall
call them together? The King. What if he will not? Who should Excommunicate
him, or if he despise your Excommunication, who shall send forth a Writ of
Significavit? No; all this was far from his Lordships thoughts. The power of
the Clergy, unless it be upheld legally by the King, or illegally by the
Multitude amounts to nothing. But for the Multitude, Suarez and the Schoolmen
will never gain them, because they are not understood. Besides there be very
few Bishops that can act a Sermon (which is a puissant part of Rhetoric) So
well as diverse Presbyterians, and Phanatick Preachers can do. I conclude
therefore, that his Lordship could not possibly believe that the Supreme
Judicature in matter of Religion could any where be so well placed as in the
Head of the Church, which is the King. And so his Lordship and I think the same
thing; but because his Lordship knew not how to deduce it, he was angry with me
because I did it. He says further that by my Principles, he that blasphemeth
Christ at Constantinople is a true Prophet, as if a man that blasphemeth
Christ, to approve his Blasphemy can procure a Miracle; for by my principles no
Man is a Prophet whose Prophecy is not confirmed by God with a Miracle. In the
last place out of this, That the lawful Sovereign is the Judge of Prophecy, he
deduces That then Samuel and other Prophets were false Prophets that contested
with their Sovereigns. As for Samuel he was at that time the Judge, that is to
say the Sovereign Prince in Israel, and so acknowledged by Saul. For Saul
received the Kingdom (from God himself, who had right to give and take it) by
the hands of Samuel. And God gave it him to himself only, and not to his Seed;
though if he had obeyed God, he would have settled it also upon his Seed. The
Commandment of God was, that he should not spare Agag. Saul obeyed not. God
therefore sent Samuel to tell him that he was rejected. For all this Samuel
went not about to resist Saul. That he caused Agag to be slain, was with Saul's
consent. Lastly, Saul confesses his sin. Where is this contesting with Saul?
After this God sent Samuel to anoint David, not that he should depose Saul, but
succeed him, the Sons of Saul having never had a right of Succession. Nor did
ever David make War on Saul, or so much as resist him, but fled from his
persecution. But when Saul was dead, then indeed he claimed his right against
the House of Saul. What Rebellion or Resistance could his Lordship find here,
either in Samuel or in David? Besides, all these Transactions are supernatural,
and oblige not to imitation. Is there any Prophet or Priest now that can set up
in England, Scotland or Ireland, another King by pretense of Prophecy or
Religion? What did Jeroboam to the man of God 1 Kings 13) that Prophesied
against the Altar in Bethel, without first doing a Miracle, but offer to seize
him for speaking (as he thought) rashly of the Kings Act; and after the
Miraculous withering of his Hand, desire the Prophet to pray for him? The sin
of Jeroboam was not his distrust of the Prophet, but his Idolatry. He was the
sole Judge of the truth which the man of God uttered against the Altar, and the
process agreeable to equity. What is the story of Eliah and Ahab (1 Kings 18.)
but a confirmation of the Right, even of Ahab to be the Judge of Prophecy?
Eliah told Ahab, he had transgressed the Commandment of God. So may any
Minister now tell his Sovereign, so he do it with sincerity and discretion.
Ahab told Eliah he troubled Israel. Upon this controversy Eliah desired Trial.
Send, says he, and Assemble all Israel; Assemble also the Prophets of Baal
four hundred and fifty. Ahab did so. The Question is stated before the People
thus, If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal follow him. Then upon the
Altars of God and Baal were laid the Wood and the Bullocks; and the cause was
to be Judged by Fire from Heaven, to Burn the Sacrifices; which Eliah procured,
the Prophets of Baal could not procure. Was not this cause here Pleaded before
Ahab? The Sentence of Ahab is not required; for Eliah from that time forward
was no more persecuted by Ahab, but only by his Wife Jezabel. The story of
Micaiah (2 Cron. 18.) is this, Ahab King of Israel consulted the Prophets, four
hundred in number, whether he should prosper or not, in case he went with
Jehosaphat King of Judah to fight against the Syrians at Ramothgilead. The
Prophet Micaiah was also called, and both the Kings Ahab and Jehosaphat sat
together to hear what they should prophecy. There was no Miracle done. The 400
pronounced Victory, Micaiah alone the contrary. The King was Judge, and most
concerned in the event; nor had he received any Revelation in the business.
What could he do more discreetly than to follow the Counsel of 400 rather than
of one Man? But the event was contrary; for he was slain; but not for following
the Counsel of the 400, but for his Murder of Naboth and his Idolatry. It was
also a sin in him, that he afflicted Micaiah in Prison; but an unjust Judgment
does not take away from any King his right of Judicature. Besides, what is all
this, or that of Jeremiah, which he cites last, to the Question of who is Judge
of Christian Doctrine?


J. D. Neither does he use God the Holy Ghost, more favorably than God the
Son. Where St. Peter says, Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Spirit; He says, By the Spirit, is meant the Voice of God in a Dream or
Vision Supernatural, which Dreams or Visions, he makes to be no more than
imaginations which they had in their sleep, or in an ecstasy, which in every
true Prophet were Supernatural, but in false Prophets were either natural or
feigned, and more likely to be false than true. To say God has spoken to him
in a Dream, is no more than to say, he dreamed that God spoke to him, etc. To
say he has seen a Vision or heard a Voice, is to say, That he has dreamed
between sleeping and waking. So St. Peter's Holy Ghost is come to be their own
imaginations, which might be either feigned, or mistaken, or true. As if the
Holy Ghost did enter only at their eyes, and at their ears, not into their
understandings, nor into their minds; Or as if the Holy Ghost did not seal unto
their hearts the truth and assurance of their Prophesies. Whether a new light
be infused into their understandings, or new graces be inspired into their
heart, they are wrought, or caused, or created immediately by the Holy Ghost,
And so are his imaginations, if they be Supernatural.


T. H. For the places of my Leviathan he cites, they are all as they stand both
true and clearly proved; the setting of them down by Fragments is no
Refutation; nor offers he any Argument against them. His consequences are not
deduced. I never said that the Holy Ghost was an Imagination, or a Dream, or a
Vision, but that the Holy Ghost spoke most often in the Scripture by Dreams and
Visions supernatural. The next words of his, As if the Holy Ghost did enter
only at their eyes, and at their ears, not into their understandings, nor into
their minds, I let pass, because I cannot understand them. His last words,
Whether new light, etc. I understand and approve.


J. D. But he must needs fall into these absurdities, who makes but a jest of
inspiration. They who pretend Divine inspiration to be a supernatural entering
of the Holy Ghost into a Man, are (as he thinks) in a very dangerous Dilemma;
for if they worship not the Men whom they conceive to be inspired, they fall
into impiety; and if they worship them, they commit Idolatry. So mistaking the
Holy Ghost to be corporeal, some thing that is blown into a Man, and the Graces
of the Holy Ghost to be corporeal Graces. And the words, inpoured or infused
virtue, and, inblown or inspired virtue, are as absurd and insignificant, as a
round Quadrangle. He reckons it as a common error, That faith and sanctity are
not attained by study and reason, but by supernatural inspiration or infusion.
And lays this for a firm ground; Faith and Sanctity are indeed not very
frequent, but yet they are not Miracles, but brought to pass by Education,
Discipline, Correction, and other natural ways. I would see the greatest
Pelagian of them all fly higher.


T. H. I make here no jest of Inspiration. Seriously, I say, that in the proper
signification of the words Inspiration and Infusion, to say virtue is inspired,
or infused, is as absurd as to say a Quadrangle is round. But Metaphorically,
for Gods bestowing of Faith, Grace, or other Virtue, those words are
intelligible enough.


J. D. Why should he trouble himself about the Holy Spirit, who acknowledges
no Spirit but either a subtle fluid body, or a Ghost, or other Idol or Phantasm
of the imagination; who knows no inward Grace or intrinsecal Holiness? Holy
is a word which in Gods Kingdom answers to that which men in their Kingdoms
use to call public, or the Kings. And again, wheresoever the word Holy is
taken properly, there is still some thing signified of propriety gotten by
consent. His Holiness is a Relation, not a Quality; for inward sanctification,
or real infused holiness, in respect whereof the third Person is called the
Holy Ghost, because he is not only holy in himself, but also makes us holy, he
is so great a stranger to it, that he does altogether deny it, and disclaim it.


T. H. The word Holy I had defined in the words which his Lordship here sets
down, and by the use thereof in the Scripture made it manifest, That that was
the true signification of the word. There is nothing in Learning more difficult
than to determine the signification of words. That difficulty excuses him. He
says that Holiness (in my sense) is a Relation, not a Quality. All the Learned
agree that Quality is an Accident, so that in attributing to God Holiness (as a
Quality) he contradicts himself; for he has in the beginning of this his
discourse denied (and rightly) that any Accident is in God, saying whatsoever
is in God is the Divine Substance. He affirms also, that to attribute any
Accident to God, is to deny the simplicity of the Divine Substance. And thus
his Lordship makes God, as I do, a Corporeal Spirit. Both here, and throughout,
he discovers so much ignorance, as had he charged me with error only, and not
with Atheism, I should not have thought it necessary to answer him.


J. D. We are taught in our Creed to believe the Catholic or Universal Church.
But T. H. teaches us the contrary, That if there be more Christian Churches
than one, all of them together are not one Church personally. And more plainly,
Now if the whole number of Christians be not contained in one Commonwealth,
they are not one Person, nor is there an Universal Church, that has any
Authority over them. And again, The Universal Church is not one Person, of
which it can be said, that it has done, or Decreed, or Ordained, or
Excommunicated, or Absolved. This does quite overthrow all the Authority of
General Councils.

All other Men distinguish between the Church and the Commonwealth; only T. H.
makes them to be one and the same thing. The Commonwealth of Christian men,
and the Church of the same, are altogether the same thing, called by two names,
for two reasons. For the matter of the Church and of the Commonwealth is the
same, namely the same Christian men; and the Form is the same, which consists
in the lawful power of convocating them. And hence he concludes, That every
Christian Commonwealth is a Church endowed with all spiritual Authority. And
yet more fully, The Church if it be one Person, is the same thing with the
Commonwealth of Christians, called a Commonwealth, because it consists of
men united in one Person their Sovereign; And a Church because it consists in
Christian men united in one Christian Sovereign. Upon which account there was
no Christian Church in these Parts of the World, for some hundreds of years
after Christ, because there was no Christian Sovereign.


T. A. For answer to this Period, I say only this, That taking the Church (as I
do in all those places) for a company of Christian men on Earth incorporated
into one Person, that can speak, command, or do any act of a Person, all that
he cites out of what I have written is true; and that all private
Conventicles, though their belief be right, are not properly called Churches;
and that there is not any one Universal Church here on Earth which is a Person
endued with Authority universal to govern all Christian men on Earth, no more
than there is one Universal Sovereign Prince or State on Earth that has right
to govern all Mankind. I deny also that the whole Clergy of a Christian Kingdom
or State being assembled, are the representative of that Church further than
the Civil Laws permits; or can lawfully assemble themselves, unless by the
command or by the leave of the Sovereign Civil Power. I say further, that the
denial of this point tends in England toward the taking away of the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. But his Lordship has not here denied any
thing of mine, because he has done no more but set down my words. He says
further, that this Doctrine destroys the Authority of all General Councils;
which I confess. Nor has any General Council at this day in this Kingdom the
force of a Law, nor ever had, but by the Authority of the King.


J. D. Neither is he more Orthodox concerning the Holy Scriptures, Hitherto,
that is, for the Books of Moses, the power of making the Scripture Canonical,
was in the Civil Sovereign. The like he says of the Old Testament, made
Canonical by Esdras. And of the New Testament, That it was not the Apostles
which made their own Writings Canonical, but every Convert made them so to
himself. Yet with this restriction, That until the Sovereign Ruler had
prescribed them, they were but Counsel and Advice, which whether good or bad,
he that was counseled might without injustice refuse to observe, and being
contrary to the Laws established, could not without injustice observe. He
makes the Primitive Christians to have been in a pretty condition. Certainly
the Gospel was contrary to the Laws then established. But most plainly, The
word of the Interpreter of the Scripture is the word of God. And the same is
the Interpreter of the Scripture, and the Sovereign Judge of all Doctrines,
that is, the Sovereign Magistrate, to whose Authority we must stand no less,
than to theirs, who at first did commend the Scripture to us for the Canon of
Faith. Thus if Christian Sovereigns, of different Communications, do clash one
with another, in their interpretations, or misinterpretation of Scripture (as
they do daily) then the word of God is contradictory to it self; or that is the
word of God in one Commonwealth, which is the word of the Devil in another
Commonwealth. And the same thing may be true, and not true at the same time:
Which is the peculiar privilege of T.H. to make Contradictories to be true
together.


T. H. There is no doubt but by what Authority the Scripture or any other
Writing is made a Law, by the same Authority the Scriptures are to be
interpreted, or else they are made Law in vain. But to obey is one thing, to
believe is another; which distinction perhaps his Lordship never heard of. To
obey is to do or forbear as one is commanded, and depends on the Will; but to
believe depends not on the Will, but on the providence and guidance of our
hearts that are in the hands of God Almighty. Laws only required obedience;
Belief requires Teachers and Arguments drawn either from Reason, or from some
thing already believed. Where there is no reason for our Belief, there is no
reason we should believe. The reason why men believe, is drawn from the
Authority of those men whom we have no just cause to mistrust, that is, of such
men to whom no profit accrues by their deceiving us, and of such men as never
used to lie, or else from the Authority of such men whose Promises, Threats,
and Affirmations we have seen confirmed by God with Miracles. If it be not from
the Kings Authority that the Scripture is Law, what other Authority makes it
Law? Here some man being of his Lordships judgment will perhaps laugh and say,
it is the Authority of God that makes them Law. I grant that. But my question
is, on what Authority they believe that God is the Author of them? Here his
Lordship would have been at a Nonplus, and turning round, would have said the
Authority of the Scripture makes good that God is their Author. If it be said
we are to believe the Scripture upon the Authority of the Universal Church, why
are not the Books we call Apocrypha the Word of God as well as the rest? If
this Authority be in the Church of England, then it is not any other than the
Authority of the Head of the Church, which is the King. For without the Head
the Church is mute, the Authority therefore is in the King; which is all that I
contended for in this point. As to the Laws of the Gentiles, concerning
Religion in the Primitive times of the Church, I confess they were contrary to
Christian Faith. But none of their Laws, nor Terrors, nor a man's own Will are
able to take away Faith, though they can compel to an external obedience; and
though I may blame the Ethnic Princes for compelling men to speak what they
thought not, yet I absolve not all those that have had the Power in Christian
Churches from the same fault. For I believe since the time of the first four
General Councels, there have been more Christians burnt and killed in the
Christian Church by Ecclesiastical Authority, than by the Heathen Emperors Laws
for Religion only without Sedition. All that the Bishop does in this Argument
is but a heaving at the Kings Supremacy. Oh, but (says he) if two Kings
interpret a place of Scripture in contrary senses, it will follow that both
senses are true. It does not follow. For the interpretation, though it be made
by just Authority, must not therefore always be true. If the Doctrine in the
one sense be necessary to Salvation, then they that hold the other must dye in
their sins, and be Damned. But if the Doctrine in neither sense be necessary to
Salvation, then all is well, except perhaps that they will call one another
Atheists, and fight about it.


J. D. All the power, virtue, use and efficacy, which he ascribes to the Holy
Sacraments, is to be signs or commemorations. As for any sealing, or
confirming, or conferring of Grace, he acknowledges nothing. The same he says
particularly of Baptism: Upon which grounds a Cardinals red Hat, or a Sergeant
at Arms his Mace, may be called Sacraments as well as Baptism, or the holy
Eucharist, if they be only signs and commemorations of a benefit. If he except,
that Baptism and the Eucharist, are of Divine institution: But a Cardinals red
Hat or a Sergeant at Arms his Mace are not: He says truly but nothing to his
advantage or purpose, seeing he deriveth all the Authority of the Word and
Sacraments, in respect of Subjects, and all our obligation to them, from the
Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate, without which these words repent, and be
Baptized in the name of Jesus, are but Counsel, no Command. And so a Sergeant
at Arms his Mace, and Baptism, proceed both from the same Authority. And this
he says upon this silly ground, That nothing is a Command, the performance
whereof tends to our own benefit. He might as well deny the Ten Commandments
to be Commands, because they have an advantageous promise annexed to them, Do
this and thou shall live; And Cursed is every one that continues not in all
the words of this Law to do them.


T. H. Of the Sacraments I said no more, than that they are Signs or
Commemorations. He finds fault that I add not Seals, Confirmations, and that
they confer grace. First, I would have asked him if a Seal be any thing else
besides a Sign, whereby to remember somewhat, as that we have promised,
accepted, acknowledged, given, undertaken somewhat. Are not other Signs though
without a Seal, of force sufficient to convince me or oblige me? A Writing
obligatory, or Release signed only with a man's name is as Obligatory as a Bond
signed and sealed, if it be sufficiently proved, though peradventure it may
require a longer Process to obtain a Sentence, but his Lordship I think knew
better than I do the force of Bonds and Bills; yet I know this that in the
Court of Heaven there is no such difference between saying, signing, and
sealing, as his Lordship seems here to pretend. I am Baptized for a
Commemoration that I have enrolled my self. I take the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to Commemorate that Christ's Body was broken, and his Blood shed for my
redemption. What is there more intimated concerning the nature of these
Sacraments, either in the Scripture or in the Book of Common Prayer? Have Bread
and Wine and Water in their own Nature, any other Quality than they had before
the Consecration? It is true that the Consecration gives these bodies a new
Relation, as being a giving and dedicating of them to God, that is to say a
making of them Holy, not a changing of their Quality. But as some silly young
men returning from France affect a broken English, to be thought perfect in the
French language; so his Lordship (I think) to seem a perfect understander of
the unintelligible language of the Schoolmen, pretends an ignorance of his
Mother Tongue. He talks here of Command and Counsel as if he were no English
man, nor knew any difference between their significations. What English man
when he commands, says more than, Do this; yet he looks to be obeyed, if
obedience be due unto him. But when he says, Do this, and thou shall have such
or such a Reward, he encourages him, or advises him, or Bargains with him, but
Commands him not. Oh, the understanding of a Schoolman.


J. D. Sometimes he is for holy Orders, and gives to the Pastors of the Church
the right of Ordination and Absolution, and Infallibility, too much for a
particular Pastor, or the Pastors of one particular Church. It is manifest,
that the consecration of the chiefest Doctors in every Church, and imposition
of hands, does pertain to the Doctors of the same Church. And it cannot be
doubted of, but the power of binding and loosing was given by Christ to the
future Pastors, after the same manner as to his present Apostles. And our
Savior has promised this infallibility in those things which are necessary to
Salvation, to his Apostles, until the day of Judgment, that is to say, to the
Apostles and Pastors, to be Consecrated by the Apostles successively, by the
imposition of hands.

But at other times he casts all this Meal down with his foot. Christian
Sovereigns are the supreme Pastors, and the only persons whom Christians now
hear speak from God, except such as God speaks to in these days
supernaturally. What is now become of the promised infallibility?

And it is from the Civil Sovereign that all other Pastors derive their right
of teaching, preaching, and all other functions pertaining to that Office, and
they are but his Ministers in the same manner as the Magistrates of Towns, or
Judges in Courts of Justice, and Commanders of Armies. What is now become of
their Ordination? Magistrates, Judges, and Generals, need no precedent
qualifications. He makes the Pastoral Authority of Sovereigns to be Jure
divino, of all other Pastors Jure civili: He adds, neither is there any Judge
of Heresy among Subjects, but their own civil Sovereign.

Lastly, the Church Excommunicateth no man but whom she Excommunicateth by the
Authority of the Prince. And the effect of Excommunication has nothing in it,
neither of damage in this World, nor terror upon an Apostate, if the Civil
Power did persecute or not assist the Church. And in the World to come, leaves
them in no worse estate, than those who never believed. The damage rather
redoundeth to the Church. Neither is the Excommunication of a Christian
Subject, that obeys the Laws of his own Sovereign, of any effect. Where is
now their power of binding and loosing?


T. H. Here his Lordship condemns, first my too much kindness to the Pastors
of the Church; as if I ascribed Infallibility to every particular Minister, or
at least to the Assembly of the Pastors of a particular Church. But he mistakes
me, I never meant to flatter them so much. I say only that the Ceremony of
Consecration, and Imposition of hands belongs to them; and that also no
otherwise than as given them by the Laws of the Commonwealth. The Bishop
Consecrates, but the King both makes him Bishop and gives him his Authority.
The Head of the Church not only gives the power of Consecration, Dedication,
and Benediction, but may also exercise the Act himself if he please. Solomon
did it, and the Book of Canons says, That the King of England has all the Right
that any good King of Israel had. It might have added that any other King or
sovereign Assembly had in their own Dominions. I deny That any Pastor or any
Assembly of Pastors in any particular Church, or all the Churches on earth
though united are Infallible. Yet I say the Pastors of a Christian Church
assembled are in all such points as are necessary to Salvation. But about what
points are necessary to Salvation he and I differ. For I in the 43d chapter of
my Leviathan have proved that this Article, Jesus is the Christ, is the unum
necessarium, the only Article necessary to Salvation; to which his Lordship
has not offered any Objection. And he (it seems) would have necessary to
Salvation every Doctrine he himself thought so. Doubtless in this Article,
Jesus is the Christ, every Church is infallible; for else it were no Church.
Then he says, I overthrow this again by saying that Christian Sovereigns are
the Supreme Pastors, that is, Heads of their own Churches; That they have their
Authority Jure Divino; That all other Pastors have it Jure Civili: How came any
Bishop to have Authority over me, but by Letters Patents from the King? I
remember a Parliament wherein a Bishop, who was both a good Preacher and a good
Man, was blamed for a Book he had a little before Published in maintenance of
the Jus Divinum of Bishops; a thing which before the Reformation here, was
never allowed them by the Pope. Two Jus Divinums cannot stand together in one
Kingdom. In the last place he mislikes that the Church should Excommunicate by
Authority of the King, that is to say, by Authority of the Head of the Church.
But he tells not why. He might as well mislike that the Magistrates of the
Realm should execute their Offices by the Authority of the Head of the Realm.
His Lordship was in a great error, if he thought such encroachments would add
any thing to the Wealth, Dignity, Reverence or Continuance of his Order. They
are Pastors of Pastors, but yet they are the Sheep of him that is on earth
their sovereign Pastor, and he again a Sheep of that supreme Pastor which is in
Heaven. And if they did their pastoral Office, both by Life and Doctrine, as
they ought to do, there could never arise any dangerous Rebellion in the Land.
But if the people see once any ambition in their Teachers, they will sooner
learn that, than any other Doctrine; and from Ambition proceeds Rebellion.


J. D. It may be some of T. H. his Disciples desire to know what hopes of
Heavenly joys they have upon their Masters Principles. They may hear them
without any great contentment, There is no mention in Scripture, nor ground in
reason, of the Coelum Empyraeum, that is, the Heaven of the Blessed, where the
Saints shall live eternally with God. And again, I have not found any Text that
can probably be drawn to prove any Ascension of the Saints into Heaven, that is
to say, into any Coelum Empyraeum. But he concludes positively, that Salvation
shall be upon earth, when God shall Reign at the coming of Christ in Jerusalem.
And again, In short, the Kingdom of God is a civil Kingdom, etc. called also
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of Glory. All the Hobbians can hope for,
is, to be restored to the same condition which Adam was in before his fall. So
says T.H. himself, From whence may be inferred, that the Elect, after the
Resurrection, shall be restored to the estate wherein Adam was before he had
sinned. As for the beatifical vision he defines it to be a word unintelligible.


T. H. This Coelum Empyraeum for which he pretends so much zeal, where is it
in the Scripture, where in the Book of Common Prayer, where in the Canons,
where in the Homilies of the Church of England, or in any part of our Religion?
What has a Christian to do with such Language? Nor do I remember it in
Aristotle. Perhaps it may be in some Schoolman or Commentator on Aristotle, and
his Lordship makes it in English the Heaven of the Blessed, as if Empyraeum
signified That which belongs to the Blessed. St. Austin says better; that after
the day of Judgment all that is not Heaven shall be Hell. Then for Beatifical
vision, how can any man understand it that knows from the Scripture that no man
ever saw or can see God. Perhaps his Lordship thinks that the happiness of the
Life to come is not real but a Vision. As for that which I say ( Lev. page
345.) I have answered to it already.


J. D. But considering his other Principles, I do not marvel much at his
extravagance in this point. To what purpose should a Coelum Empyraeum, or
Heaven of the Blessed, serve in his judgment, who makes the blessed Angels
that are the Inhabitants of that happy Mansion, to be either Idols of the
brain, that is in plain English, nothing, or thin, subtle, fluid bodies,
destroying the Angelical nature. The universe being the aggregate of all
bodies, there is no real part thereof that is not also body. And elsewhere,
Every part of the Universe is Body, and that which is not Body, is no part of
the Universe. And because the Universe is all, that which is no part of it is
nothing, and consequently no where. How? By this Doctrine he makes not only
the Angels, but God himself to be nothing. Neither does he salve it at all, by
supposing erroneously Angels to be corporeal Spirits, and by attributing the
name of incorporeal Spirit to God, as being a name of more honor, in whom we
consider not what Attribute best expresses his nature, which is
incomprehensible, but what best expresses our desire to honor him. Though we
be not able to comprehend perfectly what God is, yet we are able perfectly to
comprehend what God is not, that is, he is not imperfect, and therefore he is
not finite, and consequently he is not corporeal. This were a trim way to
honor God indeed to honor him with a lie. If this that he say here be true,
That every part of the Universe is a Body; and whatsoever is not a Body is
nothing. Then by this Doctrine, if God be not a Body, God is nothing; not an
incorporeal Spirit, but one of the Idols of the Brain, a mere nothing, though
they think they dance under a Net, and have the blind of Gods
incomprehensibility, between them and discovery.


T. H. This of Incorporeal substance he urged before, and there I answered it.
I wonder he so often rolls the same stone. He is like Sysiphus in the Poets
Hell, that there rolls a heavy stone up a hill, which no sooner he brings to
daylight, then it slips down again to the bottom, and serves him so
perpetually. For so his Lordship rolls this and other questions with much ado
till they come to the light of Scripture; and then they vanish, and he vexing,
sweating, and railing goes to it again, to as little purpose as before. From
that I say of the Universe he infers, that I make God to be nothing. But infers
it absurdly. He might indeed have inferred that I make him a Corporeal, but yet
a pure Spirit. I mean by the Universe, the Aggregate of all things that have
being in themselves, and so do all men else. And because God has a being, it
follows that he is either the whole Universe, or part of it. Nor does his
Lordship go about to disprove it, but only seems to wonder at it.


J. D. To what purpose should a Coelum Empyraeum serve in his Judgment, who
denies the immortality of the Soul? The Doctrine is now, and has been a long
time far otherwise; namely, that every man has eternity of life by nature, in
as much as his Soul is immortal. Who supposes that when a man dies, there
remains nothing of him but his Carkase; who makes the word Soul in holy
Scripture to signify always either the Life, or the Living Creature? And
expounds the casting of Body and Soul into Hellfire, to be the casting of
Body and Life into Hellfire. Who makes this Orthodox truth, that the Souls of
men are Substances distinct from their Bodies, to be an error contracted by the
contagion of the Demonology of the Greeks, and a window that gives entrance to
the dark Doctrine of eternal torments. Who expounds these words of Solomon,
[Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return
to God that gave it,] Thus, God only knows what becomes of a man's Spirit, when
he exspireth. He will not acknowledge that there is a Spirit, or any Substance
distinct from the Body. I wonder what they think does keep their Bodies from
stinking.


T. H. He comes here to that which is a great Paradox in School Divinity. The
grounds of my opinion are the Canonical Scripture, and the Texts which I cited
I must again recite, to which I shall also add some others. My Doctrine is
this, First, That the elect in Christ from the day of Judgment forward, by
virtue of Christ's Passion and Victory over death, shall enjoy eternal life,
that is, they shall be Immortal. Secondly, that there is no living Soul
separated in place from the Body, more than there is a living Body separated
from the Soul. Thirdly, That the reprobate shall be revived to Judgment, and
shall dye a second death in Torments, which death shall be everlasting. Now let
us consider what is said to these points in the Scripture, and what is the
harmony therein of the Old and New Testament.

And first, because the word Immortal Soul, is not found in the Scriptures, the
question is to be decided by evident consequences from the Scripture. The
Scripture says of God expressly (1 Timothy 6.16.) That He only has immortality,
and dwells in inaccessible light. Hence it follows that the Soul of man is
not of its own nature Immortal, but by Grace, that is to say, by the gift of
God. And then the question will be whether this grace or gift of God were
bestowed on the Soul in the Creation and Conception of the Man, or afterward
by his redemption. Another question will be in what sense immortality of
Torments can be called a gift, when all gifts suppose the thing given to be
grateful to the receiver. To the first of these, Christ himself says ( Luke
14.13, 14.) When thou make a Feast, call the Poor, the Maimed, the Lame, the
Blind, and thou shall be Blessed, for they cannot recompense thee; For thou
shall be recompensed at the resurrection of them that be just. It follows hence
that the reward of the Elect is not before the Resurrection. What reward then
enjoyes a separated Soul in Heaven, or any where else till that day come, or
what has he to do there till the Body rise again? Again St. Paul says ( Romans
2.6, 7.) God will render to every man according to his works. To them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for Honor, Glory and Immortality,
Eternal Life. But unto them that be contentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Here it is plain that God gives
Eternal Life only to well doers, and to them that seek (not to them that have
already) Immortality. Again (1 Timothy 1.10.) Christ has abolished Death, and
brought Life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel. Therefore before the
Gospel of Christ, nothing was Immortal but God. And St. Paul speaking of the
day of Judgment (1 Cor. 15.54.) says that This Mortal shall put on
Immortality, and that then Death is swallowed in Victory. There was no
Immortality of any thing Mortal till Death was overcome, and that was at the
Resurrection. And John 8.52. Verily, Verily, if a man keep my sayings he shall
never see Death, that is to say, he shall be Immortal; but it is no where said,
that he which keeps not Christ's sayings shall never see Death, nor be
Immortal, and yet they that say that the wicked, Body and Soul, shall be
tormented everlastingly, do therein say they are Immortal. Mat. 10.28. Fear not
them that can kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but fear him
that is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. Man cannot kill a Soul, for
the Man killed shall revive again. But God can destroy the Soul and Body in
Hell, as that it shall never return to life. In the Old Testament we read (
Genesis 7.4.) I will destroy every living Substance that I have made from off the
face of the Earth; therefore, if the Souls of them that perished in the Flood
were Substances, they were also destroyed in the Flood and were not Immortal. (
Math. 25.41.) Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. These words are to be spoken in the day of Judgment,
which Judgment is to be in the Clouds. And there shall stand the men that are
reprobated alive, where Souls according to his Lordships Doctrine were sent
long before to Hell. Therefore at that present day of Judgment they had one
Soul by which they were there alive, and another Soul in Hell. How his Lordship
could have maintained this, I understand not. But by my Doctrine, that the Soul
is not a separated Substance, but that the Man at his Resurrection shall be
revived by God, and raised to Judgment, and afterward Body and Soul destroyed
in Hellfire (which is the second death) there is no such consequence or
difficulty to be inferred. Besides it avoids the unnecessary disputes about
where the Soul of Lazarus was for four days he lay dead. And the order of the
Divine Process is made good, of not inflicting torments before the Condemnation
pronounced.

Now as to the harmony of the two Testaments, it is said in the old ( Genesis
2.17.) In the day that thou eatest of the Tree of Knowledge, dying thou shall
dye. Moriendo morieris, that is, when thou art dead thou shall not revive; for
so has Athanasius expounded it. Therefore Adam and Eve were not Immortal by
their Creation. Then ( Genesis 3.22.) Behold the man is become as one of us -- Now
lest he put forth his hand and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat, and live
for ever, etc. Here they had had an Immortality by the gift of God, if they had
not sinned. It was therefore sin that lost them Eternal-life. He therefore that
redeemed them from sin was the Author of their Immortality, and consequently
began in the day of Judgment when Adam and Eve were again made alive by
admission to the new Tree of Life, which was Christ.

Now let us compare this with the New Testament. Where we find these words (1
Cor. 15.21.) since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the
dead. Therefore all the Immortality of the Soul, that shall be after the
Resurrection, is by Christ, and not by the nature of the Soul. verse 22. As by
Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Therefore since we
dyed by Adam's sin, so we shall live by Christ's Redemption of us, that is,
after the Resurrection. Again verse 23. But every man in his order; Christ the
first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. Therefore none
shall be made alive till the coming of Christ. Lastly, as when God had said,
That day that thou eatest of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, thou shall
dye, though he condemned him then, yet he suffered him to live a long time
after; so when Christ had said to the Thief on the Cross, this day thou shall
be with me in Paradise, yet he suffered him to lie dead till the General
Resurrection, for no man rose again from the dead before our Saviors coming,
and conquering death.

If God bestowed Immortality on every man then when he made him, and he made
many to whom he never purposed to give his saving Grace, what did his Lordship
think that God gave any man Immortality with purpose only to make him capable
of Immortal Torments? It Is a hard saying, and I think cannot piously be
believed. I am sure it can never be proved by the Canonical Scripture.

But though I have made it clear that it cannot be drawn by lawful consequence
from Scripture, that Man was Created with a Soul Immortal, and that the Elect
only, by the Grace of God in Christ, shall both Bodies and Souls from the
Resurrection forward be Immortal; yet there may be a Consequence well drawn
from some words in the Rites of Burial, that prove the contrary, as these.
Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of his great mercy, to take unto
himself the Soul of our dear Brother here departed, etc. And these, Almighty
God, with whom do live the Spirits of them that depart hence in the Lord. Which
are words Authorized by the Church. I wonder his Lordship that had so often
pronounced them, took no notice of them here. But it often happens that men
think of those things least, which they have most perfectly learnt by rote. I
am sorry I could not without deserting the sense of Scripture and mine own
Conscience say the same. But I see no just cause yet why the Church should be
offended at it. For the Church of England pretends not (as does the Church of
Rome) to be above the Scripture; nor forbids any man to Read the Scripture;
nor was I forbidden when I Wrote my Leviathan to Publish any thing which the
Scriptures suggested. For when I Wrote it, I may safely say there was no lawful
Church in England, that could have maintained me in, or prohibited me from
Writing any thing. There was no Bishop, and though there were Preaching, such
as it was, yet no Common Prayer. For Extemporary Prayer, though made in the
Pulpit, is not Common Prayer. There was then no Church in England that any man
living was bound to obey. What I Write here at this present time I am forced to
in my defense, not against the Church, but against the accusations and
arguments of my Adversaries. For the Church, though it excommunicates for
scandalous life, and for teaching false Doctrines, yet it professes to impose
nothing to be held as Faith, but what may be warranted by Scripture, and this
the Church it self says in the 20th of the 39 Articles of Religion. And
therefore I am permitted to allege Scripture at any time in the defense of my
Belief.


J. D. But they that in one case are grieved, in another must be relieved. If
perchance T. H. has given his Disciples any discontent in his Doctrine of
Heaven and the holy Angels, and the glorified Souls of the Saints, he will make
them amends in his Doctrine of Hell, and the Devils, and the damned Spirits.
First of the Devils; He fancieth that all those Devils which our Savior did
cast out, were Phrensies, and all Demoniacks (or Persons possessed) no other
than Madmen. And to justify our Savior's speaking to a Disease as to a
Person, produces the example of inchanters. But he declares himself most
clearly upon this Subject, in his Animadversions upon my reply to his defense
of fatal destiny. There are in the Scripture two sorts of things which are in
English translated Devils. One is that which is called Satan, Diabolus,
Abaddon, which signifies in English an Enemy, an Accuser, and a destroyer of
the Church of God, in which sense the Devils are but wicked men. The other sort
of Devils are called in the Scripture Daemonia, which are the feigned Gods of
the Heathen, and are neither Bodies nor spiritual Substances, but mere fancies,
and fictions of terrified hearts, feigned by the Greeks, and other Heathen
People, which St. Paul calls Nothings. So T.H. has killed the great infernal
Devil, and all his black Angels, and left no Devils to be feared, but Devils
Incarnate, that is, wicked men.


T. H. As for the first words cited ( Levi. page 38, 39.) I refer the Reader to
the place it self; and for the words concerning Satan, I leave them to the
judgment of the Learned.


J. D. And for Hell he describes the Kingdom of Satan, or the Kingdom of
darkness, to be a confederacy of deceivers. He tells us that the places which
set forth the torments of Hell in holy Scripture, do design Metaphorically a
grief and discontent of mind, from the sight of that eternal felicity in
others, which they themselves, through their own incredulity and disobedience
have lost. As if Metaphorical descriptions did not bear sad truths in them, as
well as literal, as if final desperation were no more than a little fit of
grief or discontent; and a guilty conscience were no more than a transitory
passion, as if it were a loss so easily to be born, to be deprived for evermore
of the beatifical Vision: and lastly as if the Damned, besides that unspeakable
loss, did not likewise suffer actual Torments, proportionable in some measure
to their own sins, and Gods Justice.


T. H. That Metaphors bear sad truths in them, I deny not. It is a sad thing to
lose this present life untimely. Is it not therefore much more a sad thing to
lose an eternal happy Life? And I believe that he which will venture upon sin,
with such danger, will not stick to do the same notwithstanding the Doctrine of
eternal torture. Is it not also a sad truth, that the Kingdom of darkness
should be a Confederacy of deceivers?


J. D. Lastly, for the damned Spirits, he declares himself every where, that
their sufferings are not eternal. The Fire shall be unquenchable, and the
Torments everlasting; but it cannot be thence inferred, that he who shall be
cast into that Fire, or be tormented with those Torments, shall endure and
resist them, so as to be eternally burnt and tortured, and yet never be
destroyed nor dye. And though there be many places, that affirm everlasting
fire, into which men may be cast successivily one after another for ever; yet I
find none that affirm that there shall be an everlasting life therein of any
individual Person. If he had said, and said only, that the pains of the Damned
may be lessened, as to the degree of them, or that they endure not for ever,
but that after they are purged by long torments from their dross and
Corruptions, as Gold in the fire, both the damned Spirits and the Devils
themselves should be restored to a better condition, he might have found some
Ancients (who are therefore called the merciful Doctors) to have joined with
him, though still he should have wanted the suffrage of the Catholic Church.


T. H. Why does not his Lordship cite some place of Scripture here to prove
that all the Reprobates which are dead, live eternally in torment? We read
indeed That everlasting Torments were prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
whose natures also are everlasting; and that the Beast and the false Prophet
shall be tormented everlastingly; but not that every Reprobate shall be so.
They shall indeed be cast into the same fire, but the Scripture says plainly
enough, that they shall be both Body and Soul destroyed there. If I had said
that the Devils themselves should be restored to a better condition; his
Lordship would have been so kind as to have put me into the number of the
Merciful Doctors. Truly if I had had any Warrant for the possibility of their
being less enemies to the Church of God than they have been, I would have been
as merciful to them as any Doctor of them all. As it is, I am more merciful
than the Bishop.


J. D. But his shooting is not at rovers, but altogether at random, without
either President or Partner. All that eternal fire, all those torments which he
acknowledges, is but this, That after the Resurrection, the Reprobate shall be
in the estate that Adam and his Posterity were in, after the sin committed,
saving that God promised a Redeemer to Adam and not to them. Adding, that they
shall live as they did formerly, Marry, and give in Marriage; and consequently
engender Children perpetually after the Resurrection, as they did before, which
he calls an immortallity of the kind, but not of the persons of men. It is to
be presumed, that in those their second lives, knowing certainly from T. H.
that there is no hope of Redemption for them from corporal death upon their
well-doing; nor fear of any Torments after death for their ill-doing, they will
pass their times here as pleasantly as they can. This is all the Damnation
which T. H. fancieth.


T. H. This he has urged once before, and I answered to it, That the whole
Paragraph was to prove, that for any Text of Scripture to the contrary, men
might, after the Resurrection live as Adam did on earth, and that
notwithstanding the Text of St. Luke chap. 20. verse 34, 35, 36. Marry and
propagate. But that they shall do so, is no assertion of mine. His Lordship
knew I held that after the Resurrection there shall be at all no wicked men;
but the Elect (all that are, have been, and hereafter shall be) shall live on
earth. But St. Peter says, there shall then be a new Heaven and a new Earth.


J. D. In sum I leave it to the free judgment of the understanding Reader, by
these few instances which follow, to judge what the Hobbian Principles are in
point of Religion. Ex ungue leonem.

First, that no man needs to put himself to any hazard for his Faith, but may
safely comply with the times. And for their Faith it is internal and invisible.
They have the license that Naaman had, and need not put themselves into danger
for it.

Secondly, he allows Subjects, being commanded by their Sovereign, to deny
Christ. Profession with the Tongue is but an external thing, and no more than
any other gesture, whereby we signify our obedience. And wherein a Christian,
holding firmly in his heart the Faith of Christ, has the same liberty which
the Prophet Elisha allowed to Naaman, etc. Who by bowing before the Idol
Rimmon, denied the true God as much in effect, as if he had done it with his
Lips. Alas, why did St. Peter Weep so bitterly for denying his Master, out of
fear of his Life or Members? It seems he was not acquainted with these Hobbian
Principles. And in the same place he lays down this general Conclusion. This
we may say that whatsoever a Subject is compelled to, in obedience to his
Sovereign, and does it not in order to his own mind, but in order to the Laws
of his Country, that action is not his, but his Sovereign's; nor is it he that
in this case denies Christ before men, but his Governor and the Law of his
Country. His instance in a Mohammedan commanded by a Christian Prince to be
present at Divine Service, is a weak mistake, springing from his gross
ignorance in Case-Divinity, not knowing to distinguish between an erroneous
Conscience, as the Mahometans is, and a Conscience rightly informed.


T. H. In these his two first instances I confess his Lordship does not much be
lie me. But neither does he confute me. Also I confess my ignorance in his
Case-Divinity which is grounded upon the Doctrine of the Schoolmen. Who to
decide Cases of Conscience, take in, not only the Scriptures, but also the
Decrees of the Popes of Rome, for the advancing of the Dominion of the Roman
Church over Consciences; whereas the true decision of Cases of Consciences
ought to be grounded only on Scripture, or natural Equity. I never allowed the
denying of Christ with the Tongue in all men, but expressly say the contrary (
Lev. page 362.) in these words, For an unlearned man that is in the power of an
Idolatrous King or State, if commanded on pain of death to worship before an
Idol, he detesteth the Idol in his heart; he does well, though if he had the
fortitude to suffer death rather than worship it, he should do better. But if a
Pastor who as Christ's messenger has undertaken to teach Christ's Doctrine to
all Nations, should do the same, it were not only a sinful scandal in respect
of other Christian men's Consciences, but a perfidious forsaking of his charge.
Therefore St. Peter in denying Christ sinned, as being an Apostle. And it is sin
in every man that should now take upon him to preach against the power of the
Pope, to leave his Commission unexecuted for fear of the fire; but in a mere
Traveller, not so. The three Children and Daniel were worthy Champions of the
true Religion. But God requires not of every man to be a Champion. As for his
Lordship's words of complying with the times, they are not mine, but his own
spightful Paraphrase.


J. D. Thirdly, if this be not enough, he gives license to a Christian to
commit Idolatry, or at least to do an Idolatrous act, for fear of death or
corporal danger. To pray unto a King voluntarily for fair weather, or for any
thing which God only can do for us, is divine Worship, and Idolatry. On the
other side, if a King compel a man to it by the terror of death, or other great
corporal punishment, it is not Idolatry. His reason is, because it is not a
sign, that he does inwardly honor him as a God, but that he is desirous to
save himself from death, or from a miserable life. It seems T. H. thinks
there is no divine Worship, but internal. And that it is lawful for a man to
value his own life or his limbs more than his God. How much is he wiser than
the three Children, or Daniel himself? who were thrown, the first into a fiery
Furnace, the last into the Lions Denn, because they refused to comply with the
Idolatrous Decree of their Sovereign Prince.


T. H. Here also my words are truly cited. But his Lordship understood not what
the word Worship signifies; and yet he knew what I meant by it. To think highly
of God (as I had defined it) is to honor him. But to think is internal. To
Worship, is to signify that Honor which we inwardly give, by signs external.
This understood (as by his Lordship it was) all he says to it is but a cavil.


J. D. A fourth Aphorism may be this, That which is said in the Scripture, it
is better to obey God than man, has place in the Kingdom of God by Pact, and
not by Nature. Why? Nature it self does teach us it is better to obey God than
men. Neither can he say that he intended this only of obedience, in the use of
indifferent actions and gestures, in the service of God, commanded by the
Commonwealth, for that is to obey both God and man. But if divine Law and
humane Law clash one with another, without doubt it is evermore better to obey
God than man.


T. H. Here again appears his unskilfulness in reasoning. Who denies, but it is
always, and in all causes better to obey God than Man? But there is no Law,
neither divine nor humane that ought to be taken for a Law, till we know what
it is, and if a divine Law, till we know that God has commanded it to be kept.
We agree that the Scriptures are the Word of God. But they are a Law by Pact,
that is, to us who have been Baptized into the Covenant. To all others it is an
invitation only to their own benefit. It Is true that even nature suggesteth to
us that the Law of God is to be obeyed rather than the Law of man. But nature
does not suggest to us that the Scripture is the Law of God, much less how
every Text of it ought to be interpreted. But who then shall suggest this? Dr.
Bramhall? I deny it. Who then? The stream of Divines? Why so? Am I that have
the Scripture it self before my eyes, obliged to venture my eternal life upon
their interpretation, how learned soever they pretend to be, when no
counter-security that they can give me, will save me harmless? If not the
stream of Divines, who then? The lawful Assembly of Pastors or of Bishops? But
there can be no lawful Assembly in England without the Authority of the King.
The Scripture therefore what it is, and how to be interpreted, is made known
unto us here, by no other way than the Authority of our Sovereign Lord both in
Temporals and Spirituals, The Kings Majesty. And where he has set forth no
Interpretation, there I am allowed to follow my own, as well as any other man,
Bishop or not Bishop. For my own part, all that know me, know also it is my
opinion, That the best government in Religion is by Episcopacy, but in the
King's Right, not in their own. But my Lord of Derry not contented with this,
would have the utmost resolution of our Faith to be into the Doctrine of the
Schools. I do not think that all the Bishops be of his mind. If they were, I
would wish them to stand in fear of that dreadful Sentence, All covet all lose.
I must not let pass these words of his Lordship, If divine Law and humane Law
clash one with another, without doubt it is better evermore to obey God than
man. Where the King is a Christian, believes the Scripture, and has the
Legislative power both in Church and State, and makes no Laws concerning
Christian Faith, or divine Worship, but by the Counsel of his Bishops whom he
trusts in that behalf, if the Bishops counsel him aright, what clashing can
there be between the divine and humane Laws? For if the Civil Law be against
God's Law and the Bishops make it clearly appear to the King that it clasheth
with divine Law, no doubt he will mend it by himself or by the advice of his
Parliament; for else he is no professor of Christ's Doctrine, and so the
clashing is at an end. But if they think that every opinion they hold, though
obscure and unnecessary to Salvation, ought presently to be Law, then there
will be clashings innumerable, not only of Laws, but also of Swords, as we have
found it too true by late experience. But his Lordship is still at this, that
there ought to be, for the divine Laws that is to say, for the interpretation
of Scripture, a Legislative power in the Church, distinct from that of the
King, which under him they enjoy already. This I deny. Then for clashing
between the Civil Laws of Infidels with the Law of God, the Apostles teach that
those their Civil Laws are to be obeyed, but so as to keep their Faith in
Christ entirely in their hearts; which is an obedience easily performed. But I
do not believe that Augustus Caesar or Nero was bound to make the holy
Scripture Law; and yet unless they did so they could not attain to eternal life.


J. D. His fifth conclusion may be, that the sharpest and most successful
Sword, in any War whatsoever, does give Sovereign Power and Authority to him
that has it, to approve or reject all sorts of Theological Doctrines,
concerning the Kingdom of God, not according to their truth or falsehood, but
according to that influence which they have upon political affairs. Hear him,
But because this Doctrine will appear to most men a novelty, I do but propound
it, maintaining nothing in this or any other Paradox of Religion, but attending
the end of that dispute of the Sword, concerning the Authority (not yet amongst
my Countrymen decided) by which all sorts of Doctrine are to be approved or
rejected, etc. For, the points of Doctrine concerning the Kingdom of God, have
so great influence upon the Kingdom of Man, as not to be determined, but by
them that under God have the Sovereign Power. -- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
Let him evermore want success who thinks actions are to be judged by their
events. This Doctrine may be plausible to those who desire to fish in troubled
Waters. But it is justly hated by those which are in Authority, and all those
who are lovers of peace and tranquillity.

The last part of this conclusion smells rankly of Jeroboam, Now shall the
Kingdom return to the house of David, if this people go up to do Sacrifice in
the house of the Lord at Jerusalem; whereupon the King took counsel, and made
two Calves of Gold, and said unto them, It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem, behold thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. But by the just disposition of Almighty God this Policy turned to a
sin, and was the utter destruction of Jeroboam and his Family. It is not good
jesting with edge-tools, nor playing with holy things: Where men make their
greatest fastness, many times they find most danger.


T. H. His Lordship either had a strange Conscience, or understood not English.
Being at Paris when there was no Bishop nor Church in England, and every man
writ what he pleased, I resolved (when it should please God to restore the
Authority Ecclesiastical) to submit to that Authority, in whatsoever it should
determine. This his Lordship construes for a temporizing and too much
indifferency in Religion; and says further that the last part of my words do
smell of Jeroboam. To the contrary I say my words were modest, and such as in
duty I ought to use. And I profess still that whatsoever the Church of England
(the Church, I say, not every Doctor) shall forbid me to say in matter of
Faith, I shall abstain from saying it, excepting this point. That Jesus Christ
the Son of God dyed for my sins. As for other Doctrins, I think it unlawful if
the Church define them, for any Member of the Church to contradict them.


J. D. His sixth Paradox is a rapper, the Civil Laws are the Rules of good and
evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest, and therefore what the Lawgiver
commands that is to be accounted good, what he forbids bad. And a little after,
before Empires were, just and unjust were not, as whose nature is Relative to a
Command, every action in its own nature is indifferent. That it is just or
unjust proceeds from the right of him that commands. Therefore lawful Kings
make those things which they command, Just by commanding them, and those things
which they forbid Unjust by forbidding them. To this add his definition of a
sin, that which one does, or omitteth, says, or wills contrary to the reason
of the Commonwealth, that is, the [Civil] Laws. Where by the Laws he does not
understand the Written Laws, elected and approved by the whole Commonwealth,
but the verbal Commands or Mandates, of him that has the Sovereign Power, as
we find in many places of his Writings. The Civil Laws are nothing else but the
Commands of him, that is endowed with Sovereign Power in the Commonwealth,
concerning the future actions of his Subjects. And the Civil Laws are fastened
to the Lips of that man who has the Sovereign Power.

Where are we? In Europe or in Asia? Where they ascribed a Divinity to their
Kings, and, to use his own Phrase, made them Mortal Gods. O King live for ever.
Flatterers are the common Moths of great Palaces, where Alexander's friends
are more numerous than the King's friends. But such gross palpable pernicious
flattery as this is, I did never meet with, so derogatory both to piety and
policy. What deserved he who should do his uttermost endeavor to poison a
common Fountain, whereof all the Commonwealth must drink? He does the same who
poisoneth the mind of a Sovereign Prince.

Are the Civil Laws the Rules of good and bad, just and unjust, honest and
dishonest? And what I pray your are the Rules of the Civil Law it self? Even
the Law of God and Nature. If the Civil Laws swerve from these more authentic
Laws, they are Lesbian Rules. What the Lawgiver commands is to be accounted
good, what he forbids bad. This was just the garb of the Athenian Sophisters,
as they are described by Plato. Whatsoever pleased the great Beast [the
Multitude] they call holy, and just, and good. And whatsoever the great Beast
disliked, they called evil, unjust, profane. But he is not yet arrived at the
height of his flattery. Lawful Kings make those things which they command just
by commanding them. At other times when he is in his right wits he talks of
sufferings, and expecting their reward in Heaven. And going to Christ by
Martyrdom. And if he had the fortitude to suffer death he should do better.
But I fear all this was but said in jest. How should they expect their reward
in Heaven, if his Doctrine be true, that there is no reward in Heaven? Or how
should they be Martyrs, if his Doctrine be true, that none can be Martyrs but
those who conversed with Christ upon earth? He adds, Before Empires were,
just and unjust were not. Nothing could be written more false in his sense,
more dishonorable to God, more inglorious to the humane nature. That God
should create Man and leave him presently without any Rules, to his own
ordering of himself, as the Ostridg leaves her Eggs in the sand. But in truth
there have been Empires in the World ever since Adam. And Adam had a Law
written in his heart by the finger of God, before there was any Civil Law. Thus
they do endeavor to make goodness, and justice, and honesty, and conscience,
and God himself, to be empty names, without any reality, which signify
nothing, further than they conduce to a man's interest. Otherwise he would not,
he could not say, That every action as it is invested with its circumstances,
is indifferent in its own nature.


T. H. My sixth Paradox he calls a Rapper. A Rapper, a Swapper and such like
terms are his Lordships elegancies. But let us see what this Rapper is. It Is
this, The Civil Laws are the Rules of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, Honest
and Dishonest. Truly I see no other Rules they have. The Scriptures themselves
were made Law to us here, by the Authority of the Commonwealth, and are
therefore part of the Law Civil. If they were Laws in their own nature, then
were they Laws over all the World, and men were obliged to obey them in
America, as soon as they should be shown there (though without a Miracle) by a
Friar. What is Injust but the Transgression of a Law? Law therefore was before
Unjust. And the Law was made known by Sovereign Power before it was a Law.
Therefore Sovereign Power was antecedent both to Law and Injustice. Who then
made Injust but Sovereign Kings or Sovereign Assemblies? Where is now the
wonder of this Rapper, That Lawful Kings make those things which they command
Just by commanding them, and those things which they forbid Unjust by
forbidding them? Just and Unjust were surely made; if the King made them not,
who made them else? For certainly the breach of a Civil Law is a sin against
God. Another Calumny which he would fix upon me, is, That I make the King's
verbal Commands to be Laws. How so? Because I say the Civil Laws are nothing
else but the Commands of him that has the Sovereign Power, concerning the
future Actions of his Subjects. What verbal Command of a King can arrive at the
ears of all his Subjects (which it must do ere it be a Law) without the Seal of
the Person of the Commonwealth (which is here the Great Seal of England?) Who
but his Lordship ever denied that the command of England was a Law to English
men? Or that any but the King had Authority to affix the Great Seal of England
to any Writing? And who did ever doubt to call our Laws (though made in
Parliament) the King's Laws? What was ever called a Law which the King did not
assent to? Because the King has granted in diverse cases not to make a Law
without the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons, therefore when there is
no Parliament in being, shall the Great Seal of England stand for nothing? What
was more unjustly maintained during the long Parliament (besides the resisting
and Murdering of the King) then this Doctrine of his Lordship's? But the Bishop
endeavored here to make the Multitude believe I maintain, That the King
sins not though he bid hang a man for making his Apparel otherwise than he
appointed, or his Servant for negligent attendance. And yet he knew I
distinguished always between the King's natural and politic capacity. What
name should I give to this wilful slander? But here his Lordship enters into
passion, and exclaims, Where are we, in Europe or in Asia? Gross, palpable,
pernicious flattery, poisoning of a Commonwealth, poisoning the King's mind.
But where was his Lordship when he wrote this? One would not think he was in
France, nor that this Doctrine was Written in the year 1658, but rather in the
year 1648, in some Cabal of the King's enemies. But what did put him into this
fit of Choler? Partly, this very thing, that he could not answer my reasons;
but chiefly, that he had lost upon me so much School-learning in our
controversy touching Liberty and Necessity, wherein he was to blame himself,
for believing that the obscure and barbarous Language of School Divinity could
satisfy an ingenuous Reader as well as plain and perspicuous English. Do I
flatter the King? Why am I not rich? I confess his Lordship has not flattered
him here.


J. D. Something there is which he has a confused glimmering of, as the blind
man sees men walking like Trees, which he is not able to apprehend and express
clearly. We acknowledge, that though the Laws or Commands of a Sovereign Prince
be erroneous, or unjust, or injurious, such as a Subject cannot approve for
good in themselves; yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may not oppose or resist,
otherwise than by Prayers and Tears, and at the most by flight. We acknowledge
that the Civil Laws have power to bind the Conscience of a Christian, in
themselves, but not from themselves, but from him who has said, Let every Soul
be subject to the higher Powers. Either they bind Christian Subjects to do
their Sovereign's Commands, or to suffer for the Testimony of a good
Conscience. We acknowledge that in doubtful Cases semper praesumitur pro Rege
and Lege, the Sovereign and the Law are always presumed to be in the right. But
in plain evident cases which admit no doubt, it is always better to obey God
than man. Blunderers whilst they think to mend one imaginary hole, make two or
three real ones. They who derive the Authority of the Scriptures or God's Law
from the Civil Laws of men, are like those who seek to underprop the Heavens
from falling with a Bullrush. Nay, they derive not only the Authority of the
Scripture, but even the Law of nature it self from the Civil Law. The Laws of
nature (which need no promulgation) in the condition of nature are not properly
Laws, but qualities which dispose men to peace and obedience. When a
Commonwealth is once settled, then are they actually Laws and not before. God
help us, into what times are we fallen, when the immutable Laws of God and
Nature are made to depend upon the mutable Laws of mortal men, just as one
should go about to control the Sun by the Authority of the Clock.


T. H. Hitherto he never offered to mend any of the Doctrines he inveighs
against; but here he does. He says I have a glimmering of something I was not
able to apprehend and express clearly. Let us see his Lordship's more clear
expression. We acknowledge, (says he) that though the Laws or Commands of a
Sovereign Prince be erroneous, or unjust, or injurious, such as a Subject
cannot approve for good in themselves, yet he is bound to acquiesce, and may
not oppose or resist otherwise than by Prayers and Tears, and at the most by
Flight. Hence it follows clearly, that when a Sovereign has made a Law, though
erroneous, then if his Subject oppose it, it is a sin. Therefore I would fain
know, when a man has broken that Law by doing what it forbad, or by refusing to
do what it commanded, whether he have opposed this Law or not. If to break the
Law be to oppose it, he grants it. Therefore his Lordship has not here
expressed himself, so clearly as to make men understand the difference between
breaking a Law and opposing it. Though there be some difference between
breaking of a Law, and opposing those that are sent with force to see it
executed; yet between breaking and opposing the Law it self there is no
difference. Also though the Subject think the Law just, as when a Thief is by
Law Condemned to dye, yet he may lawfully oppose the Execution, not only by
Prayers, Tears and Flight, but also (as I think) any way he can. For though his
fault were never so great, yet his endeavor to save his own life is not a
fault. For the Law expects it, and for that cause appoints Felons to be
carried bound and encompassed with Armed men to Execution. Nothing is opposite
to Law but sin. Nothing opposite to the Sheriff but force. So that his
Lordship's sight was not sharp enough to see the difference between the Law and
the Officer. Again, We acknowledge (says he) that the Laws have power to bind
the Conscience of a Christian in themselves, but not from themselves. Neither
do the Scriptures bind the Conscience because they are Scriptures, but because
they were from God. So also the Book of English Statutes binds our
Consciences in it self, but not from it self, but from the Authority of the
King, who only in the right of God has the legislative Powers. Again he says,
We acknowledge that in doubtful cases, the Sovereign and the Law are always
presumed to be in the right. If he presume they are in the right, how dare he
presume that the cases they determine are doubtful? But says he, in evident
cases which admit no doubt it is always better to obey God than man. Yes, and
in doubtful cases also say I. But not always better to obey the inferior
Pastors than the Supreme Pastor, which is the King. But what are those cases
that admit no doubt? I know but very few, and those are such as his Lordship
was not much acquainted with.


J. D. But it is not worthy of my labor, nor any part of my intention, to
pursue every shadow of a Question which he springs. It shall suffice to
gather a Posie of Flowers (or rather a bundle of Weeds) out of his Writings,
and present them to the Reader, who will easily distinguish them from healthful
Plants by the rankness of their smell. Such are these which follow.


T. H. As for the following Posie of Flowers, there wants no more to make them
sweet, than to wipe off the Venom blown upon some of them by his Lordships
breath.


J. D. 1. To be delighted in the imagination only of being possessed of another
man's Goods, Servants, or Wife, without any intention to take them from him by
force or fraud, is no breach of the Law which says, Thou shall not covet.


T. H. What man was there ever whose imagination of any thing he thought would
please him, was not some delight? Or what sin is there, where there is not so
much as an intention to do injustice? But his Lordship would not distinguish
between delight and purpose, nor between a Wish and a Will. This was venom. I
believe, that his Lordship himself even before he was Married took some delight
in the thought of it, and yet the Woman then was not his own. All love is
delight, but all love is not sin. Without this love of that which is not yet a
man's own, the World had not been Peopled.


J. D. 2. If a Man by the terror of present death be compelled to do a Fact
against the Law, he is totally excused, because no Law can oblige a Man to
abandon his own preservation, nature compels him to the Fact. The like
Doctrine he has elsewhere. When the Actor does any thing against the Law of
Nature by the Command of the Author, if he be obliged by former Covenants to
obey him, not he, but the Author breaks the Law of Nature.


T. H. The second Flower is both sweet and wholesome.


J. D. 3. It is a Doctrine repugnant to Civil Society, that whatsoever a man
does against his Conscience is sin.


T. H. It Is plain, that to do what a man thinks in his own Conscience to be
sin, is sin; for it is a contempt of the Law it self; and from thence ignorant
men, out of an erroneous Conscience, disobey the Law which is pernicious to all
Government.


J. D. 4. The Kingdom of God is not shut but to them that sin, that is, to them
who have not performed due obedience to the Laws of God; nor to them, if they
believe the necessary Articles of the Christian Faith.

5. We must know that the true acknowledging of sin is Repentance it self.

6. An opinion publicly appointed to be taught cannot be Heresy, nor the
Sovereign Princes that Authorized the same Heretics.


T. H. The 4 th. 5 th. and 6 th. smell well. But to say, that the Sovereign
Prince in England is a Heretic, or that an Act of Parliament is Heretical,
stinks abominably, as 'twas thought Primo Elizabethae.


J. D. 7. Temporal and Spiritual government are but two words to make men see
double and mistake their lawful Sovereign, etc. There is no other Government in
this Life, neither of State, nor Religion but Temporal.

8. It is manifest, that they who permit a contrary Doctrine to that which
themselves believe and think necessary [to Salvation] do against their
Consciences, and Will, as much as in them lies the eternal destruction of
their Subjects.


T. H. The 7 th. and 8 th. are Roses and Jassamin. But his leaving out the
words [ to Salvation] was venom.


J. D. 9. Subjects sin if they do not worship God according to the Laws of the
Commonwealth.


T. H. The 9 th. he has poisoned, and made it, not mine; he quotes my Book de
Cive Cap. 15.19. Where I say, Regnante Deo per solam rationem naturalem, that
is, Before the Scripture was given, they sinned that refused to worship God,
according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Country, which has no ill scent,
but to undutiful Subjects.


J. D. 10. To believe in Jesus [in Jesum] is the same as to believe that Jesus
is Christ.


T. H. And so it is always in the Scripture.


J. D. 11. There can be no contradiction between the Laws of God, and the Laws
of a Christian Commonwealth. Yet, we see Christian Commonwealths daily
contradict one another.


T. H. The 11 th. is also good. But his Lordship's instance, That Christian
Commonwealths contradict one another, have nothing to do here. Their Laws do
indeed contradict one another, but contradict not the Law of God. For God
Commands their Subjects to obey them in all things, and his Lordship himself
confesses that their Laws, though erroneous, bind the Conscience. But
Christian Commonwealths would seldom contradict one another, if they made no
Doctrine Law, but such as were necessary to Salvation.


J. D. 12. No man gives but with intention of some good to himself. Of all
voluntary Acts, the Object is to every man his own good. Moses, St. Paul, and
the Decij were not of his mind.


T. H. That which his Lordship adds to the 12 th. namely, that Moses, St. Paul,
and the Decij were not of my mind is false. For the two former did what they
did for a good to themselves, which was eternal Life; and the Decij for a good
Fame after death. And his Lordship also, if he had believed there is an eternal
happiness to come, or thought a good Fame after death to be any thing worth, he
would have directed all his actions toward them, and have despised the Wealth
and Titles of the present World.


J. D. 13. There is no natural knowledge of man's estate after death, much less
of reward which is then to be given to breach of Faith, but only a belief
grounded upon other men's saying, that they know it supernaturally, or that they
know those that knew them that knew others that knew it supernaturally.


T. H. The 13 th. is good and fresh.


J. D. 14. David's killing of Uriah was no injury to Uriah, because the right
to do what he pleased was given him by Uriah himself.


T. H. David himself makes this good, in saying, To thee only have I sinned.


J. D. 15. To whom it belongs to determine controversies which may arise from
the diverse interpretations of Scripture, he has an imperial power over all men
which acknowledge the Scripture to be the Word of God.

16. What is Theft, what is Murder, what is Adultery, and universally what is
an injury, is known by the Civil Law, that is, by the Commands of the Sovereign.


T. H. For the 15 th. he should have disputed it with the Head of the Church.
And as to the 16 th. I would have asked him by what other Law his Lordship
would have it determined what is Theft, or what is Injury, than by the Laws
made in Parliament, or by the Laws which distinguish between Meum and Tuum? His
Lordships ignorance smells rankly ('it is his own phrase) in this and many other
places (which I have let pass) of his own Interest. The King tells us what is
sin, in that he tells us what is Law. He has authorized the Clergy to dehort
the people from sin, and to exhort them, by good motives, (both from Scripture
and Reason) to obey the Laws; and supposes them (though under forty years old)
by the help they have in the University, able in case the Law be not written,
to teach the people old and young, what they ought to follow in doubtful cases
of Conscience, that is to say, they are authorized to expound the Laws of
Nature; but not so as to make it a doubtful case whether the King's Laws be to
be obeyed or not. All they ought to do is from the King's Authority. And
therefore this my Doctrine is no Weed.


J. D. 17. He admits incestuous Copulations of the Heathens, according to
their Heathenish Laws to have been lawful Marriages. Though the Scripture teach
us expressly, that for those abominations the Land of Canaan spued out her
Inhabitants, Levit. 18.28.


T. H. The 17 th. he has corrupted with a false interpretation of the Text.
For in that Chapter from the beginning to verse 20, are forbidden Marriages in
certain degrees of kindred. From verse 20, which begins with Moreover (to the
28 th.) are forbidden Sacrificing of Children to Molech, and Profaning of
God's name, and Buggery with Man and Beast, with this cause expressed ( For all
these abominations have the men of the Land done which were before you, and the
Land is defiled) That the Land spue not you out also. As for Marriages within
the degrees prohibited, they are not referred to the abominations of the
Heathen. Besides, for some time after Adam, such Marriages were necessary.


J. D. 18. I say that no other Article of Faith besides this, that Jesus is
Christ, is necessary to a Christian man for Salvation.

19. Because Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, therefore neither can his
Ministers, unless they be Kings, require obedience in his name. They have no
right of Commanding, no power to make Laws.


T. H. These two smell comfortably, and of Scripture. The contrary Doctrine
smells of Ambition and encroachment of Jurisdiction, or Rump of the Roman
Tyranny.


J. D. 20. I pass by his errors about Oaths about Vows, about the Resurrection,
about the Kingdom of Christ, about the Power of the Keys, Binding, Loosing,
Excommunication, etc. his ignorant mistakes of meritum congrui and condigni,
active and passive obedience, and many more, for fear of being tedious to the
Reader.


T. H. The tears of School Divinity, of which number are meritum congrui,
meritum condigni, and passive obedience, are so obscure as no man living can
tell what they mean, so that they that use them may admit or deny their
meaning, as it shall serve their turns. I said not that this was their meaning,
but that I thought it was so. For no man living can tell what a School man
means by his words. Therefore I expounded them according to their true
signification. Merit ex condigno is when a thing is deserved by Pact; as when I
say the Labourer is worthy of his hire, I mean meritum ex condigno. But when a
man of his own grace throws Money among the people, with an intention that
what part soever of it any of them could catch, he that catches merits it, not
by Pact, nor by precedent Merit, as a Labourer, but because it was congruent to
the purpose of him that cast it amongst them. In all other meaning these words
are but Jargon, which his Lordship had learnt by rote. Also passive obedience
signifies nothing, except it may be called passive obedience when a man
refraineth himself, from doing what the Law has forbidden. For in his
Lordship's sense the Thief that is hanged for stealing has fulfilled the Law;
which I think is absurd.


J. D. His whole works are a heap of misshapen Errors, and absurd Paradoxes,
vented with the confidence of a Jugler, the brags of a Mountebank, and the
Authority of some Pythagoras, or third Cato, lately dropped down from Heaven.

Thus we have seen how the Hobbian Principles do destroy the Existence, the
Simplicity, the Ubiquity, the Eternity, and Infiniteness of God, the Doctrine
of the blessed Trinity, the Hypostatical Union, the Kingly Sacerdotal and
Prophetical Office of Christ, the Being and Operation of the Holy Ghost,
Heaven, Hell, Angels, Devils, the Immortality of the Soul, the Catholic and
all National Churches; the holy Scriptures, holy Orders, the holy Sacraments,
the whole frame of Religion, and the Worship of God; the Laws of Nature, the
reality of Goodness, Justice, Piety, Honesty, Conscience, and all that is
Sacred. If his Disciples have such an implicit Faith, that they can digest all
these things, they may feed with Ostriches.


T. H. He here concludes his first Chapter with bitter Reproaches, to leave in
his Reader (as he thought) a sting, supposing perhaps that he will Read nothing
but the beginning and end of his Book, as is the custom of many men. But to
make him lose that petty piece of cunning, I must desire of the Reader one of
these two things. Either that he would read with it the places of my Leviathan
which he cites, and see not only how he answers my arguments, but also what the
arguments are which he produces against them; or else that, he would forbear
to condemn me, so much as in his thought; for otherwise he is unjust. The name
of Bishop is of great Authority, but these words are not the words of a Bishop,
but of a passionate School-man, too fierce and unseemly in any man whatsoever.
Besides, they are untrue. Who that knows me will say I have the confidence of a
Jugler, or that I use to brag of any thing, much less that I play the
Mountebank? What my works are, he was no sit Judge. But now he has provoked me,
I will say thus much of them, that neither he, if he had lived could, nor I if
I would, can extinguish the light which is set up in the World by the greatest
part of them; and for these Doctrines which he impugneth, I have few opposers,
but such whose Profit, or whose Fame in Learning is concerned in them. He
accuses me first of destroying the Existence of God, that is to say, he would
make the World believe I were an Atheist. But upon what ground? Because I say,
that God is a Spirit, but Corporeal. But to say that, is allowed me by St.
Paul, that says There is a Spiritual Body, and there is an Animal Body. 1 Cor.
15. He that holds that there is a God, and that God is really somewhat (for
Body is doubtlesly a real Substance) is as far from being an Atheist, as is
possible to be. But he that says God is an Incorporeal Substance, no man can be
sure whether he be an Atheist or not. For no man living can tell whether there
be any Substance at all, that is not also Corporeal. For neither the word
Incorporeal, nor Immaterial, nor any word equivalent to it is to be found in
Scripture, or in Reason. But on the contrary that the Godhead dwells bodily
in Christ, is found in Colos. 2.9. and Tertullian maintains that God is either
a Corporeal Substance or Nothing. Nor was he ever condemned for it by the
Church. For why? Not only Tertullian but all the learned call Body, not only
that which one can see, but also whatsoever has magnitude, or that is
somewhere; for they had greater reverence for the Divine Substance than that
they durst think it had no Magnitude or was no where. But they that hold God to
be a Phantasm, as did the Exorcists in the Church of Rome, that is, such a
thing as were at that time thought to be the Sprights that were said to walk in
Churchyards, and to be the Souls of men buried, they do absolutely make God to
be nothing at all. But how? Were they Atheists? No. For though by ignorance of
the consequence they said that which was equivolent to Atheism, yet in their
hearts they thought God a Substance, and would also, if they had known what
Substance and what Corporeal meant, have said he was a Corporeal Substance. So
that this Atheism by consequence is a very easy thing to be fallen into, even
by the most Godly men of the Church. He also that says that God is wholly here,
and wholly there, and wholly every where, destroys by consequence the Unity of
God, and the Infiniteness of God, and the Simplicity of God. And this the
Schoolmen do, and are therefore Atheists by consequence, and yet they do not
all say in their hearts that there is no God. So also his Lordship by exempting
the Will of man from being subject to the necessity of God's Will or Decree,
denies by consequence the Divine Praescience, which also will amount to Atheism
by consequence. But out of this that God is a Spirit corporeal and infinitely
pure, there can no unworthy or dishonorable consequence be drawn. Thus far to
his Lordship's first Chapter in Justification of my Leviathan, as to matter of
Religion; and especially to wipe off that unjust slander cast upon me by the
Bishop of Derry. As for the second Chapter which concerns my Civil Doctrines,
since my errors there, if there be any, will not tend very much to my disgrace,
I will not take the pains to answer it.

Whereas his Lordship has talked in his discourse here and there ignorantly of
Heresy, and some others have not doubted to say publicly, that there be many
Heresies in my Leviathan; I will add hereunto for a general answer an
Historical relation concerning the word Heresy from the first use of it
amongst the Graecians, till this present time.


FINIS.
AN Historical Narration CONCERNING HERESY, AND THE Punishment thereof.

BY THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY.

At veluti Pueri trepidant, atque omnia caecis
In tenebris metuunt: Sic nos in luce timemus
Interdum nihilo quae sunt metuenda magis, quam
Quae Pueri in tenebris pavitant, metuuntque futura.
Lucr. lib. 2.3, 6. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1682.

Haereseos Larvas, Sectarum immania Monstra
Hobbius invicto dispulit ingenio.
AN Historical Narration CONCERNING HERESY, AND THE Punishment thereof.
THE word Heresy is Greek, and signifies a taking of any thing, and
particularly the taking of an Opinion. After the study of Philosophy begun in
Greece, and the Philosophers disagreeing amongst themselves, had started many
Questions, not only about things Natural, but also Moral and Civil; because
every man took what Opinion he pleased, each several Opinion was called a
Heresy; which signified no more than a private Opinion, without reference to
truth or falsehood. The beginners of these Heresies were chiefly Pythagoras,
Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, Zeno; men who as they held many Errors, so also
found they out many true and useful Doctrines, in all kinds of Learning: and
for that cause were well esteemed of by the greatest Personages of their own
times; and so also were some few of their Followers.

But the rest, ignorant men, and very often needy Knaves, having learned by
heart the Opinions of these admired Philosophers, and pretending to take after
them, made use thereof to get their Living by the teaching of Rich men's
Children that happened to be in love with those great Names. Though by their
impertinent Discourse, sordid and ridiculous Manners, they were generally
despised, of what Sect or Heresy soever; whether they were Pythagoreans, or
Academicks (Followers of Plato) or Peripateticks (Followers of Aristotle:
Epicureans or Stoics) (Followers of Zeno) For these were the names of
Heresies, or (as the Latins call them) Sects, a sequendo, so much talked of
from after the time of Alexander till this present day, and that have
perpetually troubled or deceived the people with whom they lived, and were
never more numerous than in the time of the Primitive Church.

The Heresy of Aristotle, by the Revolutions of time has had the good fortune
to be predominant over the rest. However originally the name of Heresy was no
disgrace, nor the word Heretic at all in use. Though the several Sects,
especially the Epicureans and the Stoics, hated one another; and the Stoics
being the fiercer men, used to revile those that differed from them with the
most despightful words they could invent.

It cannot be doubted, but that, by the preaching of the Apostles and Disciples
of Christ in Greece and other parts of the Roman Empire, full of these
Philosophers, many thousands of men were converted to the Christian Faith, some
really, and some feignedly, for factious ends, or for need; (for Christians
lived then in common, and were charitable:) and because most of these
Philosophers had better skill in Disputing and Oratory than the Common people,
and thereby were better qualified both to defend and propagate the Gospel,
there is no doubt (I say) but most of the Pastors of the Primitive Church were
for that reason chosen out of the number of these Philosophers; who retaining
still many Doctrines which they had taken up on the authority of their former
Masters, whom they had in reverence, endeavored many of them to draw the
Scriptures every one to his own Heresy. And thus at first entered Heresy into
the Church of Christ. Yet these men were all of them Christians; as they were
when they were first baptized: Nor did they deny the Authority of those
Writings which were left them by the Apostles and Evangelists, though they
interpreted them many times with a bias to their former Philosophy. And this
Dissension amongst themselves, was a great scandal to the Unbelievers, and
which not only obstructed the way of the Gospel, but also drew scorn and
greater Persecution upon the Church.

For remedy whereof, the chief Pastors of Churches did use, at the rising of
any new Opinion, to assemble themselves for the examining and determining of
the same; wherein, if the Author of the Opinion were convinced of his Error,
and subscribed to the Sentence of the Church assembled, then all was well
again: but if he still persisted in it, they laid him aside, and considered him
but as an Heathen man; which to an unfeigned Christian, was a great Ignominy,
and of force to make him consider better of his own Doctrine; and sometimes
brought him to the acknowledgment of the Truth. But other punishment they could
inflict none, that being a right appropriated to the Civil Power. So that all
the punishment the Church could inflict, was only Ignominy; and that among the
Faithful, consisting in this, that his company was by all the Godly avoided,
and he himself branded with the name of Heretic in opposition to the whole
Church, that condemned his Doctrine. So that Catholic and Heretic were terms
relative; and here it was that Heretic became to be a Name, and a name of
Disgrace, both together.

The first and most troublesome Heresies in the Primitive Church, were about
the Trinity. For (according to the usual curiosity of Natural Philosophers)
they could not abstain from disputing the very first Principles of
Christianity, into which they were baptized, In the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. Some there were that made them allegorical. Others
would make one Creator of Good, and another of Evil; which was in effect to set
up two Gods, one contrary to another; supposing that causation of evil could
not be attributed to God, without Impiety. From which Doctrine they are not far
distant, that now make the first cause of sinful actions to be every man as to
his own sin. Others there were that would have God to be a body with Parts
organical, as Face, Hands, Fore-parts and Back-parts. Others, that Christ had
no real body, but was a mere Phantasm: (For Phantasms were taken then, and have
been ever since, by unlearned and superstitious men, for things real and
subsistent.) Others denied the Divinity of Christ. Others, that Christ being
God and Man, was two Persons. Others confessed he was one Person, and withal that
he had but one Nature. And a great many other Heresies arose from the too much
adherence to the Philosophy of those times, whereof some were suppressed for a
time by St. John's publishing his Gospel, and some by their own
unreasonableness vanished, and some lasted till the time of Constantine the
Great, and after.

When Constantine the Great (made so by the assistance and valor of the
Christian Soldiers) had attained to be the only Roman Emperor, he also himself
became a Christian, and caused the Temples of the Heathen Gods to be
demolished, and authorized Christian Religion only to be public. But toward
the latter end of his time, there arose a Dispute in the City of Alexandria,
between Alexander the Bishop, and Arius a Presbyter of the same City; wherein
Arius maintained, first, That Christ was inferior to his Father; and
afterward, That he was no God, alleging the words of Christ, My Father is
greater than I. The Bishop on the contrary alleging the words of St. John,
And the Word was God; and the words of St. Thomas, My Lord and my God. This
Controversy presently amongst the Inhabitants and Soldiers of Alexandria
became a Quarrel, and was the cause of much Bloodshed in and about the City;
and was likely then to spread further, as afterward it did. This so far
concerned the Emperors Civil Government, that he thought it necessary to call a
General Council of all the Bishops and other eminent Divines throughout the
Roman Empire, to meet at the City of Nice. When they were assembled, they
presented the Emperor with Libels of Accusation one against another. When he
had received these Libels into his hands, he made an Oration to the Fathers
assembled, exhorting them to agree, and to fall in hand with the settlement of
the Articles of Faith, for which cause he had assembled them, saying,
Whatsoever they should decree therein, he would cause to be observed. This may
perhaps seem a greater indifferency than would in these days be approved of.
But so it is in the History; and the Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation,
were not thought then to be so many as afterward they were defined to be by
the Church of Rome.

When Constantine had ended his Oration, he caused the aforesaid Libels to be
cast into the fire, as became a wise King and a charitable Christian. This
done, the Fathers fell in hand with their business, and following the method of
a former Creed, now commonly called The Apostles Creed, made a Confession of
Faith, viz. I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and
Earth, and of all things visible and invisible, (in which is condemned the
Polytheism of the Gentiles.) And in one Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son
of God, (against the many sons of the many Gods of the Heathen.) Begotten of
his Father before all worlds, God of God, (against the Arians) Uery God of very
God, (against the Valentinians, and against the Heresy of Apelles, and others,
who made Christ a mere Phantasm.) Light of Light, [This was put in for
explication, and used before to that purpose, by Tertullian.] Begotten, not
made, being of one Substance with the Father. In this again they condemn the
Doctrine of Arius: for this word Of one substance, in Latin Consubstantialis,
but in Greek (...), that is, Of one Essence, was put as a Touchstone to discern
an Arian from a Catholic: And much ado there was about it. Constantine
himself, at the passing of this Creed, took notice of it for a hard word; but
yet approved of it, saying, That in a divine Mystery it was fit to use divina
and arcana Verba; that is, divine words, and hidden from humane understanding;
calling that word (...), divine, not because it was in the divine Scripture,
(for it is not there) but because it was to him Arcanum, that is, not
sufficiently understood. And in this again appeared the indifferency of the
Emperor, and that he had for his end, in the calling of the Synod, not so much
the Truth, as the Uniformity of the Doctrine, and peace of his People that
depended on it. The cause of the obscurity of this word (...), proceeded
chiefly from the difference between the Greek and Roman Dialect, in the
Philosophy of the Peripateticks. The first Principle of Religion in all
Nations, is, That God is, that is to say, that God really is Something, and not
a mere fancy; but that which is really something, is considerable alone by it
self, as being somewhere. In which sense a man is a thing real: for I can
consider him to be, without considering any other thing to be besides him. And
for the same reason, the Earth, the Air, the Stars, Heaven, and their Parts,
are all of them things real. And because whatsoever is real here, or there, or
in any place, has Dimensions, that is to say, Magnitude; and that which has
Magnitude, whether it be visible or invisible, finite or infinite is called by
all the Learned a Body. It follows, that all real things, in that they are
somewhere, are Corporeal. On the contrary, Essence, Deity, Humanity, and
suchlike names, signify nothing that can be considered, without first
considering there is an Ens, a God, a Man, etc. So also if there be any real
thing that is white or black, hot or cold, the same may be considered by it
self; but whiteness, blackness, heat, coldness, cannot be considered, unless it
be first supposed that there is some real thing to which they are attributed.
These real things are called by the Latin Philosophers, Entia subjecta,
substantiae; and by the Greek Philosophers, (...). The other, which are
Incorporeal, are called by the Greek Philosophers, (...); but most of the
Latin Philosophers use to convert (...) into substantia, and so confound real
and corporeal things with incorporeal; which is not well: For Essence and
Substance signify diverse things. And this mistake is received, and continues
still in these parts, in all Disputes both of Philosophy, and Divinity: For in
truth Essentia signifies no more, than if we should talk ridiculously of the
Isness of the thing that is. [ By whom all things were made.] This is proved
out of St. John, cap. 1. verse. 1, 2, 3. and Heb. cap. 1. verse. 3. and that
again out of Genesis 1. where God is said to create every thing by his sole Word,
as when he said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. And then, that Christ
was that Word, and in the beginning with God, may be gathered out of diverse
places of Moses, David, and other of the Prophets. Nor was it ever questioned
amongst Christians (except by the Arians) but that Christ was God Eternal, and
his Incarnation eternally decreed. But the Fathers, all that write Expositions
on this Creed, could not forbear to philosophize upon it, and most of them out
of the Principles of Aristotle: Which are the same the Schoolmen now use; as
may partly appear by this, that many of them, amongst their Treatises of
Religion, have affected to publish Logic and Physic Principles according to
the sense of Aristotle; as Athanasius, and Damascene. And so some later Divines
of Note, still confound the Concreet with the Abstract, Deus with Deitas, Ens
with Essentia, Sapiens with Sapientia, Aeternus with Aeternitas. If it be for
exact and rigid Truth sake, why do they not say also, that Holiness is a Holy
man, Covetousness a Covetous man, Hypocrisy an Hypocrite, and Drunkenness a
Drunkard, and the like, but that it is an Error? The Fathers agree that the
Wisdom of God is the eternal Son of God, by whom all things were made, and that
he was incarnate by the Holy Ghost, if they meant it in the Abstract: For if
Deitas abstracted be Deus, we make two Gods of one. This was well understood by
Damascene, in his Treatise De Fide Orthodoxa, (which is an Exposition of the
Nicene Creed) where he denies absolutely that Deitas is Deus, lest (seeing God
was made man) it should follow, the Deity was made man; which is contrary to
the Doctrine of all the Nicene Fathers. The Attributes therefore of God in the
Abstract, when they are put for God, are put Metonymically; which is a common
thing in Scripture; for Example, Prove. 8.28. where it is said, Before the
mountains were settled, before the Hills was I brought forth; the Wisdom there
spoken of being the Wisdom of God, signifies the same with the wise God. This
kind of speaking is also ordinary in all Languages. This considered, such
abstracted words ought not to be used in Arguing, and especially in the
deducing the Articles of our Faith; though in the Language of God's eternal
Worship, and in all Godly Discourses, they cannot be avoided: And the Creed it
self is less difficult to be assented to in its own words, than in all such
Expositions of the Fathers. Who for us men and our Salvation came down from
Heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Uirgin Mary, and was made
Man. I have not read of any exception to this: For where Athanasius in his
Creed says of the Son, He was not made, but begotten, it is to be understood of
the Son as he was God Eternal; whereas here it is spoken of the Son as he is
man. And of the Son also as he was man, it may be said he was begotten of the
Holy Ghost; for a Woman conceives not but of him that begets; which is also
confirmed, Mat. 1.20. That which is begotten in her ((...)) is of the Holy
Ghost. And was also Crucified for us under Pontius Pilate: He suffered and was
buried: And the third day he rose again according to the Scriptures, and
ascended into Heaven: and sits on the right hand of the Father; And he shall
come again with Glory to judge both the Quick and the Dead. Whose Kingdom shall
have no end. [Of this part of the Creed I have not met with any doubt made by
any Christian.] Hither the Council of Nice proceeds in their general
Confession of Faith, and no further.

This finished, some of the Bishops present at the Council (seventeen or
eighteen, whereof Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea was one) not sufficiently
satisfied, refused to subscribe till this Doctrine of (...) should be better
explained. Thereupon the Council Decreed, that whosoever shall say that God
has parts, shall be Anathematized; to which the said Bishops subscribed. And
Eusebius by Order of the Council wrote a Letter, the Copies whereof were sent
to every absent Bishop, that being satisfied with the reason of their
subscribing, they also should subscribe. The reason they gave of their
Subscription was this, That they had now a form of words prescribed, by which,
as a Rule, they might guide themselves so, as not to violate the Peace of the
Church. By this it is manifest, that no man was an Heretic, but he that in
plain and direct words contradicted that Form by the Church prescribed, and
that no man could be made an Heretic by Consequence. And because the said Form
was not put into the body of the Creed, but directed only to the Bishops, there
was no reason to punish any Lay-person that should speak to the contrary.

But what was the meaning of this Doctrine, That God has no Parts? Was it made
Heresy to say, that God, who is a real substance, cannot be considered or
spoken of as here or there, or any where, which are parts of places? Or that
there is any real thing without length every way, that is to say, which has no
Magnitude at all, finite nor infinite? Or is there any whole substance, whose
two halves or three thirds are not the same with that whole? Or did they mean
to condemn the Argument of Tertullian, by which he confuted Apolles and other
Heretics of his time; namely, Whatsoever was not Corporeal, was nothing but
Fantasm, and not Corporeal, for Heretical? No certainly, no Divines say that.
They went to establish the Doctrine of One individual God in Trinity; to
abolish the diversity of species in God, not the distinction of here and there
in substance. When St. Paul asked the Corinthians, Is Christ divided? He did
not think they thought him impossible to be considered as having hands and
feet, but that they might think him (according to the manner of the Gentiles)
one of the Sons of God, as Arius did; but not the only begotten Son of God. And
thus also it is expounded in the Creed of Athanasius, who was present in that
Council, by these words, Not confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substances; that is to say, that God is not divided into three Persons, as man
is divided into Peter, James, and John; nor are the three persons one and the
same person. But Aristotle, and from him all the Greek Fathers, and other
Learned Men, when they distinguish the general Latitude of a word, they call it
Division; as when they divide Animal into Man and Beast, they call these (...),
Species; and when they again divide the Species Man into Peter and John, they
call these (...), parts individuae. And by this confounding the division of
the substance with the distinction of words, diverse men have been led into the
Error of attributing to God a Name, which is not the name of any substance at
all, viz. Incorporeal.

By these words, God has no parts, thus explained, together with the part of
the Creed which was at that time agreed on, many of those Heresies which were
antecedent to that first General Council, were condemned; as that of Manes, who
appeared about thirty years before the Reign of Constantine, by the first
Article, I believe in one God; though in other words it seems to me to remain
still in the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which so ascribes a Liberty of
the Will to Men, as that their Will and Purpose to commit sin, should not
proceed from the Cause of all things, God; but originally from themselves, or
from the Devil. It may seem perhaps to some, that by the same words the
Anthropomorphites also were then Condemned: And certainly, if by Parts were
meant not persons Individual, but Pieces, they were Condemned: For Face, Arms,
Feet, and the like, are pieces. But this cannot be, for the Anthropomorphites
appeared not till the time of Valens the Emperor, which was after the Council
of Nice between forty and fifty years; and was not condemned till the second
General Council at Constantinople.

Now for the Punishment of Heretics ordained by Constantine, we read of none;
but that Ecclesiastical Officers, Bishops and other Preachers, if they refused
to subscribe to this Faith, or taught the contrary Doctrine, were for the first
Fault Deprived of their Offices, and for the second Banished. And thus did
Heresy, which at first was the name of private Opinion, and no Crime, by
virtue of a Law of the Emperor, made only for the Peace of the Church, become a
Crime in a Pastor, and punishable with Deprivation first, and next with
Banishment.

After this part of the Creed was thus established, there arose presently many
new Heresies, partly about the Interpretation of it, and partly about the Holy
Ghost, of which the Nicene Council had not determined. Concerning the part
established, there arose Disputes about the Nature of Christ, and the word
Hypostasis, id est, Substance; for of Persons there was yet no mention made,
the Creed being written in Greek, in which Language there is no word that
answers to the Latin word Persona. And the Union, as the Fathers called it,
of the Humane and Divine Nature in Christ, Hypostatical, caused Eutyches, and
after him Dioscorus, to affirm, there was but one Nature in Christ; thinking
that whenever two things are united, they are one: And this was condemned as
Arianism in the Councils of Constantinople and Ephesus. Others, because they
thought two living and rational Substances, such as are God and Man, must needs
be also two Hypostases, maintained that Christ had two Hypostases: But these
were two Heresies condemned together. Then concerning the Holy Ghost, Nestorius
Bishop of Constantinople, and some others, denied the Divinity thereof. And
whereas about seventy years before the Nicene Council, there had been holden a
Provincial Council at Carthage, wherein it was Decreed, that those Christians
which in the Persecutions had denied the Faith of Christ, should not be
received again into the Church unless they were again baptized: This also was
condemned, though the President in that Council were that most sincere and
pious Christian, Cyprian. And at last the Creed was made up entire as we have
it, in the Calcedonian Council, by addition of these words, And I believe in
the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son. Who with the Father and the Son together is Worshipped and Glorified.
Who spoke by the Prophets. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church. I
acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of Sins. And I look for the
Resurrection of the Dead, and the Life of the World to come. In this addition
are condemned, first the Nestorians and others, in these words, Who with the
Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified: And secondly the
Doctrine of the Council of Carthage, in these words, I believe one Baptism for
the Remission of Sins: For one Baptism is not there put as opposite to several
sorts or manners of Baptism, but to the iteration of it: St. Cyprian was a
better Christian than to allow any Baptism that was not in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. In the General Confession of Faith contained in
the Creed called the Nicene Creed, there is no mention of Hypostasis, nor of
Hypostatical Union, nor of Corporeal, nor of Incorporeal, nor of Parts; the
understanding of which words being not required of the Vulgar, but only of the
Pastors, whose disagreement else might trouble the Church; nor were such Points
necessary to Salvation, but set abroach for ostentation of Learning, or else to
dazzle men, with design to lead them toward some ends of their own. The Changes
of prevalence in the Empire between the Catholics and the Arians, and how the
great Athanasius, the most fierce of the Catholics, was banished by
Constantine, and afterward restored, and again banished, I let pass; only it
is to be remembered, that Athanasius is supposed to have made his Creed then,
when (banished) he was in Rome, Liberius being Pope; by whom, as is most
likely, the word Hypostasis, as it was in Athanasius's Creed, was disliked: For
the Roman Church could never be brought to receive it* but instead thereof used
their own word Persona. But the first and last words of that Creed the Church
of Rome refused not: For they make every Article, not only those of the body of
the Creed, but all the Definitions of the Nicene Fathers to be such, as a man
cannot be saved, unless he believe them all steadfastly; though made only for
Peace sake, and to unite the minds of the Clergy, whose Disputes were like to
trouble the Peace of the Empire. After these four first General Councils, the
Power of the Roman Church grew up a pace; and either by the negligence or
weakness of the succeeding Emperors, the Pope did what he pleased in Religion.
There was no Doctrine which tended to the Power Ecclesiastical, or to the
Reverence of the Clergy, the contradiction whereof was not by one Council or
another made Heresy, and punished arbitrarily by the Emperors with Banishment
or Death. And at last Kings themselves, and Commonwealths, unless they purged
their Dominions of Heretics, were Excommunicated, Interdicted, and their
Subjects let loose upon them by the Pope; insomuch as to an ingenuous and
serious Christian, there was nothing so dangerous as to enquire concerning his
own Salvation, of the Holy Scripture; the careless cold Christian was safe, and
the skilful Hypocrite a Saint. But this is a Story so well known, as I need not
insist upon it any longer, but proceed to the Heretics here in England, and
what Punishments were ordained for them by Acts of Parliament. All this while
the Penal Laws against Heretics were such, as the several Princes and States,
in their own Dominions, thought fit to enact. The Edicts of the Emperors made
their Punishments Capital, but for the manner of the Execution, left it to the
Prefects of Provinces: And when other Kings and States intended (according to
the Laws of the Roman Church) to extirpate Heretics, they ordained such
Punishment as they pleased. The first Law that was here made for the
punishments of Heretics called Lollards, and mentioned in the Statutes, was in
the fifth year of the Reign of Richard the Second, occasioned by the Doctrine
of John Wickliff and his Followers; which Wickliff, because no Law was yet
ordained for his punishment in Parliament, by the favor of John of Gaunt, the
King's Son, during the Reign of Edward the third, had escaped. But in the fifth
year of the next King, which was Richard the Second, there passed an Act of
Parliament to this effect; That Sheriffs and some others should have
Commissions to apprehend such as were certified by the Prelates to be Preachers
of Heresy, their Fautors, Maintainers and Abettors, and to hold them in strong
Prison, till they should justify themselves, according to the Law of Holy
Church. So that hitherto there was no Law in England, by which a Heretic could
be put to Death, or otherways punished, than by imprisoning him till he was
reconciled to the Church. After this, in the next King's Reign, which was Henry
the Fourth, Son of John of Gaunt by whom Wickliffe had been favored, and who
in his aspiring to the Crown had needed the good Will of the Bishops, was made
a Law, in the second Year of his Reign, wherein it was Enacted, That every
Ordinary may convene before him, and imprison any person suspected of Heresy;
and that an obstinate Heretic shall be burnt before the People.

In the next King's Reign, which was Henry the Fifth, in his Second year, was
made an Act of Parliament, wherein it is declared, that the intent of
Heretics, called Lollards, was to subvert the Christian Faith, the Law of God,
the Church and the Realm: And that an Heretic convict should forfeit all his
Fee-simple Lands, Goods and Chattels, besides the Punishment of Burning. Again,
in the Five and Twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, it was Enacted, That
an Heretic convict shall abjure his Heresies, and refusing so to do, or
relapsing, shall be burnt in open place, for example of others. This Act was
made after the putting down of the Pope's Authority: And by this it appears,
that King Henry the Eighth intended no farther alteration in Religion, than the
recovering of his own Right Ecclesiastical. But in the first year of his Son
King Edward the sixth was made an Act, by which were repealed not only this
Act, but also all former Acts concerning Doctrines, or matters of Religion; So
that at this time there was no Law at all for the punishment of Heretics.

Again, in the Parliament of the first and second year of Queen Mary, this Act
of 1 Ed. 6. was not repealed, but made useless, by reviving the Statute of 25
Hen. 8. and freely put it in execution; insomuch as it was Debated, Whether or
no they should proceed upon that Statute against the Lady Elizabeth, the Queens
Sister.

The Lady Elizabeth not long after by the Death of Queen Mary coming to the
Crown in the fifth year of her Reign, by Act of Parliament repealed in the
first place all the Laws Ecclesiastical of Queen Mary, with all other former
Laws concerning the punishments of Heretics, nor did she enact any other
punishments in their place. In the second place it was Enacted, That the Queen
by her Letters Patents should give a Commission to the Bishops, with certain
other persons, in her Majesty's Name, to execute the Power Ecclesiastical; in
which Commission the Commissioners were forbidden to adjudge any thing to be
Heresy, which was not declared to be Heresy by some of the first four General
Councels: But there was no mention made of General Councels, but only in that
branch of the Act which Authorized that Commission, commonly called The High
Commission; nor was there in that Commission any thing concerning how Heretics
were to be punished, but it was granted to them, that they might declare or not
declare, as they pleased, to be Heresy or not Heresy, any of those Doctrines
which had been Condemned for Heresy in the first four General Councels. So
that during the time that the said High Commission was in being, there was no
Statute by which a Heretic could be punished otherways, than by the ordinary
Censures of the Church; nor Doctrine accounted Heresy, unless the
Commissioners had actually declared and published, That all that which was made
Heresy by those Four Councels, should be Heresy also now: But I never heard
that any such Declaration was made either by Proclamation, or by Recording it
in Churches, or by public Printing, as in penal Laws is necessary; the
breaches of it are excused by ignorance: Besides, if Heresy had been made
Capital, or otherwise civilly punishable, either the Four General Councels
themselves, or at least the Points condemned in them, ought to have been
Printed or put into Parish Churches in English, because without it, no man
could know how to beware of offending against them.

Some men may perhaps ask, whether no body were Condemned and Burnt for
Heresy, during the time of the High Commission.

I have heard there were: But they which approve such executions, may
peradventure know better grounds for them than I do; but those grounds are very
well worthy to be enquired after.

Lastly, in the seventeenth year of the Reign of King Charles the First,
shortly after that the Scots had Rebelliously put down the Episcopal Government
in Scotland, the Presbyterians of England endeavored the same here. The King,
though he saw the Rebels ready to take the Field, would not condescend to that;
but yet in hope to appease them, was content to pass an Act of Parliament for
the abolishing the High Commission. But though the High Commission were taken
away, yet the Parliament having other ends besides the setting up of the
Presbyterate, pursued the Rebellion, and put down both Episcopacy and Monarchy,
erecting a power by them called The Commonwealth, by others the Rump, which
men obeyed not out of Duty, but for fear, nor was there any humane Laws left in
force to restrain any man from Preaching or Writing any Doctrine concerning
Religion that he pleased; and in this heat of the War, it was impossible to
disturb the Peace of the State, which then was none.

And in this time it was, that a Book called Leviathan, was written in defense
of the King's Power, Temporal and Spiritual, without any word against
Episcopacy, or against any Bishop, or against the public Doctrine of the
Church. It pleased God about Twelve years after the Usurpation of this Rump, to
restore His most Gracious Majesty that now is, to his Fathers Throne, and
presently His Majesty restored the Bishops, and pardoned the Presbyterians; but
then both the one and the other accused in Parliament this Book of Heresy,
when neither the Bishops before the War had declared what was Heresy, when if
they had, it had been made void by the putting down of the High Commission at
the importunity of the Presbyterians: So fierce are men, for the most part, in
dispute, where either their Learning or Power is debated, that they never think
of the Laws, but as soon as they are offended, they cry out, Crucifige;
forgetting what St. Paul says, even in case of obstinate holding of an Error,
2 Timothy 2.24, 25. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto
all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose, if
God peradventure may give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth:
Of which counsel, such fierceness as has appeared in the Disputation of
Divines, down from before the Council of Nice to this present time, is a
Violation.

FINIS.
SEVEN Philosophical Problems, AND TWO PROPOSITIONS OF GEOMETRY.

By Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury.

With an Apology for Himself, and his WRITINGS.

Dedicated to the KING, in the year 1662.

LONDON: Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar, 1682.

TO THE KING.
THat which I do here most humbly present to Your Sacred Majesty, is the best
Part of my Meditations upon the Natural Causes of Events, both of such as are
commonly known, and of such as have been of late artificially exhibited by the
Curious.

They are ranged under seven Heads. 1. Problems of Gravity. 2. Problems of
Tides. 3. Problems of Vacuum. 4. Problems of Heat. 5. Problems of Hard and
Soft. 6. Problems of Wind and Weather. 7. Problems of Motion Perpendicular, and
Oblique, etc. To which I have added, Two Propositions of Geometry; One is, The
Duplication of the Cube, hitherto sought in vain; The other, A Detection of the
absurd Use of Arithmetic, as it is now applied to Geometry.

The Doctrine of Natural Causes has not infallible and evident Principles. For
there is no Effect which the Power of God cannot produce by many several ways.

But seeing all Effects are produced by Motion, he that supposing some one or
more Motions can derive from them the necessity of that Effect whose Cause is
required, has done all that is to be expected from Natural Reason. And though
he prove not that the thing was thus produced, yet he proves that thus it may
be produced, when the Materials, and the power of Moving is in our hands; which
is as useful as if the Causes themselves were known. And notwithstanding the
absence of rigorous Demonstration, this Contemplation of Nature (if not rendered
obscure by empty terms) is the most Noble Employment of the Mind that can be,
to such as are at leisure from their necessary Business.

This that I have done I know is an unworthy Present to be offered to a KING,
though considered (as God considers Offerings) together with the Mind and
Fortune of the Offerer, I hope will not be to Your Majesty unacceptable.

But that which I chiefly consider in it is, that my Writing should be tried by
Your Majesty's Excellent Reason untainted with the Language that has been
invented or made use of by Men when they were puzzled; and who is acquainted
with all the Experiments of the time; and whose approbation (if I have the good
Fortune to obtain it) will protect my reasoning from the Contempt of my
Adversaries.

I will not break the custom of joining to my Offering a Prayer; And it is,
That Your Majesty will be pleased to pardon this following short Apology for my
Leviathan. Not that I rely upon Apologies, but upon Your Majesty's most
Gracious General Pardon.

That which is in it of Theology, contrary to the general Current of Divines,
is not put there as my Opinion, but propounded with submission to those that
have the Power Ecclesiastical.

I did never after, either in Writing or Discourse, maintain it.

There is nothing in it against Episcopacy; I cannot therefore imagine what
reason any Episcopal-man can have to speak of me (as I hear some of them do) as
of an Atheist, or man of no Religion, unless it be for making the Authority of
the Church wholly upon the Regal Power; which I hope Your Majesty will think is
neither Atheism nor Heresy.

But what had I to do to meddle with matters of that nature, seeing Religion is
not Philosophy, but Law?

It was written in a time when the pretense of Christ's Kingdom was made use of
for the most horrid Actions that can be imagined; And it was in just
Indignation of that, that I desired to see the bottom of that Doctrine of the
Kingdom of Christ, which diverse Ministers then Preached for a Pretense to their
Rebellion; which may reasonably extenuate, though not excuse the writing of it.

There is therefore no ground for so great a Calamny in my writing. There is no
sign of it in my Life; and for my Religion, when I was at the point of Death at
St. Germains, the Bishop of Durham can bear witness of it, if he be asked.
Therefore, I most humbly beseech Your Sacred Majesty not to believe so ill of
me upon reports, that proceed often (and may do so now) from the displeasure
which commonly arises from difference in Opinion; nor to think the worse of
me, if snatching up all the Weapons to fight against Your Enemies, I lighted
upon one that had a double edge.

Your Majesty's Poor and most Loyal Subject, THOMAS HOBBES.

PHILOSOPHICAL PROBLEMS^
CHAP. I. Problems of Gravity.
A. WHat may be the cause, think you, that stones, and other bodies, thrown
upward, or carried up and left to their liberty, fall down again (for ought a
man can see) of their own accord? I do not think (with the old Philosophers)
that they have any love to the Earth, or are sullen, that they will neither go
nor stay. And yet I cannot imagine what body there is above that should drive
them back.


B. For my part, I believe the cause of their descending is not in any natural
appetite of the bodies that descend, but rather that the Globe of the Earth
has some special motion, by the which it more easily casts off the Air, than
it does other bodies. And then this descent of those we call heavy bodies, must
of necessity follow; unless there be some empty spaces in the world to receive
them. For when the Air is thrown off from the Earth, somewhat must come into
the place of it, (in case the world be full) and it must be those things which
are hardliest cast off, that is those things which we say are heavy.


A. But suppose there be no place empty (for I will defer the Question till
anon) how can the Earth cast off either the Air, or any thing else?


B. I shall show you how, and that by a familiar Example. If you lay both your
hands upon a Basen with water in it, how little soever, and move it circularly,
and continue that motion for a while, and you shall see the water rise upon the
sides, and fly over; by which you may be assured that there is a kind of
circulating motion, which would cast off such bodies as are contiguous to the
body so moved.


A. I know very well there is; and it is the same motion which Country people
use to purge their Corn; For the Chaff and Straws, by casting the Grain to the
side of the Seive, will come toward the middle. But I would see the Figure.


B. Here it is. There is a Circle pricked out, whose Center is A, and three
less Circles, whose Centers are B, C, D; let every one of them represent the
Earth, as it goes from B to C, and from C to D, always touching the uttermost
Circle, and throwing off the Air, as is marked at E and F. And if the world
were not full, there would follow by this scattering of the Air, a great deal
of space left empty. But supposing the world full, there must be a perpetual
shifting of the Air, one part into the place of another.


A. But what makes a stone come down, suppose from G?


B. If the Air be thrown up beyond G, it will follow, that at the last, if the
motion be continued, all the Air will be above G, that is, above the stone;
which cannot be, till the stone be at the Earth.


A. But why comes it down still with increasing swiftness?


B. Because as it descends, and is already in motion, it receives a new
impression from the same cause, which is the Air, whereof as part mounteth,
part also must descend, supposing as we have done the plenitude of the world.
For, as you may observe by the Figure, the motion of the Earth, according to
the Diameter of the uttermost Circle, is progressive; and so the whole motion
is compounded of two motions, one circular, and the other progressive; and
consequently the Air ascends and circulates at once. And because the stone
descending receives a new pressure in every point of its way, the motion
thereof must needs be accelerated.


A. It Is true; For it will be accelerated equally in equal times; and the way
it makes will increase in a double proportion to the times, as has heretofore
been demonstrated by Galileo. I see the solution now of an Experiment, which
before did not a little puzzle me. You know that if two plummets hang by two
strings of equal length, and you remove them from the perpendicular equally, I
mean in equal angles, and then let them go, they will make their turns and
returns together, and in equal times; And though the arches they describe grow
continually less and less, yet the times they spend in the greater arches, will
still be equal to the time they spend in the lesser.


B. It Is true. Do you find any Experiment to the contrary?


A. Yes; For if you remove one of the plummets from the perpendicular, so as
(for example) to make an angle with the perpendicular of 80 degrees, and the
other so as to make an angle of 60 degrees, they will not make their turns and
returns in equal times.


B. And what say you is the cause of this?


A. Because the arches are the spaces which these two motions describe, they
must be in double proportion to their own times; which cannot be, unless they
be let go from equal altitudes, that is, from equal angles.


B. It Is right; and the Experiment does not cross, but confirm the equality of
the times in all the arches they describe, even from 90 degrees to the least
part of one degree.


A. But is it not too bold, if not extravagant, an assertion, to say the Earth
is moved as a man shakes a Basen or a Seive? Does not the Earth move from West
to East every day once, upon his own Center, and in the Ecliptic Circle once a
year? And now you give it another odd motion; How can all these consist in one
and the same body?


B. Well enough. If you be a Shipboard under sail, do not you go with the Ship?
Cannot you also walk upon the Deck? Cannot every drop of blood move at the same
time in your veins? How many motions now do you assign to one and the same drop
of blood? Nor is it so extravagant a thing to attribute to the Earth this kind
of motion; but that I believe if we certainly knew what motion it is that
causes the descent of bodies, we should find it either the same, or more
extravagant. But seeing it can be nothing above that works this effect, it
must be the Earth it self that does it; and if the Earth, then you can imagine
no other motion to do it withal, but this; And you will wonder more, when by
the same motion I shall give you a probable account of the causes of very many
other works of Nature.


A. But what part of the Heaven do you suppose the Poles of your pricked Circle
point to?


B. I suppose them to be the same with the Poles of the Ecliptic. For, seeing
the Axis of the Earth in this Nation, and in the annual motion keeps parallel
to it self, the Axis must in both motions be parallel as to sense. For, the
Circle which the Earth describes, is not of visible magnitude at the distance
it is from the Sun.


A. Though I understand well enough how the Earth may make a stone descend very
swiftly under the Ecliptic, or not far from it, where it throws off the Air
perpendicularly; yet about the Poles of the Circle methinks it should cast off
the Air very weakly. I hope you will not say that bodies descend faster in
places remote from the Poles, than nearer to them.


B. No; but I ascribe it to the like motion in the Sun and Moon. For such
motions meeting, must needs cast the stream of the Air toward the Poles; And
then there will be the same necessity for the descent there, that there is in
other places, though perhaps a little more slowly. For you may have observed
that when it snows in the South Parts, the flakes of Snow are not so great as
in the North; which is a probable sign they fall in the South from a greater
height, and consequently disperse themselves more, as water does that falls
down from a high and steep Rock.


A. It Is not improbable.


B. In natural causes all you are to expect is but probability; which is better
yet then making Gravity the cause, when the cause of Gravity is that you desire
to know; and better then saying the Earth draws it, when the Question is, how
it draws?


A. Why does the Earth cast off Air more easily than it does Water, or any
other heavy bodies?


B. It is indeed the Earth that casts off that Air which is next unto it. But
it is that Air which casts off the next Air; and so continually Air moves
Air; which it can more easily do then any other thing, because like bodies are
more susceptible of one another motions; as you may see in two Lute-strings
equally strained, what motion one string being stricken communicates to the
Air, the same will the other receive from the Air; but strained to a differing
note, will be less, or not at all moved. For there is no body but Air that has
not some internal, though invisible motion of its parts. And it is that
internal motion which distinguishes all natural bodies one from another.


A. What is the cause why certain Squibs, though their substance be either Wood
or other heavy matter, made hollow and filled with Gunpowder, which is also
heavy, do nevertheless when the Gunpowder is kindled, fly upwards?


B. The same that keeps a man that swims from sinking, though he be heavier
then so much water; He keeps himself up, and goes forward by beating back the
water with his Feet; and so does a Squib, by beating down the Air with the
stream of the fired Gunpowder, that proceeding from its Tail makes it recoil.


A. Why does any Brass or Iron Vessel, if it be hollow, flote upon the water,
being so very heavy?


B. Because the Vessel and the Air in it, taken as one body, is more easily
cast off than a body of water equal to it.


A. How comes it to pass, that a Fish (especially such a broad Fish as a Turbut
or a Plaice, which are broad and thin) in the bottom of the Sea, perhaps a mile
deep, is not pressed to death with the weight of water that lies upon the back
of it?


B. Because all heavy bodies descend toward one point, which is the Center of
the Earth, and consequently the whole Sea descending at once does arch it self
so, as that the upper parts cannot press the parts next below them.


A. It is evident; Nor can there be possibly any weight, as some suppose there
is, of a Cylinder of Air, or Water, or of any other liquid thing, while it
remains in its own Element, or is sustained and enclosed in a Vessel, by which
one part cannot press the other.


CHAP. II. Problems of Tides.
A. WHat makes the Flux and Reflux of the Sea twice in a natural day?


B. We must come again to our Basen of water; wherein you have seen, whilst it
was moved, how the water mounteth up by the sides, and withal goes circling
round about. Now if you should fasten to the inside of the Basen some bar from
the bottom to the top, you would see the water, instead of going on, go back
again from that bar, ebbing, and the water on the other side of the bar to do
the same, but in counter-time; and consequently to be highest where the
contrary streams meet together, and then return again, marking out four
quarters of the Vessel, two by their meeting, which are the high waters, and
two by their retiring, which are the low waters.


A. What bar is that you find in the Ocean, that stops the current of the
water, like that you make in the Basen?


B. You know that the main Ocean lies East and West, between India and the
Coast of America; and again, on the other side, between America and India. If
therefore the Earth have such a motion as I have supposed, it must needs carry
the current of the Sea East and West; In which course, the bar that stops it
is the South part of America, which leaves no passage for the water, but the
narrow Straight of Magellan. The Tide rises therefore upon the Coast of
America; And the rising of the same in this part of the world proceeds from
the swelling chiefly of the water there; and partly also from the North Sea,
which lies also East and West, and has a passage out of the South Sea by the
Straight of Anian, between America and Asia.


A. Does not the Mediterranean- Sea lie also East and West? why are there not
the like Tides there?


B. So there are, proportionable to their lengths, and quantity of water.


A. At Genoa, at Ancona there are none at all, or not sensible.


B. At Venice there are, and in the bottom of the Streights; and a current all
along both the Mediterranean-Sea, and the Gulf of Venice; And it is the current
that makes the Tides unsensible at the sides, but the check makes them visible
at the bottom.


A. How comes it about that the Moon has such a stroke in the business, as so
sensibly to increase the Tides at Full and Change?


B. The motion I have hitherto supposed but in the Earth, I suppose also in the
Moon, and in all those great Bodies that hang in the Air constantly, I mean the
Stars, both fixed and errant. And for the Sun and Moon, I suppose the Poles of
their motion to be the Poles of the Aequinoctial; which supposed, it will
follow, (because the Sun, the Earth and the Moon at every Full and Change are
almost in one straight line) that this motion of the Earth will be made swifter
than in the Quarters. For this motion of the Sun and Moon being communicated to
the Earth, that has already the like motion, makes the same greater; and much
greater when they are all three in one straight line, which is only at the Full
and Change, whose Tides are therefore called Spring Tides.


A. But what then is the cause that the Spring-Tides themselves are twice a
year, namely when the Sun is in the Equinoctial, greater than at any other
times?


B. At other times of the year, the Earth being out of the Aequinoctial, the
motion thereof, by which the Tides are made, will be less augmented, by so much
as a motion in the obliquity of 23 degrees or thereabout (which is the distance
between the Aequinoctial and Ecliptic Circles) is weaker then the motion which
is without obliquity.


A. All this is reasonable enough, if it be possible that such motions as you
suppose in these bodies, be really there. But that is a thing I have some
reason to doubt of; For, the throwing off of Air, consequent to these motions,
is the cause, you say, that other things come to the Earth; And therefore the
like motions in the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, casting off the Air, should also
cause all other things to come to every one of them. From whence it will
follow, that the Sun, Moon, and Earth, and all other bodies but Air, should
presently come together into one heap.


B. That does not follow: For if two bodies cast off the Air, the motion of
that Air will be repressed both ways, and diverted into a course toward the
Poles on both sides; and then the two bodies cannot possibly come together.


A. It Is true. And besides, this driving off the Air on both sides, North and
South, makes the like motion of Air there also. And this may answer to the
Question, How a stone could fall to the Earth under the Poles of the Ecliptic,
by the only casting off of Air?


B. It follows from hence, that there is a certain and determinate distance of
one of these bodies (the Stars) from another, without any very sensible
variation.


A. All this is probable enough, if it be true that there is no Vacuum, no
place empty in all the World. And supposing this motion of the Sun and Moon to
be in the plain of the Aequinoctial, methinks that this should be the cause of
the Diurnal motion of the Earth; And because this motion of the Earth is (you
say) in the plain of the Aequinoctial, the same should cause also a motion in
the Moon on her own Center, answerable to the Diurnal motion of the Earth.


B. Why not? what else can you think makes the Diurnal motion of the Earth, but
the Sun? And for the Moon, if it did not turn upon its own Center, we should
see sometimes one, sometimes another face of the Moon, which we do not.


CHAP. III. Problems of Vacuum.
WHat convincing Argument is there to prove, that in all the world there is no
empty place?

B. Many; but I will name but one; and that is, the difficulty of separating
two bodies hard and flat laid one upon another; I say, the difficulty, not the
impossibility. It is possible, without introducing Vacuum, to pull assunder any
two bodies, how hard and flat soever they be, if the force used be greater than
the resistance of the hardness. And in case there be any greater difficulty to
part them, (besides what proceeds from their hardness) then there is to pull
them further assunder when they are parted, that difficulty is Argument enough
to prove there is no Vacuum.


A. These Assertions need demonstration. And first, how does the difficulty of
separation argue the Plenitude of all the rest of the world?


B. If two flat polished Marbles lie one upon another, you see they are hardly
separated in all points at one and the same instant; and yet the weight of
either of them it is enough to make them slide off one from the other. Is not
the cause of this, that the Air succeeds the Marble that so slides, and fills
up the place it leaves.


A. Yes certainly. What then?


B. But when you pull the whole Superficies assunder, not without great
difficulty, what is the cause of that difficulty?


A. I think as most men do, that the Air cannot fill up the space between in an
instant; For the parting is in an instant.


B. Suppose there be Vacuum in that Air into which the Marble you pull off is
to succeed, shall there be no Vacuum in the Air that was round about the two
Marbles when they touched? Why cannot that Vacuum come into the place between?
Air cannot succeed in an instant, because a body; and consequently cannot be
moved through the least space in an instant. But emptiness is not a body, nor
is moved, but made by the act it self of separation. There is therefore (if you
admit Vacuum) no necessity at all for the Air to fill the space left, in an
instant. And therefore, with what ease the Marble coming off presses out the
Vacuum of the Air behind it, with the same ease will the Marbles be pulled
assunder. Seeing then, if there were Vacuum, there would be no difficulty of
Separation; it follows, because there is difficulty of separation, that there
is no Vacuum.


A. Well now, supposing the world full, how do you prove it possible to pull
those Marbles assunder?


B. Take a piece of soft wax; Do not you think the one half touches the other
half as close as the smoothest Marbles? yet you can pull them assunder. But
how? still as you pull, the wax grows continually more and more slender; there
being a perpetual parting or discession of the outermost part of the wax one
from another; which the Air presently fills, and so there is a continual
lessening of the wax, till it be no bigger than a hair, and at last separation.
If you can do the same to a Pillar of Marble, till the outside give way, the
effect will be the same, but much quicker, after it once begins to break in the
Superficies; because the force that can master the first resistance of the
hardness, will quickly dispatch the rest.


A. It seems so by the brittleness of some hard bodies. But I shall afterward
put some Questions to you, touching the nature of hardness. But now to return
to our subject.

What reason can you render (without supposing Vacuum) of the effects produced
in the Engine they use at Gresham College?


B. That Engine produces the same effects, that a strong wind would produce in
a narrow room.


A. How comes the wind in? You know the Engine is a hollow round pipe of brass;
into which is thrust a Cylinder of wood covered with Leather, and fitted to the
Cylinder so exactly as no Air can possibly pass between the leather and the
brass?


B. I know it; and that they may thrust it up, there is a hole left in the
Cylinder to let the Air out before it; which they can stop when they please.
There is also in the bottom of the Cylinder a passage into a hollow Globe of
Glass; which passage they can also open and shut at pleasure. And at the top of
that Globe there is a wide mouth to put in what they please to try conclusions
on; and that also to be opened and shut as shall be needful. It Is of the nature
of a Pop-gun which Children use, but great, costly, and more ingenious. They
thrust forward, and pull back the wooden Cylinder (because it requires much
strength) with an Iron screw. What is there in all this to prove the
possibility of Vacuum.


A. When this wooden Cylinder covered with leather, fit and close is thrust
home to the bottom, and the holes in the hollow Cylinder of Brass close
stopped, how can it be drawn back, as with the screw they draw it, but that the
space it leaves must needs be empty. For it is impossible that any Air can pass
into the place to fill it?


B. Truly I think it close enough to keep out Straw and Feathers, but not to
keep out Air, nor yet matter. For suppose they were not so exactly close but
that there were round about a distance for a small hair to lie between, Then
will the pulling back of the Cylinder of wood force so much Air in, as in
retiring it forces back, and that without any sensible difficulty. And the Air
will so much more swiftly enter as the passage is left more narrow. Or if they
touch, and the contract be in some points, and not in all, the Air will enter
as before in case the force be augmented accordingly. Lastly, though they touch
exactly, if either the Leather yield, or the Brass (which it may do to the
force of a strong screw) the Air will again enter. Do you think it possible to
make two superficies so exquisitly touch in all points as you suppose, or
Leather so hard as not to yield to the force of a screw? The Body of Leather
will give passage both to Air and Water, as you will confess when you ride in
Rainy and Windy weather. You may therefore be assured that in drawing out their
wooden-leather Cylinder they force in as much Air as will fill the place it
leaves, and that with as much swiftness as is answerable to the strength that
drives it in. The effect therefore of their pumping is nothing else but a
vehement Wind, a very vehement Wind coming in on all sides of the Cylinder at
once into the hollow of the Brass Pipe, and into the hollow of the Glass Globe
joined to it.


A. I see the reason already of one of their wonders, which is, that the
Cylinder they pump with, if it be left to it self, after it is pulled back will
swiftly go up again. You will say the Air comes out again with the same
violence by reflection; and I believe it?


B. This is argument enough that the place was not empty. For what can fetch or
drive up the Sucker, as they call it, if the place within were empty; for that
there is any weight in the Air to do it, I have already demonstrated to be
impossible.

Besides, you know, when they have sucked out (as they think) all the Air from
the Glass Globe, they can nevertheless both see through it what is done, and
hear a sound from within when there is any made. Which (if there were no other,
but there are many other,) is argument enough that the place is still full of
Air.


A. What say you to the swelling of a Bladder even to bursting, if it be a
little blown when it is put into the Receiver, (for so they call the Globe of
Glass?)


B. The stream of Air that from every side meeting together, and turning in an
infinite number of small points, do pierce the Bladder in innumerable places
with great violence at once, like so many invisible small wimbles; especially
if the Bladder be a little blown before it be put in, that it may make a little
resistance. And when the Air has once pierced it, it is easy to conceive, that
it must afterward by the same violent motion be extended till it break. If
before it break you let in fresh Air upon it, the violence of the motion will
thereby be tempered, and the Bladder be less extended. For that also they have
observed. Can you imagine how a Bladder should be extended, and broken, by
being too full of Emptiness.


A. How come living creatures to be killed in this Receiver, in so little a
time as 3 or 4 minutes of an hour?


B. If they suck into their lungs so violent a wind thus made, you must needs
think it will presently stop the passage of their blood; and that is death;
though they may recover if taken out before they be too cold. And so likewise
will it put out fire; but the Coals taken out whilst they are hot, will revive
again. It Is an ordinary thing in many Coal-pits, (whereof I have seen the
experience,) that a wind proceeding from the sides of the Pit every way, will
extinguish any fire let down into it, and kill the workmen, unless they be
quickly taken out.


A. If you put a vessel of water into the Receiver, and then suck out the Air,
the water will boil. What say you to that?


B. It is like enough it will dance in so great a bustling of the Air; but I
never heard it would be hot. Nor can I imagine how Vacuum should make any thing
dance. I hope you are by this time satisfied, that no experiment made with the
Engine at Gresham College, is sufficient to prove that there is, or that there
may be Vacuum.


A. The World you know is finite, and consequently, all that infinite space
without it, is empty. Why may not some of that Vacuum be brought in, and
mingled with the Air here?


B. I know nothing in matters without the World.


A. What say you to Torricellioes Experiment in Quicksilver, which is this.
There is a Basin at A filled with Quicksilver, suppose to B, And CD a hollow
glass pipe filled with the same. Which if you stop with your finger at B, and
so set it upright, and then if you take away your finger, the Quicksilver will
fall from C downwards, but not to the bottom. For it will stop by the way,
suppose at D. Is it not therefore necessary that that space between C and D be
left empty? Or will you say the Quick silver does not exactly touch the sides
of the glass pipe?


B. I Will say neither. If a man thrust down into a vessel of Quicksilver a
blown Bladder, will not that Bladder come up to the top?


A. Yes certanly, or a Bladder of Iron, or of any thing else but Gold.


B. You see then that Air can pierce Quick silver.


A. Yes, with so much force as the weight of Quicksilver comes to.


B. When the Quicksilver is fallen to D, there is so much the more in the
basin. And that takes up the place which so much Air took up before. Whither
can this Air go if all the World without that glass pipe B C were full? There
must needs be the same or as much Air come to that space (which only is empty)
between C and D. By what force? By the weight of the Quicksilver between D and
B. Which Quicksilver weighs now upward; or else it could never have raised
that part higher, which was at first in the Basin. So you see the weight of
Quicksilver can press the Air through Quicksilver up into the pipe, till it
come to an equality of force as in D. Where the weight of the Quicksilver is
equal to the force which is required in Air to go through it.


A. If a man suck a Vial that has nothing in it but Air, and presently dip the
mouth of it into water, the water will ascend into the Vial. Is not that an
argument that part of the Air had been sucked out, and part of the room within
the Vial left empty?


B. No. If there were empty space in the World, why should not there be also
some empty space in the Vial before it was sucked? And then why does not the
water rise to fill that, when a man sucks the Vial he draws nothing out neither
into his Belly nor into his Lungs, nor into his Mouth; only he sets the Air
within the glass into a circular motion, giving it at once an endeavor to go
forth by the sucking, and an endeavor to go back by not receiving it into his
mouth. And so with a great deal of labor glues his lips to the neck of the
Vial. Then taking it off, and dipping the neck of the Vial into the water
before the circulation cease, the Air with the endeavor it has now gotten,
pierces the water and goes out. And so much Air as goes out, so much matter
comes up into the room of it.


CHAP. IIII. Problems of Heat and Light.
A. WHat is the cause of Heat?


B. How know you, that any thing is Hot but your self?


A. Because I perceive by sense it Heats me.


B. It is no good argument, The thing Heats me; therefore it is Hot. But what
alteration do you find in your body at any time by being Hot?


A. I find my skin more extended in Summer than in Winter; and am sometimes
fainter and weaker then ordinary, as if my Spirits were exhaled; and I sweat.


B. Then that is it you would know the cause of. I have told you before that by
the motion I suppose both in the Sun, and in the Earth, the Air is dissipated,
and consequently that there would be an infinite number of small empty places
but that the World being full, there comes from the next parts other Air into
the spaces, they would else make empty. When therefore this motion of the Sun
is excercised upon the Superficies of the Earth, if there do not come out of
the Earth it self some corporal substance to supply that tearing of the Air, we
must return again to the admission of Vacuum. If there do, then you see how by
this motion fluid bodies are made to exhale out of the Earth. The like happens
to a man's body or hand, which when he perceives, he says he is Hot. And so of
the Earth when it sends forth Water and Earth together in Plants, we say it
does it by Heat from the Sun.


A. It Is very probable, and no less probable, that the same action of the Sun,
is that which from the Sea and moist places of the Earth, but especially from
the Sea fetches up the water into the Clouds. But there be many ways of
Heating besides the action of the Sun or of Fire. Two pieces of Wood will take
Fire if in Torning they be pressed together.


B. Here again you have a manifest laceration of the Air by the reciprocal and
contrary motions of the two pieces of wood, which necessarily causes a coming
forth of whatsoever is Aereal or fluid within them, and (the motion pursued) a
dissipation also of the other more solid parts into Ashes.


A. How comes it to pass that a man is warmed even to sweating almost with
every extraordinary labor of his body?


B. It is easy to understand, how by that labor all that is liquid in his
body is tossed up and down, and thereby part of it also cast forth.


A. There be some things that make a man Hot without sweat or other
evaporation, as Caustiques, Nettles and other things.


B. No doubt. But they touch the part they so Heat, and cannot work that effect
at any distance.


A. How does Heat cause light, and that partially in some bodies more, in some
less, though the Heat be equal?


B. Heat does not cause Light at all. But in many Bodies, the same cause, that
is to say, the same motion causes both together; so that they are not to one
another as cause and effect, but are concomitant Effects, sometimes of one and
the same motion.


A. How?


B. You know the rubbing or heard pressing of the Eye, or a stroke upon it
makes an apparition of Light without and before it, which way soever you look.
This can proceed from nothing else but from the restitution of the Organ
pressed or stricken, unto its former ordinary situation of parts. Does not the
Sun by his thrusting back the Air upon your eyes press them? Or does not those
bodies whereon the Sun shines (though by reflection) do the same, though not so
strongly? And do not the Organs of Sight, the Eye, the Heart, and Brains resist
that pressure by an endeavor of restitution outward? Why then should there
not be without and before the Eye, an apparition of Light in this case as well
as in the other?


A. I grant there must. But what is that which appears after the pressing of
the eye? For there is nothing without, that was not there before; or if there
were, methinks another should see it better, or as well as he; or if in the
dark, methinks it should enlighten the place.


B. It is a fancy, such as is the appearance of your face in a Looking-glass;
such as is a Dream; such as is a Ghost; such as is a spot before the Eye that
has stared upon the Son or Fire. For all these are of the Regiment of Fancy,
without any body concealed under them, or behind them, by which they are
produced.


A. And when you look toward the Sun or Moon, why is not that also which
appears before your Eyes at that time a fancy?


B. So it is. Though the Sun it self be a real Body, yet that bright Circle of
about a foot Diameter cannot be the Sun, unless there be two Suns, a greater
and a lesser. And because you may see that which you call the Sun, both above
you in the Sky, and before you in the Water, and two Suns (by distorting your
Eye) in two places of the Sky, one of them must needs be Fancy. And if one,
both. All sense is Fancy though the cause be always in a real Body.


A. I see by this that those things which the Learned call the Accidents of
Bodies, are indeed nothing else but diversity of Fancy; and are inherent in the
Sentient, and not in the Objects, except Motion and Quantity. And I perceive by
your Doctrine you have been tampering with Leviathan. But how comes Wood with a
certain degree of Heat to shine, and Iron also with a greater degree; but no
Heat at all to be able to make water shine?


B. That which shines has the same Motion in its parts that I have all this
while supposed in the Sun and Earth. In which Motion there must needs be a
competent degree of swiftness, to move the sense, that is, to make it visible.
All Bodies that are not fluid will shine with Heat, if the Heat be very great.
Iron will shine and Gold will shine; but water will not, because the parts are
carried away before they attain to that degree of swiftness; which is requisite.


A. There are many fluid Bodies, whose parts evaporate, and yet they make a
flame, as Oil, and Wine, and other strong drinks.


B. As for Oil I never saw any inflamed by it self, how much soever Heated,
therefore I do not think they are the parts of the Oil, but of the combustible
body oyled that shine, but the parts of Wine and strong Drinks have partly a
strong Motion of themselves, and may be made to shine, but not with boiling,
but by adding to them as they rise the flame of some other body.


A. How can it be known that the particles of Wine have such a Motion as you
suppose?


B. Have you ever been so much distempered with drinking Wine, as to think the
Windows and Table move?


A. I confess (though you be not my Confessor,) I have, but very seldom, and I
remember the window seemed to go and come in a kind of circling Motion, such as
you have described. But what of that?


B. Nothing, but that it was the Wine that caused it; which having a good
degree of that Motion before, did when it was Heated in the Veins, give that
concussion (which you thought was in the window,) to the Veins themselves, and
(by the continuation of the parts of man's Body) to the Brain; and that was it
which made the window seem to move.


A. What is Flame? For I have often thought the Flame that comes out of a small
heap of Straw, to be more (before it has done Flaming,) then a hundred times
the Straw it self.


B. It was but your Fancy. If you take a stick in your hand by one end, the
other end burning, and move it swiftly, the burning end, if the Motion be
circular, shall seem a circle; if straight, a straight line of Fire, longer or
shorter, according to the swiftness of the Motion, or to the space it moves in.
You know the cause of that.


A. I think it is, because the impression of that visible Object, which was
made at the first instant of the Motion did last till it was ended. For then it
will follow that it must be visible all the way, the impressions in all points
of the time being equal.


B. The cause can be no other. The smallest spark of Fire flying up seems a
line drawn upward; and again by that swift circular Motion which we have
supposed for the cause of Light, seems also broader then it is. And
consequently the Flame of every thing must needs seem much greater then it is.


A. What are those sparks that fly out of the Fire?


B. They are small pieces of the wood or Coals, or other Fuel loosened and
carried away with the Air that comes up with them. And being extiguished
before their parts be quite dissipated into others, are so much Soot, and
black, and may be fired again.


A. A Spark of Fire may be stricken out of a cold stone. It is not therefore
Heat that makes this shining.


B. No It Is the Motion that makes both the Heat and shining; and the stroke
makes the Motion. For every of those Sparks, is a little parcel of the stone,
which swiftly moved, imprinteth the same Motion into the matter prepared, or
fit to receive it.


A. How comes the Light of the Sun to burn almost any combustible matter by
rerefraction through a unequal glass, and by reflection from a concave?


B. The Air moved by the Sun presses the unequal glass in such manner as the
action continued through it, proceeds not in the same straight line by which
it proceeded from the Sun, but tends more toward the center of the body it
enters. Also when the action is continued through the unequal body it bends
again the same way. By which means the whole action of the Sunbeams are
enclosed within a very small compass; in which place therefore there must be a
very vehement Motion; and consequently if there be in that place combustible
matter, such as is not very hard kindle, the parts of it will be dissipated,
and receive that Motion which works on the Eye as other Fire does.

The same reason is to be given for burning by Reflection. For there also the
Beams are collected into almost a point.


A. Why may not the Sunbeams be such a Body as we call Fire, and pass through
the pores of the glass so disposed as to carry them to a point, or very near?


B. Can there be a glass that is all pores; If there cannot, then cannot this
effect be produced by the passing of Fire through the pores. You have seen men
llght their Tobacco at the Sun with a burning glass, or with a ball of Cristal,
held which way they will indifferently. Which must be impossible, unless the
ball were all pores. Again, neither you nor I can conceive any other Fire then
we have seen, nor then such as water will put out. But not only a solid Globe
of Glass or Cristal will serve for a burning Glass, but also a hollow one
filled with water. How then does the Fire from the Sun pass through the glass
of water without being put out before it come to the matter they would have it
burn?


A. I know not. There comes nothing from the Sun. If there did, there is come
so much from it already, that at this day we had had no Sun,


CHAP. V. Problems of Hard and Soft.
A. WHat call you Hard, and what Soft.


B. That body whereof no one part is easily put out of its place, without
removing the whole, is that which I and all men call Hard; and the contrary
Soft. So that they, are but degrees one of another.


A. What is the cause that makes one body Harder then another, or (seeing you
say they are but degrees of one another) what makes one body Softer then
another, and the same body sometimes Harder, sometimes Softer?


B. The same Motion which we have supposed from the beginning for the cause of
so many other effects. Which Motion not being upon the center of the part
moved, but the part it self going in another circle to and again, it is not
necessary that the Motion be perfectly circular. For it is not circulation, but
the reciprocation, I mean the to and again that does cast off, and lacerrate
the Air, and consequently produce the forementioned effects.

For the cause therefore of Hardness, I suppose the reciprocation of Motion in
those things which are Hard, to be very swift, and in very small circles.


A. This is somewhat hard to believe. I would you could supply it with some
visible experience.


B. When you see (for example) a Cross-bow bent, do you think the parts of it
stir?


A. No. I am sure they do not.


B. How are you sure? You have no argument for it, but that you do not see the
Motion. When I see you sitting still, must I believe there is no Motion in your
parts within, when there are so many arguments to convince me there is.


A. What argument have you to convince me that there is Motion in a Cross-bow
when it stands bent?


B. If you cut the string, or any way set the Bow at liberty it will have then
a very visible Motion. What can be the cause of that?


A. Why the setting of the Bow at liberty.


B. If the Bow had been crooked before it was bent, and a string tied to both
ends, and then cut asunder, the Bow would not have stirred. Where lies the
difference?


A. The Bow bent has a Spring; unbent it has none, how crooked soever.


B. What mean you by Spring?


A. An endeavor of restitution to it is former posture.


B. I understand Spring as well as I do endeavor.


A. I mean a Prnciple or beginning of Motion in a contrary way to that of the
force which bent it.


B. But the beginning of Motion is also Motion, how insensible soever it be.
And you know that nothing can give a beginning of Motion to it self. What is it
therefore that gives the Bow (which you say you are sure was at rest when it
stood bent) its first endeavor to return to its former posture?


A. It was he that bent it.


B. That cannot be. For he gave it an endeavor to come forward, and the Bow
endeavors to go backward.


A. Well, grant that endeavor be Motion, and Motion in the Bow unbent, how do
you derive from thence, that being set at liberty it must return to its former
posture?


B. Thus There being within the Bow a swift (though invisible) Motion of all
the parts, and consequently of the whole; the bending causes that Motion,
which was along the Bow (that was beaten out when it was hot into that length)
to operate a cross the length in every part of it, and the more by how much it
is more bent; and consequently endeavors to unbend it all the while it stands
bent. And therefore when the force which kept it bent is removed, it must of
necessity return to the posture it had before.


A. But has that endeavor no effect at all before the impediment be removed?
For if endeavor be Motion, and every Motion have some effect more or less,
methinks this endavour should in time produce something.


B. So it does. For in time (in a long time) the course of this internal Motion
will lie along the Bow, not according to the former, but to the new acquired
posture. And then it will be as uneasy to return it to its former posture, as
it was before to bend it.


A. That Is true. For Bows long bent lose their appetite to restitution, long
custom becoming nature. But from this internal reciprocation of the parts, how
do you infer the Hardness of the whole Body.


B. If you apply force to any single part of such a body, you must needs
disorder the Motion of the next parts to it before it yield, and there
disordered, the Motion of the next again must also be disordered; and
consequently no one part can yield without force sufficient to disorder all.
But then the whole body must also yield. Now when a body is of such a nature as
no single part can be removed without removing the whole, men say that body is
Hard.


A. Why does the Fire melt diverse Hard bodies, and yet not all?


B. The hardest bodies are those wherein the Motion of the parts are the most
swift, and yet in the least circles.

Wherefore if the Fire, the Motion of whose parts are swift, and in greater
circiles, he made so swift, as to be strong enough to master the Motion of the
parts of the Hard body, it will make those parts to move in a greater compass,
and thereby weaken their resistance, that is to say, Soften them, which is a
degree of liquefaction. And when the Moton is so weakened, as that the parts
lose their coherence by the force of their own weight, then we count the body
melted.


A. Why are the Hardest things the most brittle, insomuch that what force
soever is enough to bend them, is enough also to break them?


B. In bending a Hard body, as (for example) a Rod of Iron, you do not enlarge
the space of the internal Motion of the parts of Iron, as the Fire does; but
you master and interrupt the Motion, and that chiefly in one place. In which
place the Motion that makes the Iron Hard being once overcome, the prosecution
of that bending must needs suddenly master the Motions of the parts next unto
it, being almost mastered before.


A. I have seen a small piece of glass, the figure whereof is this AABC. Which
piece of glass if you bend toward the top, as in C, the whole body will shatter
asunder into a Million of pieces, and be like to so much dust. I would fain see
you give a probable reason of that.


B. I have seen the Experiment. The making of the glass, is thus, They dip an
Iron Rod into the molten glass that stands in a Vessel within the Furnace. Upon
which Iron Rod taken out, there will hang a drop of molten but tough Metal of
the figure you have described, which they let fall into the water. So that the
main drop comes first to the water, and after it the tail, which though
straight whilst it hung on the end of the Rod, yet by falling into the water
becomes crooked Now you know the making of it, you may consider what must be
the consequence of it. Because the main drop A comes first to the water, it is
therefore first quenched, and consequently that the Motion of the parts of that
drop, which by the Fire were made to be moved in a larger compass, is by the
water made to shrink into lesser circles toward the other end B, but with the
same or not much less swiftness.


A. Why so?


B. If you take any long piece of Iron, Glass, or other uniform and continued
body; and having Heated one end thereof, you hold the other end in your hand,
and so quench it suddenly, though before, you held it easily enough, yet now it
will burn your fingers.


A. It will so.


B. You see then how the Motion of the parts from A toward C is made more
violent and in less compass by quenching the other parts first. Besides, the
whole Motion that was in all the parts of the main drop A, is now united in the
small end BC. And this I take to be the cause why that small part BC is so
exceeding stiff. Seeing also this Motion in every small part of the glass, is
not only circular, but proceeds also all along the glass from A to B, the whole
Motion compounded will be such as the Motion of Spinning any Soft matter unto
Thread, and will dispose the whole body of the glass in Threads, which in other
Hard bodies are called the grain.

Therefore if you bend this body (for example) in C (which to do will require
more force then a man would think that has not tried) those threads of Glass
must needs be all bent at the same time, and stand so, till by the breaking of
the Glass at C, they be all at once set at liberty. And then all at once being
suddenly unbent, like so many brittle, and over-bent Bows, their Strings
breaking, be shivered in pieces.


A. It Is like enough to be so. And if nature have betrayed her self in any
thing, I think it is in this, and in that other experience of the Cross-bow;
which strongly and evidently demonstrates the internal reciprocation of the
Motion, which you suppose to be in the internal parts of every Hard body. And I
have observed somewhat in Looking-glasses which much confirms that there is
some such Motion in the internal parts of Glass, as you have supposed for the
cause of Hardness. For let the Glass be AB, and let the Object at C be a
Candle, and the Eye at D. Now by diverse Reflections and Refractions in the two
superficies of the Glass, if the Lines of Vision be very oblique, you shall see
many images of the Candle, as E, F, G, in such order and position as is here
described. But if you remove your Eye to C, and the Candle to D, they will
appear in a situation manifestly different from this. Which you will yet more
plainly perceive if the Looking-Glass be colored, as I have observed in Red
and Blew Glasses; and could never conceive any probable cause of it, till now
you tell me of this secret Motion of the parts across the grain of the Glass,
acquired by cooling it this or that way.


B. There be very many kinds of Hard bodies, Metals, Stones, and other kinds in
the bowels of the Earth, that have been there ever sense the beginning of the
World; and I believe also many different sorts of Juices that may be made Hard*
But for one general cause of Hardness it can be no other then such an internal
Motion of parts as I have already described, whatsoever may be the cause of the
several concomitant qualities of their Hardness in particular.


A. We see water Hardened every Frosty day. It Is likely therefore you may give
a pribable cause of Ice. What is the cause of Freezing of the Ocean toward the
Poles of the Earth?


B. You know the Sun being always between the Tropicks, and (as we have
supposed) always casting off the Air; and the Earth likewise casting it off
from it is self, there must needs on both sides be a great Stream of Air toward
the Poles, shaving the superficies of the Earth and Sea, in the Northern and
Southern Climates. This shaving of the Earth and Sea by the Stream of Air must
needs contract and make to shrink those little Circles of the internal parts of
Earth and Water, and consequently Harden them, first at the superficies, into a
thin skin, which is the first Ice; and afterward the same Motion continuing,
and the first Ice cooperating, the Ice becomes thicker. And this I conceive to
be the cause of the Freezing of the Ocean.


A. If that be the cause, I need not ask how a Bottle of water is made to
Freeze in warm weather with Snow, or Ice mingled with Salt. For when the Bottle
is in the midst of it, the Wind that goes out both of the Salt and of the Ice
as they dissolve, must needs shave the superficies of the Bottle, and the
Bottle work accordingly on the water without it, and so give it first a thin
skin, and at last thicken it into a solid piece of Ice. But how comes it to
pass that water does not use to Freeze in a deep Pit?


B. A deep Pit is a very thick Bottle, and such as the Air cannot come at but
only at the top, or where the Earth is very loose and spungy.


A. Why will not Wine Freeze as well as Water?


B. So it will when the Frost is great enough. But the internal Motion of the
parts of Wine and other Heating Liquors is in greater Circles and stronger then
the Motion of the parts of water; and therefore less easily to be Frozen,
especally quite through, because those parts that have the strongest Motion
retire to the center of the Vessel.


CHAP. VI. Problems of Rain, Wind, and other WEATHER.
A. WHat is the original cause of Rain? and how is it generated?


B. The motion of the Air (such as I have described to you already) tending to
the disunion of the parts of the Air, must needs cause a continual endeavor
(there being no possibility of Vacuum) of whatsoever fluid parts there are upon
the face of the Earth and Sea, to supply the place which would else be empty.

This makes the water, and also very small and loose parts of the Earth and Sea
to rise, and mingle themselves with the Air, and to become mist and Clouds. Of
which the greatest quantity arise there, where there is most water, namely,
from the large parts of the Ocean; which are the South Sea, the Indian Sea, and
the Sea that divides Europe and Africa from America; over which the Sun, for
the greatest part of the year is perpendicular, and consequently raises a
greater quantity of water. Which afterward gathered into Clouds, falls down in
Rain.


A. If the Sun can thus draw up the water; though but in small drops, why can
it not as easily hold it up?


B. It is likely it would also hold them up, if they did not grow greater by
meeting together, nor were carried away by the Air toward the Poles.


A. What makes them gather together?


B. It is not improbable that they are carried against Hills, and there stopped
till more overtake them. And when they are carried toward the North or South
where the force of the Sun is more oblique and thereby weaker, they descend
gently by their own weight. And because they tend all to the center of the
Earth, they must needs be united in their way for want of room, and so grow
bigger. And then it Rains.


A. What is the reason it Rains so seldom, but Snows so often upon very high
Mountains?


B. Because perhaps when the water is drawn up higher then the highest
Mountains, where the course of the Air between the Equator and the Poles is
free from stopping, the Stream of the Air Freezeth it into Snow. And it is in
those places only where the Hills shelter it from that Stream, that it falls in
Rain.


A. Why is there so little Rain in Egypt, and yet so much in other parts nearer
the Aequinoctial, as to make the Nile overflow the Country?


B. The cause of the falling of Rain, I told you was the the stopping, and
consequently the collection of Clouds about great Mountains, especially when
the Sun is near the Aequinoctial, and thereby draws up the water more potently,
and from greater Seas. If you consider therefore that the Mountains in which
are the springs of Nile, lie near the Aequinoctial and are exceeding great, and
near the Indian Sea, you will not think it strange there should be great store
of Snow. This as it melts makes the Rain of Nile to rise, which in April and
May going on toward Egypt arrived there about the time of the Solstice, and
overflow the Country.


A. Why should not the Nile then overflow that Country twice a year? For it
comes twice a year to the Aequinoctial.


B. From the Autumnal Aequinox, the Sun goes on toward the Southern Tropique.
And therefore cannot dissolve the Snow on that side of the Hills that look
toward Egypt.


A. But then there ought to be such another Innundation Southward.


B. No doubt but there is a greater descent of water there in their Summer then
at other times; as there must be wheresoever there is much Snow melted. But
what should that innundate, unless it should overflow the Sea that comes close
to the foot of those Mountains? And for the cause why it seldom Rains in Egypt,
it may be this, That there are no very high Hills near it to collect the
Clouds. The Mountains whence Nile rises being near 2000 Miles off. The nearest
on one side are the Mountains of Nubia, and on the other side Sina, and the
Mountains of Arrabia.


A. Whence think you proceed the Winds?


B. From the Motion (I think) especially of the Clouds, partly also from
whatsoever is moved in the Air.


A. It is manifest, that the Clouds are moved by the Winds; so that there were
Winds before any clouds could be moved. Therefore I think you make the Effect
before the Cause.


B. If nothing could move a Cloud but Wind, your objection were good. But you
allow a Cloud to descend by it is own weight. But when it so descends, it must
needs move the Air before it, even to the Earth, and the Earth again repel it,
and so make lateral Winds every way. Which will carry forwards other Clouds if
there be any in their way, but not the Cloud that made them The Vapor of the
water rising into Clouds, must needs also as they rise, raise a Wind?


A. I grant it. But how can the slow motion of a Cloud make so swift a Wind as
it does?


B. It is not one or two little Clouds, but many and great ones that do it.
Besides, when the Air is driven into places already covered; it cannot but be
much the swifter for the narrowness of the passage.


A. Why does the South Wind more often then any other bring Rain with it?


B. Where the Sun has most power, and where the Seas are greatest, that is in
the South, there is most water in the Air; which a South wind can only bring to
us. But I have seen great showers of Rain sometimes also when the wind has
been North, but it was in Summer, and came first, I think, from the South or
West, and was but brought back from the North.


A. I have seen at Sea very great Waves when there was no Wind at all. What was
it then that troubled the Water?


B. But had you not Wind enough presently after?


A. We had a Storm within a little more then a quarter of an hour after.


B. That Storm was then coming and had moved the Water before it. But the Wind
you could not perceive, for it came downwards with the descending of the
Clouds, and pressing the Water bounded above your Sail till it came very near.
And that was it that made you think there was no Wind at all.


A. How comes it to pass that a Ship should go against the Wind which moves it,
even almost point blank, as if it were not driven but drawn?


B. You are to know first, that what Body soever is carried against another
Body, whether perpendicularly, or obliquely, it drives it in a perpendicular to
the superficies it lights on. As for Example, a Bullet shot against a flat
wall, makes the Stone (or other matter it hits) to retire in a perpendicular
to that flat; or, if the Wall be round, toward the center, that is to say,
perpendicularly. For if the way of the motion be oblique to the Wall, the
motion is compounded of two motions, one parrallel to the Wall, and the other
perpendicular. By the former whereof the Bullet is carried along the Wall side,
by the other it approaches to it. Now the former of these motions can have no
effect upon it; all the battery is from the motion perpendicular, in which it
approaches. And therefore the part it hits must also retire perpendicularly.
If it were not so, a Bullet with the same swiftness would execute as much
obliquely shot, as perpendicularly; which you know it does not.


A. How do you apply this to a Ship?


B. Let A. B. be the Ship, the head of it A. If the Wind blow just from A.
toward B. it is true, the Ship cannot go forward howsoever the sail be set. Let
C. D. be perpendicular to the Ship, and let the Sail E. C. be never so little
oblique to it, and F. C. perpendicular to E. C. and then you see the Ship will
gain the space D. F. to the headward.


A. It will so, but when it is very near to the Wind it will go forward very
slowly, and make more way with her side to the Leeward.


A. It will indeed go slower in the proportion of the Line A, E. to the Line C.
E. But the Ship will not go so fast as you think sideward: One is the force of
that Wind which lights on the side of the Ship it self; the other is, the
bellying of the Sail; for the former, it is not much because the Ship does not
easily put from her the Water with her side; and bellying of the Sail, gives
some little hold for the Wind to drive the Ship a stern.


A. For the motion sideward I agree with you; but I had thought the bellying of
the Sail, had made the Ship go faster.


B. But it does not; only in a fore-wind it hinders least.


A. By this reason a broad thin Board should make the best Sail.


B. You may easily foresee the great incommodities of such a Sail. But I have
seen tried in little what such a Wind can do in such a case. For I have seen a
Board set upon four truckles, with a staff set up in the midst of it for a
Mast, and another very thin and broad Board fastened to that staff in the stead
of a Sail; and so set as to receive the Wind very obliquely, I mean so as to be
within a point of the Compass directly opposite to it; and so placed upon a
reasonable smooth pavement where the Wind blew somewhat strongly. The event was
first, that it stood doubting whether it should stir at all or no, but that was
not long; and then it ran a head extreme swiftly, till it was overthrown by a
Rub.


A. Before you leave the Ship tell me how it comes about that so small a thing
as a Rudder, can so easily turn the greatest Ship?


B. It Is not the Rudder only, there must also be a stream to do it; you shall
never turn a Ship with a Rudder in a standing pooll, nor in a natural current.

You must make a stream from head to stern, either with Oars or with Sails:
when you have made such a stream, the turning of the Rudder obliquely holds the
Water from passing freely; and the Ship or Boat cannot go on directly, but as
the Rudder inclines to the stern, so will the Ship turn. But this is too well
known to insist upon: you have observed, that the Rudders of the greatest Ships
are not very broad, but go deep into the Water, whereas Western Barges, though
but small Vessels, have their Rudders much broader, which argues that the
holding of Water from passing is the office of a Rudder: and therefore to a
Ship that draws much Water the Rudder is made deep accordingly, and in Barges
that draw little Water, the Rudders as less deep, must so much the more be
extended in breadth.


A. What makes Snow?


B. The same cause which (speaking of Hardness) I supposed for the cause of
Ice. For the Stream of Air proceeding from. That both the Earth and the Sun
cast off the Air, and consequently makes a stream of Air from the Aequinoctial
toward the Poles, passing amongst the Clouds, shaving those small drops of
Water whereof the Clouds consist, and congeals them as they do the Water of the
Sea, or of a River. And these small frozen drops are that which we call Snow.


A. But then how are great drops frozen into Hailstones, and that especially
(as we see they are) in Summer?


B. It is especially in Summer; and hot weather, that the drops of Water which
make the Clouds, are great enough; but it is then also that Clouds are sooner
and more plentifully carried up. And therefore the current of the Air
strengthened between the Earth and the Clouds, becomes more swift; and thereby
freezeth the drops of Water, not in the Cloud it self, but as they are falling.
Nor does it freeze them thoroughly, the time of their falling not permitting it,
but gives them only a thin coat of Ice; as is manifest by their sudden
dissolving.


A. Why are not somteimes also whole Clouds when pregnant and ready to drop,
frozen into one piece of Ice?


B. I belive they are so whenever it Thunders.


A. But upon what ground do you believe it?


B. From the manner or kind of noise they make, namely a crack; which I see not
how it can possibly be made by Water or any other soft Bodies whatsoever.


A. Yes, the Powder they call Aurum Fulminans, when thoroughly warm, gives just
such another crack as Thunder.


B. But why may not every small grain of that Aurum Fulminans by it self be
heard, though a heap of them together be soft, as is any heap of Sand. Salts of
all sorts are of the nature of Ice. But Gold is dissolved into Aurum Fulminans
by Nitre and other Salts. And the least grain of it gives a little crack in the
fire by it self. And therefore when they are so warmed by degrees, the crack
cannot choose but be very great.


A. But before it be Aurum Fulminans they use to wash away the Salt (which they
call dulcifying it,) and then they dry it gently by degrees.


B. That is, they exhale the pure Water that is left in the Powder, and leave
the Salt behind to Harden with drying. Other Powder made of Salts without any
Gold in them will give a crack as great as Aurum Fulminans. A very great
Chemist of our times has written, that Salt of Tarter, Saltpeter, and a
little Brimstone ground together into a Powder, and dried, a few grains of that
Powder will be made by the fire to give as great a Clap as a Musket.


A. Me thinks it were worth your trial to see what effect a Quart or a Pint of
Aurum Fulminans would produce, being put into a great Gun made strong enough on
purpose, and the Breech of the Gun set in hot Cinders, so as to heat by
degrees, till the Powder fly.


B. I pray you try it your self; I cannot spare so much Money.


A. What is it that breaks the Clouds when they are frozen?


B. In very hot weather the Sun raises from the Sea and all moist places
abundance of Water, and to a great height. And whilst this Water hangs over us
in Clouds, or is again descending, it raises other Clouds, and it hapens very
often that they press the Air between them, and squeeze it through the Clouds
themselves very violently; which as it passes shaves and hardens them in the
manner declared.


A. That has already been granted, my question is what breaks them?


B. I must here take in one supposition more.


A. Then your Basen (it seems) holds not all you have need of.


B. It may for all this, for the supposition I add is no more but this; that
what internal motion I ascribe to the Earth, and other the Concrete parts of
the World, is to be supposed also in every of their parts how small soever; for
what reason is there to think, in case the whole Earth have in truth the motion
I have ascribed to it, that one part of it taken away, the remaining part
should love that motion. If you break a Lodestone both parts will retain their
virtue, though weakened according to the diminution of their quantity; I
suppose therefore in every small part of the Earth, the same kind of motion,
which I have supposed in the whole: and so I recede not yet from my Basen.


A. Let it be supposed, and withal, that abundance of Earth (which I see you
aim at,) be drawn up together with the Water. What then?


B. Then if many pregnant Clouds, some ascending and some descending meet
together, and make concavities between, and by the pressing out of the Air, as
I have said before, become Ice; those Atoms (as I may call them) of Earth will
be by the straining of the Air through the water of the Clouds, be left behind,
and remain in the Cavities of the Clouds, and be more in number then for the
proportion of the Air therein. Therefore for want of liberty they must needs
justle one another, and become (as they are more and more streightened of room)
more and more swift, and consequently at last break the Ice suddenly and
violently, now in one place, and by and by in another; and make thereby so many
claps of Thunder, and so many Flashes of Lightning. For the Air Recoiling upon
our Eyes, is that which makes those Flashes to our Fancy.


A. But I have seen Lightning in a very clear Evening, when there has been
neither Thunder nor Clouds.


B. Yes in a clear evening; because the Clouds and the Rain were below the
Horison, perhaps 40 or 50 Miles off; so that you could not see the Clouds nor
hear the Thunder.


A. If the Clouds be indeed Frozen into Ice, I shall not wonder if they be
sometimes also so situated, as (like Looking-Glasses) to make us see sometimes
three or more Suns by Refraction and Reflection.


CHAP. VII. Problems of Motion Perpendicular, Oblique; of Pression and
Percussion; Reflection and Refraction; Attraction and Repulsion.
IF a Bullet from a certain point given* be shot against a wall Perpendicularly
and again from the same Point Oblique, What will be the proportion of the
Forces wherewith they urge the wall?

For Example, let the wall be AB, a point given E, a Gun CE that carries the
Bullet Perpendicularly to F, and another Gun DE that carries the like Bullet
with the same swiftness Oblique to G; In what proportion will their Forces be
upon the Wall?

B. The force of the stroke Perpendicular from E to F will be greater then the
Oblique force from E to G, in the proportion of the line EG to the line OF.


A. How can the difference be so much? Can the Bullet lose so much of its force
in the way from E to G?


B. No we will suppose it loses nothing of its swiftness. But the cause is,
That their swiftness being equal, the one is longer in coming to the wall then
the other, in Proportion of Time, as EG to OF. For though their swiftness be
the same, considered in themselves, yet the swiftness of their approach to the
wall is greater in OF then in EG, in proportion of the lines themselves.


A. When a Bullet enters not, but rebounds from the wall, does it make the same
Angle going off, which it did falling on, as the Sunbeams do?


B. If you measure the Angles close by the wall there difference will not be
ensible; otherwise it will be great enough, For the Motion of the Bullet grows
continually weaker. But it is not so with the Sunbeams which press continually
and equally.


A. What is the cause of Reflection? When a body can go no further on, it has
lost its Motion. Whence then comes the Motion by which it reboundeth?


B. This Motion of rebounding or reflecting proceeds from the resistance.
There is a difference to be considered between the Reflection of Light, and of
a Bullet, answerable to their different Motions, pressing and striking. For the
action which makes Reflection of Light, is the Pressure of the Air upon the
Reflecting Body, caused by the Sun, or other shining body, and is but a
contrary endeavor; as if two men should press with their breasts upon the two
ends of a Staff, though they did not remove one another, yet they would find in
themselves a great disposition to press backward upon whatsoever is behind
them, though not a total going out of their places. Such is the way of
Reflecting Light. Now, when the falling on of the Sunbeams is Oblique, the
action of them is nevertheless Perpendicular to the Superficies it falls on.
And therefore the Reflecting Body, by resisting, turns back that Motion
Perpendicularly, as from F to E, but takes nothing from the force that goes on
parallel in the line of EH; because the Motion never presses. And thus of the
two Motions from F to E, and from E to H is a compounded Motion in the line FH,
which makes an Angle in BG, equal to the Angle FGE.

But in Percussion (which is the Motion of the Bullet against a wall,) the
Bullet no sooner goes off then it loses of its swiftness, and inclines to
the Earth by its weight. So that the Angles made in falling on and going off,
cannot be equal, unless they be measured close to the point where the stroke is
made.


A. If a man set a Board upright upon its edge, though it may very easily be
cast down with a little Pressure of ones finger, yet a Bullet from a Musket
shall not throw it down but go through it. What is the cause of that?


B. In pressing with your finger you spend time to throw it down. For the
Motion you give to the part you touch is communicated to every other part
before it fall. For the whole cannot fall till every part be moved. But the
stroke of a Bullet is so swift, as it breaks through before the Motion of the
part it hits can be communicated to all the other parts that must fall with it.


A. The stroke of a Hammer will drive a Nail a great way into a piece of Wood
on a sudden. What weight laid upon the head of a Nail, and in how much time
will do the same? It is a question I have heard propounded amonst Naturalists,


B. The different manner of the operation of weight from the operation of a
stroke, makes it uncalculable. The suddenness of the stroke upon one point of
the wood takes away the time of resistance from the rest. Therefore the Nail
enters so far as it does. But the weight not only gives them time, but also
augments the resistance; but how much, and in how much time, is (I think)
impossible to determine.


A. What is the difference between Reflection and Recoiling?


B. Any Reflection may (and not unproperly) be called recoiling; but not
contrariwise every Recoiling Reflection. Reflection is always made by the
Re-action of a Body pressed or stricken; but Recoiling not always. The Recoiling
of a Gun is not caused by its own pressing upon the Gunpowder, but by the
force of the Powder it self, inflamed and moved every way alike.


A. I had thought it had been by the sudden re-entring of the Air after the
flame and Bullet were gone out. For it is impossible that so much room as is
left empty by the discharging of the Gun, should be so suddenly filled with the
Air that enters at the Touchhole.


B. The flame is nothing but the Powder it self, which scattered into its
smallest parts seems, of greater bulk by much, then in truth it is, because
they shine. And as the parts scatter more and more, so still more Air gets
between them, entering not only at the Touchhole, but also at the mouh of the
Gun. which two ways being opposite, it will be much too weak to make the Gun
Recoil.


A. I have heard that a great Gun charged too much or too little, will Shoot
(not above, nor below but) besides the mark; and charged with one certain
charge between both will hit it.


B. How that should be I cannot imagine. For when all things in the cause are
equal, the effects cannot be unnequal. As soon as Fire is given, and before the
Bullet be out, the Gun begins to Recoil. If then there be any unevenness or rub
in the ground more on one side then on the other, it shall shoot besides the
mark, whether too much, or too little, or justly charged; because if the line
wherein the Gun Recoileth decline, the way of the Bullet will also decline to
the contrary side of the mark. Therefore I can imagine no cause of this event,
but either in the ground it Recoils on, or in the unequal weight of the parts
of the Breech.


A. How comes Refractin?


B. When the action is in a line Perpendicular to the superficies of the Body
wrought upon, there will be no Refraction at all. The action will proceed still
in the same straight Line, whether it be Pression as in Light, or in Percussion
as in the shooting of a Bullet. But when the Pression is Oblique, then will the
Refraction be that way which the Nature of the Bodies through which the Action
proceeds shall determine.


H. How is light Refracted?


B. If it pass through a Body of less, into a Body of greater resistance, and
to the Point of the Superficies it falls on, you draw a Line Perpendicular to
the same superficies, the Action will proceed not in the same Line by which it
fell on, but in another Line bending toward that Perpendiculare.


A. What is the reason of that?


B. I told you before, that the falling on works only in the Perpendicular;
But as soon as the Action proceeds further inward then a mere touch, it
works partly in the Perpendicular, and partly forward, and would proceed in
the same line in which it fell on, but for for the greater resistance which now
weakneth the Motion forward, and makes it to incline toward the Perpendicular.


A. In transparent Bodies it may be so; but there be Bodies through which the
Light cannot pass at all.


B. But the Action by which Light is made, passes through all Bodies. For this
Action is Pression; and whatsoever is pressed, presses that which is next
behind, and so continually. But the cause why there is no Light seen through
it, is the uneveness of the parts within, whereby the Action is by an infinite
number of Reflections so diverted and weakened, that before it has proceeded
through, it has not strength left to work upon the Eye strongly enough to
produce sight.


A. If the Body being transparent the Action proceed quite through, into a Body
again of less resistance, as out of Glass into the Air, which way shall it then
proceed in the Air?


B. From the Point where it goes forth, draw a Perpendicular to the
superficies of the Glass, the Action now freed from the resistance it suffered,
will go from that Perpendicular, as much as it did before come toward it.


A. When a Bullet from out of the Air enters into a Wall of Earth, will that
also be Refracted toward the Perpendicular?


B. If the Earth be all of one kind, it will. For the parallel Motion, will
there also at the first entrance be resisted, which it was not before it entered.


A. How then comes a Bullet, when shot very Obliquely into any broad Water, and
having entered, yet to rise, again into the Air?


B. When a Bullet is shot very Obliquely, though the Motion be never so swift,
yet approach downwards to the Water is very slow, and when it comes to it, it
casts up much Water before it, which with its weight presses downwards
again, and makes the Water to rise under the Bullet with force enough to
master the weak Motion of the Bullet downwards, and to make it rise in such
manner as Bodies use to rise by Reflection.


A. By what Motion (seeing you ascribe all Effects to Motion) can a Lodestone
draw Iron to it?


B. By the same Motion hitherto supposed. But though all the smallest parts of
the Earth have this Motion, yet it is not supposed that their Motions are in
equal Circles; nor that they keep just time with one another; nor that they
have all the same Poles. If they had, all Bodies would draw one another alike.
For such an agreement of Motion, of Way, of Swiftness, of Poles, cannot be
maintained without the conjunction of the Bodies themselves in the Center of
their common Motion, but by violence.

If therefore the Iron have but so much of the Nature of the Lodestone as
redily to receive from it the like Motion, as one String of a Lute does from
another String strained to the same Note (as it is like enough it has, the
Lodestone being but one kind of Iron Ore) it must needs after that Motion
received from it, (unless the greatness of the weight hinder) come nearer to
it, because at distance their Motions will differ in time, and oppose each
other whereby they will be forced to a common Center. If the Iron be lifted up
from the Earth, the Motion of the Lodestone must be stronger, or the Body of
it nearer, to overcome the Weight; and then the Iron will leap up to the
Lodestone as as Swiftly as from the same distance, it would fall down to the
Earth; but if both the Stone and the Iron be set floating upon the Water, the
attraction will begin to be manifest at a greater distance, because the
hindrance of the weight is in part removed.


A. But why does the Lodestone if it float on a Calm Water, never fail to
place it self at last in the Meridian just North and South.


B. Not so, just in the Meridian, but almost in all places with some
variations. But the cause I think is, that the Axis of this Magnetical Motion
is parallel to the Axis of the Ecliptique, which is the Axis of the like Motion
in the Earth, and consequently that it cannot freely exercise its Natural
Motion in any other Situation.


A. Whence may this consent of Motion in the Lodestone and the Earth proceed?
Do you think (as some have written) that the Earth is a great Lodestone?


B. Dr. Gilbert that was the first that wrote any thing of this Subject
rationally, inclines to that opinion. Decartes thought the Earth (excepting
this upper crust of a few Miles depth) to be of the same Nature with all other
Stars, and bright. For my part I am content to be ignorant; but I believe the
Lodestone has given its virtue by a long habitude in the Mine, the Vein of it
lying in the plain of some of the Meridians, or rather of some of the great
Circles that pass through the Poles of the Ecliptique, which are the same with
the Poles of the like Motion supposed in the Earth.


A. If that be true, I need not ask why the filings of Iron laid on a
Lodestone equally distant from its Poles will lie parallel to the Axis, but
one each side incline to the Pole that is next it. Nor why by drawing a
Lodestone all a long a Needle of Iron, the Needle will receive the same Poles.
Nor why when the Lodestone and Iron ( or two Load-stones) are put together
floating upon Water, will fall one of them a Stern of the other, that their
like parts may look the same way, and their unlike touch, in which Action they
are commonly said to Repel one another. For all this may be derived from the
union of their Motions. One thing more I desire to know, and that is; What are
those things they call Spirits? I mean Ghosts, Fairies, Hobgoblins, and the
like Apparitions.


B. They are no part of the Subject of Natural Philosophy.


A. That which in all Ages, and all places is commonly seen (as those have
been, unless a great part of Mankind by Liars) cannot, I think, be
supernatural.


B. All this that I have hitherto said, though upon better ground than can be
had for a discourse of Ghosts, you ought to take but for a Dream.


A. I do so. But there be some Dreams more like sense then others. And that
which is like sense pleases me as well (in natural Philosophy) as if it were
the very truth.


B. I was Dreaming also once of these things; but was weakened by their noise.
And they never came into any Dream of mine since, unless Apparitionrs in Dreams
and Ghoasts be all one.


CHAP. VIII. The Delphique Problem or Duplication of the Cube.
A. HAve you seen a Printed Paper sent from Paris, containing the Duplication
of the Cube, written in French?


B. Yes. It was I that Writ it, and sent it thither to be Printed, on purpose
to see what objections would be made to it by our Professors of Algebra here.


A. Then you have also seen the confutations of it by Algebra.


B. I have seen some of them; and have one by me. For there was but one that
was rightly Calculated, and that is it which I have kept.


A. Your Demonstration then is confuted though but by one.


B. That does not follow. For though an Arithmetical Calculation be true in
Numbers, yet the same may be, or rather must be false, if the Units be not
constantly the same.


A. Is their Calculation so inconstant, or rather so foolish as you make it?


B. Yes. For the same number is sometimes so many Lines, sometimes so many
Plains, and sometimes so many Solids; as you shall plainly see, if you will
take the pains to examine first a Demonstration I have to prove the said
Duplication, and after that, the Algebrique Calculation which is pretended to
confute it. And not only that this one is false, but also any other
Arithmetical account used in Geometry, unless the numbers be always so many
Lines, or always so many superficies, or always many solids.


A. Let me see the Geometrical Demonstration.


B. There it is. Read it.


To find a Cube double to a Cube given.
LEt the side of the Cube given be VD. Produce VD to A, till AD be double to
DV. Then make the square of AD, namely ABCD. Divide AB and CD in the middle at
E and F. Draw OF. Draw also AC cutting OF in I. Then in the sides BC and AD
take BR and AS each of them equal to AI or IC.

Lastly, divide SD in the middle at T, and upon the Center T, with the distance
TV, describe a semicircle cuting AD in Y, and DC in X.

I say the Cube of DX is double to the Cube of DV. For the three lines DIE, DX,
DV are in continual proportion. And Cntinuing the semicircle VXY till it cut
the line RS drawn and produced in Z, the line SZ, will be equal to DX. And
drawing XZ it will pass through T. And the four lines TV, TX, TY and TZ will be
equal. And therefore joining YX and YZ, the Figure VXYZ will be a Rectangle.

Produce CD to P so as DP be equal to AD. Now if YZ produced fall on P, there
will be three Rectangle equi-angled Triangles, DPY, DYX, and DXV; and
consequently four continual proportionals, DP, DIE, DX. and DV, whereof DX is
the least of the means. And therefore the Cube of DX will be double to the Cube
of DV.

A. That Is true; and the Cube of D Y will be double to the Cube of DX; and the
Cube of DP double to the Cube of DIE. But that YZ produced, falls upon P, is the
thing they deny, and which you ought to demonstrate.


B. If YZ produced fall not on P, then draw PY, and from V let fall a
perpendicular upon PY, suppose at u. Divide PV in the midst at a, and join au;
which done au will be equal to aV or aP. For because V uP is a right Angle, the
point u will be in the semicircle whereof PV is the Diameter.

Therefore drawing VR, the Angle uVR will be a right Angle.


A. Why so?


B. Because TV and TY are equal; and TD, TS equal; SV will also be equal to DV.
And because DP and RS are equal and parallel, RY will be equal and parallel to
PV. And therefore VR and PY that join them will be equal and parallel. And the
Angles P uV, RV u will be alternate, and consequently equal. But P uV is a
right Angle; therefore also RV u will be a right Angle.


A. Hitherto all is evident. Proceed.


B. From the point Y raise a perpendicular cutting VR wheresoever in t, and
then (because PY and VR are parallel) the Angle Y tV will be a right Angle. And
the figure uY tV a Rectangle, and ut equal to YV. But YV is equal to ZX; and
therefore ZX is equal to ut. And ut must pass through the point T (For the
Diameters of any Rectangle, divide each other in the middle) therefore Z and u
are the same point, and X and t the same point. Therefore YZ produced falls
upon P. And DX is the lesser of the two means between AD and DV. And the Cube
of DX double to the Cube of DV which was to be demostraten.


A I cannot imagine what fault there can be in this Demonstration, and yet
there is one thing which seems a little strange to me. And it is this. You take
BR, which is half the Diagonal, and which is the sine of 45 degrees, and which
is also the mean proportional between the two Extremes. And yet you bring none
of these proprieties into your Demonstration. So that though you argue from the
Construction, yet you do not argue from the Cause. And this perhaps your
adversaries will object (at least) against the Art of your Demonstratieon, or
enqure by what luck you pitched upon half the Diagonal for your Foundation.


B. I see you let nothing pass. But for answer you must know, That if a man
argue from the negative of the truth, though he know not that it is the truth
which is denied, yet he will fall at last, after many consequences, into one
absurdity or another. For though false do often produce Truth, yet it produces
also absurdity, as it has done here. But Truth produces nothing but Truth.
Therefore in Demonstrations that tend to absurdity, it is no good Logic to
require all along the operation of the cause.


A. Have you drawn from hence no Corollaries?


B. No. I leave that for others that will; unless you take this for a
Corollary, That, what Arithmetical Calculation soever contradicts it, is false.


A. Let me see now the Algebrical Demonstration against it.


B. Here it is. Let AB or AD be equal to 2 Then DF or DV is equal to 1 And BR
or AS is equal to the square root of 2 And AV equal to 3 want the square root
of 2.
The Cube of AB is equal to 8 The Cube of DIE is equal to 45 want the Square
Root of 1682 that is almost equal to 4
For 45 want the Square Root of 6681 is equal to 4


Therefore DIE is a little less then the greater of the two Means between AD and
DV.


A. There is I see some little difference between this Arithmetical and your
Geometrical Demonstration. And though it be insensible, yet if his Calculation
be true, yours must needs be false, which I am sure cannot be.


B. His Calculation is so true, that there is never a Proposition in it false,
till he come to the conclusion, that the Cube of DIE. is equal to 45, want the
square Root of 1682. But that, and the rest, is false.


A. I shall easily see that AD. is certainly 2, whereof DV. is 1, and AV. is
certainly 3, whereof DV. is 1.


B. Right.


A. And BR. is without doubt the square Root of 2.


B. Why, what is 2?


A. 2, is the Line AD. as being double to DV. which is 1.


B. And so, the Line BR. is the square Root of the Line AD.


A. Out upon it it, it is absurd. Why do you grant it to be true in Arithmetic?


B. In Arithmetic the numbers consist of so many Units; and are never
considered there as nothings. And therefore every one Line has some Latitude,
and if you allow to BY. the Semi-diagonal the same Latitude you do to AB. or to
BR. you will quickly see the Square of half the Diagonal to be equal to twice
the Square of half AB.


A. Well, but then your Demonstration is not confuted; for the Point Y, will
have Latitude enough to take in that little difference which is between the
Root of 1681 and the Root of 1682. This putting off an Unit sometimes for one
Line, sometimes for one Square, must needs mar the reckoning. Again he says
the Cube of AB. is equal to 8. but seeing AB. is 2, the Cube of AB. must be
just equal to four of its own sides; so that the Unit which was before
sometimes a Line, sometimes a Square, is now a Cube.


B. It can be no otherwise when you so apply Arithmetic to Geometry, as to
mumber the Lines of a Plain, or the Plains of a Cube.


A. In the next place, I find that the Cube of DIE. is equal to 45, want the
Square Root of 1622. What is that 45? Lines, or Squares, or Cubes?


B. Cubes, Cubes of DV.


A. Then if you add to 45 Cubes of DV. the Square Root of 1682, the sum will be
45 Cubes of DV. And if you add to the Cube of DIE. the same Root of 1682, the
sum will be the Cube of DIE. plus the Square Root of 1682. And these two sums
must be equal.


B. They must so.


A. But the Square Root of 1682, being a Line, adds nothing to a Cube;
therefore the Cube alone of DIE. which he says is equal almost to 4. Cubes of
DV. is equal to 45 Cubes of the same DV.


B. All these impossibilities do necessarily follow the confounding of
Arithmetic and Geometry.


A. I pray you let me see the Operation by which the Cube of DIE. ( that is the
Cube of 3, want the Root of 2,) is found equal to 45, want the Square Root of
1682.

A detection of the absurd use of Arithmetic as it is now applied to Geometry.


B. Here it is.

^


A. Why for two Roots of 18 do you put the Root of 72.


B. Because 2 Roots of 18 is equal to one Root of 4 times 18, which is 72.


A. Next we have, That the Root of 2 Multiplied into 2, makes the Root of 8.
How is that true?


B. Does it not make 2 Roots of 2? And is not BR. the Root of 2, and 2 BR equal
to the Diagonal? And is not the diagonal the root of a square equal to 8
squares of DV?


A. It Is true. But here the root of 8 is put for the Cube of the root of 2. Can
a line be equal to a Cube?


B. No. But here we are in Arithmetic again, and 8 is a Cubique number.


A. How does the root of 2 multiplied into the root of 72 make 12?


B. Because it makes the root of 2 times 72, that is to say the root of 144
which is 12.


A. How does 9 roots of 2 make the root of 162?


B. Because it makes the root of 2 squares of 9, that is the root of 162.


A. How does 3 roots of 72 make the root of 648?


B. Because it makes the root of 9 times 72, that is of 648.


A. For the total Sum I see 27 and 18 which make 45. Therefore the root of 648
together with the root of 162 and of 8, which are to be deducted from 45, ought
to be equal to the root of 1682.


B. So they are. For 648 multiplied by 162 makes 104976 of which the double
root is 648 and 648 and 162 added together make 810. Therefore the root of 948,
added to the root of 162 makes the root of 1459 Again 1458 into 8 is 11664. The
double root whereof is 216. The Sum of 1458 and 8 added together is 1466. The
Sum of 1466 and 216 is 1682, and the root, the root of 1682.



A. I see the the Calculation in numbers is right, though false in lines. The
reason whereof can be no other then some difference between multiplying numbers
into lines or plains, and multiplying lines into the same lines or plains.


B. The difference is manifest. For when you multiply a number into lines, the
product is lines; as the number 2 multiplied into 3 lines is no more then 3
lines 2 times told. But if you multiply lines into lines you make plains, and
if you multiply lines into plains you make solid bodies. In Geometry there are
but three dimensions, Length, Superficies, and Body. In Arithmetic there is
but one, and that is Number or Length which you will. And though there be some
Numbers called Plain, others Solid, others Plano-solid, others Square, others
Cubique, others Square-square, others Quadrato-cubique, others Cubi-cubique
etc. yet are all these but one dimension, namely Number, or a file of things
Numbered.


A. But seeing this way of Calculation by Numbers is so apparently false, what
is the reason this Calculation came so near the truth.


B. It is because in Arithmetic Units are not Nothings, and therefore have
breadth. And therefore many Lines set together make a superficies though their
breadth be insensible. And the greater the number is into which you divide your
Line, the less sensible will be your error.


A. Archimedes, to find a straight Line equal to the circumferrence of a
Circle, used this may of extracting Roots. And it is the way also by which the
Table of Sines, Secants and Tangents have been calculated, Are they all Cut?


B. As for Archimedes, there is no man that does more admire him then I do. But
there is no man that cannot Err* His reasoning is good. But he ads all other
Geometricans before and after him have had two Principles that cross one
another when they are applied to one and the same Science. One is, that a Point
is no part of a Line which is true in Geometry, where a part of a Line when it
is called a Point, is not reckoned; another is, that a Unit is part of a Number
which is also true; but when they reckon by Arithmetic in Geometry, there a
Unit is sometimes part of a Line, sometimes a part of a Square, and sometimes
part of a Cube.

As for the Table of Sines, Secants and Tangents, I am not the first that find
fault with them. Yet I deny not but they are true enough for the reckoning of
Acres in a Map of Land.


A. What a deal of Labor has been lost by them that being Professors of
Geometry have read nothing else to their Auditors but such stuff as this you
have here seen. And some of them have written great Books of it in strange
characters, such as in troublesome times, a man would suspect to be a Cipher.


B. I think you have seen enough to satisfy you, that what I have written
heretofore concerning the Quadrature of the Circle, and of other Figures made
in imitation of the Parabola, has not been yet confuted.


A. I see you have wrested out of the hands of our Antagonists this weapon of
Algebra, so as they can never make use of it again. Which I consider as a thing
of much more consequence to the science of Geometry, then either of the
Duplication of the Cube, or the finding of two mean Proportionals, or the
Quadrature of a Circle, or all these Problems put together.


FINIS.
Books Written by this Author, and Printed for William Crook.
1 DE Mirabilibus Pecci, in Quarto Latin, in Octavo in English and Lantin. 2
Three Papers to the Royal Society against Dr. Wallis. 3 Lumathematica. 4 Prima
partis Doctrinae Wallisianae de Motu Censura Brevis. 5 Resetum Geometricum,
sive propositiones aliquot frustra antehac tentatae. 6 Principia and Poblemata
aliquot Geometrica, ante desperata, nunc breviter explicata and demonstrata. 7
Quadratura Circuli Cubatio Sphaere duplicatio Cubi Breviter demonstrata. 8
Consideration on his Loyalty, Reputation, Religion and Manners; by himself. 9
De Principio and Ratione Geometri* 20 The Travels of Vlises Translated from
Homer. 11 Epistol. ad Dr. Wood. 12 The Translation of all Homers Works into
English. 13 The Epitome of the Civil Wars of Enland from 1640 to 1660. 14
Aristotle's Rhetoric Translated into English by him, with his own Rhetoric to
it. 15 A Dialogue betwixt a Student in the Common-Laws of England, and a
Philosopher in which is set forth the Errors in some Practice. 16 A Narration
of Heresy and the Punnishment thereof. 17 Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy.
18 A Poem in Latin of his Life. 19 -- idem the same in English. 20 His Life
written in Latin, part by himself and the rest by Dr. R. B. wherein is
contained the most material parts of his Life. 21 Seven Philosophical Problems,
and two Propositions of Geometry. With an Apology for Himself, and his
Writtings. Dedicated to the King, in the year 1662.



