THE CASE OF SEES VACANT By an Unjust or Uncanonical DEPRIVATION, STATED.

In Reply to a TREATISE ENTITLED A Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, etc.
TOGETHER WITH The several other Pamphlets lately published as Answers to the
BAROCCIAN TREATISE.

By HUMPHRY HODY, D. D. Fellow of Wadh. Coll. in Oxford.

Abstineamus nos a Convitiis ne tempus inaniter impendamus, and ad id quod
agitur inter nos potius advertamus. S. Aug. Ep. ad Pascentium Comitem.

Non enim vincimur, quando offeruntur nobis meliora, sed instruimur; maxim in
his, qua ad Ecclesia unitatem pertinent, and spei and fidei nostra veritatem.
S. Cypr.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse, R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Dno Dno Iohanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
December. 1. 1692.
To the most Reverend Father in God JOHN, By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop
of CANTERBURY His GRACE Primate of all England and Metropolitan.
May it please your Grace,
THis Treatise being designed for the Service of the Church as at present
Established, I presume to make your Grace this humble offer of it. It must be
confessed that the greatness of the Subject deserves a more able Manager: but, my
Lord, that favorable Acceptance with which you were pleased to honor the
Baroccian Treatise, has encouraged me to hope, that your Grace will likewise be
pleased to accept of these Endeavors, and to excuse and pardon the Defects of

Your GRACE'sMost dutiful Servant, HVMPHRY HODY.

(...) bestowed upon it, they are forced to confess by their Practice, that it
carries with it a great deal of Strength. If to be opposed by seven several
Answerers, the latter not satisfied with what the former had urged, be an
Argument of Strength in a Treatise, we may still believe (and I hope it was
so:) that the finding it out at this Juncture had something of the (...) in it.

I presume the Reader will expect I should give him some Account of these seven
several Answers which have been published against it. I shall lay down the
Titles of 'em in the same Order as they came to my hands.

1. The Oxford Antiquity examined, etc.

2. An Answer to a Treatise out of Ecclesiastical History, translated from an
ancient Greek MS. in the Public Library at Oxford, by Humphry Hody, B. D. etc.

3. Epistola ad Humfredum Hody, etc. de Tractatu e Scriniis Baroccianis
Bibliothecae Bodleianae eruto, and ab illo nuper edito, conscripta.

4. A farther Account of the Baroccian MS. lately published at Oxford.

5. Reflections on the Greek MS translated by Mr Hody. This is not Printed, but
was put into my hands in a MS.

6. A Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, asserting their Spiritual Right
against a Lay-Deprivation, against the Charge of Schism, etc.

These six are professedly and entirely in Answer to the Baroccian Treatise.
But the Author of this last mentioned was (I know not how) so unhappy as to
mistake the Question. He writes against the Treatise as if the Design of it
were to vindicate the Authority of the Civil Power in depriving Bishops: But
that is not the Design of the Treatise; neither was it my Design in publishing
it. And from this strange Mistake it comes to pass, that a great part of what
that Author says is nothing at all to our Purpose.

7. Unity of Priesthood necessary to the Unity of the Church, with some
Reflections on the Oxford MS. and the Preface annexed.

The Vindication of the Authority of the Civil Power in Depriving a Bishop for
Political Crimes, I reserve for a particular Treatise. My Business at present
is to manage the last Proposition, that advanced by the Baroccian Treatise. In
Reply to these several Answers, I here present our Adversaries with an
Impartial History of the Church's Behavior (throughout all Ages) under Bishops
put into the Places of others Deposed by a Lay, or otherwise Invalid, Sentence.
I grant at present, that all Lay-Deprivations are invalid. I suppose the worst
in all Cases. Suppose the Deprivation was not only uncanonical, but also
unjust: Suppose the Depriver not only a Layman, but doubly unqualified by
being likewise a Heretisk: Suppose besides, that the ejected Bishop was
deprived for adhering to the Truth, and for opposing Vice or Heresy:
Notwithstanding all this, I assert, That if he was deprived by a Power
irresistible, a Submission to the present Possessor (if otherwise
unexceptionable) is lawful, and warranted by the general Practice of the
Ancients.

It is not my Design to detain my Reader long in a Preface. Only one or two
things I desire of him.

If any thing here in this Treatise seem long and tedious to him, I desire he
would be pleased to consider, that my Design was to make this Discourse as
perfect as I could, that so, if possible, it might put an End to this
Controversy. And if our Adversaries shall be pleased to publish a Reply to
what is here written, I desire he would seriously compare and weigh one
Treatise with the other, consider if the main and more Substantial Parts of
this Treatise are answered, then judge for himself, and not expect that of
Course there must be another Reply. As I am not so vain as to think my self
clear from Error, so neither am I conscious to my self of having been so
Careless and Indiligent as to think I am often mistaken, I mean in things
material. I hate everlasting Wrangle. And an Adversary that Cavils, and excepts
against things not material, I shall think deserves a Reply as little as one
that Rails.

'Twill be hard, I know, to persuade our Adversaries, that the History I here
present 'em, is (what I call it) Impartial. But this Assurance I give 'em: I
have written nothing but what I myself believe. That may be; perhaps they will
say: But you have not written all that you believe: You have not told all you
know. Why truly, as to that, I know not what to answer. Since the Judgments of
Men are so extremely different, as that some have fansy'd that the Canons I
omitted, when I published the Buroccian Treatise, are really a Part of that
Treatise, and ought to have been published with it; there is nothing so
Impertinent but what some or other may fancy I ought to have mentioned. I
cannot promise but that there may be more Canons. But least it should be
suspected, that though I have produced many Instances for the Cause I have
undertaken to defend, there are others, as good, and as many, that make against
us, which I have designedly concealed; I shall here make this solemn
Declaration: That if any of our Adversaries (I speak to all in general, but my
Eye is particularly upon the learned Vindicator) can produce me any one single
Instance from the time of Aaron, the first High Priest of the Jews, to this
very day, of a High priest disowned by the Jews, or a Bishop disowned by the
Generality of the Catholic Church for this Reason, because put into the place
of another deposed by the Civil Authority: If they can show me, I say, any one
single Instance, I shall own my self obliged for the Instruction. I assure my
Reader, that after a nice and very Search I know not one.

Should our Adversaries be able to produce such an Example (as I think they
will never be able) 'twill advantage their Cause but little, especially if it
be one of the later Ages, since it is not agreeable to the Practice of the
Church in general. But if they are not able to produce so much as one single
Example, how rashly have they acted, who have separated themselves from the
Church on such an account!

I conclude in the Words of Drusius, which I here make my own: Scripsi haec
animo juvandi, non laedendi. Si laesi quempiam, jam me poenitet. Si offendi
pias aures, monitus lubenter mutabo. Si erravi uspiam, monstretur mihi error,
non ero pertinax.

Page 5. lin. 40. Whatsoever is notoriously repugnant to the Church's Interest,
so as to be necessarily productive of very great Evils, is so far from being
obliging, that it would be a Sin to act according to it. -- Least that
Proposition should be misunderstood; after the words, of very great Evils: add
(I speak of Oaths of Canonical Obedience).

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1.
The Reasonableness of submitting to the present Possessor, if otherwise
unexceptionable, though the Predecessor was unjustly or invalidly deposed by the
Secular Power, demonstrated. Objections answered. No obligation to the contrary
by the Oath of Canonical Obedience. The Authority of S. Cyprian unreasonably
alleged by our Adversaries. The Vindicator's Notion of Heresy not at all to his
Purpose. Page 1.

CHAP. II.
That the Jewish Highpriests, who were put into the places of others
(unjustly) Deposed by the Civil Authority, were all along owned and received as
true Highpriests. An Account of all those Highpriests, from the Reign of King
Solomon, to the Destruction of Jerusalem. The Instance of Abiathar and Zadok
nicely examined. The Practice of the Jews, and God's Approbation of such
Highpriests a sufficient Warrant to us. Page 16.

CHAP. III.
That our Savior himself, and his Apostles, acknowleged and communicated with
those Highpriests, who were put into the Places of others unjustly deposed by
the Civil Authority, as true Highpriests. Mr. Selden's Conjecture, That in the
Histories of the New Testament, as often as there is mention made of the
High Priest, is to be understood not the High Priest, properly so called, but
the Prince of the Sanhedrin, confuted. A Reply to an Answer of our Adversaries,
concerning the Reason why the Jews, our Savior, and the Apostles submitted to
the present Possessor. Page 33.

CHAP. IV.
That the Ancient Christians submitted all along to such Bishops (if accounted
Orthodox) as were put into the Places of others deposed by the Secular Power,
tho never so unjustly. No Examples, either for or against us, in the three
first Centuries, all the Emperors being then Heathens. The Example of Felix II.
Bishop of Rome, the put into the place of Liberius, unjustly deposed by the
bare Authority of the Emperor Constantius, and against Liberius's consent, yet
he is owned by all that accounted him, Orthodox, by the Roman Clergy; among
them, by the famous Damasus, who was afterward Pope. He is owned as
Metropolitan by the Bishops of the District of Rome. His Ordinations are
allowed of as valid, by even his Adversary Liberius. He has been all along
owned by the Church, as a Saint, and true Pope. Page 40.

CHAP. V.
The Catholics of Alexandria reject Lucius, because he was an Arian, not
because his Predecessor Peter, was unjustly deposed by the Emperor. Our
Adversaries Doctrine not known to the said Peter.. 1. S. Briccius of Tours
deposed by the People. Yet Justinian and Armentius his Successors, are owned as
true Bishops of Tours. Armentius is owned as true. Bishop by S. Briccius
himself, though he had never given up his Right, but had always claimed it.. 2.
S. Euthymius refuses to communicate with Theodosius, Patriarch of Jerusalem,
because he was a Heretic, and had embrued his hands in the Blood of many
Persons, not because the Patriarch Juvenalis, whose See he had usurpt, was
still living. Theodolius's Ordinations are allowed of as valid.. 3. Acacius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, refuses to communicate with Timotheus Aelurus, not
because he was put into the place of Timotheus Salofaciolus, unjustly deposed
by the Heretical Usurper Basiliscus, but because he was a Heretic and a
Parricide.. 4. Jo. Talaias, the Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria being deposed
by the bare Authority of the Emperor Zeno, though he still laid claim to the Sea, yet Petrus Mongus, his Successor, is acknowledged by all that accounted
him Orthodox, by Acacius and Fravitas, Patriarchs of Constantinople by
Martyrius Patriarch of Jerusalem, by (almost) all the Bishops of the Eastern
Church; That they who refused to communicate with Mongus, viz. the Western
Bishops, the Bishops of Dardania, etc. did it only because they thought him a
Heretic; That Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople communicated with him till
he found him to be a Heretic, then forsook his Communion. Pope Simplicius,
when he heard that Talaias was to be deposed, was well enough satisfied, till
he understood, that Mongus, whom he accounted a Heretic, was designed for his
Successor. Whether Orthodox Bishops unjustly ejected by the Emperor be
restored, or new Orthodox Bishops be created, he values not, he only desires
that they that are made Bishops should be Orthodox. Pope Felix III. not at all
concerned for Talaias's being deprived without a Synod, only dislikes that one,
whom he accounted a Heretic, was constituted in his place.. 5. Calendion
Patriarch of Antioch, being deposed by the Emperor Zeno, without any Synod, the
Orthodox Bishops, viz. Pope Felix III. Quintianus Asculanus, Justinus Siculus,
Acacius Constantinopolitanus, Antheon Arsinoites, Faustus, Apolloniates,
Pamphilus Abydensis, Asclepiades of Trallium, etc. refuse to communicate with
his Successor, Petrus Gnapheus, only because he was a Heretic; take no notice
of his being constituted in the room of one Unsynodically deposed, and are
ready to communicate with him as a true Patriarch of Antioch, if he will but
forsake his Heresy. Page 57.

CHAP. VI.
Macedonius Patriarch of Constantinople being violently Deposed by the
Heretical Emperor Anastasius, his Successor Timotheus is acknowleged by all
that accounted him Orthodox, though at the same time they professed that the
Deprivation of Macedonius was unjust, and could never be induced by any Terrors
to subscribe to it, viz. by Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch, Elias Patriarch of
Jerusalem, the Abbot of the Monastery of Studium, the (Orthodox) People of
Constantinople, by the great Abbots of Palaestine, S. Sabas, and S. Theodosius,
and by all Palaestine in general, at that time exceedingly flourishing for its
zealous Profession of the Orthodox Faith. The Calumnies of the Vindicator
concerning the Apostasy of the Patriarchs Flavianus and Elias, confuted.
Timotheus not known to them to be a Heretic when they communicated with him.
They are Honored by the Church as Saints. Page 70.

CHAP. VII.
Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch being deposed by the Emperor Anastasius, his
Successor Severus is rejected by the Orthodox only because he was a Heretic.
Elias Patriarch of Jerusalem being violently deposed by the said Emperor, his
Successor John is immediately acknowleged by all the People, though at the same
time they hated him: by the whole Church of Palaestine; particularly the two
great Abbots, S. Sabas and S. Theodosius, so famous for their Vndauntedness and
Sanctity: by Johannes Cappadox Patriarch of Constantinople, and all the Greek
Church: by all the whole Church ever since those Times. The Testimony of
Photius Patriarch of Constantinople out of a Manuscript. The old Patriarch
Elias, though so Tyrannically Deprived for adhering to the Orthodox Faith,
continues however to communicate with those who acknowledged his Successor.
Page 81.

CHAP. VIII.
S. Silverius Bishop of Rome being violently deposed by Belisarius the Emperor
Justinian's General, his Successor Vigilius, though put into his place so
deprived, though constituted by the bare Authority of Belisarius against the
consent of the Clergy, and though Silverius never gave up his Right, is owned
and received by the 5th. General Council, and by all the Church, as a true
Pope. He was generally owned whilst Silverius himself was living. Baronius's
conjecture concerning his being again ordained after Silverius's Death
confuted, though for some time he communicated with Heretics, yet it was not
known to the Orthodox who communicated with him. Page 90.

CHAP. IX.
Macarius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, being deposed by the Emperor Justinian, his
Successor Eustochius is owned as a true Patriarch by the Fifth General Council
and the whole Catholic Church. After some time Eustochius himself is deposed
by the Emperor, and Macarius, being restored, is received by the Church.
According to our Adversaries Principles, either Eustochius, or Macarius, after
his Restoration, was no true Patriarch: yet the Church received both. Page 97.

CHAP. X.
Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople being violently deposed by the Emp.
Justinian for refusing to subscribe to his Heresy, John surnamed Scholasticus
is made Patriarch in his room. After John was consecrated Patriarch, Eutychius
was condemned by an Assembly that consisted as well of Lay Lords as Bishops,
not only of Ecclesiastics as the Vindicator contends. He actually lays claim
to the Sea, despises the Sentence of his Judges as null and invalid, because
they proceeded unjustly and uncanonically against him, and Excommunicates them.
Notwithstanding all this, his Successor, because he proved Orthodox, was
received and owned by all the Church as a true Patriarch: He continued in the Sea near 13 years; near 12 years under Justin the Younger an Orthodox Emp. He
is owned by the Church of Constantinople, though at the same time Eutychius was
exceedingly beloved. John an Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria is consecrated by
him. For what reason Anastasius Patriarch by Antioch reproved the Patriarch of
Alexandria for being ordained by him. Anastasius did not refuse to communicate
with him, He is Honored by the Patriarch Photius with the Title of Saint. Though
Eutychius looked upon his Deprivation as absolutely invalid, and though he never
resigned but accounted himself still the rightful Patriarch, yet he lived
quietly, and never endeavored to make a Division in the Church. Dr.
Crakanthorp's Opinion, that Eutychius was deposed for being a Heretic,
confuted. The Authority of the Life of Eutychius, often quoted in this Chapter,
vindicated against the same Author. Page 101.

CHAP. XI.
S. Anastasius, Senior, Patriarch of Antioch, being deposed without any Synod
by the Emperor Justin, Junior, though he never resigned, yet his Successor
Gregory is owned by all the Church. He continued Patriarch till his Death, for
the space of 23 Years, the old Patriarch Anastasius being all the while living.
Four Saints among those that lived at that time and communicated freely with
him: S. Symeon Stylites, Junior, Pope Gregory the Great, S. Eulogius Patriarch
of Alexandria, S. John Nesteutes Patriarch of Constantinople. Pope Gregory
communicates with him as Patriarch of Antioch, though at the same time he
declares Anastasius's Deprivation to be invalid, and looks upon Anastasius to
be the rightful Patriarch. S. Anastasius, though deposed by the Lay-power, and
though he had never given up his Right, yet never left the Communion of the
Church. Page 121.

CHAP. XII.
S. Martin, Pope of Rome, being deposed without any Synod, and banished by the
Heretical Emperor Constans, though he never resigned, yet Eugenius is chosen his
Successor by the Clergy of Rome, though at the same time they were zealous
Assertors of the Orthodox Faith, and had likewise a great love for S. Martin.
Eugenius is received and owned by all as a true Pope, and has been honored all
along by the Church as a Saint. S. Martin himself owns him as a true Pope, and
prays to God for him as such. Page 128.

CHAP. XIII.
Callinicus Patriarch of Constantinople being deposed without any Synod by the
Emperor Justinianus Rhinotmetus, his Successor Cyrus is received as a true
Patriarch.. 1. So likewise is Nicetas who was put into the place of the
Patriarch Constantine deposed without any Synod by the Emperor Constantinus
Copronymus.. 2. Page 135.

CHAP. XIV.
An Account of the Schism between Photius and Ignatius, Patriarchs of
Constantinople. Photius who was put into Ignatius's place when deposed by the
Emperor, no such Person as his Enemies report him. By how great a Party he was
received. The reason why some refused to acknowledge him was not so much,
because he was so constituted, as because he was a Neophytus, and was besides
ordained by a Bishop Excommunicated, and (in their Judgments) stood himself
Excommunicated at that time. Ignatius professes, that if Photius had been one
of the Church, i. e. if he had not been an Excommunicated Person at the time of
his Consecration, he would willingly have yielded to him. Ignatius values the
Coun^ils that condemned him no more than he did the Lay-power. The Vindicator
in an Error concerning that Matter. His Errors concerning the Council called
the First and Second. A New account of the reason of that Title. His Error
concerning the Greatness of the Synod of Rome, called by P. Nicholas against
Photius. Photius after he was received by the Church, and confirmed by a
general Council, is deposed by the bare Authority of the Emperor Leo; yet his
Successor Stephen is received by the Church. Page 139.

CHAP. XV.
Nicolaus Mysticus, Patriarch of Constantinople; not deprived by a Synod, as
the Vindicator contends, but by the Emperor ( Leo the Wise.). 1. Joseph Bishop
of Brixia in Italy deposed without any Synod by King Besengarius, yet his
Successor Antony is owned and received by the Church, particularly by the Pope,
the Synods of Augspurg and Ravenna; and continued in the Sea many years.. 2.
Basilius Camaterus, and Nicetas Muntanes, Patriarchs of Constantinople, deposed
without any Synod by the Emperor Isaacius Angelus, yet no Division in the
Church on their account.. 3, 4. The Patriarchs of the present Greek Church very
frequently deprived by the Turk, yet no Division in the Church. As great Reason
to submit to the present Possessor here, as in the Greek Church. The Necessity
the same. Page 170.

CHAP. XVI.
The Sentence of an Uncanonical Synod, esteemed by the A^tients invalid. S.
Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, unjustly and invalidly deposed by a
Synod. He declares however at first, against all Separation from the Church on
his Account. He afterward yields to Resentment, and refuses to Communicate
with his Successors, Arsacius, and Atticus, because they had been his Enemies,
and had a hand in his Deprivation. The Joannites acted by their Passions, not
by Principles. They separate from the Church, not because there was another
made Patriarch in S. Chrysostom's place, but before that was done. Arsacius
being made Patriarch they refuse to Communicate with him, not because he was
put into S. Chrysostom's place, but through Hatred against St. Chrysostom's
Deposers, because they frequented his Churches. Pope Innocent of Rome not
consistent with himself. His Practice contradicts his Words. He did not think
Arsacius and Atticus no Bishops. His Zeal for the Honor of his own See, the
chief Cause of his Opposing 'em. He at last receives Atticus as a true
Patriarch: The Vindicator's Exception against the Translation of the word (...)
in the Baroccian Treatise, confuted. The Eastern Bishops refuse to separate
from the Communion of the Church, though S. Chrysostom laid Claim to his See, and
actually separated, and though they esteemed his Deprivation invalid. So did the
Monks of Egypt. The Testimony of S. Nicon, out of a M.S. S. Nicon himself, though
he esteemed his Deprivation extremely unjust; yet approves of those that did
not separate on his Account. S. Chrysostom takes it for granted, as a thing of
Course, that all would immediately resolve to choose a new Patriarch in his
room. The Patriarch Atticus highly esteemed by the whole African Church. The
Ecclesiastical Historian, Socrates, disapproves of S. Chrysostom's Deprivation;
yet speaks of Arsacius and Atticus, as of true Patriarchs. Theodoret extremely
offended at the Injustice of his Deposers, yet reckons both Arsacius and
Atticus among the Patriarchs of Constantinople. They are both owned in all the
Catalogues of the Patriarchs. Their Ordinations never questioned by any.
Atticus praised by P. Celestine I. and owned to be a true Successor of S.
Chrysostom. Page 176.

CHAP. XVII.
Deprivations by Heretical Synods invalid. S. Eustathius, Patriarch of Antioch,
deposed by an Heretical Synod; he himself accounts his Deprivation invalid. The
Orthodox separate from the Communion of his Successors, not because he was
invalidly deprived, but because they accounted them Heretics. Eustathius acts
as Bishop of Antioch, though in banishment, as long as his Successors were
Heretics; but as soon as Meletius, an Orthodox Person, was ordained his
Successor, he desisted, and concerned himself no more as Bishop of Antioch.
That he lived till Meletius was made Patriarch, demonstrated against Baronius,
Valesius, etc. Why some of the Orthodox refused to submit to Meletius. The
Vindicator's Asse^rtion, That none accounted Meletius on Arian whilst he was
Bishop, confuted. The Schism between the Meletians and the Paulinists no
Example against us.. 1, 2. The Instance of Maximus and Cyril of Jerusalem
examined.. 3. Euphemius, Patriarch of Constantinople, deposed by an Heretical
Synod; yet Macedonius, an Orthodox and a good Man, accepts of his See, though he
owned him to be the rightful Patriarch. Macedonius is received by the
Catholics, though they loved Euphemius and accounted him unjustly deprived. He
is owned by S. Elias Bishop of Jerusalem, though Elias at the same time declared
Euphemius's Deprivation unjust, and refused to subscribe to it.. 4. The Schisms
of the Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians of Egypt, no Examples against us..
5. Two Fragments of Photius out of a M S.. 1, 3. Page 186.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion.
Bishops deposed by the Civil Authority obliged even in common Charity to
acquiesce. But whether they acquiesce or not, the Church is to submit to the
present Possessor. Page 196.

The CASE of SEES Vacant, by an Unjust or Uncanonical Deprivation, Stated, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Reasonableness of submitting to the present Possessor, if otherwise
unexceptionable, though the Predecessor was unjustly or invalidly deposed by the
Secular Power, demonstrated. Objections answered. No obligation to the contrary
by the Oath of Canonical Obedience. The Authority of S. Cyprian unreasonably
alleged by our Adversaries. The Vindicator's Notion of Heresy not at all to his
Purpose.

THE Doctrine maintained by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise, is this; That
supposing a Bishop deprived without any Synod by the Civil Power, is unjustly
deprived; yet neither He himself, nor the People, ought to separate from the
Communion of his Successor, provided that Successor is not a Heretic. In
answer to that Treatise, it is alleged by some of our Adversaries, That not
only Heresy, but Schism likewise, and Excommunication make a Person incapable
of being received as a Bishop. It is manifest, says one of our An Answer to a
Treatise out of Eccles. History, etc. in the Preface.
Answerers, that the Principles advanced by the Author of the Baroccian
Treatise, make all Church Censures ineffectual, and expose the Church to all
the Mischiefs of Erastianism. For if a Prince should prefer an excommunicated
Person to the Sea of the Bishop, by whom he stands excommunicated, supposing
only that he was not excommunicated for Heresy, this Person, though never so
justly excommunicated, must be owned and obeyed instead of the Bishop who
excommunicated him; which lodges all Church Power in the Prince, and makes all
Ecclesiastical Censures of no effect for the Benefit and Preservation of the
Church, whenever he pleases. All this He very well knew was nothing at all to
his Purpose, and nothing against either ours, or our Author's Cause: But he
likewise knew, it would have been less to his Purpose to have told his Reader
so. To avoid all impertinent Cavil, that we may not run off from the Scope and
Design of our Writing, I shall take leave to alter the last Clause of the
Proposition thus: Provided that Successor be in all other Respects such whose
Communion no good Catholic can justly refuse.

. 2. Having laid down fairly our Proposition, and secured it (if that may be
possible) from all Cavil, We will now proceed to demonstrate the Truth of it.
And this we shall do, first, from the Reasonableness of it; and, 2dly. from the
Authority and Practice of the Ancients; by which the Reasonableness of it will
more certainly and evidently appear.

. 3. First from the Reasonableness of it: And that is grounded on this certain
and self-evident Maxim, That whatsoever is necessary for the present Peace and
Tranquillity of the Church, that ought to be made use of, provided it is not in
it self sinful, and the ill Consequences, which may possibly attend it, are
either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least not so likely to happen as
the Evils we endeavor to avoid. That this was a Maxim of the Ancients, We
shall easily find, if we please but to cast our eyes back upon their Times, and
consider those Methods, which were wont to be made use of in the Church. We
shall find, that in all manner of Cases, They always preferred the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Church to all other Things, the Essentials of Religion
excepted. There was no Custom or Law of the Church so sacred and inviolable,
but what they readily sacrificed, whenever Necessity required, to the Peace
and Tranquillity of it. If the exact Observation of the received Customs and
Canons of the Church was not like to conduce to the present Peace and
Tranquillity of it, they were readily superseded, and Necessity and Convenience
became the only Legislators. To prefer a Rule of the Church to the Welfare
and Prosperity of it, and to stand to the Saying of a Father in Opposition to a
Law of Necessity, is a sort of Theological Pedantry, which They were not guilty
of. They were wont to consider like truly Wise men, the Circumstances and the
Exigencies of the Times; and they knew that those Customs and Canons of the
Church, which were proper in the Times of Peace, could never indispensably
oblige in Times of a different Complexion. To prevent, or to heal the Diseases
of the Church, they acted like Philosophers, not like Empericks; considered
what ought to be done in this and that particular Case; what was truly
expedient, not what had been prescribed when the Symptoms were not the same.
Though of all the General Councils, there was none so revered as the Nicene; and
though among all the Canons of that Council there was none so Religiously and so
Universally observed, as that which makes it unlawful for any one City to have
two Bishops; and although that had always been a S. Cypr. Ep. 55. ad Anton. Ergo
ille evangelii vindex, ignorabat unum Episcopum esse oportere in Ecclesia
Catholica, says Cornelius Bishop of Rome in his Epistle to Fabius of Antioch
Ap. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 43. concerning Novatian. To have two Bishops in one
and the same City is adversum fas Sacerdotii singularis, says Pacianus Epist.
3. ad Sympronianum Novatianum.
Rule of the Catholic Church long before the time of that Council; yet S.
Augustine, and all the other Catholic Bishops of Africa, thought fit to
Collat. Carthag. 1. c. 16.
propose that Expedient to their Adversaries the Donatists, for the putting an
End to their Schism. And the same Expedient was Theodoret Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
3.
proposed And by the Synod of Sirmium to the Clergy and People of Rome in the
Case of Felix and Liberius, as Sozomen says, l. 4. c. 15. but that Synod not
was not Orthodox, but Arian.
by Meletius Bishop of Antioch to the Anti-bishop Paulinus, for the putting an
End to that Schism that was between them. Thus when Queen Chrodielde of France
had made the Bishops Theodorus and Proculus Archbishops of Tours Gr^g. Turon.
Hist. l. 10. c. 31.
together, the whole Gallican Church (because they were both very old, and so
the Inconvenience of suffering it was not like to be so great as that of
opposing the Queen) very freely acknowedg'd 'em. And though it is expressly
forbidden by the aforesaid Can. 4.
Council of Nice, and likewise by the more ancient Canons or Rules of the
Church, That one Bishop alone should Ordain another; and three at least are
positively required by that Council, how great soever the Necessity may be;
though it were moreover unlawful for any one to be Ordained a Bishop without the
Consent of the Metropolitan, and a Bishop so Ordained is declared Can. 6.
by that Council incapable of governing as a Bishop: Yet when Siderius had been
ordained Bishop of Palebisca by Synesius Epist. 67.
the single Bishop of Cyrene (a bold and resolute Man, one who often
transgressed the Orders of his Superiors) and that too without the knowledge of
S. Athanasius the Metropolitan; because of the badness of the Times, (it being
in the Reign of the Arian Emperor Valens,) Athanasius allowed of his Orders:
and because he was Orthodox, he was so far from depriving him of his
Bishopric, that he preferred him to a greater. He (...).
yielded, says Synesius, to the Necessity of the Times. It Is a Saying of the
same Author, (himself a Bishop, and a very great Man,) where he speaks
concerning that Matter; viz. in one of his Epistles to the Patriarch of
Alexandria, Theophilus: (...).
In dangerous Times it is necessary not to observe Rules. Though nothing was more
unlawful than to be made a Bishop Simoniacally, or by the mere Force of the
Lay-power; and though (as the Author of the S. Silverius levatus est a Theodato
Tyranno sine deliberatione Decreti: qui Theodatus corruptus pecunia data talem
timorem induxit Clero, ut qui non consentiret in ejus Ordinationem gl^dio
puniretur. Qui quidem Sacerdotes non subscripserunt in eum secundum morem
antiquum vel Decretum confirmaverunt ante Ordinationem: Iam vero ordinato sub
vi and metu Silverio propter adunationem Ecclesiae and Religionis postmodum sic
subscripserunt Episcopi.
Pontifical attests) Silverius obtained the Popedom of Rome by both those
unlawful Means; yet after he was Ordained, the Peace of the Church requiring
it, he was owned and received by all. He had given a Sum of Money to the
Tyrant Theodatus, the King of the Goths, and the Tyrant threatened, that
whosoever refused to consent to his Election should be punished with Death. The
Bishops however refused to subscribe, and so he was made Pope without any
consent of theirs. But after he was Ordained (says the Author of the
Pontifical) they subscribed for the sake of the Unity of the Church and of
Religion. Though the Synod of C P. before whom the Patriarch Alexius was accused
for his having been promoted to that Dignity by the bare authority of the
Emperor, without the Votes of the Clergy, looked upon his Promotion to be
altogether unlawful; yet when he pleaded, that he had Ordained many Bishops,
and, that if they deprived him, they must likewise deprive all those whom he
had Ordained; upon that bare Zonaras Annal. p. 190.
Consideration, because to Deprive so many was likely to occasion a great
Disturbance in the Church, they overruled the Accusation, and determined
nothing against him. When Calendion was made Patriarch of Antioch by the
Emperor Zeno, and Ordained by Acacius the Patriarch of C P. though that
Simplicius Papa in Epist. ad Zenonem Imp.
was unlawful by the By which it is enacted, That all Bishops should be
Ordained by Bishops of their respective Provinces. Can. 4.
Canons of the Council of Nice, and directly contrary to the constant Custom of
the Catholic Church; yet because it was done, as the Emperor and Acacius
alleged, to avoid Seditions in Antioch, the Proceeding was approved of by
Simplicius Bishop of Rome. Though I wish, Epist. 16. ad Acacium. Quod sicut non
optavimus ficri, ita faciles excusationi quam necessitas fecit exstitimus; quia
quod voluntarium non est, non potest vocari in r^atum.
says he, that it had not been done, yet I easily excused it, because it was
done through Necessity: For that which is not voluntary (i.e. that which is
done only for Convenience or Necessity's sake) cannot be imputed as a Fault.
These Examples and Autorities may serve to show in general, That there are no
Laws or Customs of the Church so sacred, but what our Wise Forefathers thought
ought to be postpon'd to the present Welfare and Prosperity of it. That the
same was their Opinion in reference to our particular Case, We shall hereafter
show in its due Place.

. 4. Our Proposition being thus established on that sure Maxim, acknowledged
(as has been shown) by the Ancients; That whatsoever is necessary for the Peace
and Tranquillity of the Church, that ought to be made use of, provided that it
is not in it self Sinful; and that the ill Consequences, which may possibly
attend it, are either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least not so
likely to happen, as the Evils we endeavor to avoid. There are two Things
which I am obliged to make out; First, That the Submitting to a Bishop put into
the place of another unjustly Deposed by the Civil Authority, is not in itself
Sinful: And, 2dly. That the ill Consequences, to which it is liable, are
either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least not so likely to happen,
as the Evils we endeavor to avoid.

. 5. First, It is not in it self Sinful: For if it is so, it must be so for
one, or more, of these following Reasons: Either, first, because it is
forbidden by some express Law of God; Or, 2dly. because it makes us Accomplices
in the Injustice; Or, 3dly. because of the Oath of Canonical Obedience, which
the inferior Clergy have taken to their Bishop, and the inferior Bishops to
their Archbishop; Or, lastly, because, as one of our Adversaries, the learned
Vindicator, contends, such a Bishop as is placed in the room of one Deposed by
the Civil Authority, is in reality no Bishop. These Objections I shall consider
distinctly.

. 6. First, It is not against any Law of God. For as to our Case, the Scripture
is altogether silent. It Is true, it Commands us to be obedient to our
Governors, and that Command reaches as well to the Spiritual as to the
Temporal: But when there are two that stand Competitors, and both claim our
Obedience; to which of those two our Obedience ought to be paid, it leaves to
our Wisdom to determine.

. 7. Neither, 2dly. does it make us Accomplices in the Injustice. For if a
Landlord be unjustly and invalidly dispossessed of his Estate by an Incompetent
Authority, Who thinks the Tenant an Accomplice in the Injustice, because he pays
his Rent to the present Possessor? Should the Clergy refuse to submit to the
Bishops in possession, it could only serve to draw down Ruin upon themselves?
It cannot restore those whom the State has deposed. It is not our Submitting to
the present Possessors, that ejects the former; for they are already
irretrievably Deposed, since the Supreme Power is peremptory against 'em. That
has publicly declared, that, whoever are our Bishops, the old ones shall
govern us no longer. If we think the Proceeding unjust, it is enough that we
remonstrate against it, and express our dissatisfaction. If that will not do,
the Good of the Public obliges us to be quiet.

. 8. Neither, Thirdly, is it sinful on the account of the Oath of Canonical
Obedience. For that is taken not absolutely and unconditionally, but with this
Supposition, That the Bishop, to whom we take it, has power to govern us. If I
take an Oath, to be faithful or obedient to a Governor, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, I engage my self to him as a Governor, that is, as one that
can govern: If therefore he can no longer govern, whatsoever the Impediment is,
my Obedience is no longer engaged. As it is in the State, so it is in the
Church: The Oath that is taken to a Bishop, as he is the Governor of a Church,
is not taken for the sake of the Bishop, but for the Peace and good Order of
the Church. It Is this was the Design of the Church when she ordered such an
Oath to be taken. When therefore the Oath tends no longer to the Good of the
Church, but notoriously to Schism, Disorder, and Confusion, it cannot any
longer oblige: but is void of it self, by virtue of the Church's Intent and
Design in the first Institution of it.

It is further to be considered, that particularly here in the Church of
England, the Oath of Canonical Obedience is always taken with this Supposition,
That the Civil Power, as well as the Ecclesiastical, do allow the Bishop to
govern.

But let us suppose even that which in reason we ought not to suppose: Let us
suppose, that the Bishop intended that the Oath should always oblige.
Whatsoever was the Intent of the Bishop; That was not the Intent of the Church.
And it is the Intent of the Church, not the private Intent of the Bishop, that
gives an Obligation to the Oath. I add, That should it be both the Intent of
the Bishop, and likewise the Intent of the Person who takes the Oath, that it
should always oblige; should it run in these express words; I will always
adhere to you, if Deposed by the Civil Authority, in opposition to him,
whosoever he be, that shall be put into your place: Should any one, I say, take
such an Oath as that, yet he cannot be obliged by it. The Oath is in it self
unlawful; it is a Sin against the Public, repugnant to the Will and the
Welfare of the Church. It would be in effect to swear thus: I will for your
sake oppose the Welfare of the Public, and break the Union of the Church; I
will leave the Communion of the Church, and adhere to you, though I have not any
Reason to do so besides this bare Oath. To conclude; Whatsoever is notoriously
repugnant to the Church's interest, so as to be necessarily productive of very
great Evils, is so far from being obliging, that it would be a Sin to act
according to it.

It is granted by our Adversaries, that the Obligation of an Oath of Canonical
Obedience ceases, if a Bishop is deprived, though never so unjustly by a Synod:
Now what is the Reason of that? It Is because to adhere to a Bishop, when a
Synod has fully deposed him, and placed another in his See, must occasion a
Division in the Church, and disturb the Public. If that is the Reason, as no
one can assign any other, (at least there can be none but what is grounded on
that,) then the Reason is the same in both Cases: and consequently in both
Cases the Oath will be equally void. It Is in vain to allege, That in the Case
of a Synod we cease to be obliged by our Oath, because every Bishop is supposed
to have obliged himself to submit to the Determination of a Synod, whether just
or unjust; and therefore when a Synod has Deposed him, though by an unjust
sentence, his Place is truly void by virtue of his supposed Consent: For
suppose a Bishop should have always declared, that he never would give his
Consent, that a Synod should have Power to Depose him by an unjust Sentence:
ought we not however to submit to the new Constituted Bishop? Our Adversaries
will tell us, that we ought. But why? It Is because the Necessity of Government
and the Peace of the Church requires it. Well then; it is certain, that it is
not the Bishop's Consent, but Necessity and the Good of the Public that makes
our Oath void.

Though in some Respects there is a great deal of Difference between what is done
by a competent or a lawful Authority, and what is done by an incompetent or an
unlawful Authority: yet, as to our Acquiescence, in a Case of Necessity, such
as is here supposed, I can see no Difference at all. The Obligation to
acquiesce is the same in both Cases, when in both Cases the Necessity is the
same. If a Lord be dispossessed of his Manor by an Incompetent Authority that
cannot be resisted, (a Conqueror, suppose, or an unlawful Court) Who thinks
the Tenant forsworn for submitting to the new Possessor? Who makes any
difference there between a Competent and an Incompetent Authority? And why is
the Tenant in such a Case not forsworn? If he cannot (or ought not to) oppose
the Intruder, yet ought he not at least to give up his Estate, rather than
submit and do Homage to the wrong Lord? 'Twill be granted, I presume, by our
Adversaries, that he is neither obliged to oppose the Intruder, nor yet to give
up his Estate. But why does the Oath, which he took to the rightful Lord,
cease to oblige him? It Is because when he took the Oath, he took it only on
this Supposition, That the Lord was Possessed of the Manor. The Peace and
Tranquillity of the Public, and the Good of Tenants in general give that
Restriction to the Oath.

If the Bishop of a Frontier Town will not own the Authority of a Conqueror, and
is therefore Deposed by that Conqueror, I desire to know of our Adversaries,
whether the Clergy of that Town are perjured if they own that Bishop whom the
Conqueror thinks fit to set over 'em? If a Bishop should by the Civil Power be
condemned to perpetual and close Imprisonment, or be banished forever from his
Country, so as that it is impossible for him to perform the Duties of a Bishop:
or should he be carried away Captive we know not where, or from whence we
cannot redeem him: What then? Are we still obliged by our Oath, because he was
Deposed by no Synod? When in the Beginning of the 3d. Century, Eusebius. Hist
Eccl. l. 6. c. 10.
Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, had secretly withdrawn himself, and no Body
knew what was become of him, left the Church should be without the Assistance
of a Bishop, there was presently a new one Ordained. How their Bishop was lost,
they knew not: 'Twas enough that he was gone, and did not any longer Officiate.
The Church, says S. Chrysostom, cannot be without a Bishop. That he said to his
People, when he himself was to be carried away into Banishment; and on that
account he advises 'em to accept of another for their Bishop.

I easily foresee what will be the Reply of our Adversaries. They will tell us,
That in such Cases we ought to presume, that the Bishop gives his Consent that
his Successor should be acknowledged: That therefore the Oath does no longer
oblige, because there is a rational Presumption, that the banished, the
imprisoned, or the captive Bishop, and He of the Frontier Town, do remit the
Obligation of it. To this I answer: 1. It is indeed to be presumed, that a good
Bishop, one that can say with Orat. 28. (...).
S. Gregory, then Bishop of C P. I seek not yours, but you, will readily forego
his own Interest for the Welfare and Prosperity of his Flock: And since our
ejected Bishops, who are (I am fully persuaded) very worthy and good Men, and
real Lovers of their People, have never by any public signification of their
Will, laid claim to the Obedience of their People, and do not now exercise
their Episcopal Power as before; in reason we ought to presume that they give
their Consent that their Successors should be acknowledged. But, 2dly. let it
be supposed, that the outed Governor does expressly assure his Inferiors, that
he does not give his Consent, but still lays Claim to their Obedience. Suppose
the conquered, the banished, the imprisoned, or the captive Bishop should
charge his People expressly upon their Oath never to accept of any other Bishop
as long as by the common Course of Nature he himself may be supposed to be
living, or till they be assured he is dead: Let this I say be supposed, (and
easy it is to be supposed,) What must be done in such Cases? Is the Church
perjured if she accepts of another? Will our Adversaries say that she is? A
hard Saying! Who can bear it? This Presumption of the ejected Governor's
Consent is (I know) what is commonly alleged by some very learned and otherwise
judicious Men, as the true and the only foundation of Acquiescence when the
lawful Governor is unjustly Deposed by a Power incompetent: But that that is
not the true and the only foundation, these Difficulties which I have alleged
do (methinks) abundantly demonstrate. Other Men I must leave to their own ways
of Thinking. For my part, I cannot imagine, that the Welfare and Prosperity of
Mankind does depend upon so ticklish and uncertain a Point as that of an
ejected Governor's Consent: That, if he refuses to give his Consent, all the
Church or the Nation must be made a Sacrifice to him. It is easy to discover,
upon how false a Principle that Notion is built. It is grounded on this, That
the Oath that is taken to the Governor, is taken only for his sake; when if
the true End and Design of Government were duly and impartially considered, it
would be found (as above I observed) that the Oath that is taken to the
Governor, is taken not only for his Good, but chiefly for the Good of the
Public; and that any Oath taken to a Governor that is notoriously and in a
high degree repugnant to the Good and Prosperity of the Public, so as to be
necessarily productive of intolerable Evils, is in its own Nature void; because
by the Public it was never designed that in such a Case it should oblige.

By the Author of a Treatise entitled; Unity of Priesthood necessary to the
Unity of Communion, there are two Examples produced, to show how observant the
Ancients were of their Oath of Canonical Obedience; which the Author calls
eminent Instances, and proposes 'em to the Consideration of the Bishops of our
Church, and wishes they would seriously apply 'em. The first is that of Ivo
Bishop of Chartres in France, who flourished about 600 years ago. He being one
of the Suffragans of the Archbishop of Sens, was desired by the Bishop of
Lions, who was likewise the Pope's Legate, to assist him at the Consecration of
the Bishop of Nivers: but the Bishop of Nivers being a Suffragan to the said
Archbishop of Sens; and that Archbishop having In those days the Pope's power
of Ordaining Bishops in another District, without the Consent of the
Metropolitan, was not owned by the Western Church.
never given his Consent that the Bishop of Lions should Ordain a Bishop of his
District, Ivo refuses to assist at the Consecration: And this is the reason he
gives for it; Because if he should engage in such an undertaking, he should be
unfaithful to his own Metropolitan, and betray the Privileges allowed that
Church by the Canons as a Metropolitical Church, which by Oath he was obliged
to maintain; Reus sieret violatae sponsionis quam Sedi Metropolitanae secerat.
If the Archbishop of York had pretended to Constitute a Bishop of the Province
of Canterbury, without the Consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and a
Suffragan of the Province of Canterbury had assisted in that Ordination, our
Bishops would then have been able to apply this eminent Instance. But as the
Case stands, they know not, I believe, how to do it: And the Author is desired,
that he himself, if he can, would be pleased to apply it. The other Instance is
that of the Bishops of our own Country in the Reign of William II. There
arising a great Difference between the King and Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury
about acknowledging the Pope, Whether the Archbishop could lawfully do it
without the King's Consent? The Matter was referred to the Parliament, and the
Bishops being by the King required to deprive the Archbishop, they answered,
says Eadmerus, Dolemus quod animo tuo, Domine, satisfacere non valemus. Primas
est non modo istius regni, sed and Scotiae, and Hiberni^e, necnon adjacentium
Infularum, nosque Suffraganei ejus, unde patet nos rationabiliter eum judicare
vel damnare nullatenus posse, etiamsi aliqua culpa in eo, qu^e modo non valet,
possit ostendi. P 30.
That that they could not do, because he was their Metropolitan. It Is hard to
conjecture what our Author intended by proposing this Example as worthy
Consideration: unless it be that an Archbishop of Canterbury should be now
above all Deprivation. He contends in his Treatise, that a Bishop ought not to
be Deprived, but by Bishops; and hereby producing this Example (if he means any
thing at all) he intimates, That an Archbishop cannot be Deprived by the
Bishops his Suffragans, because of their Oath of Obedience. But whatever was
our Author's meaning: certain it is, that it was not because of the Oath of
Obedience that the Bishops refused to Deprive Anselm, as the King would have
had 'em; but because they had at They had before promised the King to Deprive
Anselm; but, I know not how, on a sudden they took up that Opinion, which
before was never heard of amongst the Bishops of England: Protinus
intellexerunt (says Eadmerus, who was there present) quod prius non
animadverterunt, nec ipsum advertere posse putaverant; viz. Archiepiscopum
Cant. a nullo hominum, nisi a solo Papa, judicari posse vel damnari, nec ab
aliquo cogi pro quavis calumnia cuiquam, eo excepto, contra suum Velle
respondere. P. 29.
that time an Opinion amongst 'em, that a Primate or Metropolitan could be
judged and deprived by no one but the Pope. So far were they from thinking
themselves obliged by their Oath not to Deprive him, that it is very Ait Rex,
Quid igitur restat? Si eum judicare non potestis, nonne sa^em omnis obedientiae
fidem ac frarernae societatis amicitiam ei denegare potes^is? Hot quidem,
inqulunt, quoniam jubes, facere possumus. Properate igitur and quod dicitis
citi^^ facits, ut cum viderit se a cunctis despectum ac desolatum verecumdetur
and ingemiscat se Urbanum, me Domino suo contempto, secutum. Et quo ista
securius faciatis, En ego prium in imperio meo penitus ei omnem securitatem,
and siduciam mei tollo, ac deinceps in illo vel de illo nulla in causa
considere, vel eum pro Archiepiscopo aut Patre spirituali tenere volo. --
Sociatis sibi Abbatibus ( adds Eadmerus) Episcopi retulerunt Patri quod dixerat
Rex, suam, pro voto illius, abnegationem ingerentes. -- Cum propterea (answers
the Archbishop) quod me ad B. Petri Principis Apostolorum subjectionem ac
fidelitatem teneo, mihi omnem subjectionem, fidem, and amicitiam, quam Primati
vestro and Patri spirituali debetis, abnegatis, non recle proceditis.
notorius, that though he was not Deprived, yet they threw off all Obedience, and
renounced their Subjection to him.

. 9. We are next to consider that Objection which is made by the learned
Vindicator, That a Bishop put into the place of another, deposed by the
Lay-power, is in reality no Bishop. If this is true, then it must be granted,
that we cannot be obliged for the sake of Union and Peace, to adhere to the
present Possessor. This indeed is the Difference between our Civil and our
Ecclesiastical Governors. The former are purely Governors, and nothing more is
required in them but to be capable of Governing; The latter are not only
Governors, but are likewise the Administrators of Sacraments, and the sole
Ordainers of the Clergy. It is therefore necessary, not only that the
Ecclesiastical Governor should be duly qualified for Government, but that he
should be likewise endued by God Almighty with the Power of Ordaining, and of
administering the holy Sacraments. Thus much must be granted: Let us now see
what Argument the Vindicator can produce to degrade our present Possessors, and
to prove 'em no Bishops. It is nothing but a Saying of S. Cyprian that is
nothing at all to his Purpose. The Saying is this: That a second Bishop is no
Bishop. It Is strange methinks, that so great and so worthy a Man, should
pretend to raise so great and so extraordinary a Structure upon so weak a
Foundation. The Occasion of the Saying was this: Novatian, a private Presbyter,
had raised a Schism against Cornelius the lawful Bishop of Rome; he had got
himself to be ordained Bishop, though Cornelius had never been deposed, was still
the Possessor, and acknowledged the true and the only Bishop of Rome by all
the Churches of the World, both the Western, the Eastern, and the African; and
Novatian was by all condemned as a rank and notorious Schismatic. S. Cyprian,
who was always very zealous for the Unity of the Church, thus expresses
himself, in his Epistle to Epist. 55. Quo (gradu Cathedr^e Sacerdotalis)
occupato de Dei voluntate, atque omnium nostrum consensione firmato; quisquis
jam Episcopus fi^ri voluevit, foris fiat necesse est; nec habeat Ecclesiasticam
Ordinationem qui Ecclesiae non tenet unitatem; quisquis ille suerit multum de
se licet jactans, and sibi plurimum vindicans; profanus est, alienus est, foris
est. Et cum post primum secundus esse non possit; quisquis post unum qui solus
esse debeat, factus est; non jam secundus ille, sed nullus est.
Antonianus, concerning him. Cornelius, says he, being possessed of the Sea
according to the Will of God, and confirmed in it by the Consent of us all;
whoever would now be a Bishop of that See, must needs be out of the Church;
neither can he have any Ecclesiastical Orders, who does not continue in Unity
with the Church. Whosoever he is, whatsoever he may boast of himself or pretend
to, he is a profane Person, an Alien, and not of the Church: And since there
cannot be a second Bishop, where another is already in possession; whosoever is
made Bishop after another, who ought to be alone, he is not a second, but none.
This is the place out of which the learned Vindicator is pleased to draw his
Argument; with how Logical an Inference the judicious Reader may see. It Is
strange that That excellent Person should be so much blinded with Prejudice, as
not to be able to discover how vast a difference there is between the Case of
our Present Bishops, and that of which S. Cyprian discourses. Had Cornelius
been deposed by the Emperor for refusing to acknowledge his Authority, we have
all the reason in the world to believe, That his Deprivation would have been
looked upon by S. Cyrrian as very reasonable and just. But let us still grant,
as we first supposed in our Question, That he ought not to have been deprived
by the Emperor himself, but by Bishops: Yet if he had been deprived for
refusing to acknowledge the Emperor's Authority; or if he had been upon any
other account so deprived by the Imperial Authority, as that it would have been
impossible for him to exercise his Episcopal jurisdiction; Is it possible for
any wise and unprejudiced Man to imagine, That S. Cyprian would have thought so
ill of Novatian and his Adherents, as he did? If an Enemy of the Roman Empire,
suppose the King of Persia, should in S. Cyprian's time have taken a Frontier
City, and the Bishop of that City should have been deposed by him for refusing
to submit to his Authority, Who can believe that That great and wise Man S.
Cyprian, would have declared a new Bishop no Bishop, and all his Adherents
Schismatical? That a second, that is, a Schismatical Bishop, an Invader of a
See already filled and possessed, is no Bishop, is confessed to be S. Cyprian's
Doctrine: But that our Bishops are, in the Sense of S. Cyprian, the Invaders of
a See already filled and possessed, that they are secundi in his Sense, is what
we utterly deny. Not a Word, not a Hint in S. Cyprian, from whence such a thing
can be inferred. The Vindicator may be pleased to consider, that our present
Possessors did not set up themselves in opposition to such as were possessed of
their Sees; but before they pretended to be Bishops, their Predecessors were
made by the Supreme Civil Power incapable of Governing, i. e. were Deposed.
Again, he ought to consider that our present Possessors were so far from
ambitiously invading, like Novatian, the Sees of others, that they were all
chose by their respective Churches according to the usual manner; viz. in the
same manner that their Predecessors themselves had been. Let us hold up the
Picture, which the Vindicator has been pleased to draw, to a true Light; and
then we shall the better see what a strange Figure it is. The Vindicator's
Enthymeme is this:

S. Cyprian says, that he is no Bishop, but a Schismatic, who ambitiously
invades a See which another is fully possessed of. Therefore,

S. Cyprian thought, that he is no Bishop, but a Schismatic, who is chosen by
the Church, according to the usual manner, into the place of another, whom the
Civil Power will not suffer to govern any longer, because he refuses to own its
Authority.

I add, That if a Bishop be a Secundus, and no Bishop, who is put into the
place of one unjustly deposed by the Civil Authority; then it likewise must
follow, that he is a secundus, and no Bishop, who is put into the place of
another whom a Synod has unjustly deposed. But this the learned Vindicator will
neither himself grant; neither does he, I suppose, believe that S. Cyprian
thought so. I say that must follow, if we seriously consider the Matter: For
the only good Reason assignable, why in the former Case, the Successor is a
secundus, and no Bishop, is this; Because the Predecessor has still a Right to
the Bishopric. Now it is certain, that the Reason is the same in the latter
Case: For a Bishop, whom a Synod has unjustly deprived, has still as much Right
to his Bishopric, as a Bishop invalidly deposed by the Civil Authority. For to
me it is absurd, that any unjust Sentence should take away the Right: though, the
Nature of Government requiring it, it is oftentimes necessary that we should
submit to such a Sentence. And this (if I am not mistaken) is the common Sense
of Mankind. When a Bishop is unjustly deprived by a Synod, we submit to his
Successor; not because we imagine, that the other has no longer a Right, but
only for Peace sake. That a Bishop unjustly deprived by a Synod, has still a
Right to that Bishopric, as well as a Bishop deposed by an Incompetent
Authority, may be clearly demonstrated from this, That after he is deprived, he
may be again restored, and his Successor be deposed by Appeal to another Synod:
(and yet the ejected Successor is accounted a true Bishop:) Now is that done
justly or not? There is no one will say it is not: And yet it is impossible
that the Successor should be justly deprived, if the other had no Right.

To conclude: That a Bishop, who is put into the place of another, unjustly
deprived by the Secular Power, is a real and true Bishop, will by and by appear
by the Opinion and the Practice of the Ancients in general. Let us now proceed
to demonstrate, that, as the submitting to a Bishop, whose Predecessor was
unjustly deposed by the Civil Authority, is not in it self a Sin; so the ill
Consequences to which it may be liable, are either not so mischievous to the
Church, or not so likely to happen as the Evils we endeavor to avoid.

. 10. The Evils we endeavor to avoid are a Schism and a persecution; two Evils
as great as can possibly befall the Church. And that those two very great Evils
must needs be the certain and the immediate Consequences of a nonsubmission, is
too evident to any Considering Man to need any Proof. If the ill Consequences,
to which a submission may be liable, are so great as those two Evils, but not
so certain; or if they are so certain, but not so great, it must then be
granted that, with respect to Consequences, a Submission is more reasonable
than a Non-submission. Now if we consider those evil Consequences which may
justly be charged upon the Submission, we shall find that they are so far from
being both so great and so certain, that they are neither so great nor so
certain, as those two Evils, which, by a Non-submission, must unavoidably be
brought upon the Church.

So far indeed is the Principle, which we maintain, from being necessarily
attended with any very ill Consequence, that it is not easy to foresee any
Consequence at all that is Evil. As it is for the Good, the Peace, and
Prosperity of the Church, that we think our selves obliged to comply, upon
occasion, with the Necessity of Times: So if ever the Civil Power (which to
fear in this Reign would be very unjust and unreasonable) should pretend to
break in upon the Essentials of the Church, we should then be obliged not to
yield to such Impositions. ^^ the evil Day must needs come, (which God forbid!)
we will keep it off as long as we can. When it necessarily comes, as now we
show our Prudence, so we'll prove our Fortitude. Not to endeavor to escape
from Damascus when a Basket is fairly offered, would be Folly in an Apostle:
And to run on to Martyrdom, when it honestly may be avoided, is, according to
the Sanctions of the Primitive Christians, a Sin. Should a Person absolutely
unqualified be imposed upon us for a Bishop, we are not then to accept him. If
a Roman Decius would depose all our Bishops, and not permit us to constitute
others in their places, that so he may destroy our Religion, we are not then to
regard either what he does or commands. As the Romans, upon the Martyrdom of
Fabian, though, to avoid the Fury of a Persecution, The Roman Clergy for that
reason deferred the Election of Cornelius (above 16 Months) as they tell S.
Cyprian in a Letter; but as soon as the Emperor had left Rome, they chose
Cornelius Bishop.
Propter rerum and temporum difficultates, we might possibly deferr the
Election; yet as soon as we thought it convenient, we would choose a Cornelius
Bishop notwithstanding the Tyrant's Decrees. If an Heretical King Frazamund
should command us not to Ordain any Bishops, that so the Catholic Religion may
of Course be rooted out, and his Heresy only prevail, we would then no more
value that Command than the Catholics heretofore did; but in spite of his
Edict, would get as many Bishops ordained as we thought convenient for the
Church. But how can our Case be compared with either of these? Here is no
forbidding Elections, no deposing all Bishops in general, no imposing
unqualified Persons, no destroying of Religion, no advancing of Heresy. The
only Question here is, Whether Paul or Apollos may be followed, when Cephas is
in Prison, and is rendered incapable of acting as an Apostle? Our Adversaries
are resolved to have Cephas; If they cannot have him, they will neither have
Christ. To us it is altogether indifferent, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
as long as we have Christ.

There is only one Inconvenience that I can possibly foresee, which can justly
be charged on this Principle which we advance; and that is this: That by a
Submission to the present Possessor, the Civil Governor is like to be
encouraged to tyrannize over the Church, and to turn out such Bishops as he
does not like, whenever he pleases, though never so unjustly. If that be the
Objection of our Adversaries; I answer, First, That the same Inconvenience is
in all manner of Government: By submitting to a Bishop who is put into the
place of another, whom a Synod has unjustly deposed, that Synod may be possibly
encouraged to turn out others unjustly, as many as it does not like, though never
so worthy. Secondly, That here in England it is not the Will of the Prince that
can turn out a Bishop. He has all the same Securities that another Subject can
have, and he cannot be deprived of his Bishopric without a due Course of Law.
If they mean that the King and the Parliament may by that be encouraged to
Depose our Bishops at pleasure, that Supposition will be wild and extravagant.
For who can imagine, that they can ever concur for the Deprivation of a
Bishop, but upon a very extraordinary Occasion? There is nothing can be more
manifest, than that this Inconvenience is not so likely to happen as those
Evil's we endeavor to avoid. These are certain and present, That only
possible. But, Thirdly, should we grant (what in reason cannot be granted) that
it is as likely to happen: yet how great is the Difference? Should the State
here, or in other Countries one single absolute Governor, be supposed to be so
very dissolute, as to turn out frequently the Bishops of the Church without any
just Cause; yet who can look upon that Mischief to be comparable to that of a
Schism and a Persecution? What can the suffering of a few particular Men be,
when compared to the Peace and Tranquillity of the whole Church besides? Our
Adversaries may be pleased to consider, That it was not for the Bishops that
the Church was established; but the Bishops were appointed for the sake of the
Church. It is not therefore the Welfare of the Bishops, as the Bishops are
these or those Men, much less of some few particular Bishops, but the Welfare
of the whole Church in general that is chiefly to be regarded.

. 11. And thus, I hope, I have sufficiently made out what I proposed to prove,
That the submitting to a Bishop, who is put into the place of another unjustly
deposed by the Civil Authority, is neither in it self a Sin, nor liable to ill
Consequences so likely to happen as the Evils we endeavor to avoid; or, if so
likely to happen, not so great and pernicious to the Church as those are. From
whence it necessarily follows, That such a Submission is in it self highly
reasonable. Which was the first Proposition we proposed to be demonstrated. I
come now to the Second General proposed to be made out, That such a Submission
is agreeable to the Practice of the Ancients.

. 12. But before I put an end to this Chapter, and proceed to the Proof of this
last Proposition, there remains yet one thing more to be considered, and that
is the Imputation of Heresy, which the learned Vindicator is pleased to fix
upon us. Any Opinion, says the Vindicator, on account of which Men separate
from their Ecclesiastical Governors, is Heretical, though it be not in its own
nature so: And such an Opinion is not Heretical only, when Men designedly
separate from others on that very account, because they are not of that
Opinion; but also when they venture on such Practices on account of that
Opinion, wherein others cannot communicate with 'em; for that very reason,
because they cannot join with 'em in that Opinion. Then plainly the differing
in such Opinions, makes a difference of Communion unavoidable; and therefore
the Opinions themselves, in such a Case as this is, are Signals of different
Communions, which will come under the Charge of Heresy. His meaning is, that
We, maintaining this Opinion, That the Civil Power has Authority to depose a
Bishop for a Political Crime; or, if it has no such Authority, when once it has
deposed a Bishop, it is lawful to acknowledge the Successor; and in
consequence of that Opinion, submitting now to the present Possessors, are
therefore Heretics, because He and his Party cannot join with us in that
Practice, as being of the contrary Opinion. Here it comes into my mind, what S.
Ierom somewhere says, That he that can with Patience hear himself called
Heretic, is no good Christian. This is true of those Heresies which were so in
the Opinion of the Ancients: But in this Case we dare to be patient. Ego tibi
Haereticus tu mihi: That Is all the Return we shall make. The Vindicator, in
consequence of his Opinion, that the Civil Authority has no power to depose a
Bishop; and that if a Bishop is so deposed; his Successor ought to be rejected,
though otherwise never so worthy, adheres to the Bishops deprived, and disowns
those that are put into their places. In this Practice of the Vindicator we
cannot join with him; and for that very reason, because we cannot join with him
in his Opinion. And what now follows from our Author's Notion of Heresy, but
that he himself is a Heretic? It is nothing at all to our Purpose: But for his
own sake I shall here take upon me to add, (with a pace maximi Viri) That this
Notion of Heresy is a groundless and a fancyfull Notion. That he may be
properly called a Heretic, who separates from the Church, because the Church
is not of his Opinion, though the Opinion is not at all in its own nature
Heretical, I grant: For there is a sort of Heresy which is not sinful on the
account of the Opinion maintained, but only because it is a separation from
the Church. But this I assert in opposition to what is laid down by the
Vindicator, That to all Heresy (as the word is strictly taken to denote a Sin
contradistinct to Schism) it is necessary that there be an Opinion maintained;
which either the Church condemns, or for which the Person that maintains it,
does of himself separate from the Church. If it be not for any Opinion that the
Vindicator is divided from the Church, but only for what is done by the
Church, he cannot be called, in a strict sense, a Heretic, but only a
Schismatic.

. 13. But to wave this Dispute, as not at all material, and to suffer the
Vindicator, if he pleases, to enjoy his Notion; What now is the Life he would
make of it? What is his Design in advancing it? The Life he makes of it is
this: He alleges the aforesaid Heresy as a Reason for their Separation. He
tells us, That we being guilty of Heresy, they ought by our own Concessions to
keep off from our Communion, because we our selves acknowledge that Heresy is a
just cause of Separation. Though we should admit, says he, that the Author of the
Baroccian Treatise had been successful in all that he has attempted: we may
yet justify our adherence to the deprived Bishops, and our Separation from our
Adversaries opposite Altars, and justify it too by the Doctrine of their own
Author: for even he permits a Separation where Orthodoxy is concerned, and
expressly excepts this Case from the Number of those which he pretends to
confute. An Heretical Bishop he calls a false Bishop, etc. It Is strange that
the worthy and learned Vindicator should be so much out in his Logic, as not
to see the Inconsistency of what he alleges, and to offer this as a reason for
their not communicating with us! If it is their not communicating with us that
makes our Opinion Heretical, and us Heretics; how do they refuse to
communicate with us for this reason, because we are Heretics? We could not be
Heretics according to the Vindicator's own Notion, 'till they had refused to
communicate with us. So dangerous a thing it is, First to do a thing rashly,
and then to hunt for a Reason! If this Plea of our Author is good, I would very
fain know how any Separation can be proved to be unlawful. Let our Author
stand out a little, and dispute with our old Dissenters. He asks a Dissenter,
why he separates from the Church? The Dissenter tells him it is, because the
Church is Heretical. But why Heretical? Because she thinks it lawful to oblige
her Members to the use of Ceremonies, and pursuant to that Opinion she actually
imposes the use of 'em. In the use of these Ceremonies (says the Dissenter) we
cannot join with you; and for that very reason, because we cannot join with you
in this Opinion, That the Church has power to impose upon its Members the use
of Ceremonies: And because we cannot join with the Church in this Opinion and
Practice, upon that very account the Church is Heretical. Thus according to our
Author's own Plea: but the Plea would be vain and Illogical.

. 14. But this is not all: We are not only Heretics upon that account, but,
as the Vindicator contends, we are Heretics likewise (as Heresy signifies an
erring) even in Fundamentals. He affirms, that our Opinion is a fundamental
Error, because (as he says) it is utterly destructive of the Church, as the
Church is a Society distinct from the State. To maintain this Opinion, That for
Political Crimes a Bishop may be lawfully Deprived by the Civil Authority: Or
this, That supposing he cannot be lawfully so deprived; yet if he is deprived,
it is lawful for Peace-sake to submit to his Successor: How that is
destructive of the Church, as the Church is a Society, I, for my part, cannot
perceive. To me it is much more apparent, that to advance this Opinion, That a
Bishop cannot be deprived by the Civil Authority for any Crime whatsoever, is
destructive of all Civil Government, which, as well as the Ecclesiastical, is
of God's Institution. He therefore that advances that Notion, advances a very
dangerous Notion. But it is not my Business at present to engage in these
Disquisitions. I shall only make bold to ask the Vindicator a few Questions.
If he thinks that Opinion, concerning the Power of the Magistrate, a
fundamental Heresy, and enough to justify the present Separation, how came it
to pass that he did not leave the Communion of those, whom he knew to be the
Maintainers of that Opinion, before this time? I will ask him one Question
more: If the late Bishops should be again restored, would he then refuse to
communicate with those who advance that Opinion? If he would not; then it is
certain, that he does not think that enough to justify the present Separation.
One more, and then I have done. I desire to know, if our Author knows none of
his own Communion, who themselves acknowledge the Power of the Supreme Civil
Governor to depose a Bishop for Political Crimes? It Is strange if he should be
ignorant of what every body knows: And it is to be believed, that the Fathers
themselves of his own Communion, at least some of 'em, agree with us in this
Opinion, which the Church of England has all along to this time accounted
Orthodox, though the Vindicator is pleased to declare it a Heresy.

But enough, and too much, of these Matters. We will leave our much honored
Adversary to invent some other new Notion more consistent, and more useful for
his Cause: And will now proceed to enquire how Heretical our Forefathers were
in thinking it lawful to adhere to the present Possessor, and in acting
accordingly.

CHAP. II.
That the Jewish Highpriests, who were put into the places of others
(unjustly) Deposed by the Civil Authority, were all along owned and received as
true Highpriests. An Account of all those Highpriests, from the Reign of King
Solomon, to the Destruction of Jerusalem. The Instance of Abiathar and Zadok
nicely examined. The Practice of the Jews, and God's Approbation of such
Highpriests a sufficient Warrant to us. TO make it appear, that the general
Practice of the Ancients, throughout all Ages, was agreeable to ours; I shall
first show, That the same was the Practice of the Jews throughout all Ages in
reference to their Highpriests: whom S. Cyprian, and others of the Fathers,
are wont to compare to our Bishops. Secondly, I shall show, That our Savior
himself, and his Apostles, acknowledged and communicated with the Highpriests
of the Jews, as true Highpriests, though put into the places of others unjustly
turned out by their Governors. By which they seem to instruct us, what we ought
to do in relation to our Bishops or Highpriests. And, Thirdly, I shall show,
That the same has been all along the general Practice of the ancient Christians.

. 2. I begin with the Jews: But before I proceed to Examples, I think it
convenient to prevent an Objection that may possibly be made. This perhaps may
be the Plea of our Adversaries, in answer to the Examples of the Jewish
Highpriests, That the Office of a Bishop amongst us is of a nature much more
Spiritual, than the Office of those Highpriests. To that Plea I answer; That
he that considers the true and full Import of the Question now before us, will
find it to be no other than this: Whether a Person duly invested with an
Ecclesiastical Office of God's own Institution and Ordinance, being Deposed by
the Lay-power, any other can lawfully succeed in that Office? Now as to God's
particular Institution and Appointment, whatsoever otherwise the Difference may
be, (which it is needless for us to contend about,) it is certain that the
Jewish Highpriests were rather superior than inferior to our Bishops. 'Twas by
God himself, and that too in a very extraordinary manner, that the Office of
the High Priest was instituted; and it was from God alone that he received his
Authority. If therefore a Person was accepted of by God as a true and real
High Priest, though put into the room of another Deposed by the Civil Authority,
then a Bishop likewise may be truly a Bishop, and accordingly ought to be
received, though put into the place of a Bishop deposed by that Power.

To this I add, That the Annual Expiation for the Sins of the whole People was
to be performed by the High Priest. This was the chief of the federal Rites of
that Religion, and that to which our Savior's offering himself up a Sacrifice
is particularly compared in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And this they did ex
opere operato; so that it was of the greatest Consequence to the Jews to have
this Divine Institution performed by one appointed to it by God. And though no
provision was made for Cases of Necessity, yet Necessity was understood to be a
provision for itself. And it is certain these Annual Expiations were accepted
of God till our Savior's days; for that is a certain Consequence of their
being still in Covenant with God, since these Expiations were the yearly
renewing of that Covenant. Nor can any of the Performances of the Christian
Priesthood be compared to this, unless we believe the Power of
Transubstantiating. These Examples of the Jewish Highpriests alone, were there
no other to be alleged, would sufficiently warrant our Submission to our
present Possessors. Let us now see what Examples those are.

. 3. Our first Example is that of the first High Priest that ever we know to
have been deposed, viz. of Abiathar. He was After he had been High Priest 40
years, viz. during all the Reign of King David.
deposed by the bare Authority of King Solomon, for having adhered to Adonijah
his elder Brother, (as small a fault as could be of that nature) though
afterward he had submitted, and acknowledged King Solomon's Authority as soon
as ever he was made King. Though Abiathar was thus deposed, yet Zadok being by
the And the King pur Benaiah in the room of Ioab over the Host, and Zadok the
Priest did the King put in the room of Abiathar, 1 Kings 11.35.
same Authority placed in his room, all the Nation of the Jews, both Priests and
People, submit themselves to him, and own him as High Priest. Even the Sons of
the deposed Abiathar, Jonathan and Ahimelech, act as Priests under Zadok.
Josephus in his Jewish Antiquities has observed, that this was the first
Instance of a High Priest deposed. From the beginning, says he, L. 20. c. 8. He
does not speak thus in express Terms, but to a considering Reader that knows
the Story of Abiathar's being deposed by King Solomon, it will plainly appear
to be his meaning.
for 13 Successions there was no High Priest put into the room of another,
unless deceased; after that some began to be constituted whilst their
Predecessors were living. What is said by some of the Rabbis concerning the
Deprivation of Phineas, the Grandson of Aaron, was altogether unknown Though
Phineas's Posterity were put by when Ithamar's obtained the High Priesthood,
yet we ought not to conclude from thence, as the Rabbis usually do, That
Phineas himself was deposed: For it might be done after his death.
to Josephus; neither does it concern the Subject of this Treatise; he being
deprived, if at all, by God's immediate Act.

It Is alleged by Unity of Priesthood, etc. p. 34, 35. The Crime being Capital,
and the High Priest the Criminal, we may well conclude, That before Solomon
thrust him from the Priesthood, the Sanhedrin had previously judged and passed
their Sentence upon him.
one of our Adversaries, that Abiathar was not deposed by the Authority of the
King, but by that of the Sanhedrin, or great Council: And this he endeavors to
evince from these two Considerations. 1. Because it is said by the Rabbis,
that in Capital Causes it was lawful only for the Sanhedrin to judge the
High Priest. 2. Because Josephus, the Historian, says of Ioab, That before the
King sent Benaiah to fall upon him, he first sent him to fetch him from the
Altar, in order to bring him (...) to the Seat of Judicature, there to plead
his Cause. And if this Formality, says our Author, was used toward Joab before
ever the Command was given, to have him slain; it is probable ^he like was used
toward Adonijah, the King's Brother, before he was slain: and the like also to
Abiathar before he was thrust from the Priesthood. At present it is not my
Business to assert the Authority of the Civil Power in depriving a Bishop, or to
show that the Kings of Judea had Authority to deprive a High Priest: I suppose
at present, That the Deprivation of Abiathar by King Solomon was irregular and
unlawful; and am only to demonstrate, That, de facto, he was deposed by the
bare Authority of the King. Now a thousand such little Nothings, as our Author's
Presumptions and Conjectures, from what is related by Josephus concerning Ioab,
I shall fully and unanswerably confute by producing the Words of the Scripture
1 Kings 11.26.
. Now therefore as the Lord lives, says King Solomon, which has established
me, and set me on the Throne of David my Father, and who has made me a house
as he promised, Adonijah shall be put to death this day. And King Solomon sent
by the hand of Benaiah the Son of Iehoiada, and he fell upon him that he died.
And unto Abiathar the Priest said the King, Get thee to Anathoth, unto thine
own Fields, for thou art worthy of death: but I will not at this time put thee
to death, because thou barest the Ark of the Lord God before David my Father,
and because thou have been afflicted in all wherein my Father was afflicted. So
Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord. So likewise
Josephus: (...) Antiq. l. 8. c. 1.
And sending for Benaiah the Captain of his Guard, he commanded him to go and
slay his Brother Adonijah. And calling to him the Priest Abiathar, Thy bearing
the Ark, says he, with my Father, and those things which thou suffered'st in
his service, deliver thee from death; but this punishment I inflict upon thee,
because thou tookedst part with Adonijah. Stay thou not here, nor come into my
sight any more, but go unto thy own Country, and there live till the time of
thy death. For having thus sinned, thou art not worthy to continue in Not as
our English Author renders it, p. 34. For since thou have so offended me, it is
not convenient that thou should be in honor with me.
Dignity (as High Priest.) And thus for the aforesaid Cause the Family of
Ithamar was deprived of the Honor of the High Priesthood. Whatsoever was done
to Ioab, it is as clear and apparent as the Sun, That what was done to Adonijah
and Abiathar, was all done on a sudden, without any manner of Judicial Process
in the Sanhedrin, by the bare Authority of the King. But neither is it true that
Ioab was ever cited to plead his Cause in the Sanhedrin. For, first, Josephus
himself does not say so, as our Author imagins: For by the word (...), is not
meant the Court of the Sanhedrin (that is wont to be called by Josephus, not
(...), but (...)) but the King's own Tribunal, where he himself sat Judge: and
so it is understood by both the Latin Translators. Mittens Benaiam, cum jussit
adduci, ut in ejus judicio satisfaciret.
Epiphanius Schol. and Misit Benaiam qui citaret cum ad suum tribunal.
Gelenius. 2. Even that which Josephus does say, is not true; as appears by the
words of the Scripture, which Josephus follows and mistakes. Then tidings came
to Ioab, for Ioab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom;
and Ioab fled unto the Tabernacle of the Lord, and caught hold on the Horns of
the Altar. And it was told King Solomon, that Ioab was fled unto the Tabernacle
of the Lord, and behold he is by the Altar: Then Solomon sent Benaiah, the Son
of Iehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him. And Benaiah came to the Tabernacle of
the Lord, and said unto him, Thus says the King, Come forth. And he said, Nay,
but I will die here. And Benaiah brought the King word again, saying, Thus said
Ioab, and thus he answered me. And the King said unto him, Do as he said, and
fall upon him. It is said expressly that the King sent Benaiah (not to cite him
to the Tribunal, but immediately) to fall upon him. These Words Josephus, who
oftentimes mistakes the true Sense of the Scripture by trusting too much to his
Memory, had forgot: And because he remembered that Ioab was commanded to come
forth, he therefore rashly conjectured, that he was commanded to come to the
Tribunal: When the Reason why he was commanded to come forth, was only this,
Because it was thought not See Exodus 21.14.
proper to shed his blood at the Altar.

Much like the aforesaid Evasion of our English Author is that of the Jesuits
Admodum quoque rationi consentaneum est etiam Sadoci Pontificis Sententiam
consensumve intervenisse; a Levitis enim and Sacerdotibus maximam judiciorum
partem fuisse tractatam ex pluribus locis Scripturae constat. Annal. ad An. 3.
Salomonis n. 15.
Salianus and Probabile est Sadoc sententiam consensumque intervenisse, etc.
Comment. in loc.
Menochius; who would needs persuade us, that what was done, was not done by
King Solomon alone, but that Zadok likewise, the Priest, passed his Sentence
upon Abiathar, and condemned him to be deprived; at least that his Consent was
desired and granted for the Ratification of the King's Sentence. A wretched and
a groundless Shift, that deserves not to be confuted!

A third Evasion is that of the Author of a Pamphlet, entitled, Solomon and
Abiathar, etc. King Solomon (says he) did not properly and judicially deprive
Abiathar of the High Priesthood, but only commanded or required him to quit it
on pain of death. For thus the words run: And unto Abiathar said the King* Get
thee to thy Fields at Anathoth, for thou art a Man of death: But this day I
will not put thee to death, because, etc. Which the LXXII. render thus, Get
thee to Anathoth to thy Field, for thou art a Man of death in this very day;
but I will not put thee to death, because, etc. A Man of death, our Translation
renders worthy of death; but the LXXII. render the words not so much
significative of Merit as a Menace, according to such a Paraphrase: Get thee
off to Anathoth to thy Field, for else thou art a Man of death this very day;
and if thou do so, I will not put thee to death. So that Abiathar here was
put to his Option, Whether he would with dishonor retire from his Office, or
suffer death, this latter being in the rightful power of the King, if Abiathar
would not yield in the former. So that Abiathar 's Priesthood determined by his
own voluntary Cession, not the King's Censure. In answer to this, I need but
produce the Words of the LXXII. (...), etc. This (excepting the Words (...),
which are removed from the latter Clause to the antecedent,) agrees exactly
with the Hebrew: and the natural sense of those words is no other than what we
have in our English Translation, with which all Interpreters agree, Josephus,
(as is plain from his Words above produced) the Ad Ghanathoth ito tibi in domos
tuas, quia Vir obnoxious occasioni tu es: sed hodie non occidam te, quia, etc.
Chaldee Paraphrast, the In Anathoth te recipe od agrum tuum, quoniam homo es
morte dignus: body tamen non intersiciam te, eo quod, etc.
Syriack, the Vade in Anathoth rus tuum, and fundi tui culture v^cato, n^n homo
es qui necem mereris: veruntamen non occidam te, quia, etc.
Arabic, and the Vade in Anathoth ad agrum tuum, equidem vir mortis es, sed
hodie te non intersiciam, quia, etc.
Latin Translators, together with the Rabbinical Commentators Who all
understand the Text of a positive and authoritative Ejectment. And that it was
a positive Command, not an Option proposed to Abiathar, but an absolute
Deprivation, is yet more plain from the words which immediately follow: So
Solomon thrust out Abiathar, etc. in the Greek: (...), etc.

Bartoldus Nihusins has another sort of Evasion. Quanquam ejecit Solomon
Abiathar ut non esset Sacerdos Domini, and Sadoc Sacerdotem posuit pro
Abiathar, sensus tamen fuerit ex Aula solum Regis ejectum Abiatharem and
substitutum ei Sadocum in Sacerdotem Aulae, ne ille sed hic fungeretur deinceps
ibi juxta Domini Arcam Pontificis partibus; quo ipso non prohibuit Solomon
Abiathari Juum exequi munus in Tabernaculo Mosaico quod stabat in Gabaon; ut
exequntus illie fuerit antea Sadoc tanquam vicarius, 1. Paralip. 16.29. Nam
profecto Rex pagum Anathoth non assignavit Abiathari in carcerem 3 Reg. 2.26.
and hinc is etiamnum postea vocatus legatur Sacerdos: Sadoc and Abiathar
Sacerdotes; sen Pontifices. 1 Reg. IV. 4. Hypodigm. Sect. 42. p. 290.
He tells us, That Abiathar was only turned out of his Office at Jerusalem,
and forbid to officiate as High Priest at Court, where the Ark was fixed, not
properly deprived of the Office of High Priest. For afterward, says he, he was
permitted to officiate as High Priest at Gibeon, where Zadok himself had been
formerly High Priest before he was made in his stead High Priest of the Ark in
Jerusalem. And this, he thinks, may be proved from hence, That in the 4th. of
the 2d. of Kings, he is rankt with Zadok as High Priest under Solomon: And
Benaiah the Son of Iehoiada was over the Host. And Sadok and Abiathar were
Priests. This Conjecture of Nihusius, were it granted to be true, would not
make at all for his Cause, nor yet against ours. For still it is certain, that
Abiathar was turned out at Jerusalem, and Zadok was made High Priest in his
stead, and by all acknowledged as the true Aaronick High Priest. Whether Zadok,
when High Priest at Gibeon, was properly a High Priest independent of Abiathar,
or only Vicarius like our Suffragan Bishops, or Chorepiscopi, is what we
cannot determine; neither are we concerned to know. Certain it is, that when he
was made High Priest at Jerusalem, in the room of Abiathar, he was 1 Chronicles.
29.22.
anointed in the same manner as others used to be, who were never Highpriests
before. Abulensis says there are some who conclude from the Text before quoted,
That Abiathar, by the special Clemency of the King, was again restored to the
great High Priesthood of Jerusalem: And of this Opinion, says De Rege eligendo
and deponendo,. 64.
Frischmuth, was Carthusianus: But that is a mistake; for the Conjecture of
Carthusianus is only this, The King, says he, deprived him, ut Pontificali
officio amplius non fungeretur, imo nec sacerdotali ad tempus. Veruntamen
postea fecit ei elementiam, admittenao ipsum ad Sacerdotale officium. Nam infra
habetur: Zadoc and Abiathar Sacerdotes. Com. in 1 Reg. c. 2.
That Abiathar was permitted by the King to officiate under Zadok, as one of
the minor Priests. Whoever they were that were of the aforesaid Opinion, it is
certain they were under a Mistake. For the Scripture observes, that when
Abiathar was turned out, and Zadok put in his place, the Words which God had
spoken to Eli, concerning the Alienation of the High Priesthood from his
Family, were fulfilled. And what was that Prophecy? There shall not be (says
God) an That is, according to some Commentators, There shall not be a
High Priest, etc.
Old man in thy house for ever -- I will raise me up a faithful Priest, Sam.
c. 2.
and I will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine anointed for
ever. And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thy house,
shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver, and a morsel of bread, and
shall say, Put me (I pray thee) into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat
a piece of bread. This plainly demonstrates, that Abiathar was not again
restored to the great High Priesthood at Jerusalem: And from thence it may
likewise be gathered, that he was not permitted to officiate as High Priest at
Gibeon. So great an Honor would hardly suit with that Prophecy: And how is it
likely, that the King would permit one whom he had banished from Jerusalem as
his Enemy, and unworthy of the High Priesthood, to officiate as High Priest at
Gibeon, since he himself (which Nihusius seems not to have thought on) was wont
to go 1 Reg. c. 3. v. 3, 4.
thither, and to offer Sacrifices there, as well as at Jerusalem? I might add
against both these Opinions, as well the one as the other, that Josephus knew
nothing of Abiathar's Officiating after his Ejectment: He takes it for granted,
as appears by the Sentence which he makes the King pass upon him, that he never
came any more into the King's sight, but lived all his life at Anathoth. And
Cit. apud Frischmuth.. 65. Praecepit Abiathari Solomon, ut nepedem efferret
loco ipsi assignato, Anathot. Futurum eni^ alias, ut si inde se proripere haud
dubitarit, sanguis ejus sit super capite ejus, quemadmodum and Simei filio Gera
intimaverat; Atque hoc constat ex verbis Salomonis: Sed hodie te non
interficiam: quasi dicat, At interficiam te eo die, quo egredi inde quopiam
ausus fueris.
Abravanel, a learned and judicious Rabbi, is so far from thinking that he
afterward Officiated as High Priest either at Gibeon or at Jerusalem, that he
thinks he was banished to Anathoth as to a Prison, and was not to stir thence
upon peril of Life. And so far was Cit. a P. Martyr in Com. ad loc. and a
Frischmuth, loco cit.
Kimchi from being of either of the aforesaid Opinions upon the account of that
Text, that he thinks Abiathar, who is mentioned there with Zadok, was not he
that was Ejected, but another of that Name. It Is a Conjecture of Cit. ab eisdem.
R. Levi Ben Gerson, that Abiathar was sometimes permitted to Officiate in the
room of Zadok, whenever Zadok was by any Defect or Pollution made incapable of
Officiating himself; And therefore he is rankt with Zadok in that Text. Nic. de
Lira, Sanctius.
Others think with Carthusianus, That therefore he is mentioned with Zadok,
because he was admitted to Officiate as one of the lesser Priests. It Is the
Opinion of others, That therefore he is mentioned with Zadok, because in the
beginning of Solomon's Reign he had been High Priest: For it is not, say See
Abulensit Quaest. 33. in 3 Reg. c. 2. He is followed by P. Martyr, Tirinus, a
Lapide.
they, the Design of that Chapter, to give an account of those Men who were at
one certain particular time the great Officers under Solomon, but to give an
account likewise of those who at any time had been so. This Explication may
well pass for The only Objection seems to be this, That Ioab, who was not
actually deprived of his Generalship till Abiathar was of the High Priesthood,
is not there mentioned, but only Benaiah. But perhaps the reason might be,
Because Ioab, who had adhered to Adonijah, though he was not presently deprived,
yet he never had acted as General in the time of Solomon; whereas Abiathar had
several times acted as High Priest.
probable; but the true one I take to be that of Serarius, Menochius, and
Grotius, who tell us, That therefore he is joined with Zadok in the Text above
cited; because, though turned out of the Office, yet he still enjoyed the Name
and Title of High Priest, (and was still highly honored as a Man of great Age
and Dignity.) Thus it is certain from Josephus, That in Aftertimes, when so many
Highpriests were deposed, all they that were deposed enjoyed still the Title
as well as if they had been the Possessors. And so it is now with the
Patriarchs of Constantinople.

A fifth Evasion is that of L. 6. de rebus Salomonis, c. 15. n. 7.
Io. de Pineda, and the Card. L. 2. de Pont. c. 29. and lib. contra 8. Propos.
Venetam.
Bellarmin, whom the Jesuits generally follow, as Defens. Bellarmini, l. 2. c.
29. and l. 2. ad Theologos Venetos.
Gretser, Com. in loc.
Serarius, Com. in loc.
A Lapide, Manuali Controvers. l. 5. c. 19.. 39, 40.
Becanus, etc. They own that Abiathar was completely deprived by King Solomon;
but, say they, he did not do it as King, but by a particular Commission from
God as a Prophet. And this they prove from that Saying of the Scripture: And
Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord: that the word of
the Lord might be fulfilled which he spoke concerning the House of Eli in
Shiloh. In answer to this, I observe, first, That till after this was done King
Solomon had no Gift of Prophecy: It appears from See 1 Reg. c. 3.
the Scripture that he was first inspired and made a Prophet when God appeared
to him in a Vision at Gibeon: which was after the Deprivation of Abiathar.
2dly. If Solomon had deprived Abiathar to this end, that he might fulfill that
Prophecy God to Eli; yet it would not thence follow, That he did it as a
Prophet. He had heard of that Prophecy, and so he might adventure of himself to
fulfill it. It appears from Quaest. 32 ad 3 Reg. cap. 2. An Solomon peccasset
privando Abiathar si ^um privasset solum ut compleretur Sermo Dei? Dicendum
(inquit) quod peccaret Solomon si non privaret Abiathar ex alia causa. Quod
patet ex duobus. 1o. Quia dato quod sciret Sacerdotium aliquando cessaturum de
domo Heli: tamen nesciebat an Deus voluerat, quod cessaret tempore Abiathar,
vel alterius Successoris; ideo si privaret Abiathar, ageret contra
conscientiam: dubitans, an compleret Prophetiam Dei, vel ageret contra
intentionem ejus. Secundo, peccasset Solomon isto modo, quia dato quod
revelatum esset debere finiri Sacerdotium domus Heli in Abiathar, non licebat
et privare Abiathar, quia aut privaret cum jure suo; sc. in quantum trat
Princeps populi Dei, ad quem pertinebat infligore poenas, and praemia tribuere,
aut ex aliqua concessione speciali Dei. Non primo modo, quia tunc non poterat
privare Abiathar, nisi pro aliquo crimins, quia poenae regulariter pro culpis
dari debent. Item non erat Abiathar de jurisdictione Salomonis quantum ad
Prophetiam dictam de domo Heli: Nam Solomon and quilibet alius Princeps p^pul^
Dei erat executor Legis datae per Mosin, quae erat communis, Prophetiae tamen
dictae contra aliquos crant quaedam sententiae particulares Dei, quarum nullus
de jure orat Executor, nisi ipse Deus, aut ille cui ipse specialiter hoc
demandaret, sed cum aliquis punit alium, qui non est de jurisdictione sua,
peccat: ergo etiam Solomon peccasset. Secundum non stat, quia Deus non commisit
punitionem Abiathar, vel Executionem Prophetiae ipsi Salomoni specialiter, ergo
si ipse se intromitteret de executione illius, peccaret tanquam judicans in non
suo territorio, vel usurpan* sibi quocunque modo Iurisdictionem. Peccaret ergo
Solomon quocunque modo puniret Abiathar, nisi pro aliquo crimine cum privaret,
quia quantum ad istud esset de Jurisdiction sua, and sic factum est hic, nam
pro crimine l.^s.^ Majestatis privavit cum.
Abulensis, that though in his time, and before, there were some of that Opinion,
That Solomon deprived Abiathar that he might fulfill the aforesaid Prophecy,
yet they never imagined that he did it as a Prophet by a special Commission
from God; they thought he did it of himself by his own bare Authority. 3dly, It
does not appear by the Text that Solomon designed, by deposing Abiathar, to
fulfill that Prophecy of God. For those words, That the Word of the Lord might
be fulfilled, do only show, that That was the design of Providence; a common
mode of Expression. In the Hebrew it is, ad implendum sermonem: where ad, says
Grotius, is only (...). neque enim hoc respiciebat Solomon. So long before
Grotius, the great and judicious Quaest. 31. in 3 Reg. cap. 2. Solomon non
privavit Abiathar propter Prophetiam dictam contra Heli, sed ex aliis causis,
ut patet ex verbis ejus: Nam dixit, Vir quidem mortis es, sed hodie non te
intersiciam, and tamen referendo ad Prophetiam dictam contra Heli, non erat
verum quod Abiathar esset, Vir mortis: nam licet privari posset sacerdotio,
tamen mortem (ob istam prophetiam) non merebatur.
Abulensis, a Bishop of their own Church. It is said in the Gospel of S.
Matthew, that C. 2. v. 23.
Joseph came and dwelt in a City called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene: That the Jews
C. 27. v. 35.
crucified Christ, parting his Garments, casting Lots, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet; They parted my Garments among them,
etc. So S. John: The Soldiers said therefore among themselves, Let us not
rent, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be; that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, which says, etc. It is said in another place of S. John, that
notwithstanding all the Miracles of Christ, yet C. 12. v. 38.
the Jews believed not on him; that the Saying of Esaias the Prophet might be
fulfilled, which he spoke, Lord, who has believed our Report, etc. That C. 18.
v. 32.
when Pilate commanded the Jews to take Jesus and Judge him according to their
Law, they said unto him, It is lawful for us to put any man to death: That the
Saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what death he
should die. Who so very injudicious, as to infer from these places, that such
was the End and Design of the Persons themselves? Yet as well may we infer,
that such was here the Design of the Persons themselves, as that such was the
Design of King Solomon deposing Abiathar. I shall only add, That whereas some
of the Jesuits do pretend to confirm their Opinion with the Authority of
Theodoret and Procopius Gazaeus; those Authors are so far from thinking that
King Solomon deprived Abiathar as a Prophet, that it does not appear, that they
thought he had any respect to that Prophecy. They only say, That in depriving
Abiathar, he was (...), an Instrument (or an Asier) made use of by God for the
fulfilling of his Prophecy.

The Jesuit Becanus, not very well satisfied (as it seems) with this Answer of
Bellarmin, has besides another of his own: He tells us, That if King Solomon
deposed Abiathar by his Regal Authority only, and was not inspired by God, then
he acted unlawfully; for as he was King (says he) he was not a lawful and a
competent Judge. Here now is a Man that speaks out. This is home to our
Purpose. Let our Adversaries now take what Part they please. If they grant that
King Solomon did well, then the Civil Power is a Competent Judge of a Bishop,
and may lawfully deprive him if he refuses to own its authority, or for any
other Criminal Cause for which he may by Bishops be justly deprived. If, with
the Jesuit Becanus, they say he did ill, then it is plain from the Scripture it
self, that the whole Nation of the Jews, and God himself, accepted of a
High Priest, who was put into the place of another invalidly deprived by the
Civil Authority, as a true High Priest.

. 4. For a great many Generations the High Priesthood continued in the Family
of Zadok without the Deprivation of any. We read of no one deposed by either
the Regal or any other Authority, till the time of Onias III. Surnamed the
Pious. Of him we read in the Breviary of Jason of Cyrene, viz. the C. 4.
11. of Maccabees, that he was deposed by King Antiochus Epiphanes, by the
means of a Bribe which his Brother Jesus (called otherwise Jason) had offered
for the Honor, who was thereupon placed in his room. Josephus, in the Cap. 6.
(...).
12th. Book of his Antiquities, says Antiochus, conferred the High Priesthood
on Jason, after the death of Onias. And again, in his 15th. Book he says, that
Jason himself was the first of all the Highpriests (he means after Solomon's
time) that whilst alive were deprived of their Dignity. But in this Josephus
was mistaken, as appears not only by the express Testimony of Jason of Cyrene,
but likewise by that very particular See 2. Maccab. c. 4. v. 33, etc.
account which he gives of Onias's Death several years after the Promotion, and
even after the Deprivation of Jason, in the time of the High Priest Menelaus.
And Josephus himself in another place, viz. in his Book (...). C. 4.
(...), has affirmed the same thing, that Onias was deposed by the King, and
Jason for Money promoted to the High Priesthood. The contrary Custom of
continuing the High Priest, during life, is called by (...), etc. Quanquam
insolitum (says Sulpitius Severus) neque ante permissum cuiquam erat perpetuo
Sacerdotio non fungi, sollicitus tamen Regis animus atque aeger avaritia facile
superatus est.
Josephus a Law; yet of any Contention occasioned by the good and unjustly
deposed Onias, not a word in any Author. On the contrary it appears, that he
meekly submitted to Necessity; and we read no more of him till the time of the
High Priest Menelaus, that he reprehended that ungodly High Priest for having
embezell'd the holy Vessels of the Temple, and was therefore murdered.

. 5. Jason, after the expiration of three years, was deposed by the same
Authority, and by the same means by which he had been advanced; and his younger
Brother Onias, called likewise Menelaus, succeeded him. He was deposed, says
Josephus, through some Antiq. l. 12. c. 6. (...).
displeasure, which the King had conceived against him; by the means of a
Bribe, says Jason of Cyrene, which his Brother Menelaus had offered for the
Honor. Here now is an Example for our Adversaries; but a very unhappy one.
There was no Sedition occasioned by the Pious Onias; but Jason, who, after he
was made High Priest, proved a very profane and ungodly Wretch, was no sooner
deposed, but he raised a Sedition against his Successor. He raised a Sedition
for the Dignity of the High Priesthood, says Eusebius; and Josephus tells us,
that the greater part of the People joined with him, to that degree, that
Menelaus, with the Chief of his Adherents, was forced to flee away to
Antiochus, though he soon returned and enjoyed the High Priesthood. You will not
imagine, it was any thing of Conscience, or any sense of Religion that caused
that Sedition, or that made the major part of the People declare in the
beginning for Jason: No certainly; That could not be, since Jason himself had
been advanced to that Dignity, when his Brother and Predecessor had been
unjustly deposed, and that too by his procurement; especially since that
Brother, who had been unjustly deposed, was still living. Though Menelaus was at
that time a very flagitious Villain, and ought upon that account to have been
opposed, yet 'twas nothing but Revenge and Resentment that excited Jason; and
'twas chiefly the lewd and profane Pastimes which the People enjoyed under
Jason, that made 'em adhere in the beginning to him. Read the 4th. Chapter of
the 2d. of Maccabees, where after a History of his excessive wickedness, as it
is there termed, and an account of the Heathenish Customs to which he had
debauched the People; he is styled (...).
the ungracious Jason, that ungodly Wretch, and not a High Priest. There was
yet another thing, which seems to have heightened the People's aversion to
Menelaus, when first he was advanced to that Dignity; and that was his cruel
and bloody Disposition. He came, says the Author of the Maccabees, with the
King's Mandate, bringing nothing worthy of the High Priesthood, but having the
fury of a cruel Tyrant, and the rage of a Savage beast. We will leave the foeda
certamina of these two Brothers, (so Sulpitius Severus calls 'em) and proceed to

. 5. Hyrcanus, the second of that Name, who was deprived of his High Priesthood
and Kingdom by his younger Brother Aristobulus, after he had enjoyed the
High Priesthood for the space of nine years. They had fought a battle; and
Hyrcanus being overcome, was forced to Josephus Antiq. l. 14. c. 1. and de
bello Iud. l. 1. c. 4.
resign both his Honors by a solemn League and Agreement. His Resignation was
by Compulsion, and Aristobulus was looked upon by all as an Usurper. Josephus
affirms, that Hyrcanus had still a De bello Iud. l. 1. c. 5.
Right to the Dignity; and so it was afterward Ibid.
adjudg'd by I. Caesar; and so Hyrcanus after that Antiq. l. 14. c. 5.
pleaded before Pompey. However, Aristobulus is owned, and is peaceably settled
in his Government. Hyrcanus submits to Necessity, and lives very quietly under
him. He is urged by his Friend Antipater to endeavor for a Restoration; he
denies to do it; Antipater tells him, He is in danger of his Life; that the
King designs to destroy him, yet nothing will persuade him. At last, being
wearied by the Importunities of Antipater, and affrighted by the continual
Representations made him of the danger he was in, he flies away to Aretas, a
King of the Arabs, obtains of him an Army, defeats his Brother in a Battle, and
besieges him in the Temple. The Siege is raised by the Authority of the Romans:
Their Cause is brought before Pompey the Great, who leaves it not fully
decided. Pompey having afterward received an Affront from Aristobulus, raises
a War against him, takes the City Jerusalem by Storm, and (...). De'bel. Iud.
l. 1. c. 5. In eundem tenorem, Antiq. l. 14. c. 8.
bestows the Pontificate on Hyrcanus. This he did, says Josephus, as well
because of other good Offices which Hyrcanus had done him, as because he had
hindered the Jews of the Country round about from defending Aristobulus against
him.

At that time that Hyrcanus, as is above said, besiege Aristobulus in that part
of the City Jerusalem where the Temple was built; Josephus says, that the
People of Jerusalem went all over to the Conqueror Hyrcanus; but withal he
observes, that the (...). Antiq. l. 14. c. 3.
Priests would not leave their present High Priest Aristobulus, but still
adhered faithfully to him.

It is further observable what Josephus relates as happening during that Siege:
For by that it may appear of what opinion both He and others were concerning
those Sacrifices which were offered up to God by the Usurper Aristobulus, and
how acceptable to God those Acts of Religion were, which he as High Priest
performed, though he came into the Office by force and usurpation, and was not
accounted the (...), says Josephus.
rightful High Priest. Whilst Aristobulus, Antiq. l. 14. c. 3.
says Josephus, was besieged in the Temple, the Feast of Unleavened Bread,
which we call the Passover, being at hand, the Chief among the Jews left their
Country, and fled into Egypt. Now one Onias, a just Man, and beloved of God,
who had formerly, in the time of a Drought, obtained Rain by his pious Prayers,
and hid himself, as perceiving a Civil War coming on: Him the Jews brought into
their Camp, and required him, That as he had heretofore prevented a Famine, so
he would now draw down a Curse upon Aristobulus, and all those that adhered to
him. When he had long refused to do it, and at last was threatened by the
Multitude, he stood in the midst of 'em, and prayed thus: O God, the King of
all the World, since these, who stand here with me, are thy People, and they
that are besieged are thy Priests, I beseech thee not to hearken to the Prayers
of either Party against the other. After he had made this Prayer, there
encompassed him round about certain Villainous Jews, and they overwhelmed him
with Stones. Which cruelty God immediately revenged after this manner. Whilst
Aristobulus was thus besieged, the Passover comes on; in which Feast our Custom
is to honor God with many Sacrifices: Now the Besieged being destitute of
Sacrifices, entreated their Countrymen without, that for Money, as much as they
would desire, they would supply 'em with Victims. They demand a thousand
Drachms for each Victim; which Aristobulus and the Priests agree to, and let
down the Money from the Wall. But they, when they had got the Money, refused to
supply 'em with Victims; and proceeded so far in Impiety, as both to violate
their Faith with Men, and likewise to defraud God of the Honors due unto him.
The Priests therefore, who had been wronged, prayed to God that he would punish
their Countrymen: And immediately it was done. For a vehement Storm so
destroyed the Fruits of the whole Country, that a Measure of Wheat was sold for
15 Drachms.

Perhaps it may be said, that Aristobulus was accepted as a true High Priest;
not because he was the Possessor, but because Hyrcanus (though by force and
compulsion) had solemnly and fully resigned to him. If this be alleged, then it
follows, that Hyrcanus had no Right to the High Priesthood: yet he, after he
was restored by the bare Authority of the Heathen Pompey, (though Aristobulus was
deposed After he had been High Priest 3 years and as many months.
by only the same Authority of that Conqueror) was owned again, and received
as a true High Priest by all the Jews: and so he continued for the space of
Josephus Antiq. l. 20. c. 8.
24 years.

True it is, that Alexander, the Son of Aristobulus, raised a War against
Hyrcanus and the Romans. It is likewise true, that Aristobulus himself, having
made his escape from Rome, raised another small Army, and endeavored to
reobtain the Pontificate. But we are not to imagine, that they that joined thus
with Aristobulus, and endeavored to restore him, did therefore do so, because
they thought the present High Priest Hyrcanus not truly such. It was in this
Case as usually it is in other Kingdoms: where Love, hope of Gain, and a
longing after Innovation, engages turbulent Spirits against the present
Establishment. Josephus assures us, that they that joined with Aristobulus,
were induced thereunto by the glory of his Name, the desire of Innovation,
(...). Antiq. l. 14. c. 11. (...).
and the hopes of Gain. And that it was only Ambition, not any thing of
Religion or Conscience, that made Aristobulus endeavor to recover the
Government, cannot possibly be doubted by any Person of Judgment. 'Twas the
King, and not the High Priest, that raised those Commotions.

. 7. After the term of 24 years, Hyrcanus was again deposed by Antigonus, the
younger Son of Aristobulus; and his Ears were cut off, that by that he might be
made incapable of being restored. Whether Antigonus himself took upon him the
Function of the High Priest, together with the Government, we are not well
assured. But it was not long before he himself lost his life; and Herod was
made King of the Jews. And now we are come to a strange Scene of Tyranny; a
surprising Train of unjust and tyrannical Deprivations. For the future we shall
find very few Highpriests, but who were deposed by the Secular Governors: And
of those that were deposed, very few were deposed for any just Cause: Yet still
the Successor was owned both by Priests and People; as well by the learned, the
Sanhedrin, the Scribes, and the Pharisees, as by the unlearned Multitude.

Ananelus, Jos. Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 3. (...), says Nicephorus Patr. in
Chronol. But that he was not (...), but both a Jew, and likewise descended from
Aaron, is clear from Josephus. If he had not been a descendant from Aaron, the
Jews would never have owned him.
a Jew of Babylon, was made High Priest by King Herod, in the room of either
Antigonus or Hyrcanus. This Alexandra, the Daughter of Hyrcanus, the Wife of
Alexander, and the King's Mother-in-law, took very ill, because he was
preferred to her Son Aristobulus: She therefore wrote to Cleopatra the Queen of
Egypt, and requested her to obtain of Mark Antony the High Priesthood for her
Son. Upon this account, to satisfy Alexandra, and likewise his Wife Mariamne,
the King deposes Ananelus, and preferrs Aristobulus to the Dignity. And after
the Death of Aristobulus, he again restores Ananelus.

Jesus the Son of Phabes, who was made High Priest upon the death of Ananelus,
was Ibid. l. 15. c. 12.
deposed by the same King Herod, and Simon the Son of Boethus succeeded him.
And for what was this done? For no other reason, but because the King had a
mind to Marry Simon's Daughter; and he thought the Match would seem too mean
for him, unless Simon were advanced to that Honor.

The Daughter of Simon, after she was married to the King, being suspected as
engaged in a Conspiracy against him; her Father was for that Ibid. l. 17. c. 6.
deposed. And to him succeeded Matthias, the Son of Theophilus.

Of this Matthias it is very observable, That (as Josephus relates) being
polluted with an unvoluntary Uncleanness the night before the day of Expiation,
Ibid. c. 8.
on which he was to officiate in a solemn manner, he made it known; and on that
account there was consecrated a new High Priest for that day to officiate in
his stead. This, I say, is on this account very observable; because from thence
it appears, That both Matthias himself, who accepted of the High Priesthood,
which in justice belonged to Jesus the Son of Phabes, and the great Men among
the Jews, who owned him as true High Priest, were very Religious Persons, and
nice Observers of all necessary Laws. He likewise was displaced by the King
upon a Suspicion, that he had given encouragement to certain Zealots, who had
pulled down a Golden Eagle which the King had set up over one of the Gates of
the Temple. In his room the King Ibid. c. 15.
placed Ioazarus, the Son of Simon Boethus. Ioazarus was extremely hated by all
that Party, that favored the aforesaid Zealots: They present a Petition to the
Tetrarch Archelaus, the Son and Successor of King Herod, and require him in a
seditious manner to displace him. But what was their Plea? Not that he was no
true High Priest. Though in other things they showed so much Zeal for their Laws,
as even to raise a Sedition for the Vindication of 'em, and though their Love for
the ejected High Priest was very great: yet they allege nothing at all
concerning the unlawfulness of submitting to the present Possessor. They Ibid.
c. 11.
only allege, that he was not worthy of the Honor; and desire that another
more worthy, any one that Archelaus thought fit, might be named to succeed him.

Though Archelaus did not hearken to what they demanded, yet after some time he
Ibid. c. 15.
deposed him upon another account; viz. because he suspected him to be somewhat
concerned in the raising of a Sedition. To him succeeded his Brother Eleazar.
He was likewise Ibid.
displaced by the same Archelaus; and succeeded by Jesus the Son of Sie.

Ioazarus, the Son of Simon Boethus, was again restored upon the Death of Jesus
the Son of Sie: (So it seems; for there is no mention made, that Jesus was
removed:) But he was again displaced Ibid. l. 18. c. 3.
by Quirinus, the Roman Prefect of Syria. His Crime no other, but that, upon
some account incurring the People's displeasure, there had been a Sedition
raised against him. In his place was substituted.

Ananus the Son of Seth, who himself was deposed Ibid.
by Valerius Gratus, the Roman Prefect of Judea. And Ismael the Son of Phabi,
was promoted to his Dignity. Ananus flourished long after his Ejectment amongst
the Jews, and at the time of our Savior's Passion was one of their Chief
Priests or Rulers, under the High Priest Caiaphas, his Son-in-law. He is
mentioned in the Histories of the Gospel by by the Name of Annas.

Ismael the Son of Phabi was likewise removed Ibid.
by the same Valerius Gratus, who advanced in his stead Eleazar the Son of
Ananus but now mentioned.

Him likewise after a years time he deposed, Ibid.
and promoted Simon the Son of Camith.

After one year he likewise removed Ibid.
Simon, and in his place he substituted Josephus, who was Sir-named Caiaphas.

Caiaphas was Ibid. c. 6, and 7.
removed by Vitellius the Roman Prefect of Syria, and Jonathan, another Son of
Ananus, was advanced to the Honor of the High Priesthood.

The same was likewise the Fate of Jonathan: For he Ibid. c. 7.
after some little time was removed by the same Governor, and his Brother
Theophilus was promoted in his stead. He continued after that a worthy Patriot,
and at last was Antiq. l. 20. cap. 6. and de Bello Iud. l. 2. c. 12.
murdered by the Roman Governor Felix.

Theophilus was Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 5.
displaced by King Herod Agrippa, and Simon who was surnamed Cantharas, the Son
of Simon Boethus, succeeded him.

Him Agrippa likewise Ibid.
deposed, and promoted Ibid. c. 6.
Matthias a fourth Son of Ananus, and Brother to the Highpriests, Theophilus,
Jonathan and Eleazar. The King was desirous that Jonathan should be re-invested
with the Honor, as more worthy of it than Simon Cantharas: but Jonathan begged
to be excused, and recommended to him his Brother Matthias. By his Answer alone
we might judge how far the Jews were from thinking it unlawful to succeed one
unjustly or arbitrarily deposed by the Civil Governor. I am obliged, says he,
to your Majesty for your Good Will to me in making me the offer of so great an
Honor; but I think it sufficient, that I once wore those sacred Robes; which I
cannot now receive with the same Holiness as heretofore I did, since God has
judged me unworthy of 'em. He adds, that, if the King required him, he would
tell him who was far more worthy of the Honor than himself: That his Brother
Matthias was more innocent, and free from all sort of guilt or Imputation, whom
therefore he would recommend to him as fit to be preferred to the Dignity.

Matthias was himself Ibid. c. 7.
displaced by the same Prince; in his room there was substituted Elioneus
surnamed Cantharas, the Son of Cantharas.

Elioneus was Ibid. l. 20. c. 1.
removed by Herod the Brother of King Agrippa; and to him succeeded Josephus
the Son of Canei or Camydus (more truly Camithus, the same I suppose with
Camith above mentioned.)

Josephus was deposed Ibid. c. 3.
by the same Herod, and succeeded by Ananias the Son of Nebedeus; he of whom we
read in the c. 23. v. 2.
Acts of the Apostles, as sitting chief Judge in the Cause of St. Paul.

Ananias was sent Antiq. l. 20. c. 5. and de Bello Iud. l. 2. c. 11.
bound by Numidius Quadratus, the Roman Prefect of Syria, to the Emperor
Claudius at Rome, there to answer for a Tumult which had been raised between
the Jews and Samaritans. Upon that account, I suppose, he was deposed. That he
was deposed is manifest; and he De Bello Iud. l. 2. c. 17, 18.
flourished after that at Jerusalem, till the beginning of the War with the
Romans: at what time he was murdered by the Seditious. In his room succeeded
Ismael, Antiq. l. 20. cap. 6.
the Son of Phabei (the same, I presume, with Phabi) promoted by King Agrippa
the younger.

He was sent by the Jews Ambassador to the Emperor Nero, upon a difference
which happened between them and the King. There being detained as a Hostage,
the King Ibid. l. 20. c. 7.
promoted in his stead Josephus, sirnam'd Cabei.

Him he likewise Ibid.
deposed, and preferred Ananus, the Son of Ananus.

This Ananus it was that condemned St. James, the brother of our Savior, with
others, to be stoned. Upon which account he was after three months Ibid. c. 8.
deposed by the same Prince. He continued, after he was deposed, a very great
man amongst the Jews, and was one of their chief Commanders in the time of
their Wars with the Romans; and was De Bello Iud. l. 2. c. 25, and 28. and l.
4. c. 5, 6, 7.
killed at last by the seditious Zealots: highly praised by Josephus, as the
chief of all the Highpriests of that time, for his Justice, Love of his
Country, and other excellent Qualities.

Jesus the Son of Damneus, who succeeded in the High Priesthood upon the
ejectment of Ananus, was Antiq. l. 20. c. 8.
deposed by the same King Agrippa the younger, and succeeded by Jesus the Son
of Gamaliel.

He likewise Ibid.
was deprived by the King, and the Honor was conferred on Matthias the Son of
Theophilus. In whose time there broke out that War in which Jerusalem was
destroyed by the Romans.

. 8. This is the Account which Josephus has delivered down to us, of the
several Revolutions in the Jewish Pontificate, from the beginning of the Reign
of King Herod. As he himself does not give us the least Hint, That he thought
that they who succeeded upon an unjust or a lay-deprivation was no true
High Priest; but speaks of 'em always as as true and real Highpriests as any
other: so it plainly appears from him, That that was likewise the Sense of all
the Nation of the Jews. How arbitrarily or unjustly soever the Predecessor was
deposed, both the Priests and the People submitted to the present Possessor.
And He who had been unjustly deposed, though he came himself regularly to the
Honor (which some few of 'em did,) yet raised no disturbance on the account of
his Ejectment; but remained at Jerusalem a Member of the Church, and peaceably
communicated with his Successor in the Offices of the Temple, and the
Sacrifices made to God. Jesus the son of Damneus was the only High Priest that
expressed his Resentments with any thing of undecency. Of him it is related by
Josephus, that when he was deposed, his Resentment was such that it caused a
great Animosity between him and his Successor, to that degree, that both going
guarded by a company of audacious young men, they themselves not only
proceeded to public Revilings, but their Attendants likewise threw Stones at
one another. This Jesus did, as is manifest, not for any thing of Conscience,
but purely through Ambition and Regret: for he himself had been promoted to the
High Priesthood when another had been as unjustly deposed.

. 9. I must not forget to mention that in the time of the Wars with the Romans,
that wicked and seditious Party, who called themselves the Zealots, having
fortified themselves in the Temple, and excluded Matthias the High Priest,
together with all the true Patriots, who were by far the majority, chose by lot
one Phannias, a wretched Country-fellow, for High Priest; pretending (though
falsely) that that was the ancient method of Election, and that therefore
Matthias was not regularly constituted. This was highly resented, and very
deservedly, by all the orderly Party; both the Priests and the People were
extremely provoked at so daring an Extravagance. How extremely flagitious and
wicked those Zealots were, who took upon 'em to tyrannize, and exclude Matthias
and the much major part of the People, we may learn from Josephus, throughout
his whole History of the Jewish Wars: and how highly all ^resented that
audacious Fact of theirs in pretending of themselves to elect ^ High Priest,
and such a one too as was altogether unworthy, the same Author De Bello I^d. l.
4. c. 11.
largely relates. So great an Impiety, says he, was to them a mere Sport and
Pastime. But the other Priests, who saw afar off the Law ridiculed, could not
refrain from Tears, and grievously lamented for the Dissolution of the Honor
of the Priesthood. The People could not bear with so daring an Action, but
attempted forthwith to dissolve the Tyranny, etc. It is worthy our observation,
that Josephus, neither in the words which he lays down as his own, nor yet in
that Speech which he makes the famous Patriot Ananus speak to the People upon
this occasion to excite 'em to the Vindication of their Laws, mentions any
thing at all of Matthias: he does not insist on the Injury done to him; he
only complains, that a very unworthy Person was constituted High Priest, and
that by such as had no authority to make any High Priest, a tumultuous Part of
the Rabble. I observe moreover from this Example of Resentment, that the Jews,
if they had been of Opinion, That a High Priest was no true High Priest,
because put into the place of another deposed by the Laypower, would not have
failed to express their dislike of one so constituted: since here, in this
Case, they express their Abhorrence with so much Zeal and Concern. From thence,
I say, it appears, That they thought they ought to submit to a worthy Person
put into the High Priesthood by the Prince, although the Predecessor was unjustly
deposed and still living; though they thought they ought not to submit to a
Person unworthy, whom a part of the Rabble should advance. Hear Ananus (or
Josephus again, in his Name) expressing his Abhorrence of the violation of the
Laws in this latter Case, in his Speech to the People. The People, says
Josephus, being backward in their endeavor to suppress the Seditious, because
they looked upon 'em to be impregnable, Ananus stood in the midst of 'em, and
looking often toward the Temple, with his eyes full of Tears, he thus spoke:
Indeed, says he, it is my duty rather to dye, than to see the House of God so
extremely profaned by the feet of flagitious Villains: But yet I live arrayed
with the Sacerdotal Vestment, and called by the most holy and venerable of all
Names. I seem to be desirous of Life, and do not prefer a glorious Death. If I
must be alone, and you leave me, I alone will give up my Soul for the Cause of
God.

CHAP. III.
That our Savior himself, and his Apostles, acknowleged and communicated with
those Highpriests, who were put into the places of others unjustly deposed by
the Civil Authority, as true Highpriests. Mr. Selden's Conjecture, That in the
Histories of the New Testament, as often as there is mention made of the
High Priest, is to be understood not the High Priest, properly so called, but
the Prince of the Sanedrin, confuted. A Reply to an Answer of our Adversaries,
concerning the Reason why the Jews, our Savior, and the Apostles submitted to
the present Possessor.

WE come now to the Second Part of our Historical Inquiry; to show, That not
only the Jews, but likewise our Savior himself, and his Apostles, acknowleged
and submitted to the present Highpriests, though put into the Places of others
unjustly deposed by the Civil Authority. Which Practice of theirs is a Rule to
us. First of all, I observe, That though Caiaphas, who enjoyed the
High Priesthood all the time of our Savior's Preaching, was advanced upon the
unjust Deprivation of another; and although for many Successions there was no
High Priest but what had been so promoted; and the Jews, both the Priests and
the People, had all along acknowleged their Authority and the Validity of their
Sacrifices, yet our Savior never gave the least Hint concerning the Illegality
of those Highpriests. If he had not thought those Highpriests as true
Highpriests as the rest, he would doubtless have took some occasion to express
his dislike of so great a profanation; especially since he knew what an
Influence this Example and Practice of the Jews must of course have upon his
own Followers in future Ages in relation to their Bishops. Had our Savior
intended, that a Bishop in those Circumstances should not be acknowleged by his
Followers; it is highly probable, that he would have given us an Instruction to
the contrary, by expressing some dislike of so great a Profanation of the
High Priesthood. Secondly, I observe, That our Savior does not only not
reprove the Jews for their owning those Highpriests; but, he himself likewise
communicated all along with 'em, and expressly owns their Authority. When he was
before the High Priest S John c. 18. v. 22.
Caiaphas, and was struck by an Officer for answering the High Priest in a
manner that seemed not agreeable, and was asked how he dared to answer the
High Priest so; though that was a very fair occasion, yet he does not deny his
Authority, but expressly owns it by this Reply: If I have spoken Evil, bear
witness of the Evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? Thirdly, I observe, That
though Ananias the High Priest had been advanced in the same manner with
Caiaphas; viz. in the room of another whom the Civil Governor had arbitrarily
deposed; yet S. Paul, the Apostle, expressly owns his Authority, and acknowleges
he was God's High Priest. When through Ignorance (according to some
Commentators) or Inconsiderateness he had spoken revilingly to him, and was
asked how he dared to revile him, being God's High Priest, he approves of the
Title that was given him, and repents of his speaking so rashly: Acts 23.5.
I wist not, Brethren, that it was the High Priest: For it is written, Thou
shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People.

. 2. It may possibly be alleged in reply to what has been urged, That our
Savior and S. Paul did not own the Authority of Caiaphas and Ananias, as
Highpriests properly so called, but only as they were Magistrates and Princes
at that time of their great Council the Sanedrin. And it is indeed the
Conjecture of our famous and learned Mr. Seldom, that in all places of the
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles, where there is mention made of the
High Priest, we are not to understand the High Priest, properly so called, but
the chief Governor of the Sanedrin; and where there is mention of two
Highpriests together, we ought to understand the two chief Rulers of the
Sanedrin; viz. the Prince and the Father of the Sanedrin, as they were wont to
be called. The full of his Conjecture is this; That in those times when the
Jews were governed by Roman Prefects, the High Priest, properly so called, had
not, as High Priest, any Power or Authority in Judicial Matters: That, if he had
any, 'twas only by virtue of his Office in the Sanedrin, as Prince or Father
of that Council. And hence, says he, it was, that though Caiaphas was the only
High Priest, properly so called, when our Savior began to preach his Gospel;
yet it is said in S. Luke, that Annas and Caiaphas were then the Highpriests.
Annas, says Mr. Seldom, is there mentioned first, because he was at that time
the Prince of the Sanedrin, and Caiaphas only the Father. After that, at the
time of our Savior's Passion, Caiaphas was the Prince, and Annas only the
Father: And therefore when our Savior was first led to Annas; he sent him away
to Caiaphas as his Superior. And on this account likewise it is said in the
Gospel of S. John, that Caiaphas was the High Priest that same year. After that
again, Annas was the Prince, and Caiaphas only the Father: And hence it is
said in the Acts; And Annas the High Priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and
Alexander, though Caiaphas was at that time in the proper and original sense the
(only) High Priest.

To this I answer; First, That if we granted Mr. Selden's Conjecture to be
true, though we could not conclude by the words above mentioned, that our Savior
owned Caiaphas as a true High Priest, properly so called; yet still our
Observation would hold good, That our Savior himself communicated with the
High Priest of that Age, and does not any where hint, That they that in his
time Officiated in the Temple as Highpriests, were not truly Highpriests. And
it would however appear, that S. Paul acknowleged the reality of the then
Highpriests, so called in the proper and original Sense; since he owned
himself in an Error, as soon as he was told, that the Person whom he had
reviled was GOD's High Priest. For by the Title of GOD's High Priest the
Ecclesiastical Office was pointed out to him.

Secondly, I deny Mr. Selden's Conjecture to be true. And against it I offer
these following Considerations. First, Neither Josephus, nor any other Jewish
Writer, does any where tell us, that the Highpriests, properly so called, were
deprived by the Romans of their Power and Authority in Excepting Capital Causes;
which were prohibited by the Romans, not only to the High Priest properly so
called, but likewise to the Sanedrin it self. For it was not lawful for the
Jews, when under the Government of the Romans, to put any man to death.
Judicial Matters, and confined to the Offices of the Temple. Mr. Seldom does
not pretend to the Authority of any Writer. And Josephus, had there been any
such thing, would scarce have fall'd to have mentioned it; especially since he
mentions, that in such and such Parts of Judea there were Courts of Judicature
erected by the Romans. Secondly, Josephus is so far from warranting any such
Opinion, that, on the contrary, he speaks throughout his whole History of the
Highpriests, properly so called, as of Persons of great Power and Authority in
Civil Affairs. What he says of Ananus the younger is very express. Having said
that the King had deprived Josephus Cabei of the High Priesthood, and
substituted in his place Ananus the Son of Ananus; he immediately adds, Antiq.
l. 20. c. 8.
The younger Ananus, who was constituted, as we said, High Priest, was a man of
a rigid and severe Temper, by Sect a Sadducee; which sort of men is the most
severe of all Jews in Judicial Matters. Being of that disposition, he took an
opportunity, after Festus (the Governor's) death, before (his Successor)
Albinus was arrived in Judea, to call a Council of the Judges, and commanding
James, the Brother of Jesus, to be brought before him, he condemned him,
together with some others, and delivered 'em to the People to be stoned to
death. This thing extremely displeased all those of the City that were well
disposed and zealous for the Laws; and they privately sent Messengers to the
King to entreat him to lay his Commands upon Ananus not to do the like for the
future, it being a thing that he ought not to have done. Some moreover went to
meet Albinus as he came from Alexandria, and suggested to him, That it was not
lawful for Ananus, without his Consent, to call a Council, (That it was not
lawful for the Jews, without the particular Consent of the Governor, to sit
Judges in a Capital Cause.) Hereupon Albinus wrote angrily to the High Priest,
and threatened him for what he had done. And after three months King Agrippa
deprived him for that Fact of the High Priesthood, and bestowed the Dignity on
Jesus the Son of Damnaeus. Here seems to be a plain Intimation, that the
High Priest, as such, had authority in Civil Affairs; though neither he, nor any
other of the Jews, might, without the Consent of the Roman Governor, sit Judge
in a Capital Cause. Thirdly, It is likewise confirmed by that frequent and
continual Changing of the High Priest under the Romans. For if the
Highpriests, properly so called, were, as such, concerned about the Sacrifices
only, not at all in Matters of Government, how could they so frequently come
under the Displeasure of the supreme Civil Governor? Why so frequently turned
out of their Places? Fourthly, When S. Paul was told that the Person, whom he
had reviled, was God's High Priest; that is, High Priest properly so called; he
strait inferrs, That then he was the Ruler of the People. Fifthly, Those
difficult places of Scripture, on which Mr. Selden's Conjecture is bottomed,
may well admit of another Explication.

I am so far from denying that the two chief Rulers, the Prince and the Father
of the Sanedrin, might commonly be honored with the Title of Highpriests,
that I almost persuade my self, that in those later Times that Title was common
to all those of the Sacerdotal Order who were Members of the Sanedrin. But on
this I do not rely. I have one thing more to offer, to account for those many
Highpriests which are mentioned as flourishing at the same time. Which is
this: That the 24 With this Notion agrees very well that Relation in Josephus
concerning the Highpriests in the time of King Agrippa, Antiq. l. 20. c. 6. Et
ipsi summi Pontifices dissidere caeperunt a Sacerdotibus and primatibus
Hierosolymitanorum Civium -- In tantum autem exarsit summorum Pontificum
impudentia, ut anderent servos suos in areas mittere, qui auferrent debitas
Sacerdotibus decimas, aliquotque pauperiores e sacerdotum ordine alimentorum
inepia fame deficerent.
Chief Men or Heads of the 24 Sorts or Families of the Priests, into which it
is said, in the first of Chronicles, that King David distributed the Priests,
were wont to be peculiarly honored with the Title of (...), or Highpriests.
As all in general were called (...), Priests; so 'twas natural to distinguish
the Heads of the several Classes from the inferior Priests whom they governed,
by the Title of (...), High or Chief Priests. That De hoc vide Lightfooti Heb.
and Talmud. exercitat. in S. Lucam, c. 1. v. 5.
this Division of the Priests was continued to our Savior's time, appears from
the first Chapter of S. Luke, where it is said, That Zacharias, the Father of S.
John Baptist, was a Priest, (...), of the Course of ^bia; and it is added: And
it came to pass, that while he executed the Priest's Office in the Order of his
Course; according to the Custom of the Priest's Office, his Lot was to burn
incense when he went into the Temple of the Lord. This is plainly according to
the Order and Division made by King David, in the 24th of 1 Chronicles. where the
Household of Abia is mentioned as the 8th. principal Household of the Priests.
Neither ought it to be objected, that in that place of S. Luke, Zacharias is
called only Priest, not High or Chief priest: For even the High Priest
himself, properly so called, is oftentimes called by the bare Title of Priest.

That in those days there were many at the same time entitled Highpriests, is
apparent from a great many Places both of the New Testament, and likewise of
Josephus. That those learned Men are mistaken, who think that those many
Highpriests who are mentioned by Josephus, and in the New Testament, as
flourishing at the same time, were only the Expontifices, i. e. those who had
formerly been Highpriests, and were then deprived of their Dignity, but not of
the Title; That that, I say, is a Mistake, is plain from many places of
Josephus. For he often calls those Men Highpriests, who, it is certain, had
never been Highpriests properly so called. In his Hist. De Bello Iud. l. 4. c.
12. (...).
The most approved, says he, of the Highpriests, Jesus the Son of Gamala, and
Ananus the Son of Ananus. The same Jesus the Son of Gamala, is again entitled
(...), High Priest, Ibid. c. 6. and ult. and l. 7. c. 29. for he and Ananus are
the (...) there spoken of; yet he had never been High Priest properly so
called. That he was not the same with Jesus the Son of Gamaliel (as some may be
apt to imagine from the Likeness of the Names) is apparent from P. 1013. (...).
Iosephus's Life, where Gamala and Gamaliel are mentioned together as different
Men. In the same Book ( viz. the Life of Josephus) Simon the Son of Gamaliel,
is said to be (...), one of the Highpriests. So again, de Bell. Iud. l. 2. c.
42. (...), Jesus the Son of Sappha, one of the Highpriests. Yet it is certain,
that neither of these had been High Priest properly so called. Again, l. 7. c.
4. See the Words in the following Paragraph.
our Author Josephus calls himself, and one Jesus (the Son of Thebuthi)
Highpriests. That in that place by Josephus and Jesus the Highpriests, he
means himself and Jesus the Son of Thebuthi; I gather from hence, That in that
place he speaks of those Jews who went over to the Romans in the time of the
Wars; and says, that Josephus and Jesus the Highpriests were two of 'em. And
that he himself and Jesus the Son of Thibuthi (who were both Priests) went over
to the Romans, he mentions in the Course of his History, which he does not do
of any other Josephus or Jesus. In the same place he mentions Matthias the
High Priest, who was killed by Simon the Son of Geiora: And the same he
mentions again, l. 6. c. 33. where he tells us, (...), l. 6. c. 33.
That he was the Son of Boethus: He was therefore distinct from both those
Matthias's who had been Highpriests, properly so called.

There are other learned Men who are of Opinion, That the Sons of the
Highpriests were wont to be honored with that Title; and that thence it came
to pass, that many Highpriests are said to be at the same time. But this
Opinion I can likewise confute by an Observation out of Josephus. It is the
place already quoted where he mentions those Highpriests, etc. who went over
to the Romans. The Words are these: De Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 4. (...) (Sic Cod.
MS. Bigotii Ruffini Versioni consonus) (...).
There were some (says he) that took their Opportunity, and went over to the
Romans: Amongst them there were two High=priests, Josephus and Jesus; and some
the Sons of High=priests, as the three Sons of Ismael, who was beheaded at
Cyrene, and four Sons of Matthias, and one of that other Matthias, whom Simon
the Son of Geiora put to death. Besides them, there went over with the
Highpriests many other Persons of Quality. I observe, that in this Place the
Highpriests, whether properly or improperly so called, are by that Title
distinguished from their Sons. Their Sons therefore were not of course called
Highpriests. It must therefore be some particular Station that distinguished
'em.

According to this Notion which I have laid down concerning the Plurality of
Highpriests, I interpret that Text of the Acts: And Annas and Caiaphas, and
John and Alexander, (...), and all the Highpriests or Heads of the several
Classes of the Priests (who doubtless were all Members of the Sanedrin) were
gathered together at Jerusalem; taking (...) in the same fence, as when Plato
says (...), and as Cicero takes familia, when he says Philosophorum familia.
These things I leave to the Consideration of the Learned. Let us now proceed,
and see what other Explications the aforesaid Places of Scripture do admit of.

1. The Highpriests (properly so called) in the time of the Romans, were not
only very frequently displaced, but (as it is above observed) those two
Highpriests, who immediately preceded Caiaphas, had been each of 'em deposed
after the expiration of one single year; and many of the others were permitted
to govern no longer than that time. This I take to have been the occasion of
that Expression in S. John, That (...). c. 11. v. 49.51. etc. 18. v. 13.
Caiaphas was High Priest for that year. Though he knew, that Caiaphas had
enjoyed the High Priesthood both for some years before, and likewise for many
years after; yet he chooses to conform his Expression to the common Mode. I
might offer likewise this Conjecture, That though Caiaphas held the
High Priesthood much more than a year, yet his Power and Authority was only
annual, and renewed to him every year. This Conjecture may receive a
Confirmation from that Tradition of the ancient Rabbis in their Quoted by
Seldom de Succes. in Pontiff. p. 168.
Gemara; who speaking of the Times of the Hasmonei, tell us, that in those days
the High Priest was changed every year. Which though it be not true of those
Times, yet it is not improbable but that it might be grounded on this, That a
little after, under the Romans, at least for some time, there was some such
thing; if not always an annual Change, yet an annual Confirmation.

2. When it is said in S. Luke, that the Word of God came to John in the time of
Annas and Caiaphas the Highpriests: And again in the Acts; and Annas the
High Priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, etc. In both places Annas
is first mentioned, and in the latter he alone is called High Priest; for no
other reason, but because of his great Power and Authority, because he was an
Ancient, and a more famous Man, had been formerly High Priest himself properly
so called, was at that time the Father-in-law of Caiaphas, and his great
Directour and Guide. And that this was the only Reason, we may gather from the
Scripture it self: For it is said, that, when our Savior was seized, he was
carried before Annas as a Magistrate; and why before Annas? The reason is there
given: (...). c. 18. v. 13.
Because he was the High-priest's Father-in-law: As much as if it had been
said, That therefore he was carried before Annas, because he, as being the
High-priest's Father-in-law, was of very great Power and Authority. That it was
an usual thing amongst the Jews to mention an inferior High Priest improperly
so called, before the superior so called in the proper sense, and that too
without any respect to any superiority on the account of some other Station,
appears moreover from a certain Place in Josephus. (...). De Bell. Jud. l. 2. c.
11.
Quadratus, says he, the Roman Prefect, sent two of the most powerful, who
were likewise Highpriests, Jonathan and Ananias; and Ananus Ananias' s Son,
and other noble Jews to Caesar. Ananias there mentioned, in the latter place,
was at that time High Priest properly so called, as appears from the same
Antiq. l. 20. c. 3. and 5.
Author; and Jonathan was one that had formerly enjoyed that Honor. That
Jonathan was not there mentioned before Ananias, because he was his Superior
in some other Station (suppose as Prince of the Sanedrin) I infer from hence,
that in another Place where Josephus speaks of the same thing, there is no
mention at all made of Him, but only of Ananias, who was High Priest properly
so called. (...). Antiq. l. 20. c. 5.
He sent Ananias the High Priest, and Ananus the Captain, bound to Rome, there
to answer before Caesar for what had been done. Another Example of this nature
we have in the Scripture it self, where Zadok the inferior is mentioned before
Abiathar the superior High Priest: 1 Chronicles. XV. 11.
And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the Highpriests. Hence some have
imagined that Zadok even at that time was superior to Abiathar. But the reason
why he is first mentioned, is, Because by being afterward placed in the room
of Abiathar, and by being the first High Priest of the Temple, and by having
his Posterity established in the High Priesthood, he was at that time, when
that Book was written, much more famous than Abiathar.

. 3. To what has been said concerning our Savior and his Apostles, that they
acknowleged and communicated with the Highpriests of that Age as true
Highpriests; I add, that it appears moreover from C. XI. v. 51.
S. John, that Caiaphas was accepted and owned by God himself. And one of them,
named Caiaphas, being the High Priest that same year, said unto them, Ye know
nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should
die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. And this spoke he not
of himself: but being High=priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should
die for that nation, etc. It appears from these words, both that S. John owned
him to be a true High Priest, and that as High=priest, he received from God the
Power of Prophesying.

. 4. I shall here, for the close of all, take notice of an Answer which some of
our Adversaries have been pleased to make, when urged with these Examples of
the Jews, our Savior, and his Apostles. Upon this account, say they, the
Nation of the Jews, our Savior, and his Apostles, submitted to the present
Possessor though put into the place of another unjustly deposed by the Secular
Authority, because the Temple being in the power of the Secular Magistrate, they
could not perform the more Solemn Acts of their Religion, unless they accepted
of that High Priest whom the Secular Magistrate had set over the Temple. To
this I answer, That if they had looked upon the present Possessor to be no true
High Priest, their being confined to the Temple of Jerusalem, could not have
been any inducement to 'em to submit themselves to him, and to communicate with
him in the Sacrifices which he offered. If the Secular Magistrate would shut up
their Temple, they were not obliged to have any Sacrifices, or any High Priest
at all: And, because they have now no Temple, they have therefore no Priests or
Sacrifices. So, if they had not been permitted to offer up their Sacrifices by
a High Priest duly qualified, they would not have thought themselves obliged to
offer any Sacrifices at all, any more than they would, if he that was their
Governor, should have kept all lawful Sacrifices from 'em, and allowed 'em
only Swine. And how can we imagine, that, if God had not looked upon those
Highpriests to be true and real Highpriests, he would ever have accepted of
the Sacrifices which they offered, or have sent down upon 'em, as Highpriests,
his Spirit of Prophecy? If a Swine had been offered, would God have accepted
that Sacrifice because the Civil Governor would permit no other to be offered?

CHAP. IV.
That the Ancient Christians submitted all along to such Bishops (if accounted
Orthodox) as were put into the places of others deposed by the Secular Power,
tho never so unjustly. No Examples, either for or against us, in the three
first Centuries, all the Emperors being then Heathens. The Example of Felix II.
Bishop of Rome, tho put into the place of Liberius, unjustly deposed by the
bare Authority of the Emperor Constantius, and against Liberius's consent, yet
he is owned by all that accounted him Orthodox, by the Roman Clergy; among them,
by the famous Damasus, who was afterward Pope. He is owned as Metropolitan by
the Bishops of the District of Rome. His Ordinations are allowed of as valid,
by even his Adversary Liberius. He has been all along owned by the Church, as a
Saint, and true Pope.

WHAT was the Practice of the Jews, our Savior, and the Apostles in relation
to the Highpriests, who were put into the places of others, unjustly deposed
by the Civil Authority, that they all along owned 'em as true Highpriests, and
that God himself approved of 'em, we have shown in the two foregoing Chapters.
I come now to show, in the third place, That the same was the Practice of the
Ancient Christians throughout all Ages; (I mean, the generality of 'em in every
particular Age) with respect to their Bishops, provided only, that they thought
'em upon no other account justly exceptionable.

For the three first Ages the Emperors were all Heathens, and if they deposed
any Bishops, they did it to destroy Christianity, and all Bishops in general:
It is not therefore to be expected, that the three first Ages should afford us
any Examples. But as they afford us no Examples, so neither can our Adversaries
produce any one single Example of those Ages, that makes for their Cause. We
can say (says our Adversary, the Learned Vindicator) that even in the Age of
St. Cyprian, it is very notorious, that they then owned no such Power of the
Secular Magistrate to deprive Bishops of their purely Spiritual Power; and that
the Church, as a Society distinct from the State, subsisted on their not owning
it, even as to a deprivation of their particular Districts and Jurisdictions.
It is notorious, and as notorious as any one Tradition of the Catholic Church
in those Ages, (not excepting that of the Canon of the New Testament it self)
that Christians then, and not only then, but in all the former Persecutions
that had been from the times of the Apostles to that very Age, did own
themselves bound to adhere to their Bishops, when it was notorious withal, that
those Bishops were set up and maintained against the consent of the Civil
Magistrate. It is as notorious also, that this Adherence of theirs was not
only matter of Fact (which is all our Adversaries pretend here) but a Duty
owned by them as obliging in Conscience, and as the Result of Principles.
Again, says the Vindicator: Till our Adversaries can disarm us of the Advantage
we have from the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, signified on occasion of
these earliest Instances of Schism, in S. Cyprian' s Age, their Author's
Collection of later Instances, were it never so pertinent to their purpose, can
do them no Service. Should a Person, unacquainted with the Histories and
Writers of those Times, read what the Vindicator has here so positively
asserted, he could not but conclude, that the three first Ages were full of
Examples against us. But they that are not utterly Strangers to the Practice
and the Histories of those Ages, know very well, that all that the Vindicator
lays down, is unworthy of so learned a Man; either utterly untrue, or not in
the least to his Purpose. That the Christians of those Ages did not own any
Power in the Secular Magistrate to deprive Bishops of their purely Spiritual
Power, is what we never denied. That they ever disowned the Power of the
Secular Magistrate to deprive a Bishop of his particular District, if he should
refuse to acknowledge the Authority of that Magistrate; or if upon any other
Civil account he deserved to be deprived, our Adversaries cannot demonstrate.
But it is not now our Business to inquire concerning that. We are only at
present to inquire, Whether ever they refused to submit to the present
Possessor, because his Predecessor was unjustly deposed by the Secular Power.
That they were wont to adhere to their Bishops, though set up and maintained
against the Consent of the Civil Magistrate, we acknowledge. But what is that to
our Adversaries Purpose? If they still adhered to their Bishops, when the
persecuting Emperors endeavored to root out Christianity by driving away the
Bishops, what is that to the Case now before us? Should our Magistrates, like
the Persecutors of those Ages, endeavor to destroy Christianity, by depriving
us of our Bishops, and by suffering none to be substituted in their places;
then those Bishops would be our only Bishops, and as such we should still
adhere to 'em. If in those Ages the Emperors had only deposed such Bishops as
would not own their Authority, or as otherwise deserved to be deprived, and had
suffered other Persons, as worthy, to be put into their Places, who can doubt
but that the Christians of those Ages would have done as we now do, as was done
in the very next Age, and as the Jews had all along done? I shall answer all
that the Vindicator has said, or ever will be able to say, concerning the
Practice of those Ages, with this Challenge,

That he show me any one single Instance of a Bishop disowned by the Church in
those three first Centuries, for being put into the place of another deposed by
the Civil Authority. If he cannot do that: I shall only desire him to produce
the Authority of any one single Writer of those Ages, that directly makes to
this purpose, That a Bishop so constituted ought not, upon that account, to be
owned. Till that be done, whatsoever he is pleased to allege, I shall only say
this of him: Magna dicit, sed nihil probat.

. 2. The first Instance of an Orthodox Bishop, put into the place of another
Orthodox Bishop deposed by the Civil Authority, is that of Felix II. Bishop of
Rome: who in the Year Liberius was banished Arbitione and Lolliano Coss. says
Sulpitius Severus, Hist. Sacr. lib. 2. cap. 55. It appears likewise from other
Authorities, that it was on the year 355.
CCCLV. was put Into the place of Liberius, deposed by the Emperor
Constantius. That Liberius was deposed and banished by the bare Authority of the
Emperor, without any pretense to a Synod, and that too very unjustly; for no
other Reason, but because he was Orthodox, and refused to comply with him in
subscribing to the Condemnation of S. Athanasius, Archbishop of Alexandria, is
manifest, beyond all doubt, from the Testimonies of all Historians, l. 2. c. 37.
Socrates, l. 4. c. 11.
Sozomen, l. 2. c. 16. and 17.
Theodores, Apolog. ad Constable. and Epist. and Solit. p. 834, 835.
S. Athanasius himself, Hist. l. 15. c. 8.
Ammianus Marcellinus, and Libellus Synodicus, c. 51. Marcell. and Faustinus
Praef. ad libell. Prec. Pontifical.
others.

Felix, who was put into his place, though he was rejected by the much greater
number of the Laity of Rome, because he was Ordained by the Arians; and because
he was thought to favor that Party, yet by all such as were satisfied that he
was really Orthodox, was owned and received, without any Regard had to the Lay
and unjust Deprivation of Liberius. Theodoret tells us, that, when he was at
Church, there were none of the People of Rome would go into it. But what does
he say was the reason? It was not because Liberius had been deposed only by
the Civil Authority, but because he communicated with the Arians. After the
great Liberius, says he, there was Ordained one of his Deacons, named Felix,
who indeed had continued firm in the Faith of the Nicene Fathers; (...).
yet with those that endeavored to subvert it, he freely Communicated: And on
that account there were none of the Inhabitants of Rome would go into the
Church when he was there. Should we grant what Theodoret says, that none of the
Inhabitants of Rome would communicate with him: Yet this at least we have
gained by his Testimony, that they would not have refused, if he had not
communicated with Heretics. That the reason of the Peoples refusing to submit
to Pope Felix, was, because they thought him a Heretic, is expressly asserted
by Freculphus Bishop of Lisieux, who flourished in the Year 840. Liberius
Cognoverat etiam Liberius quod Felicis illius successoris, clerus and populus
urbis communionem velut Haeretici declinarent, ejusque solenniis nequaquam
interessent. Chron. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 4.
, says he, knew that the Clergy and the People of the City declined the
Communion of his Successor Felix, as being a Heretic. If Freculphus did not
write this from some antienter Historian, (as indeed he could not read so
concerning the Clergy, for that is very false, as will by and by appear,) then
by that Conjecture it appears, that he did not think there was any other good
Reason for which they might separate from him. It appears likewise by the
Testimony even of S. Athanasius, that the reason of the People's Aversion to
Felix, was, Because he was put in by the Heretics, and was himself thought
one. (...). Epist. ad Solitar. p. 861.
But the People, says he, well knowing the wickedness of the Heretics, did not
suffer 'em (Felix and his Ordainers) to enter into their Churches, but
separated from their Communion. That S. Athanasius thought Felix a Heretic, is
a thing not at all to be wondered at: For he knew nothing of him, and had never
heard of him, but as put by the Arians into Liberius's place. And therefore it
was natural for him to think him, as the People of Rome did, one of that Party.

But though the Generality of the People were so far possessed with Prejudice
against him, through the great and extraordinary Ammianus Marcel. says, That
the People burned with the love of Liberius; ( ejus amore stagrabat) to that
degree, that they that were to carry him away, dared not attempt it in the
daytime, but were forced to do it at midnight; and even at that time they
could not do it without a great deal of difficulty.
Affection which they had for Liberius, as not to be capable of being
convinced, but that he must needs be an Arian: Yet the Clergy of the City of
Rome knew him to be thoroughly Orthodox, and accordingly received him for their
Bishop. Let us hear what the Presbyters Marcellinus and Faustinus say of it.
Sed co die quo Liberius in exilium proficiscebatur, Clerus omnis, i. e.
Presbyteri and Archidiaconus Felix, and ipse Damasus Diaconus, and cuncta
Ecclesiae Officia, omnes pariter, praesente populo Romano, sub jurejurando
firmaverunt, se vivente Liberio Pontificem alterum nullatenus habituros. Sed
Clerus contra fas, quod minime decebat (this they say as the inveterate Enemies
of Damasus, who was one of that Clerus) cum summo perjurii seclere Felicem
Archidiaconum ordinatum in locum Liberii susceperunt. Praefat. ad Libellum
Precum.
The same day, say they, that Liberius went away into banishment, all the
Clergy, that is, the Presbyters, and the Archdeacon Felix, and Damasus
Liberius' s Deacon, and all that bare Office in the Church, with one accord in
the presence of the People obliged themselves by an Oath, not to accept of any
other Bishop as long as Liberius was living. But the Clergy, notwithstanding
their Oath, accepted of Felix the Archdeacon, when Ordained in the room of
Liberius. Let us likewise hear S. Jerome concerning the same Matter. Liberio in
exilium ob fidem truso, omnes Cleri^^ juraverunt ut nullum al^^^ sis^iper^nt,
^erum quum Felix ab Ar^^is fuissit in Sacerdotium subslitu^^, plurimi
p^jeraverunt, and post ^m^um cu^ Felice ejecti sunt, qu^ Lib^rius t^di^ victus
exilii, and in haeretica pravitate subscriben^ Roman quasi victointraverat.
Chron. ad ^^ 350.
Liberius, says he, being driven into Banishment on the account of his Faith,
all the Clergy engaged themselves by an Oath not to receive any other Bishop.
But when Felix was Ordained their Bishop, the greatest part of 'em broke their
Oaths, and were after a years time ejected together with Felix; because
Liberius, to free himself from Banishment, had subscribed to the Heresy of the
Arians, and had entered Rome as a Conqueror. 'Twas this general Compliance of
the Clergy that excited the angry Laity to violate those Immunities and
Privileges which had formerly been granted the Clergy of Rome. This occasioned
a new Law for the Confirmation of those Immunities and Exemptions, to secure
the Clergy of that City from Indignities offered 'em by the Laity. Which Law is
now extant in the Theodosian lib. 16. tit. 2. leg. 14.
Code, directed by the Emperor Constantius to Pope Felix. From these Relations
of S. Jerome, and the Presbyters Marcellinus and Faustinus, there are three
Things to be observed. 1. That the Clergy obliged themselves by an Oath not to
accept of any other Bishop whilst Liberius was living. Now what need had they
to enter into such an engagement, if, in their Opinions, and according to the
Principles of those Times, Whosoever should be put into Liberius's place whilst
alive, would on that account be no Bishop? They knew of no such Doctrine. 2.
That though they had took an Oath, and though Felix was Ordained by the Arians, and
though their Aflection for Liberius was great, though all these things concurred to
oblige 'em not to receive Felix for their Bishop; yet because they knew him to
be truly Orthodox, and no promoter of the Arian Interest, as they expected he
would be whom the Arians should Ordain in Liberius's place, they thought
themselves obliged to act contrary to the Oath they had taken, and to
acknowledge him as their Bishop. 'Twas Orthodoxy they had regard to, not by whom
he was Ordained, or in whose place he was substituted. Their Love for Liberius
was inferior to their Love of the Church. And as for their Oath; when they
took it, they did it for the security of the Orthodox Faith: When they saw that
such a one was Ordained, as they did not expect, one whom they well knew to be
no promoter of the Arian Belief, they thought it no longer obliged 'em. It Is
observable, in the Third place, That as almost all the Clergy submitted to
Felix, as their Bishop; so after he was expelled, they still adhered to him in
opposition to Liberius. This is clear not only by the Testimony of S. Jerome,
who says they were ejected together with Felix; but likewise by the more
express words of Marcellinus and Faustinus. Here possibly it may be objected:
If the Clergy thought themselves in Conscience obliged to submit to the present
Possessor, because he was Orthodox, Why did they not leave Felix, and return
again to Liberius, when he was again the Possessor? The Reason is plain. 'Twas
because Liberius, in the time of his Banishment, had subscribed to the Arians;
and they looked upon him as no longer an Orthodox Bishop. That Liberius did so,
is certain: For though some of the Greek Writers, as Socrates and Theodoret, do
not seem to have known any thing of it; and though others amongst the Latins, as
Sulpitius Severus and Phaebadius, make no mention of it; yet it is positively
asserted by S. Jerome in the Words above cited, and De Scriptor. Eccles. in
Fortunatiano.
elsewhere; as likewise by Ad Constantion Imp.
S. Hilary, Hist. l. 4. c. 3.
Philostorgius, l. 4. c. 15.
Sozomen, and Epist. ad Solit. p. 837.
S. Athanasius. And that indeed was the Reason why Felix was turned out, and he
again restored. For eight years together they adhered to Felix, in opposition
to Liberius; i. e. during all the Life of Felix; for Marcel. and Faustinus in
Praefat. ad Libellum Precum.
so long Felix lived after Liberius was restored, though some say he died in a
short time after his Ejectment. After Felix's Death, being by that time better
satisfied concerning Liberius's Faith; that though he had apostatized, by
subscribing to the Arians, yet now again he was Orthodox, they reunite
themselves to him. He pardons them for their breaking their Oath (as he called
it) they him for his Apostasy.

It is very remarkable, that the famous Damasus, who afterward was himself
Pope of Rome, was one of those of the Clergy that submitted and adhered to
Felix. At that time that Liberius was banished, he was his Deacon, and for some
time he accompanied him in his Banishment: But though he loved him so well, and
though he himself had been sworn with the rest of the Clergy, he left him
however, and returned to Rome, and there submitted to the new Bishop Felix.
This appears from the Testimony Cum Liberio Damasus Diaconus ejus se s^nulat
proficisci; unde fugiens de itinere, Roman rediit, ambitione corruptus.
of the Presbyters Marcellinus and Faustinus. They add indeed, that what he did
was through Ambition: But that is only a malicious Insinuation, which was very
natural to them, they being, when they wrote, the mortal Enemies of Damasus,
and engaged in a Schism against him: And indeed their whole Book is nothing but
a Petition preferred to the Emperors against him. With this Testimony of
Marcellinus and Faustinus, as to matter of fact, agrees that Tradition of the
Pontisical, that Damasus was one of those Presbyters that buried the Body of
Felix. Hence likewise it came to pass, That, after the Death of Liberius, that
part of the Clergy that had formerly adhered to Pope Felix, chose Damasus Pope
in opposition to Vrsinus (or Vrsicinus.) This appears by the Testimony of an
ancient Register of the Roman Church, as ancient as those Times, which Quo
mortuo Presbyteri aliquot and Diaconi S. R. E. Liberianae partis statim
Ursicinum Diaconum Episcopum constituunt, and a Paulo Episcopo Tiburtino
ordinari faciunt. Hi vero qui Felici adhaeserant, Damasum in Schismate etiam
ipsi Pontificem Romanum renunciant. Onuphrius Not. ad Platinam ad vitam Felicis
II. ex Registro (ab Ursinianis scripto.)
Onuphrius Panvinius quotes; and it is likewise related by Marcellinus and
Faustinus; who give this account of that Affair: Tune Presbyteri and Diaconi,
Ursinus, Amantius and Lupus, cum plebe sancta, que Liberio fidem servaverat in
exilio constituo, caeperunt in Basilica Iulii procedere, and sibi Ursinum
Diaconum Pontificem in locum Liberit ordinar^ deposcunt. Perjuri vero in
Lucinis Damasum sibi Episcopum in locum Felicis expostulant.
Liberius, say they, being deceased, the Presbyters and Deacons, Ursinus,
Amantius, and Lupus, with the holy People who had continued firm to Liberius in
his Banishment, meet together, and Ursinus is chose Bishop in the room of
Liberius; but the perjured Party (so they speak, as having been themselves
Liberians, and as being at that time the mortal Enemies of Damasus) chose
Damasus their Bishop in the room of Felix. So firmly had Damasus, and the rest
of that Party, adhered to Felix, that here they say, 'twas in Felix's room that
Damasus was chose Bishop by that Party. This, I say, is highly remarkable, that
not only the much greater Part of the Clergy of Rome, but likewise the famous
and the learned Damasus did not at all doubt of the lawfulness of submitting to
the present Orthodox Possessor, though the Predecessor were never so unjustly
deposed by the Lay-power. This was both the Opinion and the Practice of one who
is wont to be called the Great, the Pious, and the Orthodox Damasus; he that
for his Piety has been all along honored by the Church as a Saint; the Cleri
speculumque decusque, as a Nic. Montacutius in versibus de Romany Pontif.
Modern Poet calls him; That sanctus and beatus Damasus, as Epist. 30. ad
Valentin, Augustum.
S. Ambrose and Lib. 6. contra Iulianum, c. 12.
S. Augustine call him; That Vir laudabilis, as he is called by Lib. 10. Epist.
41.
Symmachus; That mentis sanctissimae Vir, as he is styled by the Emperor
Rescripto apud Sirmondianas Conciliorum Italiae Epistolas, p. 94.
Gratian; That Vir egregius and eruditus in Scripturis; That Ecclesiae Doctor,
as he is termed by Apolog. ad Pammachium prope finem.
S. Jerome; the most glorious Damasus, as (...), Theodoret Hist. l. 5. c. 10.
Theodoret calls him; he that was (...). Ibid. l. 2. c. 22.
adorned with all sorts of Virtue, and was always ready to defend all true
Apostolical Doctrines, both by his Words and by his (...). Ibid. l. 5. c. 2*
and Libellus Cynodicus, c. 65.
Actions, as the same Author says of him; He (in a word) whom the Emperor
Theodosius, by a Cod. Theodos. lib. 16. tit. 1. leg. 2. By Isaac Catholicus,
Invectiva 1. in Armenios p. 390, he is reckoned amongst the (...).
Law, makes the Rule and Standard of all Orthodoxy. It may perhaps be objected,
That though our Damasus, when he chiefly flourished, was accounted so great and
so worthy a Man; yet in Felix's time he might be but a young Man: and so his
Authority will be much less considerable. To this I answer, That in the time of
Pope Felix, our Damasus was so far from being a Damasus was 23 Years old in the
time of the Council of Nice.
young Man, that, when Felix was made Pope, he was above fifty Years old; and
when Felix died, to whom he had constantly adhered, he was above sixty: And it
was not full a Year after Felix's Death before he himself was advanced to the
Honor of the Popedom. This is manifest from hence, That after he was made
Pope, viz. upon Liberius's Death, in the Year 366, in the Month of October, he
lived, according to those that say Pontificale, Ado in Martyrolog. etc.
most, but 18 Years and 2 or 3 Months, more truly but From October in the
Consulship of Gratian and Dagalaiphus, in which Damasus was made Bishop, as
appears by the Presb. Marcellinus and Faustinus, to October in the Consulship
of Antonius and Syagrius, in which he died, as appears by Marcellinus Gomes,
are just 16 Years.
16 Years; and yet, when he died, he was as S. Jerome, his Familiar Friend,
attests, about Catalogo Script. Eccles. prope octogenarius, which Sophronius
translates (...): So Suidas out of him.
80 Years of Age. He died, as Marcellinus Comes witnesses, in the Month of
October, when Antonius and Syagrius were Consuls, that is, in the Year 382. He
was therefore 53 Years of Age when Felix was made Bishop, and, when Felix died,
he was in the 63d. Year of his Age. Felix, as is above said, was promoted in
the room of Liberius, in the Year 355. and was again turned out upon the
Restoration of Liberius, somewhat less than two Years after: Eight Years (as
has been already observed) he lived after that, and died on the 10th. of the
Kalends of December, when Valentinian and Valens were Consuls, i. e. in the
Year 365. Liberius survived Felix but about 10 Months, for he died on the 8th.
of the Kalends of October, in the Consulship of Gratian and Dagalaiphus, i. e.
the Year following. This is plain from the express Words of the Presbyters
Marcellinus and Faustinus. I need not add any thing, to consute that Story,
which we find in two fabulous Lives of Pope Damasus, That when Pope Liberius
was banished, he constituted our Damasus his Vicar to supply his place in his
absence; and that he accordingly did so, till Liberius was restored. If that be
true, then he did not adhere to Pope Felix: But it needs but very little
Judgment, were there no good Authority for what we have here laid down, to
discover the falseness of that Monkish Story; and it is easy to show how little
the Writers of it knew, relating to Liberius's Banishment. I shall take it for
granted, that there is no one so Injudicious as to hearken to it.

I must here add, That though our Authors, when they speak of the People's
Aversion to Felix, are wont to make use of general Terms; and tell us, that all
the People refused to communicate with him; yet I do not believe, that they
ought to be understood strictly, but only of the much greater Part. That Felix
had a very considerable Party, not only amongst the Clergy, but likewise
amongst the Laity, seems to me very probable from hence, That within a Year
after Felix's Death, when Vrsinus (or Vrsicinus) was chose Pope by the
Liberians, and Damasus by the Felicians, there arose a great Contention, not
only among the Clergy, but likewise among the Laity; and Damasus then had the
greatest part of the People on his side, and many of 'em were so zealous and
violent for him, as that much blood was spilt. This Schism and Contention seems
to have proceeded partly from some former Heats and Sidings of the People. I
know, that the Presbyters Marcellinus and Faustinus say, that Damasus had
bribed the People with a great Sum of Money: But that is only a malicious
Suggestion, such as might be expected from Persons so much his Enemies. I shall
not take notice, that in the Pontifical it is said, That, when Felix was
Martyred, there suffered with him multi Clerici and Fideles; not only many of
the Clergy, but likewise many others of the Faithful: The Story of his being
put to Death is too uncertain, much more the Circumstances of it. Yet at least
this appears from that Story, that amongst the Ancients 'twas believed, that
many of the Laity, as well as of the Clergy, adhered to him.

Having thus shown, what Reception Pope Felix met with at Rome, I shall show in
the next place, that, though he was made Bishop in the room of the unjustly
deposed Liberius, yet, first, the Catholic Bishops of his own district
communicated with him, and received him as their Metropolitan. Secondly, His
Ordinations were received and allowed of as valid, by even his Adversary
Liberius. Thirdly, The whole Western Church has all along owned him as one of
the true Bishops of Rome.

It cannot be expected, but that he who was Ordained by the Arians in the place
of one deposed for opposing the Arians, and likewise communicated with the
Arians, should by many, be both thought and spoken ill of. But whoever they
were, that did not approve of our Pope Felix, because they thought him an
Arian, or because he was ordained by the Arians, or because he communicated
with the Arians, their Authority and Judgment make nothing at all against us. He
was thought (as has been already observed) not only by the People of Rome, but
likewise by S. Athanasius, an Arian. So (...). l. 2. c. 37.
Socrates calls him expressly, though he mentions with all, that others affirmed,
he was Orthodox. So likewise S. Jerome in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
Writers; though indeed in Sophronius's Greek Translation of that Work, the word
Arian is not to be found. From this ill Opinion that many had conceived of him,
it came to pass, that by some there was this false story raised concerning him,
That as soon as he was put by the Arians into Liberius's place, he was punished
by God with the loss of his Eyes, and afterward died of a Pestilential
Disease. This Story is told of him by the Author of that Life of S. Athanasius,
which is extant in Biblioth. Cod. 258. p. 1445.
Photius. Hence likewise it was, that the Writer of one of the Lives of Pope
Damasius (whom another follows in his Fiction) invented that Story above
mentioned, that Liberius made Damasus his Vicar to oppose the Endeavors of the
Arians during the time of his Banishment: He had read in S. Jerome, that Felix
was ordained by the Arian Acacius (so he himself writes) and thence he
concluded, that Felix himself was an Arian. Thence he further inferred, that
some one was appointed by Liberius, to oppose in his stead, the endeavors of
the Arians; and who should that be, but his Damasus? Hence likewise it was,
that the Chronologer Marcellinus Comes thought he ought to be excepted out of
the number of the Bishops of Rome. That his thinking him an Arian, was the
reason of his excepting him, may be gathered from hence, that he likewise
Damasus Roman Ecclesiae, exceptis Liberio and Felice, XXXV. Episcopus.
excepts Liberius, because he at last had subscribed to the Arian Belief. In
like manner Chron. ad an. 329 349.
S. Jerome calls S. Cyril of Jerusalem, and Meletius of Antioch, Heretics; and
he will not allow 'em a place amongst the Bishops of those Sees; because they
were made Bishops by the Arians, and at first seemed to favor 'em. Yet even in
his Time almost all the Greek Church received 'em into Communion, and very
highly esteemed 'em; and now by both Churches they are honored with the Title
of Saints, By De Schismate Donatist. l. 2. p. 36. Marco Successit Julius, Iulio
Liberius, Liberio Damasus, etc.
Optatus Melevitanus and Epist. 165. in the same words with Optatus.
S. Augustine, where they reckon up the Successions of the Bishops of Rome, our
Felix is omitted: But from thence it cannot be inferred, that they did not own
him as one of the Bishops of Rome. For it is not their Design to reckon up all
the Popes that had been, but only to show, for the Confutation of the
Donatists, that at Rome they had had a Succession of Bishops from the Times of
the Apostles. Since therefore Liberius was again restored, and so was the
immediate Predecessor of Damasus, as he was the Successor of Julius, it was not
at all for their purpose to make any mention of Felix. It is not the business
of Optatus, says a learned Annotator, to give us the Names of all the Popes,
but only the Successions. And it would have been ridiculous in him to have
mentioned Felix as the Successor of Liberius, since Liberius not only outlived
Felix, but likewise enjoyed the Pontificate after his death. Upon this account
likewise, S. Augustine in his 165 th. Epistle, where, upon the like occasion,
he reckons up the Successions of the Bishops of Rome, makes no mention of
Felix. Thus the learned Meric Casaubon, though he was not at all concerned
whether Felix were owned as a true Pope or no. It Is observed by Anastasius, in
his Edition of the Pontifical, that the Time of Felix's Government is usually
comprehended in that of Liberius. Thus it is in the Catalogues of Kings; if a
King has Reigned twice, the Name of that King who Reigned, in the Time of the
others Expulsion, is very frequently omitted. And this was the reason why Felix
is omitted by Theodoret in that Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome which he has
subjoined at the end of his History.

These things I thought fit to premise, to prevent Mistakes, and to cut off all
Objections beforehand. We will now proceed to the Things proposed to be proved.

1. That the Catholic Bishops of his District acknowleg'd him as their
Metropolitan, and that others likewise, as many as had an occasion,
communicated with him, may be proved by many Arguments: First, From the three
Epistles which are extant in Isidorus Mercator, one from S. Athanasius and the
Synod of Alexandria to him, in which he is owned as true Bishop of Rome, and
addressed to as such; another from him and a Synod at Rome, in answer to that
of S. Athanasius; and a third from him and a Synod at Rome, to the
Church-Catholick. For though it be certain, that all those Epistles are
altogether fictitious; yet from them it is manifest, that at that time in which
they were written, viz. about 900 Years ago, it was taken for granted, that
Felix was generally owned by all Catholic Bishops. 2dly, From the Authority of
the Pontifical, in which it is said, that he called a Synod of 48 Bishops, and
condemned the Emperor Constantius and the Arians. And this is affirmed not
only in the Vulgar Pontifical ascribed to Anastasius, but likewise in that
which was published in the time of the Emperor Justinian the Elder, above 1150
Years ago; viz. about the Year 534. If it be doubted whether there were really
such a Synod called by Pope Felix, as the Pontifical affirms; yet at least thus
much must be granted, that near 1200 Years ago there was an undoubted Tradition
in the Church, that the Bishops of the District of Rome acknowleg'd him for
their Metropolitan. But 3dly. It appears from the Inscription which was found
on his Body, when that was took up at Rome in the Time of Pope Gregory XIII.
that there was such a Synod called by him. The Inscription was this See
Daronius's Annals, an. 357.. 50.
: CORPUS S. FELICIS PAPAE ET MARTYRIS QUI DAMNAVIT CONSTANTIVM. The aforesaid
Pope Gregory XIII. having ordered the Roman Martyrology, to be reviewed and
corrected, Baronius was very zealous to have our Felix omitted, as doubting of
his being a Martyr, (and because he thought, that his being owned as one of the
true Popes, might prove a good Argument against some Pretensions of the Church
of Rome:) In this he was by many opposed, especially by the Card. Julius
Antonius Sanctorius. In the midst of this Contention the Body chanced to be
found, together with the Bodies of some other Saints, (by a Miracle, say the
Popish Historians,) and that put an end to the Controversy. Though there is no one
more apt than my self to suspect the Integrity of Romanists in things of this
Nature; and though the time in which this Body was found is enough to make one
suspect at first thought, that the Inscription of that Body which was found,
was only a pia fraus of the Cardinal Sanctorius's Party: Yet if we feriously
consider, 'twill be hard to think it an Imposture, since all the great Men of
Rome saw the Body, amongst them Baronius, who owns himself confuted by it. It Is
true, I do not believe that the being a second time baptized was that for which
Constantius was condemned by that Synod: But that is not said in the
Inscription; and 'twas only the mistake of the Author of the Pontifical.
Neither do I believe that that Synod was called before Pope Felix was ejected:
I rather think that 'twas after he was ejected, and that it consisted of s^al^
Bishops (scarce so many, I suppose, as 48.) as adhered to him, in the time of
his Ejectment, in opposition to the lapsed Liberius. Neither, Lastly, do I
believe, that Felix was ever put to death. The whole truth I take to be this:
He was therefore called a Martyr by his Adherents, and so entitled in the
abovesaid Inscription, because he was ejected by the Heretics, and suffered
That the Title of Martyr was frequently, given to such, though they died a
natural Death, See Forbes^i Instruct. Hist. Theol. l. 12. c. 2. etc. and
Suiceri Thesa^ltus.
much for his Faith, and died a Confessor. Hence afterward arose that
Tradition concerning his being put to death, the Title of Martyr being
understood by Posterity in the more common sense. 4thly. It is said in both the
Pontificals, as well the ancient as that ascribed to Anastasius, that Felix in
his time Ordained 5 Deacons, 21 Presbyters, and 18 (or 19) Bishops. And the
truth of this cannot with any show of Reason be questioned; since 'twas easy
for the Author to know it by the public Registe^s. 5thly. I observe, that
amongst all the ancient Writers, who have mentioned his succeeding Liberius,
though he governd The Pontifical says a year, and two months. It is certain from
Theodoret, S. Athanasiu^ Epist. ad Solit. p. 837. and Apolog. ad Constable. p. 807.
and the Presb. Marcellinus and Faustinus, that 'twas somewhat more than two
years that Liberius was in Banishment.
above a year, and though they generally mention that the Laity of Rome refused
to communicate with him; yet not a word in any, that the Bishops of the
District of Rome refused to own him for their Metropolitan. Had the Bishops of
his District refused to own him, it must needs have made such a noise, as that
some one or other would have mentioned it.

2. That our Felix Ordained many Bishops and others, is apparent, not only from
the express Testimony of the Pontifical, but likewise from Reason it self,
since he governed, as I but now said, above the space of a Year, and Liberius
was in Banishment above two Years: Now that all those whom Felix had ordained,
were received and approved of by Liberius when he was again restored, is
apparent from this, That there is not a word in any Author of so much as a
Question raised against 'em And of this Baronius himself, though no great Friend
of Felix's, does not at all doubt.

I here observe farther, First, That the Schismatical Presbyters, Marcellinus
and Faustinus, and the Writer of Onuphrius's Register, who likewise lived in
those days, though they were all Vrsinians, and hated all those that adhered to
Felix, yet giving an account what became of the Clergy that adhered to Felix,
they only say, that after the death of Felix they Post annos octo defunctus
est Felix, Liberius misericordiam fecit in Glericos qui perjuraverant, eosque
in locis propriis suscepit.
had their Perjury pardoned by Liberius, and so were restored to their former
Stations in the Church. They do not say, that they were pardoned or absolved
for any Sin committed in receiving a second Bishop, but that they were pardoned
for their Perjury. The other, it seems, was not reckoned a sin by either
Liberius or those Writers. Secondly, That it appears from the Historian
Philostorgius, that Felix, after he was ejected was still accounted a Bishop.
Felix, says he, who in the absence of Liberius had been consecrated Bishop of
Rome, when Liberius was again restored, retired to another place, (...). l. 4..
3.
enjoying indeed the Honor and Title of a Bishop, but without any District.
There are some of the Moderns, as Platina (if I well remember) and others, who
say, That after he was deposed at Rome, he was made the Bishop of some other
Place; but that indeed is not true. They seem to have been deceived by those
words of Theodoret; (...).

3. That the Church of Rome, and withal, the whole Western Church has all
along owned him for one of the true Bishops of Rome, appears from all their
ancient Catalogues, Martyrologies, and Breviaries. By all which it is manifest,
not only that they have all along owned him as a true Bishop of Rome, but
likewise, that they have all along worshipped him as one of their The Day
dedicated to him is the 29th. of July.
Saints. Vt verus Pontifex habetur (says the Learned Papebrochius) memoratus in
omnibus Catalogis, Breviariis, and Martyrologis, and haclenus in Ecclesia
officio proprio colitur. Hence it was that those Epistles were forged in his
Name, which are extant in Mercator amongst the Epistles which are forged in the
Names of the rest of the Popes. Hence likewise in the ancient Collectors of
Canons, such as Ivo Carnotensis and Decreti part 2. Cause. 2. Qu. 6. c. 16. and
Cause. 3. Qu. 3. and 5. c. 11.
Gratian, there are extant certain Decrees in his Name, as Authentic and good
Law, taken out of the aforesaid Epistles. He is owned as a Saint and true Pope
by the Historians, Martinus, an Archbishop of Poland, in the Thirteenth
Century; Marianus Scotus in the Eleventh Century; Albo Floriacensis in the
Tenth; Anastasius the Librarian, and the German Author of the Book de Vitis
Pontificum attributed to Luitprandus Bishop of Cremona, in the Ninth. So
likewise in the ancient Martyrologies. In the genuine Martyrology of our
Venerable Bede near 1000 Years ago, and in those of Florus and Writ in Verse,
and erroneously ascribed to Bid under the Title of Ephemerides.
Wandelbertus, he is mentioned. In others more fully. In the Roman published by
Baronius: Sancti Felicis II. Papae and Martyris. In that of Vsuardus: Natalis
Sancti Felicis Papae, qui a Constantio Augusto a sede sua dejectus, etc. In
that of Notkerus: Nativitas sancti Felicis Papae. Again, Ejecit Constantius
sanctum Felicem Vrbis Episcopum de sede Episcopatus sui. In that of Ado
Archbishop of Vienna, who flourished in the Ninth Century, as did likewise
Vsuardus and Notkerus: Beati Felicis Pontificis. Again in the same words with
Notkerus, Ejecit Imp. Constantius, etc. Again, Depositus sanctus ac beatissimus
Papa Felix. In that of Rabanus Archbishop of Mentz, who flourished in the
beginning of the same Age; Passio Felicis Papae and Martyris. In another
ascribed to Bid, and extant amongst his Works, but not truly his; S. Felicis
Pontificis. In the Sacramentarium of Pope Gregory the Great, who flourished in
the Year 590: Beati Felicis Martyris tui atque Pontificis intercessio gloriosa
nos protegat. To these I add the ancient Pontifical, which was writ (as I said)
above 1150 Years ago, about the Year 534, in which he is mentioned as a Saint,
and one of the true Popes. And here again I must repeat what has been already
observed, That so great was the Honor which the Church had for him in the time
of Pope Damasus, that it is said by the Vrsinian Presbyters Marcellinus and
Faustinus, that Damasus was chose, not into the room of Liberius, but in
Felix's place. Though that cannot be true, since, as those Presbyters themselves
attest, those of the Clergy who chose Pope Damasus, had after Felix's death,
been reconciled to Liberius, and they did not pretend to choose Damasus till
after the decease of Liberius: Yet (I say) it is manifest from that
Insinuation, that all Damasus's Party, that is, the Church, at least the Clergy
of the Church, had still a great honor for Felix, and still looked upon him as
one of their true Popes.

As he is owned for a true Pope by the whole Western Church, so likewise in the
Eastern by Nicephorus the Patriarch of Constantinople, who flourished in the
Year 806. and that too, though Nicephorus (...).
well knew, that he came into the place of Liberius when Liberius was unjustly
deposed by the Emperor. In his Chronology, as Liberius is reckoned the 35th.
Bishop of Rome, so our Felix is called the 36th.

To all this I add, That among all the ancient Writers, who have mentioned our
Felix his succeeding Liberius, there is not so much as one, that either says
expressly, or gives any Hint, that upon that account, it was not lawful for
the Church of Rome to submit to him: or that upon that account he could not be
a true Bishop. The Schismatical Presbyters, Marcellinus and Faustinus, are the
only Writers that have any thing looking that way. They say, that the Clergy
of Rome accepted of Pope Felix contra fas quod minime decebat cum summo
perjurii scelere. But it does not appear from these words, that they thought it
was a Sin to receive a Bishop when the other had been unjustly deposed: They
only seem to reflect upon their being forsworn; so they afterward say that
Liberius pardoned their Perjury, and do not take notice of any other Sin
pardoned. If they meant any more, it is not at all to be wondered at, in regard
that Felix was ordained by the Arians, and it is certain that the said
Presbyters were great Admirers of Lucifer Calaritanus, and did not allow of a
Bishop ordained by the Arians. I add, That whatsoever their Opinion might be,
it deserves not at all to be regarded, since what they write is directly
against Pope Damasus, who was one of that Party: And since when they wrote,
they were Schismatics, and had never any regard to the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Church. It appears in particular of the Historian Sozomen, that he never
knew any thing of our Adversary's Doctrine. He says, that when Liberius was
restored, he and Felix were Co-bishops of Rome: But Felix, (...) l. 4. c. 15.
To the same purpose Nicephorus Callist. l. 9. c. 37. out of Sozomen.
says he, after Liberius was joined with him, lived but a little while, and
Liberius alone governed the Church. And this indeed happened by God's
particular Providence, lest the Sea of Peter should be dishonored, by being
governed at the same time by two Bishops; which is both repugnant to the Unity,
and against the Laws of the Church. Tho ' this be Sozomen had heard that Felix
was still owned by one part of the Clergy; and thence he inferred, that he and
Liberius were Bishops together in Rome.
not altogether true as to matter of fact, yet from what he says it is easy to
discover that this was his opinion, That Felix was a true Bishop, and that it
was lawful to acknowledge him as such. Yet no one more tender of the Church's
Honor than he: as appears from these same Words.

Though we have been a long while in the Company of Pope Felix, and the Reader (I
presume) begins to grow weary of it: Yet before we shake hands there must one
thing more be cleared. It Is said in the Pontifical, that when Liberius was
deposed, 'twas by his own Advice that Felix was made Bishop in his room. In
this the Pontifical is followed by several of the Moderns; in particular by
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, who Chron. part 2. Tit. 9. c. 2.
tells us, That either Liberius resigned, and so, together with others, chose
Felix for his Successor, or else he made him his Vicar General to supply his
place in his absence. If any thing of this be true, then all that we have
hitherto said makes nothing for our purpose: It therefore highly concerns us to
lay open the falseness of that Story. We shall do it with a great deal of ease;
and that from these Considerations. First, That the Clergy of Rome, when
Liberius was about to leave the City, engaged themselves to him by an Oath not
to accept of any other Bishop whilst he was alive, and that when they did
accept of Felix, they were looked upon as perjured. This is expressly attested
by S. Jerome, the Presbyters Marcellinus and Faustinus, and the Writer of the
Register quoted by Onuphrius who all lived at that time. Secondly, That the
same S. Jerome, and likewise Ruffinus, and Socrates, and S. Athanasius himself,
expressly affirm, and others plainly intimate, that Felix was put into
Liberius's Place by the Arians. Thirdly, That, Liberius being again restored,
Felix, with all those of the Clergy that had submitted to him, were with
violence expelled, and Liberius entered Rome as a Conqueror. So S. Jerome
affirms, and with him agree the Pontifical it self, Theodoret, Socrates,
Onuphrius's Register, and the Presbyters Marcellinus and Faustinus. To
conclude; That Story of the Pontifical that Liberius consented to the making of
Felix Pope, is by Baronius himself rejected as not in the least to be hearkened
to. The falseness of it seems to have been discovered by Platina himself, and,
long before him, by the Author of the Book De Vitis Pontificum ascribed to
Luitprandus: who, though in other things they follow the Pontifical, and say, as
that does, that the Sacerdotes called a Synod, and made Felix Bishop; yet they
leave out those words, Cum Consilio Liberii.

I shall only add, That if Liberius gave his Consent to the Election of Felix,
then Felix was the rightful and the only Bishop. Since therefore Liberius was
again received and owned by the Catholic Church, when Felix was deposed by the
Emperor's bare Authority, we should (if we granted that Story to be true) only
change one Instance for another, not lose one.

And thus have we done with the famous Example of Felix and Liberius. An
Example which our Adversaries (as I found after this was written) are so
unhappy as to allege for their Cause. They tell us that Felix was rejected by
the Catholics of Rome: So the Author of the Page 7.
Further Account of the Baroccian MS. and the Author of the Page 60.
Unity of Priesthood, etc. Once more, says the latter, and then most or all my
Instances, will be reviewed and made good, and that relates to Liberius and
Felix: Liberius was banished, and Felix his Deacon was made Bishop in his
stead; A man, says Sozomen, always reported to be firm to the Nicene Faith,
and as to matters of Religion altogether blameless. And yet when Liberius was
re-call'd from Banishment, Felix was forced to retire; nay, the People of Rome,
though requested thereunto by the Emperor, would not so much, according to
Theodoret, as suffer him to remain Co-partner with Liberius in the Bishopric.
From whence it is evident, let Mr. Hody say what he will to the contrary, that
there is something more required in a new Bishop, than barely to be Orthodox.
It Is impossible but these Authors must have known at least something of what
has been above demonstrated: But they did not think that it would be for their
profit to let their Readers know all. To confirm our Assertion, (says the
Author first quoted) that the Ancients thought it unlawful to submit to the
present Possessor, when the Predecessor was deposed by the Emperor, you may
command a great many Instances from the Churches of France, Italy, Asia, Egypt,
and the like; at present I shall only produce that of Felix and Liberius. I am
sorry those many Instances of France, Italy, Asia, Egypt, etc. were concealed
by our Author. What sort of Instances they are, we may guess by that of P.
Felix, which, as one of his best, he thinks fit to produce. When he shall be
pleased to draw out the rest of his Artillery, I dare engage, they will either
appear to be nothing at all but Wood, or may easily be turned against him. I
expect the former, in regard that to prove his Assertion, he produces the
Example of S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, who, says he, was banished by the
Emperor Constantius, yet was still owned as Bishop of that See: And that he
proves from those words of his, in his Book which he wrote to the Emperor;
Licet in exilio permanens, and Ecclesiae adhuc per Presbyteros meos Communionem
distribuens. If S. Hilary continued still Bishop of Poictiers, what is that to
the Cause now before us, since there was not any Orthodox Person made Bishop in
his stead? So far was he from having an Orthodox Person for his Successor, that
(while he was in Banishment) he had not any Successor at all. He was never
deposed, but barely banished: and accordingly after four years time he was
again restored.

CHAP. V.
The Catholics of Alexandria reject Lucius, because he was an Arian, not
because his Predecessor Peter, was unjustly deposed by the Emperor. Our
Adversaries Doctrine not known to the said Peter.. 1. S. Briccius of Tours
deposed by the People. Yet Justinian and Armentius his Successors, are owned as
true Bishops of Tours Armentius is owned as true Bishop by S. Briccius himself,
though he had never given up his Right, but had always claimed it.. 2. S.
Euthymius refuses to communicate with Theodosius, Patriarch of Jerusalem,
because he was a Heretic, and had embrued his Hands in the Blood of many
Persons, not because the Patriarch Juvenalis, whose See he had usurpt, was
still living. Theodosius's Ordinations are allowed of as valid.. 3. Acacius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, refuses to communicate with Timotheus Aelurns, not
because he was put into the place of Timotheus Salofaciolus, unjustly deposed
by the Heretical Usurper Basiliscus, but because he was a Heretic and a
Parricide.. 4. Jo. Talaias, the Orthodox Patriarch of Alexand. being deposed by
the bar^ Authority of the Emperor Zeno, though he still laid claim to the Sea,
yet Petrus Mongus his Successor, is acknowleged by all that accounted him
Orthodox, by Acacius and Fravitas, Patriarchs of Constantinop. by Martyrius
Patriarch of Jerusalem, by (almost) all the Bishops of the Eastern Church; That
they who refused to communicate with Mongus, viz. the Western Bishops, the
Bishops of Dardania, etc. did it only because they thought him a Heretic; That
Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople communicated with him till he found him
to be a Heretic, then for sook his Communion. Pope Simplicius, when he heard
that Talaias was to be deposed, was well enough satisfied, till he understood,
that Mongus, whom he accounted a Heretic, was designed for his Successor.
Whether Orthodox Bishops unjustly ejected by the Emperor be restored, or new
Orthodox Bishops be created, he values not, he only desires that they that are
made Bishops should be Orthodox. Pope Felix III. not at all concerned for
Talaias's being deprived without a Synod, only dislikes that one, whom he
accounted a Heretic, was constituted in his place.. 5. Calendion Patriarch of
Antioch, being deposed by the Emperor Zeno, without any Synod, the Orthodox
Bishops, viz. Pope Felix III. Quintianus Asculanus, Justinus Siculus, Acacius
Constantinopolitanus, Antheon Arsinoites, Faustus Apolloniates, Pamphilus
Abydensis, Asclepiades of Trallium, etc. refuse to communicate with his
Successor, Petrus Gnapheus, only because he was a Heretic; take no notice of
his being constituted in the room of one Unsynodically deposed, and are ready
to communicate with him as a true Patriarch of Antioch, if he will but forsake
his Heresy.

IN the year CCCLXXI. Peter tho Successor of S. Athanasius in the Sea of
Alexandria, because he was Orthodox, was violently deposed by Palladius the
prefect of Egypt; and the High-Treasurer Magnus, by the order of Valens the
Arian Emperor, and Lucius an Arian was made Bishop in his place. That there
was not any Synod concerned in his deprivation, is plain beyond all controversy
from what is related by Hist. l. 4. c. 21.
Theodoret, L. 4. c. 21.
Socrates, L. 6. c. 19.
Sozomen, and by Apud Theodoret. l. 4. c. 22. Vide quoque libel. Synodicum Syn.
70.
Peter himself in that Epistle, which he wrote to the Catholic Church
concerning his Deprivation. Though Peter was in this manner deposed, yet the
Catholics of the Church of Alexandria, did not upon that account keep off from
Lucius's Communion, but only upon the account of his being a Heretic. This I
gather from those words of Theodoret (...).
. But the People having been nourished with the Doctrine of Athanasius, when
they saw that quite contrary Food was offered them, kept off from the Churches.
Not a word any where that the unjust deprivation of Peter, was one of the
Causes of their Separation.

And Peter himself in the aforesaid Epistle, though with a great deal of
Rhetoric he endeavors to set forth the Crimes of Lucius, and to excite all
the Church, to whom he writes, to the greatest abhorrence of his Actions, yet
he does not raise this Objection against him, that he was thrust into the
Throne whilst he himself was yet living. He only complains, 1st. That he was a
Heretic, and 2d. That he was made Bishop without any Regular and Customary
Proceedings; That he had bought the Bishopric, like a secular Office, with
Money; was created Bishop neither by a Synod of Orthodox Bishops, nor by the
Votes of the lawful Clergy, nor by the Postulation of the People, as the Laws
of the Church required. There were with him no Bishops, no Presbyters or
Deacons, no multitudes of People, no Monks going before him singing Hymns. He
thought (as it seems) that there was no thing more required for the making his
Successor true Bishop of that See, but Orthodoxy and a Regular Election.

. 2. In the year CCCCXXXV. S. Briccius Archbishop of Tours, the Successor of S.
Martin was deposed, after he had been Bishop above 32 years, by the Qua de re
surrexit omnis populus Turonorum in iram, and totum crimen super Episcopum
referunt, volentes eum unanimiter lapidare. -- illis vero non credentibus, sed
contradicentibus, trahitur, calumniatur, ejicitur -- hoc enim ejecto
Iustinianum Episcopum constituunt, etc. Greg. Turon, Hist. l. 2, cap. 1.
Inhabitants of that City. They suspected him to be guilty of Incontinence, and
although it was only a suspicion, yet out he must go. In his Room they placed
one Justinian, who shortly after dyed; then they made one Armentius their
Bishop, who continued in that See till he died, for near the space of seven
years. In the mean time Briccius remained at Rome, there making his complaint
to the Pope, and V. Greg. Turon. loco cit.
endeavoring to be restored. So far was he from consenting to the consecration
of Armentius. I here observe, that the Historian Gregory who was one of the
Archbishops of that See, and flourished in the year 573. when he treats of
this Affair, makes no manner of mention of any disturbance in the Church
occasioned by this injustice, not a word to the contrary, but that Armentius
was readily acknowleged by all of that district, and by all the Bishops of
France. Had there been any disturbance, he could not but have known it, and if
he had known it, he would not have failed to have mentioned it; for he himself
very highly resents the injustice which the holy Briccius suffered. He tells
us, that Iustinian's dying so soon, was a Judgment of God upon him. He thinks
it so, because (as he himself relates) God had wrought certain Miracles by the
hand of Briccius to convince the People of his Innocence, yet they would not be
convinced, and notwithstanding those great Miracles turned him out, and made
Justinian their Bishop. I observe in the 2d. place, that the Historian, who
himself (as I said) was Bishop of that See, and moreover a Saint, reckons
Justinian and Armentius in the Catalogue of his predecessors the Archbishops
of Tours. For though in that Catalogue of the Bishops of that See, which is
added at the end of the last Book, Briccius is called the Fourth, and
Eustochius, who succeeded upon his Death, is called the Fifth Bishop from the
first Institution of the Sea, yet throughout the whole History, Justinian and
Armentius are reckoned in the number. For L. 2. c. 14.
Perpetuus who succeeded Eustochius, is called the Fifth Bishop after S.
Martin. Virus, who was the 2d. from Eustochius, is called the L. 2. c. 26.
7th. Bishop after S. Martin. To him succeeded Licinius, and him he calls the
L. 2. c. 39. Denique migrante viro (so it must be read, not Eustochio)
Turonorum Episcopo, octavus post sanctum Martinum, Licinius Turonicis Episcopus
ordinatur.
8th. Bishop after S. Martin. Now unless Justinian and Armentius are included
in the Number, Perpetuus will be only the 3d. Bishop after S. Martin, Virus
only the 5th. and Licinius only the 6th. Thirdly, I observe, that S. Briccius,
though he was so unjustly deposed by barely the Violence of the People, and
though he never had given up his right, but had all along endeavored to
recover it, yet he himself owned Armentius to be a true Bishop of Tours, and
calls him his Brother. The Historian tells us, that when he was sent back to
Tours by the Pope to be restored, as he lay at some distance from the City,
Armentius died, and the death of Armentius being revealed to him by a Vision,
he thus cried out to his Company; Arise quickly, that we may go to the Funeral
of Ait suis, Surgite velocius, ut ad tumulandum fratrem nostrum Turonicum
pontificem occurramus.
our Brother the Bishop of Tours.

. 3. In the year 452. Iuvenalis being Patriarch of Jerusalem, Theodosius a
certain turbulent Monk, and an Adversary of the Council of Chalcedon, had Vide
Imp. Marcia^^ Epistolam apud alla concilii Chalced. part 3. c. 3. p. 851. and
ejusdem Epistolam aliam, ibid. c. 9. p. 856. Vide and Evag. l. 2. c. 5. and
Cyrillum Scythop. V. S. Euthym. p. 55, 56.
by the slaughter of a great many Persons, got himself to be ordained Patriarch
of that See, though Iuvenalis was still alive, and had never been deposed by
any Synod, nor yet by the Emperor himself; yet the only Objection that the S.
Euthymius was at that time in the 76th. Year of his Age. V. Vitam ejus, p. 54.
Venerable, the Great, and Orthodox Abbot, S. Euthymius, made against him, when
urged to acknowledge him as Patriarch, and to communicate with him, was this,
That he had been guilty of many Murders, and was likewise a Heretic. (...),
Ib. p. 56.
God forbid (says he) I should approve of his Murders, and ill Opinions.
Concerning Iuvenalis, that he had not been Synodically deprived, and that
therefore it was not lawful to acknowledge a Successor, not a word. Theodosius
had ordained many Bishops in the room of those Orthodox Bishops who were not
yet returned from the Council, and all places that were vacant he filled up.
After some little time, he was deposed by the Emperor, and Iuvenalis being
restored, was commanded by the Emperor to depose all those Bishops whom he had
ordained. But though he had usurpt* the Sea after so (...) Cyril. loc. cit.
barbarous a manner, and though they that had been ordained by him, were as
uncanonically. ordained as possibly they could be, yet He is reckonin the
Catalogue of the Bishops of I^rusalem, by Nicephorus Patriarch of
Constantinople. (...).
they who were Orthodox, were still accounted true Bishops, and if their
Predecessors were dead, were still continued in their Sees. This appears from
the Example of There fell off, says Evagrius, l. 3. c. 6. from the Communion of
Timotheus Aelurus, (...).
Theodotus Bishop of Ioppa, who, though he was ordained by him, yet continued
long after that time Bishop of that See, and was owned as such by the Orthodox.

. 4. Timotheus Aelurus, a notorious Eutychian Heretic, who as such had been
formerly condemned by a Synod Epist. Episcoporum and Cler. Aegypti, ap. Evag.
l. 2. c. 8.
of all the Bishops of Egypt, was in the year 457. the 1st. of the Emperor
Leo, made Bishop of Alexandria, by the People of that City, ( Proterius the
Orthodox Bishop being then Ibidem.
living and in full possession of the Sea) and ordained by only two Bishops,
and those besides Heretics, and as such judicially condemned. Being made
Bishop after this irregular manner, his Predecessor Proterius was in a little
time after murdered, as 'twas thought, by his procurement. After some time he
was Evag. l. 2. c. 11.
deposed and banished by the Authority of the Emperor, and the Judgment of the
Bishops of the Catholic Church, and an Orthodox Person, Timotheus
Salofaciolus, was constituted his Successor. After 18 years Salofaciolus was
Ibid. l. 3. c. 4.
deposed by the sole Authority of the Heretical Usurper Basiliscus, and Aelurus
being recalled from Banishment, was again made Bishop of Alexandria. Whilst he
was at Constantinople with the Emperor Basiliscus, Acatius the stout and
Orthodox Patriarch of that City, would not suffer him to enter into any of his
Churches. And why not? Not because he was substituted in the room of one
unjustly deposed by the bare Authority of Basiliscus, but because he was a
Heretic and a Murderer. So Pope Simplicius, in one of his Epist 6. Et
dilectionis tuae laudando constantiam multum nobis, imo ipsi Domino placere
memoravinus, quod damnatum hominem, non solum fidei, sed eti^m parrici^ii causa
nullam Constantino, olis Ecclesiam introire permiseris.
Epistles to Acacius. Thy constancy, says he, is praise worthy both in the
sight of God and in ours, in that thou would not suffer that condemned Person
to enter into any of the Churches of Constantinople, not only because he was a
Heretic, but likewise because he was a Parricide.

. 5. In the year 482. Johannes Talaias (or Tabennesiotes) an Orthodox Patriarch
of Alexandria, was deposed by the Emperor Zeno, and Petrus Mongus, one who had
been formerly deposed from that See for being an Eutychian, but had now
subscribed to the Orthodox Faith, and had been absolved by Acacius the
Patriarch of Constantinople was made Bishop in his stead. The reason why
Talaias was deposed, was this, There having been great Seditions raised at
Alexandria in the elections of the Patriarchs, the Emperor had been forced to
deprive that Church and People of their ancient Right of Election, and to take
upon him to constitute their Patriarch himself. The Patriarch Timotheus
Salofaciolus being again restored to that See, sends Liberatus Diac. Brev. c.
16. Evag. l. 3. c. 12.
Talaias, his Oeconomus or the Treasurer of the Church, to Constantinople to
the Emperor, to thank him for his restoring him, and withal to beg of him,
that after his ( Salofaciolus's) Death, the Church of Alexandria might have a
free Election. This the Emperor grants, but suspecting that Talaias might have
took upon him to negotiate this Affair, that so he himself might obtain the
dignity, he made him take an Oath that he himself would never endeavor to
obtain it. Talaias returning home with the Emperor's Grant, was, after the
Death of Salofaciolus, chosen Patriarch by the Orthodox party, and the Emperor
disliking the Election, deposed him as guilty of Perjury. That Talaias was
really guilty, he himself would never acknowledge, alleging that it was only
because he was Orthodox, that he was deposed. But guilty or not guilty, deposed
he was, and that too by barely the Emperor's Authority, as appears from L. 3.
c. 12, 13. (...), etc.
Evagrius, Breviario c. 17. Quos jucundissime suscepit Acacius, and imperatori
praesentavit, and persuasit ei, ut scriberet Apollonio Augustali, and duci
Perganio, ut Ioannem ab Alexandrina sede, quasi ean contra suum jusjurandum,
quod in regia civitate dedit, arripuisset, expelleret. Ioannes Talaia judicatur
a Zenone episcopatu pelli. Vide c. 18.
Liberatus Diaconus, and the Epistles of Pope Verbis infra adducendis.
Gelasius, that he had been canonically chosen and ordained, and to all intents
and purposes, fully confirmed by the Catholic Bishops of the district of
Alexandria, is apparent from an Epistle of Pope Epist. 17. dat. mense Iulio an.
482. Nuper ab Aegyptia Synodo quae and numero plurima, and fidei Catholicae
esset communione suffulta, atque ab ipso omni propemodum clero Alexandrinae
sedis ad nos ex m^re relatio missa patesecit, sancte memoriae fratrem quondam
and coepiscopum nostrum obijsse Timotheum, inque ejus vicem consona fidelium
voluntate Ioannem, cui ad sacerd^tium constare crederentur omnia, subrogatum,
etc.
Simplicius to Acacius, as likewise from Brev. c. 17. Vide quoque Gesta de
nomine Acacii.
Liberatus Diaconus, who tell us besides, That he had sent about his Synodical
Epistles, and that after he was ejected he never surrendered up his Right, but
still laid claim to the Sea of Alexandria, is what I need not endeavor to
prove. His fleeing to Rome to the Pope, that so he might be restored by his
means, is notorious. So far was he indeed from resigning, that after the death
of the Emperor Zeno, he applied himself to the Emperor Anastasius, and
Theophanes Chron. Nicephrus Call. l. 16. Victor Tun. ad Cons. Asterii and
Praesidii.
desired him to restore him.

Though Talaias had been thus Arbitrarily Deposed by the Emperor, without any
Synod, and without any Trial or Hearing, and had never surrendered up his
Right: Yet I observe,

First, That all they who thought his Successor Mongus a true and sincere
Convert to the Orthodox Faith, and in that respect sufficiently qualified, very
freely acknowleged him, and Communicated with him.

1. Acacius the Patriarch of Constantinople did so; though in all other Cases
he had always shown a great deal of Courage, and Resolution, and Zeal for the
Orthodox Faith. When the Usurper Basiliscus had Issued out a Decree against the
Council of Chalcedon, and in Obedience to that at least 500 Bishops had
deserted the Orthodox Profession, he stoutly stood up for the Faith, and so
Evag. l. 3. c. 7. Theodorus Lector. l. 1. p. 556. Author Vitae S. Danielis
Stylitae ap Su^ium in December. c. 41. Acacium qui tunc sedem tenebat
pontificalem, qui rectam quidem defendebat rationem, illius autem dogmatum
tempestati spiritus ferv^re and dicendi liberate, vehementer resitebat, vult
Basiliscus morte mulclare.
briskly opposed him, that the Tyrant was forced to recall his Edict. At the
same time when Aelurus the Heretical Patriarch of Alexandria would have gone to
Church at Constantinople though supported and patronized by the Emperor, yet he
would not permit him to enter into any Church there. Upon this account (as has
been above observed) his Constancy is highly praised by Pope Simplicius; And by
the same Pope he is Epist. ad Archimandritas Constantinop.
elsewhere, Entitled, Probatissimus Sacerdos. And even at that time that he
Communicated with Mongus he retained the same Zeal, and could never be
persuaded to Communicate with one whom he himself thought an Eutychian, or an
Enemy of the Council of Chalcedon. When Calendion the Orthodox Patriarch of
Antioch was turned out by the Emperor, and a Notorious Heretic, Petrus
Gnapheus, was made Patriarch in his place, there was nothing Cui usque in finem
se non communicasse gloriabatur Acacius. Gelasius P. 1. Epist. ad Orient.
Episcopos.
could ever persuade him to receive him into Communion; and he joined Epist.
Faelicis III. ad Gnapheum and ad In p. Zenonem, and Acacii ipsius Epistolae ad
Gnapheum ap. Tom. 4. Council.
with Pope Felix III. to Depose him. And the same Zeal he showed in Respect to
Mongus himself: For as soon as he had heard that Mongus had Condemned the
Council of Chalcedon, he Evag. l. 3. c. 16.
sent away immediately to Alexandriae to enquire into the Truth of the
Accusation. Whether Mongus had really done so, is uncertain: Certain it is,
That he produced to Acacius's Messengers certain Acts to prove himself
Innocent; and that if he had appeared to have been Guilty, Acacius would have
utterly rejected him. If the Writers of the Church of Rome have Condemned
Acacius as an ill Man, and a Heretic, we know that they did it, not because he
really was so, but because he Communicated with Mongus, whom the Popes of that
time accounted and Condemned as a Heretic: And we know very well why the Popes
did so; They knew that Mongus had Vide Evag. l. 3. c. 17.22. Gelasius Papa
Lepist. ad orient. Episc. Sed solvit illum auctoritate sua prius Acacius, and
sic suscepit.
subscribed to the Orthodox Faith, and that he had been absolved by Acacius;
But because it was done by Acacius, and not by the Pope, they looked upon that
Fact as Derogatory to the Sea of Rome; and therefore to maintain their own
Grandeur, they declared the Absolution of Mongus Invalid, and that consequently
he was still to be accounted a Heretic. Then Acacius was Excommunicated by
Pope Felix III. as one that Communicated with a Heretic, so in show: but the
true Reason was, because he endeavored to advance the Sea of Constantinople
above that of Rome. This Excommunication was the Reason, why some later
Writers, even amongst the Greeks, are wont to speak of Acacius as of one
inclined to the Eutychians; so besides a great many others, Theophanes the
Chronographer, and the Patriarch Photius in a Treatise De Episcopis and
Metropolitis, etc. (...).
not yet Published. Though Acacius during all his Lifetime, and for many years
after, was highly honored by the Orthodox at Constantinople, and by the
generality of the Eastern Church, as a great and truly Orthodox Patriarch, and
no notice at all was taken of the Pope's Excommunication; yet at last, after
the Expiration of 37 years, by the importunity of Pope Hormisdas, that so the
two Churches, the Eastern and the Western might be Reconciled, In the beginning
of the Emperor Justin. Photius in the place above quoted, says (...) for (...).
his Name was struck out of the Dipty^hs. Then the Greeks began to imitate the
Latins, and to speak ill of him whom before they had deservedly Honored. It is
certain, in a word, that whatever Mongus in reality was in the life time of
Acacius, yet outwardly he seemed to be Orthodox. If he was in reality a
Heretic, that Acacius knew not, and according to Defens. 3. capit. l. 7. c. 3.
Facundus, Aliud est, si quisque simpliciter in Haeretico dolos suos occuliente
fallatur, ut eum putet Orthodoxum: Et aliud, si ipsammet ejus Haeresim agnitam
sectetur atque defendat. Non debet crimini deputari simplicium non intellecta
versutia malignorum.

2. So did likewise Fravites the Successor of Acacius. As he took no notice of
the Pope's Excommunication of Acacius, so as soon as he was made Patriarch, be
sent away his Evag. l. 3. c. 23.
Communicatory Letters to Mongus.

3. So did likewise Martyrius, the Cyrilla^ Seyth^pol. V^ta S. Euthymii p. 86.
and V. S. Sabae p. 244, 245.
Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem, who flourished in the time of Acacius. With
Mongus (says L. 3. c. 16. (...).
Evagrius) Communicated Acacius the Patriarch of Constantinople and Martyrius
the Patriarch of Jerusalem sent him his Synodical Letters.

4. So did in a word all the Greek or Eastern Catholics, as many as thought
him no Heretic, not taking any notice at all of his being put into the place
of another Deposed without any Synod. This appears from the Epist. ad Orient.
Episcopos. Taken istud nemo discutiebat, synodum nemo poscebat, passim omnia
li^ite fieri a quibuscunque videbantur; nullum discrimen rerum, nulla
examinatio postulabatur ecclesiae, sed prout de uno quoque venisset in mentem,
de suis urbibus Catholic^s pellebatur Episcopus, non soliam Metropolitanus, sed
etiam tertiae (sc. Antiachenae) and secundae sedis Antistes. In his nulla rerum
vestigatio quaerebatur, nulla facienda concilia jactabantur, etc. Certe quae
seeds Apostolica decreverat, Orientalibus Episcopis non innotuisse jactatur --
Vbi tamen non solum reus tenetur Acacius, sed omnes Pontifices Orientales, qui
pari modo in haec cecidere contagia, merit^que simili damnatione tenentur
obstricti, etc.
Epistles of Pope Gelasius 1. Omnes Pontifices Orientales: So Gelasius says
expressly; who, because it was done without the consent of the Popes his
Predecessors, and because he himself accounted Mongus a Heretic, is very angry
with 'em for it. Neither were they compelled to it by the Patriarch Acacius, as
Theophanes, who lived at that time when Acacius was accounted a Heretic, would
needs persuade us. For it is plain from Pope Gelasius ad Episcopos Orientales,
that they all did it readily, and that no one pretended that he had been
compelled to it.

Secondly, I observe, That among all those who refused to Communicate with
Mongus, there is no one said to have done so on the account of his being
Constituted in the place of one Vnsynodically Deposed, that their only Reason
was, because they accounted him a Heretic. So Theophanes supposes of those
Eastern Bishops and others, who he says were compelled by Acacius to receive
Mongus into Communion.

1. It is plain from the Epistle of the Bishops of Dardania to Pope Gelasius,
That that was their only Reason. They only allege he was a Heretic, say
nothing of the vnsynodical Deprivation of his Predecessor.

2. The same is intimated by Evagriut concerning Calendion the Patriarch of
Antioch. In his Letters, says he, to the Emperor Zeno, and Acacius, he called
Peter (Mongus) an Adulterer, (...). l. 3. c. 16.
saying, That being at Alexandria he Anathematized the Council of Chalcedon.

3. Euphemius (says the same (...) l. 3. c. 23.
Author) being made Patriarch of Constantinople in the room of Fravitas
deceased, received the Synodical Epistle which Mongus had written to Fravitas,
and when he found that he Anathematized the Council of Chalcedon, (so he
ventured to do as soon as Acacius was Dead, which he dared not do before, at
least not publicly) he was very much troubled and broke off from his
Communion. Hence it plainly appears that before that time he freely
Communicated with him, and that now he broke off upon only the account of
Heresy; yet how Orthodox a Person he was, and how stout and courageous a
Bishop, is very Notorious. That sufficiently appears from his Behavior to
Anastasius. When being a great Person in the Court of the Emperor Zeno,
Anastasius had discovered his Inclination to Eutychianism, and did something
prejudicial to the Cause of the Orthodox, Euphemius the Patriarch Theoph.
Chron. p. 115.
thrust him out of the Church, and threatened him, that if he did not desist
from his Practices, he would shave his Head for him, and deliver him up to the
Mockeries of the Rabble. When the same Anastasius was to be Crowned Emperor in
the room of Zeno, he Evag. l. 3. c. 32. Theodorus Lector l. 2. p. 558.
refused to give his consent till he had forced him to give him an Assurance
under his Hand, That he never would innovate in Matters of Religion. And he
afterward so stoutly opposed him, as to suffer Expulsion and Banishment.

4. As it appears from L. 3. c. 13. (...).
Evagrius and others, That the Proterians, or the Orthodox of Egypt,
acknowleged Mongus for their Bishop; so we are told by Brev. c. 18.
Liberatus Diaconus, that when it was Reported that he had Anathematized the
Council of Chalcedon, they that believed he had done so separated from him. Et
his ita gestis, abscesserunt quidam a Petri Communione, and Romam nuntiaverunt
Papae Romae.

5. When Pope Simplicias had received a Letter from the Emperor concerning his
design to Depose Talaias, he was so far well enough satisfied, and nothing
displeased him, till Reading further in the Letter he found that a Heretic, i.
e. one whom he accounted a Heretic, was designed for his Successor. This he
owns in his Letter to Acacius. Epist. 17. Cum ecce secundum Consuetudinem mihi
talia dispenenti Tranquillissimi Principis scripta sunt reddita, quibus
memoratum tanquam perjurii reum, quod Fraternitati quoque tuae non esse
diceretur incognitum, Sacerdotio perhiberet indignum. Illico retraxi pedem, and
meam retocavi super ejus Confirmatione sententiam, ne quid contra tantum ac
tale Testimonium praepropere fecisse judicarer. Sed illud me non mediocriter
fecit attonitum, quod insdem literis suis Petrum, qui Haereticorum socius dudum
extitisse probetur and Princeps, quod Conscientiam dilectionis tuae mem^nimus
non latere, instructionesque ipsiss, quibus faerit consutatus, nosse
considimus, quemque etiam dubium non sit adhuc extra Communionem durare
Catholicam, saepeque nos de eodem ex illa urbe pellendo scripsisse sit certum,
ad Praefatae Ecclesiae regimen existimet provehendum, etc.
When, says he, according to Custom I was about to send to John my Confirmatory
Letters, I received a Letter from the Emperor, in which he declared him
unworthy of the Dignity, as being guilty of Perjury. I forthwith slept, and
recalled my Sentence of Confirmation, least I should be judged to have acted
rashly in opposition to so great a Testimony. But this extremely astonished me,
that in the same Letter he mentions that he thought fit to promote Peter in his
room, one who was ere while a Ringleader of the Heretics, and is still to be
presumed to be out of the Communion of the Church. He adds, That if Peter
(Mongus) did (...) to return to the Church, he could not be made a Bishop till
by Penance, according to the Rules of the Church, he had made ample
Satisfaction; That it was not safe for the Church that he should be promoted to
that Bishopric, least by making a show of being a Convert he should propagate
his Heresy. He begs Acacius to do his utmost endeavor with the Emperor, that
Mongus might not be made Bishop; Opportunitatibus ergo repertis, Clementissimi
Principis voluntatem incessabiliter pro side Catholica supplicando and ab his
sedulo revocare quae nociva sunt Dogmati Christiano, etc.
to intercede with him incessantly for the Catholic Faith, that what was done
in prejudice to it might be Revoked. Concerning the Unlawfulness of a Bishops
succeeding another before that other was Synodically Deposed, not a word. The
same Pope in another Epistle to Acacius, which in order follows the former, but
was written before it, and before these times just after the Emperor Zeno was
restored upon the Expulsion of Basiliscus, when the Heretic Timotheus Aelurus
was made Bishop of Alexandria in the room of Timotheus Salofaciolus the
Orthodox Patriarch, whom Basiliscus had Deposed; I say, in that Epistle he
desires Acacius to take care to intercede with the Emperor that the Heretical
Bishops might be turned out and Banished, and that either the ejected Orthodox
Bishops might be Restored, or at least new Orthodox Bishops be Created.
Quatenus his submotis atque in solitudinis perpetua relegatione damnatis,
Antistites Cathelici deceptis vel reddantur Ecclesiis vel creentur. Whether old
ones or new ones, was to him altogether indifferent; he only desired they
should be Orthodox. So (as is above observed in the forgoing Section) he highly
extolls Acacius's Constancy in forbidding Aelurus to enter into any of his
Churches, because he was a Heretic and a Murderer; takes no notice at all of
his being put into the room of Salofaciolus Vnsynodically Deposed.

6. Pope Felix III. in his two first Pathetical Epistles which he wrote in his
own Name, and the Name of a Synod of Rome, to Acacius and the Emperor,
concerning the promotion of Mongus, takes no notice at all of Talaias's being
Deposed without a Synod: He only complains that Mongus was a Heretic. So
likewise in his sixth Epistle to Acacius, wherein he Excommunicates him, and
declares him Deposed; the great Reason assigned, is, because he continued to
Communicate with the Heretic Mongus. And though there are other pretended
Crimes charged upon him, yet concerning any Crime committed by him in
Communicating with a Person put into the place of another Vnsynodically
Deposed, there is nothing alleged.

We may gather lastly from Evagrius, That Talaias himself did not think it
Unlawful for the People and Clergy of Egypt to accept of another Patriarch, if
that other had been likewise Orthodox. He flees, L. 3. c. 15.
says Evagrius, to Rome, and raises there very great Stirs, affirming (not that
another could not be put into his place, because he was not Deposed by a Synod,
but) that it was for his defending the Council of Chalcedon that he was
Deposed, and that he that was Constituted his Successor was an Enemy to the
Doctrine of that Council. By these Allegations, Simplicius Pope of Rome was so
far moved, as to write to the Emperor concerning him. And the Emperor returned
him this Answer, That 'twas only for Perjury that he had been Deposed, not on
any other account.

7. In the year 483. Calendion the Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch was Deposed
Evag. l. 3. c. 16. Liberatus Diac. c. 4.18.
by the Emperor Zeno, as suspected to have conspired against him with the
Rebels Illus and Leontius. That he was Deposed without any Synod, is manifest
from the express Testimony of Epist. ad Orient. Episcopos. Sed miramur, cur eos
non pudeat in istorum damnatione de Synodo non fact^ causari, cum sciant tot
tantosque Pontifices (Calendionem, Talaiam, etc.) nulla Synodo fuisse depulsos,
etc. So expressly in several other Places. See the place above quoted, where by
tertiae Sedis Antistes is meant Calendion of Antioch.
Pope Gelasius I.

Though Deposed in this manner, yet his Successor Petrus Gnapheus, a notorious
Heretic, was rejected by none of the Orthodox upon any other account, but
because he was a Heretic.

1. Pope Felix III. in his two Epistles to Petrus Gnapheus, (in the latter of
which he declares him Deposed) and in another, which he writes to the Emperor
to desire that he might be Ejected, takes no notice at all of Calendion, no
notice at all of his being Vnsynodically Deposed; the only thing he objects
against Gnapheus, is, his being a Heretic. For this, and for this alone, he
Deposes him; and he plainly intimates, that if he would forsake his Heresy,
there was nothing else to be objected against him. He tells the Emperor, That
(...), etc.
the Church had Deposed him because he was a Heretic. and to him himself,
Epist. 3. ad fi^em. (...).
Forsake (says he) I beseech thee this Error; Thou art fallen, do not lie as
thou art; Thou have Sinned, do not continue to do so; The Holy Church of God
expects thee, she desires to embrace thee a Penitent, and a Convert to her
Faith; She cries out to thee by us, Come to me all you that Labor, etc. God
wills not, most Honored Brother, the Death of a Sinner, but that he should be
Converted and Live --. These Things, I, together with a Synod, have written to
thee, Conjuring thee by God and the Holy Angels, that thou Preach these Things;
and agree with us in the True Faith; That so our Faith may remain Vnadulterated
to the Glory of God. The same is to be said of all those Bishops whose Epistles
to Gnapheus are extant in the 4th. Tome of the Councils; not one takes notice
of his being Invalidly Constituted in the room of Calendion. Heresy is the
only Thing they object, that the only Thing they exhort him to forsake.

2. Quintianus Asculanus, (...); -- (ad finem) (...).
Thou proceedest, says he, in thy Heretical Doctrines not withstanding the
Admonitions of many Bishops, and particularly Pope Felix, who have exhorted
thee to forsake 'em, and to preach the Orthodox Faith. -- Who can bear with
thee, whilst thou thus pervertest the Gospel of Christ? -- Let thy Liturgy be
as that of the Orthodox is (without the addition of that Clause, who wast
Crucified for us) and that punishment, which is intended for thee, shall be
slopt. If thou do not do so, there will be sent thee from Pope Felix a
Deprivation.

3. Justinius Siculus. (...), etc.
Cease, says he, from this Wickedness, and then thou will not be the cause of
the Ruin of those that are more ignorant, least our Pope Felix should according
to the Canons pass Sentence upon thee. -- Receive my Admonition as the
Admonition of a Brother. Extinguish the Pride of Heretics, and become a Pastor
to thy Sheep, not a Wolf, etc.

4. Acacius Patriarch of Constantinople. (...)
Walk, says he, and lead thy Flock in the high way, in which the Fathers of the
Council of Chalcedon walked, that thou may be a true High Priest of God.

5. To the same purpose, Antheon Bishop of Arsinoe, and Faustus of Apollonius.
(...), etc.
I have heard, beloved, (says the latter) from many Bishops, That thou turn'st
away from the Orthodox Faith, and in all place, they talk of it; I therefore
thought it necessary to enquire of thee thy self, whether it be really so, etc.

6. Pamphilus Bishop of Abydus. (...)
This Reprehension I send thee, that returning to the true Faith, thou may
enjoy the Dignity of thy Throne; But if thou do not return to the Orthodox
Faith, I will Excommunicate thee.

7. Ascelepiades Bishop of Trallium. (...).
The whole World is offended at thy addition to the Trishagium; and the Pastors
of the Church are deservedly excited to pronounce an Anathema against thee.
Give us, I beseech thee, some little Signification of thy being Orthodox, etc.

The only Person that takes any notice of his being irregularly Constituted,
is, Flaccianus Rhodopensis; and of him it is uncertain, whether, when he says,
That Gnapheus was irregularly Constituted, he had any respect to the
Deprivation of Calendion. For Gnapheus had been formerly deposed from the Sea
of Antioch, as a Heretic; and therefore since he had never been absolved by
the Church, he might well be said, even upon that account, to have been
irregularly promoted: And to At enim cribratus es Canonice a Praesulibus
nostris, id est, a Principe Apostolorum Petro, cui Dominus ait: Quodcunque
ligaveris super terram, erit ligatum and in ^^^lo. At nec hoc meruisti, ut per
dignam poenitentiam relaxeris, in temetipsum statuens, ut perseveres in hac
Danmatione: Sed in hac vita spem habes tantummodo in principibus, ut redeas ubi
digne ejectus es a Sancta sede; ideoque perfectius es miserabilior omnibus
hominibus, tanquam minime desiderium habens ad Deum vivum and ejus regnum
Coelorum: veruntamen noli frustra pulvere dealbari, quia irregulariter
Sacerdotii principatum arripuisti: neque infleris adversus nos pie recteque
praedicantes.
this Flaccianus seems to allude. Whatever was his meaning, he only barely
mentions it, does not offer it as a Reason, why the Orthodox did not, or ought
not, to Communicate with him. He insists, like the rest, upon only his being a
Heretic.

I am not ignorant that these Epistles of Pope Felix, Quintianus, Justinius,
Acacius, Antheon, Faustus, Pamphilus, and Asclepiades to Petrus Gnapheus, are
looked upon by Valesius Tract. de Petro Fullone. D. Allix de Trisagio.


some Learned Men not to be Genuine. But I likewise know that that Opinion is
by D. Cave Hist. Liter. in Iustino Siculo.
others opposed. However it be: This at least is apparent, that he or they, who
wrote 'em, (and it is certain that they are very ancient) did not doubt of the
lawfulness of Communicating with a Bishop, who was put into the place of
another unjustly Deposed by the Lay-Power, provided he were not a Heretic; or,
if he were, would leave his Heresy and come over to the Orthodox Faith. And
here I must observe, that the Epistle last quoted, viz. That of Flaccianus, is
Condemned as Spurious, by even Dr. Cave loco cit.
those who will not yield that the rest should be thought so.

CHAP. VI.
Macedonius Patriarch of Constantinople being violently Deposed by the
Heretical Emperor Anastasius, his Successor Timotheus is acknowleged by all
that accounted him Orthodox, though at the same time they professed that the
Deprivation of Macedonius was unjust, and could never be induced by any
Terrors to subscribe to it, viz by Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch, Elias
Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Abbot of the Monastery of Studium, the (Orthodox)
People of Constantinople, by the great Abbots of Palaestine, S. Sabas, and S.
Theodosius, and by all Palaestine in general, at that time exceedingly
flourishing for its zealous Profession of the Orthodox Faith. The Calumnies of
the Vindicator concerning the Apostasy of the Patriarchs Flavianus and Elias,
confuted. Timotheus not known to them to be a Heretic when they Communicated
with him. They are Honored by the Church as Saints.

IN the year In the 21st year of Anastasius, says Theophanes, and out of him
Cedrenus.
511, Macedontus the Orthodox Patriarch of Constantinople was Deposed by the
bare Authority of the Heretical Emperor Anastasius, and that because he was
Orthodox, and refused to Condemn the Council of Chalcedon. Though Macedonius
was so unjustly Deposed, yet Timotheus, whom the Emperor had constituted in his
place, was received and acknowleged as true Bishop of Constantinople by all
those that accounted him Orthodox. This is one of the Examples produced by the
Author of the Baroccian Treatise.

Evagrius says, That the Patriarch Macedonius (...), l. 3. c. 32.
went away privately from the City of Constantinople by the persuasions of
Celer the Captain of the Emperors Guards; By which he means that the Captain of
the Guards being commanded by the Emperor to carry him away into Banishment,
persuaded him to go away with him peaceably and privately for the avoiding of a
Tumult. That the Patriarch did not resign, but was forced to go away, and looked
upon himself still as the Rightful Patriarch, is apparent from the express
Testimony of several Authors, and Evagrius himself in another place affirms,
That he was C. 44. (...).
ejected. The Emperor, says Hist. Eccl. l. 2. p. 565. (...), etc,
Theodorus Lector, supposing that Macedonius, if he should have been judged,
would, as innocent, have been defended by the People, sent him away by force to
Chalcedon by Night, and commanded him to be carried from thence to Eucha^^a;
and the next day he made one Timotheus Patriarch in his stead. Anastasius the
Emperor (says Chron. Anastasius Imperator Macedonium Constantinopolitum
Episcopum cum quibusdam Clericis nolentem Synodi Chalced. Decreta damnare, ab
Ecclesia rapit, and in exilium mitti, atque pro eo Timotheum Presb. Episcopum
facit.
Victor Tununensis) deposed Macedonius the Bishop of Constantinople by
Violence, and sent him away into Banishment, because he refused to Condemn the
Council of Chalcedon, and in his stead he made the Presbyter Timotheus Bishop.
Chronogr. p. 133. (...). etc.
Theophanes, the Emperor commanded Celer to fetch Macedonius out of his Palace
by force, who cried out, That he was ready to justify himself, not only before
the Emperor, but even before all the People in the Theater -- Thus he commanded
him to be led away forcibly by Night, first to Chalcedon, and thence to
Euchaita, not daring to bring him to a Trial (...).
for fear of the People, and the next day be made one Timotheus Bishop. To
these may be added, Chron.
Marcellinus Comes, V. S. Sabae, c. 50.
Cyrillus Scythopolitanus, Brev. c. 19.
Liberatus Diaconus, Syn. 110.
Libellus Synodicus, Annal.
Zonaras, Chron. p. 360.
Cedrenus, L. 16. c. 26.
Nicephorus Callisti. After Macedonius was Banished, and Timotheus Ordained
Patriarch in his room, the Emperor to persuade the World that it was not for
nothing, but for very great Crimes, that he was Banished, ordered a mock Trial:
Accordingly he was tried when absent, Accused, Judged, Condemned, by the very
same Persons. His Mock-Condemnation, or Deprivation, being sent him, he
rejected it as null and void in it self, because his Judges were Heretics. Of
this Chron. p. 133, 134. (...), etc. Perpendens ^orro Anastasius Macedonium,
indicta causa, nullave depositionis in eum lata sententia in exilium ejectum,
misso Magistro (Celere) deportari cum jussit (so it ought to be reader'd, not
diem ei dixit) ultra Claud^^polim Honoriadis Provinciae. Tidem vero cum essent
and judices and testes and accusatores (so it ought to be rendered) ejectum jam
ante judicium and absentem muneris abrogatione damnant, and per Episcopos and
Presbyterum Cyzicenum depositionis sententiam mittunt. Quos ubi conspexit
Macedonius, etiam ante sermonis exordiam interrogat, Number Chalcedonensem Synodum
admittant? Respondentibus illis, Tu quis es? Dixit ipse. Sabbatiani aut
Macedoniani (Haeretici) si ^^hi depositionis deferrent sententiam, me admittere
oporteret? Et ita re infecta reversi sunt, ^^se vero Euchaitam reversus est. To
the same purpose Nicephorus Call. l. 16. c.26.
Theophanes has given us a particular Account, I suppose out of the
Ecclesiastical History of Theodorus Lector; for him he quotes by Name P. 139.
a little after.

That Timotheus, though the Deprivation of Macedonius was accounted by all the
Orthodox Party to be absolutely Null, and though he was ordained Patriarch even
before that Mock-Deprivation, was however acknowledged by all those of the
Orthodox Party that accounted him Orthodox, is apparent from many Authorities.
If he was rejected, it was only by those who believed him to be, what really he
was, a Heretic. I observe in the first place, that amongst all the Authors who
mention the Deprivation of Macedonius, there is not so much as one that either
says expressly, or gives any hint, that any one separated from Timotheus upon
that account. They observe indeed, that many of the Followers of Macedonius
were at the same time Persecuted, and Banished. So P. 133. (...). Cedrenus has
almost the same words.
Theophanes, Cedrenus, and L. 16. c. 26. (...).
Nicephorus Callisti. But then at the same time they intimate, that it was for
the same Reason that Macedonius himself was Banished; viz. Because they were
great Sticklers for the Orthodox Faith; and because for the sake of the
Orthodox Faith they still adhered to him. In the Ap. Acta Conc. sub Menna Act.
v. p. 164. Secundum Capitulum in Libellis continebatur, ut qui propter
causam(...), etc. praedictorum Patrum (Euphemii dicimus and Macedonii) relegati
fuerunt and fugati, reversi restituantur propriis gradibus. Quoniam igitur
justa petitio est, ut primae consequens, deliberavimus ut praedicti adjuventur,
etc. To the same purpose the Petitio Monachorum ad Synodum, ibid. p. 172.
Relatio, or Libellus Petitionis, which was presented to John the Successor of
Timotheus by the Synod of Constantinople, after the Death of the Emperor
Anastasius, concerning the Condemnation of the Heretic Severus, and the
restoring of the Names of Euphemius and Macedonius to the Sacred Diptychs; It
is likewise desired, that they that had been Banished, or forced to flee away
upon the account of Euphemius and Macedonius, might be recalled and restored to
their respective Places. These things had been demanded by the People in their
public Acclamations; and that the aforesaid Persons were banished and forced
to flee away for their zealous defense of the Catholic Faith, the same People
testify by their Acclamations just after the aforesaid Petition was delivered:
Their words there are (...). Ibid. p. 181.
Let those that are in banishment for the Faith be recalled and restored to the
Church.

Secondly, Theophanes says of the Illustrious and Religious Lady Iuliana, That
she was (...), etc.
so great a Defender of the Council of Chalcedon, that the Emperor could not
possibly persuade her with all his Art to communicate with Timotheus, neither
could Timotheus himself persuade her, though he often endeavored to do it. The
reason, why she would not communicate with Timotheus, was, as may be gathered
from these words of Theophanes, not because Macedonius was unjustly deposed,
but because she accounted Timotheus an Enemy to the Council of Chalcedon.

Thirdly, It Is observed by the same Author, That though some Orthodox Bishops
refused to communicate with Timotheus (because they thought him a Heretic) yet
others, and those two not the most timorous, received him into Communion,
though they absolutely refused to subscribe to Macedonius's Deprivation, and
Condemned it as Unjust and Uncanonical. (...).
Timotheus, says he, sent his Synodical Spistles, and a Copy of Macedonius' s
Deprivation, to the several Bishops to be subscribed. Those that were more
stout refused to subscribe to either; they that were timorous subscribed
through fear of the Emperor to both. Others kept the midway, and subscribed to
the former, but refused to subscribe to the latter; which (in effect) was the
same thing, though to them they seemed to be different. By these last Words is
meant, That they that subscribed to Timotheus's Synodical Epistle, though they
did not themselves believe him to be a Heretic, yet because he really was so,
did by consequence, and by accident, as much advance the Cause of the
Heretics, as if they had likewise approved of Macedonius's Deprivation.
Amongst those Bishops who accepted of Timotheus's Synodical Epistle, and by
doing so received him into Communion, and owned him as Bishop of
Constantinople, two were the Famous Flavianus and Elias, the Patriarchs of
Antioch and Jerusalem. This is in express Terms attested by Cyrillus
Scythopolitanus, a very good Author in these Matters, as one of our
Adversaries, the Learned Vindicator acknowleges; though A farther Account of the
Baroccian MS.
another (who either does not know how to distinguish a good Author from a bad
one, or at least for a Cause, can Vilify any good Author) is pleased to
affirm, That Cyril's Legend is too weak an Authority to persuade any Man that
Elias (and Flavianus) accepted of Timotheus'^ Synodical Epistle. We will leave
our Author to inform himself a little better of the Character of Writers, and
will give you here the words of Cyrillus. The Vita S. Sabae, c. 50. (...).
Emperor (says he) having driven Macedonius out of his See, placed Timotheus in
his room, and required Flavianus and Elias to unite themselves to him in
Communion. And they indeed assented to his Synodical Letters, but they would
not do so to the Acts of Macedonius' s Deprivation. Upon which account the
Emperor was extremely enraged against them both, and a great storm hung over
both Churches. It Is observed by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise, That the
great Elias, Bishop of Jerusalem, embraced the Communion of three Patriarchs of
Constantinople, all alive together, viz. Euphemius, Macedonius, and Timotheus,
being troubled indeed at the Ejectment of him in Possession, but receiving the
Successor also, because of his Orthodox Faith. That Timotheus, Flavianus, and
Elias, were Fellow-Communicants, is intimated likewise by Brev. c. 18. Post
quem ordinatus est Alexandrie Ioannes Machiota (Niciola aut Nicaeota) qui etiam
ipse suos priores (Eutychianos) secutus est, suscipiens quidem unitivum Zenonis
Edictum, non autem Chalcedonense Concilium and Epistolam Papae Leonis, tanquam
non communicaret Flaviano Antiocheno, and Eliae Hierofolymorum Episcopis, and
Timotheo Constantinopolitano. Dicebat enim imperfecte Edictum se habere, nec ad
unitatem sufficere, quod non in Anathemate Synodi fuisset factum. Deinde cum ei
Imp. Anastasius scripsisset, ut univetur Constantinopolitano Episcopo: Haec
rescripsit, Quia (i. e. quod) non sufficeret ei ad perfectain unitatem, eo quod
non anathematizaret Synodum.
Liberatus Diaconus.

It Is acknowleged by the Learned Vindicator; who, because their Opinion and
Practice was so directly contrary to his, is resolved to be revenged on 'em.
They were Men, says he, of no Principles, turned frequently Apostates to the
Eutychian Heretics, very frequently and easily-varied from the Principles
which they themselves professed and owned for Principles. We see, says he, that
they corresponded with so Notorious a Heretic as Timotheus, (which is more
than ever our Authors own Principles would have allowed 'em) rather than hazard
their Places. Why should we then wonder if they had corresponded with
Schismatics, even such as themselves took for such? Much more of the same
Nature he very Unworthily throws at 'em. To all which I Answer,

1. That when they Subscribed to the Synodical Letters of Timotheus, at the
same time they absolutely refused to Subscribe to the Deprivation of
Macedonius, because they thought it Unlawful; and though, as Cyrillus tells us,
the Emperor was extremely enraged against 'em, because they refused to
Subscribe to the latter, and immediately resolved to Depose 'em, yet they never
could be prevailed with to do it. They still continued to Communicate with
Timotheus, but to their dying day did never Subscribe to the Deprivation of
Macedonius. From hence it is manifest, that they received Timotheus into
Communion, not because they dared not hazard their Places, but because they
thought they might Lawfully do it.

2. It is utterly untrue that they knew Timotheus to be a Heretic. Had our
Author judged Heartily as he ought to have done, he would easily have judged of
himself, that the Synodical Letters, which Timotheus sent to Flavianus and
Elias, contained in 'em nothing Heretical, since such Men as they received 'em.
And had he looked nicely into the Histories and Concerns of those Times, he
would have found, that Timotheus did not presently appear to be a Heretic.
They that knew him very well, or were nicely informed concerning him, did
believe that he was so, and accordingly withdrew from his Communion: But
certain it is, that to the Catholics who did not well know him he pretended to
be one of their Party. It is certain that after he was made Patriarch, he (...)
(Praefectum Monasterii Studitarum) (...). Theodorus Lector l. 2. P. 563.
denounced an Anathema against all those that were either averse to, or
Anathematized the Council of Chalcedon. This an ancient and an authentic
Historian expressly affirms. So far indeed was he from denouncing an Anathema
against the Council of Chalcedon in his Synodical Letters, that See his Words
above cited.
Liberatus Diaconus expressly asserts, that upon that very account, because he
did not, the Eutychian Patriarch of Alexandria refused to Communicate with him.
The same Author plainly intimates, That Timotheus (as well as Flavianus and
Elias) Subscribed in his Synodical Letters to the Council of Chalcedon, and the
Epistle of Pope Leo. Ioannes Nicaeotes, (says he) the Patriarch of Alexandria
pursued the steps of his (Eutychian) Predecessors, receiving indeed the uniting
Edict of Zeno, Non autem Chalcedonense Concilium and Epistolam Papae Leonis,
tanquam non communicaret Flaviano Antiocheno, and Eliae Hierosolymorum
Episcopis, and Timotheo Constantinopolitano. Another Authority is that of the
Historian Evagrius, who L. 4. c. 4. (...).
affirms, That the Synodical Epistles of Severus, who succeeded Flavianus in
the Sea of Antioch, about a year or two after Timotheus was made Patriarch of
Constantinople, were (because they Anathematized the Council of Chalcedon)
received by none of the then Patriarchs, besides the Patriarchs of Alexandria.
Therefore, according to the Testimony of Evagrius, the Synodical Epistles of
the Eutychian Severus, were rejected by Timotheus. If Evagrius was mistaken, at
least from what he says it is manifest, That Timotheus was believed by many to
be Orthodox. To these I add the express Testimony of Nicephorus Callisti. L.
16. c. 32. (...).
Elias, says he, and Flavianus received Timotheus into Communion, as seeming to
be Orthodox. But the Banishment of Macedonius they did not approve off as being
by Violence, and against the Laws of the Church.

3. Though the Patriarch Flavianus was by the Persecutions of his Enemies so
far prevailed upon, as to subscribe to the Condemnation of Theodoret, Ibas,
etc. yet it is certain from the Ap. Evag. l. 3. c. 31.
Epistle of the Monks of Palaestine to Alciso, that he Condemned 'em upon
Supposition that they were Nestorians. And though by repeated Persecutions he
was further prevailed upon to Subscribe against the Council of Chalcedon; yet
from the same Authentic Monument it is manifest, that he subscribed against
the Doctrine of it only upon this Supposition, That it was (as his Potent
Enemies contended) Nestorian: For it is plain, that at the very same time he
owned that Council as to its Condemning Eutyches. 'Twas this Subscription of
his that occasioned all those Reports which we find in some Authors,
particularly in Theophanes the Chronographer, concerning his Anathematizing the
Council of Chalcedon. That all those Reports are very great Mistakes, and that
he never could be prevailed upon (though his Persecutions were intolerable,
though by all manner of Afflictions his Enemies endeavored to force him) to
Anathematize that Council, or to Subscribe to the Eutychian Heresy, and that
at last, because he could not be prevailed upon, he lost his Bishopric, is
very apparent from the aforesaid Loc. Cit. See likewise c. 32.
Epistle. They many ways afflicted him, as V. Sabae, p. 308. (...) By (...), he
does not mean, that they effectually compelled him to Anathematize the Council,
but only that they endeavored it. So the word (...) is used a little after, P.
310. So likewise by Theophanes, Chron. p. 130. twice. And so these words of
Cyrillus were understood by the ancient Latin Translator of the Second Council
of Nice, Act 1. where they are quoted. He renders it thus Cogentes and obinto
collo huc trabentes, ut acta Concilii Chalced Anathemate prosequeretur: quo
nolente, Episcopatu suo privatus in exilium quoque damnatus est.
Cyrillus Scythopelitanus says, and as it were Strangled him to make him
comply; yet even at this time he Communicated still with Timotheus. How great
an Honor the Orthodox had for him may be gathered from the public Subjoined
to the Epistle of the Synod of Tire to the Synod of Constantinople, extant in
the Acts of the Council sub Menna, Act. 5. p. 206. (...).
Acclamations of the Orthodox Party of Tire, just after the Death of the
Emperor Anastasius. They demand that his Name, which had been struck out by the
Heretics, should be again restored to the Diptychs of the Church, and are very
zealous to have his Body brought to their City, that there it might be disposed
of after the most honorable manner. And that this might be done ^s the Request
of the Synod of Tire to the Synod of Constantinople. Ibid. p. 202. (...), etc.
Similem deprecationem super his osserimus, ut -- accipiamus honorifice Corpus
Spiritualis Patris nostri Flaviani Patr. Antiocheni, and restituatur catalogo
Sanctorum Patrum qui in Apostolica sede ante defuncti sunt; and inseratur nomen
ipsius venerabile sacris tabulis. Iustum enim est oum, qui pro Christo
Deo-nostro, and ejus recta fide fatigatus est, and qui sustinuit aerumnosam
sententiam eorum, qui eum calumniabantur ((...), etc.) in Communionem veniret
eorum, etc.
It is just (say they) that his venerable Name should be inserted in the Sacred
Diptychs, who suffered so much for Christ our God, and for the true Faith, etc.
In a word, so great an Honor has the Church had all along for him, that to
this very day he is Worshipped as a Flaviani Secundi Episcopi Antiocheni, and
Eliae Episcopi Hierosolymorum, qui pro Synodo-Chalced, ab Anastasio Imp. in
exilium acti, victores migrarunt ad Dominum. Martyrolog. Romans Julii 4. In
Moschus's Pratum Spirituale, c. 26. it is said (though untruly, yet it shows how
great an Opinion that Age had of him) That God revealed to him, as well as to
Elias, the time of his own, and likewise of the Emperors Death.
Confessor and a Saint. By Marcellinus Comes Chron. ad Consul. Pauli and
Musciani.
, who was living at that time, he is called expressly a Confessor. By L. 16. c.
27. (...).
Nicephorus Callisti he is styled a very great Man.

4. As for the Patriarch Elias, he likewise is honored by the Church as a
Saint and a Confessor, though till he was Deposed from his See he still
continued to Communicate with Timotheus. As Flavianus was Deposed for his
Constancy at Antioch, so was Elias a little after at Jerusalem. He is called by
Vita S. Sabae, c. 34. (...).
Cyrillus of Scythopolis, Elias who was truly a High Priest of God: By the
Author of the Syn. III. (...).
Synodicon, Elias the Preacher of God: By the Author of the Baroccian Treatise,
The Great, the Blessed Elias: By Nicephorus Callisti (...).
, The most Celebrated Elias. And so Holy a Man was he esteemed, That Loc. Cit.
c. 60.
Cyrillus says, That after his Ejectment, the time of his own, and likewise the
Emperor Anastasius's Death, was Revealed by God to him. Neither was he a young
Man at that time when he was Deposed, and when he Communicated with Timotheus,
but a Man of a very great Age, of no less than Cyrillus tells us, c. 60. that
he was Eighty eight years old when he Died, and that he Died Ten days after the
Emperor Anastasius, i. e. Anno 518.
Eighty One years, when first he began to Communicate with him, and of
Consequence fully instructed in the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic
Church.

What we Read in L. 2. p. 501. Theophanes, who writ out of Theodorus, says the
quite contrary to Theodorus, p. 130. That Elias then acknowleged the Council of
Chalcedon: But I think with Valesius, That Theophanes ought to be Corrected
from Theodorus, though Goar thinks the contrary, that Theophanes's is the true
Reading, and that Theodorus ought to be Corrected out of him.
Theodorus Lector concerning Elias, that being Commanded by the Emperor to call
a Synod, and Condemn the Council of Chalcedon, he did not indeed call a Synod,
but however he himself wrote a Letter to the Emperor, in which he Anathematized
Nestorius and Eutyches, Diodorus and Theodorus, and the Council of Chalcedon.
This I say is a Notorious Error. It is very well observed by Baronius, That
Theodorus was led into this Mistake by a Spurious Letter which the Heretics
had feigned in Elias's Name. Let us hear the Monks of Palaestine in their
Epistle to Alciso, which was written a little after whilst Elias himself was
yet living. The Ap. Evag. l. 3. c. 31. (...), etc.
Heretics, say they, require the Bishop of Jerusalem to give 'em an account of
his Faith in Writing. He accordingly sends an account of it to the Emperor by
some that were Heretics. Now that Account which they produce, contains an
Anathema against those who assert two Natures, ( i. e. against the Council of
Chalcedon, etc.) but the Bishop alleges that that is spurious and feigned by
them, and produces a Copy of that which he sent, which has no such Anathema in
it. This indeed is no wonder: For so the Heretics have often Corrupted the
Writings of the Fathers, and have falsely ascribed the Books of Apollinaris to
Athanasius, Gregorius Thaumaturgus, and (Pope) Julius; by which they have drawn
over many to their Errors. So great a Man was Elias, that to bring over others
of the Orthodox to their Party, the Heretics Forge an Heretical Belief in his
Name. It is true, that when the Emperor Anastasius had Commanded a Synod to be
called at Sidon, over which those violent Heretics, Soterichus and Xenaias,
(or Philoxenus) were to preside, in order to Condemn the Orthodox Faith; Elias,
together with Flavianus, that they might hinder the sitting of that Synod, or
break it up without any effect, sent the Emperor a soothing and a complaisant
Letter, by which the Emperor was persuaded to dismiss the Synod without doing
what had been intended. P. 131. (...).
Theophanes says, That in that Letter Elias rejected the Council of Chalcedon;
but it appears from the Words of the Letter produced by Cyrillus Scythop. that
he did not reject the Doctrine of the Council, but only said, V. Sabae, c. 52.
(...).
That he did not approve of the Council of Chalcedon, because upon the account
of that Council there had been great Scandals raised in the Church. These Words
deceived the Emperor, and he broke out afterward into a mighty Passion, when
he saw that Elias was truly Orthodox, and intended nothing less than the
Condemning the Orthodox Faith. Ibid. (...). etc.
Your Archbishop (says the Emperor to S. Sabas, whom Elias had sent to
Constantinople,) has made himself the Champion of the Council of Chalcedon; and
not only so, but has likewise drawn over to his Party Flavianus of Antioch (of
whom before the Heretical Party had some hopes, but Elias had now set him
beyond all their hopes) -- I am not ignorant that he is at this time, and so
was before, when he refused to subscribe to the Deprivation of Euphemius and
Macedonius, a Defender of the Council of Chalcedon. I therefore now, as thou
see, Decree, That he be Deposed. Let your Majesty, (...), etc. Elias had been
a Mo^k before he was made Patriarch.
answered the great S. Sabas, be fully persuaded, That the Archbishop of our
Holy City of God, who has been instructed in all Godly Doctrines by the ancient
Luminaries of our Desert, those Fathers the Workers of Miracles, does reject,
as well the Nestorian Division, as the Eutychian Confusion of the two Natures
of our Savior, that he keeps the midway, and enclines to neither the right
Hand nor to the left. We know that he embraces the Holy Doctrines of S. Cyril,
Archbishop of Alexandria, and that he Anathematizes all those that are averse
to them. And therefore we beseech your Majesty, that the Holy City of
Jerusalem, and our Archbishop, may remain unmolested. I could add much more to
show how untruly and unaccurately the Vindicator discourses concerning the
unsteddiness of the Patriarchs Elias and Flavianus. But I hasten to other
Examples. Only this I shall add, That as Elias continued to his Death an
undaunted Champion for the Faith, so great and so singular was his Courage, as
that, together with the Monks of Palaestine, he denounced an Anathema upon even
the Emperor himself, then alive. L. 3. c. 34. Nicephorus Call. l. 16. c. 35.
Eutychius Patr. Alex. in Annal. Arab. Tom. 2. p. 140. Cum ergo andiisset Elia
Patr. Hierosol. Flavianum in exilium pulsum esse, ac Severum in locum ipsius
suffectum, convoc^vit coram Sepulchro and Golgotha Monachos qui in Anastasium
Imp. and Severum Patr. and quotquot ipsius sententiam amplecterentur, Anathema
denunciarunt.
Evagrius speaks of it as of an Example of extraordinary stoutness. There were
some, says he, of the Orthodox that struck the Emperor Anastasius' s Name, as
being a Heretic out of the Diptychs. But at Jerusalem, even whilst he was
alive, he was Anathematized.

But it was not only Elias and Flavianus those two great Patriarchs of
Jerusalem and Antioch, that Communicated with Timotheus, and acknowleged him as
Bishop of Constantinople. For,

Fourthly, We are assured by Theodorus Lector, that the great Abbot of the
Monastery of Studium at Constantinople, refused to be Consecrated by Timotheus,
whilst he thought him a Heretic; but, as soon as Timotheus had given him an
Assurance that he was not so, without the least scruple concerning the unjust
Deprivation of his Predecessor Macedonius, he readily yielded to be Consecrated
by him. The Abbot (says Theodorus) of P. 563. (...).
the Monastery of Studium being Dead, Timotheus the Patriarch went to the
Monastery to Consecrate a new Abbot: But he who was to be Consecrated told him,
That he could not receive the Blessing from one that had Condemned the Council
of Chalcedon. Timotheus hereupon denounced an Anathema against all those that
were either averse to, or Condemned that Council. Then he that was to be
Consecrated received the Benediction from his Hands. This is to be supposed to
be the Act not only of the Abbot himself, though that alone would be very
considerable, but likewise of the whole Monastery. The same thing we find
related by Chron. p. 135.
Theophanes, and L. 16. c. 35.
Nicephorus Callisti: And they all speak of it as a thing they very well
approved of.

Fifthly, It appears from Theophanes, that the Orthodox Party of Constantinople
Communicated generally with him. Timotheus (says P. 13^. (...).
he) being willing to insert the Name of Severus in the Diptychs, and to strike
out that of Flavianus, was hindered by the People. For all the Orthodox
declined the Communion of Severus. A plain Intimation. The same is attested by
Die Dominico dam jubente Anastasio Caesare, per Marinum perqae Platonem in
Ecclesiae pulpito consistentes, in Hymnum Trinitatis Deipassianorum quaternitas
additur, malti Orthodoxorum pyistin^ voce Psallentes perfidosque praecones
clamoribus objurgantes, in ejusdem Ecclesiae gremio caesi sunt, du^^ique in
carocre per^^runt: Altera nihilominus die in atrio Sancti Theodori majori caede
Catholici pro side unica perculsi sunt. Ad Coss. Paulum and Muscianum.
Marcellinus Comes, who speaks of the Orthodox, their being at Church at that
time when the Words, Who have Crucified for us, were by the Command of the
Emperor added to the Trisagium. Which, as he says, was the next year after the
Promotion of Timotheus. I know that L. 3. c. ult. He quotes the Epistle of
Severus for what he says, but perhaps Severus only meant, That Macedonius,
while in Banishment, excited the People so far, as to make 'em raise a Sedition
upon that account.
Evagrius and Theophanes thought that those Words were added in the time of the
Patriarch Macedonius; but Cedrenus and others agree with Marcellinus. I might
add, That if Marcellinus was mistaken in placing it a year too low, yet his
placing it in the time of Timotheus, is however an Argument for what we Assert;
for he could not have been guilty of such a mistake, if he had He lived at that
time. and wrote his Chronicle within 23 years after.
known that the Orthodox did not Communicate with Timotheus.

Sixthly, It appears from the Epistle of the Palaestine Monks to Alciso, that
in Palaestine, not only the Patriarch Elias, but all in general, allowed of
Timotheus's Communion; though at the same time they rejected the Communion of
Severus, who was put into the place of Flavianus, as being a manifest Heretic.
Ap. Evag. l. 3. c. 33. (...).
The Synodical Epistles of Timotheus now Bishop of Constantinople, are received
here in Palaestine. But the Deprivations of Macedonius and Flavianus are not
approved off. Neither are the Synodical Letters of Severus received here. Here
it ought to be observed, how Famous and Flourishing for a vast number of
Religious and Orthodox Persons Palaestine was at that time. It appears from V.
Sabae.
Cyrillus of Scythopolis, that there flourished there at that time above In the
Desert, within a few hours of Jerusalem, besides many others who inhabited on
the River Jordan.
Ten Thousand Orthodox Monks. And in their Name it was that the Epistle above
cited was written by the Abbots and Governors of the Monasteries. How great and
extraordinary Persons S. Sabas and S. Theodosius were, who were two of the
Chief of the Governors of the Monks at that time, we shall show in the
following Chapter. Concerning the State of Palaestine in general, how generally
Orthodox it was at that time, I shall produce the Testimony of the Monks
themselves. (...), etc.
The Monasteries, say they, which are here, and Jerusalem it self, and most
other Cities, together with their Bishops, agree in the right Faith. For all
whom, and for us, we desire you, most Holy and Honored Sir, to Pray, that we
enter not into Temptation.

Least any one should suspect, that therefore they, of whom we have hitherto
Spoken, Communicated with Timotheus as true Bishop of Constantinople, because
Macedonius was Deceased; I shall here add, That it appears from Theophanes and
Cedrenus, That Macedonius died on the 25th year of the Emperor Anastasius, i.
e. A. D. 515. four years after he was Deposed. And from Marcellinus Comes it
likewise appears, that he was alive in the Consulship of Senator, (or
Cathodorus) i. e. in the year 514. It is manifest therefore that his Successor,
Timotheus, was acknowledged by all those above spoken of, whilst he himself was
still Living.

CHAP. VII.
Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch being Deposed by the Emperor Anastasius, his
Successor Severus is rejected by the Orthodox only because he was a Heretic.
Elias Patriarch of Jerusalem being violently deposed by the said Emperor, his
Successor John is immediately acknowleged by all the People, though at the same
time they hated him: by the whole Church of Palaestine; particularly the two
great Abbots, S. Sabas and S. Theodosius, so Famous for their Vndauntedness and
Sanctity: by Johannes Cappadox Patriarch of Constantinople, and all the Greek
Church: by all the whole Church ever since those Times. The Testimony of
Photius Patriarch of Constantinople out of a Manuscript. The old Patriarch
Elias, though so Tyrannically Deprived for adhering to the Orthodox Faith,
continues however to Communicate with those who acknowleged his Successor.

1. AFter what manner Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch, of whom we have spoken so
largely in the foregoing Chapter, was Deposed, Theophanes has given us a
particular Relation. (...), etc. p. 134.
He tells us (I suppose from Theodorus Lector) that there were sent to Antioch
by the Emperor Anastasius to Depose him, certain (...), i. e. Great Men or
Magistrates, who persuaded him to retire for some time from the City of
Antioch, pretending this Reason, That thereby the Tumults which had been raised
on his account might be appeased. He according to their Advice retires, and
immediately they create the Heretic Severus Patriarch. Though such were the
Deprivation of Flavianus, yet the only Reason assigned by the Orthodox why they
would not Communicate with Severus, was his being a Notorious Heretic.
Concerning the Unlawfulness of Communicating with him, because put into the
place of another so unjustly and tyrannically Deprived, not a word (that I know
of) in any Author. This happened in the year 513.

2. In a short time after, viz. in the year His Successor John governed 7
years, and 9 months, and died three years before the Emp. Justin, as appears
from Cyrillus Scythop. V. Sabae, c. 68. For (...), p. 310. read, (...) It Is
their said that Elias was Deposed in the beginning of the Indict. It was
therefore in September. A. 515.
515. Elias Patriarch of Jerusalem was violently Deposed by the said Emperor
Anastasius, for refusing to Communicate with the Heretic Severus, who was
Constituted Patriarch of Antioch in the room of Flavianus. Though Elias had
been thus Vncanonically Deposed, yet his Successor John, because he was
Orthodox, was readily acknowledged by all. This is another of the Instances
produced by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise, who affirms (what was easy
to be known) that the Names both of John and Elias were written in the Sacred
Diptychs of the Church of Jerusalem, The said Emperor Anastasius (says our
Author) Deposed and Banished the said Blessed Elias from the Sea of Jerusalem,
because he would not come over to his Heretical Opinion, and Constituted John
in his place; whom, because he publicly Preached the Orthodox Faith contrary
to the Emperor's Expectation, Elias in no wise rejected, but continued in
Communion with him. And Theodosius and Sabas, those Reverend Fathers, the Heads
and Chief of all the Monks of the Holy City, visiting Elias in his Exile, both
loved him and Communicated with him, as an injured Patriarch, and yet they
Communicated with John too, (that sat then in the Throne of Jerusalem) as
their Patriarch. And therefore the Names both of John and Elias were written in
the Sacred Diptychs of Jerusalem, in these Words: May the Memory of Elias and
John be Everlasting. These Things (i. e. all save what is said of the Diptychs)
are written in the Life of the Holy and great Sabas. 'Twill be worth ones while
to Read what is said in Answer to this by my extremely learned and most elegant
Friend, the Writer of the Epistola ad Humfredum Hody, etc.
Latin Epistle. Proximo loco (says he) e Vita sancti magnique Sabae mira
profert Author tuus, sc. Anastasium e Sede Constantinopolitana primo Euphemium,
deinde Macedonium ( quibus successit Timotheus) dejecisse, and Eliam
Hierosolymorum Episcopum cum his omnibus communicasse, ipsumque Eliam etiam
fuisse condemnatum and in exilium actum, cui successit Johannes, quorum nomina
in Diptychis: sed haec quoad nos gratis dicta sunt; nam ubi latet illius Sancti
Sabae Vita, tunobis ostende; interim an tale aliquid nunc in rerum Natura
inveniri potest, dubitari liceat: nec been quadrant, quae narrat Author; nam
Euphemius and Macedonius, and ipse tandem Elias in longinquas and distantes
Regiones in exilium missi sunt, Timotheus and Johannes qui seeds occuparunt,
non admodum suere vicini; and tamen hi c^^nes quam amicissime inter se
communicant: ex verbis Auctoris putares eos se mutuo visitasse, aut vtplurimum
convixisse: fateor quidem posse illos in locis maxim remotis dissitos inter se
communicare; sed si ad hoc probandum non obscuram Sabae vitam, sed
communicatorias eorum literas protulisset, aliquid ad rem dixisset. A strange
heap of Simplicity and Ignorance! He was not only ignorant before, that there is
such a Life extant as that of S. Sabas, but even after I had taken care to
direct the Reader where he may find it, he continues still ignorant of it, and
Challenges me to produce it. What he adds of the Communicatory Letters, that
our Author ought to have produced them themselves, recals to my Remembrance
what he elsewhere objects against the Authority of the Treatise it self. He
tells me, that the Yreatise, which I published, cannot carry with it any
Authority because it was not published from the Author's own Copy. Librum illum
in Bibliotheca Bodleiana Chartaceum esse dicis, sed satis antiquum; sed cum,
quam sit antiquus, non audes dicere, and Chartaceum fateris, inde suspicari
licet Originalem illum non esse, sed aliunde transcriptum: and si sic fe res
habet, omnis ejus Authoritas ex alio Libro, quem non habemus, dependet: eas
igitur, si placet, and alia Scrinia scruteris, Baroccianum parum aut nihil
causae prodest. Thus much for the Readers Diversion.

Let us see what the Learned Vindicator has to say to this Example of the
Church of Jerusalem. He tells us, That Elias by his own Cession, might ratify
that Ordination of John, which otherwise had been invalid and unobliging: And
this Cession (says he) might be known by his not Challenging his Right, and by
his not taking it ill at their Hands, who owned his Rival for their Patriarch,
and by the Friendly Behavior of his Rival to him in continuing his Name in the
Ecclesiasticat Diptychs, if it was not afterward restored, but then continued
as our Author supposes: Otherwise this Form in the Jerusalem Diptychs,
mentioned by our Author, of wishing the memory of Elias and John perpetual;
like that of the Tomus Unionis in Constantinople, seems rather as if it were
brought in after their Deaths, to accommodate some Differences that might have
been formerly between Parties, that had been made on their Accounts. You see
that the Vindicator (so learned a Man as he is) has nothing of Authority to fly
to, he is forced to that poor weak Refuge of Conjecture and Guess. As for that
which he says concerning the accommodating of Differences, I deny there was
ever any Difference: So readily, so unanimously did all the whole Church of
Jerusalem submit to the new Patriarch John, that there is not any hint in
Antiquity concerning any Dissension on his Account. It Is alleged indeed by
another of our A farther Account of the Baroccian Manuscript.
Answerers, That the People of Jerusalem rejected John, because he had been the
Supplanter and Betrayer of Elias: But it is not true, that John was upon that
account rejected by the People of Jerusalem. Cyrillus Scythopolitanus, (the
Author which our Answerer alleges) says only, That when John was cast into
Prison for refusing to Anathematize the Council of Chalcedon, the People
rejoiced at it, because he had been an Actor against Elias. So far is he from
saying, that they rejected him, that from him it plainly appears that they all
very freely acknowleged him. And this to me is a very considerable Argument for
the Doctrine which we maintain, That though the People had still a great Love
for Elias, and hated John, because he had been one of the Expellers of Elias;
yet they This appears by the words of Cyrillus a little lower.
freely Communicated with John as their Bishop, because he was Orthodox. Had
they loved John and hated Elias, their Acquiescence under the present Possessor
might perhaps have proceeded from their Passions; but when the Case was quite
contrary, what else could oblige 'em to submit to the present Possessor, but
the Love of Peace, and Conscience? As for that which the Vindicator Conjectures
concerning their presuming that Elias might have surrendered up his Right to
John; Who could ever imagine that Elias did so, since John was one of his
Expellers? But concerning all this matter I desire the Reader should pass his
Judgment from that very particular and Authentic Account which Cyrillus
Scythopolitanus has given us in the Life of S. Sabas. I shall here Translate
the whole Account, and from thence it will plainly appear, That the Church of
Jerusalem had no regard at all to the Will and Good liking of Elias, but that
what they did they did as a thing of Course, and on all Hands owned to be
Lawful, whether he consented or not. C. 56.
Elias (says Cyrillus) refusing to receive the Heretic Severus into Communion,
the Emperor was extremely enraged at it, and he sent one Olympius of Caesarea,
the Governor of Palaestine, with express Commands to Depose him whatsoever
opposition he might meet with. He comes to Jerusalem with the Emperor's Forces,
and by making use of many Arts and Contrivances, he expells Elias from his
Bishopric, and Banishes him to Aila, and makes John the Son of Marcianus, who
had promised to receive Severus into his Communion, and to Anathematize the
Council of Chalcedon, Bishop of Jerusalem in his (...), etc.
stead. When the Holy Sabas and the other Fathers of the Desert had understood
what John had engaged to do, they It appears by what follows that John was
owned as Bishop before they could have any such Reasons as the Vindicator
assigns, to believe that Elias had resigned his Right.
addressed themselves to him, and entreated him not to receive Severus into
Communion, nor Anathematize the said Council, that if he would not do it they
would all stand by him and assist him. By this means, John through the
Reverence which he had for the Fathers, was kept from doing what he had
promised the Governor. But the Emperor Anastasius, when he found that John did
not do as he had promised, being mightily enraged at it, removed Olympius from
his Government, and sent Anastasius the Son of Pamphilus, whom he had made
Governor of Palaestine, in his Room, to make John Communciate with Severus, and
Anathematize the said Council; Or, if he would not do it, to thrust him out of
his Bishopric. He comes to Jerusalem, and unexpectedly sets upon the
Archbishop, and commits him to the public Prison; which all the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem (...).
were glad of, because he had Supplanted and Betrayed the Archbishop Elias. Now
there was one Zacharias, the Chief Magistrate of Caesarea, who got privately
into the Prison, and advised him after this manner: That if he desired not to
be deprived of his Bishopric, he should by no means be prevailed upon to
receive Severus into Communion; but to the Governor he should pretend that he
would; That he should pretend to the Governor, that indeed he was ready to do
it, even there where he was, but least some should say that he was by Force and
Compulsion brought to it, he had rather do what he Commanded, in Public, viz.
the next Lords Day. This the Archbishop did, and the Governor being persuaded
by what he said, restored him to his Church. Being got out of Prison, he called
together by Night an Assembly of the Monks from all Parts, who, according to
some that counted 'em, amounted to the number of Ten Thousand, and because the
Church would not hold so great a number of Persons, he ordered that on the
Lords Day they should meet together at S. Stephen's Church, which was big
enough to contain all. Being all met together, as well the (...).
People of the City, as the Monks, together with Anastasius the Governor, and
Zacharias the Governor of Caesarea, and Hypatius the Emperors Sisters Son, who
was just then come to Jerusalem to offer up his Prayers, and pay his Vows there
for his Deliverance from the Captivity of Vitalianus; when the Governor
expected that the Emperors Will should be fulfilled, the Archbishop went up
into the Pulpit, together with Theodosius and Sabas, the two Chief Governors of
the Monks; and (...), etc.
all the People for many hours together, cried out, Anathematize the Heretics,
Confirm the Council. So they all 3 with one Voice Anathematized Nestorius, and
Eutyches, and Severus, and Soterichus, and all others that did not receive the
Council of Chalcedon. When they had thus done, and were come down from the
Pulpit, the Abbot Theodosius turning to the People, if any one ( says he) does
not receive the four Councils as the four Gospels, let him be Anathema. These
things being done, the Governor being afraid of so great a number of Monks,
fled away to Caesarea. -- When the Emperor Anastasius had heard what was done,
he prepared to drive by force into banishment the Archbishop John, and
Theodosius and Sabas, who went up into the Pulpit together with him. And his
design being known at Jerusalem, Theodosius and Sabas the Governors of the
Monks, those Champions of Piety, those Defenders and Supporters of the Orthodox
Faith, called together all the Monks of the Desert, and in the name of all
together wrote a supplicatory Letter to the Emperor.

The Letter which they Wrote is recorded by Cyrillus: It runs thus, To the most
Religious and Pious Emperor, etc. the request and supplication of Theodosius
and Sabas Abbots; together with the other Governors of Monasteries, and all the
Monks that are in Jerusalem, the Desert round about it, and that inhabit on
Jordan, etc. They profess in that Epistle, that they had all rather see their
City Jerusalem burnt and destroyed, and besides that had all rather lose their
Lives, than accept of an Eutychian Patriarch; and they humbly beseech the
Emperor, not to depose (...).
their most Holy Archbishop John. Though in the beginning of the Epistle there
is mention only of the Monks, yet all the Inhabitants of Palaestine are
supposed to be included, as may be gathered from these words in the Epistle:
(...).
All we the Inhabitants of this Holy Land. When the Emperor received it, he was
engaged in the War with Vitalianus, and on that account, he desisted from his
purpose of deposing the Patriarch John. Thus, John (says Cyrillus) escaped
being deposed from the Throne of Jerusalem.

For Ibid. c. 68.
seven Years and nine Months, i. e. as long as he lived, he continued Bishop of
Jerusalem, acknowleged unanimously by all, and that too, though for Elias died
on July Indict. 11. (as appears c. 60.) i. e. Anno Dom. 518. Nicephorus Patr.
in Chron. assigns him 11 years.
three years of that time, Elias the old Bishop was still living. If victor
Tununensis may be believed, John continued Bishop of Jerusalem no less than
nineteen years, for he says that he died, and that Peter succeeded him, in the
consulship of Belisarius, which falls in with the eighth and ninth year of the
Emperor Justinian; but that is a very great mistake, no less than that other of
his concerning John's Anathematizing the Council of Chalcedon, and receiving
Severus into Communion, which, he says, he did when first he was made Bishop.
As Victor being an African knew nothing exactly of what was done amongst the
Greeks, so 'twas natural for him to suppose that John actually did so, since he
was put into the place of another deposed for refusing to do it.

Whether since the beginning of Christianity, there was ever a Church more
flourishing and zealous for the Orthodox Faith, than that of Jerusalem was at
this time, may very well be doubted: And how can we imagine, that so Stout and
so Orthodox a Church, as that of Jerusalem then was, would have ever submitted
to the Successor of Elias, if it had not been their Opinion that they might
lawfully do it? They that could oppose the Emperor so bravely and courageously
as they did, they that declare boldly to him, that they had all rather lose
their lives than submit to an Eutychian Bishop, are so far from rejecting their
Patriarch John, because put into the place of another unjustly deposed, that
they take no notice at all of it; are so far from deposing him themselves for
being so constituted, that they supplicate the Emperor not to depose him. After
so great a demonstration of their Stout^^ss, and their Zeal for the Orthodox
Faith, as the foregoing Relation af^^ords, 'twould be needless to remind the
Reader, that likewise before that time, when Elias was their Patriarch, they
pronounced an Anathema upon even the Emperor himself; 'twould be needless to
tell him of the (...), which Theophanes the Chronographer speaks of, who a
little before this time (...), etc. p. 130.
being excited (as he says) by a divine Real, came from Palaestine to
Constantinople, to oppose in disputation the Heretic Severus. It is needless
likewise to heap up together those many glorious Epithets which are bestowed by
the Ancients on the two great Abbots, St. Sabas and St. Theodosius. It Is
needless to remind the Reader of those Praises that are given them by Cyrillus
in the place above quoted, (...).
Theodosius and Sabas, those Champions of Piety, those Defenders and Supporters
of Orthodoxy. 'Twere needless to tell him, that they are called by Isaac
Catholicus (...). Invect. 1. in Armenios p. 390.
Theodosius and Sabas the most holy; and by the Author of the Synodicon, Syn 3.
(...).
Theodosius and Sabas the Supporters of the Orthodox, and the fixed Stars of the
Faith, by which the Monks of the Desert and their Governors were enlightened.

I shall not mention, that S. Sabas is called by Symeon Archbishop of
Thessalonica, in his M. S. Baroc. 91. Biblioth Oxon. Responso ad Quest. de
antiquitate Jejuniorum 40 malis, SS. Apostolorum and S. deiparae. (...).
questions not yet published, the most divine Sabas, and a Father and Doctor of
the Church. I pass by likewise those several places of his life, where he is
called (...), p. 310.
the Sanctified, the (...), c. 37.
illuminated Sabas, that (...), c. 63.
Angel on Earth, that heavenly Man Sabas, the Patron of Orthodoxy, the Opposer
of false Doctrine, etc. as likewise another place where he and Theodosius are
both together styled (...) etc. Erat autem Pater noster Sabas moderato animi
sensu, moribus lenibus and simplicissimit, plenusque omni spirituali prudentia
and discretione: caritatem vero non sictam, sed maxim sinceram erga memoratum
beatum Abbatem Theodosium servabat; qui consimilem pariter sinceritatem erga
Patrem nostrum retinebat; (...). Il duo Monachorum caetum omnem ad regnum
coelorum dirigebant. Siquidem beatus Theodosius praeses, dux, and Archimandrita
erat totius sanctae civitati subjecti Coenobiaci canonis, sanctificatus ver^
Sabas princeps sait and legislator totius Anachoreticae vitae, omniumque qui in
cellis degere selegerant, c. 65.
true Sons of Light and Sons of Day, Men of God, faithful Servants, the Pillars
and Supporters of Truth, men of excellent desires. These are very extraordinary
Encomiums, and from them it is apparent how great and extraordinary Persons
both for Piety and Orthodoxy Theodosius and Sabas were. I shall not mention how
great a Veneration and Honor the greatest Persons of S. Sabas's own Age were
wont to pay him; how the Vita ejus c. 75.
Archbishop and all the People went out to meet him when he came to Caesarea;
how the Emperor C. 70, 71.
Justinian, when he came to Constantinople sent his own Yachts to receive him;
how the Patriarch of Constantinople together with other great Bishops went out
with the Yachts to meet him; how when he came into the Presence, the Emperor
ran to salute him; how he kissed his head, shed tears for joy to see him, and
received his Blessing. So great an Honor was paid our Sabas, though as to his
outward appearance he was nothing else but a poor Vide c. 51.
ragged old Man. I pass by all these things: But this the Reader is desired to
take notice of and remember, That by both the Churches, as well the The day
dedicated to S. Theodosius is the 11 th. of Ian. that dedicated to Sabas is the
5 th. of December. Martyrolog. Romans S. Sabae abbatis, qui in Palaestina miro
sanctitatis exemplo refulsit, etc. S. Theodosii Coenobiarchae qui multa pro
fide Catholica passus, in pu^^ tandem quievit.
Western as the Eastern, Theodosius and Sabas are both honored with the Title
of Saints. They are not only Worshipped as Saints, but in the Liturgies, the
Menology, and the Anthology, of the Greek Church, they have, as two of the
Sancti majorum gentium, their proper and peculiar Offices. Let us hear a little
those Elogiums and Praises which they give them; (not private Authors, but the
whole Greek Church in her sacred Offices) (...), etc. -- (...), etc.
most blessed Sabas, (says the Church in her addresses to that Saint;) The
unextinguish'd Lamp of Continence, the most refulgent Luminary of those that
live a monastic life, enlightened with love, the unshaken Tower of
Perseverance; -- Holy Sabas, the fiery Pillar of Virtues, the light that guides
those that sail on the Sea of the World to the Shore of Heaven, thou that
opposest the Spirits of Error, the pure Vessel of the Holy Ghost, the conductor
of Monastic Persons, the exact measure of Temperance, the most illustrious
Example of Humility, the perfect Rule of Virtue. Much more of the like Nature
the pours out in the Praises of that Saint; and much of the same Nature she
offers up to S. Theodosius. (...), etc.
Holy Father, Divine Theodosius, says she in a Prayer to him composed by
Theophanes. See likewise that Ap. Antho^gium. (...), etc.
Hymn, which she Sings in Praise of him, composed by Iohanne, Dam^s^enas. Thus
much I thought sit to say concerning those two great Men, that the World may
see what Examples those are which we follow.

(...) it was not only the Church of Palaestine, S. Sabas, and S. Theodosius,
etc. that acknowledged John as true Patriarch of Jerusalem: It appears from an
Epistle of Johannes Cappadoae Patriarch of Constantinople, and the Synod of
Constantinople, that was called under him in the beginning of the Emperor
Justin, viz. on the year 5'8. that the whole Greek Church acknowleged him. (The
Latin Church at that time was broken off from the Communion of the Greek Church
on the Account of Acacius formerly Patriarch of Constantinople) That Epistle is
extant in the Acts of the Council Act. V. p. 186. (...), etc.
sub Menna, and is directed to our John Archbishop of Jerusalem, and to the
Metropolitans under him. It begins thus; Christ our God, who has given from
Heaven the Bond of Charity in Peace, to Men that are of one Soul and of one
Faith, has Commanded that what is done by some should be Communicated to all,
etc. (...) etc. (...).
I have (therefore) thought it necessary to signify (these things) to your
Holiness, that by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, you, by knowing what has
been done, may be confirmed in the Word of Truth. The business of the Epistle
is to let him, and his Bishops know, that Severns the Heretical Patriarch of
Antioch had been Anathematized at Constantinople, etc. and about the same
matter there is another Epistle sent from the same Synod of Constantinople to
Epiphanius Archbishop of Tire. There is extant in the same Acts of the Council
sub Menna, an Epistle of our John Archbishop of Jerusalem, and the Synod of the
three Palaestines, (to which, besides the Archbishop himself, there are the
Subscriptions of 34 Bishops) to the Patriarch of Constantinople in answer to
that abovementioned.

(...).
To my Lord and Fellow-Communicant, the most Pious and Holy John, and to the
Holy Synod of Constantinople, John by the Mercy of God Bishop of Jerusalem, and
the Holy Synod of the Three Palaestines, now sitting in the Holy Places of
Christ the God of all Things, Health in the Lord. Neither can it be alleged,
That therefore the Patriarch and the Church of Constantinople acknowleged our
John of Jerusalem, because at that time the old Bishop Elias was Dead. For
Elias Died in Banishment at a great distance from Constantinople, the Cyril, V.
Sabae, c.
20th. of July, A. D. 518, ten days after the Emperor Anastasius and the Synod
of Constantinople completed that about which they write to John of Jerusalem
four days before, viz. on the Vide Acta Concilii sub Menna Act. V. p. 181.
16th of the same Month. And besides it is plain from the Words of the Epistle
of the Patriarch of Constantinople to our John of Jerusalem, that before that
time they owned the latter as true Bishop of Jerusalem.

As our Archbishop John was in his life time acknowleged by all the Church, so
he has been all along in the following Ages. First, Cyrillus Scythopolitanus,
who wrote his History of the Life of S. Sabas, about Thirty three years after
The Archbishop's.
his Death, speaks every where of him as of one of the true Bishops of
Jerusalem, and in one place he says, that he was C. 35. (...).
adorned with a Divine Prudence or Understanding. Secondly, In the
Constantinopolitan Council sub Menna, (which was celebrated in the year 536.
where the Pope of Rome was concerned as well as the Greek Church) his Epistle
to the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the Patriarch's Epistle to him, are
recited in the same manner as the Epistles of other Orthodox Bishops are wont
to be in the Councils; and in the Acts of that Council he is Styled more than
once John Archbishop of Jerusalem Act. V. p. 157. (...) Rurfus p. 186. (...).
of Holy Memory. Thirdly, the Author of the Synodicon speaking of that Synod of
Monks which wrote that Epistle to the Emperor Anastasius, in which the
Eutychian Heresy is Anathematized, and the Emperor desired not to Depose their
most Holy Archbishop John, gives it the Title of a (...). Syn. III.
Divine and Holy Synod. Which shows, that he very well approved of the
Proceeding of those Monks as to their Acquiescence under John their Archbishop.
Fourthly, It is certain that the Names both of John and Elias were continued
all along in the Sacred Diptychs of the Church of Jerusalem. This is expressly
asserted not only by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise in the Words above
Cited, but likewise by Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople, in a Entitled,
(...), etc. MS. Baroc. 91. Biblioth. Oxon.
Treatise of his not yet published. His Words are express to our Purpose. They
are these, (...).
Elias Bishop of Jerusalem being Banished from his Church by the Eutychians,
they made John Bishop in his stead; who had promised to Communicate with
Severus, In Manuscritto (...).
and to Anathematize the Fourth Council. But he doing the contrary by the
persuasion of S. Sabas and S. Theodosius, was so far from being either punished
or reprehended, that to this very day he is Commemorated as a Saint, together
with Elias. Neither did they who Communicated with him, suffer any thing in
their Reputation for doing so.

I shall conclude this Chapter with an Observation concerning the good old
Archbishop Elias. He, though so Tyrannically deposed, though deposed for
adhering to the Orthodox Faith, yet continued still to communicate with those
who acknowleged his Successor John. This is plain from the Testimony of
Cyrillus Scythopolitanus, who V. S. Sabae c. 60.
tells us, That (near three years after he was banished) a little before he
fell sick and died, S. Sabas and Euthalius, the Governor of those Monasteries
which he had built at Jericho when he was Archbishop, and another Abbot went to
Aila, where he lay confined in banishment, to give him a visit: Though S. Sabas
and the rest, had immediately acknowleged his Successor as soon as he was
deposed, though they still adhered to that Successor as the true Archbishop of
Jerusalem, and though Euthalius had been in a particular manner obliged to
Elias by being constituted by him, the Governor of his own Monasteries; yet the
good old man takes no notice at all of it, but as Cyrillus says, (...), etc.
received them with joy, kept them several days with him, and communicated
daily with them.

CHAP. VIII.
S. Silverius Bishop of Rome being violently deposed by Belisarius the Emperor
Justinian's General, his Successor Vigilius, though put into his place so
deprived, though constituted by the bare Authority of Belisarius against the
consent of the Clergy, and though Silverius never gave up his Right, is owned
and received by the 5th. General Council, and by all the Church, as a true
Pope. He was generally owned whilst Silverius himself was living. Baronius's
conjecture concerning his being again ordained after Silverius's Death
confuted, though for some time he communicated with Heretics, yet it was not
known to the Orthodox who communicated with him.

IN the year 538, Silverius Pope of Rome was deposed by Belisarius, the Emperor
Iustinian's General, then in Italy, being accused of a design to betray the
City of Rome to the Goths, and Vigilius was made Pope in his stead. There being
a suspicion (says L. 1. de bell. Goth. c. 25. (...).
Procopius Caesariensis) that Silverius the Bishop of the City intended to
deliver up the City to the Goths, Belisarius sent him away immediately into
Greece, and a little after made another Bishop in his stead, by name Vigilius.
To the same purpose the Viriges Tyrannus exercitu aggregato Romam obsidet cui
tunc faventem Papam Silverium Belisariut ab Episcopata submovit, and loco ejus
Vigilium diaconum ordinavit.
Continuator of Marcellinus Comes' s Chronicle, and Paulus Hist. l. 16.
Statimque ei (Belisario) a Theodora Augusta praeceptio allata est, ut Papam
Silverium convictum accusatione falsorum testium in exilium truderet, ea quod
Anthinum hereticum Constantin^politanum recuperatione recipere noluisset. Quod
Belisarius licet nolens nihil moratus effecit. Pulsas denique est Papa
Silverius ad Pontiam insulam in qui and exulans obiit.
Diaconus, least any one should suspect that, though he is said to be deposed
by Belisarius, yet it was not barely by his Authority, but by a Synod of
Bishops: I shall here present the Reader with that particular Account of the
whole Proceeding, which we find in Breviarii c.22. Romana Civitas (Agapeto Papa
Constantinopoli desuncto) Silverium elegit ordinandum. Augusta vero vocans
Vigilium Agapeti diaconum, profiteri sibi secreto ab eo slagitavit, ut si Papa
fieret, tolleret synodum (Chalced.) and scriberet (communicaret cum) Theodosio,
Anthimo, and Severo, and per Epistolam suam eorum firmaret fidem; promittens
dare ei praeceptum ad Belisarium, ut Papa ordinaretur, and dari centenaria
septem. Lubenter ergo suscepit Vigilius promissam ejus amore principatus and
auri. Et facta professione Romam profectus est; ubi veniens invenit Silverium
Papam ordinatum. Belisario (tunc in Italia existenti) tradens praeceptum
Augustae promisit ci duo auri centenaria, si, Silverio remoto, ordinaretur ipse
pro eo. Belisarius vero Romam reversus, evocans Silverium ad palatium,
intentabat ei calumniam, quasi Gothis scripsisset ut Romam introirent. Fertur
autem Marcum quendam Scholasticum, and Iulianum quenda^ praetorianum fictas de
nomine Silverit composu^sse literas Regi Gothorum scriptas, ex quibus
convinceretur Silverius Romanam velle perdere civitatem. Secreto autem
Belisarius and ejus conjuae persuadebant Silverio implere praeceptum Augustae,
ut tolleretur Chalcedonensis Synodus, and per Epistolam suam Haereticorum
firmaret fidem. -- Ad quem rursus mandavit Belisarius ut ad Palatium veniret.
Qui de Ecclesia exire nolebat dolos sibi praeparatos agnoscens. Sed postea
orans, and causam suam domino commendans, exiit, and ad Palatium venit. Qui
solus ingressus, a suis ulterius non est visus. Et alia die Belisarius
convocatis Presbyteris and Diaconis and Clericis omnibus, mandavit eis ut alium
sibi Papam eligerent. Quibus dubitantibus, and nonnullis ridentibus, savore
Belisaris ordinatus est Vigilius. Silverius autem in exilium missus est, in
civitatem provinciae Lyciae, quae Patara dicitur. -- Silverio veniente Pataram,
venerabilis Episcopus civitatis ipsius venit ad imperatorem, and judicium dei
contestatus est de tantae sedis Episcopi expulsione, multos esse dicens in hoc
mundo Reges, and non esse unum, sicut ille Papa est super Ecclesiam mundi
totius, a sua sede expulsus. Quem audiens imperator, revocari Romam Silverium
jussit, and de literis illis judicium fieri, ut si probaretur ab ipso fuisse
scriptas, in quacunque civitate Episcopus degeret; si autem falsae fuissent
probatae, restitueretur sedi suae. Pelagius vero current cum voluntate
Augustae, volebat ^rritum facere imperatoris praeceptum, ne Silverius Romam
reverteretur, sed praevalente imperatoris jussione, Silverius ad Italiam
reductus est. Cujus adventu territus Vigilius, ne sede pelleretur, Belisario
mandavit: Trade mihi Silverium, alioqui non possum facere quod a me exigis. Ita
Silverius traditus est duobus Vigilii defensoribus and servis ejus, qui in
Palmariam insulam adductus, sub eorum custodia defecit inedia.
Liberatus Diaconus, who flourished at that time. He tells us, That Pope
Agapetus being dead, and Silverius being chosen by the City of Rome in his
stead, the Empress persuaded Vigilius, Agapetus's Deacon, who was at that time
at Constantinople, to enter into a secret Engagement, That if he should be made
Pope, he would condemn the Council of Chalcedon, and communicate with (the
Heretics) Theodosius, Anthimus, and Severus, and confirm their belief by an
Epistle. He having engaged himself to do so, she writes a Letter by him to
Belisarius, requiring him to depose Silverius and to make Vigilius Bishop in
his room. Belisarius to fulfill the Empress's Will, and for the lucre of a sum
of Money which Vigilius had offered him, gets Silverius to be accused as having
written to the Goths and engaged to deliver up the City into their hands. And
it is reported (says Liberatus) that one Marcus, and one Iulianus forged
Letters in his name to that purpose. Now Belisarius and his Wife had privately
persuaded Silverius to do the same thing which the Empress had engaged Vigilius
to do, but he refused, and betakes himself to a Church. Belisarius sends a
messenger to him to invite him again to the Palace; he accordingly goes relying
upon an Oath which was made him that he should have leave to return. He returns
again to the Church, and again is commanded by Belisarius to come to the
Palace; but he would not go out of the Church, well knowing that some evil was
designed him. At last he yielded to go, and commending himself and his cause to
God by Prayer, he went thither: He entered in alone, and was afterward never
seen by those that attended him. Another day Belisarius called together the
Presbyters, and the Deacons, and all the rest of the Clergy, and commanded them
to choose another Pope. Which when they scrupled to do, and some laughed at the
command, Vigilius was by his order ordained Pope. Now Silverius being banished
to Patara a City of Lycia, the Bishop of that City addressed himself to the
Emperor, and reasoned with him concerning the Expulsion of Silverius, telling
him that there were many Kings in the World, but but one Pope, the Head of the
Church of the whole World. ( This the Popes at that time had pretended to be,
and their Flatterers humored them in it.) By this the Emperor was induced to
recall Silverius, and gave order that those Letters which were produced against
him should be enquired into, That if it could be proved that he wrote them, he
should be banished to any City they should think fit; but if they appeared to
be false, he should be restored to his See. This news being carried to the
Empress, she endeavored to prevent Silverius's return to Rome; but she could
not prevail, and Silverius was brought back to Italy by the Emperor's command.
Now Vigilius being terrified at his coming, least he should lose his See,
required Belisarius, to deliver him up into his hands, telling him, that if he
did not do so, he should not be able to pay him that fumm of Money which he had
promised him. S^ Belisarius gave him up into the hands of Vigilius's Servants,
who carried him into the Isle Palmaria, where in their custody he died of want.

This is the account which Liberatus has given us, and the same account, as to
the main we have in the Pontifical. It appears from hence, That Silverius was
not only deposed without any Synod, but likewise by an inferior Person, not by
the order of the Sovereign Power; that (besides that) he was deposed very
unjustly and tyrannically without any formal Trial; and lastly, that Vigilius
was made Pope without any Election, expressly against the consent of the Clergy
of Rome, by the bare Arbitrary Power of Belisarius.

Though such were the Circumstances of Silverius's deprivation, though after
his deprivation he never gave up his right, and though Vigilius was (besides
that) so uncanonically constituted, yet because he appeared to be Orthodox, he
was owned and acknowleged by all; by the People of Rome even though they very
much hated him for his Cruelty to his Predecessor and for other ill Actions,
and by all the Catholic Church, particularly by the 5 th. General Council. He
governed as long as he lived, near 18 years, and to this day is reckoned by all
as one of the true Popes of Rome. I need not produce the Autorities of any of
the Ancients to prove that he was generally acknowleged, it being a truth so
notorious. But there are four things which I must not omit taking notice of.

1. That there is extant in Isidorus Mercator an Epistle of Silverius, supposed
to be then in banishment, to Vigilius, in Novumque scelus erroris in Apostolica
sede rursus niteris inducere; and in morem Simonis cujus discipulum te ostendis
operibus, data pecunia, meque repulso qui (favente domino) tribus jam jugiter
emensis temporibas et praesideo, tempora mea nitaris invadere. Habeto ergo, cum
his qui tibi censentiunt, poenae damnationis sententiam; sublatumque tibi nomen
and munus Ministerii sacerdotalis agnosce, spiritus judicio, and Apostolica a
nobis autoritate damnatus. Sic enim decet sidem sanctorum Patrum in Ecclesia
servari Catholica, ut quod habuit amittat qui improbabili temeritate quod non
accepit assumpserit. Dat. 80 Kal. Principe Basilio. Caelius Silverius Papa
urbis Romae huic decreto Anathematis in Vigilio pervasore facto ad omnia
statuta consensum praebens subscripsi. Pariter and 4 Episcopi subscripserunt,
id est, Terracinensis, Fundanus, Firmanus, and Minturnensis.
which he excommunicates him and degrades him from the Ministry for invading
his See by Simony; and he likewise excommunicates all those that adhere to him.
And to this Epistle and Sentence, four other Bishops of Campania subscribe. A
second Epistle, is from one Amator a Bishop, to Silverius, in which he condoles
with him for the injuries which he had suffered, and desires to know the
circumstances of his Ejectment; and a third there is from Silverius to Amator
in Answer to his. In this he tells Amator, That Belisarius trapan'd him into
the Palace, and so detained him and sent him into Banishment; Me vero vi
retento, and ante praedictam Patriciam deducto, miserunt; in quo modo sustentor
pane tribulationis and aqua angustiae. Ego tam^n propterea non dimisi nec
dimitto officium meum: sed cum Episcopis quos congregare potui, eos qui talia
erga me egerunt anathematizavi.
But (says he) I do not therefore resign up my right to my See, but together
with such Bishops as I could gather together, I have excommunicated those who
did so to me. To these Epistles I answer, That they are all fictitious and
forged by that idle and ignorant Impostor Mercator. This appears from the
Barbarousness of the Style in which they are writ, from the falseness of the
Stories contained in 'em, and from their Date. For whereas the 1 st. is
pretended to be dated in the Consulship of Basilius, and the last in the 5th.
Consulship of Justinian when he was Consul together with Belisarius. It is very
certain, First, That Basilius was not Consul till two or three years after
Silverius was deposed. Secondly, That Belisarius was never Consul after the
year 535, which was two or three years before Silverius's Expulsion. Thirdly,
That Justinian was never a 5 th, time Consul. Fourthly, That Justinian and
Belisarius were never Consuls together. So ignorant an Impostor was that idle
Fellow the Forger of those Epistles; for further satisfaction the Reader is
desired to consult Blondel his Pseudo Isidorus. I shall only add that all those
three Epistles are now rejected as Spurious by even the Papists themselves, as
particularly by the Jesuit Ad Ep. 1. Suspect ^ sulei epistolam cum alia
probant, tum styli barbaries. -- Surrepsisse videtur adjecta nota Consularis,
quia tempore Silveri^ neque Belisarius neque Basilius ullum Consulatum egerunt,
in quit ad ^^am Binius: verum mihi potius hec a^^uere videntur Impos^oris
audacem inscitiam, qui Basilium anno 541. Consulem celebe^^inum dusbus minimum
annis prae^e^te^it. ^^ de h^see Mercatoris aberrationibus Chronologicis jam
saepius conquelli sumus. Ad Ep. 2. Hanc quoque suspectae sidei censent viri
docti, nec imme^^t^, cum jisdem atque se ^ens vitrij; laborer. The last is
condemned by even Baronius and Binius themselves. Baronius says 'twas written
ab aliquo otioso; and it is strange he should not likewise reject the other.
It Is manifest that the second was forged only as an occasion to write the last.


Labbee in his Edition of the Councils. It does not therefore appear that there
was ever any the least Schism on the account of Silverius, though the
Cricumstances of his Ejectment and of Vigilius's Promotion were so
extraordinary. Such indeed were the circumstances both of the Ejectment of the
former, and likewise of the promotion of the latter, so very extraordinary and
provoking, that it is to be admired that there was none; and the Forger of
those Epistles above mentioned, had reason enough from the heinousness of the
circumstances (though not from Tradition or History) to believe there might have
been some Schism, and accordingly to make Silverius and four other Bishops
excommunicate Vigilius and his Adherents. I here observe, by the bye, that he
that forged those Epistle, does not make Silverius complain of his being
deposed without a Synod, he does not make him excommunicate his deposers and
Vigilius and his Adherents, for that; for he takes no notice at all of it: but
he makes him excommunicate his Deposers because they deposed him by Fraud and
Treachery; and he makes him excommunicate Vigilius and his Adherents, because
he had usurped his See by Simony.

2. Baronius, and out of him Binius (who is every where the Transcriber of
Baronius) are willing to persuade the World, that after the death of Silverius,
Vigilius resigned the Popedom that so he might be new Chosen, and that being
new Chosen he was made a true Pope by virtue of his last Consecration, not by
virtue of his first. A strange and prodigious Fancy! Let us see what ground
they have for it. Their only Argument is this, That in the Pontifical it is
said, that after the death of Silverius there was a five days vacancy in the Sea. Now, say they, since Vigilius was made Pope before Silverius's death, how
there should be a Five days Vacancy after Silverius' s death, unless it was
because Vigilius resigned upon his death and was again chosen Pope after a Five
days Vacancy, we cannot imagine. To this I answer, 1. That had there been such
a Resignation, it must have been looked upon as so extraordinary a thing, as
that some one or other would have mentioned it: But Liberatus Diaconus who
lived at that time, and gives a particular account of the Deprivation and death
of Silverius, and of the Promotion of Vigilius, makes no mention of any such
thing. So far is he from doing so, that the contrary may easily be gathered
from what he says. Having told his Reader, that Vigilius to make good his
Promise to the Empress, had sent his Communicatory Letters to the Heretics
Theodosius, Anthimus and Severus, and confirmed their Belief; he subjoins, Et
haec Vigilius scribens Haereticis occulte, permansit sedens. And so he was
continued in his See. 2. It does not appear that the Author of the Pontifical
meant, that there was a Vacancy in the Sea of Five days after the death of
Silverius: He might only mean that there was a Vacancy of Five days between the
Deprivation of Silverius and the Promotion of Vigilius. 3. It is certain that
the Author of the Pontifical writes very fabulously concerning Silverius and
Vigilius, and plainly discovers, that he knew very little of the matter. As for
his cessavit Episcopatus dies 5. he had so much used his Pen to, cessavit
Episcopatus, at the end of every Life, that that comes in always of Course,
even then when ('it is certain) there never was any Vacancy. Witness the cessavit
episcopatus dies 7. between the death of Liberius and Felix II. and the
cessavit episcopatus diebus 39. between the same Felix and Damasus. Than which
there can be nothing more false: For Damasus did not succeed Felix but
Liberius; and Felix being put into Liberius's place, was again turned out upon
Liberius's Restoration, without any manner of Vacancy. So, rather than a
cessavit episcopatus should be wanting, he adds in the Life of S. Fabian. Et
cessavit Episcopatus dies septem: when we very well know, that between the
Martyrdom of S. Fabian and the Consecration of his Successor S. Cornelius there
was a Vacancy of no less than a Year, Four Months and Four Days. Our Author
knew nothing of the Business; but a cessavit Episcopatus he would not be
without.

3. That Vigilius was owned and acknowleged as a true Pope, not only after the
death of Silverius, but likewise before, appears 1. from hence, That there is
no mention in any credible Author of his being by any rejected on the Account
of Silverius; so far was he from being generally rejected. 2. From an Epistle
of Eutherius a Bishop (as it seems of Spain) to him, wherein he desires his
Opinion in some Points relating to the Church. That there was such an Epistle
written to him by Eutherius, appears from Vigilius's Dileclissimo Fratri
Eutherio Vigilius. Directas ad nos tuae caritatis Epistolas, plenas Catholicae
inquisitionis solicitudme, gratanter accepimus, benedicentes dei nostri
clementiam, quia tales in extremis mundi partibus dignatur suis ovibas
providere pastores, per quos and pascuis valcant salutaribus abundare, and ab
antiqui hostis rapacitate servari, ut insidias nequeant ejus sa^reptionis
incurrere: unde certum est, quia promissae vos be atitudinis ^^atia
subseqa^tur, quan^^ a vobis coelestium perfectia doctrinarum tam votiva
sciscitatione ^erquiritu^; scriptum est enim, Ecati qui scrutantur testimonia
ejus: in toto cord exquirunt cum. Hoc igitar, frater carissime, propositum
tuae consultationis tota mente tractantos, de te quoque provenire contendimus,
qui regulam Catholicae fid^i iisdem s^udes tenere vestigiis, quibus e^m in
Apostotica fide cognoscis esse fundatam, etc.
Epistle in Answer to it: and that it was written in a very little time after
Vigilius was made Pope is apparent from the date of Vigilius's Answer; for that
is dated the Data Kal. Martii Volasiano and Ioann^ Viris clariss. ^oss.
1 st. of March in the Consulship of Volusianus and Ioannes, i. e. anno 538.3.
From an Epistle of the Church of Austrasia to him, written by their King
Theodebert, and sent by an Ambassador to him, to know his Judgment, what
Penance ought to be inflicted on one who had Married his Brother's Wife. That
there was such an Epistle written to him by K. Theodebert, is plain from an Si
pro observatione mandatorum Catholicae filios Ecclesiae opportune ^ el
importane sacerdotes singulos decet instruere, quanto magis his, qui d^votioni
laudabili de rebus sibi dubiis ad studium veniunt consulendi, competenti
necesse e^^ ordine res^^nderi? Hi^e est quod gloriosi silii nostri Regis
Theodeberti interrogationem, qua nos per Modericum, virum illustrem, legatum
suum credidit requirendos, duximus amplecten^am: in qua gloriam suam desiderat
informari, cujusmodi poenitentia possit illius purgari delictum, qui cum uxore
fratris sui illicitum praesumpsit inire conjugium. Cui nos equidem missis
affatibus, quorum tenorem tua fraternitas in subjectis inveniet, hoc indicare
curavimus, etc.
Epistle which he wrote to Caesarius Archbishop of Arles. And that that Epistle
was sent him just after he was promoted to the Popedom, is apparent from the
date of his Epistle to Caesarius: for that is dated on the Datum pridie Nonarum
Martiarum Ioanne V. C. Consule.
6 th. of March 538. I take no notice of what is said by the Cardinal Baronius
and the Editors of the Councils, that the two aforesaid Epistles of Eutherius
and K. Theodebert were written not to Vigilius but Silverius, and that being
brought to Rome after the Expulsion of Silverius, Vigilius took upon him to
answer 'em. That is only an Evasion: and it is plain from Vigilius's Words,
that those Epistles were written, not to Silverius, but directly to him. And
certain it is moreover, that Vigilius writes, both in his Epistle to Eutherius,
and likewise in that to the Archbishop of Arles, as a Pope universally
acknowleged.

4. It may possibly be alleged, That Vigilius when he was made Pope, sent his
Communicatory Letters to the Heretics, Theodosius, Anthimus, and Severus, and
confirmed their Heretical Doctrines; that therefore they who communicated with
him, and owned him as true Bishop of Rome, were men of no Principles, since
they owned a Heretic to be a true Pope. To this I answer, That all that was
done by Vigilius in reference to the Heretics, was done secretly, and was not
known to the Orthodox who communicated with him till after he had utterly
forsook the Heretics. This appears 1 st from the Testimony of Liberatus
Diaconus, who speaking of the engagement between Vigilius and the Empress, says
that it was a secret; that she secretly persuaded him to promise to communicate
with those Heretics: and speaking afterward of his Communicatory Letters to
the Heretics, and of his subscribing to their Heresy, he adds, that this he
did occulte. 2. From the Communicatory Letter it self which Vigilius wrote to
the Heretics, and to which he added his Subscription to their Doctrine. For in
that, as it is extant in Liberatus and Victor Tununensis, he expressly charges
'em Oportet ergo, ut hec que vobis scribo, nullus cognoscat: sed magis tanquam
suspectum hic me sapientia vestra ante alios existimet habere, ut facilius
possim hec quae coepi operari and perficere.
not to let any one know that he had written to 'em; and pretends this Reason,
because by keeping it secret, he should be the better able to advance their
Cause. So far indeed was Vigilius from being publicly known to be a
Communicator with Heretics and a Subscriber to their Heresy, that the Author
of the Pontifical tells us, That he absolutely Ad haec rescripsit Vigilius:
Absit hoc a me, Domina Augusta. Prius locutus sum male and insipienter, modo
autem nullo modo tibi consentio, ut revocem hominem Haereticum and
anathematizatum. Et fi indignus Vicarius sum B. Petri Apostoli, quomodo fuerunt
antecessores mei sanctissimi Agapetus and Silverius qui cum damnaverunt.
refused to do as he had promised the Empress, and was therefore persecuted by
her.

CHAP. IX.
Macarius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, being deposed by the Emperor Justinian, his
Successor Eustochius is owned as a true Patriarch by the Fifth General Council
and the whole Catholic Church. After some time Eustochius himself is deposed
by the Emperor and Macarius, being restored, is received by the Church.
According to our Adversaries Principles, either Eustochius, or Macarius, after
his Restoration, was no true Patriarch: yet the Church received both.

ABout the end of the Year Not on the Year 545, as some say; nor 546, as
Baronius states it. It appears from Cyrillus Scythop. Vita S. Sabae, p. 371,
373. That Peter died, and Macarius was constituted, not before about the end of
the sixteenth Year after S Sabas's death: Now S. Sabas died the fifth of
December. Indict. to the sixth Year of Justinian, as appears p. 353, 354; And
therefore the end of the sixteenth Year after S. Sabas's death, was in the
latter part of Iustinian's 22d. Year, which began the First of April. And with
this agrees what he says, page 369, 371. That the Abbot Gelasius died October.
Ind. 9. That after him, besides the Intervals, George was Abbot seven Months;
after him Cassianus ten Months; then Conon, in whose time Peter the Patriarch
died, and Macarius was promoted. From hence it appears that Peter was Patriarch
about 25 Years; not 20 only, as Theophanes and Nicephorus Patriarch tell us;
for he began three Years before the Beginning of Iustinian's Reign, as appears
p. 336, 337.
548, the 22d. of the Reign of Justinian, Macarius was constituted Patriarch of
Jerusalem in the room of Peter deceased. After two years time he was deposed by
the Emperor; partly, because he had been promoted without his Consent; and
partly, because he was suspected to be a favourer of the Origenian Heretics;
and great Riots were raised at Jerusalem on his account. He being deposed,
Eustochius was preferred in his stead. After Peter ( says Hist. Eccles. l.17.
c. 26. (...).
Nicephorus Callisti) Macarius was ordained Patriarch of Jerusalem without the
Emperor's Consent: and was therefore deposed. For he was said to be a great
promoter of the Doctrines of Origin. He being expelled, Eustochius was advanced
to the holy Chair. As Nicephorus intimates in these words, That he was deposed
by the Emperor: So in C. 29.
another place he says so expressly. And L. 4. c. 37. (...).
Evagrius intimates the same thing. And that there was no Synod, no formal
Trial, may be gathered from hence, That Evagrius, and after him Nicephorus
Callisti say only, that it was reported that he was a favourer of the
Origenian Doctrines: Had he been formally tried and condemned, they would not
have used that word. To these I add the Testimony of Cyrillus Scythopolitanus,
who flourished in Palaestine at that time. After the death, Vita S. Sabae c.
90. (...).
says he, of the Archbishop Peter, Macarius being through the boldness of the
Neolauritans ordained in his stead, and there being great Riots in the City,
the most pious Emperor incensed against Ascidas and the Origenists, commanded
Macarius to be expelled his Bishopric. Now the Abbot Conon and his Associates,
took hold of that opportunity, and presented the Emperor a Libel concerning
the impious Doctrine of the Origenists; and by that means being admitted to
speak freely to the Emperor, got Eustochius, the Oeconomus of the Church of
Alexandria, then at Constantinople, to be nominated Patriarch. So our most holy
Emperor commanded Eustochius to be ordained Patriarch, and a General Council
to be called. Theophane's, says (...). Chronogr. ad an 2. Iustini Iun. He
mistakes the Reign, and places it under Iustinian's Successor.
Macarius, was wrongfully deposed, (...), i. e. factione, as Anastasius
Bibliothecarius renders it, by a malicious Conspiracy of his Enemies.

Eustochius being thus promoted, was owned as Patriarch of Jerusalem by the
whole Catholic Church in the Fifth General Council, in which he had his
Representatives: and continued Patriarch about Nicephorus Patriarch, and
Theophanes allow him but one Year: (and so Baronius:) But in the Author which
they followed, there seems to have been an Error in the writing, (...) for
(...). He was made Patriarch the 25th. Year of Justinian, just before the Fifth
General Council was summoned, as appears from Cyril of Scythopolis's Words, and
wa^ deposed on the 37th. of the same Emperor, as Victor Tun. asserts. It
appears from Cyril of Scythop. at the end of S. Sabas's Life, that he was
Patriarch the 23d. Year after S. Sabas's Death; i. e. the 28th. or 29th. of
Justinian, a Year and more after the end of the Fifth General Council. Baronius
is extremely mistaken concerning these Patriarchs. He orders 'em thus: 1.
Macarius. 2. Eustochius. 3. Macarius again. 4. Eustochius again, after the Death
of Macarius, before the Fifth General Council.
eleven or twelve Years.

After this he himself was deposed by the Emperor, and Victor. Tun. Chron. ad
an. Justiniani 37. Eustochius Hierosolymitanus Episcopus, qui fuerat Macario
superstite ordinatus, ejicitur: and rursum Macarius reformatur.
Macarius was again, restored, having cleared himself from the Imputation of
Heresy, by subscribing to the Condemnation of Origin, Evagrius and Didymus. The
Historian Evagrius, where he reckons up the several Patriarchs that governed
the Catholic Church about the end of Iustinian's Reign, has these words: L. 4.
c. 39. (...).
Macarius was Patriarch of Jerusalem, being restored to his Throne, after the
Deposition of Eustochius, because he had Anathematized Origin, Didymus, and
Evagrius. For what reason Eustochius was deposed, Evagrius does not tell us.
Nicephorus Callisti L. 17. c. 29. (...). The words which I have enclosed in a
Parenthesis, the Latin Interpreter did not understand.
tells us, that the Emperor deposed him, because he refused to subscribe to
his Opinions (concerning the Incorruptibility of the Body of Christ. But
Theophanes gives us another reason (...). Chronogr. ad an. 3. Justini Jun.
: He says it was, because he expelled the Monks of the Nova Laura ( in
Palaestine) as Origenists. What the true Reason was, is not easy to guess. As
for that which Nicephorus assigns, it seems to be confirmed by an Epistle of
Nicetius, Bishop of Trier, to the Emperor, concerning the Heresy which he had
lately embraced; in which he mentions, that the Emperor, to advance his
Doctrine, had expelled several Bishops out of their Sees. What several Bishops
those should be, we know not, unless Eustochius might be one of 'em; for we
read of but one deposed on that account, and that was Eutychius the Patriarch
of Constantinople. But then, on the other side, how Eustochius, Patriarch of
Jerusalem, should be deposed on that account by the Emperor, when none of the
other Foreign Patriarchs were deposed, and at least a Year or two before even
the Patriarch of Constantinople himself was deposed, I cannot easily imagine.
And besides, it is likely that Eustratius, who lived at Constantinople in those
times, and wrote the Life of the Patriarch Eutychius, who was deposed for not
subscribing to the Emperor's Doctrine, would have spoken somewhere of the
Patriarch of Jerusalem his having been deposed on the same account; especially
since he mentions, that Anastasius, Patriarch of Antioch, was on that account
extremely persecuted by the Emperor, and upon the brink of Deprivation. As for
the Reason given by Theophanes; that I am sure is false. For it appears by the
express Testimony of Vita S. Sabae ad finem: (...).
Cyrillus Scythopolitanus, that the Neolauritan^ were expelled by the
Emperor's own Command, because they refused to anathematize Origin, Didymus
and Evagrius, according to the Decree of the Fifth General Council.

Macarius being restored upon the Ejectment of Eustochius, was owned and
received by all as Patriarch of Jerusalem, and enjoyed the Honor till he died,
which was four Years. Johannes Moschus Prato Spirit. c. 69. aliis 96.
tells us of one Iulianus, a Monk of Palaestine, who doubted for some time
whether or no he ought to communicate with the Archbishop Macarius, and went to
S. Symeon Stylites (the latter of that Name) to ask his Advice, desiring to
know (...).
how he ought to carry himself toward a Brother who had committed Fornication,
and toward one who by Oath had engaged himself to his Party? S. Symeon
answered: (...).
Do not separate thy self from the holy Church; for by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ the Son of God, she is not amiss. The reason why the Monk scrupled
to communicate with Macarius, was, because he thought him an Origenist: Whether
it happened before he was deposed, or after he was restored, is uncertain: I
believe it was before he was deposed. In the Ap. Surium ad November. 23. c. 10.
etc.
Life of S. Gregory, Bishop of Agrigentum, he is honored with the Title of Cum
in D. Macarii Episcopi congressum venissent, etc.
Saint, is said to have the Gift of Prophecy, and to have ordained S. Gregory
Deacon: But this Life, though it be quoted by Baronius, etc. as true, is nothing
but the Forgery of Metaphrastes, and all those Stories are notorious Lies. For
in the same Life it is said, that S. Gregory was made Bishop of Agrigentum
after the time of the Sixth General Council, in which the Patriarchs Vide c.
24, etc.
Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus and Cyrus, were condemned as Monothelites; which
Council was called in the Year 681, near 120 Years after the Death of our
Patriarch Macarius. However, from hence we may gather what opinion Posterity
had of that Patriarch.

Concerning any Schism occasioned by Macarius when he was deposed, or
afterward by Eustochius, not a word in any Author.

CHAP. X.
Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople being violently deposed by the Emp.
Justinian for refusing to subscribe to his Heresy, John surnamed Scholasticus
is made Patriarch in his room. After John was consecrated Patriarch, Eutychius
was condemned by an Assembly that consisted as well of Lay-Lords a Bishops, not
only of Ecclesiastics as the Vindicator contends. He actually lays claim to
the Sea, despises the Sentence of his Judges as null and invalid, because they
proceeded unjustly and uncanonically against him, and Excommunicates them.
Notwithstanding all this, his Successor, because he proved Orthodox, was
received and owned by all the Church as a true Patriarch: He continued in the Sea near 13 years; near 12 years under Justin the Younger an Orthodox Emp. He
is owned by the Church of Constantinople though at the same time Eutychius was
exceedingly beloved. John an Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria is consecrated by
him. For what reason Anastasius Patriarch of Antioch reproved the Patriarch of
Alexandria for being ordained by him. Anastasus did not refuse to communicate
with him. He is Honored by the Patriarch Photius with the Title of Saint. Though
Eutychius looked upon his Deprivation as absolutely invalid, and though he never
resigned but accounted himself still the rightful Patriarch, yet he lived
quietly, and never endeavored to make a Division in the Church. Dr.
Crakanthorp's Opinion, that Eutychius was deposed for being a Heretic,
confuted. The Authority of the Life of Eutychius, often quoted in this Chapter,
vindicated against the same Author.

IN the Year 565, Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople, whom I mentioned in
the foregoing Chapter, was deposed by the Emp. Justinian, and John, formerly an
Advocate, afterward a Presbyter of Antioch, whom resided at that time at
Constantinople as Apocrisiarius for the Church of Antioch, (the same with him
whose Collection of Canons is extant in the Bibliotheca Iuris Canonici) was
advanced to the Sea. This Instance the Author of our Baroccian Treatise takes
notice of. In the Reign (says he) of the Emp. Justinian, Eutychius of Amasia
being constituted Patriarch of Constantinople, a Man holy and beloved of God,
was unjustly deposed, and expelled the City, and John was preferred to the Sea.
But Eutychius did not upon that account separate himself from the Communion of
John, and both therefore were received by the Church.

The Collector of the Synodicon Synod. 119. (...).
tells us, that the Emp. called a Synod, and deposed Eutychius, because he
refused to subscribe to the Doctrine maintained by that Synod, i. e. because he
refused to subscribe to the Heresy of the Aphthartodocetae, who thought our
Savior's Humane Nature incorruptible, which the Emp. and his Synod maintained.
The truth is this; He was first banished by the Emp. and after his Successor
was ordained, he was condemned by a Synod or Assembly, consisting partly of
Bishops, and partly of Lay-Lords. L. 4. c. 38.
Evagrius passes over this business too slightly, and only says, That he was
expelled; for what, or whether by a Synod or not, he does not acquaint us. That
he was deposed by the Emperor is expressly asserted by Chron.
Victor Tun. Chronog p. 203.
Theophanes, Chronol.
Nicephorus the Patriarch, Annal. p. 272.
Glycas, Annal. l. 14. c. 9.
Zonaras, Hist. Comp.
Cedrenus, Catalogo Patriarcharum MS.
Nicephorus Callisti; and so the Emp. Synaxario M. Aprilis apud Acta Sanctorum.
(...).
Basilius intimates; of whom not one makes any mention of a Synod. A particular
and exact account of the whole matter we have in his Life, which was written by
Eustratius (commonly, but erroneously called Eustathius) who was one of his
Presbyters, and a constant Attendant upon him, both before, and in his
Banishment. The Life is extant not only in Latin, as the Vindicator believed,
but likewise in Ed. a Papebrochio ad finem tomi 1 Aprilis. Act. Sanct.
Greek.And this is the Account he gives us. The Emp. (says Eustratius) desired
him to subscribe to the Doctrine of the Aphthartodocetae. 37, 38, 39. (...),
etc.
, which when he refused to do, he was persuaded by some of his Nobles, and by
certain Priests, to depose him; which accordingly he did. For on S. Timothy 's
Day, as Eutychius was officiating in the Church of Hormisdas, his Palace was
violently entered by a Captain, together with his Soldiers, who seized his
Servants, designing to make 'em witness something against him, that he might
not seem to have been deposed without some cause. When the Patriarch understood
that they had broken into his Palace and carried away and imprisoned some of
his Servants, after he had made an end of Divine Service and had administered
the Sacrament, he staid in the Chancel; for he was told by some, that if he
went out of the Church it might cost him his Life, there being some armed Men
that expected his coming forth. On this account he stood still before the Altar
after he had dismissed the People, arrayed in his proper Vestments till the
third hour of the Night, still holding up his Hands to Heaven, and beseeching
God to preserve the Orthodox Faith, and the Church in Tranquillity. When he had
done praying, the Monks and Priests that were with him, advised him to eat
somewhat; which when he had done and had slept a little, there came in upon him
that great wild Beast Aetherius, with a great company armed with Swords and
Clubs, who took him and carried him away to a Monastery called Choracudin:
where after he had stayed one day, because 'twas a miserable poor place, his
Adversaries took pity on him (for even his Enemies themselves admired his
Virtue) and ordered him to be carried to the Monastery of the Holy (Virgin)
which was near Chalcedon. And without examining whether he had been justly or
unjustly deposed, they irregularly ordained another in his stead, and eight
days after that, they appointed a Court of Judicature consisting of Bishops and
Princes, who cited him, after he had been already deposed and condemned without
any Examination, to plead his Cause before 'em, and to answer to the Charge
that was brought against him. The Accusations brought against him were these
ridiculous ones (...).
, That he had fed deliciously upon small Birds; and that he had prayed many
hours together upon his Knees, together with others more ridiculous than these.
When those Bishops and Noblemen who were sent to him from the Court of
Judicature, to require him to make his appearance, came to him, To whom (says
he) are ye come? What Title do you give me? They answered, being compelled by
Truth; that of our Lord and Father. Who, says he, is your Lord and Father? We
are come, answered they, as it were chastis'd by some invisible Powers, to our
Patriarch the Lord Eutychius. I am (says he) a Patriarch by the Grace of God,
and no Man shall take away this Dignity from me. Who is he whom you have
constituted in my place? They being not able to answer to these things,
returned, as bassl'd to those that sent 'em. But the same Court (or Assembly)
acting contrary to all Canons, sent according to the prescription of the
Canons, a second and a third Citation to him. To which he answered: If I am to
be judged according to the Canons, let my Clergy and my Patriarchal Dignity be
restored me, and then I will make my Defense, and will produce for Witnesses,
even my accusers themselves. The Court having received this Answer, did nothing
agreeable to Reason, but passed such a Sentence upon him as was worthy of them.
Which being done, he denounced upon all them a Sentence of Excommunication till
such time as they should repent and correct what they had done. The Court have
passed their mock Sentence upon him, that they might seem to have done justly
what they did unjustly (for the same Men were both his Accusers and Judges)
they removed him from the place where he was, to an Island called the Prince's
Island. Where, after he had continued under a Guard for three Weeks, 'twas
decreed by the same Judges that he should be carried to Amasea, there to live
in the Monastery which he himself had built. Which accordingly was done.

It is here expressly said, that the Court by which he was condemned consisted
partly of Bishops, and partly of Lay-Lords or Princes. In the Greek, (...). In
the Latin Translation, which the Vindicator read; Coacto conventu Episcoporum
and Principum. Concerning these Principes, what they were, the Vindicator has
these words: What the Greek word was here (says he) we know not; nor therefore
can we determine whether the Princes were Chorepiscopi, or Prefects of
Monasteries, who by this time began to take upon 'em in Affairs relating to
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, as having very considerable Ecclesiastical Bodies
under 'em, who would be concluded by their Suffrages. Certainly they were
Ecclesiastics: For in the Synods of those times, though there were present
Secular Persons to represent the Emperor, yet they never used to Vote: Only
they took care that all things should be fairly managed, and made their Reports
to the Emperor accordingly. And indeed the Secular part of the Deprivation had
already been performed in sending the Patriarch into Exile. Nor was it
requisite by the Lex Regia ( as it was called) in those times, that the Emperor
should have any concurrence of Council for Affairs of this nature. It was
therefore undoubtedly a Synod, and is owned for such in the Greek Synodicon.
And accordingly they send their Summons to Eutychius by persons of their own
rank, Bishops and Princes, which was the way of Synods not of Imperial
Councils. In answer to all this, least the Learned Vindicator should be apt to
fancy, that what he says is not confuted by the Greek Title (...), least he
should persuade himself, that by (...) here in this place may be understood
Ecclesiastics, I shall desire him to consult Dufresne's Graec. in (...) Lat.
in Archontes. APXONTE^, universim appellati Magnates and Proceres Aulae
Constantinopolitanae, etc.
Glossaries. From them he may be convinced, that by the Title of (...) not any
Ecclesiastics, but only Lay-Governours and Noblemen, or the Grandees of the
Emperor's Court, are to be understood. So the Nobles were simply entitled, and
their Ladies were called (...); the Order of Noblemen was called (...) and
(...). And Latin Historians, when they mention the Lora's of the
Constantinopolitan Court, are wont to call 'em Archontes. Ex quo c^im in
Aegyptum descenderant ejus (imperatoris Constantinopolitani) Archontes, says
Bell. Sac. l. 3. c. 18.
Gulielmus Tyrius. Romanae Constantinopolitanae dignitatis (...), i. e.
Principes, says L. 3. c. 9.
Luitprandus. A hundred Examples are produced by the Learned Dufresne, and a
thousand more might be easily produced, if need were. I shall only advise my
Reader, that in the Acts of the Councils, the Lay-Lords or Noblemen, who sat
in the Councils together with the Ecclesiastics, are wont to be distinguished
from the Ecclesiastics by this Title of (...). In the Acts of the Council of
Chalcedon, not all the Nobles that sat in that Council, but only some few of
the great Officers of the Court, have the honor of that Title; and by that are
distinguished as well from the Senate, which was likewise present in that
Council, as from (...). Act. 1. p. 97. Vide in initio singularum actionum.
the Bishops or Ecclesiastics. In the Second Council of Nice, the Two great
Temporal Lords that sat there, are always (...). Act. 1. Sic in Actionibus
sequentibus: (...).
distinguished by the Title of (...) both from Bishops, and from Prefects of
Monasteries. In the Acts of the IV General Council of Constantinople, the
Temporal Lords that sat there, are sometimes called (...), sometimes (...),
very frequently (...) as well simply as with an Epithet, (...), and (...). In
Anastasus Bibliothecarius his Act. 1. p. 985.
Latin Version: Omnes Episcopi cum magnificentissimis Principibus clamaverunt.
Photius, (says Vita Ignatii Patriarchae, Tom Conc. p. 1204.
Nicetas Paphlagonius) gathered against Ignatius, the ejected Patriarch, (...).
In the Account of the Trial and Condemnation of S. Martin Bishop of Rome,
translated out of Greek by Anastasius Bibliothecarius, the Senators who were
his Judges (there were no Bishops among 'em) are entitled Principes, from the
Greek Title (...). It is said in the Greek Syn. 148.
Synodicon, that certain Bishops and Monks, that were disaffected to the
Patriarch Ignatius, got him to be deposed (...). In which place (...) signifies
the Secular Power; so appropriated to the Lasty was the Title (...). To this I
add, that in the Euchologium the Title (...) is explained by (...) P. 931. Goar
renders it thus, Oration in promotione Procerum veletiam Patriciorum; but the
word (...) in the Prayer which follows, shows that (...) is not to be taken in
a disjunctive, but in an explanative sense, and that by (...) and (...) were
meant the same.
(...).

This being premises, there are Three things to be observed concerning
Eutychius's Deprivation. 1. That the Successor, John, was ordained and
possessed of the Sea, before Eutychius had been condemned by any Court of
Judicature. Agreeably to this Loco inferius cit.
Nicephorus Callisti tells us, that John was ordained Patriarch but three days
after Eutychius was violently deposed by the Emperor. 2. That the Court that
afterward condemned him, consisted as well of Lay-Lords as Bishops. 3. That he
never gave up his Right, but looked upon himself still as the rightful
Patriarch, laid claim to the Sea, and excommunicated the Assembly that
condemned him, as acting contrary to the Prescription of the Canons, and
therefore invalidly.

Though such were the Circumstances of Eutychius's Deprivation and of John's
Promotion, yet by all the Orthodox, both of that Age, and likewise of the
following Ages, John was owned and received as a true Patriarch of
Constantinople.

1. He continued Patriarch not only till the Death of the Emperor Justinian,
(which was not above three quarters of a Year after his promotion) but likewise
for many Years after; and that too under an Emperor, who did not follow the
Heresy of Justinian, but was all along a Defender of the Orthodox Faith. The
Emperor Justinian Junior, says (...), p. 204.
Theophanes, was completely Orthodox. L. 4. c. 1.
Evagrius, Chron.
Ioannes Biclarienses, and others, affirm the same; and it plainly appears by
his Ap. Evag. l. 4. c. 14.
Edict concerning the true Faith, under that Emperor our John continued
Patriarch of Constantinople during all his own Life, for the space of near Some
Authors make the Emperor Justin. jun. to reign in all not above eleven years,
or eleven years and eight months, but it is a mistake.
Twelve Years, and died Aug. 31. A. 577. after he had governed in all Twelve
Years Seven Months and Two and Twenty Days. It Is observed by one of the A
farther Account of the Baroc. MS. p. 12.
Answerers of the Baroccian Treatise, out of Nicephorus Callisti, That the
Emperor Justinian became so sensible of the injury he had done Eutychius, and
of his right to the Chair of Constantinople, that upon his death Bed he ordered
his Successor Justin to restore him. And this (says he) was presently done; for
Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, says, John sat but two Years; and
Paulus Diaconus says Eutychius crowned Justin. He adds, That John died in a
very convenient time, just as Eutychius was to be restored, or else perhaps he
might have been an Example on the other side, and we should have met with a
Patriarch dethroned as an Intruder: That he knows other Historians put off John
's Death and Eutychius 's Restoration to the Ninth or Tenth Year of Justin;
but they are Men (he says) of little Credit, and Dr. Crakanthorp in his Book of
the Fifth Synod p. 340. has confuted them already. So far our Author, with no
less Ignorance than Assurance. That Crakanthorp pretends to confute those
Authors, is true; that he has really confuted 'em, none will affirm but such as
are as little acquainted with Antiquity as our Answerer. It Is true, That
Nicephorus Callisti relates, that the Emperor Justinian gave order on his
Deathbed that Eutychius should be restored: But he does not say (...).
, that Justinian ordered that John should be deposed that so Eutychius might be
restored. Nicephorus understood the Emperor's meaning to be this, That
Eutychius should be restored provided he outlived the present Possessor: For L.
17. c. 36. (...).
afterward he has these words: Justin, after the Death of the Patriarch John,
recalled Eutychius, as Justinian had ordered in his Will. If we go and consult
the Arabians, we shall meet with some that will tell us, That Eutychius was
restored by Justinian himself. So Tom. 2. p 184. Anno vero imperii sui 28.
certior factus Eutychium Patrem Constantinopolitanum veritati contradicere, ac
Iacobitam factum esse, ipsum in exilium ejecit, cujus in locum suffectus est
ibi Ioannes ut Patriarchatus Constantinopolitam munere fungeretur, qui septem
annos sedit, dein mortuus est. Tum Eutychius Patriarcha relegatus Imperatorem
aggressus est open Consiliariorum ac Ducum, qui ipsum rogarunt, ut eum Cathedrae
restitueret, siquidem falsum fuisse quod de eo dictum fuerat; Cathedrae ergo ab
Imperatore restitutus est; quam cum quadriennio occupaverat, mortuus est. Anno
ejusdem 39. constitutus est Johannes Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus; annos 13.
sedit, dein mortuus est.
Said Ebu Batric in his Arabic Annals. But as for that Author, he plainly
discovers, that he knew just nothing of the Matter: Yet even he himself allows
our Patriarch John no less than Seven Years. When Paulus Diaconus says, That
the Emperor Justin was crowned by Eutychius, he He takes no notice at all of
Eutychius's being ever deposed, or that John was ever Patriarch.
commits a manifest not only Error but Blunder: For Justinius Imperator, nepos
Iustiniani, coronatus a Ioanne Patriarcha.
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, the Author whom he follows, says expressly, that
it was John that crowned the Emperor Justin. And so it is expressly affirmed in
(...).
Theophanes his Chronography, out of which Anastasius translated his History,
and (out of Theophanes) likewise by Cedrenus. But granting (you will say) that
Paulus Diaconus errs, and that Justin was crowned by John; yet how does it
appear that John continued Patriarch for so many years? It appears, First, from
the Testimony of Nicephorus Callisti, who in his MS. Catalogue (...).
of the Patriarchs of Constantinople affirms, that John continued Patriarch
(...). 12 Years and 7 Months. And hence it plainly appears, that in Nicephorus
the Patriarch's Chronology, it ought to be read, not (...). but (...). I need
not observe that the Greek Copy of Nicephorus's Chronology, out of which
Anastasius Bibliothecarius made his Latin Translation Ioannes Presbyter
Antiochiae e^ numero Scholasticorum, an. 12. m. 7.
, had as I have corrected it. The thing is plain of it self. In the same
Chronology, it is said, by a like mistake of the Transcriber, that Eutychius
was restored (...) for (...). Nicephorus Callisti in his After the words
above cited, it follows; (...).
MS. Catalogue adds, That Eutychius was restored upon John' s Death the 12 th.
Year of the Emperor Justin. Secondly, In the Catalogue of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople, which is extant in Leunclavius's P. 299. (...) ( id male) (...).
Ius Graeco-Romanum, the same time abating but one Month, is allotted him. And
the same Author affirms, that he was Patriarch not only under Justin, but
likewise under Tiberius; meaning, that time in which Tiberius had the
management of Affairs together with Justin, as Caesar. Thirdly, That John
continued Patriarch till Aug. 31. Indict. 10. the 12th. Year of the Emperor
Justin, is expressly (...), ad an. 12. Iustini jun. Anastasius Bibl. in his
Latin Translation, thus; Tertio decimo imperii Iustini anno, Ioanne
Constantinopolitano defuncto Episcopo, Eutychius recepit iterato thronum eundem.
asserted by Theophanes; who adds, That Eutychius was restored on (...). So
Cedrenus, who follows Theophanes; (...) (in ed. male (...).
October following. It appears from this exact account which Theophanes has
given us of the time of John's Death, that he was Patriarch (as I said) 12
Years, 7 Months and 22 Days. For from Eustrasius tells us that he was deposed
on St. Timothy's day, which in the Greek Calendar is the 22d. of January: and
in another place he says expressly, that it was Jan. 22. Theophanes says he was
deposed Apr. 12. (Ind. 13) but erroneously.
January 22. Indict 13. on which Eutychius was deposed, to Aug. 31. Indict. 10.
on which John died, is 12 Years, 7 Months and 25 Days; and John was made
Patriarch three days after Eutychius was deposed. Fourthly, Evagrius, who
flourished in those very times, says, That L. 5. c. 13. (...). etc. At this
time, according to Evagrius, the Emperor Justin spoke his famous Speech to
Tiberius. Theophanes, and after him Zonaras and Cedrenus, by mistake make him
speak that Speech when (as they say) he created Tiberius Emperor, three years
after he had created him Caesar. On this account Evagrius seems to make John
live longer than Theophanes makes him live: for Theophanes says that John died
just before Tiberius was made Emperor, and that Speech was spoken. But the
difference between them is only in the time when that Speech was spoken.
John was Patriarch at that time when Tiberius was created Caesar: which
according to Evagrius himself was many Years after the beginning of Iustin's
Reign. The Chronicon Paschale assures us, it was on the Eighth Indiction,
September 7, the Emperor's Eighth Year: He should have said, the Emperor's
Tenth Year; for September 7. Indict. 8. falls in with the end of the Tenth Year
of that Emperor. So Theophanes tells us, That Tiberius was made Caesar on the
Tenth Year of the Emperor Justin. Fifthly, That Eutychius was not restored till
after Tiberius was made Caesar, is attested likewise by the Emperor Synazario
Aprilis: (...).
Basilius, who tells us, that he was restored by Justin and Tiberius. Sixthly,
That John was Patriarch of Constantinople at least some Years after the
beginning of Justin, may be confirmed from the Testimony of the Patriarch
Biblioth. Cod. 75.
Photius: for he mentions his acting as Patriarch on the 1 st. Indiction, which
was three Years after the death of Justinian. To all these I add the Testimony
of Eustratius the Writer of Eutychius's Life, who tells us in express words,
That our Patriarch John died a little before Eutychius was restored, and that
Eutychius was restored by Justin and Tiberius, and that he continued at Amasea
in Banishment above. 63. (...).
Twelve Years.

Secondly, as it is to be presumed, that John was generally received and
acknowleged as a true Bishop of Constantinople since he sat in the Chair as
long as he lived, for the space of Twelve Years and about Eight Months, and
under an Orthodox Emperor; so particularly it appears from Eustratius, that the
People of Constantinople did all in general acknowledge him, and that too, though
at the same time they exceedingly loved Eutychius, and looked upon him as
unjustly deposed. Eustratius tells us, That. 65. (...), etc.
as soon as John was dead (not before) the People petitioned the Emperors
Justin and Tiberius, that their old Patriarch might be restored. He adds
concerning the Emperors, That they had a very great respect for him even whilst
he was in Banishment; and that sufficiently appears from their restoring him.
And here it is to be observed, that though they had a great Honor for him, and
looked upon him to be unjustly deposed, yet because John was now possessed of
the Sea, they did not think there was any Reason why they should turn out John
to restore him, they therefore staid till John was dead, and then restored him.
How much he was beloved by all sorts of People, as well of other places as of
Constantinople, and how much all rejoiced at his being restored Lege S. 71, 72,
etc.
, and with how great Pomp and Splendour he was S. 74. Having described the
pompous reception of St. Athanasius into Alexandria after his banishment, out
of Gregory Naziazzen, he adds, (...), etc. Ad hunc ergo modum' etiam nunc suam
in urbem regressus est magnus and admirabilis Eutychius, cum edque celebritate,
ut licet ab omni retro tempore multae multorum honorificae Exceptiones factae
sint non solum Principibus sed etiam Sacerdotibus and Palatinis illustrioribus,
nulla frequentior aut gloriosior fuisse memoretur, sed ipsa sola praecellat and
superaverit omnes. -- Quis dicendo posset assequi res admirandas, mari terraque
tunc gestas? quomodo scilicet constratus sit pontus, tergaque sua navibus
subjiciens telluri factus fuerit similis, ade^ ut sine impedimento possent
omnes super ipsum incedere, and nemo prae multitudine hominum aquam ab humo
discerneret, utraque autem esset labium unum, voxque divina and coelestis
omnium, Domini and Creatoris sui gloriam celebrantium.
received at Constantinople, Eustratius describes at large.

Thirdly, It appears from the express Testimony of Theophanes, That John
Patriarch of Alexandria, Successor to Apollinarius, and Predecessor to
Eulogius, was ordained Patriarch by our John of Constantinople; and that though
he was so ordained, yet he was owned by the Church, and continued in the Sea of
Alexandria Theophanes and Nicephorus Patriarcha in Chronolog.
Eleven Years. Said Ebn Batric, who was Patriarch of Alexandria about 600 Years
ago, mentions one John Patriarch of that See, and Successor to Apollinarius,
whom he styles a Manichee, and says, that he governed but Three Years, and was
succeeded by one Athanasius a Iacobite; But this John was not he of whom
Theophanes speaks, but one of the Heretical Patriarchs of Alexandria. For in
those days the two several Parties of Alexandria, the Melchites and the
Iacobites, had two distinct Patriarchs. Said Anno imperii ejusdem (Iustini
junioris) sexto constitutus est ibidem Patriarcha Johannes, Orthodoxus, qui XI.
annos sedit, dein mortuns est. Annal. tom. 2. p. 187.
himself mentions a little after, one John an Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria,
the Predecessor of Eulogius, who governed, as he says, Eleven Years, and was
made Patriarch the Sixth Year of the Emperor Justin Junior. This is he whom
Theophanes speaks of. L. 5. c. 16. (...).
Evagrius speaks of him, as of a Bishop acknowleged by all.

Fourthly, It likewise appears, that Anastasius, the Patriarch of Antioch,
communicated with John of Constantinople, and that too, though he himself, had it
not been prevented by Iustinian's death, had been turned out of his See for
defending that Truth for which Eutychius was deposed; and consequently must be
supposed to have had a great esteem for Eutychius, and no great love for his
Successor John. Concerning Anastasius, Chronogr. p. 206. (...).
Theophanes has these words. In the Fifth Year of the Emperor Justin the
Younger, the great Anastasius Bishop of Antioch, having severely reprehended
John Bishop of Constantinople, who had ordained John Patriarch of Alexandria,
and likewise the Patriarch of Alexandria himself who had been ordained, viz. in
his Answer to the Synodical Letter, which John of Alexandria had sent him, was
thrust out of his Bishopric by the Emperor, who was angry with him for it; and
Gregory a Monk was Consecrated Patriarch in his room. Agreeably to this
Relation, Vita Gregorii Magni, l. 4. c. 25. qui (Anastatius) Ioannem
Constantinopolitanum Praesulem voce libera reprehendens Imperatoris Iustini
jussu detrusus in exilium.
Ioannes Diaconus tells us, That Anastasius was banished by the Emperor Justin,
because he freely reproved John Bishop of Constantinople. But he only follows
Theophanes, with whose Chronography which his great Friend Anastasius
Bibliothecarius had turned into Latin, he was doubtless well acquainted. Not.
in Evagr. l. 5. c. 5.
Valesius, and after him some other Learned Men are of Opinion, that therefore
those two Patriarchs were reproved by Anastasius, because the one was put into
Eutychius's place, and the other therefore ought not to have been ordained by
him. This none of our Adversaries have observed: but I observe it for 'em; for
it is not my design to shuffle, conceal, and prevaricate, but to present the
Reader with a fair and impartial account of the Practice of the Ancients. Now
to this I answer, 1. That if Anastasius had absolutely refused to communicate
with John of Constantinople, yet it cannot be proved that he did so because
John was put into the place of the unjustly deposed Eutychius: For the reason
of his refusing to own him as Bishop of Constantinople, might have been only
because he thought him not Orthodox. Since Eutychius was turned out because he
would not subscribe to the Doctrine of the Aphthartodocetae, it might
reasonably be thought, that John, who was put into his place, did actually
subscribe. And that he was thought by some, to be one of that Party, appears
from the Author of the (...).
Synodicon, who says, That He complied with the Doctrine of those that deposed
his Predecessor: And likewise from (...).
Eustratius, who assures us, that therefore they deposed Eutychius, that they
might put in one who would comply with 'em; and he plainly enough intimates,
that John did so. No wonder therefore if Anastasius, who was the great Defender
of the contrary Doctrine, and had been himself condemned by Justinian to be
deposed on that account, was so much prejudiced against John, as not to like
that the Patriarch of Alexandria should be ordained by his hands. This (I say)
might have been Anastasius's Opinion and Prejudice. Yet it is not certain, that
John did actually subscribe. Eustratius was his very great Enemy, and the
Author of the Synodicon, might speak only by Conjecture. At least this is
certain, that if he ever subscribed, he quickly retracted, and proved a very
Orthodox Patriarch. This appears, not only from his continuing so long under
an Orthodox Emperor, and from his being so generally received; but likewise by
the Edict which was published in the beginning of Iustin's Reign. That Edict is
not only Orthodox in general, but does likewise strike particularly at the
Doctrine of the Aphthartodocetae, by declaring L. 4. c. 4. (...).
, That the Body of Christ was subject to all the Passions to which our Bodies
are subject. It cannot be doubted but that the Patriarch himself was the chief
Promoter of this Edict, and it is very probable, that he himself was the
Composer of it. That (...).
all subscribed to it, is attested by Evagrius. To this I must add, That the
Patriarch Biblioth. Cod. 75. (...).
Photius mentions a Catechetical Oration, which our Patriarch spoke and
published on the First Indiction, i. e. three Years after the beginning of
Iustin's Reign, in which he laid down matters of Faith Divinely, as Photius
says, concerning the Holy Trinity, and against which Ioannes Philoponus the
Heretic wrote a Treatise. Secondly, If we suppose, according to Valesius's
Conjecture, that the reason why Anastasius reprehended the two Patriarchs, was,
because the Ordainer succeeded the unjustly deposed Eutychius; yet from the
words of Theophanes, it cannot be inferred, that he refused to communicate
either with him or with the Patriarch of Alexandria whom he had ordained. On
the contrary, it may be gathered from Theophanes's words, that he did not
refuse their Communion. For if he had refused their Communion, Theophanes would
have said so; he would not have said only, that he reprehended 'em. Besides,
if Anastasius was deposed for reprehending John of Constantinople because put
into Eutychius's place, from thence it may be concluded, that before that time,
which was near Five Years after the Expulsion of Eutychius, he all along
communicated with him: For if the Emperor did so highly resent his reproving
John of Constantinople on that account, he would doubtless have been deposed
before that time, if he had refused on that account to communicate with him.
But Thirdly, It does not appear that was the Reason for which Anastasius
reproved the two Patriarchs of Constantinople and Alexandria. It does not, I
say, appear, that it was, as Valesius conjectures, because John of
Constantinople by whom He of Alexandria was ordained, was put into Eutychius's
place. There may be another Reason assigned, more probable than that. It Is
expressly enacted by the General Council of Nice, That all Metropolitans should
be Consecrated by the Bishops of their own Province: The Ordination of a
Patriarch of Alexandria by the Patriarch of Constantinople was directly against
that Canon, and 'twas looked upon by the other Patriarchs as a great Presumption
in the Patriarch of Constantinople to pretend to ordain another Patriarch. This
seems to be the thing which Anastasius, who was a nice observer of all Rules,
so much disliked. He reproved the one for taking so much upon him, and the
other for being ordained in a manner not agreeable to the Canons. In the same
manner before those times, Simplicius, Pope of Rome, had reproved Acacius
Patriarch of Constantinople, for taking upon him to Consecrate Steven and
Calendion, Patriarchs of Antioch. That this was the true Reason, Theophanes
himself seems to imitate, if we duly consider his Words. It is to be supposed,
that what was done as to that Ordination, was done by the Emperor's Order: And
thence it came to pass, that the Emperor so highly resented the words of
Anastasius's Letter, as reflecting no less upon himself, than upon the two
Patriarchs, the Ordainer and the Ordained. To this may be added, That it is not
probable, that the Emperor Justin should be so much displeased with Anastasius
for reflecting on the Patriarch of Constantinople for his being put into
Eutychius's place, since it was not himself, but Justinian that deposed
Eutychius, and since, as Eustratius affirms, he had still a great Honor for
Eutychius, though he did not think fit to restore him as long as John lived.

That Anastasius Patriarch of Antioch did not refuse to communicate with John
of Constantinople, may be further confirmed from this Consideration, That
Eustratius in the Life of Eutychius, tho he. 41. (...).
mentions, that he, as well as Eutychius, boldly opposed the Doctrine advanced
by Justinian and his Synod, and suffered very much for doing so, yet speaks not
a word of his refusing to communicate with Eutychius's Successor. And the same
we may likewise gather from Evagrius. He speaking of the Reasons why the
Emperor Justin deposed Anastasius, makes no mention at all of his being deposed
for either refusing to communicate with John of Constantinople, or for any
severe words spoken against him on the account of his being constituted in
Eutychius's place; but he Lib. 5. c. 5. (...), etc. Porro Justinius Anastasium
quoque ex Antiochena Sede ejecit: objiciens ei, tum quod Sacram pecaniam in
superfluos ac minime necessarios usus profudisset, tum quod ipsi convitiatus
esset. Nam cum interrogatus fuisset Anastasius, Cur adeo profuse Sacram
pecuniam dilapidarct, diserte responderat, Ne a Iustino communi p^ste ac
pernicie generis humani diriper^tur. Dicebatur autem Justinius idcirco infeusus
fuisse Anastasio, quod cum pecuniam ab eo ad Episcopatum promoto postulavisset,
Anastasius eam dare nolucrat. Objiciebantur praeterea eidem Anastasio alia
quaedam, nonnullis Imperatoris proposito ac voluntati gratificari studentibus.
assigns other reasons for it. And if Anastasius had refused to communicate
with John, it cannot be supposed, but that Evagrius, who lived at that time,
and was Assessor to Anastasius's Successor, would somewhere have mentioned it.

Fifthly, As neither Evagrius, nor Eustratius himself, nor any other Author
makes any mention of Anastasius his refusing to communicate with John; so
neither is there mention any where made of any the least disturbance in the
Church on his account: No mention any where of any one person that declined his
Communion.

Sixthly, Though Eustratius, for his Lord, Eutychius his sake, was a very bitter
Enemy of John's, and speaks in his Life of Eutychius, very virulently of him,
yet he no where speaks reflectingly of any for receiving him as Bishop of
Constantinople. His Life of Eutychius is an Oration made to the People in the
great Church of Constantinople in praise of him: And certainly, if in those
days it had been accounted unlawful to acknowledge a Bishop who was put into
the place of another unjustly and uncanonically deposed, he would in some
manner or other have expressed his dislike of the Churches owning and receiving
John. The same we may observe of the several other Authors who speak of John
and Eutychius. There is not so much as one that either says expressly or
intimates, that the former ought not to have been received as Patriarch.

Seventhly, It is certain, that he was acknowleged as a true Bishop of
Constantinople by the Church in all following Ages. This appears not only by
his being spoken of as such by Evagrius, Theophanes, Nicephorus the Patriarch,
Nicephorus Callisti, Zonaras, Cedrenus, etc. His Collection of Canons, though it
was published when he was only Scholasticus, or an Advocate of Antioch, yet in
many MSS. carries with it the Title of Patriarch of Constantinople, (...). So a
MS. in the Chancellor of France his Library. (...), MS. Oxon. (...). So a MS.
in the King of France's Library.
but likewise from the Testimony of the Baroccian Treatise, the Author of which
could not but be very well acquainted with the Diptychs of the Church of
Constantinople. He affirms, That both John and Eutychius were received by the
Church. To this I add, That Bibl. Cod. 75. (...). See the whole place
above cited.
Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople who flourished in the Year 858, calls
our Patriarch John, Saint John, or John of blessed Memory, Archbishop of
Constantinople. He was not only owned and received as a true Patriarch, but
was likewise accounted a very worthy and a holy Patriarch.

Eighthly, That there was no Schism, no Division in the Church on Eutychius's
account, and that he himself, though he had never resigned, but always looked upon
himself as the rightful Patriarch of Constantinople, did nevertheless continue
in Communion with the Church, I gather from hence, That when John was dead, the
Emperors Justin and Tiberius, or the Emperor and Caesar, having decreed that
Eutychius should be restored, sent Messengers away to Amasea, commanding 'em to
bring him away to Constantinople to be restored to his Dignity, whether willing
or unwilling. So Eustratius. 70. (...).
tells us expressly. So quietly did the good Man live in his Monastery at
Amasea, so far from heading a Schism as an Anti-patriarch, that the Emperors
did not know, whether he was willing to be restored or not! And thus is
confirmed what the Author of the Baroccian Treatise asserts. That Eutychius did
not separate from John 's Communion.

We must not bid Farewell to our Patriarch Eutychius till we have cleared him
from a Charge and Accusation which Dr. Crakanthorp has laid against him. The
Doctor in his Part of his Book concerning the Fifth general Council.
Treatise concerning the Emperor Justinian, in which he endeavors to clear
that Emperor from the Imputation of Heresy against Cardinal Baronius, would
needs persuade us, That the Patriarch Eutychius was not deposed by Justinian
because he refused to subscribe to the Doctrine of the Aphthartodocetae, but
for being an Origenian Heretic. That Eutychius had written a Book concerning
the Resurrection, in which he contended, that our Bodies after the Resurrection
will not be properly Flesh and Blood, but Aereal and Impalpable, the Doctor
proves from the Testimony of Pope Gregory the Great, who says, That he himself
disputed against him.

If this were the reason of Eutychius's being expelled, then all that we have
alleged concerning the Church's acknowleging his Successor John, will be of no
force, because Eutychius was a Heretic, and consequently his Expulsion just,
whatsoever that Authority was by which he was expelled: I am therefore
concerned to confute this pretended Reason. And, 1. I answer, That the Book
which Eutychius published concerning the Resurrection, was so far from being
published before the time of his Expulsion, that it was not published till
after his Restoration. This plainly appears from what Pope Gregory says. He
tells us, that when he resided at Constantinople (as Legate from Pope Pelagius
in the Reign of the Emperor Tiberius) he had a great Dispute with the Patriarch
Eutychius about that Subject, and Tunc itaque de hac re in longa contentione
perducti gravissima a nobis caepimus simulatione resilire cum piae memoriae
Tiberius Constantinus Imperator secreto me and illum suscipiens, quid inter nos
discordiae versaretur agnovit, and utriusque partis allegationem pensans,
eundem librum, quem de resurrectione scripserat, suis quoque allegationibus
destruens, deliberavit ut flammis cremari debuisset. A quo ut egressi sumus,
une aegritudo valida, eundem vero Eutychium aegritudo and mors protinus est
secuta. Quo mortuo quia pene nullus erat qui ejus dicta sequeretur, dissimulavi
coepta persequi, ne in favellas viderer verba jaculari. Dum tamen adhuc
viveret, and ego validissimis febribus aegrotarem, quicunque noti mei ad eum
salutationis gratia pergebant, ut eorum relatione cognovi, ante eorum oculos
pellem manus suae tenebat, dicens: Confiteor, quia omnes in hac carne
resurgemus. Quod, sicut ipsi fatebantur, omnino prius negare consueverat. L.
14. Moral. c. 29.
Tiberius having heard the Arguments of both sides, was about to condemn the
Patriarch's Book to be burnt. Which had been done, says he, had not the
Patriarch died. If Eutychius had been expelled by Justinian for that Opinion
which he then maintained, it cannot be supposed but that Pope Gregory would
have given an account of it. 2. That Eutychius was deposed by Justinian because
he refused to subscribe to the Doctrine of the Aphthartodocetae, is unanimously
asserted by all the Greek Authors who have mentioned the Reason of his
Deprivation, by the Author of the Synodicon, Glycas, Zonaras, Theophanes, Joel,
Nicephorus Callisti, and Eustratius the Writer of his Life. Neither can it be
supposed, that Eustratius assigned a false Reason that so he might salve his
Reputation, and conceal his Opinions concerning the Resurrection; for had he
beed deposed for maintaining any Heretical Opinion, there was no one but must
have known it, and Eustratius would never have been so impudent as to give a
false Reason before that great Congregation to whom he spoke his Oration.
Neither does he conceal the Imputation which was by some fixed upon him
concerning the Resurrection: After an account given of his Death, he. 88, 89,
90.
takes an accasion to speak of that Imputation, and he says it was occasioned
by his being not rightly understood. To this I add, That it plainly appears
from Evagrius, who lived and flourished at that time, that the Emperor
Justinian did just before his death endeavor to advance the Doctrine of the
Aphthartodocetae, and published a Decree concerning it, requiring the Bishops
to subscribe to it; who generally answered, as he tells us, that they would
follow the Example of Anastasius Patriarch of Antioch, who (says he) could
never be persuaded to subscribe, and had therefore been deposed, if the Emperor
had not suddenly died. It Is a weak and injudicious Plea that of Crakanthorp,
that Evagrius is guilty of several Errors: For let it be granted that he is
(and what Historian is not?) yet how could he err in a thing of that nature?
Since he flourished at that time, and was within a few years after Assessor to
Anastasius's Successor, since he flourished at Antioch when Anastasius himself
was Patriarch: How could he be mistaken in such a thing as that? He intimates,
that he had read the Speech which Anastasius had composed and spoken to the
People of Antioch when he understood that the Emperor designed to banish him:
And he tells us, that Anastasius wrote Epistles concerning the Emperors
Doctrine to the Monks of Syria who had desired to know his Judgment. Among many
other things that may be added, I shall only mention that (as has been already
observed in the foregoing Chapter) there is extant in the Tomes Tom. 5. p. 832.
of the Councils an Epistle from Nicetius Bishop of Trier, to the Emperor
Justinian concerning his Lapse. And in that Epistle Patres a quibus
benedictionem expectare debuisti, in exilium transmisisti.
Nicetius mentions, that the Emperor had for the Advance of his Erroneous
Doctrine banished certain Bishops, alluding plainly to the Patriarch
Eutychius's Expulsion.

Dr. Crakanthorp finding that the Life of Eutychius made directly against his
Opinion concerning the Emperor Justinian his never falling into Heresy,
endeavors to prove, that that Life was not written by one that lived at that
time, but forged by some late Monk: and of this Opinion is one of the Answerers
of the Baroccian Treatise, he whose words I but now produced, convinced by
Crakanthorp's Arguments. I need not oppose this Opinion, that so it may be
proved, that Justinian fell into Heresy, and that Eutychius was deposed for
refusing to subscribe to that Heresy; for these things I have sufficiently
demonstrated from the concurrent Testimonies of other Writers. But because I
have produced the Authority of that Life for several other things which cannot
be proved from other Authors, I am therefore obliged to clear the Authority of
it from the Objections alleged against it. The chief Argument brought against
it by Crakanthorp is its making Eutychius to continue above 12 Years in
Banishment, whereas it appears (says he) from Paulus Diaconus, that he was
restored just after Iustinian's death, and that he crowned the Emperor Justin;
and from the Patriarch Nicephorus's Chronology, that he was in Banishment only
two Years and Seven Months. This Argument I have already ready confuted. A
Second Argument proposed by Crakanthorp, is this: It. is said in the Life; That
after the Fifth General Council was summoned, Eutychius was sent to
Constantinople by the Bishop of Amasea, who was then sick, to supply his place
in that Council; that a little after he came to Constantinople Mennas the
Patriarch died, and so he was made Patriarch in his stead. This Relation, says
Crakanthorp, is so untrue, that there are not so many Words as Lies therein:
For the Fifth General Council, says he, was not summoned till the Six and
Twentieth Year of Justinian, and it appears from the Testimony of the Pope's
Legates in the Third Act of the Sixth General Council, that the Patriarch
Mennas died in the One and Twentieth Year of Justinian. To this I answer, That
though it be true, that the Pope's Legates in the Sixth General Council affirm,
That Mennas the Patriarch died on the One and Twentieth of Justinian, yet,
either they were extremely mistaken, or at least the Reading is Erroneous, and
for (...), it ought to be read (...) (or (...)). That Mennas lived till after
the One and Twentieth of Justinian, and till the beginning of the Fifth General
Council (as the Life of Eutychius relates) is undoubtedly certain from many
other Authorities. 1. It is manifest from an Epistle of Pope Vigilius to
Valentinianus, a Bishop of Scythia, Datum XV. Kal. Apr. imperii Domini
Justinian perpetui ^ Augusti anus XXIII. (sort XXII^. says a marginal Note)
post Consulatum Basilii viri cl. anno IX. (in the Margent X.)
dated XV. Kal. Apr. in the Three and Twentieth (or Four and Twentieth) Year of
Justinian, which is extant in the Acts of the Collat. 7. p. 557.
Fifth General Council, that the Patriarch Legant ergo quae de causa quae hic
mota est, ad fratrem nostrum Mennam Constantinopolitanum Episcopum scribentes
legimur definisse -- Credimus enim Catholicis Ecclesiae filiis ea quae tunc ad
fratrem and cospiscopum nostrum Mennam scripsimus.
Mennas was at that time living. 2. It appears from the Testimony of
Theophanes, That he was living in September, the Fifteenth Indiction; and
Theophanes particularly mentions (...), etc. p. 193.
that at that time he and Apollinarius Patriarch of Alexandria Consecrated the
Church of S. Irene, and he gives a particular description of their Procession.
He just after (...).
adds, That Mennas died and Eutychius succeeded him on that same Year. Now the
former part of this Fifteenth Indiction falls in with the Five and Twentieth
Year of Justinian, and the latter part falls in with his Six and Twentieth
Year. And to his Six and Twentieth Year Theophanes places the Fifth General
Council. It appears from the In the beginning Imperii Domini Iustiniani
perpetui Augusti anno 27 post consulatum Basilii, anno 12. die quarto Nonas
Maias, Indictione prima. So likewise the Emperor's Commission is dated.
Acts of the Council that it began to sit in the beginning of the Seven and
Twentieth Year of Justinian, the Fourth Day of May, Eight Months after the end
of that Year, or Indiction, on which Mennas died. And it is to be supposed,
that the Summons were sent about a Year or more before that time. Thirdly, It
is positively asserted by Evagrius, that Mennas was alive when first the
Council was called, and he particularly observes, that he died a little after,
and was succeeded by Eutychius (...), l. 4. c. 38.
. Vigilius says he, being Bishop of Rome, Mennas first and then Eutychius being
Bishop of Constantinople, Apollinarius being Bishop of Alexandria, Domninus of
Antioch, and Eustochius of Jerusalem, the Fifth Council was called by
Justinian. Evagrius, in what follows, gives us a particular account how (...),
etc. Prima igitur quaestione proposita, utrum liceret mortuos anathemati
subjicere: Eutychius qui illic aderat, in sacris scripturis apprime
exercitatus, superstite adhuc Mena, nondum valde illustris; erat enim etiam tum
Apocrisiarius Episcopi Amasenorum: Cum eos qui congregati erant, tanquam
solertior, per contemptum adspexisset, aperte dixit, quaestionem illam
deliberatione non egere. Quandoquidem. Josias Rex Sacerdotes daemonum non modo
vivos interfecisset, sed and eorum qui diu^ante mortui fuerant, sepulchra
essodisset. Atque hoc ab Eutychio aptissime dictum esse, cuncti qui aderant
censuerunt. Quod cum Iustinianus intellexisset, Eutychium paulo post ad
Pontificalem Urbis regiae sedem promovit, Mena ex vivis sublato. Porro Vigilius
per literas quidem consensit, Concilio tamen interesse noluit.
Eutychius came to be made Patriarch. It appears from him, that before the
Council fate there were several Debates among those who were sent to the
Council, and that in the time of those Debates Mennas was Patriarch. It appears
likewise from that him, that before Mennas died there were sent to
Constantinople from Eustochius Patriarch of Jerusalem, certain Legates to
concert the Affair against the Origenists; and that those that were sent by
Eustochius about that Business, were sent to the General Council, is expressly
asserted by Vita Sabae, c. 90.
Cyrillus Scythopolitanus. And here I observe, that all those previous Debates
relating to the Origenian Heresy, were wont to be reckoned as part of the
General Council it self. Hence it was that Theophanes places that Council to
the Six and Twentieth, and Cedrenus and the Chronicon Paschale to the Five and
Twentieth Year of Justinian. Fourthly, It is likewise asserted by the Patriarch
Epist. de Synodis. (...).
Photius, That Mennas and Eutychius one after the other presided in the Fifth
General Council, together with Vigilius of Rome, etc. Fifthly, That Mennas fate
in the Chair of Constantinople Sixteen Years is asserted by Catal. MS. (...).
Nicephorus Callisti, and Theophanes, and Zonaras: Nicephorus the Patriarch
adds the odd Months, and allots him Sixteen Years and Six Months: Now it is
certain, that he was promoted on the Ninth Year of Justinian (in the latter
part of the Year which falls in with the Year of Christ 536.) and so says
Nicephorus Callisti. And hence it must follow, that he died not on the One and
Twentieth, but on the Five and Twentieth or Six and Twentieth of Justinian.
Sixthly, That Eutychius was Patriarch not above Twelve Years and Five Months
before he was deposed, is asserted by Loc. cit. (...).
Nicephorus Callisti: Theophanes for the roundness of the number says 13 Years:
The Patriarch Nicephorus allows him but Twelve Years, and two Months: Zonaras
strikes off the odd Months, and allows him no more than Twelve Years: Now it is
very notorious that he was not deposed before about the end of Iustinian's
Eight and Thirtieth Year. Nicephorus Callisti and Cedrenus say, he was deposed
on the Eight and Thirtieth. Victor Tun. on the Nine and Thirtieth of Justinian:
The truth is this, He was deposed two Months before the end of Iustinian's
Eight and Thirtieth Year; for Justinian began his Reign April 1. Indict. 5. and
though his Predecessor Justin Sen. did not die till the First of August
following, yet the Years of Iustinian's Reign were always computed from the
time of his Inauguration, as the Chronicon Paschale observes. Now from April 1.
Indict. 5. to Jan. 22. Indict. 13. on which Eutychius was deposed are Thirty
Seven Years and near Eleven Months. From hence it follows, that he was not made
Patriarch till the Six and Twentieth, or about the end of the Five and
Twentieth Year of Justinian. The most ancient Monument from whence we may
gather any thing concerning the beginning of Eutychius's Patriarchate, is an
Epistle of Pope Vigilius to him in answer to one of his, dated VIII. Idus
Ianuarias anno Iustiniani 27. post Consulatum Basilii anno 12. apud Acta
Consilii V. Collat. 1. p. 428. For 27. it ought to be read 26. For though the
27th. year of Justinian is connected with the 12th. year after the Consulship
of Basilius, yet since the years of Justinian began in April, January in the 12
year after the Consulship of Basilius could not be in the 27th. but in the
26th. of Justinian. It cannot be suspected that the Error lies in the number
12. and that it ought to be read 13. for January in the 13th. year after the
Consulship of Basilius, was after the time of the Council.
Ian. 6. in the Seven and Twentieth Year of Justinian.

A Third Objection alleged by Crakanthorp against the Life of Eutychius, is,
that it is full of improbable Fables concerning Miracles wrought by Eutychius;
but this is no Argument at all against the Genuineness of it; For Stories
concerning Miracles are common to all the Writers of Lives, as well of that
Age, as of the following Ages, though otherwise very good Authors, as Cyrillus
Scythopolitanus, and others. The professed Historians themselves, such as
Evagrius, Theodoret, and the like, are full of such Relations. 'Twas the
natural result of a Superstitious Piety. I need not mention a Fourth Argument
proposed by Crakanthorp; that he could not find the Life of Eutychius any where
but in Surius, who he thinks ought not to be trusted. I only observe, that as
it is generally received as genuine by the Vita Eutychii Patriarchae apud
Surium ab Eustathio ejus Discipulo eleganter conscripta. Vales. ad Evagr. l. 4.
c. 38.
Learned, so it carries with it as clear and manifest Characters of Genuineness
as any Life extant. Concerning the Author of it I have this to add, That he was
the same with that Eustratius whom Bibl. Cod. 171.
Photius entitles Presbyter of the Great Church (of Constantinople) and whose
Treatise concerning the state of the Dead, he mentions; which Treatise is now
extant, published by Romae, 1655. 8o. p. 319. ad 581. Libro de Occidentalium
atque Orientalium perpetua in dogmate Purgatorii Consensione.
L. Allatius. That he was the same, I gather from hence, that Eustratius the
Presbyter, who wrote of the State of the Dead, not only discovers (as the
Worthy and Learned Dr. Hist. Lit.
Cave has observed) that he lived in the time of the Patriarch Eutychius, but
expresses likewise a singular Affection and Veneration for him. (...).
The geat Eutychius Archbishop of Constantinople, that Holy and by me
ever-to-be honored Person.

CHAP. XI.
S. Anastasius, Senior, Patriarch of Antioch, being deposed without any Synod
by the Emperor Justin, Junior, though he never resigned, yet his Successor
Gregory is owned by all the Church. He continued Patriarch till his Death, for
the space of 23 Years, the old Patriarch Anastasius being all the while living.
Four Saints among those that lived at that time and communicated freely with
him: S. Symeon Stylites, Junior, Pope Gregory the Great, S. Eulogius Patriarch
of Alexandria, S. John Nesteutes Patriarch of Constantinople. Pope Gregory
communicates with him as Patriarch of Antioch, though at the same time he
declares Anastasius's Deprivation to be invalid, and looks upon Anastasius to
be the rightful Patriarch. S. Anastasius, though deposed by the Lay-power, and
though he had never given up his Right, yet never left the Communion of the
Church.

I Have mentioned in the foregoing Chapter that Anastasius, the Patriarch of
Antioch, was deposed by the Emperor Justin the Younger. It was done in the
fifth Year of Iustin's Reign, in the Year of Christ 570. And that it was done
barely by the Emperor's Authority, without any Synod, may easily be gathered
from the account which Evagrius gives of it. L. 5. c. 5.
Justin (says he) turned Anastasius out of the Sea of Antioch, objecting
against him that he had profusely squandered away the sacred Money upon things
not necessary, and that he had likewise spoken reproachfully of him; that being
asked why he was so profuse of the sacred Money, he answered downright, That
therefore he had done it, that it might not be took away by Justin, that common
Plague. Now it was said, that therefore Justin had a spite against Anastasius;
because when he demanded a sum of Money of him, when promoted to the
Bishopric, he refused to give it him. There were, besides the abovementioned,
some other things objected against him, by some that were willing, as we may
suppose, to gratify the Emperor in his design. The same may be gathered from
the account we have in Vide locum cap. praeced.
Theophanes. That he was thrust out of his See through the Emperor Justin 's
displeasure, because he had spoken sharply against John, Patriarch of
Constantinople, who had ordained John Patriarch of Alexandria, and likewise
against John of Alexandria himself. Agreeably to this, Vita Gregorii M. l. 4.
c. 25.
Johannes Diaconus tells us, that he was deposed Potestatibus: And Pope Epist.
l. 1. Ep. 25.
Gregory the Great intimates the same thing, when he says, he was made
Patriarch by God, but deposed voluntate hominum.

Though such were his Deprivation, and though (as will by and by appear) he never
gave up his Right, and though he was a great and admired Bishop of that Age, so
highly esteemed and revered by all the Bishops of the Catholic Church, as that
when the Emperor Justinian had sent about to all Bishops, and required 'em to
subscribe to his newfangled Heresy, they all unanimously replied, That they
(...). Evag. l. 4 c. 39.
would follow the Example of Anastasius of Antioch. Tho, I say, he was so great
and admired a Person; yet,

1. I observe, that there is not the least mention in any Author of any
disturbance in the Church occasioned by his Deprivation.

2. It is certain, that Gregory, Abbot of Mount Sinai, who succeeded him,
continued Patriarch of Antioch no less than 23 or 24 Years; and that too, though
Anastasius was all that while living; and was never deprived, but died
possessed of the Sea. And after his Death Anastasius was again restored.
Nicephorus, the Patriarch of Constantinople, assigns him 24 Years; L. 6. c. 24.
Evagrius 23.

3. It appears from Evagrius, that Gregory, who accepted of his See, was a
Person of extraordinary Worth: And from thence it appears, That the greatest
and the worthiest Men did not think it unlawful, or a disparagement, to accept
of the Sea of a Bishop deposed by the Lay-power.

4. It appears likewise from Evagrius, That he was not only received as Bishop
of Antioch, but was highly beloved and honored. Let us hear what Evagrius
says. After Anastasius (says he) Gregory was preferred to the Episcopal Throne,
(...), etc.
whose glory, according to the Poet, is spread far and near. -- He was for
Understanding and Virtue, and all Accomplishments, a very extraordinary Person,
and in any thing he undertook, of an unconquerable Resolution, fearless and
undaunted, and never yielding (in any ill or unreasonable thing) to the Supreme
Powers. So liberal and magnificent he was, that as often as he came abroad, a
vast number of Persons, besides his own proper Attendants, were wont to wait on
him: And as soon as any perceived him, or heard that he was a coming, they
immediately flocked in to attend him. And so highly was he honored, that the
(...).
Honor which is usually paid to the Emperors themselves, was less than that
which was paid to him. Evagrius adds much more in his praise, and tells us,
That he was admired not only by the Christian, but likewise by the Persian
Emperors, etc. He L. 6. c. 11, 12, 13.
tells us likewise how by his great Authority he appeased a whole Army that
mutinied against their Commanders. In his Speech to that Army, I am, says he,
C. 13. (...).
by the Grace of God a Bishop, and have the power of binding and loosing both
in Heaven and in Earth. Evagrius adds, That he appeased God by Prayers and
Supplications. This Action of the Patriarch Gregory is recorded likewise by
another Historian of that Age, Historiae Mauricianae, l. 3. c. 5. (...).
Theophylactus Simocattes: Philippicus (says he) was received by the Army,
Gregory the then Archbishop of Antioch, having reconciled it to him.

5. To this Patriarch our Historian Evagrius was himself Assessor or
Chancellor. Though it appears by that great Character, which he gives the former
Patriarch Anastasius, that he highly honored and esteemed him; yet he readily
acknowleges the present Possessor, and acts as L. 6. c. 7. and 24.
Assessor or Chancellor under him as the true Patriarch. There was no one
doubted of the lawfulness of it.

6. He was likewise acknowleg'd by S. Symeon Stylites, the latter of that name,
as appears from Evagrius, who speaks of a L. 6. c. 23. (...).
Prophecy which he uttered to the Patriarch Gregory, and of Gregory's (...).
going to give him a visit in his sickness, to take his leave of him before he
died. How holy a Man this Symeon Stylites was, we may read at large in
Evagrius: He tells us, That (...).
of all Men living in that Age, he was the most holy. And by both Churches he
is to this day honored as a Saint, by the Martyrologium Romans
Latin on the third, by the Menologium Graec.
Greek on the first of September.

7. That he was generally owned as Bishop of Antioch by the Bishops of the
Catholic Church, is apparent from his being An. 589.
tried as a Patriarch by a very great Council at Constantinople; a Council in
which all the Eastern Patriarchs were present, either in their own Persons or
by their Representatives. The Case was this: There happened a great Difference
between him and Asterius, the Comes Orientis, who usually resided at Antioch;
and by the influence which the Comes had upon the People, they were mightily
excited against their Patriarch; to that degree that they maliciously accused
him for lying with his own Sister, another man's Wife, and as a Disturber of
the Peace and Quiet of the City. He appealed to the Emperor and a Council,
which accordingly was called at Constantinople, where he made his Appearance,
and was acquitted, and his Accuser was publicly whipped and banished. That this
Council was a very great and a General Council, is attested by Evagrius, who
was there present, as the Patriarch's Counsel and Advocate. He says, L. 6. c.
7. (...).
. That all the Patriarchs were there present at the Trial, either in their own
Persons, or by their Legates, together with a great many Metropolitans and the
Senators of Constantinople. When he says that all the Patriarchs were there, he
means the Oriental Patriarchs. For there is extant in Isidorus Mercator, an
Epistle from Pope Pelagius II. to the Bishops of that Council; from which it
may be gathered, That the Pope had no Legate there, for he seems very angry,
that John Nesteutes, the then Patriarch of Constantinople, who had called the
Council by his own Authority, and had usurpt the Title of Universal Bishop,
should pretend to do so; and he declares, That the Summons being unlawful and
derogatory to the Power of the Sea of Rome, whatsoever was done in that Council
should be null, and of no force. And though it be certain that this Epistle is
spurious, and Labbee himself confesses it; yet it is likewise apparent from the
express words of Pope Lib. 4. Indict. 13. Ep. 36. ad Euloginm, etc.
Gregory the Great, that Pope Pelagius II. did not approve of the Synod. And
that he had no Representative in it, may be collected from Pope Gregory's
Words; for he says, Ibid. Ante hos annos 8. s. m. decessoris mei Pelagii
tempore, frater and coepiscopus noster Ioannes in Constantinopolitana urbe ex
causa alia occasionem quaerens Synodum fecit, in qua se. Vniversalem appellare
conatus est. Quod mox idem decessor meus ut agnovit, directis literis ex
auctoritate S. Petri Apostoli ejusdem Synodi acta cassavit. Quarum, vtz.
Epistolarum sanctitati vestrae exemplaria studui destinare. Diaconum vero qui
juxta morem pro responsis Ecclesi^e faciendis piiss^norum Dominorum vestigiis
adb^ercbat, cum praefato consacerdote nostro missarum solennia celebrare
prohibuit.
That, the Patriarch of Constantinople having in that Synod endeavored to
usurp the Title of Universal, Pope Pelagius, as soon as he heard of it, sent
(not to any Legate or Legates that he had sent to the Synod, but) to his
Deacon, who, according to custom, resided at the Emperor's Court, as
Apocrisiarius for the Sea of Rome, and commanded him not to communicate with
the Patriarch. But nevertheless, it is certain, that Pope Pelagius himself, as
well as the other Patriarchs, acknowleged Gregory as Patriarch of Antioch. This
appears from another Epistle of Pope Gregory the Great L 7. Ep. 69. (aliis 70.)
Cognoscat siquidem fraternitas vestra Ioannem quondam Constantinopolitanae
Civitatis antistitem contra Deum, contra pacem Ecclesi^e, in omnium despectu
and injuria Sacerdotum, modestiae ac mensurae suae terminos excessisse, and
illicite in Synodo superbum ac pestiferum aecumenicum, hoc est universalis sibe
vocabulum usurpasse. Quod beatae recordationis Pelagius decessor noster
agnoscens, omnia gesta ejusdem Synodi, praeter illa quae illic de causa
venerandae memoriae Gregorii Episcopi Antiocheni sunt habita, valida omnino
districtione cassavit.
, in which he says, that Pope Pelagius did not declare all the Acts of the
Synod of Constantinople void, but only that part which was concerning the
Title of Universal, which the Patriarch of Constantinople had usurpt; and that
he ratified what had been decreed concerning Gregory the Patriarch of Antioch.

8. It is likewise very notorious, that Pope Gregory the Great himself, who
succeeded Pelagius, though the ejected Patriarch Anastasius was his See the
several Epistles which Pope Gregory wrote to Anastasius, full of Love and
Affection. Lib. 1. Epist. 7. 25. Lib. 4. Ep. 37, etc.
dearly beloved Friend, and though he looked upon his Deprivation as absolutely
invalid, and accounted him always the rightful Patriarch of Antioch, yet never
separated from the Communion of his Successor Gregory, but communicated always
with him. First, That Pope Gregory looked upon Anastasius to be the rightful
Patriarch of Antioch, while Gregory was possessed of the Sea, and accounted his
Deprivation invalid, is apparent, first, from the Titles which he always gives
him, of Patriarch of Antioch Epist. l. 1. Ep. 25. alibique.
, Gregorius, Anastasio Patriarchae Antiocheno. 2. From his sending a L. 1. Ep.
24.
Synodical Episle to him as well as to the rest of the Patriarchs, when first
he was made Pope. 3. From his express Words to that purpose, in an Epist. 25.
praecit. Pr^terea sicuti Patriarchis aliis vel fratribus, ita and Synodicam
vobis Epistolam direxi, quia apud me se^per hoc estis, quod ex omnipotentis Dei
munere accepis^ts esse, non quod ex voluntate hominum putamini non esse. Jo.
Diaconus in Vita Gregorii M. l. 4. c. 25. Ab adversis potestatibus praegravatos
fortissimus mi^ les Christi Gregorius viriliter defendebat, injusteque dejecto;
non solum inter depositos non habebat, verum etiam pristinis gradibus
auctoritatis suae privilegio reformabat. Nam Anastasium Patriarcham Antiochenum
qui Ioannem Constantinopolitanum Praesulem voce libera reprehendens,
Imperatoris Iustini juss^ detrusus in exilium, ab ipsis Ioannis Papae
tomporibus, usque ad sui Pontificatus tempora permanebat, mox ut summum
Sacerdotium meruit, inter Patriarchas eum reputans, scriptis talibus animavit.
Praeterea (inquit) sicut Patriarchis aliis paribus vestris, Synodicam vobis
Epistolam direxl, etc.
Epistle which he wrote him, together with the Synodical one: In which he tells
him, That he had sent a Synodical Epistle to him, as well as to the other
Patriarchs, as looking upon him to be still a Patriarch as well as heretofore;
to be still what God Almighty had made him, not, what he was commonly
accounted, deposed. Secondly, That notwithstanding all this, though such was his
Opinion concerning the Nullity of Anastasius's Deprivation, yet that he
likewise communicated with Gregory, Anastasius's Successor, and acknowleged him
as Bishop of Antioch, is apparent from the Title of his Synodical Epistle: For
from that it is manifest, that the Epistle was sent to Gregory, as well as to
Anastasius, and the rest of the Patriarchs. The Title is this: Gregorius Ioanni
Episcopo Constantinopolitano, Eulogio Alexandrino, Gregorio Antiocheno, Ioanni
Hierosolymitano, and Anastasio Patriarchae Antiocheno a paribus. Though in order
the Patriarch of Antioch was always mentioned before the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, as Gregory is here placed; yet Anastasius he places below the
Patriarch of Jerusalem, because he was a Patriarch of Antioch de jure only,
not in possession. In another Ad Joannem Constantinopolitanum l. 2. Indict. 13.
Ep. 38. Et quidem hac de re (de nomine universalis Episcopi ab eo arroga^o)
sanct^e memoriae decessoris mei Pelagii gravia ad sanctitatem vestram scripta
transinissa sunt. In quibus Synodi quae apud vos de Fratris quondam and
Consacerdotis nostri causa congregata est propter nefandum elation^s vocabulum
acta dissolvit.
Epistle the Pope calls the Patriarch Gregory, then deceased, his late Brother
and Co-bishop: And in another L. 7. Ep. 69. (aliis 70.) Quae Eusebio
Thessalonicensi aliisque compluribus Episcopis directa est. Locum integrum vide
superius productum.
again, he calls him venerandae memoriae Gregorium Episcopum Antiochenum. This
Example of Pope Gregory his owning both Gregory and Anastasius at the same
time, Non satis advertere videntur (says the learned Annotator on his Epistles
L. 1. Ep. 25.
in the last Paris Edition) qui ad summos juris apices de re qualibet
decernentes, SCHISMATIBVS and contentionibus viam parant zelo PRAECIPITI NEC
SATIS CAVTO. It Is worthy our Observation, that among those who communicated
with, and acknowleged Gregory as Patriarch of Antioch, there were no less than
four, who are honored by the Church as Saints. 1. Symeon Stylites. 2. Pope
Gregory the Great. 3. Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria, who was one of those
Patriarchs that acquitted our Patriarch Gregory in the abovementioned Synod of
Constantinople. These three are honored and worshipped as Saints by both
Churches, both the Greek and the Latin. Of S. Symeon Stylites I have spoken
already: Of Of him S. Ildefonsus de vir. illustr. c.2. speaks thus: Ita
cunctorum meritorum claruit perfectione sublimis, ut exclusis omnium virorum
illustrium comparationibus, nihil illi simile demonstraret antiquitas: vicit
enim sanctitate Antonium, eloquentia Cyprianum, sapientia Augustinum, etc.
S. Gregory the Great, there is no need I should say any thing, he being so
generally known. Of Eulogius it is to be observed, That as he was a very De eo
vide inter alios Moschi Pratum Spirit. c. 117,118,119. ( aliis 146, 147, 148.)
holy Man and a Saint in the Church's Calendar, so he was likewise a very
learned Man, a zealous Defender of the Orthodox Faith, and a great Opposer of
Heretics, as his several learned Treatises, which Biblioth. Codd. 208, 225,
226, 227, 230, 280. Cod. 230. p. 885. Photius mentions a Synod called by
Eulogius in the 7th. Year of the Emperor Marcianus: least any one should be led
into an error by that place, and fancy that Eulogius was not the same with him
of whom we speak, because the Emperor Marcianus was long before these times, I
must here acquaint my Reader, that instead of (...), he ought to read (...).
Photius has given us a large account of, abundantly testify. The fourth Saint
is the Patriarch of Constantinople, John Nesteutes, who is worshipped as a Saint
by the Greek Church, and had doubtless been worshipped in the same manner by the
Latins, if his styling himself Universal Bishop had not excited the Church of
Rome against him, which could never endure that any Bishop should pretend to be
equal to the Pope of Rome. This great Man was so far from being likely to
comply for fear with what he thought unlawful, that there was not a Man in
that Age more mortified to the World than he was. When he was first made
Patriarch, it was utterly against his Will, as we may learn from the Epistles
of Pope Gregory the Great. He was so given to Mortification and Fasting, that
from thence he had his Surname (...). He always went in a very mean Habit; and
was so far from being desirous of Riches, that when he died he left behind him
nothing but a wooden Bed, on which he was wont to lie, a woollen Coverlet of no
value, with a poor plain Cloak. This account Hist. l. 7. c. 6.
Theophylactus Simocattes, a Writer of that Age, gives of him. Who adds, That
after his Death the Emperor Mauricius took this Bed, Coverlet, and Cloak of
his, and kept 'em as precious Relics, preferring 'em before things of the
greatest value; and was wont in the Lent-time, instead of his own rich Bed, to
make use only of that, as believing that that would convey to him Divine
Grace. This Patriarch (says the same Proaemio p.36. (...), etc.
Author) was a Person endowed with the highest Degree of Divine Knowledge, and
advanced to the very height of Virtue, etc.

Sophronius, Epist. Synodica ap. Phot. Bibl. Cod. 231. p. 890.
Patriarch of Jerusalem, mentions one John, Patriarch of Constantinople,
Sir-named Cappadox, from the Country where he was born, whom he calls (...).
the Habitation of Virtue: Some think him to be the same with our John
Nesteutes, but in that, I think, they are mistaken; for John Nesteutes was
never Sir-nam'd Cappadox. He of whom Sophronius speaks, was the Successor of
Timotheus, and the Predecessor of Epiphanius, Patriarchs of Constantinople; yet
the great Elogium that he gives him, makes nevertheless for our Cause. For
'twas he that communicated with John, Patriarch of Jerusalem, who was put into
the place of Elias, unjustly deposed by the Emperor Anastasius; and who himself
had been Niceph. Patr. in Chronolog.
Syncellus (which before I had forgot to mention) to Timotheus Patriarch of
Constantinople, who was put into the place of Macedonius unjustly deposed by
the same Emperor.

See Page 134. and add that Paragraph here.

CHAP. XII.
S. Martin, Pope of Rome, being deposed without any Synod, and banished by the
Heretical Emperor Constans, though he never resigned, yet Eugenius is chosen his
Successor by the Clergy of Rome, though at the same time they were zealous
Asserters of the Orthodox Faith, and had likewise a great love for S. Martin.
Eugenius is received and owned by all as a true Pope, and has been honored all
along by the Church as a Saint. S. Martin himself owns him as a true Pope, and
prays to God for him as such.

IN the Year 642, Pyrrhus, the Monothelite, Patriarch of Constantinople, is
said to have been deposed by the Senate and People of Constantinople, being
suspected to have poisoned the Emperor Constantine, the Son of Heraclius, and
Not Peter, as it is said in the Synodicon, Syn. 131. He succeeded Pyrrhus after
he was again restored.
Paul, (himself likewise a Monothelite,) being ordained in his stead, was
received as a true Patriarch by all the Monothelites: But though it is generally
said, that the Patriarch Pyrrhus was deposed, yet I find upon strict enquiry,
that he was not actually deposed; but that being sure that he should be
deposed, to avoid greater Mischiefs, he himself resigned his Dignity. This
Instance therefore I pass by.

In the Year 654, S. Martin, Pope of Rome, was violently deposed by the Emperor
Not Constantinus Pogonatus, as the Synodicon c.132. calls him.
Constans: His Crime no other, but that by a Synod called at Rome, he had
asserted the Orthodox Faith, and had condemned the Heresy of the Monothelites,
whose Cause the Emperor had espoused: But that which they alleged against him,
was, That he had entered into a Confederacy with the Saracens, and others of
the Emperors Enemies, and had spoken somewhat (I know not what) to the
dishonor of the Virgin Mary. That there was no Synod concerned in the Matter,
is very notorious. Let us hear what he himself says of the Circumstances of his
Expulsion, in his Epistle to Theodorus Spudeus, who had sent to him, then at
Constantinople, about it. He tells Theodorus Noscere voluit cara vestra
dilectio qualiter de Sede S. Petri Apostoli^ raptus fuerim -- Omnia praescivi
per totum tem^u^, quae meditabantur, and sumpto meipso cum omni Cleno, privatim
mansi in Ecclesia -- quae cognominatur Constantiniana -- Illis enim omnes nos
seorsum morabamur a die Sabbati, quando Calliopas cum Ravennati exercitu, and
Theodoro Cubiculario, introicit civitatem. -- Ego vero ipse graviter insi^mus
eram ab Octobrio mense usque ad praedictum tempus, id est usque ad sextodecimo
Kalendas Iulias -- Ego itaqueante altar Ecclesiae lectulum meum habebam, in
quo jacebam, and nondum transacta media hora, ecce exercitus cum eis veniens in
Ecclesiam obumbrati omnes tenentes lanceas and spathas suas, quin and arcus
suos paratos una cum scutis suis, and facta sunt illic quae nec dicenda sunt.
-- Quibus confestim introeuntibus, jussio a Calliopa porrecta est Presbyteris
and Diaconis, in qua humilitatis meae abjectio continebatur, quod irregulariter
and sine lege Episcopatum surripuissem, and non essem in Apostolica Sede dignus
institui, sed omnimodis in hanc regiam urbem (Constantinopolim) transinitti,
subrogato in loco meo Episcopo, quod necdum aliquando factum est, and spero
quod necdum aliquando fieri habet: quia in absentia Pontificis Archidiaconus
and Archipresbyter, and Primicerius locum praesentant Pontificis. -- Eadem
itaque hora dedi meipsum ad exhibendum Imperatori, and non resistendum. Porro
acclamantibus mihi (ut veritatem dicam) quibusdam ex clero ne facerem hoc,
nulli eorum accommodavi aurem, ne subito sierent homicidia. Sed dixi illis:
Sinite mecum venire ex Clero, qui necessarii mihi sunt, Episcopos, viz.
Presbyteros, and Diaconos, and absolute qui mihi videntur. Respondit Calliopas:
Quotquot voluerint venire cum bono veniant. Nos cuiquam necessitatem non
facimus. Respondi ego: Clerus in potestate mea est. Exclamantes autem quidam ex
Sacerdotibus dicebant: Cum ipso vivimus and cum ipso morimur. Post haec coepit
dicere per se Calliopas, and qui cum ipso erant: Vent nobiscum ad Palatium. Nec
hoc facere recusavi, sed exivi cum eis in Palatium cadem secunda feria, and
tertia feria venit ad me omnis Clerus, and multi erant qui se pa^averant ad
navigandum mecum. -- Eadem ergo nocte, quae illucescit in feria quarta, quae
erat tertiodecimo Kal. Iulias, circa horam quasi sextam noctis, tulerunt me de
Palatio, retrusis omnibus qui mecum in Palatio erant. -- Et non nisi cum sex
puerulis and uno cauculo eduxerunt nos ex urbe. -- Et pervenimus Kal. Iulias
Mesenam, in qua erat navis, id est, carcer meus, etc.
, That Calliopas, the Hexarch of Ravenna, came to Rome with his Army, and,
together with his Soldiers, entered into the Church where he himself lay sick
before the Altar, and there delivered to the Clergy, the Presbyters and the
Deacons, the Emperor's Command, by which he was declared unworthy to govern any
longer, and they were required to elect a new Bishop in his stead. Then they
took him by violence, and carried him away privately to a Ship, and so, after
some time, to Constantinople. What happened to him at Constantinople, and what
became of him afterward, we learn from an Anonymous Author, who was at the
same time at Constantinople, and sent a particular account of all things to
Rome, whose Epistle is in the Tomes of the Councils falsely ascribed to
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, who was only the Translator. He tells us, that S.
Martin was there tried by a Court of Judicature, consisting of Senators, of
which one Troilus, the Sacellarius (a great Officer (...). Dignitas Palatina,
qui sacelli seu sisci Imperatorii curam habebat. See Du Fresne's Gloss. Graec.
and Lat. Med. There was likewise an Ecclesiastical Dignitary so called, but the
other is here meant. Neither was the Ecclesiastical Sacellarius ever a Bi^hop.
In the Collatio S. Maximi Mart. cum Principibus in Secretario, the same Treilus
is called Troilus Patricius. So in the Collatio S Maxim cum Theodosio Episc.
Caesareae, p. Edir. Sirmond. 180. Epiphanius and Troilus Patricii. Again, p.
187. Dixerant autem and Patricii, Troilus, viz. and Epiphanius.
of the Emperor's Court) was President In ipsa vero 93 a. die (post adventum
ejus ad Vrbem) quae est dies Parasceue, mane tulerunt cum de custodia,
constituendum in cella S^cellarii, jubentes pridie convenire omnem SENATVM,
quod and factum est. Iusserunt autem eum introducendum, and introduxerunt in
portatoria sella: Erat enim penitus aeger -- Intenden^ autem in eum primus, qui
praesidebat Sacellarius cum RELIQVIS PRINCIPIBVS a long, jussit cum surgere a
ferculo and stare. -- Videns ergo justus Vir introountes eos and jurantes sino
parcirate testificatores, compassus perditioni animarum eorum, ai^ ad eos qui
praesidebant PRINCIPES: Obsecro vos per Deum, nolite praepararo cos jurare, sed
absque sacramento dicant quaecunque volunt, vosque facite quaecunque vultis. --
Denuo inter accusantes testes, ait ad cum PRAEFECTVS Troilus. -- ad quem
continuo dixit ipse beatus Apostolicus Papa, Dic DOMINE Troile -- Surgens
Sacellarius cum plurimis qui considerant ei, ingressus est nunciare Imperatori
quaeque ipse voluit. Eduxerunt autem S. Apostolicum virum de cella judicii,
magis autem ex Aula Caiaphae, in gestario sedili sedentem, and statuerunt cum
in medio atrii, quod erat ante cellam Sacellarii, and Imperialis Stabuli, quo
consueverat omnis populus convenire, and expectare Sacellarii ingressum. --
Statuerunt ergo reverendissimum virum in medio solarii dispositionis,
praesentia totius SENATVS subnixum hinc and inde. Facta est ergo constipatio
subito non minima, and exiens ab Imperatore Sacellarius apertis januis
triclinii in solarium, dividere universum populum jussit. Veniensque ad sanctum
ac venerabilem virum Martinum Apostolicum, dixit ad eum: Vide quomodo Deus te
duxit, and tradidit in manus nostras. Tu nitebaris contra Imperatorem, quid
tibi spei erat? Ecce dereliquisti Deum, and dereliquit te Deus. Et continuo
exolamans Sacellarius quendam astantium excubitorum tonsorem, praecepit sine
mora auferre psachnion summi and Apostolici atque praecipui Pastoris omnium
Christianorum. -- Cum ergo incidisset psachnion beati viri excubitor, and
corrigiam campagiorum ejus, statim tradidit eum Sacellarius Praefecto Vrbis,
dicens: Toll eum, Domine Praefecte, and continuo membratim incide illum. Cum
his autem omnibus jussit astantibus anathematizare eum, quod and fecerunt. Non
responderunt autem hujuscemodi voci viginti virorum anime. Sed omnes quique hoc
ipsum videbant, and sciebant quia est Deus in coelo conspector little quae
fiebant, dimisso vultu cum multa maestitudine recedebant tribulati, etc.
By which he was condemned to die, for conspiring (as was proved by false
Witnesses) against the Government. But afterward by the Intercession of Paul,
Patriarch of Constantinople, who, though his Adversary and a Monothelite, could
not but pity him for the extremely barbarous Usage which he met with after his
Condemnation, his Life was spared. And he was banished to Cherso, a Town upon
the Lake Meotis; where he died. The same account we have in his Life, which is
extant in Surius: But that Life was compiled out of this Anonymous Epistle, and
out of the Popes own Epistles, and the Pontifical; not composed by a Writer,
who lived at that time, as Surius imagined. Those words, from whence Surius
gathered, that the Author lived at that time, were injudiciously transcribed by
the Compiler out of this Anonymous Author.

Though such were the Circumstances of S. Martin's Deprivation; though he was
deposed by the Lay-power; and not only so, but likewise by such as were
Heretics; though he was so much beloved by his Clergy, as that, when he was
feiz'd by the Hexarch Calliopas, some of 'em advised him to make opposition,
and others cried out that they would live and die with him; though, besides all
this, it is certain that he never resigned, nor gave his consent that the
Clergy should choose another in his room; which appears as well from the
particular account which he himself gives of his being seized and carried away,
as from those words in his Epistle, which he wrote at least a Year and four
Months after he was carried away from Rome, where he mentions that the Emperor
had commanded him to be carried to Constantinople, and the Clergy to choose a
new Pope: Quod necdum aliquando factum est, and spero quod necdum aliquando
fieri habet: quia in absentia Pontificis Archidiaconus and Archipresbyter, and
Primicerius locum praesentant Pontificis: Notwithstanding all this, as soon as
they understood that he was not acquitted at Constantinople, but condemned, and
of consequence not like to return again to his See, they chose another in his
place, viz. Eugenius. As for that which Baronius, and his faithful Echo,
Binius, would needs persuade the World, That Eugenius was not chosen as a new
Pope, but only as S. Martin's Vicar; That their design was, that, though he
acted as Pope, yet he should not be truly so till after S. Martin's Death, is a
trifling Evasion, not grounded in the least on any Authority: And I need not
mention that S. Martin himself speaks of him as of his Successor, not his Vicar.

How long Pope Eugenius governed before S. Martin's Death, may be gathered from
S. Martin's Epistle, but now cited, and from the Anonymous Author. That he was
not made Pope, when first the Clergy were commanded to choose a new one; that
is, when S. Martin was carried away from Rome, but after his arrival at
Constantinople, is plain from S. Martin's Words, which I just now produced; and
likewise from an Epistle which he wrote to Constantinople from Cherso, four
Months after his arrival there, and at least two Years and three Months after
he was carried from Rome: In which he speaks of his Successor, as if he had but
very lately heard the news of his being ordained in his room; Pastorem, qui eis
nunc praesse MONSTRATVR. It appears from that particular account which P.
Martin gives in his Epistle, that he was carried away from Rome the 19th. Day
of June, and that he did not arrive at Constantinople till about a Year and
three Months after that. We are assured by the Anonymous Author, that he
arrived at Constantinople the 17th. of September; That the 93d. Day after his
Arrival he was tried and condemned; That 85 Days after his Condemnation he was
sent away toward Cherso, and that he died the 16th. of September, Indict. 14.
Baronius's Chronology is in this part, as in many others, very lame. He makes
S. Martin to be carried away from Rome in the Year 651, to be banished to Cherso
(and Eugenius to succeed him) in the Year 652, to die in the Year 654. All
which is false. Theophanes makes S. Martin to live in banishment till the 2d.
Indict. 659, three Years too long.
i. e. in the Year 656. Whether the September, on which he died, were the next
after his arrival at Cherso, we cannot for certain determine. There is extant
in the Anonymous Author an Epistle which he wrote from Cherso to a Friend at
Constantinople, on the Month of September: But however it is probable, that he
died on that same September, a few days after he had written that Epistle. And
my Reason is, Because the Anonymous Author, who produces two Epistles, which he
wrote from Cherso, within about four Months after his arrival there, says
nothing more of him, but only concerning his Death. Had he lived a Year
longer, it is very likely that his Friends at Constantinople would have heard
again from him, and our Author would have had more to write concerning him. And
that he died very soon after his arrival, appears yet more probable from his
weak and sickly condition, and from the great Complaints which he makes
concerning his misery and the want of subsistence at Cherso. From these
Considerations I infer, That he was carried away from Rome the 19th. of June,
654, and lived after that two Years and three Months; That he was tried and
condemned at Constantinople the 18th. of December. 655. And from hence it
follows, that Eugenius was chosen Pope about the Month of January 656, The
Pontifical says Eugenius was Pope two Years and eight Months; it therefore
follows, That he died about the end of the first Indiction, 653: And this
agrees well enough with the beginning of Pope Vitalianus, for his first
Epistles are dated (the Date of one of 'em is false, and the business about
which he writes, was transacted) after the beginning of the ad. Indiction. The
Pontifical adds, that he was buried on the 4th. of June: He was therefore Pope
not two Years and eight Months, but two Years and about five Months.
about eight Months before S. Martin's Death, allowing about three Weeks or a
Month for the carrying of the News of S. Martin's Condemnation from
Constantinople to Rome. If that may be relied on which the Author of the
Pontifical says concerning a Vacancy of 28 Days, it would then follow that
Eugenius was made Pope the 16th. of January: But on that we cannot rely, not
only because the words, Cessavit Episcopatus dies 28, are wanting in some
Copics; but because that Author (as I have already observed) is wont to be very
exact in assigning the Duration of Vacancies, when we know he knew nothing of
the matter. What he says concerning the time of S. Martin's Deprivation, that
he was deposed Depositus die 16. mensis Sept. and cessavit Episcopatus dies 28.
on the 16th. of September, is an error, occasioned by his having heard that he
died on that Day.

Eugenius being constituted Pope, as he had been freely Elected by the Clergy,
so he was readily owned and acknowleged Fait Eugenius (says the Pontifical)
benignus, mitis, mansuetus, omnibus affabilis, and sanctitate praeclarior.
Rogam Clero solitam tribuit, and indigentibus elcemosynam ministravit. -- Hujus
temporibus Petrus Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus direxit Synodicam Epistolam
ad Sedem Apostolicam juxta consuetudinem priorum (Pyrrhi and Pauli) and ultra
regulam, non autem declarans Operationes aut voluntates in Domino nostro in
Jesus Christo. Et accensus Populus, vel Clerus, eo quod talem Synodicam
direxisset, minime susceperunt eam, sed cum majore strepitu est a sancta Dei
Ecclesia projecta: Ut etiam nec eundem Papam dimitteret Populus vel Clerus
missas celebrare in basilica sanctae Dei Genitricis, semperque Virginis Mariae,
quae appellatur ad praesepe, nisi promisisset his ipse Pontifex, minime eam
aliquando suscipere.
by the People of Rome as a true Pope; and that too, though the People of Rome
were at that time exceedingly zealous for all Orthodox Doctrines. When Peter,
the Monothelite, Patriarch of Constantinople, had sent to Rome his Synodical
Letters (this happened while S. Martin Paul, Patriarch of Constantinople, died
a little after S. Martin's Condemnation, as appears from the Anonymous Account:
To him succeeded Pyrrhus, who lived not full five Months, and died the
Whitsontide before S. Martin; then Peter presently succeeded. Nicephorus
Callisti in Catal. Manuscripto. (...), etc.
was yet living) in which the Doctrine of the Monothelites was passed by in
silence, and not condemned, the whole Church utterly rejected 'em, and would
not suffer their Pope Eugenius to officiate at Divine Service, till he had
promised, that he would never receive 'em. Though so stout Asserters of Orthodoxy
in opposition to the Emperor himself; yet they never scrupled to submit to a
Bishop, who was put into the place of another unjustly deposed by the
Lay-power, and still living, at least for ought they knew.

That Pope Eugenius was acknowledged by the Bishops of the Roman District, is
apparent, as from the thing it self; so likewise from hence, That though he
governed in all but a very little while, not above two Years and eight Months,
yet there were 21 or 22 Bishops ordained by him; as we are assured by the
Author of the Pontifical. Neither is there mention in any Author of any the
least Disturbance in the Church on his account.

He was not only owned as a true Pope, but was likewise after his Death
honored by the Church as a Saint; and so he has been all along to this day. By
the Author of the Pontifical he is said to be sanctitate praeclarior; and in
the Ad 2. Iunii.
Roman Martyrology we read: Romae sancti Eugenii Papae and Confessoris. A Saint
is deposed, and a Saint accepts of his place!

It is here to be observed, that many of the Greek Writers, who were not well
acquainted with the Affairs of the Latins, make not Eugenius, but Pope Agatho
to succeed S. Martin; though not only Eugenius, but Vitalianus likewise, and
Adeodatus came in between S. Martin and Agatho: But it is likewise to be
observed, that though they knew that P. Martin was unjustly deposed, yet they
speak of P. Agatho, whom they took to be his Successor, as of a true Pope and
an excellent Man, S. Martin, says Chron. p. 276. (...), etc.
Theophanes, being banished, Agatho is ordained Pope of Rome; who being moved
with zeal toward God, called a holy Synod, and condemned the Heresy of the
Monothelites. The Author of the Synodicon: Syn. 132,133. (...). Isaac
Catholicus Invect. 1. in Armen. ad finem: (...), etc. It is scarce to be
doubted but that he likewise took Agatho to be S. Martin's immediate Successor.
Martin, the most holy Pope of Rome, was banished to Cherso. -- Agatho, the
most blessed Pope of Rome, who was advanced to Martin 's Throne, gathered a
holy Synod, etc.

In the last place I add, That S. Martin himself was so far from abhorring the
Communion of his Successor Eugenius, that he owns him as a true Pope, and prays
for him. May God (says that good Man in his last Epistle which he wrote from
Veruntamen Deus, qui omnes vult salvos fieri, and ad agnitionem veritatis
venire, per intercessiones S. Petri stabiliat corda little in orthodoxa fide,
and confirmet contra omnem haereticum and adversarium Ecclesiae nostrae
personam, and immobiles custodiat, praecipue Pastorem qui eis nunc praeesse
monstratur.
Cherso) who wills that all Men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the Truth, establish the hearts of the People of Rome in the Orthodox Faith,
through the Intercessions of S. Peter, and confirm 'em against all Heretics
and Adversaries of the Church, and make 'em immovable, especially the Pastor,
who (I hear) presides now over 'em.

It appears from what has been observed concerning P. Gregory his looking upon
Anastasius to be still the rightful Patriarch of Antioch, his giving him the
Title of Patriarch; and his sending him his Synodical Letters, That Anastasius,
after his Expulsion, had never given up his Right or resigned. And yet it
appears, that Anastasius, the great Anastasius, he to whom all the Bishops of
the East paid so great a Deference, never separated from the Communion of the
Church, but continued to communicate peacebly with it. This appears from an L.
1. Ep. 27. Praeterea indico suggestionem me apud piissimos. Dominos summis
precibus plenam fecisse, ut virum beatissimum Dominum Anastasium Patriarcham
concesso usu pallii ad B. Petri Apostolorum principis limina ^necum
celebraturum solennia missarum transmittere debuisset, quatenus si ei ad sedem
suam minime reverti liceret, saltem mecum in honor suo viveret. Sed quae causa
contigerit ut eadem scripta retinerem, praesentium lator vobis innotescet.
Ejusdem tamen Domini Anastasii animum cognoscite, and quicquid ei de hac re
placuerit, vestris mihi Epistolis indicate.
Epistle of P. Gregory, to Sebastian, Bishop of Risinum; in which the Pope
says, That he had written a Petition to the Emperor ( Mauricius) to desire that
Anastasius, if he might not be restored to his See, yet at least might be
permitted to come to Rome, and officiate there with him as a Bishop. The same
he says in an Ep. 7. Praeterea indico quia a serenissimis Dominis quantis valui
precibus postulavi: Ut vos honor restituto (intellige usum pallii, non Sedem)
ad S. Petri Apostolorum principis limina venire, and quousque it a Deo
placuerit, hic mecum vivere concedant: Quatenus dum vos videre aneruero,
peregrinationis nostrae taedium de. aterna patria invicem loquendo relevcinus.
Epistle to Anastasius himself.

This Paragraph should have been placed at the End of the Eleventh Chapter, at
Page 127.

CHAP. XIII.
Callinicus Patriarch of Constantinople being deposed without any Synod by the
Emperor Justinianus Rhinotmetus, his Successor Cyrus is received as a true
Patriarch.. 1. So likewise is Nicetas who was put into the place of the
Patriarch Constantine deposed without any Synod by the Emperor Constantinus
Copronymus.. 2.

THE Emperor Justinian Sirnam'd Rhinotmetus, having commanded the General of
his Army to slaughter the People of Constantinople, and to begin with the
Patriarch Callinicus, the Patriarch was advised by Leontius, and other great
Men, to endeavor to have the Emperor deposed, and to excite the people against
him by crying out: This is the day which the Lord has made. He accordingly did
so, and the people accordingly took the Emperor and cut off his Nose, and
banished him to Cherso, and made Leontius Emperor. After three Years Leontius
was deposed by Apsimarus, and he, after Seven Years, was deposed by the ejected
Emperor Justinian. Justinian being restored (this happened in the Year 703.)
commanded Leontius and Apsimarus to be put to death, and the Patriarch (...).
Theophil. p. 313.
Callinicus he deprived of his Sight and banished him to Rome, and made one
Cyrus a Recluse of Amastris, who had foretold of his being to be restored,
Patriarch in his stead. So Theophanes. Glycas thus: Justinian put Apsimarus,
together with Leontius to Death; (...).
and Callinicus the Patriarch, because he had opposed him in some Designs of
his against the Church, he deprived of his Sight, and banished him to Rome, and
promoted Cyrus (in the Greek Cyriacus) a Recluse of Amastris, in his stead;
because he had prophesied to him of his Restoration. That Callinicus was
deposed and banished without any Synod, may be easily gathered from the thing
it self. For doubtless the enraged and revengeful Emperor dealt with him as he
did with the rest, and did what he did in a Fury. In a word (adds Glycas (...).
, just after the words produced) he murdered all like so many Sheep, for he was
all in a fury. That he was deposed and banished by the Emperor, is asserted
likewise by Zonaras, Cedrenus, Nicephorus (...), etc.
the Patriarch, Joel and Constantinus Manasses; who tells us, that before he
was deprived of his Sight and banished Hist. Breviario, p. 28.
, he was exposed to the Boys as a laughingstock, to be abused by them.

Callinicus being thus deposed and banished, the new Patriarch Cyrus was
readily owned as a true Patriarch by all. Concerning any disturbance in the
Church occasioned by Callinicus's Lay-Deprivation, not a single word in any
Author. This Instance the Author of the Baroccian Treatise takes notice of, who
observes, not only that Cyrus was received by the Church, but likewise that
Callinicus never separated from the Church's, and Cyrus's Communion; by which
he means, That there was not any Schism headed by Callinicus as an
Anti-patriarch. And the silence of all Authors in general, does sufficiently
confirm what he says. The Emperor Justinian (says he) Sir-nam'd Rhinotmetus,
coming the second time to the Throne, deposed and banished unjustly the most
holy Patriarch Callinicus and placed Cyrus a Recluse of Amastris in the Sea.
Now observe, That Callinicus did not separate himself from the Church and from
Cyrus, upon the account of his unjust Deprivation; and that Cyrus, together
with those he had ordained, were received by the Church. It Is a vain thing for
our Adversaries to allege, that therefore, probably Callinicus did not think
fit to insist upon his Right, because, by being guilty of Treason he had
forfeited his Life: For whether Callinicus did insist upon his Right or not,
the Church did not care. As soon as he was banished, and Cyrus was constituted
in his place, they immediately submitted to the present Possessor. Who can ever
believe, that the Church of Constantinople sent to Rome, to know what the old
Patriarch's Pleasure was?

Theophanes, Nicephorus Patr. Nicephorus Callisti Catal. MS.
Six years the Patriarch Cyrus enjoyed the Dignity. After that time, there
being another Revolution in the State, Justinian being killed and Philippicus
advanced to the Imperial Throne, he was deposed by the new Emperor. What the
reason was is not said; but that we may easily guess at. The Emperor
Philippicus as soon as he came to the Throne, called an Heretical Synod, and
condemned the Sixth General Council, and preferred one John a Zonaras. Annal.
l. 14. c. 26. Theophanes, p. 319, 320. Nota Marginalis MS. ad Nicephori Call.
Catalogum MS.
Monothelite to the Patriarchal Chair: It is therefore likely, that the
Patriarch Cyrus was therefore deposed because he refused to comply with the
Emperor in that Design. The Patriarch Hist. Brev. p. 31.
Nicephorus intimates, that Cyrus was turned out and John made Patriarch before
the meeting of that Synod.

. 2. After John succeeded Germanus, who was forced by the Emperor Leo Isaurus
to resign his Bishopric, because he refused to condemn the Worship of Images.
After this time the Church of Constantinople were for many years Iconoclasts,
to the Church of Rome Heretics, to us Orthodox. Anastasius succeeded Germanus,
and after his death Constantine was advanced to the Patriarchal Throne by the
Emperor Constantius Copronymus. The Patriarch Constantine, after Twelve Years
Government, viz. in the Year 766. was deposed by the same Emperor. The occasion
and the manner is thus described by Theophanes, (...).
On the Thirtieth day of August (says he) the Fourth Indiction, the Emperor
raged with a great fury against his Namesake the Patriarch, and having found
out certain Monks, Clergymen, and Laics who were the Patriarch's intimate
Friends, he got 'em to allege against him, that they had heard him speak
against him to Podomagulus ( or Podopagurus, a great Man, whom the Emperor had
just before put to death as accused of conspiring against him) and sent 'em to
the Patriarch's Palace, there to witness it to his Face; and the Patriarch
denying it, he made 'em swear by the Holy Cross, that they had heard the
Patriarch speak thus and thus reproachfully of him; and sent some to seal up
the Gate of his Palace, and took him and banished him to Hieria, and after that
to the Prince's Island. Theophanes P. 370. (...). etc.
adds, That on the Sixteenth of November following, the Emperor made Nicetas,
an Eunuch, Patriarch in Constantine's room. He further adds, That on the 16 th
of P. 371. (...).
October next after that, he sent for Constantine from the Prince's Island, and
having so scourged him as that he was not able to stand, he commanded him to be
carried into the Great Church, and all the People of the City being gathered
together, there was a Libel read publicly, containing the Heads of all the
Accusations that were brought against him; and at the reading of every
Accusation, the Secretary, who read it, and stood by him, struck him on the
Face; (...), etc.
the Patriarch Nicetas sitting there in his Throne by him, and seeing all that
was done. Then they went up into the Pulpit, and the Patriarch Nicetas took the
Libel, and commanded some Bishops to take away his Patriarchal Cope from him,
and anathematized him. So giving him the nickname of Scotiopsis they made him
go out of the Church backward. After this Relation Theophanes gives an account
of his being put to death, and how very inhumanely and barbarously they used
him. It appears from this exact and particular account, that Constantine was
never Synodically tried and condemned, and that Nicetas was made Patriarch
before he was condemned in the great Church; and that when he was there
condemned and deposed or degraded, he was deposed or degraded by Nicetas
himself, who had been put into his place. It likewise appears that he had never
given up his Right, since he still wore his Patriarchal Cope, and was there
deprived of it. Nicephorus the Patriarch Hist Brev. p. 48. (...), etc.
gives the same account of the Matter, though not so particularly. The Emperor
(says he) suborned some of the Patriarch Constantine 's Acquaintance to depose
upon Oath, that they had heard him speak of the Conspiracy of Antiochus and
Theophylactus. (They had been condemned together with Podopagurus.) And
immediately sent him away as a banished Man to Hieria ( an Imperial Palace in
Asia over against Constantinople) and created Nicetas the Presbyter of the
Church of the Apostles, an Eunuch, Patriarch. All these things were done in the
Month of August Indict. 4. Not long after he sent for Constantine and commanded
him to be carried to the Church; and together with him he sent one of his own
Secretaries with Accusations against him, which the Secretary read before all
the people there gathered together, striking him on the Cheek at the reading of
every Accusation. And then they went up into the Pulpit and deposed him, the
new Patriarch reading the Accusations at the Altar. To the same purpose L. 15.
p. 111.
Zonaras.

Though such were the Circumstances of Nicetas's Promotion, yet of any
disturbance in the Church occasioned by it, not a Syllable in any Author. He
was readily owned by all the Orthodox, i. e. the Iconoclasts; and governed no
less than Fourteen Years, as appears from Theophanes and Nicephorus Catal. MS.
Callisti. The Patriarch Nicephorus in his Chronology allows him Fifteen Years.
If you find him called by any Author a Pseudo-Patriarch, or the like; it is
only by such, as, being themselves the Worshippers of Images, accounted him,
(so likewise his Predecessor himself) a Heretic, and on that account no true
Patriarch.

CHAP. XIV.
An Account of the Schism between Photius and Ignatius, Patriarchs of
Constantinople. Photius who was put into Ignatius's place when deposed by the
Emperor, no such Person as his Enemies report him. By how great a Party he was
received. The reason why some refused to acknowledge him was not so much,
because he was so constituted, as because he was a Neophytus, and was besides
ordained by a Bishop Excommunicated, and (in their Judgments) stood himself
Excommunicated at that time. Ignatius professes, that if Photius had been one
of the Church, i. e. if he had not been an Excommunicated Person at the time of
his Consecration, he would willingly have yielded to him. Ignatius values the
Councils that condemned him no more than he did the Lay power. The Vindicator
in an Error concerning that Matter. His Errors concerning the Council called
the First and Second. A New account of the reason of that Title. His Error
concerning the Greatness of the Synod of Rome, called by P. Nicholas against
Photius. Photius after he was received by the Church, and confirmed by a
general Council, is deposed by the bare Authority of the Emperor Leo; yet his
Successor Stephen is received by the Church.

IT appears from what has been said in the foregoing Chapters, that the
Doctrine which we maintain, is grounded on the earliest Antiquity, and
confirmed by the Practice of the Church, in the first 400 Years after the
Emperors became Christian. We are now fallen into the Dregs of time (says one
of our Further account of the Baroccian MS. p. 12.
Answerers, speaking of the Seventh, and the following Centuries) years of
Superstition, Idolatry, Dot age, and Disorder; and therefore though the Instances
produced out of this Age were truly reported, and pertinent to the Purpose,
they would not be fit Examples for us to follow. Had our Author known that the
Ages, of which he gives this Character, were the Ages that afford his Party
their most considerable (in themselves inconsiderable) Precedents, we should
not (I suppose) have found him so ingenuous in his Confession, and free of his
Characters, We are now fallen into the Dregs of time: It Is true, and no wonder
if the Spirit of Antiquity was so far lost, as that some few Instances may be
found in these times agreeable to the practice of our Adversaries. But this is
confessed by them themselves, that the Examples of these lower Ages, that do
not agree with the Practice of the former, are not fit Examples for us to
follow.

In the Year 858. there broke out a Schism at Constantinople, between Ignatius
deposed, and Photius, who was constituted in his place. That the Reader may
have a full and perfect view of all this Concern; I will first present him with
a short Historical, and Chronological Account of the chief Transactions.
Secondly, I will show what manner of Man Photius was, who accepted of
Ignatius's See, that he was a virtuous and pious Man. Thirdly, I will show by
how great and numerous a Party he was received. Fourthly, That they that
separated from him, did not look upon him to be otherwise unexceptionable, but
separated from him for several Reasons. From whence it appears that the Case is
quite different from ours, and no Example for our Adversaries.

In the Year but now mentioned, Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople, Son to a
former Emperor, Michael Rangabe, was deposed by the Emperor Michael, Sirnam'd
the Drunkard, because he refused to take the Emperors Sisters and his Mother,
and make 'em Nuns by force, as the Emperor had commanded him. This was the
immediate Reason: but he that excited the Emperor against him was Bardas the
Emperor's Uncle, whom the Patriarch had a little before Ex-communicated for
living incestuously with his own Son's Wife. Ignatius being thus deposed
Nicetas Paphlag, in vita ejus p. 1229.
November 23. the famous Photius, chief Secretary of State, was on
Christmas Day ordained Patriarch in his stead. Nicet^s loc. cit. p. 1200.
Two Months, or to speak exactly, Theognostus in Libello Ignatii nomine scripto
ad Nicolaum P. I. p. 1268.
forty days after that, Ignatius began to be persecuted, and was Theognostus
ib. This first Deprivation by Photius is mentioned likewise by Metrophanes
Metropolite of Smyrna, Epist. ad Manuelem Patricium.
Deposed and Anathematized by his Successor Photius, whilst absent at the
Island Terebinthus; to which he had been banished. He was suspected to have
conspired against the Emperor, and on that account suffered very hard things,
but nothing could be made out against him. From Terebinthus he was removed to
Hieria, from thence to Numera; and, on the Month of Necetas, p. 1212.
August* after his Ejectment, to the Isle Mitylene, still suffering great
Afflictions, and Indignities. Between this time and Nicetas, who, says he, had
governed full eleven Years when first deposed, adds, p. 1205. That when he was
condemned by that Synod, he had been Patriarch very near twelve Years. P.
Nicholas I. Ep. 1. and Ep. ad Episcopos and Clerum prove. Constantinop. ap. Acta
Concilii VIII. act. 7. p. 1047. says, he had been Patriarch 12 Years.
November following, he was again Deposed and Anathematized, while absent, by a
Provincial Synod, which Photius had called. After this the Emperor, and the
Patriarch Photius send to Rome to Pope Nicholas, to desire him to send some
Legates to Constantinople to consult against the Iconoclasts, intending by the
concurrence of those Legates, when they should be sent, to ratify what had
been done against Ignatius. The Pope receives his Letters, and refuses to own
him as the true Patriarch of Constantinople, till by his Legates he had had a
hearing of the whole Cause. He sends his Legates, Radoaldus and Zacharias, both
Bishops, to Constantinople, and there in the beginning of the Year In February,
for the Pope's Letters sent by those Legates are dated September 25. Indict. 9.
i. e. A. D. 860. and the Legates were at Constantinople 100 days before the
Council sat, as appears from an Epistle of Pope Nicholas to Photius ap. Conc.
VIII. p 1034. Metrophanes Bishop of Smyrna, Epig. ad Manuelem Patricium, says,
they were at Constantinople eight Months before the sitting of the Council; but
that could not be. The Pope's Epistle which he wrote from Constantinople, to
signify his dislike of what had been decreed, is dated Mart. 19. Ind. 9. i. e.
A. D. 861.
861. by a general Council of no less than 318 Bishops, just the number of the
Council of Nice; Ignatius is again Condemned, Deposed, and Anathematized. The
Crime alleged against him was So Nicetas; but p. 1228, he mentions 52 Heads of
Accusations brought against him.
, That he had been made Patriarch by the Emperor's bare Authority, without the
Suffrages of the Clergy: and this was attested upon Oath by In the Ninth
Session of the Eighth Council, they own that they were perjured, and that they
were put upon it by the Emperor and Bardas.
72 Witnesses, of whom there were some of the Order of Senators. He appeals
from the Council to the Pope, and about Six months after, he sends away
privately one of his Friends, by name Theognostus, to the Pope, to give him an
Account of what had been done, and to beg his assistance: who resided at Rome
Hadriani P. II. Epist. ad Imp. Basil. and Ignatium ap. Conc. VIII. p. 1085.
Stylianus Episc. Neocaes. Ep. ad Steph. P. p. 1401. Theognostus was at Rome
seven Years, ending in August, 868.
, as his Legate or Agent, all the time of his Deprivation. The Pope before this
had had an Account of the whole Matter: his Legates return from Constantinople
with a Copy of the Acts of the Council: he refuses to ratify what they had
done, alleging that he had commanded, that nothing should be decreed concerning
Ignatius, till they had given him a particular Account, and received his
Orders. He sends away speedily to the Emperor and Photius, to let 'em know,
that he did not give his Consent to what had been done: requires that Photius
should be deposed, and Ignatius restored: and because he was not obeyed, in the
Year Indict. XI. ut patet ex Conc. VIII. act. 7. p. 1097. Anastasius Bibl.
Praef. ad Conc. 8.
863. he calls a Synod at Rome by which he deposes Photius, declares him a mere
Layman, and withal Excommunicated if ever he should pretend for the future to
Act as Patriarch, so as never to be capable of Absolution Decreta Synodi
Romanae ap. Epistolam Nicholai P. act. Conc. VIII. p. 1172.
, except at the point of Death: The same Synod Excommunicates likewise the
Nicetas V. Ignatii.
Emperor himself, together with all the Senate, if they refused to receive
Ignatius, and to reject Photius. It likewise declares the Orders of all those
whom Photius had ordained, void. In the same Synod, Zacharias, one of the
Legates, was Deposed and Excommunicated, because he had concurred in the
Deprivation of Ignatius: and because the other Legate Radoaldus was not there
present, there was afterward Nic. P. Ep. ad Episcopos and
Clorum-Constantinopolit. ap. Conc. VIII. act. 7. p. 1070. Anastasius Bibl. Vita
Nicholai P. I.
another Synod called at Rome on his Account, in which as well as the former he
refused to make his appearance; but by this he was Deposed and Anathematized as
his Colleague had been in the former. In the Year Praeterito anno, per Indict.
viz. 13, etc. ait P. Nic. in Ep. praecit. p. 1080.
865. the Emperor sends his Holiness a very contemptfull and opprobrious
Letter, which provoked him to that Degree, that the next Year after he sends an
Epistle to Constantinople, directed to the Bishops and Clergy of that District,
in which he requires that the Emperor should make him satisfaction by burning
his Epistle. In the same Epistle he exhorts 'em all to receive Ignatius as
their Patriarch, and sends 'em the Decrees of his Roman Synod. In the latter
end of the same Year, viz. on the Ides of November 866. he sends about many
Epistles; to Photius himself, to the Caesar Bardas, to the Empresses Theodora,
and Eudoxia (and to the Senate of Constantinople) and he likewise sends to the
Emperor, exhorting him to send Ignatius, and Photius both to Rome, that he
might sit Judge of their Cause. But so far are all these efforts from
prevailing, that as Photius had been deposed by him; so he pays him in his own
Measures, and the Emperor by his persuasions calls a General Council at
Constantinople; which Condemns, Deposes, and Anathematizes the Pope for certain
Crimes charged upon him. This Council sat about That it could not be before
Whitsunday 866. appears from hence, That Basilius, who subscribed to it as
Caesar, was not made Caesar before that time. And that it could not be before
after November 866, may be gathered from the several Epistles which Pope
Nicholas wrote to Constantinople on that Month, in which he makes no mention of
any such design against him. That it was before September 867, is apparent from
hence, That the Emperor Michael was killed in that Month. That it was a little
before his death appears from hence, that the Messengers who were carrying the
Acts of that Council into the West, were overtook and brought back to
Constantinople by other Messengers sent after 'em by the new Emperor Basilius,
as Nicetas Paphlago tells us. I said that Basilius was made Caesar on
Whitsunday 866, for though Nicetas seems to intimate, that it was on Whitsunday,
before Michael was killed, yet he does not expressly say so; but it is expressly
asserted by Leo Gramm. and Joel, that Basilius reigned with Michael one Year
and four Months; and Zonaras says, he reigned with him a Year.
Midsummer 867. 'Twas this, I suppose, that broke Pope Nicholas's heart; for he
died presently after. On September 24. the same Year, the Emperor Michael was
killed by Basilius Macedo, who the next day after deposed the Patriarch
Photius, and on the 23. of Novem. following restored Ignatius to his See, after
a Deprivation of Nine years. Having done thus he summoned a General Council,
and sends away to Rome to Pope Nicholas, to give him an Account of what he had
done. That Pope being dead, his Successor Hadrian II. receives the Emperor's
Letter: he calls a It appears by the Subscriptions ap. Acta Concilii VIII. p.
1095. that he had not above thirty Bishops in it.
Synod at Rome, confirms the Decrees of Pope Nicholas's Synod against Photius,
and condemns the Acts of the late Constantinopolitan Council, by which his
Predecessor was deposed to be burnt by the common Hangman; and sends his
Legates to Constantinople, by whom he requires, that not a Copy of that Council
should be preserved, not an Ep. ad Imp. Basilium and Anastasius Bibl. Praef.
Conc. VIII.
Iota under pain of Excommunication, but all be burnt in the Presence of the
General Council. Two As appears by the Acts of the Council p. 985. D. and by
Ioannes Bibliothecarius Continuat. Pontificalis in Hadriano II.
years before the Arrival of his Legates at Constantinople, the Bishops were
there gathered together: at last they came, and the Council began to sit October.
5. 869. It breaks up on the last of Febr. following, and issues out this Decree
against Photius: That Can. 4.
he never was, nor is now a Bishop; that all his Ordinations are absolutely
Null, and that those Churches which he, or they whom he had ordained, had
consecrated, should be consecrated again: In fine, they heap upon him a
thousand Anathema's. This is the Council, which the Church of Rome calls the 8
th. General Council. In the Year 877. October 23. the Patriarch Ignatius Natus
annos 80.
dies, after he had been Patriarch the Second time, Ten years wanting a Month.
Nicetas V. Ignatii.
Three days after his Death Photius is again restored, by the same Emperor that
had deposed him, though by the late Council he had been declared no Bishop, and
Anathematized; and though he were declared incapable of being Nusquam per ullum
modum vel tempus accepturus locum satisfactionis Desinitio Thomae Episcopi Tyri
in Concilio act. 1. p. 993. a toto Concilio rata, p. 994.
ever restored by any means whatever. Being thus restored, he is generally
owned, and even by the Pope of Rome himself, Pope John the Successor of
Hadrian; and confirmed by a General Council called at Constantinople of 373
Bishops, which began to sit in the beginning Actio secunda fuit N^v. 7. Ind.
13. ut patet ex Actis.
of November 879. After the Expiration of Nine years, from the time of his
Restitution, he was again deposed by the Emperor Leo.

Secondly, That the Patriarch Photius, who accepted of the Sea when Ignatius
had been so unjustly deposed by the Lay-power, was a very great Man for his
Parts, and his Learning, the most learned Person of his Age, and Equal to the
Ancients themselves, is confessed by even his Nicetas V. Ignatii.
greatest Adversaries. That he was likewise a very pious and religious Man,
they will easily be satisfied, who lay all things together in the Balance, and
weigh impartially those things that may be said for him, against those things
which his Enemies have alleged against him. It is true, that the Ignatians
heretofore, such as Nicetas Paphlago, whose Life of Ignatius is nothing but an
angry and malicious Invective against Photius, have endeavored to make him
appear under a very horrid Shape; and the Church of Rome, because he so
manfully opposed, and even deposed their Pope, is willing to believe whatever
his Enemies have said to his Disparagement. But it is easy to discover, that
all that his Enemies allege, is rather the result of their malice, than any
wise probable. It Is confessed by the learned Vindicator, that we have Photius's
Cause conveyed to us with no small disadvantage: His Adversaries (says he) at
that very time suppressed his principal Writings on that Subject; they seized
and burnt his Original Papers, before any Copies could be transcribed; they
have afterward had it in their Power to suppress many of his other Works,
whilst the Empire of Constantinople was in the hands of Latins, or Latinizing
Greeks; and they have since had it in their Power, to hinder the Printing of as
many of them as have not fallen into the hands of Protestants. This no doubt,
must needs have proved very prejudicial to a right understanding of his Cause,
that we have very few assistances for understanding it, but from his professed
and very inveterate Enemies. We are told by Nicetas, that when Photius was
deposed by the Emperor Basilius, there was taken from him (...), p. 1225.
Seven Bags full of Amongst them were two Volumes containing the Acts of his
two General Councils, that against Ignatius and that against Pope Nicholas;
which were burnt with the rest, together with two other Copies of the same
Councils which Photius had sent into the West, and the Emperor Basilius had
recalled, by sending some that overtook the Messengers.
Writings, which his Servants had endeavored to hide and secure: all which
were publicly burnt by that Council, by which he was a little after Condemned.
Had not such Tricks as these been made use of, things would have been placed in
another manner of Light: But still there is extant enough to convince any
disinterested Man, that Photius had no such black within him, as his Enemies
have laid upon him. That he was accounted by his Followers a very holy Man, may
be gathered from his Enemy P. 1228. (...).
Nicetas; and from others of his Enemies it appears, that before he was made
Patriarch he was accounted a Person of a strict and virtuous Life. He complains
in one of his Ep. 3. p. 67. (...).
Epistles to Bardas, of the Lies invented against him. Whatsoever was inflicted
on the Patriarch Ignatius, all that Nicetas, and others deceived by him, impute
to our Patriarch Photius: but it is easy to discover, that what he says is all
Conjecture and Malice; and Photius himself complained in another Ep. 8. ad
Bardam, (...), etc.
Epistle, that when he himself suffered unjustly, he was accused of injuring
others: and this, he says, extremely afflicted him. But H^ec Epistola (says
Bishop Montague in his Notes upon it) uti and praecedentes ad Bardam scriptae,
Photium, impium, improbum, and hypocritam non repraesentant, quod calumniatur
Baronius, sed vere pium, and divin^e providenti^e se submittentem.
thanks (says he) for all things to God our Savior, etc. It Is alleged by his
Enemy Nicetas, that he was very Ambitious, and that through Ambition he caught
at Ignatius 's Dignity greedily and impudently: But hear him himself; he
assures us, that he was not willing to be made Patriarch P. John, Epist ad
Basil. Imp. ap. Conc. juxta Graecos 8. in Pandect. Bevereg. to. 2. p. 276. says
he was forced likewise when he was restored; (...).
at all, but was quite drawn, as it were, and forced to it. This he affirmed
not only in an Epistle to As the Pope mentions in an Epistle of his.
Pope Nicholas, but also in another to Bardas. And though it might be suspected,
that in writing to the Pope, he might make use of a Nolo Episcopari, for mere
Form, as even the most ambitious Bishops are wont to do: yet it cannot be
supposed, that he would ever have wrote so to Bardas, if it had not been really
so, since Bardas was the Person that preferred him, and very well knew whether
that which he said was true or not. Neither did his unwillingness to be made
Ignatius's Successor, proceed from this Consideration, that Ignatius was
deposed by the Lay-power, but from the Sense he had of the height of the
Station. His Words are these (...). Ep. 6.
I knew even before I had experience of it, that I was unworthy of the
Patriarchal Dignity, and of the Pastoral Care; and on that account, when I was
driven and drawn on to it, it went extremely against me. And would to God I had
died before I yielded to the intolerable Violence of those that compelled me to
it. He adds, That therefore he was the more unwilling, because his Mind misgave
him, that he should meet with great Troubles. (...).
I was therefore (says he) extremely afflicted by their Importunities: I wept,
entreated 'em, and would have done any thing to have got my self excused. It Is
objected besides by the malicious Nicetas, that whilst he was Patriarch he made
it his business to collogue unworthily with the Persons in Authority, that he
might not be deprived of his Bishopric. But this likewise appears to be a
malicious Calumny. Let any one read his 13th. Epistle to Basilius (afterward
Emperor) at that time advanced to the high Station of Patricius and Prefect of
Constantinople, and then let him tell me what he thinks of him; if it does not
appear, That he was so far from being, through Ambition, a fordid Assentator or
Flatterer, that his Boldness and Freeness in speaking, and reprehending, ought
to be admired. How boldly, how undauntedly, how much like a Patriarch does he
tell Basilius of his Faults! how undauntedly does he tell that great Man Ep.
13. (...), etc.
, that by his being made the Governor of others more worthy than himself, a
whole Iliad of Evils had befallen the City! This abundantly shows the Bravery
of Photius's Spirit: And yet there is one thing more which far exceeds that,
and, in spite of all the Malice and Calumny of his Enemies, declares him a most
admirable Patriarch. It Is that which is related by Zonaras, in these Words.
Annal. l. 16. c. 8. (...).
Basilius (says he) having murdered the Emperor Michael, and placed himself
upon the Throne, when he came into the Church to receive the Sacrament, the
Patriarch Photius refused to give it him, calling him Murderer. For which (adds
he) the Emperor being angry, called a So Ioannes Thracesius Scylitzes ap.
Append. Actorum Graec. Concilii VIII. c. 12. p. 1432. (and out of him Cedrenus)
says he expelled Photius by a Synod: by which they mean the VIII. Genesis Council,
(as the Latins call it.) But it is certain that Photius wa^ expelled before that
Council by the Emperor's bare Authority; who pretended that he did it in
Obedience to the Decrees of Pope Nicholas's Synod.
Synod, and deposed him, pretending this reason, that he had been uncanonically
constituted. For this Relation of Zonaras, the Cardinal Baronius is very angry
with him Ad an. 867. p. 380.
. Haec Zonaras Schismaticus favens Schismatico novam and inauditam fingens
causam Photii ejectionis. He calls him a Schismatic, as being of the Greek
Church, which in Zonaras's time was, in the Judgment of the Latins,
Schismatical: But what if Zonaras was of the Greek Church? why should he
therefore invent such a Lie? Against this Relation the Cardinal urges the
Authority of the Emperor's own Letter to Pope Nicholas (or Hadrian) and of Pope
Hadrian's Epistle to him; from whence he says, it appears that the Emperor
deposed Photius in obedience to Pope Nicholas's Decrees. It is true, that That
was his Pretense; and that is all that can be made out by the Epistles. Here
Zonaras tells us what excited him to make use of such a Pretense. But it is not
only Zonaras, as Baronius thought, that gives this account of Photius's stout
Behavior toward the Emperor, and that That was the reason of his being
ejected. The same is attested by the Chronographer P. 179. (...).
Joel: and not by him only, but also by Chronogr. p. 471. (...).
Leo Grammaticus, who flourished above 100 Years before Zonaras; and by
Georgius De novis Imp. p. 544.
Monachus. And to these I add Cit. a Labb^eo not. in Append. Actorum Graec.
Concilii VIII. p. 1431.
Georgius Hamartolus, an Historian, not yet published, who flourished at this
very time, and ended his History in the Beginning of our Emperor Basilius. I
shall close this Paragraph with the Testimonies of the Emperor Hist. Basilii
Macedonis. (...). c. 44.
Constantinus Porphyrogennetus, who highly praises our Patriarch; not only for
his Wisdom, but likewise for his Virtue; and of Pope John IX. in his Epistle to
the Emperor Ap. Acta Conc. VIII. juxta Graecos, Pandect. Bevereg. to. 2. p.
277. (...) (sic leg.) (...). These words are not in the Epistle published Conc.
Labbaei, tom. 8. p. 1452. which the Popish Editors call the genuine Epistle;
looking upon this as corrupted by Photius. But it is this is the genuine one,
and the other is corrupted.
Basilius: He there calls him (...). And then adds: We have heard from almost
all People that come from Constantinople to us, that he is a Person adorned
with Divine and Primitive Qualifications, and excellent above all others for
his Wisdom and Understanding in Matters both Humane and Divine; famous for all
practical Virtues, and an unblameable Observer of the Divine Commands. And we
think it not just, that such and so great a Man should continue without
Employment in the Church; but that being exalted, and shining in the Church, he
should act as a Bishop and Patriarch.

Thirdly, In the Third place we are to enquire by whom and by how many the
Patriarch Photius was received as Patriarch, and by whom and by how great a
Party rejected. He himself complains in an Epistle to Bardas, which he wrote
some time after his Advancement, that he was deprived of Ep. 3. p. 66. (...).
half his Jurisdiction; but he ought not to be understood strictly, but as the
word is commonly used, for a great part.

1. He was received by even such Metropolitans as were Friends to Ignatius, not
induced thereunto by Hatred against Ignatius. This appears from what Nicetas
and others relate. The Metropolitans (says Vita Ign. (...).
Nicetas) who received him as Patriarch, first made him give it under his hand,
that he would honor Ignatius as his Father, and would do all things according
to his Will, and would not grieve him in any thing. By another Author, a great
Enemy of Photius and his Party, we find it related thus Anonymus de Photianorum
Perjuriis ap. Append. Actorum Graec. Concilii VIII. p. 1413.
. When first Bardas Caesar (says he) attempted to eject the Patriarch Ignatius;
Ignatius, that he might not be driven out with Ignominy, chose rather to recede
of himself: But the Bishops made a Protestation, That if Bardas took upon him
to depose him, they would rather suffer the greatest Extremities, than permit
it to be done. And thus they kept Ignatius from resigning. But when Bardas
afterward had deposed him, the Bishops joined themselves with Bardas, and so
made themselves obnoxious to the Anathema, which they had pronounced against
themselves, if they should permit Ignatius to be deposed. Then Photius being by
force thrust into the Throne, the Bishops required him to give 'em an assurance
under his hand, that he would pay Ignatius all due honor, etc. Metrophanes,
Bishop of Smyrna, another great Ignatian Ep. ad Manuclem Patricium ap. Append.
Actorum Graec. Conc. VIII. p. 1385.
, tells us, That Photius being thrust into Ignatius 's Throne by Bardas, all
the Bishops rejected him, and pitched upon three others (as fitter to be chosen
in Ignatius's room) and in that mind continued for many days; but at last the
Generality of the Bishops were prevailed with to accept of Photius, all, except
five, of which he himself was one. He adds, That he himself, and the other four
his Associates, did at last comply when they saw that the Generality of the
Bishops were resolved to accept of Photius: When therefore (says he) he had
given it under his hand that he would carry himself toward Ignatius as toward
an unblameable Patriarch, and neither speak any thing against him himself, nor
approve of any that should do so, we received him, being forced thereunto by
the Emperor and Bardas. A little while after he took away the Paper he had
given us under his hand, and deposed Ignatius. At which time P. 1388. (...),
etc.
all the Bishops of the District of Constantinople being present, anathematized
Photius, and pronounced him deposed in the Name of the Father, the Son and the
Holy Ghost; and also anathematized themselves if ever they should own him as
Patriarch. This Synod sitting for 40 days together in the Church of S. Irene;
Photius in the mean while, by the assistance of Bardas, gets a Synod How then
could the other Synod consist of all the Bishops of the District of
Constantinople?
together in the Church of the Apostles, deposes Ignatius again, and
anathematizes him. For which we reproved him to his face, and were therefore
violently deposed and imprisoned together with Ignatius. The same Author adds,
That Photius was condemned by Five Synods, and the first of these Five he makes
to be this at Constantinople; and again he says, That it consisted of (...), p.
1392.
all the Bishops of the District of Constantinople. All this that he says
concerning the Synod of Constantinople is a very great Falsity; so notorious an
Untruth, that I easily persuade my self that the Author of this Epistle was not
Metrophanes the Ignatian Metropolite of Smyrna, but some later Person who
forged it in his Name: And this may be confirmed from 1. He says that Ignatius
was carried Prisoner to Mitylene after he was deposed by Photius in a Synod;
whereas it appears by Nicetas in his Life, that he was at that time a Prisoner
in Mitylene. 2. The third Synod which (as he says) condemned Photius, he makes
to be called by Pope Nicholas before he sent away his Legates Radoaldus and
Zacharias to Constantinople. But it is certain from Pope Nicholas's first
Epistle to the Emperor Michael, and from his first to Photius, that he was not
at that time condemned in any Synod called at Rome. The Pope indeed refuses to
own him as Patriarch; but he sends his Legates to Constantinople to enquire
into his Cause, intending to act according to the account they should give him.
So the Author de Perjuriis Photianorum, p. 1415. mentions only two Roman
Synods in which Photius was condemned, viz. that called by Pope Nicholaes after
the return of his Legates from Constantinople, and that called by Pope Hadrian.
The Emperor Basilius's Legates to Pope Hadrian in their Speech, which they
spoke before the Pope had called his Synod, recorded by Ioannes Bibl. in
Pontificalis Contenuat. V. Hadr. II. assert, That before that he was bis a Sede
Apostolica judicatus bisque damnatus: But that Speech seems to be made by the
Author himself, who therefore makes 'em speak so; because when he wrote, it was
true that he had been twice condemned at Rome. Unless we will suppose that Pope
Nicholas's second Synod, which he called to condemn Radoaldus for consenting to
Ignatius's Condemnation, might be meant for one. 3. He says that the Pope's
Legates were at Constantinople eight Months before they could be persuaded to
join with Photius: which could not possibly be; for the Legates did not leave
Rome before September. 25. 860. and the Council in which they condemned Ignatius
must needs be ended in February following, as has been already proved.
other Errors, of which he is guilty. That there was no such Synod as he speaks
of, will be easily granted by those that have read Ignatius's Life, written by
Nicetas; his Case presented by Theognostus to Pope Nicholas, Pope Nicholas's
Epistles, the Acts of the VIIIth. General Council, Anastasius Bibliothecarius
his Preface to it, Stylianus his Epistle to Pope Steven I. and the Anonymous
Author de Perjuriis Photianorum: who though they were all great Enemies to
Photius, yet make no mention of any such Synod. Had Photius been condemned by
any such Synod, we should have had it everywhere mentioned and alleged against
him. To this I add, That it is not at all likely that the Emperor and Bardas
would suffer such a Synod to sit 40 Days together in the Church of S. Irene
against their Patriarch. The whole Truth is this: When Ignatius began to be
persecuted, then some of the Bishops and others, excited by Compassion toward
their old Patriarch, began to fall off from him. So Anastasius Bibliothecarius
expressly tells us. He tells us, that Ignatius being in Banishment, was
extremely tormented by Bardas; that he was continually cufft, and had his Teeth
struck out: Then he adds Praef. Conc. VIII. His ergo compertis COEPERUNT
NONNULLI Metropolitani antistites, ac inferioris sacerdotii vel Laici
Pontificis sui tormentis compatientes, dejectionemque dolentes, rectorem sibi
proprium reddi, magnopere clamitarc.
; These things being known, some Metropolitans and inferior Churchmen and
Laymen, compassionating the Afflictions of their Patriarch; and being sorry
for his being deposed, began to cry out very zealously to have him restored.

2. Ep. ad Steph. P.
Stylianus, Bishop of Neocaesarea, a great Ignatian, tells us, That the People
of Constantinople were induced by the Authority of the Pope, after his Legates
Radoaldus and Zacharias had deposed Ignatius in the Synod of Constantinople, to
own and receive Photius; intimating, that they did not do so before. But that
is notoriously false. Anastasius Bibiiothecarius having told us, that some
Metropolitans, etc. began to cry out to have Ignatius restored; adds, that on
that account Photius called a Synod, and deposed and anathematized Ignatius.
And this being done (says Quo gesto magis ac magis pietas fidelium accenditur,
and eo constantius ab universis ovibus proprius Pastor exquiritur quo versutius
lupi crudelitas fuerit.
he) the piety of the Faithful was the more inflamed; and the more constantly
did the Sheep require their Shepherd, the more cruelly Photius raged. It is
plain from these words, and those but now produced, that they first adhered to
Photius; and that they that afterward left him, were drawn off from him, not
by their Consciences, but their Passions. He afterward adds, That after
Photius had been Condemned, and Deposed by the Pope in his Synod at Rome, they
that were subject to Photius, Sequestered themselves from him in whole Troops,
as paying great Deference to the Cujus Censur^ Photio minime parente, sacratus
fidelium catalogus magis in^lammatur, and ab ejus se communione catervatim
sequestrat, horrescens quod nec a tanta sede perculsus corrigi consenserit.
Pope's Authority.

Thirdly, How great and numerous a Party there continued to adhere to Photius,
may be gathered from the great number of Bishops, which sat in the Two Synods
called against Ignatius: by both which Ignatius was Condemned, and
Anathematized. The first of those two Synods is spoken of by Radoaldus, and
Zacharias, the Pope's Legates, who sat in the Second, Ap. Theognosti Libel.
pro Ignatio ad Nic. P.
as a Synod of Authority sufficient to depose Ignatius. The Second Synod was so
numerous, that it consisted of 318. Bishops, and was not only Provincial, but
General. So it is expressly called by Comment. in Canones istius; (...), etc.
Balsamon. So likewise by those Messengers Ap. Nicetam V. Ignatii, p. 1205.
, whom it sent to command Ignatius to make his appearance. (...), Again, (...).
And that there were Legates in it, sent as well from the Eastern Patriarchs, of
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, as from the Pope, is sufficiently apparent
from the Reason of it is being called. For why should Photius send to the Bishop
of Rome, to have Legates sent from thence, and not to the rest of the
Patriarchs? Was it because the Council of Sardica seems to give the Bishop of
Rome a particular Power in the Deprivation of Bishops? That could not be the
Reason, for neither was the Council of Sardica, regarded by Nicholaus P. Ep. ad
Photium ap. Conc. VIII. act. 4. p. 1033. Quod vero dicitis, neque Sardicense
Concilium neque Decretalia vos habere sanctorum* Pontificum, vel recipere, non
facile nobis facultas credendi tribuitur maxim cum Sardidicense Concilium quod
penes vos in vestris regionibus actum est, and omnis recipit: qua ratione
convenerat; ut hoc sancta Constantinopolitana Ecclesia abjiceret, and (ut
dignum est) non retineret, etc.
Photius, neither was the business of Ignatius's Deprivation the only Reason
why this Council was called. For it is very notorious, that one great Reason,
why Photius got this Council to be called, was, because the Iconoclasts began
at that time to grow powerful, that by the Decrees of a Council, that Sect
might be utterly suppressed. This appears by P. Nicholas's first Epistles to
the Emperor Michael and Photius, sent in Answer to theirs, by the Legates
Radoaldus, and Zacharias, who were sent to that Council. And it also appears by
what was done in that Council. For the Council sat twice, so as to seem two
different Councils, once about the Patriarch Ignatius, and another time about
the Iconoclasts, and other matters relating to the Discipine of the Church. And
hence it came to be called, (...) the First and Second Council. This is what
the Learned have not hitherto observed. The learned Vindicator is extremely
mistaken concerning this Council. The Author of the Synodicon (says P. 78.
he) besides the Synod, which he mentions cap. 148. by which, he says, Photius
was made Patriarch, makes two more, (c. 149, 150.) the former in Blachernis,
the latter in the Church of the Apostles. This I take to be the A. B. Synodus,
wherein Ignatius was deposed, as the Commentators expressly tell us. And the two
Sessions of that same Synod in different places, as it gave occasion for them
to give the Title of A. B. to the Synod it self; so it also seems to have been
the occasion, why this injudicious Collector of the Synodicon, should make two
Synods of it. The latter of the two Sessions was that wherein the Pope's
Legates were either forced, or bribed to sign the Condemnation of Ignatius. I
am apt to think, that the true occasion of convening a Second time the same
Bishops before they were departed to their several Homes, was the unexpected
arrival of the Legates, that they also might Conciliarly confirm, what had been
done in the Council before their Arrival. I shall not take this Account in
pieces, to confute the several parts of it, but proceed to demonstrate the
truth. We are told by the Commentator Zonaras, that this Synod sat Zonaras,
(...).
both times in the Church of the Apostles; and that therefore it was called
First and Second, because it was forced to break up re infecta, by reason of a
Disturbance occasioned by the seditious Heretics (so the Iconoclasts were
called) and afterward met together again, and so published its Decrees. In
this account Zonaras is followed by Balsamon. It Is the opinion of the Reverend
and very Learned Not. in hoc Conc. Pandect. tom. 2. p. 170.
Dr. Beverege, that therefore it was called First and Second, because it was
really two distinct Councils, and the Decrees of the former were confirmed by
the latter. The first of those two Councils, he takes to be that in which
Nicetas says Ignatius was Condemned when absent, (which was only a Provincial
one;) the Second, to be that in which the Pope's Legates, Radoaldus and
Zacharias, sat Presidents. This Conjecture may seem to be confirmed by this
Consideration, that the former, the Provincial Synod, was likewise in the
Church of the Apostles, as appears (though the Synodicon makes it to have been in
Blachernis) by the express Testimony of Nicetas, and Metrophanes Bishop of
Smyrna; or whoever else was the Author of the Epistle written in his Name. To
which may be added, That as both Condemned the Patriarch Ignatius, so Zonaras
(whom Balsamon followed) seems to speak only by Hearsay, when he says, that
the Council called First and Second, was in truth but one Council, and was
therefore called First and Second, because it broke up, by reason of Tumults
and Disturbances, and afterward sat a Second time: (...). But notwithstanding
all this, it is certain, that the Council called First and Second, was really
but one Council; that the Roman Legates presided in both its Sessions, or
Parts; that the former Provincial Synod is not to be reckoned as one part of
it, but that it was so called because it met twice, upon two different Matters,
One the Deprivation of Ignatius, and the Other the Condemnation of the
Iconoclasts, and had two distinct Tomes containing the Acts, and Decrees of the
two distinct Sessions. But how does this New Account appear to be true? I
gather what I have asserted from an Epistle of Ap. Conc. VIII. act. 7. p. 1068.
P. Nicolas to the Bishops and Clergy of the District of Constantinople. He
there says, that after Ignatius had been condemned at Constantinople by the
Synod, in which his Legates, Radoaldus and Zacharias, presided, the Emperor
Michael sent him, duo volumina, quorum unum Depositionis Ignatii gesta
continebat, alterum autem de sanctis habebat Imaginibus acta. In the same
Epistle P. 1069.
, a little after, he speaks of this Council, as of two distinct Councils,
because of its two distinct Parts, and two distinct Acta. Alia illa concilia,
quae imminentibus illis (Radoaldo and Zacharia Legatis praesidentibus)
Constantinopoli celebrata sunt, viz. tam id quod adversus Patriarcham Ignatium,
quam id quod pro sacris Imaginibus collectum est. It appears from Theognostus,
that in that Session or Convention, in which Ignatius was condemned, there
happened a great Disturbance, and Swords were drawn, and some wounded: and this
(I suppose) it was, that occasioned that Report mentioned, and followed by
Zonaras, that therefore the first Convention broke up re infecta, because the
Iconoclasts disturbed 'em, and Swords were drawn, and many killed. The first
part of this Council consisted of Seven Actions, as appears by Nicetas, who
gives an Account of 'em all, as written in a Volume directed by Photius to the
Western Emperor Ludovicus, and in another which Photius kept himself, both
which were seized by the Emperor Basilius, and burnt (at least one of 'em) by
the General Council that restored Ignatius. That Copy which the Legates
Radoaldus, and Zacharias brought with 'em from Constantinople to Rome, seems to
have been preserved in the Library at Rome. Certain it is, that Anastasius
Bibliothecarius quotes the Acts of that Session, which condemned Ignatius, as
extant when he wrote, which was some few years after Pontificali V. Nicholai I.
. Sicut in gestis Constantinopolitanis ab illis compilatis facile reperitur. We
are told by Nicetas, that all this Volume of the Acts of the Council which
condemned Ignatius, was V. Ign. p. 1225. (...).
forged by Photius: but that is an idle and a foolish Calumny.

Theognostus tells us, that the Patriarch Ignatius when he was brought before
this Council, alleged, that before they took upon 'em to try him, they ought to
displace Photius, else they could not be his Judges: to which Radoaldus and
Zacharias, the Pope's Legates, replied, That the (...) ( Theognostus speaks in
the Person of Ignatius) (...).
Emperor would not permit it to be done. Though they grant it to be agreeable to
the Prescript of the Canons; yet because the Emperor would not permit it, they
plead that Necessity, as a sufficient excuse. He also adds, that the
Metropolitans in that Council, being asked by the Princes, who sat there with
'em, why they desired to have Ignatius again for their Patriarch, (...).
since they did not in the beginning oppose his Deprivation; they answered,
That two evils being proposed, the Emperor's Displeasure, and the Insurrection
of the People, they chose the least. But do you (say they) who are about the
Emperor, restore our Patriarch to his Throne, and we are ready to receive him.
Here it ought to be observed, that though they still owned, that Ignatius was
unjustly deposed, though still they loved him so much as to desire he should be
restored, yet they own the present Possessor, because the Emperor would not
suffer Ignatius to Govern any longer.

Fourthly, So great was the number of Bishops that received and acknowleged
Photius, that to the Decree of his Third Council, which was called against Pope
Nicholas, there subscribed no less than about a Thousand, the most numerous
Subscription that ever was to any Council. I do not suppose, that there were so
many Bishops present in the Council: a great many of 'em, I suppose, were
procured after the Council was broke up; and so V. Ign. p. 1224.
Nicetas seems to intimate. But how does it appear, that about a Thousand
Bishops subscribed? It appears, from the express Testimony of Praef. Conc.
VIII. Mill circiter Antistisam subscriptiones.
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, who was present in the 8 th. General Council
(commonly so called) where the Acts and Subscriptions of this Council were
burnt. Neither was it only the Bishops of the District of Constantinople that
subscribed to that Council, for the Bishops of that District were at most not
above Five hundred, there were therefore near Five hundred of the other
Patriarchates. And there were present in that Council, Legates from the Three
great Eastern Sees of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, who all subscribed to
it. I know that Anastasius pretends, that almost all those Subscriptions were
forged by Photius, and that of all that great multitude not above Twenty one
did really subscribe: I know that it is commonly alleged by the Enemies of
Photius, as frequently in the Acts of the 8 th. Council, that Photius forged
all the Acts of that Council, all the Speeches recorded in those Acts, together
with all the Subscriptions: but withal I know, that there needs but very little
Judgment to discover the falsity of that Allegation. I know that they whose
Names were subscribed in this Photian Council, did generally deny before the 8
th. (Anti-Photian) Council that they ever subscribed; I know that the Act. 8.
p. 1103.
Metropolitans did so; that Ibid. act. 1. p. 997. act. 4. p. 1035.
Thomas Bishop of Tire, who represented the Patriarch of Antioch in this
Council, denied that the Church of Antioch ever sent to, or received any
Letters from Photius; that Ibid. act. 4. p. 1035. act. 5. p. 1042.
Elias who sat there as a Legate from the Patriarch of Jerusalem, expressly
affirms more than once, that the Church of Jerusalem never received Photius,
that she never sent to him, or received a Letter from him: I know that he
asserts this, as before God, and the Elect Angels. Nay more, I acknowledge that
they who sat in this Photian Council, as Legates from the three Eastern
Patriarchs, being called before the 8 th. (Anti-Photian) Council Act 8. p.
1102, 1103. act. 9. p. 1121, 1122.
did all deny that they were sent from their respective Churches as Legates;
that they own themselves to be mean Persons, and that they were corrupted by
Photius. All this I acknowledge: and this, you will say, is enough to prove our
Patriarch Photius a very great Villain, and to ruin the Authority of the Acts of
his Council. No such matter: We need but consider the Circumstances of those
times, and then we may easily see, that all that was denied, was either through
ignorance denied, or for fear. The Pope of Rome having been Condemned, and
Anathematized by this Photian Council, there was nothing to be expected from
Rome by those, over whom that proud and imperious Church had any power, but
utter Ruin, Deprivation, Anathema's, all that ever she could inflict: The
Emperor Basilius having deposed the stout Patriarch Photius, whom at that time
he mortally hated, what now must be done, that he may ingratiate himself with
the Pope? He had lately subscribed, as Caesar, to the Pope's Condemnation; what
shall he do to pacify an implacable Pope? It Is no very difficult matter. It is
but to bring in the Acts of the Photian Council before a great Company (as
Nicetas tells us was done) and there seem astonished at the strange Impostures
of Photius. His own Name subscribed! He, for his part knows nothing of it. And
what follows then? a general Protestation of all. There is no one (forsooth!)
of all those, who saw their Names subscribed, knows any thing of the matter.
Who dares to do it? Thus after a general Subscription there follows a general
Nicetas V. Ignatii. Metrophanes Ep. ad Manuelem Patricium. Legati imp. Basilii
ap. Pontificale V. Hadriani II.
Denial. Thus the Eastern Churches for fear of the Roman Anathema's deny, that
they sent any Legates, or acknowleged Photius as Patriarch; and the Legates
themselves, are forced to say they were no Legates, least by standing out in
the Truth, they should run themselves Headlong into inevitable ruin, and expose
themselves to the bitterest torments. And here I cannot but observe, that when
Basilius and Leontius the Legates of Alexandria, and Jerusalem, were examined
by the Anti-Photian Council, and scrupled to Anathematize those who subscribed
to the Photian Acts, and had any thing to do in his Council, the Popes Legates
cry out to affright 'em to a Compliance P. 1103. Senatus dixit: Quoniam non
vultis anathematizare, apparet quia comparticipes ejus (Photii) estis; ut aut
anathematizemini and ipsi, aut tradamini Legibus Vicarii Romae dixerunt.
Quoniam non patiuntur anathematizare qui fecit malum hoc, tradantur nobis, and
descendant nobiscum Romam, etc.
, Deliver 'em up to us, that they may be carried to Rome. This scared 'em quite
out of their Honesty, and so they pronounce the Anathema. That what I have said
is a true Account of the Matter, they that are altogether disingaged from
Prejudice, will (I sansie) easily grant. For how is it possible for an
unprejudiced Man to believe, that the great Photius would ever have dared to be
Guilty of so gross an an Imposture so easy to be detected? Who can believe,
that Photius never sent to the Eastern Patriarchs, as the Legates in the 8th.
Council affirm? It appears moreover, from the Testimony of George, who sat as
Legate in our Photian Council from the Church of Antioch, that there was a
correspondence betwixt that Church and Photius, whatever the Bishop of Tire,
either through Fear or Ignorance, asserts to the contrary. Though the Legate
George is forced to say, that he was not sent from that Church as a Legate; yet
even that which he says, is enough to prove that there was a correspondence. I
came (says he) to Constantinople Conc. VIII. act. 9. p. 1122.
, tamummodo ut literarum delator, a Constantino Oeconomo Antiochensium
Ecclesiae (there was no Patriarch of Antioch at that time, and in the Vacancy
the Oeconomus was the chief Person of the Church) missus. Ab eo enim missus sum
ad Photium and Michaelem Imp. Praef. Conc. VIII. p. 966. Sane notandum quod
caeteri Throni nihil, inter Agarenos positi, super hoc negotio sumpsere laboris.
causa benedictionis. To this I must add, that though the Pope after he had
condemned Photius in his Synod at Rome, sent about his Synodical Letters to all
the Eastern Patriarchs, yet it is confessed by the Ignatians themselves, as by
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, That the Eastern Patriarchs were not any way active
against Photius. It moreover appears, that during all the time of Ignatius's
Deprivation, the Eastern Patriarchs, at least the Patriarch of Jerusalem, had
no correspondence with Ignatius. This Theodosius Patriarch of Jerusalem
confesses of himself, in the Nosti autem utique, sanctissime, causam, ob quam
neque scribere neque mittere potuimus ad vos, ne forte fieremus penes
potestatem, quae nos tenet existimationi malae vel suspicioni; ap. Conc. 8. p.
987.
Letter which he wrote him after his Restoration, pretending to him then, that
the reason was, because living under the Government of the Saracens, he dared
not write into those Parts. What, not in so long a time?

Fifthly, That the Clergy (in General) the Senate, and all the whole City of
Constantinople received, and submitted to Photius, is confessed by Baanes, the
Praepositus, in the Presence of the (...). Act. 8. p. 1352. Sic Acta Latina p.
1100. Sacerdotium and Senatus and tota civitas.
8 th. Council. So p. 1213.
Nicetas says in the Life of Ignatius, that P. Nicholas, and his Synod,
Excommunicated Photius and his Adherents, the Emperor and all the Senate. And
the Emperor Ap. Acta Concilii VIII. act. 3. p. 1295. (...).
Basilius tells P. Nicholas (or Hadrian, for he received the Epistle) in the
Epistle which he wrote to him against Photius, That there were very few Bishops
that adhered to Ignatius, and did not own Photius. How very few Bishops there
were, that adhered to Ignatius, may be gathered from the Acts of the 8 th.
Council. In the beginning of that Council all the Bishops that had adhered to
Ignatius, are called in by the Legates of the Patriarchal Sees. P. 1229.
Ingrediantur Episcopi QVOT QVOT pro veritate Ignatio adjuncti depugnarunt:
then all are mentioned Nicephorus Amasiae, Ioannes Silei, Nicetas Athenarum,
Metrophanes Smyrnae, Michael Rhodi, Georgius Iliopoleos, Petrus Troadis,
Nicetas Cephaludii, Athanasius Magnesiae, Nicephorus Crotonae, Antonius Alisi,
Michael Gercyrorum.
by Name, and they amount to no more than twelve, though in the whole District of
Constantinople there were near upon Five hundred. It Is true, I believe there
might be some few more who were not then at Constantinople, because Stylianus
Bishop of Neocaesaria, who was not one of those twelve, (but was present in the
last Act of the Council) Ep. ad Steph. P.
affirms, that he had constantly adhered to Ignatius: But it is not to be
doubted, but that all that possibly could, took care to be present at
Constantinople, at the beginning of the Council. It is here to be observed,
that even these few did not reject Photius, but owned him as Patriarch till he
began to persecute Ignatius. This may be gathered from the Epistle of
Metrophanes to Manuel Patricius, already quoted.

Sixthly, Neither was it only by the Eastern Bishops that Photius was received.
It appears moreover, that, though the Pope, who was Patriarch of the West, had
condemned Photius by a Synod, yet many even amongst the Latins themselves,
acknowleged him as Patriarch of Constantinople. This I gather from what Nicetas
Paphlago relates, That Photius having with his Council condemned P. Nicholas,
sent to the Emperor of the Latins, LVDOVICVS, to desire him to eject him; and
this (says (...). p. 1224. I believe this Agreement between Photius and the
Emperor Ludovicus was made when the Council was first summoned.
Nicetas) the Emperor readily compli'd with, and promised to do. What he adds
concerning the Motive, made use of by Photius, that he promised to make
Ludovicus and his Wife Ingelberta, Emperor and Empress of Constantinople, if he
would do it, that is so idle and incredible a Story, that there is no one but may
easily perceive it to be nothing, but the issue of his Malice. The Synod which
concurred with P. Nicholas, in condemning Photius at Rome, is said by Nicetas
to be P. 1213.
a Synod of the whole Church: in another P. 1253.
place he calls it a Provincial Synod. Pope Hadrian's Legates in the Act. 1. p.
995. Tunc cognoscens diviserus Papa Nichol Scrutatus omnia, fecit Synodum and
convocavit OMNES Occidentales Episcopos, Archiepiscopos, Metropolitas, and
omnem Clerum sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, ac totum Senatum Principum Romanorum,
etc.
8 th. General Council, affirm, that it consisted of all the Western Bishops,
Archbishops, Metropolitans, and all the Clergy of Rome, together with the
Senate and Nobility. In another Ibid. act. 7. p. 1064. So ^ct. 6. p. 1055, they
say that the Pope condemned him. Indict. XI. collectis Occidentalibus Episcopis
in Ecclesia B. Petri.
place they tell us, that Photius was condemned by P. Nicholas, cum OMNIBVS
occidentalibus Pr^sulibus. So the Emperor Sermon Exhortatorio lecto in Conc.
VIII, act. 6. p. 1056.
Basilius asserts, that the Pope, cum tota Romanorum Ecclesia, condemned him.
Metrophanes Bishop of Smyrna, (or whoever else was the Author of the Epistle
inscribed to Manuel Patricius) is more modest: he only says, that it was (...).
Append. Actorum Graec. Concilii VIII. p. 1388.
no small Synod. So likewise is P. Nicholas himself in his Epistle to Ep. 13.
Tunc Convocato multaerum provinciarum occidentalium regionum sanctissimorum
Episcoporum coetu, etc.
Ignatius, in which he only says, that he had called together very many Bishops
out of many of the Western Provinces, and condemned Photius: So in his Epistle
Ap. Conc. VIII. act. 7. p. 1069.
to the Bishops and Clergy of the District of Constantinople. But in an Epistle
to the Emperor Ap. Acta Graeca Concilii VIII. p. 1211. (...).
Michael, he uses Terms as general, as those above quoted, and tells him, that
himself with all the Western Bishops had condemned Photius. The exact truth we
learn from the C. 9. p. 1417. (...) (so by many others Radoaldus is said to be
deposed, together with Zacharias, tho, in truth, he was not deposed in this
Synod). (...), etc.
Appendix of the Greek Acts of the 8 th General Council: we have there the
number of Bishops precisely set down, and they amount to no more than One
hundred and seventy, though it is not at all to be doubted, but that the Pope did
his utmost endeavor, and got as many Bishops together as possibly he could. It
appears from this Testimony, how much the Vindicator is mistaken, when he
Fancies that this Synod of the Pope exceeded the Photian Synod which it
condemned, which consisted of Three hundred and Eighteen Bishops P. 80.
. P. Nicholas (says he) no doubt, made all the interest he could to get a Synod
that he might oppose to this Synod of Photius. He knew his Authority alone would
never be admitted for it without a Synod, and such^ a Synod as the Canons
required: And though he allowed no Superstition for the number (of Three hundred
and Eighteen, the same with the number of the Nicene Council) yet the
Antiochian Canon, which by this time obtained in both the Eastern and western
Churches, required, that the Synod that must restore Ignatius, must at least be
more numerous than the Synod that deprived him. No Synod therefore could serve
his purpose, but such a one as must have had more than Three hundred and
Eighteen Bishops. This, I suppose, made it some time before he could condemn
Photius, or restore Ignatius with such a Synod. Though it be asserted by the
Roman Legates, in the 8th. General Chuncil, that all the Western Archbishops,
Metropolitans, etc. sat in that Synod, yet Binius (if I well remember)
confesses, that there was only one Metropolitan there: but how he knew that, I
know not.

Seventhly, As Photius was by so many received, whilst the ejected Patriarch
Ignatius was still living; so as soon as he was restored upon Ignatius's Death,
though he was not ordained again, he was generally received by both the
Metropolitans and Bishops of his own District, and likewise all the Patriarchs.
As soon as he was restored to his See, he sent a Synodical Letter to Pope John
IX. the Successor of Hadrian, subscribed by V. Ign. (...).
all the Metropolitans of the Constantinopolitan District, as appears from
Nicetas; who, according to the Calumny so often made use of by Photius's
Enemies, adds, that he got their Subscriptions by Deceit: The Metropolitans
(says he) knowing nothing at all of the Matter, but believing that they had set
their hands to a Deed of Conveyance. Pope John having received his Epistle,
receives him as Patriarch, and sends away his Legates to Constantinople to the
Genesis Council which the Emperor had summoned. An Abridgment of the Acts of that
Council, as it was transcribed out of a Treatise of Ioannes Beccus, a Patriarch
of Constantinople, Dr. Beverege has published in his Pandects. From the Acts of
this Council I observe, That Pope John and the rest of the Patriarchs and
Bishops not only own Photius as a true Patriarch at that time, and make a
Decree, That whosoever was rejected by Photius, should be likewise rejected by
the Pope; and whoever was rejected by the Pope, should be likewise rejected by
Photius; but also, that they owned him to have been a true Patriarch whilst
Ignatius was living, from the very beginning. This is manifest concerning the
Pope, from his Epistle to the Emperor Basilius, which is there extant. In that
Epistle he calls those Synods, which were called against Photius, P. 277. (...).
unjust Synods: And is so much ashamed of what had been done by those Synods,
that he affirms, that his Predecessors Nicholas and Hadrian had no hand in 'em,
and did not approve of what they decreed. He requires all Christians to receive
him as a true Patriarch: And let no one (says he) allege for their excuse,
those unjust Synods which were gathered against him. Let no one plead that (as
some foolish Persons do believe) our blessed Predecessors, Nicholas and
Hadrian, condemned him. For those things which were done against him, were not
approved of by them. I know that these Words are not to be found in the Copy of
this Epistle which the Popish Editors of the Councils have published out of the
Vatican Library with the Title of Pope John's genuine Epistle: But it is much
more probable that the Romanists corrupted that Epistle, than Bec^us mentions
two Copies of this Epistle, a Greek one and a Latin one, both recorded in the
Acts of this Council.
that this which we have quoted was corrupted by Photius. He likewise declares,
that he received him by virtue of his first Promotion, in these words: P. 278.
(...), etc.
Because we through the care we have of the Peace of the Church, have received
our most holy Brother Photius, as heretofore Pope Hadrian I. did his Uncle
Tarasius (promoted, as Photius was, immediately from a Layman) it ought not to
be made a Custom or Rule; for those things which are good only upon occasion,
cannot be a Law to many. It appears also from that Epistle which the Romanists
call his genuine Epistle, that the Pope did not require that Photius should be
re-ordain'd, though by the Synods in which he was condemned he was declared a
mere Layman. 2dly. I observe, that all that whole General Council, condemned
all the Proceedings of the several Synods against him. (...), p. 283.
We decree (says the Council) that the Synod called at Rome under the most
blessed Pope Hadrian against the most holy Patriarch Photius, and the Synod
gathered at Constantinople against the most holy Patriarch Photius, be to all
intents and purposes condemned and cast out of the Church: That it be never
reckoned as one of the holy Councils, nor ever called by the Name of a Council.
God forbid it should. To this the whole Council of no less than 373 Bishops,
and among them the Legates of the Pope, and all the other Patriarchs,
subscribe. And the Emperor Basilius, who had some Years before subscribed to
the Council, that condemned and anathematized Photius, here subscribes, with
the Princes his Sons, to (...), p. 286, 287.
the renunciation of all things that had either been written or spoken against
him.

Notwithstanding all this, they that were heretofore great Sticklers for
Ignatius, continued still Photius's Enemies, and refused to communicate with
him. And lest Pope John's Authority should draw off some of their Party, they
raise a Report that he did not receive Photius, but that he had Breviarium
Concilii VIII. ap. Append. Actorum Graecorum, page 1424.
condemned and deposed his Legates, Eugenius and Paul, for confirming Photius
in that Council without his Order; and that from the Append. eadem, page 1424.
Ambo he pronounced them Anathema who should think that Photius, when condemned
by Pope Nicholas and Hadrian, was not condemned by the just Judgment of God.
But it is confessed by even Ep. ad Steph. P. ibid. p. 1494.
Stylianus himself, that Photius was received by Pope John. He pretends that
Paul and Eugenius were corrupted by Photius when sent by the Pope to
Constantinople about another Business: That after that Photius forged a Paper
in the Names of Ignatius and his Adherents, in which the Pope was desired to
receive him. On this account (says he) the Pope sent to Constantinople another
Legate These are the three Roman Legates that sat in the Council above
mentioned, as appears by the Acts.
Peter, who, together with Paul and Eugenius, proclaimed him received by the
Pope.

To all this I add, That our Patriarch Photius has all along to this time, been
owned by the Greek Church to have been a true Patriarch of Constantinople, even
before Ignatius's Death, when he was Patriarch the first time. This is manifest
from hence, that the abovementioned Council, which condemned all the Synods,
that were called against Photius, as unjust, is commonly owned by the Greeks,
and called the 8 th. General Council: and that which the Latins are wont to
call by that Title (that in which Photius was condemned) the Greeks take no
notice of. It appears moreover from hence, That the Canons which were made by
the Photian Council, Entitled, The First and Second, by which Ignatius was
condemned, have been all along received by the Church, as good Ecclesiastical
Law, and as such are illustrated with the Comments of the Greek Canonists,
Zonaras, Balsamon, etc. and the Council it self is honored with the Title of
(...).
the holy and great Constantinopolitan Council, First and Second.

It appears from what has been said, though it should be granted, that the
Ignatians refused to own Photius, for this reason only, because Ignatius was
uncanonically deposed, yet this Example would make more for us than for our
Adversaries.

I come now in the Fourth place to show, That that was not the only Reason,
that Ignatius and his Adherents looked upon Photius to be on other Accounts,
incapable of being a true Patriarch, and that they allege other Reasons for
their separating from him. Which are these,

1. That he was a Neophytus; that he was ordained Patriarch contrary to the
Canons, having gone through all the several Degrees in Six days time. This is
every where urged against him, as a Reason why he ought not to be received as
Patriarch, by P. Nicholas in his Epistles, who insists very largely upon it; by
the Libello lecto ap. Conc. VIII. p. 1184. and in 1. decreto ibid. act. 7. p.
1172. In which Decree, after Photius is declared deposed, and no Bishop, and
Excommunicate, if he did not submit, it is immediately added; Vt hac unusquisque
discens, nequaquam de caetero temer aria praesumptione ex Laitis subito in
Dominicis Castris, insperato quodammodo impetu irrepere audeat, and principatus
amore ante ducatum praestare velit, quam tyronis consuminet officium, and ante
tentet docere quam discere.
Synod of Rome, under the other Ap. Append. Actorum Graec. Concilii VIII. c.
10. p. 1420.
Roman Synod, under P. Hadrian; by the General Council of Constantinople, by
which he was condemned; by the Patriarch T^s^e Theognoste in Libello Nicolao P.
oblato.
Ignatius himself before the Council of Constantinople, called First and
Second; and by Ep. ad Steph. P. ap. Append. Actorum Graec, Concilii VIII.
Stylianus Neocaesariensis. Anastasius Bibliothecarius Pontificali. In sancta
Constantinopolitana Ecclesia Schisma adoleverat, sc. quia ejecto ex ejusdon
sede Ecclesiae Ignatio reverendissimo Patriarcha Photium ex Laicis and ex
milit^ consura^um contra reverendorum Canonum Statuta Neophytum subito inibi
subrogaru^t Antistitem.
in his Life of P. Nicholas, where he mentions this Schism, gives us only this
Reason for it, by which it appears, that he looked upon it to be, at least, the
chief Reason, if not the only One. In the holy Constantinopolitan Church, (says
he) there was a Schism, viz. because the most reverend Patriarch Ignatius being
ejected, they substituted Photius a Layman, ordained suddenly, contrary to the
Prescript of the Canons.

2. That he was ordained by a Person not capable of Ordaining any one, viz.
Gregory Archbishop of Syracuse, who (say they) was at that time deposed and
stood Excommunicate, and actually engaged in a Schism. This Gregory of Syracuse
had been first Deposed and Excommunicated by Benedict III. of Rome, and a
Synod; (so some say, more truly by Pope Leo IV. and afterward by Pope
Benedict) and being at Constantinople when Ignatius was first made Patriarch,
Ignatius Vide Nicetam in Vita.
refused to permit him to be present at his Consecration. On that account he
engaged in a Schism against him, and was Excommunicated likewise by him. When
Ignatius was deposed, the Synod that Elected Photius, took off his
Excommunication and restored him, and all that were engaged with him, to the
Church; but this Absolution Ignatius, and his Party looked upon as perfectly
Null: and consequently Photius was in their Judgment no Bishop. This Reason,
why he ought not to be received as a Patriarch or Bishop, is alleged by Ep. ad
Orientales, ap. Conc. VIII. p. 1075, 1076, 1077.
Pope Nicholas, and very largely insisted on: he alleges that Gregory standing
thus Excommunicated, Photius's Head was rather wounded, than consecrated by
that Imposition of hands, and Quamobremcogitate, fratres charissimi, tractate
and vobiscum sedula meditatione perquirite, si stare Photius possit, etiamsi
miris virtutibus polleat, etiamsi omni scientia fulgeat; quando qui hunc
statuisse tentavit, dudum jam cecidit, and volens erigi, cum conantibus se
erigere nunquam recuperaturus denuo ruit. Consideret ergo vestra divinitus
inspirata prudentia, quomodo Photius, etiamsi nihil aliud sibi jure valeat
impedire, queat in Sacerdotali gradu persistere: quandoquidem instituter suus,
cum hic ordinaretur, non solum Sacerdotio, verum and ipso carebat Christiano
vocabulo.
denies, that he could be a Bishop being so ordained. It is also urged by the
Synod of Rome, called by Pope Nicholas, in its Decrees against Photius, and by
Stylianus Neocaesariensis. It was alleged by Theognostus.
Ignatius himself to the Council, by which he was tried and condemned.

3. That Photius himself was engaged in a Schism against Ignatius, before he
was ordained, together with Gregory of Syracuse; and together with him
excommunicated by Ignatius. This is urged as another Reason why he ought not to
be owned as a Bishop by Loc. supra cit.
Pope Nicholas, and Loc. cit.
Ignatius himself, and Metrophanes Bishop of Smyrna in the P. 1055. Et quod
Schismaticus fuerit (Photius) antea multorum scandalorum author effectus est,
and multos ab Ecclesiastica Communione recedere fecerit, and ultroneus ac
volens consecrari a Gregorio proposuerit, nulla in hoc necessitate impulsus.
Eighth General Council, and by the Author of the C. XI. p. 1424.
Appendix to the Greek Acts of that Council. And this is the first Objection
made against him in the Decrees of Pope Nicholas's Ap. Epist. Nicholai P. ad
Episc. and Clerum Constantinopol. lectam in Conc. VIII. act. 7. p. 1171.
Photius qui ex Schismaticorum, and se a sancta Communionis participatione
avertentium part esse dignosectur, etc.
Synod.

To all this I add, (and this I desire, our Adversaries would be pleased to
take special notice of) That Ignatius, when he was tried by the great Council
of Constantinople freely professed before the Council, That if Photius (...)?
had not been out of the Church, i. e. if he had not been a Schismatic and
Excommunicate, when he was made Patriarch, he would not have opposed him, but
would willingly have pselded to him, But an alien (said he) from Christ, how
shall I make a Pastor of the Sheep of Christ? That Ignatius made this
Delaration before that Council, he himself witnesses (or what is the same
thing, his Legate Theognostus for him) in his case presented to Pope Nicholas.
And by its being there mentioned it appears he was still of that mind. It is
likewise attested by the Author of the Epistle entitled, An Epistle of
Metrophanes the Metropolite ( of Smyrna) to Manuel Patricius, That at that time
that Photius was consecrated Patriarch, the deposed Patriarch Ignatius gave his
free consent, that another should be chosen in his place, provided he were of
the Church, not engaged in a Schism or Excommunicate: Photius (says Append.
Act. Graec. Concilii VIII. p. 1385.
that Author) whilst he was a Layman, separated himself from the Church, and
was excommunicated. And, whilst he was under those Circumstances, he was
nominated Patriarch by Bardas. He then adds (as has been already observed) That
the Bishops rejected him, and pitched on three others, but all save five were
at last brought over to Photius. Now (says he) when we perceived that the
generality of the Bishops were corrupted, we thought fit (he either was, or
pretends to have been one of those five) to restore him to the Church, and to
the Patriarch's Communion, that we might not transgress the Patriarch's
Commands (...).
, who had commanded that we should choose such a one Patriarch as was a Member
of the Church.

It is natural for Readers to desire Variety, and it is irksome to be long on
one Subject. And they that are weary of being so long in the same Company, may
here, if they please, take their leave of Ignatius, and turn to the other fresh
Company. But for those who are not weary of this Entertainment, I shall add
these following Remarks.

1. I observe, that Ignatius and his Adherents did no more regard the
Determinations of Synods, than they did the Imperial Authority. When the
Suffrages of a Council were once gained (says P. 79.
the worthy and learned Vindicator) what Arts soever those were that were used
to gain 'em, Photius had then some appearance of Right, till Ignatius could
relieve himself by another, and a greater Council. That was a lawful way of
recovering it by the very Canons. However, Photius could in the mean time plead
the Canons of his own Council, (which condemned Ignatius, and forbad the Clergy
and Bishops to separate from their present Patriarch) that none ought to
separate from himself, thus Synodically settled, nor to join with Ignatius, thus
Synodically condemned, till himself were condemned, and Ignatius resetled by a
greater and a more numerous Synod. -- Till P. Nicholas (says the Vindicator a
little after) had restored Ignatius by a greater Synod than that was, that
condemned him, how good soever his Tible was, yet the Guilt of Schism had been
imputable to Ignatius, if he had made a Separation, or intruded himself into
his own Throne, before a Synod had restored him. Nay by the Antiochian Canon,
he had forfeited all Pretensions of having the merit of his Cause considered,
if he had challenged any Duty from his Clergy and People before a Synod had
restored him. He adds, that by the Canons of the Church, a Provincial Synod of
Rome, could not condemn or restore a Patriarch of Constantinople; and therefore
the Synod called at Rome by P. Nicholas, how numerous soever it might be, could
not have any Authority to depose Photius, and restore Ignatius: that Photius
therefore was the Canonical Patriarch of Constantinople, till he was deposed by
a Synod called at Constantinople, that was greater than that which deposed
Ignatius. The Synod (says he) by which Ignatius was to be relieved, was to be
another, and that a greater Synod in the same Constantinople, and till he could
get such a Synod on his side, himself had been responsible for the Schism, that
must have followed on his claiming his Right. Thus much the Vindicator: And
thus (though he does not know it) he perfectly condemns Ignatius, and all his
Adherents, as men not regarding the Rules of Ecclesiastical Government, but
hurried away by their own Passions to Schismatical Proceedings. We do not find
(says he) that Ignatius made any stir after he was deposed by a Synod of
Constantinople, till he was restored Conciliarly in the same place, where he
had been deprived. No? Then sure he never could find, that he made any stir at
all. There is nothing can be more notorious than that Ignatius, never paid any
deference to the Authority of those Synods that condemned him. That he looked
upon himself as Patriarch, as well after he was condemned by Synods, as before;
appears, First from hence, That after he had been condemned by a Provincial
Synod, when he was summoned to appear before the General Council, called First
and Second, he asked those, that summoned him, under what Character they would
have him appear, as a Bishop, as a Priest, or as a Monk? And when it was told
him, that he might appear as himself in his own Conscience thought fit, he put
on his Patriarchial Robes, and was going to the Council in 'em, till Messengers
from the Emperor met him, and commanded him to put 'em off, or it should cost
him his Life.

This Account we have in his Life. 2. When he made his appearance before that
Council, he declared against their Authority, and positively told 'em that they
could not be his Judges, except they first deposed Photius. This his Legate
Theognostus attests in his Case presented to Pope Nicholas. 3. After he was
condemned by this great Council, he still continued to suffer the same
Afflictions and Torments as before; and why was he still tormented and
persecuted, but because he was still the same Man? A Description of what he
suffered, even after he was deposed by that Council, you may see at large in
his Life. Theognostus likewise speaks of 'em. So P. Nicholas's Synod alleges in
its Ap. Conc. VIII. p. 1171.
Decrees against Photius, that he still continued to that very time, to torment
Ignatius, and to depose and punish those Bishops that would not join with him.
So likewise P. Nicholas in his XIth. Epistle to Photius. 4. As soon as the
Emperor Basilius had deposed Photius, though Photius as yet had never been
condemned by a Council called at Constantinople, nor yet by any called any
where else, that was greater than that which had confirmed him, Ignatius
readily accepts of the Sea, and not only so, but condemns and Nicetas V. Ign.
p. 1232.
rejects both Photius, and all those whom he had Ordained, as no Bishops? 5. So
far were the Ignatians from regarding the Authority of Synods, that even after
Ignatius's Death, though Photius had been again confirmed by a General Council of
no less than 373 Bishops, yet they Ibid. p. 1256.
still continued their Schism, and refused to Communicate. Nay, even after
Photius was a Second time deposed, and even after his Death, some of 'em still
refused to receive those whom Photius had Ordained. And the Schism does not
seem to have been perfectly ended, till the Tomus Vnionis, or Synodicon was
published in the Year 920. by which there was an end likewise put to several
other Divisions in the Church.

Secondly, I observe that Ignatius, and all his Party were great betrayers of
the Privileges of the Constantinopolitan See. That he might regain his See, he
cared not for the Honor of it, but Acted very unworthily of a truly great Man,
and Theognostus.
appeals from the Council of Constantinople, to the Pope of Rome. Thus betrays
the Honor of his See, and Acts quite contrary to the Canons of the II. General
Council: by which it is Enacted, Can. 2.
That the Affairs of every Province shall be managed by a Synod of that same
Province.

Thirdly, In the Third and last place, it is to be observed, that the Reason
why the Popes of Rome, engaged so zealously against Photius, and for the
ejected Ignatius, was chiefly, because they thought it concerned the Honor of
their See. The Pope took upon him to be the chief Judge in Causes relating to
Bishops, and to suffer the Emperor to Depose a Patriarch, was to give away
(forsooth!) his own Super-eminent Prerogative. That all the Proceedings of the
Popes in this Matter, were grounded chiefly on their Pride and Ambition, may be
easily gathered from their so frequently Vide Nicholai P. Epistolam 2. and 8.
ad Michaelem Imp. Epistolam ad Photium ap. Conc. VIII. p. 1031, 1032. Epistolam
ad Episcopos and Clerum Constantinop. ib. act. 7. Synodum Romans ib. p. 1074.
Verba Hadriani P. II. in Synodo sua ap. Conc. VIII. p. 1091. Stephani P. VI.
Ep. ad Basilium Imp. and aliam ejusdem ad Stylianum Neocaes. etc.
inculcating their Prerogative of being the ultimate Judges of all Bishops, in
the Epistles which they wrote concerning this Business; from their so
frequently inculcating, That a Bishop ought not to be deposed by any Authority
whatever, whether Imperial or Synodical, without the Consent of the Sea of S.
Peter. Because (says P. Nicholas in an Epistle to the Emperor Michael) you (the
Synod of Constantinople) At quia nunc Photium retinentes, prudentissimum virum
Ignatium Patriarcham absque nostri Apostolatus judicio, ejecistis, nosse vos
^mnimodis volumus nullatenus nos Photium recipere vel. Ignatium Patriarcham
damnare. Ap. Conc. VIII. act. 4. p. 1019.
have deposed the Patriarch Ignatius, and confirmed Photius in his See without
the Authority of our Apostleship, We give you to understand, that we do not
either receive Photius, or condemn Ignatius. And to the Eastern Patriarchs and
Bishops, in his Circular Epistle, We require you (says he) not to give your
Assent to the Synod called against Ignatius, but to Act according to our
Sentence. And these things we write, not fearing at all least we may have
judged amiss. For the Sea of S. Peter is not to be judged by any one, except by
him who gave Peter the Keys of the Kingdom. And do you, that you may observe
the ancient Customs, neither judge nor approve of any thing without our
Authority.

We have now done with the Patriarch Ignatius, but not yet with Photius. He
affords us another Example; for though he was received by the Church, and
confirmed by a General Council, yet as soon as Leo Sapiens, upon his Father
Basilius's Death, had obtained the Empire, he was presently deposed (a second
time) by the Imperial Authority. He being thus deposed, the Emperor's Brother
Stephen A very young Man; for it appears by Leo Gram. p. 470. that he was a
Child, and baptized within twenty Years before, viz. after his Father Basilius
was Emperor.
, was preferred to his See, and was owned and received by the Church. This the
Author of the Baroccian Treatise observes. It Is observed by the Vindicator, in
Answer to that Treatise that Photius was not deposed by the Emperor Leo, but
resigned. And this he proves from an Epistle of P. Stephen V. ad Episcopos
Orient. in which the Pope says, that in a Letter the Emperor had told him, that
In the Greek Epistle ap. Append. Actorum Graec. Concilii VIII. p. 1408. he
says, That the Emperor had told him, that Photius had given in a Resignation
written with his own hand.
Photius quietam vitam elegit. Stylianus and a Synod had written to the Pope to
acquaint him, that Photius for certain Crimes was deposed by the Emperor Leo;
the Emperor in a Letter of his own, had told the Pope that Photius had
resigned: this made the Pope write that Letter to Stylianus, and the rest of
the Bishops to know of him, how it came to pass, that they so contradicted one
another. Stylianus and the rest of those Bishops, tell him in their Answer,
that they that owned Photius as a Bishop, had sent him word that he had
resigned: but, as for themselves, they did not own him to have been ever a
Bishop; and therefore it was that they did not say he had resigned. This
confirms what the Vindicator contends for. But notwithstanding all this, it is
not true, that Photius resigned. To me it is certain, that he was turned out by
the Emperor; The Reason why the Emperor pretended to the Pope that Photius had
resigned, was because he dared not tell him, that he himself had deposed him.
That he knew the Pope would never approve of, it being in the Judgment of the
Popes of those times, the Prerogative of the Sea of S. Peter to depose a
Bishop. And the reason why Stylianus and his Bishops writ after that manner in
their Answer to the Pope; was, because if they had told the truth, it was like
to occasion a great Disturbance in the Church. For the Quare nos absque
diligenti totius rei indagatione nullam possismus sententiam proferre.
Quaprepter and nuper sententiam distulimus; and opportet ut ab utraque part
reverendissimi Episcopi legati mittantur, ut omni discussa dubitatione,
veritateque ex omnibus partibus explorata, quod Deus suggesserit judicare
possimus.
Pope had positively declared in his Epistle to 'em, that he would not give his
Consent, that Photius should be turned out without his special Concurrence. But
this you will say, is only Conjecture. What greater Autorities have we, that
Photius was truly deposed? I. Answer, we have many.

1. That Photius was deposed by the Emperor Leo is positively asserted by all
Historians. The Emperor (says (...), etc.
Joel) for certain Reasons deposed Photius, and made his own Brother Stephen
Patriarch. Glycas P. 298. (...), etc.
: The Emperor Leo, being resolved to be revenged on Santabarenus (Bishop of
Euchaita, who had set his Father against him) chooses first to depose the
Patriarch Photius, because it was likely he would take Santabarenus 's part;
for there was a report, that Photius had conspired with Santabarenus to advance
one of his own Family to the Empire. Zonaras. Leo as soon as he was made
Emperor, was forthwith bent upon revenge against Santabarenus. But suspecting
that the Patriarch Photius, who was his Friend, would take his part, he (...),
etc.
invents Accusations against the Patriarch, and thrusts him out of the Church,
and banishes him to the Monastery of the Armeniaci.

2. By other Historians he is not only said to be deprived by the Emperor; but
there is likewise a particular Relation given of the manner. And in one and the
same Relation, they all unanimously agree. The Anonymous Continuator of the
Emperor Constantinus Porphyrogennetus's History, gives us this account of it.
The Emperor P. 218. (...), etc.
(says he) sent Andrew the Captain of his Guards, with Joannes Hagiopolites, to
the Church of S. Sophia: who there went up into the Ambo, and in the hearing of
all read the Accusations against the Patriarch Photius, and expelled him out of
his See, and banished him to the Monastery of the Armoniani. And the Emperor
makes his own Brother Stephen, the Syncellus, Patriarch; who was ordained by
Theophanes, Metropolitan of Caesarea, and continued Patriarch Six years, and
Five months, then died.

The Emperor (says (...), etc.
Leo Grammaticus, sent Andrew the Captain of his Guard, and Joannes
Hagiopolites the Logotheta Dromi: who went up into the Ambo of the Church, and
there read Accusations against Photius the Patriarch, and deposed him, and
thrust him into the Monastery of the Armeniani. -- and promoted his own Brother
Stephen to the Throne, who was ordained a little before Christmas, by
Theophanes the first Metropolitan (of Caelarea) and the rest of the Bishops.
The same Leo tells us, that Photius P. 472. (...).
died in Banishment. The Emperor Leo (says Georgius Cedrenus) being come to the
Throne, immediately resolved to be revenged on Santabarenus: and first of all,
he set upon Photius to depose him, because he knew that if he continued
Patriarch, he would defend Santabarenus, and besides, there was a report, that
Photius had conspired with Santabarenus, to destroy him, and to advance one of
his own Family to the imperial Throne. He accordingly sent Andreas, etc. Having
told us how he was deposed and banished, agreeing exactly with the Authors
already quoted, he adds, that Stephen was (...).
immediately constituted in his Room.

3. It appears by the Minutes of the Trial of Photius and Santabarenus, which
happened a little after Photius was ejected, that Photius had never resigned.
'Twas expected at that Trial, (which, by the by, was only before Lay-Lords)
That Santabarenus would have accused Photius of High Treason; and he was asked
by one of the Judges concerning a Promise he had made the Emperor to accuse
him; upon which he fell down upon his Knees before Photius, with these words:
P. 219. (...).
My Lord, I conjure you by God, to depose me and degrade me from my Priesthood,
and then let 'em punish me as a Malefactor, for I never told the Emperor any
such thing. To which Photius made this Answer; By the Salvation of my Soul, my
Lord Theodorus, you are an Archbishop, both in this World and in the World to
come. Thus the Continuator of Constantinus Porphyrogennetus, Leo Grammamaticus,
and Cedrenus. By Santabarenus's desiring Photius to depose him, it is very
manifest, that he accounted him his Patriarch, and that Photius looked upon
himself as such, may be gathered from his Answer.

4. It Is asserted by all the three Authors last quoted, That the Emperor was
extremely enraged at that disappointment (...). Leo Gram.
, because he could not get a sufficient Accusation against the Patriarch: If he
had resigned, what should make the Emperor so malicious against him? The
Accusations for which he had been deposed, were thought insufficient, the
Emperor therefore, endeavored to have other and greater things made out
against him, that he might not be accused of Injustice in deposing him.

5. It appears from the Emperor's own express words in his Speech which he made
to Stylianus and other Bishops, etc. after he had deposed Photius, that Photius
did not resign, but was properly deposed. The Speech is recorded in the
Appendix to the Greek Acts of the VIII Council. The Author of that Appendix
having first asserted in his own words, That the Emperor (...), p. 1397.
expelled Photius for his Crimes, adds, That having called Stylianus and many
others, whom Photius had persecuted, together, he spoke these words to 'em
(...), etc.
, Our Imperial Majesty, which proceeds from God, having wellweighed and
considered the matter, has driven that wicked Man from his Throne, and
delivered you from your Persecution, etc.

I take no notice of what the Vindicator says, concerning the new Patriarch
Stephen, that since he was brought up and instructed by Photius, it is not
likely that he would have accepted of the Sea, if Photius had not resigned.
There is no strength in that. Ambition, or obedience to the Emperor his
Brother, might be a sufficient Motive.

By what I but now observed concerning Santabarenus, it should seem that he did
not at the time of that Trial, own the Patriarch Stephen. But though He, as
Photius's Creature and very great Friend, did not at that time own him: yet
certain it is, that the Church in general did. Hence in the Synodicon, or Tomus
Vnionis, which was published in the Year 920. Apud jus Graeco-Rom. producitur
idem locus (...) ex (libello) Synodico, non a Synodico consessu quod vertit
claris. Interpres, ap. Pandect. Bevereg. tom. 2. p. 292.
May the Memory of Ignatius, Photius, Stephanus, Antonius, Nicholaus, the most
holy Patriarchs, be everlasting. Whatsoever has been either written, or spoken
against the most holy Patriarchs Germanus, Nicephorus, and Methodius, Ignatius,
Photius, Stephanus, Antoninus, be Anathema. It Is true, that there was some
Schism on his Account, may be gathered from this very thing, because his Name
is in that Tome: But then it does not appear, that that Schism was occasioned
by his being put into Photius's place. We know that he had been ordained Deacon
by Photius, we likewise know, that there were some in his time, that refused to
own any that had been ordained by Photius: and this I take to be the true
Reason, why Stephen is mentioned in the Tome: the rather because even his
Successor Antonius, whose Circumstances were not the same, is likewise
mentioned. They were both (I suppose) disowned by such as did not allow of
Photius's Ordinations. We must not forget, that Leo Grammaticus has told us,
that the Patriarch Stephen was consecrated Patriarch, by the chief Metropolitan
of the District, and the rest of the Bishops, i.e. by a great many.

I shall conclude this Chapter, or rather Dissertation, concerning Photius,
with the Testimony of Aretas, Archbishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia; from which
it may appear, not only that he was accounted an excellent Man, but that he was
likewise violently deposed. Aretas in an Oration, which he made at the
Sepulcher of Euthymius Patriarch of Constantinople, who was deposed Twenty five
Years after Photius's last Deprivation, and was used so barbarously, as that he
died a little after, O potestatem Pontificum Dei, quae una cum iis, qui
virtutis causa perpessi injurias sunt, laetitia exultas, una cum Abel invidiae
obnoxia es, una cum antiquo illo Jacob ab aemulis assidue vexaris, una cum
Zacharia jugularis, una cum Iacobo in gratioam Iudaeorum mactaris, una cum D.
Athanasio e sedibus tuis exturbaris, una cum Paulo exilii pedicis, quemadmodum
hic confessionis, honestaris una cum Nicephoro (ab Imp. Leone Armeno violenter
ejecto) ac PHOTIO, viris clarissimis, fugis ac mortibus decoraris, etc.
O the Power (says he) of the Highpriests of God, That rejoicest with those
that have suffered Injuries for the sake of Virtue, that with Abel art
obnoxious to Envy, That, as Jacob heretofore, art constantly tormented by
Competitors, That art murdered as James was for the sake of the Jews, That with
the holy Athanasius art thrust out of thy Throne, With Paul (Patriarch of
Constantinople) art adorned with the Schackles of Banishment, and, as this holy
Patriarch, by the Bonds of a Confessor, That together with Nicephorus and
PHOTIUS, those most famous ^en, art graced with Expulsions and Deaths.

CHAP. XV.
Nicolaus Mysticus, Patriarch of Constantinople; not deprived by a Synod, as
the Vindicator contends, but by the Emperor ( Leo the Wise). 1. Joseph Bishop
of Brixia in Italy deposed without any Synod by King Berengarius, yet his
Successor Antony is owned and received by the Church, particularly by the Pope,
the Synods of Augspurg and Ravenna; and continued in the Sea many years.. 2.
Basilius Camaterus, and Nicetas Muntanes, Patriarchs of Constantinople, deposed
without any Synod by the Emperor Isaacius Angelus, yet no Division in the
Church on their account.. 3, 4. The Patriarchs of the present Greek Church very
frequently deprived by the Turk, yet no Division in the Church. As great Reason
to submit to the present Possessor here, as in the Greek Church. The Necessity
the same.

AFter the Death of the Patriarch Stephen, Antonius Cauleas succeeded in the Sea of Constantinople, and after his Death Nicolaus Mysticus, or the Secretary
of State, was made Patriarch. In his time the Emperor Leo, contrary to the
Canons of the Church, married a fourth Wife, for which he excommunicated him;
and because he refused to take off the Excommunication, was deposed by him.

The Vindicator would needs persuade us, that he was not deposed by the
Emperor, but by a Synod: The Author he quotes for it is Eutychius or Said Ebn
Batrick, who is so far from affirming, and likewise from intimating, what the
Vindicator contends for, that he Annal. Arab. to. 2. p. 484. Porro cum Leoni
Imp. Romano mortua esset Vxor nulla relicta prole, aliam ille uxorem ducere
voluit; at prohibuit ipsum Nicolaus Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus, dicens,
Non est tibi licitum uxorem ducere; siquidem Anagnostes es and precibus
Sacerdotum consecratus; quod si uxorem duxeris non licet tibi ad altar
accedere. Cui Leo; Vxorem ducere cupio quo sit mihi filius qui p^st me regnum
haereditario possid^at. At non permisit ipsi Patriarcha conjugium. Scripsit
ergo Leo Imp. ad Patriarcham Romanum, Michaelem Patriarcham Alexandrinum, Eliam
Mansuri F. Patriarcham Hierosolymitanum, and Symeonem Zarnaki F. Antiochenum,
rogans ut ad ipsum accederent, quo dispicerent, liceret, necue ipsi uxorem
ducere: At noluit eorum quispiam ad ipsum accedere, nisi quod singuli nomine
suo Legatum mitterent. Ac Legatis se adjungentes Episcopi quidam
Constantinopolitani, de negotio Imperatoris dispicientes, matrimonium ipsi
licitum pronunciarunt: quare uxorem duxit, natusque est ipsi filius quem
Constantinum appellavit. Cumque Nicolaum Patriarcham Cathedra abdicasset,
constitutus est ipsius loco Anthimus (Euthymius) Patriarcha
Constantinopolitanus. It Is plain that Eutychius makes the Synod to sit before
Constantinus (Porphyrogennetus) was begot, and Nicolaus to be deprived (as
indeed he was) after he was born: and besides he expressly says that the
Emperor did it.
plainly intimates the contrary. But whatever Authors the Vindicator thinks fit
to make use of, we know the Authority of Eutychius to be so contemptible, and we
know him to be so erroneous, particularly in what he says relating to the
Emperor Leo and the Patriarch Nicolaus, That, tho he makes directly against the
Vindicator, yet we scorn to produce him as a Witness. Neither indeed have we
need. That the Patriarch Nicolaus was deposed by the Emperor, is positively
asserted by the Emperor's Son, Constantinus Porphyrogennetus. He says Praef. ad
Tomum Unionis apud Ius Graeco-Rom. p. 104.
his Father deposed him as a Liar and a perjured Man, because he had several
times promised and sworn that he would absolve him, and yet refused to do it.
We have other very good and authentic Writers that give us so particular an
account of the whole matter, that there is nothing can be more manifest, than
that there was not any Synod concerned. The Historian Leo Grammaticus, after a
Relation given us of the Emperor's being excommunicated, adds, That Samonas, a
very ill Man, being made the Gentleman of the Bedchamber (...).
, the Emperor and He laid their Heads together to depose the Patriarch; and
sending for him on the first of February, desired him to restore 'em to the
Church: Which when he refused to do, they ordered him to be put into a Boat and
to be carried to Hieria, from whence he went on foot through the Snow to
Galacreni. In his place Euthymius the Syncellus was ordained. So word for word
the Page 228.
Anonymous Continuator of Constantinus Porphyrogennetus. And Page 602.
Georgius Cedrenus agrees exactly with 'em. Neither does Zondras differ from
'em. Annal. l. 16. c. 13. (...).
Samonas (says he) urged the Emperor to do many things against his Duty, among
other things to force the Patriarch to absolve him. The Emperor therefore
sending for the Patriarch, desired to be absolved: which the Patriarch refusing
to do, he was immediately carried over to Iria, from whence they led him on
foot to the Monastery in Galacrenae which he himself had built, after he had
governed the Church XI. Years. And Euthymius the Syncellus was made Patriarch.

But the Knot that the Vindicator would cut, I will fairly untie for him. The
whole Truth is this: The Patriarch Nicolaus was first deposed by the Emperor,
but, before Euthymius was made Patriarch in his room, he resigned; though he does
not seem to have regarded his Resignation. That he did resign, I gather from
the Haud it a multo post vehemens Ecclesiam tempestas invasit, quam ejus, cujus
tum mann gubervacula erant, temeraria arrogantia excitarat: in quo quidem
tumultu cum Author ejus ille qui suerat, animum despondisset, eoque sacri sui
honoris repudii libellum Ecclesi^ dedisset, malus male abiit. Aderat unus is
(Euthymius) idoneus, qui desertum id ab eo munus susciperet.
Oration which Aretas, Archbishop of Caesarea, spoke in praise of Euthymius:
which the Vindicator does not seem to have read. But since of our own accord we
give away this Example, to what purpose has there been so much said concerning
it? To that I answer: That I therefore thought fit to lay open this Error of
the Vindicator, not because I have thereby demonstrated a Truth: For in a
Treatise which should be Logical, to endeavor to make out an impertinent
Truth, is to discover either want of Judgment, or want of Argument: But because
the Vindicator does not seem, methinks, to have discovered any great Ingenuity
in what he says, concerning Nicolaus's Deprivation. Since he thought fit to
quote so bad an Author as Eutychius, one that he himself perfectly contemns,
how came it to pass that he did not think fit to tell his Reader what the
Authentic Greek Authors say? It is certain he had read 'em* But he knew not
how to answer this Example without a little of Shuffle. He knew that the good
Greek Authors made directly against his Evasion. The Cause I have undertaken to
defend, does not need any Disingenuities. If it did, I should leave it to some
other to be its Vindicator.

. 2. In the Year 950, or 951, Joseph (by some called Gonfus) Bishop of Brixia
in Italy, was deposed by the Tyrannical King Berengarius without any manner of
Synod, as Hist. sui temporis l. 5. c. 13. Hoc in tempore Joseph quidam moribus
senex, diebus juvenis, Civitatis Brixianae clarebat Episcopus. Quem
Berengarius, ut erat Dei tyrrannus vehemens, ob morum probitatem Episcopatu
privavit: Ejusque loco Antonium, qui nunc usque superest, nullo Consilio habito
nulla Episcoporum deliberatione constituit.
Luitprandus Ticinensis, who flourished Cap. seq.
immediately after in Berengarius's Court, as his Secretary, expressly attests.
Though Joseph was thus deposed, yet Antony, whom the King made Bishop in his
room, was owned and received by the Church. This appears; first, from
Luitprandus, who says he was at that time Bishop of Brixia when he wrote his
History. Qui nunc usque superest. By which he must mean that he still continued
Bishop of Brixia to that time. For if he had been deposed at that time, he
would have mentioned it, not have used those words. 2. From the Preface to the
Decrees of the Synod of Augspurg, held in the Year 952, in which our Antonio
Brixiensis Ecclesiae Episcopo. Council. to. 9. p. 635.
Antony Bishop of Brixia is reckoned among the Bishops that sat in that Synod.
3. From the Subscriptions of the Council of Ravenna, held in the Year 967, in
which we read: Ibid. p. 678.
Antonius Brixiensis Ecclesiae Episcopus consensi and subscripsi. 4. From the
Subscriptions to Pope John the thirteenth's Ibid. p. 676.
Diploma against Heroldus Archbishop of Salisburg, sent to the Bishops of that
Council, and by them subscribed; among whom he is one.

. 3. In the Reign of Isaacius Angelus, who was Emperor but nine Years, began
1185, and ended 1194, there were at least three Patriarchs deposed without any
Synod. The Emperor Isaacius Angelus (says the Author of the Baroccian Treatise)
finding Basilius Camaterus in the Patriarchal Chair, deposed him without any
just cause, and promoted Nicetas the Chaplain of the Church to the Sea. In
Answer to this, the Vindicator tells us, That the Reason why he was deprived
was a Matter of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and therefore it is probable that he
was deposed by a Synod. But what says Nicetas Choniates in his History of
Isaacius Angelus? He plainly intimates the contrary, that he was violently
deposed by the Emperor L. 2. n 4. (...).
: As the violence (says he) and power of Emperor is not wont to be restrained
till they have altered and changed all things, both divine and human, according
to their pleasure; so Isaacius, when he came to the Crown, deposed Basilius
Camaterus from the Patriarchal Chair, though he had been the chief Instrument in
his promotion to the Imperial Crown. The Reason pretended, was, That he had
freed those noble Women from their confinement, whom (the late Emperor)
Andronicus had made Nuns against their Wills. In his room he substituted
Nicetas Muntanes, the Chaplain of the great Church. The same account we have in
Nicephorus Callisti his MS. Catalogue of the Patriarch's of Constantinople. He
tells us that (...)... (Mr. Dodwel in a Transcript of his reads, (...), Dr.
Langbain, (...); to me it seems to be something like this, (...).
Basilius Camaterus was made Patriarch by Andronicus and deposed by Isaacius
Angelus that he might not crown another Emperor after he had crown^d him: But
the Emperor's pretense (says he) was this, That he had given a Lady who had
thrown off her (Nuns) habit which she had been forced to put on, his
Benediction. Of any Division in the Church on the account of this Deprivation,
there is no mention made. And the same is true of the Instance following.

. 4. After a little time Nicetas himself was deposed as unfit to govern by
reason of his Old age. The Vindicator tells us from the Catalogue of Patriarchs
that is extant in the Ius Graeco-Romanum, that Nicetas resigned: But what says
Nicetas Choniates, a much better Author? He tells us expressly that he was
deposed by the Emperor against his will. But neither (says Ibid. (...).
he) did the Emperor suffer this Man, so old as he was, to die Patriarch; but
alleging, that by reason of his age and simplicity, he was not fit to be
Patriarch, he expelled him the Sea against his will. And that he did not
resign, may be confirmed from Nicephorus Callisti his M S. Catalogue of
Patriarchs: For he mentions that his Successor Leontius resigned, but of
Nicetas he says no such thing: If he had known any such thing, he would
doubtless have mentioned it, since he takes care to tell us that his Successor
did so; and since he takes care likewise to tell us, that Theodosius
Barradiotes, Basilius Camaterus's Predecessor, and several others, did so. I
here observe that the Greek Verb (...), which is used concerning the Patriarch
Nicetas in the Catalogue of the Ius Graeco-Romanum, though it properly denotes a
Resignation, yet was used sometimes for amisit, he lost his Bishopric. It
seems to be used in this sense by Nicephorus Callisti in his M S. Catalogue,
where he speaks concerning Dositheus Patriarch of Jerusalem, his being
translated from the Sea of Jerusalem to that of Constantinople, and of his
being deposed at Constantinople, because Translations from one See to another
were repugnant to the Canons.(...). Which Nicetas Choviates expresses after
this manner. He was deposed (says he) at Constantinople, and suffered in the
same manner with Aesop' s Dog, being deprived of the Sea of Constantinople, and
losing likewise that of Jerusalem, which was then possessed by another.

. 5. After these times we read of no Patriarch deposed by the Emperor's bare
Authority, as long as Constantinople was in the hands of the Christians. For
Leontius, Nicetas's Successor was not barely deposed by the Emperor, but after
he was deposed, resigned. What the Condition of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople and the other Eastern Patriarchs, has all along been, and is to
this day, under the Turks; that there are few Patriarchs of Constantinople that
die possessed of their See, few that are not deprived by the Grand Seignior's
bare Authority, is too notorious to be proved. We have reason to believe, that
for these 230 Years, from the time of Ioasaphus Cusas, the third Patriarch
after Constantinople was taken by the Turks, who was deposed by the Sultan
Mahomet the Great, there has been no space of time without several Patriarchs
alive together: And it is very notorious, that in the Years 1669, and 1670,
there were no less than Dr. Smith in his account of the Greek Church, p. 81,
82, 83. See Grelot's Voyage to Constantinople, p. 138, 139, 140.
four or five Patriarchs of Constantinople living.

The Examples of these Patriarchs of the present Greek Church, I do not here
mention, as if I thought they deserved for their Learning or Wisdom to be
Guides and Patterns to the Bishops of England: But this is the use I would make
of it. I would fain know of our Adversaries, Whether they think an ejected
Patriarch of Constantinople would do well, if, after he was deposed, he should
separate from the Communion of his Successor, and make a Division in the
Church? I can hardly believe but that such a Separation would be condemned by
even our Adversaries themselves. And how then can they justify their own
Separation, they who refuse to communicate with their Successors, because they
themselves are deposed by the Secular Power? There is one Question more, to
which I desire a positive Answer: It is certain, that when the Patriarch of
Constantinople is deposed by the Sultan, the Church submits immediately to the
Successor, without asking the Old Patriarch's leave: Whether he will give his
Consent or not, she is not at all concerned. Now this is the Question I would
ask: Is the Greek Church therefore Schismatical? If the ejected Patriarch
should actually lay claim to his See, would the Church be Schismatitical for
adhering to the present Possessor? If, they say, it would not: Why then are We
Schismatics in adhering to our present Possessors? Will they say that the
Greeks lie under a greater Necessity? So one of our Adversaries seems to
intimate. I cannot see (says Unity of Priesthood, p. 39.
he) that either the Case of the Jews in our Savior's time, or the Case of the
present Greek Church runs parallel to ours; for the Jews for many years before
had been under the Roman Yoke, and so have the Greeks for many Centuries of
years under the Turks; both despoiled of their Rights and Customs, and so far
at Mercy, that it was well for the Jew that he could have any Priest, and for
the Greeks that they have any Christianity. But our Author does not consider,
that the Question may be asked as well concerning those Jews who first
submitted to a High Priest put in by the Romans, and concerning those Greeks
who first submitted to a Patriarch, ordained in the place of another deposed by
the Turk, as concerning the Jews in our Savior's time, or the Greeks of these
times. Neither does he consider, that the lastingness of an Oppression adds
nothing at all to the strength of a present Necessity: If Necessity will excuse
an Action a hundred Years after the beginning of an Oppression, 'twould as well
excuse in the very beginning of it. It Is as strong in the beginning as
afterward. But the Jews (says our Author) were at the Mercy of the Romans, and
the present Greeks are at the Mercy of the Turks. We grant it: and that is the
Necessity we plead. How does that make our Case not to be parallel? Is not the
Church of England as much at the Mercy of the King and Parliament here, as the
Jews were at the Mercy of the Romans, or as the Greeks are at the Mercy of the
Turk? Is not the King and Parliament as powerful here, as the Romans in
Iudaea, or the Grand Seignior at Constantinople? If Necessity will excuse them;
our Necessity is the same, and that will justify us.

CHAP. XVI.
The Sentence of an Uncanonical Synod, esteemed by the Ancients invalid. S
Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, unjustly and invalidly deposed by a
Synod He declares however at first, against all Separation from the Church on
his Account. He afterward yields to Resentment, and refuses to Communicate
with his Successors, Arsacius, and Atticus, because they had been his Enemies,
and had a hand in his Deprivation. The Joannites acted by their Passions, not
by Principles. They separate from the Church, not because there was another
made Patriarch in S. Chrysostom's place, but before that was done. Arsacius
being made Patriarch they refuse to Communicate with him, not because he was
put into S. Chrysostom's place, but through Hatred against St. Chrysostom's
Deposers, because they frequented his Churches. Pope Innocent of Rome, not
consistent with himself. His Practice contradicts his Words. He did not think
Arsacius and Atticus no Bishops. His Zeal for the Honor of his own See, the
chief Cause of his Opposing 'em. He at last receives Atticus as a true
Patriarch: The Vindicator's Exception against the Translation of the word (...)
in the Barroccian Treatise, confuted. The Eastern Bishops refuse to separate
from the Communion of the Church, though S. Chrysostom laid Claim to his See, and
actually separated, and though they esteemed his Deprivation invalid. So did the
Monks of Egypt. The Testimony of S. Nicon, out of a M S. S. Nicon himself, though
he esteemed his Deprivation extremely unjust; yet approves of those that did
not separate on his account. S. Chrysostom takes it for granted, as a thing of
Course, that all would immediately resolve to choose a new Patriarch in his
room. The Patriarch Atticus highly esteemed by the whole African Church. The
Ecclesiastical Historian, Socrates, disapproves of S. Chrysostom's Deprivation;
yet speaks of Arsacius and Atticus, as of true Patriarchs. Theodoret extremely
offended at the Injustice of his Deposers, yet reckons both Arsacius and
Atticus among the Patriarchs of Constantinople. They are both owned in all the
Catalogues of the Patriarchs. Their Ordinations never questioned by any.
Atticus praised by P. Celestine I. and owned to be a true Successor of S.
Chrysostom.

I Have now concluded my History of the Church's Submission to Bishops put into
the places of others deposed by the Secular Power. I have brought it down from
the first High Priest that ever was deposed by the Secular Power, i. e. from
the Reign of King Solomon, to these very times, and have showed, That the
Behavior of the Jews under their Highpriests, and of the Ancient Christians
under their Bishops, was agreeable to the present Practice of our Church. To
make this History the more complete, I shall now show, That the same was the
general Practice of the Ancients in respect to Bishops put into the places of
others unjustly and uncanonically deposed by Synods, where the Secular Power
concurred as executing the Sentence of the Bishops. I say, where the Secular
Power concurred in executing the Sentence of the Bishops; for whatever the
Vindicator, and others, are pleased to tell us concerning Synodical
Deprivations, it is easy to show, That the Ancients never regarded the Decree
or Sentence of an Vncanonical Synod, if the Civil Governor did not force 'em
to submit by taking upon him to excuse the sentence.

It is not every Synod that has power by the Canons of the Church to depose a
Bishop, and the Sentence of an Vncanonical Synod, is by the Canons as invalid
as if it were no Synod at all. In the Fifth Canon of the General Council of
Nice, there is a plain Intimation that the Affairs of every Province, ought to
be managed by the Bishops of the respective Provinces: and by the Second Can.
of the General Council of Constantinople, it is expressly ordained, That no
Metropolitan should go out of his own District to concern himself in the
Affairs of another District (except in a General Council.) So when Theophilus
Patriarch of Alexandria was accused to the Emperor Arcadius of certain great
Crimes, and the Emperor commanded him to make his Appearance at Constantinople,
to be tried there by S. Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, he sent S.
Chrysostom a Letter, in which he alleged, That he could not be Judge of his
Cause, that (...). S. Chrysostom. Ep. ad P. Innocent. ap. Pallad. V. ejus p. 13.
the Affairs of every Province ought to be managed only by the Bishops of the
respective Province. And S. Chrysostom tells P. Innocent, that when Theophilus
came to Constantinople, and the Emperor commanded him to call him before him as
his Judge, he refused to do it, because he knew (...).
, that by the Canons he could not do it.

'Twas contrary to this Law of the Church, that S. Chrysostom himself was
deposed, and that too by Theophilus himself, who had pleaded that Law. The
Circumstances of S. Chrysostom's Deprivation were these. Theophilus being at
Constantinople, instead of being judged by S. Chrysostom, was encouraged by S.
Chrysostom's Enemies, particularly by the Empress Eudoxia, to summon Him before
him, and to Depose him. He packs a Synod consisting of Pallad. p. 23.
Twenty nine Bishops of Egypt, whom he brought with him, and Seven others of
other Countries, and, several malicious Accusations being preferred against him
by his Enemies, cites him to appear, before he himself had cleared himself from
the Crimes charged upon him, S. Chrysostom. ib. p 13. (...).
which was contrary to all Canons and Laws. S. Chrysostom sends him word, that
he was ready to appear before a lawful and impartial Synod, but, as for him, he
could not own him as his Judge, because he was his professed Enemy Ib. p. 14.
(...).
, had already drawn often a part of his People from his Communion, and had no
Authority to sit as a Judge out of his own District, and besides was himself
obnoxious. Notwithstanding all this, Theophilus, and the Bishops that were with
him, pass upon him the Sentence of Deprivation. And pursuant to that Sentence,
he is carried away from Constantinople; but there being a great Tumult among
the People by whom he was exceedingly admired, he is presently recalled by the
Emperor's Command, and the Suffrages of Ibid. p. 16.
Thirty Bishops. He desires the Emperor to call a General Council, that his
Cause might be heard. Theophilus flees away to Alexandria, together with most
of his Bishops. But after a little time S. Chrysostom's Enemies prevail again.
They gather a Synod at Constantinople and depose him, by a Canon of the Synod
of Antioch, for presuming to act as a Bishop, after he had been deposed by a
Synod. He Is accordingly expelled a Second time, though there were present at that
time at Constantinople, no less than Pallad. p. 19. 71, 82.
Forty Bishops, that declared against those Proceedings, among whom there were
Seven Metropolitans. He was carried away into Banishment; in which he died
Three years, and Three Months after his Expulsion.

A little while after, Arfacius, Brother to Nectarius his Predecessor, was
ordained his Successor: who died Socr. l. 6. c. 20.
November 11. 405. after he had been Patriarch somewhat above a Two Years, say
Nicephorus Patriarch, Nicephorus Call. Catal. MS. Theophanes, the Catalogues in
the Ius Graeco-Rom. and the First Vol. of the Byzantine Hist. Palladius, whose
Authority is greater than all, p. 94. allows him but fourteen Months, so the
Baroccian Treatise. And hence it appears, That he was made Patriarch, not, as
Socrates says, Within a few Days after S. Chrysostom's expulsion, but three
Months after.
Year: For S. Chrysostom, was deposed Socr. lib. 20. c. 18.
June 20.404. To him succeeded Atticus In Febr. A. D. 406. Sozomen l. 8. c 27.
says, He was made Patriarch in the Fourth Month after Arsacius's death.
, S. Chrysostom being still living.

Such were the Circumstances of that great Man's Deprivation. That the Emperor
was not at all concerned in it, (any otherwise than as he executed the Sentence
of the Bishops) he himself attests in his Epistle to P. Innocent. And that he
himself looked upon it as absolutely invalid, is notorious. Let us now see what
the Consequences were, what was his Behavior, and what the Behavior of the
Church in relation to his Successors.

1. It is to be observed, that though he was so injuriously, and provokingly
dealt with, though he accounted all the Proceedings against him perfectly
invalid, yet before he was carried away from Constantinople, he absolutely
declared against all Separation on his Account. This appears, from what has
been already observed in the Prefaces to the Baroccian Treatise. When he
expected to be deposed (...) Pallad. V. Chrysostom. p. 67.
, Pray for me, my Brethren, (says he to the Bishops his Friends) and if you
love Christ, let no one leave the Church on my Account, -- And so you may
obtain Mercy. When one of the Bishops complained of the loss the Church would
have in his Deprivation (...).
: It suffices, Brother, (says he) speak no more; but, as I said, leave not your
Churches. For as the Gift of Preaching did not begin with me, so neither will
it end with me. Again he charges 'em (...).
to continue in Communion with those that deposed him, that they might not rend
the Church. When he was just agoing out of his Church, to be led away into
Exile, he thus addressed himself to the Deaconnesses, who were wont to attend
there: (...). Ib. p. 90.
Come hither (says he) my Daughters, and hear me. I am, I perceive, to be your
Patriarch no longer. I have finished my Course; and perhaps my Face you will
never see any more. This is that which I exhort you to do: Let no one of you be
drawn off from the Good Will to the Church, which you have hitherto had: And
whoever shall be ordained (Patriarch in my stead) without his own seeking it,
by the Consent of all, to him submit your Heads, (to receive his Blessing) as
to my self: for the Church cannot be without a Bishop: And by doing so, you may
obtain Mercy. Remember me in your Prayers.

We are told by An Answer to a Treatise out of Eccles. Hist. p. 6. A farther
account of the Baroccian MS. Unity of Priesthood. p. 63.
some of our Answerers, that S. Chrysostom looked upon himself as a dying Man,
when he used these words in taking his leave of the Bishops, and of the
Deaconesses, and therefore they cannot import, that he would have them submit
to a Bishop, who should succeed him during his Life: But if they had duly
considered the Words which he spoke to the Deaconesses, they would easily have
seen, that what they say is not true. And perhaps my Face you will never see
any more. What means the word, perhaps, if he verily expected a speedy Death?
It Is as clear, I think, as the Sun from that single Word, that he did not then
certainly expect to be put to Death. And it likewise appears from that Word,
that the Advice he gives the Deaconesses, concerning their submitting to his
Successor, was intended as well for his own Lifetime, as otherwise. Since he
plainly intimates, that he thought it doubtful, whether they should ever see
him again, or not; if he had only intended, that they should submit to a
Successor after his Death, he would have plainly told 'em so: As he takes care
to tell 'em, that the Bishop they ought to submit to, should be one duly
Elected; so he would likewise have told 'em, that it ought to be after his own
Death.

This Answer, it seems, was not thought so sufficient, but that some have
thought fit to contrive another way to escape. Perhaps, says one An Answer to a
Treatise out of Eccles. Hist. p. 23.
of our Answerers, those Speeches were not truly S. Chrysostom's, but made in
his Name by Palladius. To this I answer, 1. That if it were true, that those
Speeches were made by the Author, not really spoken by S. Chrysostom, yet this
at least must be confessed, that the Author intended, when he made those
Speeches, to make such Speeches, as would be thought proper for so great a Man
to speak, such as should beget in his Reader a great Esteem, and Veneration for
S. Chrysostom. This at least must be granted, that in that Age in which the
Author wrote, it was thought a thing very Commendable, not to assert ones
Right, so as to occasion a Schism. But, 2. there is not any reason to suspect,
that these Speeches were invented by the Author. He speaks so particularly of
things; he tells ye the Name of the Bishop, and the Names of the Deaconesses,
to whom he speaks; and the whole Relation carries with it so great an Air of
Truth, that it cannot with any show of Reason be called in Question. Sure I am,
those Speeches were always understood by the Ancients to be truly S.
Chrysostom's own. Nicephorus Callisti tells us, Hist. Eccl. l. 13. c. 20.
that S. Chrysostom commanded the Bishops not to separate from the Communion of
his Enemies, and the Deaconesses to submit to his Successor: and he highly
praises him for it. And George Patriarch of Alexandria, in his Life of
Chrysostom, out of which Cod. 96. p. 264. (...).
Photius has given us some Excerpa, mentions the same thing, that he begged the
Bishops not to make a Schism in the Church on his Account.

This was S. Chrysostom's Judgment, whilst his Piety was too warm for his
Resentment: but the best of Men are not always consistent with themselves.
After he was carried away from Constantinople; his Passions so far prevail, as
to make him Act contrary to his own Advice. He separates from the Church, and
sends about Letters to encourage others to do so. What the reason of this was,
is no hard matter to guess. It appears, by the Ap. Photium Cod. 59. p. 58.
(...).
Acts of the Synod ad Quercum, by which he was deposed, that Arsacius and
Atticus had both been Witnesses against him. Palladius assures us, P. 95. (...).
that Atticus was the Contriver of all that was done against him: and Hist. l.
1. c. 27. (...).
Sozomen tells us, that he was one of those that conspired against him. And
this in all Likelihood was the Cause, why he would not yield to 'em. He hated
'em, as his Enemies, and his Passions were too strong for his Piety. He had
owned before that his Successors ought to be received; but when he saw that
such were made his Successors, as had had a hand in his Deprivation, and had
been Witnesses against him, when he saw that even Atticus himself, his very
great Enemy, was made his Successor; his Passions grew too strong for his
Judgment. If the Epistle to Cyriacus were written by S. Chrysostom, in whose
Name it was published, his Passions must needs be confessed by all, to be very
exorbitant (...). etc. Ep. 115.
. I hear that that Dotard Arsacius, whom the Empress has placed in my Chair,
persecutes those that will not Communicate with him, and that many of them have
died in Prison. That Dotard! But I am not willing to believe, so ill a thing of
S. Chrysostom, as that he would suffer his Passion to break out after that
manner: and though Photius Cod. 277. p. 1565.
, a great Critic, quotes that Epistle as one of S. Chrysostom's; yet I doubt
not, but they are in the Right, who reject it as Spurious, and of a Style quite
different from S. Chrysostom's. It Is observed by one of our An Answer to a
Treatise out of Eccles. Hist. p. 9.
Answerers, that there are so many Accidents, which may make any Authors Style
different, at different times, especially in his familiar Letters, and those
written in Banishment, and perhaps under the Disorders of Sickness and Dangers,
which S. Chrysostom so often complains of, that this censure from the Style
must be the less certain, especially since Photius did not discern it. We grant
that S. Chrysostom did not give up his Right to Arsacius: there is no need
therefore, that our Author should defend that Epistle. But if he will needs
have it, let him have it: It will make more against his Cause than for it. Only
this I shall say, that it is from the Style of those very Epistles, which S.
Chrysostom wrote in his Banishment, in the very same Circumstances, and about
the same Concerns, that I am fully convinced, that that to Cyriacus is not
Genuine. Black and White, are hardly more different. And among all S.
Chrysostom's Epistles, there is not one that resembles it. If Photius did not
discern it, 'twas because he did not consider it.

2. It is to be observed, that they that adhered to S. Chrysostom, and refused
to Communicate, with his Successors, Arsacius and Atticus, were rather carried
away by their Passions, than governed by Conscience and Principles. This
appears from hence, that though Atticus was constituted against S. Chrysostom's
Will, and though they themselves had separated from him, and continued in their
Separation long after S. Chrysostom's Death, yet when Atticus had restored S.
Chrysostom's Name to the Diptychs of the Church, then almost all were well
satisfied, and Communicated with Atticus as a true Bishop. How can this be
Reconcilable to Principles? How could the inserting S. Chrysostom's Name in the
Diptychs, make Atticus sit to be owned as a Bishop, if he was not qualified to
be owned before? It is plain, they were governed by their Love, to S.
Chrysostom, not by Principles. Others there were, of the Ioannites, that
refused to Communicate with Atticus, even after S. Chrysostom's Name was
inserted in the Diptychs, they refused to Communicate even with his Successor
Sisinnius; they refused likewise to communicate with Sisinnius's Successor,
Proclus: But observe what follows: when the Patriarch Proclus, had ordered S.
Chrysostom's Body to be brought to Constantinople, and there to be honorably
interred, which was Theop. Chron. p. 30.
three and thirty Years after his Deprivation, then the Breach was all made up,
they were all contented, and submitted freely to Proclus. What was this, but to
be governed by Passion? What Alteration could be made in the Nature of the
thing, by bringing S. Chrysostom's Body to Constantinople? It Is moreover
observable, that the Ioannites of Constantinople fell off from the Communion of
the Church, before there was any one ordained in his place, and before S.
Chrysostom was carried away from Constantinople. This appears from the
Testimony of Socrates L 6. c. 18.
. The Emperor (says he) sent Chrysostom word, that himself could not go to
Church, if he, who had been deposed by two Synods, were there. On that Account
Chrysostom went no more to the Church. Then all that were of his Party, forsook
the Church, and celebrated the Feast of Easter in the public Baths of
Constantius. With them there were many Bishops and Presbyters, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, who because they kept separate Meetings, were called
JOANNITES. To all this I add, that L. 8. c. 23. (...).
Sozomen tells us, that the reason why the Ioannites refused to Communicate
with Arsacius after Chrysostom was carried away, and He made Patriarch, was
(not because they thought it unlawful to Communicate with him, but) because in
his Congregations there were some of Chrysostom's Deposers.

Among those that received Atticus into Communion upon his inserting S.
Chrysostom's Name in the Diptychs, was Vide ejus Epist. 14, 15, 16, 17, 19.
P. Innocent of Rome, together with the rest of those Western Bishops, who had
been kept by his Authority, from Communicating with Atticus. P. Innocent in his
Ap. Sozom. l. 8. c. 26. and Niceph. Hist. l. 13. c. 32. (...).
Epistle to the Clergy and People of Constantinople had said, that a Bishop
unjustly constituted cannot be a Bishop; but words are oftentimes rashly
spoken; it is Practice that best expresses the true and genuine Sentiments of
the Heart. And the Pope's Practice was contrary to that Saying. If Atticus was
no Bishop, because unjustly constituted, how could he be a Bishop afterward,
without a New Ordination? yet afterward he is owned It Is said in the Baroccian
Treatise, That Severianus Bishop of Gabala, and Acacius of B^rrhaea, who were
chiefly concerned in St. Chrysostom's Deprivation, were not deposed or punished
(...), which I render thus; Quum post aliquanto coram Papa Innocentio
sisterentur. The Vindicator, p. 39. says, This is not rightly translated, that
the word (...) signifies only accued in this place; For (says he) no History
owns, that Severianus and Acacius appeared personally before Pope Innocent: But
that is his mistake; For though in truth they never did personally appear, yet
it is certain, that by the latter Greeks 'twas believed that they did. This the
Vindicator would not have been ignorant of if he had read the spurious Epistle
written in the Emperor Arcadius's Name to Pope Innocent. The Emperor there
tells the Pope, That he had sent Acacius and Severianus to him to answer for
what they had done: (...), etc.
by the Pope, and that too without being confirmed by any Council, by Virtue of
the Orders conferred upon him, while Chrysostom was living. I must here
observe, that the chief Reasons why the Pope declared so zealously for S.
Chrysostom, seems to be this: because Theophilus of Alexandria his taking upon
him, to depose a Patriarch of Constantinople, was a great Presumption, and a
Derogation from the Grandeur of the Sea of Rome. The Pope therefore was obliged
to oppose him. And hence it came to pass, that he only desired, that S.
Chrysostom's Name should be restored to the Diptychs: For by that the Patriarch
Atticus owned, that S. Chrysostom was not justly, or validly deprived. That was
all the Pope aimed at. It is also observable, that P. Innocent, when he
proposed that S. Chrysostom's Name should be restored to the Diptychs of the
Church of Constantinople, and of the other Churches of the East, does not at
all insist on this, that Arsacius's Name, who was made Patriarch while
Chrysostom was living and died before him, should be struck out. No, though such
were his Circumstances, yet the Pope was well contented that his Name should be
recited in the Churches, as one of the true Patriarchs of Constantinople.

3. It is to be observed, that a very great part of the Catholic Church
received and communicated with Arsacius and Atticus, though at the same time they
owned, that S. Chrysostom was unjustly deposed, and that too whilst S.
Chrysostom was still living.

1. Maximianus a Bishop of Macedonia, one of S. Chrysostom's great Friends, and
one to whom he wrote some Epistles, whilst he was in Banishment, sent Ep. 16.
Innocentii P. I.
to P. Innocent, to desire him to receive the Patriarch Atticus into Communion.
It Is true, this was after S. Chrysostom's Death: yet it shows that he was not
of Opinion, that Atticus's Ordination was Null, because ordained while
Chrysostom was living.

2. That the Patriarch Atticus was owned and received by all the African
Church, appears from the Code of the Canons, of that Church. Let us send (says
Alypius, P. 331. (...), etc.
one of the Bishops of the Council of Africa) to our most holy Brother the
Bishop of Constantinople, for a Copy of the Nicene Canons. Accordingly they did
so, and the Patriarch Atticus's Answer to them is P. 405.
still extant. The same Church in her Epistle to P. Celestine, calls Atticus,
Ib. p. 409. (...).
the venerable Bishop of Constantinople, and Breviario, c. 4.
Liberatus, a Deacon of that Church, where he mentions him, gives him the Title
of Beatus Atticus. So by Common. super nomine Caelestii, Pelagi, and Iuliani.
Council. tom. 2. p. 1512.
Marius Mercator, who also seems to have been of Africa, he is styled sanctae
memoriae Atticus, Episcopus; again, sanctus ille Vir. I Grant that these
Testimonies of the Church of Africa, were after S. Chrysostom's Death: but
withal it must be observed, that as they show, that the Church allowed of his
Ordination, so it does not by any means appear, that that Church was ever
concerned for S. Chrysostom, or ever declined Atticus's Communion, whilst S.
Chrysostom was living, though it cannot be doubted, but that they accounted S.
Chrysostom unjustly deposed. That the African Church did not side with P.
Innocent, against the Patriarch Atticus, and those that Communicated with him,
appears moreover from a Cod. Can. Eccles. Afric. c. 101. (...).
Decree of one of the Synods of that Church; by which the Church orders, that a
Letter should be sent to P. Innocent, to reconcile the two Churches of Rome and
Alexandria, that there might be Peace between 'em as the Lord had commanded.
This Decree was made in the Year 407.

3. It Is expressly attested by Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 34. (...).
Theodoret, that the greatest part of the Eastern Bishops, esteemed S.
Chrysostom' s Deprivation unjust, yet did not break the Peace of the Church on
his Account. And this express Testimony I desire the Vindicator would be
pleased to take notice of; who tells us P. 12.
that he believes we can give no Instances of any, who thought S. Chrysostom
unjustly deprived, but who were Joannites, and therefore separated from the
Communion of his Deprivers. One would wonder how so learned a Man should be
ignorant of a thing so obvious.

4. It Is asserted by S. Nicon, who flourished above Seven hundred years ago, in
a Treatise concerning Schismatics and Schism MS. Baroc. 91. fol. 27. (...).
, not yet published, (taken, I suppose, cut of his Pandects,) that the Monks of
Egypt, a vast Body of Men, and exceedingly pious, accounted S. Chrysostom's
Deprivation unjust, yet never separated from the Communion of their Patriarch
Theophilus (and consequently not from the Communion of Arsacius and Atticus
Patriarchs of Constantinople.) In the same words S. Nicon plainly discovers
what his opinion was: He speaks of S. Chrysostom's Deprivation, as extremely
unjust, yet highly approves of the Behavior of the Monks of Egypt, in not
separating themselves from Theophilus's Communion. Yet so holy a Man was he
esteemed, that he is worshipped by the Church, both the Greek and the Latin, as
a Saint.

5. When S. Chrysostom took his leave of the Deaconesses, and charged 'em to
submit to his Successor, provided he were Elected by the Consent of all, he
plainly intimates, that he did not think any would refuse to choose a new
Bishop in his place, because he was unjustly deposed. It is plain from those
words, that he took it for granted, that all would presently resolve to Elect
another in his Room; as a thing to be done of Course.

6. Socrates the Ecces. Historian, though he Vide l. 6. c. 10. 15, 16, 18.
takes part with S. Chrysostom as to the Equity of his Cause, and condemns his
Deposers, as Acting unjustly and uncanonically, yet at the same time, approves
very well of their new Patriarchs Arsacius and Atticus. He says, That Arsacius
was a person of C. 19. (...).
extraordinary mildness, and governed peaceably. Atticus he calls (...). c. 20.
a pious and a prudent man: and tells us, that by L. 7. c. 2.
those Qualifications he much increased the Church, the Heretics being brought
over to it by his Management. He spends (in a word) whole Ib. etc. 25.
Chapters in his praise.

7. The Historian Theodoret, who was himself a Bishop, and lived at that time,
though he extremely Vide l. 5. c. 34.
disapproved of S. Chrysostom's Deprivation as unjust, and illegal, yet he
reckons not only Atticus, who survived S. Chrysostom, but likewise Arsacius,
amonst the Patriarchs of Constantinople, viz. in the Catalogue of Patriarchs
subjoined to his History. (...).
Bishops of Constantinople -- Ioannes Chrysostomus, Arsacius, Atticus,
Sisinnius. They are reckoned likewise, as Patriarchs of Constantinople, in all
the Catalogues of the Patriarchs of that See, in that of the Patriarch
Nicephorus, in that of Nicephorus Callisti not yet published, in that which is
extant in the Ius Graeco-Romanum, and in both those that are published in the
beginning of the First Volume of the Byzantine Historians. Yet it is certain,
that when these Catalogues were written, 'twas a thing received as the Gospel
it self, That S. Chrysostom was unjustly, and unlawfully deposed. He is
reckoned also as one of the true Patriarchs of Constantinople, by Theophanes in
his Chronography.

8. It Is well observed by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise, that though it
cannot be supposed, but that the Patriarch Arsacius ordained several Persons,
Bishops and Presbyters, yet it does not at all appear, that any ever scrupled
to receive any Persons on that account, because by him ordained.

I shall conclude this Chapter with the words of P. Celestine I. concerning the
Patriarch Atticus. Atticus (says he in his Ap. Conc. Ephesians. part 1. cap 18.
(...).
Epistle to the Patriarch Nestorius) of holy Memory, that Doctor of the
Catholic Faith, who was truly a Successor of the blessed John (Chrysostom) as
well in his Faith as in his See, etc.

CHAP. XVII.
Deprivations by Heretical Synods invalid. S. Eustathius, Patriarch of Antioch,
deposed by an Heretical Synod; he himself accounts his Deprivation invalid. The
Orthodox separate from the Communion of his Successors, not because he was
invalidly deprived, but because they accounted them Heretics. Eustathius acts
as Bishop of Antioch, though in banishment, as long as his Successors were
Heretics; but as soon as Meletius, an Orthodox Person, was ordained his
Successor, he desisted, and concerned himself no more as Bishop of Antioch.
That he lived till Meletius was made Patriarch, demonstrated against Baronius,
Valesius, etc. ^ by some of the Orthodox refused to submit to Meletius. The
Vindicator's Assertion, That none accounted Meletius an Arian whilst he was
Bishop, confuted. The Schism between the Meletians and the Paulinists no
Example against us.. 1, 2. The Instance of Maximus and Cyril of Jerusalem
examined.. 3. Euphemius, Patriarch of Constantinople, deposed by an Heretical
Synod; yet Macedonius, an Orthodox and a good Man, accepts of his See, though he
owned him to be the rightful Patriarch. Macedonius is received by the
Catholics, though they loved Euphemius and accounted him unjustly deprived. He
is owned by S. Elias Bishop of Jerusalem, though Elias at the same time declared
Euphemius's Deprivation unjust, and refused to subscribe to it.. 4. The Schisms
of the Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians of Egypt, no Examples against us..
5. Two Fragments of Photius out of a MS.. 1, 3.

THat the Deprivation of a Bishop by an Heretical Synod is absolutely null and
invalid, is a certain Maxim in the Law of the Church. Yet this the Vindicator
does not seem to take notice of. If he can show that a Bishop was deprived by
Bishops, he presently thinks himself secure, without considering whether the
Deprivers were Heretical or not. S. Athanasius in his Epistle ad Solitarios,
where he tells us that the Emperor Constantius sent to Liberius, Bishop of
Rome, to persuade him to subscribe to his ( Athanasius's) Condemnation, whom a
Synod of Arians had deposed, makes Liberius speak to the Messenger after this
manner. Let there be (says he) an Ecclesiastical Synod called, and let the
Heretics P. 833. (...).
be thrown out, and let the Orthodox have freedom of Speech. For they cannot be
Members of a Synod who are not Orthodox in Faith: neither ought any Judicial
Enquiry to be made concerning Actions, till there has been an Enquiry
concerning Faith. For, first, all difference in Faith ought to be removed, and
then we may make an Enquiry into Actions. -- These things have we learnt from
our Fathers. These things declare to the Emperor. Thus when Macedonius the
Orthodox Patriarch of Constantinople was deprived first by the Emperor
Anastasius, and afterward by a kind of Synod, which consisted of Eutychian
Heretics, and some Bishops were sent to him with his Deprivation, he asked 'em,
Theoph. p. 134. (...).
Whether they received the Council of Chalcedon? For (says he) if Sabbatians or
Macedonians should bring me a Deprivation, ought I to receive it? So he refused
to receive it. So far was the Church from allowing a Heretic to be a Judge of
a Bishop, that she would not allow one to be a Witness against a Bishop. It Is
expressly forbidden by the 6th. Canon of the 2 d. General Council.

In the time of the Emperor Constantine, Eustathius, Patriarch of Antioch was
deposed by an Heretical Synod upon an Accusation of Incontinence. The
Vindicator tells us that his Deposers, though they secretly favored the Arians,
were not as yet declared an opposite Communion. That is nothing to the purpose:
For it is certain, that for a great while together, that Party were in a sort of
Communion with the Catholics, and yet were accounted Heretics. That
Eustathius was deposed by Heretics (such at least as refused to subscribe to
the (...) or Doctrine of the Nicene Council) is attested by S. Encom. Eustath.
Chrysostom, Apolog. ad Imp. p. 702. (...), etc.
Athanasius, Chron. Eustathius, quo in exilium ob fidem truso.
S. Ierom, (...), l. 2. c. 19.
Sozomen, the Patriarch (...). Chronol.
Nicephorus, and Menaeum Graecorum. Libellus Synodicus, etc.
others, who tell us not only that he was deposed by Arians, but likewise that
he was deposed on the account of his Faith, because he was a great Enemy of the
Arians, and a great Defender of the Orthodox Faith. Hence it is that he is wont
to be honored with the Title of Niceph Patr. loc. cit. Anastasius Sinaita
Contempl. Anagog. in Hexaem. l. 9.
Martyr and Martyrolog. Romans 17. Kal. Aug. and alia Martyrologia.
Confessor. Theodoret L. 1. c 21. (...), etc.
tells us that the Orthodox Bishops, who were present in that Synod, were
against his Deprivation, and persuaded him not to submit to the Sentence passed
upon him. Neither did he submit; for those that had condemned him were forced
to apply Ibid.
themselves to the Emperor, to desire him to execute their Sentence, and to
banish him from Antioch. Which was accordingly done.

Though Eustathius was so unjustly and invalidly deposed, yet,

1. I observe that the Orthodox Party of Antioch did not separate from his
Successors, because he had been invalidly deprived, but because they accounted
them Arians. That this was the Cause of their Separation, is expressly asserted
by Theodoret. Having said that Eulalius, Euphronius, and Flaccillus were made
Bishops of Antioch successively in Eustathius's room, he L. 1 c. 22. (...).
adds: All these were inwardly Arians, and on that account, the greatest part
of the Orthodox, both Clergy and Laity, left the Churches, and met together in
Conventicles: and were called Eustathians, because they began after he was
carried away. Socrates tells us, that after Eustathius was deposed, there was a
great Sedition in Antioch, one part of the City being for Socr. l. 1. c. 24. he
omits Eulalius. Theodoret shows that they did not endeavor to choose Eusebius,
till after Eulalius's Death. Socrates is likewise in an error when he says
there was a 8 Years vacancy between Eustathius and Euphronius.
Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, and others, desiring that Eustathius should be
restored: He adds, That Eusebius refusing to accept of the Bishopric of
Antioch, the Seditions ceased. No wonder if the People were for the
restoration of their old Bishop, since there was not any other then in his
See. No wonder if they were so much against Eusebius's being made Bishop, since
he (as is very notorious) was accounted an Arian.

2dly. I observe, that Eustathius being in Banishment, continued to take care
of the Orthodox of Antioch as their Bishop (as much as he could at so great a
distance) as long as those that were put into his place were Arians: But as
soon as Meletius, an Orthodox Person, was made Bishop in his room, he peaceably
gave over, and never concerned himself any more as a Bishop of Antioch. It Is
observed by Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople, in a MS. Baroc.(...).
Treatise not yet published, that Meletius, though he had received his Orders
from Arians, and though Eustathius was still living, was however owned by the
Church as a true Patriarch of Antioch. The holy Meletius (says he) was ordained
Bishop of Sebastia by the Arians, and by the Arians likewise was translated
from thence to Berrhoea, and afterward to Antioch, S. Eustathius being thrust
out of that See for his Orthodoxy. But nothing of all this proved a prejudice
to him; not his being translated from one See to another not his being advanced
to Eustathius' s Throne when he was banished for his Piety and still living,
nor his being ordained by Arians. But because he adhered to the Orthodox Faith,
he was readily received by the Church, and is honored among the chief of the
holy Fathers. He it was that ordained Chrysostom, Deacon; and the great Basil,
Presbyter: as we learn from Socrates' s Ecclesiastical History, and from S.
Amphilochius' s Oration concerning S. Basil. That S. Basil and S. Chrysostom
were ordained by Meletius, and that the old Patriarch Eustathius was living
when Meletius was made Patriarch of Antioch, is likewise observed by the Author
of the Baroccian Treatise. But that Eustathius was living when Meletius was
made Patriarch of Antioch, is positively denied by some of our A further
Account of the Baroccian M S. p 6, 7.
Answerers. I had observed in my Notes on that Treatise, that L. 4. c. 14, 15.
Socrates and L. 6. c. 13.
Sozomen expressly attest that Eustathius was alive in the third Consulship of
Valentinianus and Valens, i. e. A. D. 370. which was long after Meletius was
made Patriarch, that he had been recalled from Banishment by the Emp. Iovian,
that he was on that Year at Constantinople, where he Ordained Evagrius the
Orthodox Patriarch of Constantinople, in opposition to Demophilus the Arian,
and was again banished by the Emperor Valens to Bizua in Thrace; I observed that
the Arguments produced by Baronius and Valesius, to show that Eustathius died
before Valesius was made Patriarch, and that Socrates and Sozomen mistook
Eustathius of Antioch for Eustathius of Sebastia, are not of so great weight as
to be laid in the Balance against so express and particular an account as those
Authors give us. To this, says one of our Answerers: I must confess that
Eustathius (as the Editor observes against Valesius) might have lived to the
third Consulship of Valentinianus and Valens, for then he had not been above 90
Years of Age. But is this the Argument of Baronius, or does Valesius produce no
other? Had he looked into the Annals, An. 370. he would have found that Baronius
thought it absurd to imagine that the Orthodox Bishops, and Catholic People of
Antioch, would have suffered Meletius or Paulinus to have sat in that Chair,
had Eustathius been alive: That it is incredible he should not repair to
Antioch, and appear in the Catholic Synod at that time; and folly to fancy
that Meletius and Paulinus would not have given place to him, and to put an end
to the Schism in that Church. And Valesius proves from S. Ierom that Eustathius
of Antioch was buried at Trajanople in Thrace, to which place he was banished
(by Constantine) and therefore could not be that Eustathius who was banished by
Valens to Bizna in Thrace. But these are Arguments not very favorable to the
Editor's Designs, and therefore must be shuffled over and concealed: So that we
have a full Testimony of Theodoret, who wrote his History to supply the Defects
and correct the Mistakes of Socrates and Sozomen, and says that Eustathius was
dead before Meletius was made Patriarch; and likewise the Authority of S. Ierom
against a senseless surmise of one single Socrates, (for Sozomen transcribes
him) who was neither so accurate nor judicious as either of the other two, etc.
Thus much our Author. But notwithstanding his Sufficiency and Confidence, I
still assert, that Eustathius was living when Meletius was made Patriarch of
Antioch. First, As for the Testimony of S. Ierom, it might very well be so as
he says, and yet so as Socrates says too. For Eustathius, tho banished by
Valens to Bizua, might be buried at His Body, as it seems was afterward
removed to Philippi. For Victor T^n. and Theodorus Lector say, it was carried
to Antioch from Philippi. Theodorus thought that he was banished to Philippi.
Trajanople. And since that Eustathius, whom Socrates mentions, was banished
into Thrace, where S. Ierom and S. Chrysostom say Eustathius of Antioch lay
buried, even from thence it appears probable that it was the same Eustathius.
2. The Authority of Theodoret is much less than that of Socrates. That
Eustathius was dead when Meletius was made Patriarch, might be said only by
Conjecture: But to tell such a particular Story as Socrates does concerning his
being alive after that, argues a particular Knowledge. And as for Theodoret his
being so much a better Historian than Socrates, our Author might have learnt
from Valesius himself, that Praef. ad Theodorit. Illud praeterea in Historia
Theodoriti neprehendendum mihi videntur, quod in toto opere nullam notam
temporum adhibuit. -- Quanto magis. Laudanda est Socratis diligentia, etc.
Socrates was particularly diligent in his Chronology. 3. It is not only
Socrates, and those that follow him, that are Witnesses of what we assert. I
shall not urge the Authority of Photius, nor that of the Ad. Phot. Bibl.
Life of S. Athanasius, of Chron. ub^ de Evagrio Ep. Constantipolitano.
Nicephorus the Patriarch, of Catal. MS. Patr. Constantinopolitan. and in
Histor.
Nicephorus Callisti, who, as well as Sozomen, seem to have borrowed from
Socrates: But others there are who did not follow him. 1. It Is expressly
asserted in the Menology of the Greek Church, that our Eustathius was a hundred
Years old when he died. 2. It Is likewise expressly asserted by L. 2. p. 557.
Theodorus Lector, who is followed by Theophanes, that he died a hundred Years
before his Body was translated from Philippi to Antioch by the Patriarch
Calendion, which was in the Year Not 490, as Victor Tun. and Valesius say: for
Calendion was not Patriarch so long.
482, or 483; Therefore according to Theodorus he died about the Year 382. To
which time he might very well live, since he was a hundred Years old when he
died. But to what purpose do I cite these Autorities, when S. Chrysostom
himself is my Witness? Let us hear what he says of Eustathius in his Encomium.
He there plainly tells us, not only that he was living, when Meletius was
ordained his Successor, (which I wonder that neither Baronius, nor Valesius
observed) but likewise that he left off to concern himself, as a Bishop of
Antioch, as soon as the Orthodox Meletius was ordained in his place. (...), etc.
God (says S. Chrysostom) permitted the Blessed Eustathius to be lead away into
Banishment, that he might make the strength of Truth, and the weakness of
Heretics more manifest. When he was to be carried away, though he was to leave
the City, yet he would not cease to love you: and he did not therefore look
upon himself to be deprived of his Episcopal Office, because he was thrust out
of his Church. But so much the more he applied himself to take care of you, and
calling you all together he exhorted you, not to yield to the Wolfs, or betray
the Flock to 'em. -- (...).
When they invaded the Sheep, he did not leave 'em, though he was not possessed
of the Episcopal Chair. But that his generous and Philosophical Soul did not
value: the Honors of a Governor he left to others, but he bore the burden of a
Governor, being conversant among Wolfs. -- (...).
In doing thus he formed all to the true Faith. Neither did he desist, till by
the Providence of God the blessed Meletius came hither, and received the whole
Mass: the one sowed, and the other reapt.

3. I observe, that though as S. Chrysostom witnesses, Eustathius continued to
Act as Bishop of Antioch, yet as soon as Meletius, an Orthodox Person, was
proposed to be Elected Bishop of that See, the Orthodox Party very readily
concurred and accepted of him, though it does not appear, that they knew that
Eustathius would give his Consent. How cheerfully the Orthodox accepted of
Meletius we may read in L. 2. c. 31.
Theodoret. There were some of the Eustathius that stood out against him, and
refused to own him: But their reason was, because he had been ordained by
Arians which that party accounted a just Cause of Separation, and besides was
by many accounted an Arian himself. We are told by the P. 50, 51.
Vindicator, that the only Reason why his Adversaries excepted against him
was, his being ordained by Arians: But that is a very great Mistake. That by
some he was accounted an Arian, even whilst he was Bishop of Antioch, Ep. 321,
349.
S. Basil complains. Chron. an. 329. Eustathio in exilium ob fidem truso, usque
in presentem diem, Arriani Ecclesiam occupaverunt, i. e. Eulalius, Eusebius,
Euphronius, Placillus, Stephanus, Leontius, Eudoxius, Meletius, Euzoius,
Dorotheus; rursum Meletius. Quorum idcirco tempora non digessi, quod cos hosts
potius quam Episcopos Christi judicavi. Vide ad an. 361.
S. Ierom himself expressly calls him a Heretic or Arian, and so does the
Author of the P. 688. Ed. in. 40.
Chronicon Paschale.

. 2. After some time Meletius was by the Emperor Constantius banished and
recalled, together with the other Orthodox Bishops that had been banished, by
the Emperor Julian. Before he returned to Antioch, Lucifer Calaritanus, a great
Zealot, one that did not allow of any one whom the Arians had ordained, had
been there; and had ordained a Presbyter of the Eustathians, by Name Paulinus,
Bishop of Antioch. This the greatest part of the Orthodox did not allow of, but
refused to receive him as their Bishop, and when their Bishop Meletius
returned, adhered to him. We are told by An Answer to a Treatise out of Eccles.
Hist. p. 4, 5.
some of our Adversaries, that this Example makes directly against us. For (say
they) Paulinus was possessed of the Sea of Antioch, and was likewise Orthodox,
yet Meletius's Party did not receive him, but waited for his Return, and
adhered to him. But it is strange, that this should be urged against that
Doctrine which we maintain. I shall not mention that Paulinus was esteemed by
some not Orthodox, but a Epiphan. Haer. 77. c. 20.
Sabellian; neither shall I mention, that his not allowing the Ordinations of
the Meletian Clergy, as being derived from the Arians, was enough to make that
Party oppose him. I only observe, that the Circumstances of his Promotion, were
extremely different from those supposed in our Question. 1. Lucifer Calaritanus
had nothing at all to do with the Sea of Antioch. What Authority had he to
constitute a Bishop of Antioch? Had Meletius been dead, the Church of Antioch
would not have been obliged to submit to Paulinus whom he made Bishop. If an
Outlandish Bishop, that had nothing at all to do here, should pretend to
constitute an Archbishop of Canterbury, in the room of a banished Archbishop,
who can imagine that, by the Principles which we advance, we should be obliged
to receive him? 2. Meletius was not at that time in Banishment, not made
incapable of serving as a Bishop of Antioch. He was so far from being made
incapable by any Sovereign Power, that by the Emperor's Authority he had Socr.
l. 3. c. 6, 7, 9. Theodoret, l. 3. c. 4, 5.
leave given him to return to his See, and was as it were upon the Road.

. 3. It Is alleged by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise, That Maximus an
Orthodox Bishop of Jerusalem, was deposed by Acacius the Heretical Bishop of
Caesarea in Palestine, because he took part with S. Athanasius, and established
the Doctrine of the Homoousion: That, he being so deposed, Cyrillus an Arian
was constituted Bishop in his room, but was afterward owned by the Church,
because he came over to the Orthodox Faith, and is honored by the Church as a
Saint. To this our Adversaries answer, that L. 2. c. 26.
Theodoret, and Chron. an. 349.
S. Ierom attest, that Maximus was (not deposed but) dead before Cyril was made
Bishop of Jerusalem. To which they might have added, the Authority of the Epist.
Synod. ad Damas. P. ap. Theod. l. 5, 9 p. 211.
General Council of Constantinople, in which it is declared that Cyril was made
Bishop Canonically ordained by the Bishops of the Province. On the other side
it may be alleged, that the Historian Socrates L. 2. c. 38.
expressly affirms, that Maximus was expelled, and Cyril substituted in his room
by the Arians, Acacius and Patrophilus; and that in this Socrates is followed
by many; by the Author of the C. 49.
Synodicon, and by the Authors of the two Lives of S. Athanasius. It is
likewise attested by Theophanes, that Maximus was deposed. To which I shall add
the Testimony of Photius, out of a MS. Treatise, which is directly to our
purpose. S. Maximus (says MS. Baroc. (...).
he) the Confessor, being expelled by the Arians for his Orthodoxy, Cyril was
by the Arians ordained in Jerusalem, one of the Chief of the Arian Faction, as
Ecclesiastical Historians tell us. But he coming over to the Orthodox Faith,
was not only received as a Bishop, together with those whom he had ordained,
but is also honored by the Church as a Saint. Concerning whom Gregory Nyssen
in his Homily, upon the Translation of the Body of S. Stephen the Proto-Martyr,
has these words: Cyril repented and adhered to the Orthodox Faith. He presided
in the Second Council, and was not excepted against, either because he was
ordained by Arians, and had been an Arian himself, or because he had usurpt the
Chair of S. Maximus, expelled in defense of the Homoousion, and still living.
This Instance I leave to the Reader's Judgment.

. 4. Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople, was deposed by an Heretical Synod,
in obedience to the Heretical Emperor Anastasius. The Emperor Anastasius (says
Theodorus P. 559.
Lector) charged the Patriarch Euphemius with the Rebellion of the Isauri,
alleging that he had written Letters to the Rebels, and called together (...).
those Bishops which were in Town; who to gratify the Emperor, passed upon
Euphemius the Sentence of Excommunication, and Deprivation. It Is to be observed
of this Synod, that it was unlawful on two Accounts. 1. It was only a Synodus
(...), i. e. a few Bishops called together, such as were then residing at
Constantinople, which by the Canons of the Church could be of no force at all,
for they require that a That the Affairs of a Province should be managed by the
Bishops (in General of that Province.
Synod should be at least Provincial. The Vindicator says such a Synod was by
the Canons of the Church sufficient and obliging, till a greater number of
Bishops, could be persuaded to restore him. By what Canons? If the Law
requires, that all the Members of Parliament should be summoned, and only some
few are called, though every one is truly a Member, yet they cannot make a
Parliament, 2. It was an Heretical Synod. Such a one to be sure it was. For the
true reason why the Emperor would have Euphemius deposed Evagr. l. 3. c. 30
Victor, Tun. p. 5. Macellinus Comet, Cyrillus Seythop. V. Sab.e.
was because he knew him to be a stout Defender of the Faith. If they had not
been Men of his own Faith, the Emperor would never have employed 'em in that
Business: and Theophanes P. 128.
expressly tells us, that the Bishops that were about the Emperor were
Heretics. That this Synod in particular, was an Heretical C. 107. (...).
Synod, the Libellus Synodicus asserts. I now observe: 1. That Macedonius who
was put into Euphemius's place, and was really Orthodox, though the Emperor (I
suppose) thought him well inclined to his Party, though he accounted Euphemius
invalidly deprived, and had with all a great Honor for him, yet he freely
accepted of the Sea and that too, though he knew that Euphemius had never
resigned. That he thought him invalidly deprived, may be gathered from these
words of Theodorus Lector. The Emperor (says he) Commanded Euphemius to be
banished to Euchaita, who desired that Macedonius might give him his Word, that
he should not be injured on the way. Macedonius therefore being permitted by
the Emperor to pass his Word for his Security, did a thing that deserves
Praise: He commanded his Deacon (...).
to take off his Episcopal Robe, and, so he went into the Baptisterium of the
Church to Euphemius. He took up Money likewise upon use, and gave it him to
sustain his Company. If he had not thought him invalidly deposed, he would not
have showed him that kind of respect.

2. That Macedonius being thus constituted was received as Patriarch of
Constantinople by the Catholic Church. This is too notorious to need any
Proof. I shall only observe, that he is called by Zonaras a Holy Man; and that
the People of Constantinople submitted to him, though they loved Euphemius so
well, and so much condemned the Proceedings against him, as to Theodorus
Lector, (...), etc.
raise a Sedition for his sake when first deprived.

3. That when Macedonius sent his Synodical Letters to Elias Patriarch of
Jerusalem, Elias received him as Patriarch, though at the same time he refused to
subscribe to Euphemius's Deprivation. (...). V. Sabae. c. 50.
Elias (says Cyrillus Scythopolitanus) refused to give his Consent to
Euphemius' s Deprivation, but Macedonius he received into Communion, when he
found by his Synodical Letter that he was Orthodox. So between Macedonius and
Elias there was Concord.

4. So far was Euphemius from cherishing any Animosity against his Successor
Macedonius, that after Macedonius, was likewise banished, they Libel. Synod. c.
110.
visited one another as Friends, and were therefore both murdered by the
Emperor's Command.

. 5. It Is alleged by one The Unity of Priesthood, etc. p. 58, 59.
of our Adversaries, that the Novatians, the Donatists, and the Meletians of
Egypt were Schismatics in the Opinion of the Church, because the Bishops who
first headed 'em were Second Bishops; but this is easily answered: For the
Bishops, whom they followed, were not set up by any Sovereign coercive Power,
in the room of others deposed, but were set up by inferior Persons, against
others possessed of the Sees. I have already said, that it is not every one
whom a small tumultuous Party shall get to be ordained, that ought to be
received as a Bishop; but that which we maintain is this, That where the lawful
Bishop is deposed by an Irresistible Party, there the Successor may be
acknowleged. Here I cannot but take notice, that before Majorinus, the Head of
the Donatists, was made Bishop of Carthage by that Party, Caecilianus, who was
first possessed of the Sea, was deposed by a Synod of no less than Seventy
Bishops; yet was owned by the Catholic Church, to have been all along the
rightful Bishop even before he was confirmed by the Synods of Rome and Arles;
and the other Party was accounted Schismatical from the very beginning. This
our Adversaries who are pleased to Talk so much of Synods, would do well to
consider. He never was thrust out of his See by the Civil Power, and the Synod
no Body valued, though it was Orthodox; he was therefore owned, because he was
still in Possession.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion.
Bishops deposed by the Civil Authority obliged even in common Charity to
acquiesce. But whether they acquiesce or not, the Church is to submit to the
present Possessor.

I Have now done. And from what has been said, I think we may very well draw
this Conclusion: That supposing a Bishop deprived by the Secular Power is
unjustly and invalidly deprived; supposing likewise that he does not acquiesce,
but still lays claim to his Bishopric; yet the Church may lawfully, and ought
for peace sake, to receive the present Possessor, if otherwise unexceptionable.

I shall here take my leave of those Readers to whom I have hitherto directed
my Discourse, and address my self, with all due Reverence and Respect, to those
reverend and worthy Persons, whose Dissatisfactions have occasioned the writing
of this Treatise.

If the Church is not obliged to adhere to an ejected Bishop who refuses to
acquiesce, then it is certain that That Bishop, if he makes a Separation, is
himself guilty of a Schism. We will now proceed to consider, in short, the Duty
of an ejected Bishop; upon this Supposition, That there are some of our late
Bishops that still lay Claim to the Obedience of their People, which, as has
been observed in the Beginning of this Treatise, does not as yet sufficiently
appear. And (for their sakes I speak it) may it never appear! We will suppose,
if they please, that the Church ought not to submit to the present Possessor,
unless the ejected Bishop gives his Consent. Let that be supposed. Yet if the
Church, to avoid a Persecution, has actually done it, what then ought a good
Bishop to do? Let us consider a little what the consequences of a Schism may
be. To be engaged in a Schism, is, according to S. Cyprian, and our Adversaries
themselves, to be out of the Church of Christ, and to be in a State of
Damnation. And how can a good Bishop, one that ought to lay down even his Life
for his Flock, see his People in a State of Damnation, when by only his
communicating with his Successor, they may be redeemed? This deserves to be
seriously considered.

It Is the Advice of S. Clement, Bishop of Rome, to some turbulent Persons of
Corinth, who disturbed the Presbyters of the Church, that they should, if they
could not agree, rather leave that place than disturb the Presbyters, and
hinder 'em in the Discharge of their Duty. This place of S. Clement I formerly
understood, as if he had given that advice to the Presbyters themselves, that
they should rather withdraw than be the occasion of Schisms and Divisions; and
so easy it is to mistake it, that it is acknowleged by even some of my
Adversaries It Is true, S. Clement not only advises the injured Presbyters at
Corinth, but tells them it was their real Interest to withdraw. A farther
Account of the Baroccian MS. p. 2. The Author of the Answer to a Treatise out
of Eccles. Hist. p. 27. speaks doubtingly of it.
that I rightly understood it: But upon perusing S. Clement's Epistle a second
time, I agree with the learned Vindicator, that this is his Meaning -- Vtinam
mihi sic semper disputare contingat, ut ad meliora proficiens, deseram quod
ma^^ tenebam. That I heartily say with S. Adv. Luciferianos.
Ierom. I could heartily wish that all were of the same Disposition: Caeterum
scimus quosdam (I use S. Ep. ad Steph. P.
Cyprian's words) quod semel imbiberunt nolle deponere, nec propositum suum
facile mutare.

That the Clergy ought not to be unjustly disturbed, is a thing we all agree
in: It is likewise certain, that if they have Injury done 'em, they ought to
have Amends made 'em. But the Question now is, Whether if the State has
unjustly deposed 'em, and is resolved not to restore 'em, and the Church for
Peace-sake has thought fit to submit, they that are injured ought not so to
acquiesce, as that all People may be united, and the much greater Part
retrieved from the Spiritual Danger to which they are obnoxious? I have
produced in my Preface to the Baroccian Treatise some Examples to show how
tender good Bishops have always been of their Flock and the Church's Peace.
They deserve to be here also mentioned. When S. Gregory Nazianzen was Patriarch
of Constantinople, and great Disturbances were raised in the Church on his
account, he freely surrendered up his Right, and in the General Council of
Constantinople, thus addressed himself to the Bishops: It Is a base and unworthy
thing, my Colleagues and Co-pastors of the Flock of Christ, for you who teach
others Peace, to stir up among your selves an intestine War. For how shall you
be able to reduce others to Concord, who differ and disagree among your selves?
By the Trinity it self I beseech you, to concert your Affairs peaceably and as
becomes you. And if on my account there be any Dissentions, I am not better
than the Prophet Jonas: Throw me into the Sea, and so shall you cease to be
tossed by the tempest of Tumults. Whatsoever you shall think fit, though I am not
guilty of any thing, I will willingly endure it, if by that means there may be
Concord preserved. Depose me from my Throne. Cast me out of the City. This
only I desire, that (to speak in the words of Zacharias) you would love Truth
and Peace. When Nectarius was ordained, and fate as his Successor, he addressed
himself to him, and desired him to take care against Heretics. As for my own
private Troubles (says he) I do not so much as reckon 'em among Evils: I regard
only the Afflictions of the Church. When the African Church was broken in
pieces by the Schism of the Donatist's, all the Catholic Bishops of that
Church, to the number of near 300, made the Donatists this Offer, That, if they
pleased, all the Bishops of both Parties should resign their Bishoprics, and
new ones, whom both Parties should acknowledge, should be chosen in their
places: This Offer they publicly make in the first Conference of Carthage in
their Epistle to Marcellinus the Emperor's So I call him, because in the
Conference he was dep^red by the Emperor Honorias to represent him as judge by
a particular Commission. Because I did not call him by his old Title of
Trib^o^^ Notarius, one of my Answerers says he does not believe that I ever
looked into S. Austin or the Conference of Carthage which I quoted. This both
He, and all others, may rely upon, That I never quote Authors, but I have
either read 'em my self or tell from whom I quote 'em.
Vicegerent. For why (say they I should we doubt to offer up in our Redeemer
the Sacrifice of such a Humility. Did he descend into a Human Body from Heaven,
that we might be Members of him, and shall we scruple to descend from our
Thrones to preserve his Body from being torn in pieces by a cruel Division?
It Is sufficient for us that we are faithful and obedient Christians: Let us
therefore so continue. We are ordained Bishops for the sake of the People of
Christ: That therefore which conduces to the peace of Christ's Church, let us
do according to the Duty of Bishops. If we are profitable Servants, how can we
prefer our Temporal Honors to the Eternal Rewards of our Lord. The Episcopal
Dignity will be more advantageous to us, if, by being resigned, it may gather
together the Flock of Christ, than if it disperses it by being retained. For
with what face shall we hope for those Honors which are promised by Christ in
the World to come, if our pretending to our Honors here in this World does
hinder the Unity of the Church. Who can believe that these great Men, if they
had been unjustly deposed by the Civil Authority* would therefore have broken
the Peace of the Church, and separated from the Communion of their Successors?
It Is a Saying of S. Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, That Schism is more to be
avoided than Idolatry it self; because by avoiding Idolatry, we consult only
our ow^ private Good, but by avoiding Schism, we consult the Good of all the
whole Church. This he writes to Novatian, who had set up himself against
Cornelius as Bishop of Rome. And he tells him, That if he was chosen against
his Will (as he had pretended) he ought to show it by resigning voluntarily:
That he ought to endure any thing that the Church of God might not be divided.
This Authority our Adversaries are pleased to urge for themselves: But they do
not consider how different their Case is from that of Cornelius. They do not
consider, that Cornelius was never deposed, was still in Possession, still
owned by all the Churches of the World, Novatian being owned but by a very
small Party. If Cornelius had been irre^^ievably deposed by the Civil Power, if
Novatian had been chosen by the Church in his place, and been owned by almost
all, if such had been Cornelius's Case, who can believe but that S. Dionysius,
who thought Schism worse than Idolatry, would have exhorted him to acquiesce,
that so there might be an end put to the Schism? Our Adversaries ought to
consider, that it is not the Cession of the Bishops now in Possession, that can
restore those that are deposed. And it is the Duty of every good Bishop to
consider not what is his Right, but what is likely to conduce to the Peace of
the Church. It Is his Duty, as S. Dionysius says, to endure any thing that the
Church of God may not be divided.

When Socr^ l. 7. c. 3.
Theodosius Bishop of Synada, was deposed by the People, and Agapetus the
Bishop of the Macedonian Heretics, was, upon his turning to the Orthodox
Faith, together with his Followers, made Bishop in his stead, he appealed to
Attic^s the Patriarch of Constantinople, but the Patriarch advising him to
acquiesce, and to prefer the Go^d of the Public before his private advantage,
he contented himself with a private Life. When Maximianus Bishop of Bagai in
Africa, was opposed by his People who were not willing to be under him, he
quietly gave up his Right, and he is highly praised for it by S. Epist. 238.
Long est quippe gloriostus. Episcopatus sarcinam propter Ecclesiae vitanda
pericula deposuisse, quam propter regenda gubernacula sussepisse: Ille quippe
se honorem si pacis ratio pateretur, digne ^accipere potuisse demonstrat qui
acceptum non dese^dit INDIGNE -- Retribuatur ei pux ^terna, quae promisa est
Ecclesi^e, qui intellexit si^i non expedire quod paci non expediat Ecclesiae.
Austin. It is far more glorious (says S. Austin on that occasion) to give up
ones Bishopric, for the securing the Church from Dangers, than to take it upon
one. For he who does not unworthily defend the Honor he received, plainly
shows, that he would have been worthy of it, if the Church's Peace would have
permitted him to keep it. -- May Maximianus be repaid with that everlasting
Peace, which is promised the Church, because he esteemed that, not expedient
for him, which was not expedient for the Church. Those many Examples of a
peaceable Acquiescence, which we have produced in the foregoing Discourse, I
shall not here repeat. I shall not mention the Example of S. Elias Patriarch of
Jerusalem, nor that of Eutychius, Patriarch of Constantinople, nor that of S.
Anastasius, Patriarch of Antioch, nor those of S. Eustathius, and Euphemius. I
shall not mention that Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople declared, that if
Photius had been otherwise unexceptionable, he would have yielded to him:
Neither shall I mention, that S. Martin, when in Banishment, prayed for his
Successor. These and many more Examples of a peaceful and pious Acquiescence, I
leave to the serious Consideration of those that are concerned.

It Is alleged by the Author of a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Of Christian
Communion to be kept on in the Unity of Christ's Church, that the ejected
Bishops are not obliged to acquiesce, but rather to Act still as Bishops;
because it is the Duty of all Bishops and Clergymen to stand to, and preach up,
all good Doctrines: but (says he) if they should resign, there are some good
Doctrines, which in these times will not be defended. This is the Sum of all
that concerns us. In answer to which, I shall only desire the Author to
consider, that according to that Notion there is no Separation, but what may
easily be defended. What Dissenter is there amongst us, that cannot make the
same Plea?

I desire to be pardoned, for presuming to offer my Advice. I can truly say of
those reverend Men, what S. Cyprian does of Maximus and his Associates, who
were ere-while Confessors, and afterward engaged in a Schism. Ep. 54. Ad
Maximum and caeteros Confessores, ex Schismate ad Ecclesiam reversos. Dolebam
vehementer and graviter angebar quod cum cis communicare non possum quos semel
diligere caepissem.
I am extremely sorry, that I cannot Communicate with those whom I had begun to
love. God grant, that like Maximus and his Associates, they that were lately
our Confessors, may be again united to the Church. I cannot but grieve when I
consider those Persons in a Meeting House, whom I so much loved and reverenced
in the Tower.

FINIS.
ADDENDA.
P. 4. l. 12. after the words, cannot be imputed as a fault; add, In an Epistle
of P. Felix IX. Ap. Acta Concilii juxta Graeo^s VIII. p. 276.
to the Emperor Basilius Macedo, we have several other Autorities of the
Ancient Popes collected, to show, That the Laws and Customs of the Church ought
to give place to Necessity and Convenience. When Necessity (says Pope (...).
Gelasius) does not require the contrary, the Decrees of the Fathers ought to
be observed. So (...).
Pope Leo; who adds, But where there is Necessity and Force, there let him that
governs so order Matters, as the Convenience of the Churchrequires. We ought to
consider (says (...).
Pope Felix) That when there is a Necessity, the Constitutions of the Fathers
are oftentimes transgressed. To all which I add the Authority of Pope Pelagius
II. For a Bishop to be translated from one See to another is directly against a
Canon of the Council of Nice; and for the observation of this Canon Pope
Pelagius zealously contends; yet he adds withal, That if Necessity, or the Good
of the Church requires it, it is lawful to act contrary to it; and he says,
That they that think otherwise, do not understand the Nature of the Laws of the
Church. They do not well understand (says Ep. 1. Ad Benignum Archiep. Non been
intelligunt Ecclesiasticas Regulas, qui hoc negant causa utilitatis aut
necessitatis fieri posse, quoties communis utilitas aut necessitas persuaserit.
he) the Ecclesiastical Rules, who deny* That it may be done for Convenience or
Necessities sake when the Public Good or Necessity requires.

The Principal ERRATA are these.
Page ^0. l. 24, 25. and in several other places, Sense for Sense. p. 20. Note
1. l. 2. write occisioni. p. 24. l. 2. in deposing p. 27. l. 2. had hid
himself. p. 34. l. 35. conclude from the words. p. 37. l. 9 Thebuthi. p. 45^
note 3. l. 4. constituto. p. 51. l. 32. there are some. p. 59. note 4. l 2.
Viro. p. 61. l. 37. Gelasius. That. p. 62. l. 6. Epistles. And. p. 63. l. ult.
occulente. p. 64. l. 4. the Pope's excommunicating Acacius. p 65. l. 9. broke
off only upon. p. 61. l. 1. --. 6. In the Year 483. p. 67. note 3. l. 18.
(...). p. 68. l. 30. Apollonias. ibid. note 1. l. 9. (...) p. 69. l. 20. only
upon p. 71. l. 8. Theophanes: The. p. 86. note 6. (...). p. 90. l. 29.
confuted. Though p. 91. l. 3. Diaconas. Least. p. 97. l. 31. p. 98. l. 33.
Nicephorus the Patriarch. p. 100. l. 7. (...). p. 101. l. 26. who resided p.
105 l. 5. (...). l. 33. Nicelas Paphlago. p. 106 l. 27. Biclariensis l. 29.
Faith. Under. p. 107. n. 3. l. 16. Patriarcham Constable. p. 110 ^ ult. l. 4.
(...). p. 118. l. 29. from him that before p. 121. l. 15. a Potestatibus. p.
122. l. 2. was the great p. 130. l. 6. consederant. l. 8. gestatorio. p. 132.
n. 1. l. 9. false) and the business about which he writes was. p. 137. l. 3.
Constantinus Copr. p. 139. l. 32. Characters. We p. 140. n. 6. who says he had.
p. 141. n. 5. p. 150 n. 5. p. 152, etc. Nicolaus p 147. l. 5. (...). p. 150. n.
4. l. 4. (...). p. 188. n. 4. l. 5. (...). What Errors there may be in the
following Pages, which the Author has not seen, the Reader is desired to
correct.

THE CASE of SEES VACANT By an Unjust or Uncanonical DEPRIVATION, STATED.

In Reply to a TREATISE ENTITLED A Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, etc.
TOGETHER WITH The several other Pamphlets lately published as Answers to the
BAROCCIAN TREATISE.

By HUMPHRY HODY, D. D. Fellow of Wadh. Coll. in Oxford.

Abstineamus nos a Convitiis ne tempus inaniter impendamus, and ad i^ quod
agitur inter nos potius advertamus. S. Aug. Ep. ad Pascentium Comitem.

Non ^nim vincimur, quando offeruntur nobis meliora, sed instruimur; maxim in
his, qua ad Ecclesia unitatem pertinent, and spei and fidei nostrae veritatem.
S. Cypr.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse, R. Rmo in Christo Patri ac Dno Dno Iohanni Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacris Domest.
December. 1. 1692.
To the most Reverend Father in God JOHN, By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop
of CANTERBURY His GRACE Primate of all England and Metropolitan.
May it please your Grace,
THis Treatise being designed for the Service of the Church as at present
Established, I presume to make your Grace this humble offer of it. It must be
confessed that the greatness of the Subject deserves a more able Manager: but, my
Lord, that favorable Acceptance with which you were pleased to honor the
Baroccian Treatise, has encouraged me to hope, that your Grace will likewise be
pleased to accept of these Endeavors, and to excuse and pardon the Defects of

Your GRACE's Most dutiful Servant, HVMPHRY HODY.

To the Reader.
THere are two things which they that separate from the Communion of the Church
on the account of Bishops deposed by the Civil Authority, are obliged to make
out, to justify themselves from the Charge of Schism:

1. That the Civil Power has no Authority in any Case whatever to deprive a
Bishop of his See.

2. That no Bishop that is put into the place of another deposed by an
incompetent Authority ought to be owned.

If they cannot make out both these Propositions, they do nothing at all. For
if we may lawfully submit to a Bishop put into the place of another deprived by
the Civil Power, though the Civil Power had no Authority to deprive, it must
thence follow that They are guilty of Schism who separate from the Church on
such an account, because there is nothing can justify a Separation from the
Church, when we may lawfully communicate with it.

But on the other Side, the Case is quite different. They that own the present
Possessor in opposition to one deposed by the Civil Power, are, to justify
their Adherence to him, obliged to make out but only one thing: Either,

1. That the Civil Power may lawfully deprive a Bishop of his See for Crimes
(or reputed Crimes) purely Political: Such as are here supposed: or,

2. That if it cannot lawfully do so, yet if it has actually done it, and
another, unexceptionable on all other accounts, is established in the Sea, it
is lawful, for Peace-sake, to own the Possessor.

This Advantage We have of our Adversaries. The Baroccian Treatise, which I
lately published, is a Proof of the last Proposition. It supposes, that Bishops
deprived uncanonically, whether by Princes only, or by Synods, (it produces
Examples of both kinds) are unjustly and invalidly deprived; yet shows, that we
ought not to separate on that account from the Communion of the Present
Possessor. Never was a poor Treatise more hardly and severely used by its
Adversaries, than that has been! This was a Proposition that our Adversaries
were not aware of. They were therefore highly concerned to employ all their Art
to weaken the Authority of that Treatise. But for all the hard Names they have
so liberally bestowed upon it, they are forced to confess by their Practice,
that it carries with it a great deal of Strength. If to be opposed by seven
several Answerers, the latter not satisfied with what the former had urged, be
an Argument of Strength in a Treatise, we may still believe (and I hope it was
so) that the finding it out at this Juncture had something of the (...) in it.

I presume the Reader will expect I should give him some Account of these seven
several Answers which have been published against it. I shall lay down the
Titles of 'em in the same Order as they came to my hands.

1. The Oxford Antiquity examined, etc. 2. An Answer to a Treatise out of
Ecclesiastical History, translated from an ancient Greek MS. in the Public
Library at Oxford, by Humphry Hody, B. D. etc. 3. Epistola ad Humfredum Hody,
etc. de Tractatu a Scriniis Baroccianis Bibliothecae Bodleianae eruto, and ab
illo nuper edito, conscripta. 4. A farther Account of the Baroccian MS. lately
publish^d at Oxford. 5. Reflections on the Greek MS. translated by Mr. Hody.
This is not Printed, but was put into my hands in a MS. 6. A Vindication of the
Deprived Bishops, asserting their Spiritual Right against a Lay-Deprivation,
against the Charge of Schism, etc.
These six are professedly and entirely in Answer to the Baroccian Treatise.
But the Author of this last mentioned was (I know not how) so unhappy as to
mistake the Question. He writes against the Treatise as if the Design of it
were to vindicate the Authority of the Civil Power in depriving Bishops: But
that is not the Design of the Treatise; neither was it my Design in publishing
it. And from this strange Mistake it comes to pass, that a great part of what
that Author says is nothing at all to our Purpose.

7. Unity of Priesthood necessary to the Unity of the Church, with some
Reflections on the Oxford MS. and the Preface annexed.
The Vindication of the Authority of the Civil Power in Depriving a Bishop for
Political Crimes, I reserve for a particular Treatise. My Business at present
is to manage the last Proposition, that advanced by the Baroccian Treatise. In
Reply to these several Answers, I here present our Adversaries with an
Impartial History of the Church's Behavior (throughout all Ages) under Bishops
put into the Places of others Deposed by a Lay, or otherwise Invalid, Sentence.
I grant at present, that all Lay-Deprivations are invalid. I suppose the worst
in all Cases. Suppose the Deprivation was not only uncanonical, but also
unjust: Suppose the Depriver not only a Layman, but doubly unqualified by
being likewise a Heretic: Suppose besides, that the ejected Bishop was
deprived for adhering to the Truth, and for opposing Vice or Heresy:
Notwithstanding all this, I assert, That if he was deprived by a Power
irresistible, a Submission to the present Possessor (if otherwise
unexceptionable) is lawful, and warranted by the general Practice of the
Ancients.

It is not my Design to detain my Reader long in a Preface. Only one or two
things I desire of him.

If any thing here in this Treatise seem long and tedious to him, I desire he
would be pleased to consider, that my Design was to make this Discourse as
perfect as I could, that so, if possible, it might put an End to this
Controversy. And if our Adversaries shall be pleased to publish a Reply to
what is here written, I desire he would seriously compare and weigh one
Treatise with the other, consider if the main and more Substantial Parts of
this Treatise are answered, then judge for himself, and not expect that of
Course there must be another Reply. As I am not so vain as to think my self
clear from Error, so neither am I conscious to my self of having been so
Careless and Indiligent as to think I am often mistaken, I mean in things
material. I hate everlasting Wrangle. And an Adversary that Cavils, and excepts
against things not material, I shall think deserves a Reply as little as one
that Rails.

'Twill be hard, I know, to persuade our Adversaries, that the History I here
present 'em, is (what I call it) Impartial. But this Assurance I give 'em: I
have written nothing but what I myself believe. That may be; perhaps they will
say: But you have not written all that you believe: You have not told all you
know. Why truly, as to that, I know not what to answer. Since the Judgments of
Men are so extremely different, as that some have fansy'd that the Canons I
omitted, when I published the Baroccian Treatise, are really a Part of that
Treatise, and ought to have been published with it; there is nothing so
Impertinent but what some or other may fancy I ought to have mentioned. I
cannot promise but that there may be more Canons. But least it should be
suspected, that though I have produced many Instances for the Cause I have
undertaken to defend, there are others, as good, and as many, that make against
us, which I have designedly concealed; I shall here make this solemn
Declaration: That if any of our Adversaries (I speak to all in general, but my
Eye is particularly upon the learned Vindicator) can produce me any one single
Instance from the time of Aaron, the first High Priest of the Jews, to this
very day, of a High priest disowned by the Jews, or a Bishop disowned by the
Generality of the Catholic Church for this Reason, because put into the place
of another deposed by the Civil Authority: If they can show me, I say, any one
single Instance, I shall own my self obliged for the Instruction. I assure my
Reader, that after a nice and very curious Search I know not one.

Should our Adversaries be able to produce such an Example (as I think they
will never be able) 'twill advantage their Cause but little, especially if it
be one of the later Ages, since it is not agreeable to the Practice of the
Church in general. But if they are not able to produce so much as one single
Example, how rashly have they acted, who have separated themselves from the
Church on such an account!

I conclude in the Words of Drusius, which I here make my own: Scripsi haec
animo juvandi, non laedendi. Si laesi quempiam, jam me poenitet. Si offendi
pias aures, monitus lubenter mutabo. Si erravi uspiam, monstretur mihi error,
non ero pertinax.

Page 5. lin. 40. Whatsoever is notoriously repugnant to the Church's Interest,
so as to be necessarily productive of very great Evils, is so far from being
obliging, that it would be a Sin to act according to it. -- Least that
Proposition should be misunderstood; after the words, of very great Evils: add
(I speak of Oaths of Canonical Obedience).

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
The Reasonableness of submitting to the present Possessor, if otherwise
unexceptionable, though the Predecessor was unjustly or invalidly deposed by the
Secular Power, demonstrated. Objections answered. No obligation to the contrary
by the Oath of Canonical Obedience. The Authority of S. Cyprian unreasonably
alleged by our Adversaries. The Vindicator's Notion of Heresy not at all to his
Purpose. Page 1.

CHAP. II.
That the Jewish Highpriests, who were put into the places of others
(unjustly) Deposed by the Civil Authority, were all along owned and received as
true Highpriests. An Account of all those Highpriests, from the Reign of King
Solomon, to the Destruction of Jerusalem. The Instance of Abiathar and Zadok
nicely examined. The Practice of the Jews, and God's Approbation of such
Highpriests a sufficient Warrant to us. Page 16.

CHAP. III.
That our Savior himself, and his Apostles, acknowleged and communicated with
those Highpriests, who were put into the Places of others unjustly deposed by
the Civil Authority, as true Highpriests. Mr. Selden's Conjecture, That in the
Histories of the New Testament, as often as there is mention made of the
High Priest, is to be understood not the High Priest, properly so called, but
the Prince of the Sanhedrin, confuted. A Reply to an Answer of our Adversaries,
concerning the Reason why the Jews, our Savior, and the Apostles submitted to
the present Possessor. Page 33.

CHAP. IV.
That the Ancient Christians submitted all along to such Bishops (if accounted
Orthodox) as were put into the Places of others deposed by the Secular Power,
tho never so unjustly. No Examples, either for or against us, in the three
first Centuries, all the Emperors being then Heathens. The Example of Felix II.
Bishop of Rome, the put into the place of Liberius, unjustly deposed by the
bare Authority of the Emperor Constantius, and against Liberius's consent, yet
he is owned by all that accounted him Orthodox, by the Roman Clergy; among them,
by the famous Damasus, who was afterward Pope. He is owned as Metropolitan by
the Bishops of the District of Rome. His Ordinations are allowed of as valid,
by even his Adversary Liberius. He has been all along owned by the Church, as a
Saint, and true Pope. Page 40.

CHAP. V.
The Catholics of Alexandria reject Lucius, because he was an Arian, not
because his Predecessor Peter, was unjustly deposed by the Emperor. Our
Adversaries Doctrine not known to the said Peter.. 1. S. Briccius of Tours
deposed by the People. Yet Justinian and Armentius his Successors, are owned as
true Bishops of Tours. Armentius is owned as true: Bishop by S. Briccius
himself, though he had never given up his Right, but had always claimed it.. 2.
S. Euthymius refuses to communicate with Theodosius, Patriarch of Jerusalem,
because he was a Heretic, and had embrued his hands in the Blood of many
Persons, not because the Patriarch Juvenalis, whose See he had usurpt, was
still living. Theodosius's Ordinations are allowed of as valid.. 3. Acacius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, refuses to communicate with Timotheus Aelurus, not
because he was put into the place of Timotheus Salofuciolus, unjustly deposed
by the Heretical Usurper Basiliscus, but because he was a Heretic and a
Parricide.. 4. Jo. Talaias, the Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria being deposed
by the bare Authority of the Emperor Zeno, though he still laid claim to the Sea, yet Petrus Mongus his Successor, is acknowleged by all that accounted him
Orthodox, by Acacius and Fravitas, Patriarchs of Constantinople by Martyrius
Patriarch of Jerusalem, by (almost) all the Bishops of the Eastern Church; That
they who refused to communicate with Mongus, viz. the Western Bishops, the
Bishops of Dardania, etc. did it only because they thought him a Heretic; That
Euphemius Patriarch of Constantinople communicated with him till he found him
to be a Heretic, then forsook his Communion. Pope Simplicius, when he heard
that Talaias was to be deposed, was well enough satisfied, till he understood,
that Mongus, whom he accounted a Heretic, was designed for his Successor.
Whether Orthodox Bishops unjustly ejected by the Emperor be restored, or new
Orthodox Bishops be created, he values not, he only desires that they that are
made Bishops should be Orthodox. Pope Felix III. not at all concerned for
Talaias's being deprived without a Synod, only dislikes that one, whom he
accounted a Heretic, was constituted in his place.. 5. Calendion Patriarch of
Antioch, being deposed by the Emperor Zeno, without any Synod, the Orthodox
Bishops, viz. Pope Felix III. Quintianus Asculanus, Justinus Siculus, Acacius
Constantinopolitanus, Antheon Arsinoites, Faustus Apolloniates, Pamphilus
Abydensis, Asclepiades of Trallium, etc. refuse to communicate with his
Successor, Petrus Gnapheus, only because he was a Heretic; take no notice of
his being constituted in the room of one Unsynodically deposed, and are ready
to communicate with him as a true Patriarch of Antioch, if he will but forsake
his Heresy. Page 57.

CHAP. VI.
Macedonius Patriarch of Constantinople being violently Deposed by the
Heretical Emperor Anastasius, his Successor Timotheus is acknowleged by all
that accounted him Orthodox, though at the same time they professed that the
Deprivation of Macedonius was unjust, and could never be induced by any Terrors
to subscribe to it, viz. by Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch, Elias Patriarch of
Jerusalem, the Abbot of the Monastery of Studium, the (Orthodox) People of
Constantinople, by the great Abbots of Palaestine, S. Sabas, and S. Theodosius,
and by all Palaestine in general, at that time exceedingly flourishing for its
zealous Profession of the Orthodox Faith. The Calumnies of the Vindicator
concerning the Apostasy of the Patriarchs Flavianus and Elias, confuted.
Timotheus not known to them to be a Heretic when they communicated with him.
They are Honored by the Church as Saints. Page 70.

CHAP. VII.
Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch being deposed by the Emperor Anastasius, his
Successor Severus is rejected by the Orthodox only because he was a Heretic.
Elias Patriarch of Jerusalem being violently deposed by the said Emperor, his
Successor John is immediately acknowleged by all the People, though at the same
time they hated him: by the whole Church of Palaestine; particularly the two
great Abbots, S. Sabas and S. Theodosius, so famous for their Vndauntedness and
Sanctity: by Johannes Cappadox Patriarch of Constantinople, and all the Greek
Church: by all the whole Church ever since those Tunes. The Testimony of
Photius Patriarch of Constantinople out of a Manuscript. The old Patriarch
Elias, though so Tyrannically Deprived for adhering to the Orthodox Faith,
continues however to communicate with those who acknowleged his Successor. Page
81.

CHAP. VIII.
S. Silverius Bishop of Rome being violently deposed by Belisarius the Emperor
Justinian's General, his Successor Vigilius, though put into his place so
deprived, though constituted by the bare Authority of Belisarius against the
consent of the Clergy, and though Silverius never gave up his Right, is owned
and received by the 5th. General Council, and by all the Church, as a true
Pope. He was generally owned whilst Silverius himself was living. Baronius's
conjecture concerning his being again ordained after Silverius's Death
confuted, though for some time he communicated with Heretics, yet it was not
known to the Orthodox who communicated with him. Page 90.

CHAP. IX.
Macarius, Patriarch of Jerusalem, being deposed by the Emperor Justinian, his
Successor Eustochius is owned as a true Patriarch by the Fifth General Council
and the whole Catholic Church. After some time Eustochius himself is deposed
by the Emperor, and Macarius, being restored, is received by the Church.
According to our Adversaries Principles, either Eustochius, or Macarius, after
his Restoration, was no true Patriarch: yet the Church received both. Page 97.

CHAP. X.
Eutychius Patriarch of Constantinople being violently deposed by the Emp.
Justinian for refusing to subscribe to his Heresy, John surnamed Scholasticus
is made Patriarch in his room. After John was consecrated Patriarch, Eutychius
was condemned by an Assembly that consisted as well of Lay Lords as Bishops,
not only of Ecclesiastics as the Vindicator contends. He actually lays claim
to the Sea, despises the Sentence of his Judges as null and invalid, because
they proceeded unjustly and uncanonically against him, and Excommunicates them.
Notwithstanding all this, his Successor, because he proved Orthodox, was
received and owned by all the Church as a true Patriarch: He continued in the Sea near 13 years; near 12 years under Justin the Younger an Orthodox Emp. He
is owned by the Church of Constantinople, though at the same time Eutychius was
exceedingly beloved. John an Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria is consecrated by
him. For what reason Anastasius Patriarch of Antioch reproved the Patriarch of
Alexandria for being ordained by him. Anastasius did not refuse to communicate
with him. He is Honored by the Patriarch Photius with the Title of Saint. Though
Eutychius looked upon his Deprivation as absolutely invalid, and though he never
resigned but accounted himself still the rightful Patriarch, yet he lived
quietly, and never endeavored to make a Division in the Church. Dr.
Crakanthorp's Opinion, that Eutychius was deposed for being a Heretic,
confuted. The Authority of the Life of Eutychius, often quoted in this Chapter,
vindicated against the same Author. Page 101.

CHAP. XI.
S. Anastasius, Senior, Patriarch of Antioch, being deposed without any Synod
by the Emperor Justin, Junior, though he never resigned, yet his Successor
Gregory is owned by all the Church. He continued Patriarch till his Death, for
the space of 23 Years, the old Patriarch Anastasius being all the while living.
Four Saints among those that lived at that time and communicated freely with
him: S. Symeon Stylites, Junior, Pope Gregory the Great, S. Eulogius Patriarch
of Alexandria, S. John Nesteutes Patriarch of Constantinople. Pope Gregory
communicates with him as Patriarch of Antioch, though at the same time he
declares Anastasius's Deprivation to be invalid, and looks upon Anastasius to
be the rightful Patriarch. S. Anastasius, though deposed by the Lay-power, and
though he had never given up his Right, yet never left the Communion of the
Church. Page 121.

CHAP. XII.
S. Martin, Pope of Rome, being deposed without any Synod, and banished by the
Heretical Emperor Constans, though he never resigned, yet Eugenius is chosen his
Successor by the Clergy of Rome, though at the same time they were zealous.
Assertors of the Orthodox Faith, and had likewise a great love for S. Martin.
Eugenius is received and owned by all as a true Pope, and has been honored all
along by the Church as a Saint. S. Martin himself owns him as a true Pope, and
prays to God for him as such. Page 128.

CHAP. XIII.
Callinicus Patriarch of Constantinople being deposed without any Synod by the
Emperor Justinianus Rhinotmetus, his Successor Cyrus is received as a true
Patriarch.. 1. So likewise is Nicetas who was put into the place of the
Patriarch Constantine deposed without any Synod by the Emperor Constantinus
Copronymus.. 2. Page 135.

CHAP. XIV.
An Account of the Schism between Photlus and Ignatius, Patriarchs of
Constantinople. Photius who was put into Ignatius's place when deposed by the
Emperor, no such Person as his Enemies report him. By how great a Party he was
received. The reason why some refused to acknowledge him was not so much,
because he was so constituted, as because he was a Neophytus, and was besides
ordained by a Bishop Excommunicated, and (in their Judgments) stood himself
Excommunicated at that time. Ignatius professes, that if Photius had been one
of the Church, i. e. if he had not been an Excommunicated Person at the time of
his Consecration, he would willingly have yielded to him. Ignatius values the
Councils that condemned him no more than he did the Lay power. The Vindicator
in an Error concerning that Matter. His Errors concerning the Council called
the First and Second. A New account of the reason of that Title. His Error
concerning the Greatness of the Synod of Rome, called by P. Nicholas against
Photius. Photius after he was received by the Church, and confirmed by a
general Council, is deposed by the bare Authority of the Emperor Leo; yet his
Successor Stephen is received by the Church. Page 139.

CHAP. XV.
Nicolaus Mysticus, Patriarch of Constantinople; not deprived by a Synod, as
the Vindicator contends, but by the Emperor ( Leo the Wife.). 1. Joseph Bishop
of Brixia in Italy deposed without any Synod by King Berengarius, yet his
Successor Antony is owned and received by the Church, particularly by the Pope,
the Synods of Augspurg and Ravenna; and continued in the Sea many years.. 2.
Basilius Camaterus, and Nicetas Muntanes, Patriarchs of Constantinople, deposed
without any Synod by the Emperor Isaacius Angelus, yet no Division in the
Church on their account.. 3, 4. The Patriarchs of the present Greek Church very
frequently deprived by the Turk, yet no Division in the Church. As great Reason
to submit to the present Possessor here, as in the Greek Church. The Necessity
the same. Page 170.

CHAP. XVI.
The Sentence of an Uncanonical Synod, esteemed by the Ancients invalid. S.
Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople, unjustly and invalidly deposed by a
Synod. He declares however at first, against all Separation from the Church on
his Account. He afterward yields to Resentment, and refuses to Communicate
with his Successors, Arsacius, and Atticus, because they had been his Enemies,
and had a hand in his Deprivation. The Joannites acted by their Passions, not
by Principles. They separate from the Church, not because there was another
made Patriarch in S. Chrysostom's place, but before that was done. Arsacius
being made Patriarch they refuse to Communicate with him, not because he was
put into S. Chrysostom's place, but through Hatred against St. Chrysostom's
Deposers, because they frequented his Churches. Pope Innocent of Rome not
consistent with himself. His Practice contradicts his Words. He did not think
Arsacius and Atticus no Bishops. His Zeal for the Honor of his own See, the
chief Cause of his Opposing 'em. He at last receives Atticus as a true
Patriarch: The Vindicator's Exception against the Translation of the word (...)
in the Baroccian Treatise, confuted. The Eastern Bishops refuse to separate
from the Communion of the Church, though S. Chrysostom laid Claim to his See, and
actually separated, and though they esteemed his Deprivation invalid. So did the
Monks of Egypt. The Testimony of S. Nicon, out of a MS. S. Nicon himself, though
he esteemed his Deprivation extremely unjust; yet approves of those that did
not separate on his Account. S. Chrysostom takes it for granted, as a thing of
Course, that all would immediately resolve to choose a new Patriarch in his
room. The Patriarch Atticus highly esteemed by the whole African Church. The
Ecclesiastical Historian, Socrates, disapproves of S. Chrysostom's Deprivation;
yet speaks of Arsacius and Atticus, as of true Patriarchs. Theodoret extremely
offended at the Injustice of his Deposers, yet reckons both Arsacius and
Atticus among the Patriarchs of Constantinople. They are both owned in all the
Catalogues of the Patriarchs. Their Ordinations never questioned by any.
Atticus praised by P. Celestine I. and owned to be a true Successor of S.
Chrysostom. Page 176.

CHAP. XVII.
Deprivations by Heretical Synods invalid. S. Eustathius, Patriarch of Antioch,
deposed by an Heretical Synod; he himself accounts his Deprivation invalid. The
Orthodox separate from the Communion of his Successors, not because he was
invalidly deprived, but because they accounted them Heretics. Eustathius acts
as Bishop of Antioch, though in banishment, as long as his Successors were
Heretics; but as soon as Meletius, an Orthodox Person, was ordained his
Successor, he desisted, and concerned himself no more as Bishop of Antioch.
That he lived till Meletius was made Patriarch, demonstrated against Baronius,
Valesius, etc. Why some of the Orthodox refused to submit to Meletius. The
Vindicator's Assertion, That none accounted Meletius an Arian whilst he was
Bishop, confuted. The Schism between the Meletians and the Paulinists no
Example against us.. 1, 2. The Instance of Maximus and Cyril of Jerusalem
examined.. 3. Euphemius, Patriarch of Constantinople, deposed by an Heretical
Synod; yet Macedonius, an Orthodox and a good Man, accepts of his See, though he
owned him to be the rightful Patriarch. Macedonius is received by the
Catholics, though they loved Euphemius and accounted him unjustly deprived. He
is owned by S. Elias Bishop of Jerusalem, though Elias at the same time declared
Euphemius's Deprivation unjust, and refused to subscribe to it.. 4. The Schisms
of the Novatians, Donatists, and Meletians of Egypt, no Examples against us..
5. Two Fragments of Photius out of a M S.. 1, 3. Page 186.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion.
Bishops deposed by the Civil Authority obliged even in common Charity to
acquiesce. But whether they acquiesce or not, the Church is to submit to the
present Possessor. Page 196.

The CASE of SEES Vacant, by an Unjust or Uncanonical Deprivation, Stated, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Reasonableness of submitting to the present Possessor, if otherwise
unexceptionable, though the Predecessor was unjustly or invalidly deposed by the
Secular Power, demonstrated. Objections answered. No obligation to the contrary
by the Oath of Canonical Obedience. The Authority of S. Cyprian unreasonably
alleged by our Adversaries. The Vindicator's Notion of Heresy not at all to his
Purpose. THE Doctrine maintained by the Author of the Baroccian Treatise, is
this; That supposing a Bishop deprived without any Synod by the Civil Power, is
unjustly deprived; yet neither He himself, nor the People, ought to separate
from the Communion of his Successor, provided that Successor is not a Heretic.
In answer to that Treatise, it is alleged by some of our Adversaries, That not
only Heresy, but Schism likewise, and Excommunication make a Person incapable
of being received as a Bishop. It is manifest, says one of our An Answer to a
Treatise out of Eccles. History, etc. in the Preface.
Answerers, that the Principles advanced by the Author of the Baroccian
Treatise, make all Church Censures ineffectual, and expose the Church to all
the Mischiefs of Erastianism. For if a Prince should prefer an excommunicated
Person to the Sea of the Bishop, by whom he stands excommunicated, supposing
only that he was not excommunicated for Heresy, this Person, though never so
justly excommunicated, must be owned and obeyed instead of the Bishop who
excommunicated him; which lodges all Church Power in the Prince, and makes all
Ecclesiastical Censures of no effect for the Benefit and Preservation of the
Church, whenever he pleases. All this He very well knew was nothing at all to
his Purpose, and nothing against either ours, or our Author's Cause: But he
likewise knew, it would have been less to his Purpose to have told his Reader
so. To avoid all impertinent Cavil, that we may not run off from the Scope and
Design of our Writing, I shall take leave to alter the last Clause of the
Proposition thus: Provided that Successor be in all other Respects such whose
Communion no good Catholic can justly refuse.

. 2. Having laid down fairly our Proposition, and secured it (if that may be
possible) from all Cavil, We will now proceed to demonstrate the Truth of it.
And this we shall do, first, from the Reasonableness of it; and, 2dly. from the
Authority and Practice of the Ancients; by which the Reasonableness of it will
more certainly and evidently appear.

. 3. First from the Reasonableness of it: And that is grounded on this certain
and self-evident Maxim, That whatsoever is necessary for the present Peace and
Tranquillity of the Church, that ought to be made use of, provided it is not in
it self sinful, and the ill Consequences, which may possibly attend it, are
either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least not so likely to happen as
the Evils we endeavor to avoid. That this was a Maxim of the Ancients, We
shall easily find, if we please but to cast our eyes back upon their Times, and
consider those Methods, which were wont to be made use of in the Church. We
shall find, that in all manner of Cases, They always preferred the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Church to all other Things, the Essentials of Religion
excepted. There was no Custom or Law of the Church so sacred and inviolable,
but what they readily sacrificed, whenever Necessity required, to the Peace
and Tranquillity of it. If the exact Observation of the received Customs and
Canons of the Church was not like to conduce to the present Peace and
Tranquillity of it, they were readily superseded, and Necessity and Convenience
became the only Legislators. To prefer a Rule of the Church to the Welfare
and Prosperity of it, and to stand to the Saying of a Father in Opposition to a
Law of Necessity, is a sort of Theological Pedantry, which They were not guilty
of. They were wont to consider like truly Wise men, the Circumstances and the
Exigencies of the Times; and they knew that those Customs and Canons of the
Church, which were proper in the Times of Peace, could never indispensably
oblige in Times of a different Complexion. To prevent, or to heal the Diseases
of the Church, they acted like Philosophers, not like Empericks; considered
what ought to be done in this and that particular Case; what was truly
expedient, not what had been prescribed when the Symptoms were not the same.
Though of all the General Councils, there was none so revered as the Nicene; and
though among all the Canons of that Council there was none so Religiously and so
Universally observed, as that which makes it unlawful for any one City to have
two Bishops; and although that had always been a S. Cypr. Ep. 55. ad Anton. ^rgo
ille evangelii vindex, ignorabat unum Episcopum esse oportere in Ecclesia
Catholica, says Cornelius Bishop of Rome in his Epistle to Fabius of Antioch
Ap. Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 43. concerning Novatian. To have two Bishops in one
and the same City is adversum fas Sacerdotii singularis, says Pacianus Epist.
3. ad Sympronianum Novatianum.
Rule of the Catholic Church long before the time of that Council; yet S.
Augustine, and all the other Catholic Bishops of Africa, thought fit to
Collat. Carthag. 1. c. 16.
propose that Expedient to their Adversaries the Donatists, for the putting an
End to their Schism. And the same Expedient was Theodores Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c.
3.
proposed And by the Synod of Sirmium to the Clergy and People of Rome in the
Case of Felix and Liberius, as Sozome^ says, l. 4. c. 15. but that Synod was
not Orthodox, but Arion.
by Meletius Bishop of Antioch to the Anti-bishop Paulinus, for the putting an
End to that Schism that was between them. Thus when Queen Chrodielde of France
had made the Bishops Theodorus and Proculus Archbishops of Tours Greg. Turon.
Hist. l. 10. c. 3^.
together the whole Gallican Church (because they were both very old, and so
the Inconvenience of suffering it was not like to be so great as that of
opposing the Queen) very freely acknowedg'd 'em. And though it is expressly
forbidden by the aforesaid Can. 4.
Council of Nice, and likewise by the more ancient Canons or Rules of the
Church, That one Bishop alone should Ordain another; and three at least are
positively required by that Council, how great soever the Necessity may be;
though it were moreover unlawful for any one to be Ordained a Bishop without the
Consent of the Metropolitan, and a Bishop so Ordained is declared Can. 6.
by that Council incapable of governing as a Bishop: Yet when Siderius had been
ordained Bishop of Palehisca by Synesius Epist. 67.
the single Bishop of Cyrene (a bold and resolute Man, one who often
transgressed the Orders of his Superiors) and that too without the knowledge of
S. Athanasius the Metropolitan; because of the badness of the Times, (it being
in the Reign of the Arian Emperor Valens,) Athanasius allowed of his Orders:
and because he was Orthodox, he was so far from depriving him of his
Bishopric, that he preferred him to a greater. He (...).
yielded, says Synesius, to the Necessity of the Times. It Is a Saying of the
same Author, (himself a Bishop, and a very great Man,) where he speaks
concerning that Matter; viz. in one of his Epistles to the Patriarch of
Alexandria, Theophilus: (...).
In dangerous Times it is necessary not to observe Rules. Though nothing was more
unlawful than to be made a Bishop Simoniacally, or by the mere Force of the
Lay-power; and though (as the Author of the S. Silverius levatus est a Theodato
Tyranno sine deliberatione Decreti: qui Theodatus corruptus pecunia data talem
timorem induxit Clero, u^ qui non consentiret in ejus Ordinationem gladio
puniretur. Qui quidem Sacerdotes non subscripserunt in eum secundum morem
antiquum vel Decretum confirmaverunt ante Ordinationem: Iam vero ordinato sub
vi and metu Silverio propter adunationem Ecclesiae and Religionis postmodum sic
subscripserunt Episcopi.
Pontifical attests) Silverius obtained the Popedom of Rome by both those
unlawful Means; yet after he was Ordained, the Peace of the Church requiring
it, he was owned and received by all. He had given a Sum of Money to the
Tyrant Theodatus, the King of the Goths, and the Tyrant threatened, that
whosoever refused to consent to his Election should be punished with Death. The
Bishops however refused to subscribe, and so he was made Pope without any
consent of theirs. But after he was Ordained (says the Author of the
Pontifical) they subscribed for the sake of the Unity of the Church and of
Religion. Though the Synod of C P. before whom the Patriarch Alexius was accused
for his having been promoted to that Dignity by the bare authority of the
Emperor, without the Votes of the Clergy, looked upon his Promotion to be
altogether unlawful; yet when he pleaded, that he had Ordained many Bishops,
and, that if they deprived him, they must likewise deprive all those whom he
had Ordained; upon that bare Zonaras Annal. p. 190.
Consideration, because to Deprive so many was likely to occasion a great
Disturbance in the Church, they overruled the Accusation, and determined
nothing against him. When Calendion was made Patriarch of Antioch by the
Emperor Zeno; and Ordained by Acacius the Patriarch of C P. though that
Simplicius Papa in Epist. ad Zinonens Imp.
was unlawful by the By which it is enacted, That all Bishops should be
Ordained by Bishops of their respective Provinces. Can. 4.
Can^ns of the Council of Nice, and directly contrary to the constant Custom of
the Catholic Church; yet because it was done, as the Emperor and Acacius
alleged, to avoid Seditions in Antioch, the Proceeding was approved of by
Simplicius Bishop of Rome. Though I wish, Epist. 16. ad Acacium. Quod sicut non
optavimus fieri, ita faciles excusationi quam necessitas fecit exstitimus; quia
quod voluntarium non est, non potest vocari in reatum.
says he, that it had not been done, yet I easily excused it, because it was
done through Necessity: For that which is not voluntary ( i.e. that which is
done only for Convenience or Necessity's sake) cannot be imputed as a Fault.
These Examples and Autorities may serve to show in general, That there are no
Laws or Customs of the Church so sacred, but what our Wise Forefathers thought
ought to be postpon'd to the present Welfare and Prosperity of it. That the
same was their Opinion in reference to our particular Case, We shall hereafter
show in its due Place.

. 4. Our Proposition being thus established on that sure Maxim, acknowledged
(as has been shown) by the Ancients; That whatsoever is necessary for the Peace
and Tranquillity of the Church, that ought to be made use of, provided that it
is not in it self Sinful; and that the ill Consequences, which may possibly
attend it, are either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least not so
likely to happen, as the Evils we endeavor to avoid. There are two Things
which I am obliged to make out; First, That the Submitting to a Bishop put into
the place of another unjustly Deposed by the Civil Authority, is not in itself
Sinful: And, 2dly. That the ill Consequences, to which it is liable, are
either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least not so likely to happen,
as the Evils we endeavor to avoid.

. 5. First, It is not in it self Sinful: For if it is so, it must be so for
one, or more, of these following Reasons: Either, first, because it is
forbidden by some express Law of God; Or, 2dly. because it makes us Accomplices
in the Injustice; Or, 3dly. because of the Oath of Canonical Obedience, which
the inferior Clergy have taken to their Bishop, and the inferior Bishops to
their Archbishop; Or, lastly, because, as one of our Adversaries, the learned
Vindicator, contends, such a Bishop as is placed in the room of one Deposed by
the Civil Authority, is in reality no Bishop. These Objections I shall consider
distinctly.

. 6. First, It is not against any Law of God. For as to our Case, the Scripture
is altogether silent. It Is true, it Commands us to be obedient to our
Governors, and that Command reaches as well to the Spiritual as to the
Temporal: But when there are two that stand Competitors, and both claim our
Obedience; to which of those two our Obedience ought to be paid, it leaves to
our Wisdom to determine.

. 7. Neither, 2dly. does it make us Accomplices in the Injustice. For if a
Landlord be unjustly and invalidly dispossessed of his Estate by an Incompetent
Authority, Who thinks the Tenant an Accomplice in the Injustice, because he pays
his Rent to the present Possessor? Should the Clergy refuse to submit to the
Bishops in possession, it could only serve to draw down Ruin upon themselves?
It cannot restore those whom the State has deposed. It is not our Submitting to
the present Possessors, that ejects the former; for they are already
irretrievably Deposed, since the Supreme Power is peremptory against 'em. That
has publicly declared, that, whoever are our Bishops, the old ones shall
govern us no longer. If we think the Proceeding unjust, it is enough that we
remonstrate against it, and express our dissatisfaction. If that will not do,
the Good of the Public obliges us to be quiet.

. 8. Neither, Thirdly, is it sinful on the account of the Oath of Canonical
Obedience. For that is taken not absolutely and unconditionally, but with this
Supposition, That the Bishop, to whom we take it, has power to govern us. If I
take an Oath, to be faithful or obedient to a Governor, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical, I engage my self to him as a Governor, that is, as one that
can govern: If therefore he can no longer govern, whatsoever the Impediment is,
my Obedience is no longer engaged. As it is in the State, so it is in the
Church: The Oath that is taken to a Bishop, as he is the Governor of a Church,
is not taken for the sake of the Bishop, but for the Peace and good Order of
the Church. It Is this was the Design of the Church when she ordered such an
Oath to be taken. When therefore the Oath tends no longer to the Good of the
Church, but notoriously to Schism, Disorder, and Confusion, it cannot any
longer oblige: but is void of it self, by virtue of the Church's Intent and
Design in the first Institution of it.

It is further to be considered, that particularly here in the Church of
England, the Oath of Canonical Obedience is always taken with this Supposition,
That the Civil Power, as well as the Ecclesiastical, do allow the Bishop to
govern.

But let us suppose even that which in reason we ought not to suppose: Let us
suppose, that the Bishop intended that the Oath should always oblige.
Whatsoever was the Intent of the Bishop; That was not the Intent of the Church.
And it is the Intent of the Church, not the private Intent of the Bishop, that
gives an Obligation to the Oath. I add, That should it be both the Intent of
the Bishop, and likewise the Intent of the Person who takes the Oath, that it
should always oblige; should it run in these express words; I will always
adhere to you, if Deposed by the Civil Authority, in opposition to him,
whosoever he be, that shall be put into your place: Should any one, I say, take
such an Oath as that, yet he cannot be obliged by it. The Oath is in it self
unlawful, it is a Sin against the Public, repugnant to the Will and the
Welfare of the Church. It would be in effect to swear thus: I will for your
sake oppose the Welfare of the Public, and break the Union of the Church; I
will leave the Communion of the Church, and adhere to you, though I have not any
Reason to do so besides this bare Oath. To conclude; Whatsoever is notoriously
repugnant to the Church's interest, so as to be necessarily productive of very
great Evils, is so far from being obliging, that it would be a Sin to act
according to it.

It is granted by our Adversaries, that the Obligation of an Oath of Canonical
Obedience ceases, if a Bishop is deprived, though never so unjustly by a Synod:
Now what is the Reason of that? It Is because to adhere to a Bishop, when a
Synod has fully deposed him, and placed another in his See, must occasion a
Division in the Church, and disturb the Public. If that is the Reason, as no
one can assign any other, (at least there can be none but what is grounded on
that,) then the Reason is the same in both Cases: and consequently in both
Cases tho Oath will be equally void. It Is in vain to allege, That in the Case
of a Synod we cease to be obliged by our Oath, because every Bishop is supposed
to have obliged himself to submit to the Determination of a Synod; whether just
or unjust; and therefore when a Synod has Deposed him, though by an unjust
sentence, his Place is truly void by virtue of his supposed Consent: For
suppose a Bishop should have always declared, that he never would give his
Consent, that a Synod should have Power to Depose him by an unjust Sentence:
ought we not however to submit to the new Constituted Bishop? Our Adversaries
will tell us, that we ought. But why? It Is because the Necessity of Government
and the Peace of the Church requires it. Well then; it is certain, that it is
not the Bishop's Consent, but Necessity and the Good of the Public that makes
our Oath void.

Though in some Respects there is a great deal of Difference between what is done
by a competent or a lawful Authority, and what is done by an incompetent or an
unlawful Authority: yet, as to our Acquiescence, in a Case of Necessity, such
as is here supposed, I can see no Difference at all, The Obligation to
acquiesce is the same in both Cases, when in both Cases the Necessity is the
same. If a Lord be dispossessed of his Manor by an Incompetent Authority that
cannot be resisted, (a Conqueror, suppose, or an unlawful Court) Who thinks
the Tenant forsworn for submitting to the new Possessor? Who makes any
difference there between a Competent and an Incompetent Authority? And why is
the Tenant in such a Case not forsworn? If he cannot (or ought not to) oppose
the Intruder, yet ought he not at least to give up his Estate, rather than
submit and do Homage to the wrong Lord? 'Twill be granted, I presume, by our
Adversaries, that he is neither obliged to oppose the Intruder, nor yet to give
up his Estate. But why does the Oath, which he took to the rightful Lord,
cease to oblige him? It Is because when he took the Oath, he took it only on
this Supposition, That the Lord was Possessed of the Manor. The Peace and
Tranquillity of the Public, and the Good of Tenants in general give that
Restriction to the Oath.

If the Bishop of a Frontier Town will not own the Authority of a Conqueror, and
is therefore Deposed by that Conqueror, I desire to know of our Adversaries,
whether the Clergy of that Town are perjured if they own that Bishop whom the
Conqueror thinks fit to set over 'em? If a Bishop should by the Civil Power be
condemned to perpetual and close Imprisonment, or be banished forover from his
Country, so as that it is impossible for him to perform the Duties of a Bishop:
or should he be carried away Captive we know not where, or from whence we
cannot redeem him: What then? Are we still obliged by our Oath, because he was
Deposed by no Synod? When in the Beginning of the 3d. Century, Eusebius. Hist
Eccl. l. 6. c. 10.
/ Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, had secretly withdrawn himself, and no Body
knew what was become of him, left the Church should be without the Assistance
of a Bishop, there was presently a new one Ordained. How their Bishop was lost,
they knew not: 'Twas enough that he was gone, and did not any longer Officiate.
The Church, says S. Chrysostom, cannot be without a Bishop. That he said to his
People, when he himself was to be carried away into Banishment; and on that
account he advises 'em to accept of another for their Bishop.

I easily foresee what will be the Reply of our Adversaries. They will tell us,
That in such Cases we ought to presume, that the Bishop gives his Consent that
his Successor should be acknowledged: That therefore the Oath does no longer
oblige, because there is a rational Presumption, that the banished, the
imprisoned, or the captive Bishop, and He of the Frontier Town, do remit the
Obligation of it. To this I answer: 1. It is indeed to be presumed, that a good
Bishop, one that can say with Orat. 28 (...).
S. Gregory, then Bishop of C P. I seek not yours, but you, will readily forego
his own Interest for the Welfare and Prosperity of his Flock: And since our
ejected Bishops, who are (I am fully persuaded) very worthy and good Men, and
real Lovers of their People, have never by any public signification of their
Will, laid claim to the Obedience of their People, and do not now exercise
their Episcopal Power as before; in reason we ought to presume that they give
their Consent that their Successors should be acknowledged. But, 2dly. let it
be supposed, that the outed Governor does expressly assure his Inferiors, that
he does not give his Consent, but still lays Claim to their Obedience. Suppose
the conquered, the banished, the imprisoned, or the captive Bishop should
charge his People expressly upon their Oath never to accept of any other Bishop
as long as by the common Course of Nature he himself may be supposed to be
living, or till they be assured he is dead: Let this I say be supposed, (and
easy it is to be supposed,) What must be done in such Cases? Is the Church
perjured if she accepts of another? Will our Adversaries say that she is? A
hard Saying! Who can bear it? This Presumption of the ejected Governor's
Consent is (I know) what is commonly alleged by some very learned and otherwise
judicious Men, as the true and the only foundation of Acquiescence when the
lawful Governor is unjustly Deposed by a Power incompetent: But that that is
not the true and the only foundation, these Difficulties which I have alleged
do (me thinks) abundantly demonstrate. Other Men I must leave to their own ways
of Thinking. For my part, I cannot imagine, that the Welfare and Prosperity of
Mankind does depend upon so ticklish and uncertain a Point as that of an
ejected Governor's Consent: That, if he refuses to give his Consent, all the
Church or the Nation must be made a Sacrifice to him. It is easy to discover,
upon how false a Principle that Notion is built. It is grounded on this, That
the Oath that is taken to the Governor, is taken only for his sake; when if
the true End and Design of Government were duly and impartially considered, it
would be found (as above I observed) that the Oath that is taken to the
Governor, is taken not only for his Good, but chiefly for the Good of the
Public; and that any Oath taken to a Governor that is notoriously and in a
high degree repugnant to the Good and Prosperity of the Public, so as to be
necessarily productive of intolerable Evils, is in its own Nature void; because
by the Public it was never designed that in such a Case it should oblige.

By the Author of a Treatise entitled; Unity of Priesthood necessary to the
Unity of Communion, there are two Examples produced, to show how observant the
Ancients were of their Oath of Canonical Obedience; which the Author calls
eminent Instances, and proposes 'em to the Consideration of the Bishops of our
Church, and wishes they would seriously apply 'em. The first is that of Ivo
Bishop of Chartres in France, who flourished about 600 years ago. He being one
of the Suffragans of the Archbishop of Sens, was desired by the Bishop of
Lions, who was likewise the Pope's Legate, to assist him at the Consecration of
the Bishop of Nivers: But the Bishop of Nivers being a Suffragan to the said
Archbishop of Sens; and that Archbishop having In those days the Pope's power
of Ordaining Bishops in another District, without the Consent of the
Metropolitan, was not owned by the Western Church.
never given his Consent that the Bishop of Lions should Ordain a Bishop of his
District, Ivo refuses to assist at the Consecration: And this is the reason he
gives for it; Because if he should engage in such an undertaking, he should be
unfaithful to his own Metropolitan, and betray the Privileges allowed that
Church by the Canons as a Metropolitical Church, which by Oath he was obliged
to maintain: Reus fieret violatae sponsionis quam Sedi Metropolitanae fecerat.
If the Archbishop of York had pretended to Constitute a Bishop of the Province
of Canterbury, without the Consent of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and a
Suffragan of the Province of Canterbury had assisted in that Ordination, our
Bishops would then have been able to apply this eminent Instance. But as the
Case stands, they know not, I believe, how to do it: And the Author is desired,
that he himself, if he can, would be pleased to apply it. The other Instance is
that of the Bishops of our own Country in the Reign of William II. There
arising a great Difference between the King and Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury
about acknowledging the Pope, Whether the Archbishop could lawfully do it
without the King's Consent? The Matter was referred to the Parliament, and the
Bishops being by the King required to deprive the Archbishop, they answered,
says Eadmerus, Dolemus quod animo tuo, Domine, satisfacere non valemus. Primas
est non modo istius regni, sed and Scotiae, and Hiberniae, necnon adjacentium
Insularum, nosque Suffraganei ejus, u^de patet nos rationabiliter eum judicare
vel damnare nullatenus posse, etiamsi aliqu^ culpa in eo, quae modo non valet,
possit ostendi. P. 30.
That that they could not do, because he was their Metropolitan. It Is hard to
conjecture what our Author intended by proposing this Example as worthy
Consideration: unless it be that an Archbishop of Canterbury should be now
above all Deprivation. He contends in his Treatise, that a Bishop ought not to
be Deprived, but by Bishops; and hereby producing this Example (if he means
anything at all) he intimates, That an Archbishop cannot be Deprived by the
Bishops his Suffragans, because of their Oath of Obedience. But whatever was
our Author's meaning: certain it is, that it was not because of the Oath of
Obedience that the Bishops refused to Deprive Anselm, as the King would have
had 'em; but because they had at They had before promised the King to Deprive
Anselm; but, I know not how, on a sudden they took up that Opinion, which
before was never heard of amongst the Bishops of England: Protinus
intellexerunt (says Eadmerus, who was there present) quod prius non
animadver^erunt, nec ipsum advertere posse putaverunt; viz. Archiepiscopum
Cant. a nullo hominum, nisi a solo Papa, judicari posse vel damnari, nec ab
aliquo cogi pro quavis calumnia cuiquam, eo excepto, contra suum Velle
respondere. P. 29.
that time an Opinion amongst 'em, that a Primate or Metropolitan could be
judged and deprived by no one but the Pope. So far were they from thinking
themselves obliged by their Oath not to Deprive him, that it is very Ai^ Rex,
Quid igitur restat? Si eum judicare non potestis, nonne sakem omnis obedientiae
fidem ac fraternae societatis amicitiam ei denegare potestis? Hoc quidem,
inquiunt, quoniam jubes, facere possumus. Properate igitur and quod dicitis
citius facite, ut cum viderit se a cunctis despectum ac desolatum verecundetur
and ingemiscat se Urbanum, me Domino suo contempto, secutum. Et quo ista
securius faciatis, En ego primium in imperio meo penitus ei omnem securitatem,
and siduciam mei tollo, ac deinceps in illo vel de illo nedla in causa
confidere, vel cum pro Archiepiscopo aut Patre spirituali tenere volo. --
Soci^tis sibi Abbatibus ( adds E^dmerus) Episcopi retulerunt Patri quod dixerat
Rex, suam, pro voto illius, abnegationem ingerentes. -- Cum propterea (answers
the Archbishop) quod me ad B. Petri Principis Apostolorum subjectionem ac
fidelitatem tenco, mihi omnem subjectionem, fidem, and amicitiam, quam Primati
vestro and Patri spirituali debetis, abnegatis, non recte proceditis.
notorious, that, though he was not Deprived, yet they threw off all Obedience,
and renounced their Subjection to him.

. 9. We are next to consider that Objection which is made by the learned
Vindicator, That a Bishop put into the place of another, deposed by the
Lay-power, is in reality no Bishop. If this is true, then it must be granted,
that we cannot be obliged for the sake of Union and Peace, to adhere to the
present Possessor. This indeed is the Difference between our Civil and our
Ecclesiastical Governors. The former are purely Governors, and nothing more is
required in them but to be capable of Governing; The latter are not only
Governors, but are likewise the Administrators of Sacraments, and the sole
Ordainers of the Clergy. It is therefore necessary, not only that the
Ecclesiastical Governor should be duly qualified for Government, but that he
should be likewise endued by God Almighty with the Power of Ordaining, and of
administering the holy Sacraments. Thus much must be granted: Let us now see
what Argument the Vindicator can produce to degrade our present Possessors, and
to prove 'em no Bishops. It is nothing but a Saying of S. Cyprian that is
nothing at all to his Purpose. The Saying is this: That a second Bishop is no
Bishop. It Is strange methinks, that so great and so worthy a Man, should
pretend to raise so great and so extraordinary a Structure upon so weak a
Foundation. The Occasion of the Saying was this: Novatian, a private Presbyter,
had raised a Schism against Cornelius the lawful Bishop of Rome; he had got
himself to be ordained Bishop, though Cornelius had never been deposed, was still
the Possessor, and acknowledged the true and the only Bishop of Rome by all
the Churches of the World, both the Western, the Eastern, and the African; and
Novatian was by all condemned as a rank and notorious Schismatic. S. Cyprian,
who was always very zealous for the Unity of the Church, thus expresses
himself, in his Epistle to Epist. 55. Quo (gradu Cathedrae Sacerdotalis)
occupato de Dei voluntate, atque omnium nostrium consensione firmato; quisquis
jam Episcopus fieri voluerit, foris fiat necesse est; nec habeat Ecclesiasticam
Ordinationem qui Ecclesiae non tenet unitatem; quisquis ille fu^rit multum de
se licet factans, and sibi plurimum vindicans; profanus est, alienus est, foris
est. Et cum post primum secundus esse non possit; quisquis post unum qui solus
esse debeat, factus est; non jam secundus ille, sed nullus est.
Antonianus, concerning him. Cornelius, says he, being possessed of the Sea
according to the Will of God, and confirmed in it by the Consent of us all;
whoever would now be a Bishop of that See, must needs be out of the Church;
neither can he have any Ecclesiastical Orders, who does not continue in Unity
with the Church. Whosoever he is, whatsoever he may boast of himself or pretend
to, he is a profane Person, an Alien, and not of the Church: And since there
cannot be a second Bishop, where another is already in possession; whosoever is
made Bishop after another, who ought to be alone, he is not a second, but none.
This is the place out of which the learned Vindicator is pleased to draw his
Argument; with how Logical an Inference the judicious Reader may see. It Is
strange that That excellent Person should be so much blinded with Prejudice, as
not to be able to discover how vast a difference there is between the Case of
our present Bishops, and that of which S. Cyprian discourses. Had Cornelius
been deposed by the Emperor for refusing to acknowledge his Authority, we have
all the reason in the world to believe, That his Deprivation would have been
looked upon by S. Cyprian as very reasonable and just. But let us still grant,
as we first supposed in our Question, That he ought not to have been deprived
by the Emperor himself, but by Bishops: Yet if he had been deprived for
refusing to acknowledge the Emperor's Authority; or if he had been upon any
other account so deprived by the Imperial Authority, as that it would have been
impossible for him to exercise his Episcopal Jurisdiction; Is it possible for
any wise and unprejudiced Man to imagine, That S. Cyprian would have thought so
ill of Novatian and his Adherents, as he did? If an Enemy of the Roman Empire,
suppose the King of Persia, should in S. Cyprian's time have taken a Frontier
City, and the Bishop of that City should have been deposed by him for refusing
to submit to his Authority, Who can believe that That great and wise Man S.
Cyprian, would have declared a new Bishop no Bishop, and all his Adherents
Schismatical? That a second, that is, a Schismatical Bishop, an Invader of a
See already filled and possessed, is no Bishop, is confessed to be S. Cyprian's
Doctrine: But that our Bishops are, in the Sense of S. Cyprian, the Invaders of
a See already filled and possessed, that they are secundi in his Sense is what
we utterly deny. Not a Word, not a Hint in S. Cyprian, from whence such a thing
can be inferred. The Vindicator may be pleased to consider, that our present
Possessors did not set up themselves in opposition to such as were possessed of
their Sees; but before they pretended to be Bishops, their Predecessors were
made by the Supreme Civil Power incapable of Governing, i. e. were Deposed.
Again, he ought to consider that our present Possessors were so far from
ambitiously invading, like Novatian, the Sees of others, that they were all
chose by their respective Churches according to the usual manner; viz. in the
same manner that their Predecessors themselves had been. Let us hold up the
Picture, which the Vindicator has been pleased to draw, to a true Light; and
then we shall the better see what a strange Figure it is. The Vindicator's
Enthymeme is this:

S. Cyprian says, that he is no Bishop, but a Schismatic, who ambitiously
invades a See which another is fully possessed of. Therefore,

S. Cyprian thought, that he is no Bishop, but a Schismatic, who is chosen by
the Church, according to the usual manner, into the place of another, whom the
Civil Power will not suffer to govern any longer, because he refuses to own its
Authority.

I add, That if a Bishop be a secundus, and no Bishop, who is put into the
place of one unjustly deposed by the Civil Authority; then it likewise must
follow, that he is a secundus, and no Bishop, who is put into the place of
another whom a Synod has unjustly deposed. But this the learned Vindicator will
neither himself grant; neither does he, I suppose, believe that S. Cyprian
thought so. I say that must follow, if we seriously consider the Matter: For
the only good Reason assignable, why in the former Case, the Successor is a
secundus, and no Bishop, is this; Because the Predecessor has still a Right to
the Bishopric. Now it is certain, that the Reason is the same in the latter
Case: For a Bishop, whom a Synod has unjustly deprived, has still as much Right
to his Bishopric, as a Bishop invalidly deposed by the Civil Authority. For to
me it is absurd, that any unjust Sentence should take away the Right: though, the
Nature of Government requiring it, it is oftentimes necessary that we should
submit to such a Sentence. And this (if I am not mistaken) is the common Sense
of Mankind. When a Bishop is unjustly deprived by a Synod, we submit to his
Successor; not because we imagine, that the other has no longer a Right, but
only for Peace sake. That a Bishop unjustly deprived by a Synod, has still a
Right to that Bishopric, as well as a Bishop deposed by an Incompetent
Authority, may be clearly demonstrated from this, That after he is deprived, he
may be again restored, and his Successor be deposed by Appeal to another Synod:
(and yet the ejected Successor is accounted a true Bishop:) Now is that done
justly or not? There is no one will say it is not: And yet it is impossible
that the Successor should be justly deprived, if the other had no Right.

To conclude: That a Bishop, who is put into the place of another, unjustly
deprived by the Secular Power, is a real and true Bishop, will by and by appear
by the Opinion and the Practice of the Ancients in general. Let us now proceed
to demonstrate, that, as the submitting to a Bishop, whose Predecessor was
unjustly deposed by the Civil Authority, is not in it self a Sin; so the ill
Consequences to which it may be liable, are either not so mischievous to the
Church, or not so likely to happen as the Evils we endeavor to avoid.

. 10. The Evils we endeavor to avoid area a Schism and a Persecution; two
Evils as great as can possibly befall the Church. And that those two very great
Evils must needs be the certain and the immediate Consequences of a
non-submission, is too evident to any Considering Man to need any Proof. If the
ill Consequences, to which a submission may be liable, are so great as those
two Evils, but not so certain; or if they are so certain, but not so great, it
must then be granted that, with respect to Consequences, a Submission is more
reasonable than a Non-submission. Now if we consider those evil Consequences
which may justly be charged upon the Submission, we shall find that they are so
far from being both so great and so certain, that they are neither so great nor
so certain, as those two Evils, which, by a Non-submission, must unavoidably be
brought upon the Church.

So far indeed is the Principle, which we maintain, from being necessarily
attended with any very ill Consequence, that it is not easy to foresee any
Consequence at all that is Evil. As it is for the Good, the Peace, and
Prosperity of the Church, that we think our selves obliged to comply, upon
occasion, with the Necessity of Times: So if ever the Civil Power (which to
fear in this Reign would be very unjust and unreasonable) should pretend to
break in upon the Essentials of the Church, we should then be obliged not to
yield to such Impositions. If the evil Day must needs some, (which God forbid!)
we will keep it off as long as we can. When it necessarily comes, as now we
show our Prudence, so we'll then prove our Fortitude. Not to endeavor to
escape from Damascus when a Basket is fairly offered, would be Folly in an
Apostle: And to run on to Martyrdom, when it honestly may be avoided, is,
according to the Sanctions of the Primitive Christians, a Sin. Should a Person
absolutely unqualified be imposed upon us for a Bishop, we are not then to
accept him. If a Roman Decius would depose all our Bishops, and not permit us
to constitute others in their places, that so he may destroy our Religion, we
are not then to regard either what he does or commands. As the Romans, upon the
Martyrdom of Fabian, though, to avoid the Fury of a Persecution, The Roman Clergy
for that reason deferred the Election of Cornelius (above 16 Months) as they
tell S. Cyprian in a Letter; but as soon as the Emperor had left Rome, they
chose Cornelius Bishop.
Propter rerum and temporum difficultates, we might possibly deferr the
Election; yet as soon as we thought it convenient, we would choose a Cornelius
Bishop notwithstanding the Tyrant's Decrees. If an Heretical King Frazamund
should command us not to Ordain any Bishops, that so the Catholic Religion may
of Course be rooted out, and his Heresy only prevail, we would then no more
value that Command than the Catholics heretofore did; but in spite of his
Edict, would get as many Bishops ordained as we thought convenient for the
Church. But how can our Case be compared with either of these? Here is no
forbidding Elections, no deposing all Bishops in general, no imposing
unqualified Persons, no destroying of Religion, no advancing of Heresy. The
only Question here is, Whether Paul or Apollos may be followed, when Cephas is
in Prison, and is rendered incapable of acting as an Apostle? Our Adversaries
are resolved to have Cephas; If they cannot have him, they will neither have
Christ. To us it is altogether indifferent, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas,
as long as we have Christ.

There is only one Inconvenience that I can possibly foresee, which can justly
be charged on this Principle which we advance; and that is this: That by a
Submission to the present Possessor, the Civil Governor is like to be
encouraged to tyrannize over the Church, and to turn out such Bishops as he
does not like, whenever he pleases, though never so unjustly. If that be the
Objection of our Adversaries; I answer, First, That the same Inconvenience is
in all manner of Government: By submitting to a Bishop who is put into the
place of another, whom a Synod has unjustly deposed, that Synod may be possibly
encouraged to turn out others unjustly, as many as it does not like, though never
so worthy. Secondly, That here in England it is not the Will of the Prince that
can turn out a Bishop. He has all the same Securities that another Subject can
have, and he cannot be deprived of his Bishopric without a due Course of Law.
If they mean that the King and t^^ Parliament may by that be encouraged to
Depose our Bishops at ple^^ure, (...) Supposition will be wild and extravagant.
For who can imagine, that they can ever concur for the Deprivation of a
Bishop, but upon a very extraordinary Occasion? There is nothing can be more
manifest, than that this Inconvenience is not so likely to happen as those
Evils we endeavor to avoid. These are certain and present, That only
possible. But, Thirdly, should we grant (what in reason cannot be granted) that
it is as likely to happen: yet how great is the Difference? Should the State
here, or in other Countries one single absolute Governor, be supposed to be so
very dissolute, as to turn out frequently the Bishops of the Church without any
just Cause; yet who can look upon that Mischief to be comparable to that of a
Schism and a^ Persecution? What can the suffering of a few particular Men be,
when compared to the Peace and Tranquillity of the whole Church besides? Our
Adversaries may be pleased to consider, That it was not for the Bishops that
the Church was established; but the Bishops were appointed for the sake of the
Church. It is not therefore the Welfare of the Bishops, as the Bishops are
these or those Men, much less of some few particular Bishops, but the Welfare
of the whole Church in general that is chiefly to be regarded.

. 11. And thus, I hope, I have sufficiently made out what I proposed to prove,
That the submitting to a Bishop, who is put into the place of another unjustly
deposed by the Civil Authority, is neither in it self a Sin, nor liable to ill
Consequences so likely to happen as the Evils we endeavor to avoid; or, if so
likely to happen, not so great and pernicious to the Church as those are. From
whence it necessarily follows, That such a Submission is in it self highly
reasonable. Which was the first Proposition we proposed to be demonstrated. I
come now to the Second General proposed to be made out, That such a Submission
is agreeable to the Practice of the Ancients.

. 12. But before I put an end to this Chapter, and proceed to the Proof of this
last Proposition, there remains yet one thing more to be considered, and that
is the Imputation of Heresy, which the learned Vindicator is pleased to fix
upon us. Any Opinion, says the Vindicator, on account of which Men separate
from their Ecclesiastical Governors, is Heretical, though it be not in its own
nature so: And such an Opinion is not Heretical only, when Men designedly
separate from others on that very account, because they are not of that
Opinion; but also when they venture on such Practices on account of that
Opinion, wherein others cannot communicate with 'em; for that very reason,
because they cannot join with 'em in that Opinion. Then plainly the differing
in such Opinions, makes a difference of Communion unavoidable; and therefore
the Opinions themselves, in such a Case as this is, are Signals of different
Communions, which will come under the Charge of Heresy. His meaning is, that
We, maintaining this Opinion, That the Civil Power has Authority to depose a
Bishop for a Political Crime; or, if it has no such Authority, when once it has
deposed a Bishop, it is lawful to acknowledge the Successor; and in
consequence of that Opinion, submitting now to the present Possessors, are
therefore Heretics, because He and his Party cannot join with us in that
Practice, as being of the contrary Opinion. Here it comes into my mind, what S.
Ierom somewhere says, That he that can with Patience hear himself called
Heretic, is no good Christian. This is true of those Heresies which were so in
the Opinion of the Ancients: But in this Case we dare to be patient. Ego tibi
Haereticus tu mihi: That Is all the Return we shall make; The Vindicator, in
consequence of his Opinion, that the Civil Authority has no power to depose a
Bishop; and that if a Bishop is so deposed, his Successor ought to be rejected,
though otherwise never so worthy, adheres to the Bishops deprived, and disowns
those that are put into their places. In this Practice of the Vindicator we
cannot join with him; and for that very reason, because we cannot join with him
in his Opinion. And what now follows from our Author's Notion of Heresy, but
that he himself is a Heretic? It is nothing at all to our Purpose. But for his
own sake I shall here take upon me to add, (with a pace maximi ^iri) That this
Notion of Heresy is a groundless and a fancyfull Notion. That he may be
properly called a Heretic, who separates from the Church, because the Church
is not of his Opinion, though the Opinion is not at all in its own nature
Heretical, I grant: For there is a sort of Heresy which is not sinful on the
account of the Opinion maintained, but only because it is a separation from
the Church. But this I assert in opposition to what is laid down by the
Vindicator, That to all Heresy (as the word is strictly taken to denote a Sin
contradistinct to Schism) it is necessary that there be an Opinion maintained;
which either the Church condemns, or for which the Person that maintains it,
does of himself separate from the Church. If it be not for any Opinion that the
Vindicator is divided from the Church, but only for what is done by the
Church, he cannot be called, in a strict sense, a Heretic, but only a
Schismatic.

. 13. But to wave this Dispute, as not at all material, and to suffer the
Vindicator, if he pleases, to enjoy his Notion; What now is the Use he would
make of it? What is his Design in advancing it? The Use he makes of it is this:
He alleges the aforesaid Heresy as a Reason for their Separation. He tells us,
That we being guilty of Heresy, they ought by our own Concessions to keep off
from our Communion, because we our selves acknowledge that Heresy is a just
cause of Separation. Though we should admit, says he, that the Author of the
Baroccian Treatise had been successful in all that he has attempted: we may
yet justify our adherence to the deprived Bishops, and our Separation from our
Adversaries opposite Altars, and justify it too by the Doctrine of their own
Author: for even he permits a Separation where Orthodoxy is concerned, and
expressly excepts this Case from the Number of those which he pretends to
confute. An Heretical Bishop he calls a false Bishop, etc. It Is strange that
the worthy and learned Vindicator should be so much out in his Logic, as not
to see the Inconsistency of what he alleges, and to offer this as a reason for
their not communicating with us! If it is their not communicating with us that
makes our Opinion Heretical, and us Heretics; how do they refuse to
communicate with us for this reason, because we are Heretics? We could not be
Heretics according to the Vindicator's own Notion, 'till they had refused to
communicate with us. So dangerous a thing it is, First to do a thing rashly,
and then to hunt for a Reason! If this Plea of our Author is good, I would very
fain know how any Separation can be proved to be unlawful. Let our Author
stand out a little, and dispute with our old Dissenters. He asks a Dissenter,
why he separates from the Church? The Dissenter tells him it is, because the
Church is Heretical. But why Heretical? Because she thinks it lawful to oblige
her Members to the use of Ceremonies, and pursuant to that Opinion she actually
imposes the use of 'em. In the use of these Ceremonies (says the Dissenter) we
cannot join with you; and for that very reason, because we cannot join with you
in this Opinion, That the Church has power to impose upon its Members the use
of Ceremonies: And because we cannot join with the Church in this Opinion and
Practice, upon that very account the Church is Heretical. Thus according to our
Author's own Plea: but the Plea would be vain and Illogical.

. 14. But this is not all: We are not only Heretics upon that account, but,
as the Vindicator contends, we are Heretics likewise (as Heresy signifies an
erring) even in Fundamentals. He affirms, that our Opinion is a fundamental
Error, because (as he says) it is utterly destructive of the Church, as the
Church is a Society distinct from the State. To maintain this Opinion, That for
Political Crimes a Bishop may be lawfully Deprived by the Civil Authority: Or
this, That supposing he cannot be lawfully so deprived; yet if he is deprived,
it is lawful for Peace-sake to submit to his Successor: How that is
destructive of the Church, as the Church is a Society, I, for my part, cannot
perceive. To me it is much more apparent, that to advance this Opinion, That a
Bishop cannot be deprived by the Civil Authority for any Crime whatsoever, is
destructive of all Civil Government, which, as well as the Ecclesiastical, is
of God's Institution. He therefore that advances that Notion, advances a very
dangerous Notion. But it is not my Business at present to engage in these
Disquisitions. I shall only make bold to ask the Vindicator a few Questions.
If he thinks that Opinion, concerning the Power of the Magistrate, a
fundamental Heresy, and enough to justify the present Separation, how came it
to pass that he did not leave the Communion of those, whom he knew to be the
Maintainers of that Opinion, before this time? I will ask him one Question
more: If the late Bishops should be again restored, would he then refuse to
communicate with those who advance that Opinion? If he would not; then it is
certain, that he does not think that enough to justify the present Separation.
One more, and then I have done. I desire to know, if our Author knows none of
his own Communion, who themselves acknowledge the Power of the Supreme Civil
Governor to depose a Bishop for Political Crimes? It Is strange if he should be
ignorant of what every body knows: And it is to be believed, that the Fathers
themselves of his own Communion, at least some of 'em, agree with us in this
Opinion, which the Church of England has all along to this time accounted
Orthodox, though the Vindicator is pleased to declare it a Heresy.

But enough, and too much, of these Matters. We will leave our much honored
Adversary to invent some other new Notion more consistent, and more useful for
his Cause: And will now proceed to enquire how Heretical our Forefathers were
in thinking it lawful to adhere to the present Possessor, and in acting
accordingly.


