OF LIBERTY AND NECESSITY A TREATISE, Wherein all Controversy concerning
Predestination, Election, Free Will, Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. is fully
decided and cleared, in answer to a Treatise written by the Bishop of
Londonderry, on the same subject.

By Thomas Hobs.

Dedicated to the Lord Marquess of Newcastle.

LONDON, Printed by W. B. for F. Eaglesfield at the Marygold in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1654.

To the Sober and Discreet Reader.
IT made S. Chrysostom tremble when ever he reflected on the proportion, which
those that went the narrow way, bore to those which marched in the broad, how
many were the Called, and how few the Chosen, how many they were that were
created for and in a capacity of eternal beatitude, and how few attained it.
This consideration certainly would make a man look upon the holy Scriptures,
among Christians, as the greatest indulgence of heaven, being all the
directions it has been pleased to afford poor man in so difficult a journey as
that of his eternal bliss or misery. But when a man comes to look into those
transcendent writings, he finds them to be the works of a sort of innocent
harmless men, that had little acquaintance or familiarity with the world, and
consequently not much interessed in the troubles and quarrels of several
Countries; That though they are all but necessary, yet were they written
occasionally, rather than out of design; and lastly, that their main business
is, to abstract man from this world, and to persuade him to prefer the bare
hope of what he can neither see, hear, nor conceive, before all the present
enjoyments this world can afford. This begat a reverence and esteem to them in
all those who endeavor to work out their salvation o^ of them. But if a man,
not weighin^ them in themselves, shall consider the practices of those, who
pretend to be the interpreters of them, and to make them fit meat for the
people, how that instead of renouncing the world, they endeavor to raise
themselves into the greatest promotions, leisure, and luxury; that they make
them the decoys of the people, to carry on designs and intriques of State,
and study the enjoyments of this world more than any other people, he will
find some grounds to conclude, the practices of such men to be the greatest
disturbance, burden, and vexation of the Christian part of the world. The
complaint is as true as sad; Instead of acquainting the credulous vulgar, with
the main end of their functions, and the great business of their embassy, what
a great measure of felicity is prepared for them, and how easily it may be
forfeited? they involve their consciences in the briars of a thousand needless
scruples, they spin out volumes out of half sentences, nay, out of points and
accents, and raise endless Controversies about things (were men free from
passion* and prejudice) in themselves clear enough, and when they have canvas'd
their questions, till they are weary themselves, and have wearied hearers, and
readers, and all they have to do with, every one sits down under his own vine,
and hugs his own apprehensions, so that after all their pains, bandings, and
implacable adhesion to parties, the inconvenience remains still, and we as far
from any solid conviction, as at first setting out.

The Controversies betwixt Rome and the Reformation, are long since beaten out
of the pit, by other co^batants of their own brood, so that if we speak of
Protestant and Catholic, they are in a manner content to sit down with their
present acquests; for as to conviction he certainly is a rare Prosolite, at
whose conversion, interest, humor, discontent, inclination, are not admitted
to the debate.

But to come yet nearer our purpose, Let us consider our own fractions, of
fractions of Religion here in England, where if that saying, That, It is better
to live where nothing is lawful, than where all things, be as true in Religion
as Policy, Posterity may happily feel the sad consequence of it. What I pray is
the effect of so many sermons, teachings, preachings, exercises, and exercising
of gifts, meetings, disputations, conferences, conventicles, Printed books,
written with so much distraction and presumption upon God Almighty, and abuse
of his holy Word? Marry this, It is the seminary of a many vexatious, endless
and fruitless controversies, the consequence whereof, are jealousies,
heart-burnings, exasperation of parties, the introduction of factions, and
National quarrels into matters of Religion, and consequently all the calamities
of war and devastation. Besides, they are good lawful diversions for the
duller sort of Citizens, who contract diseases for want of motion; They supply
the building of Pyramids among the Egyptians, by diverting the thoughts of the
people from matters of State, and consequently from Rebellion.

They find work for Printers, etc. if the parties interessed are troubled with
the itch of popularitie, and will suffer themselves to be scratched out of
somewhat by way of Contribution to the Impression. Hence are the Stationer's
shop furnished, and thence the Minister's study in the Country, who, having
found out the humor of his auditorie, consults with his Stationer, on what
Books his money is best bestowed, who very gravely, it may be, will commend
Cole upon the Philippians before the excellent (but borrowed) Caryll upon Job.
But as to any matter of conviction, we see every one acquiesces in his own
sentiments, every one hears the Teacher who is most to his humor, and when he
has been at Church, and pretends to have sat at his feet, comes home and
censures him as he pleases.

To be yet a little more particular, what shall we think of those vast and
involuble volumes concerning Predestination, Free Will, Free Grace, Election,
Reprobation, etc. which fill, not only our Libraries, but the world with their
noise and disturbance, whereof the least thing we are to expect is conviction;
every side endeavoring to make good their own grounds, and keep the cudgels in
their hands as long as they can? What Stir is there between the Molinists and
Jansenists about Grace and Merits, and yet both pretend S. Augustine?

Must we not expect, that the Jesuits will, were it for no other end but to
vindicate that reputation of Learning they have obtained in the world,
endeavor to make good their Tenets, though the other were the truer opinion?
Is Truth then retired to that inaccessible rock that admits no reproaches? or
are we all turned Ixion's, and instead of enjoying that Juno, entertain our
selves with the clouds of our own persuasions, of which unnatural coition, what
other issue can there be but Centaurs and monstrous opinions? To these
questions I shall not presume to answer, but in the words of this great Author,
who answering the charge of Impiety, laid upon the holding of Necessity, says
thus; If we consider the greatest part of Mankind, not as they should be, but
as they are, that is, as men, whom either the study of acquiring wealth and
preferment, or whom the appetite of sensual delights, or the impatience of
meditating, or the rash embracing of wrong Principles, have made unapt to
discuss the truth of things, I must confess, etc.

Certainly we have some reason to expect an effectual cure from this man, since
he has so fortunately found out the disease. Now if he in so few sheets has
performed more than all the voluminous works of the Priests and Ministers, and
that in points of soul-concernment and Christian interest, as Predestination,
Free Will, Grace, Merits, Election, Reprobation, Necessity, and Liberty of
actions, and others, the main hinges of human Salvation, and to do this, being
a person, whom not only the aversness of his nature to engage himself in
matters of Controversy of this kind, but his severer study of the
Mathematics, might justly exempt from any such skirmishes; We may not stick to
infer, that the Black-Coats, generally taken, are a sort of ignorant Tinkers,
who in matters of their own profession, such as is the mending and sodering of
men's consciences, have made more holes than they sound; nay, what makes them
more impardonable, they have neither the gratitude nor ingenuitie to
acknowledge this repairer of their breaches, and assertor of their reputation,
who has now effected what they all this while have been tampering about. I
know this Author is little beholding to the Ministers, and they make a great
part of the Nation, and besides them, I know there are a many illiterate,
obstinate, and inconvincible spirits, yet I dare advance this proposition, how
bold soever it may seem to some; That this Book, how little and contemptible
soever it may seem, contains more evidence and conviction in the matters it
treats of, than all the volumes, nay Libraries, which the Priests, Jesuits, and
Ministers have, to our great charge, distraction, and loss of precious time,
furnished us with. Which if so, I shall undertake for any rational man, That
all the controversial Labors concerning Religion in the world, all the
Polemical Treatises of the most ancient or modern, shall never breed any
maggots of scruples, or dissatisfactions in his brains, nor shall his eyes or
head ever ache with turning them over, but he shall be so resolved in mind, as
never to importune God Almighty with impertinent addresses, nor ever become any
of those Enthusiastical spiritati, who as the most Learned M. White says,
expound Scripture without sense or reason, (and are not to be disputed with,
but with the same success* as men write on sand) and trouble their neighbors
with their dreams, revelations, and spiritual whimsies. No; here is solid
conviction, at least, so far as the Metaphysical Mysteries of our Religion will
admit. If God be omnipotent, he is irresistible; if so, just in all his
actions, though we (who have as much capacity to measure the justice of Gods
actions as a man born blind to judge of colors) happily may not discern it. What
then need any man trouble his head whether he be Predestined or no? Let him
live justly and honestly according to the Religion of his Country, and refer
himself to God for the rest, since he is the Potter, and may do what he please
with the vessel. But I leave the Reader to find his satisfaction in the
Treatise it self, since it may be I derogate from it by saying so much before
it. This Book, I doubt not will find no worse entertainment than the Leviathan,
both in regard of its bulk, and that it does not strike so home at the
Ministers and Catholic party as that did. And yet here we must complain of
want of sufficiency or ingenuitie, to acknowledge the truths, or confute the
errors of that book, which till it is done, we shall not count the Author an
Heretic. On this side the sea, besides the dirt and slander cast on him in
Sermons and private meetings, none has put any thing in Print against him, but
Mr. Rosse, one who may be said to have had so much Learning as to have been
perpetually barking at the works of the most learned. How he has been received
beyond Seas I know not, but certainly, not without the regret of the
Catholics, who building their Church on other foundations than those of the
Scriptures, and pretending infallibility, certitude, and unity in Religion,
cannot but be discontented that these Prerogatives of Religion are taken away,
not only from Tradition, that is to say, from the Church, but also from the
Scriptures, and are invested in the Supreme power of the Nation, be it of what
persuasion it will.

Thus much, Reader, I have thought fit to acquaint thee with, that thou
might know what a jewel thou have in thy hands, which thou must accordingly
value, not by the bulk, but the preciousness. Thou have here in a few sheets
what might prove work enough for many thousand sermons and exercises; and more
than the Catachisms and Confessions of a thousand Assemblies could furnish thee
with; Thou have what will cast an eternal blemish on all the cornered caps of
the Priests and Jesuits, and all the black and white caps of the Ministers; to
be short, Thou art now acquainted with that Man, who, in matters of so great
importance as those of thy salvation, furnishes thee with better instructions,
than any thou have ever yet been acquainted with, what profession, persuasion,
opinion, or Church soever thou art of; of whom and his works make the best use
thou can, etc. Farewell.

RIGHT HONORABLE
I Had once resolved to answer my Lord Bishops Objections to my Book De CIVE in
the first place as that which concerns me most, and afterward to examine his
discourse of LIBERTY and NECSSITY, which (because I had never uttered my
opinion of it) concerned me the less. But seeing it was your Lordships and my
Lord Bishops desire that I should begin with the latter, I was contented so to
do, and here I present and submit it to your Lordships judgment.

And first I assure your Lordship I find in it no new argument neither from
Scripture nor from Reason, that I have not often heard before, which is as much
as to say, I am not surprised.

The preface is a handsome one, but it appears even in that, that he has
mistaken the question. For whereas he says thus, If I be free to write this
discourse, I have obtained the Cause, I deny that to be true, for it is enough
to his freedom of writing, that he had not written it unless he would himself.
If he will obtain the cause, he must prove that before he writ it, it was not
necessary he should (...) it afterward. It may be his Lordship thinks it all
one to say; I was free to write it, and It was not necessary I should write it,
but I think otherwise; for he is free to do a thing that may do it if he have
the will to do it, and may forbear, if he have the will to forbear. And yet if
there be a necessity that he shall have the will to do it, the action is
necessarily to follow; and if there be a necessity that he shall have the will
to forbear, the forbearing also will be necessary. The Question therefore is
not whether a man be a free Agent, that is to say, whether he can write or
forbear, speak or be silent according to his will, but whether the will to
write and the will to forbear come upon him according to his will, or according
to any thing else in his own power. I acknowledge this Liberty that I can do if
I will, but to say, I can will if I willt. I take to be an absurd speech,
wherefore I cannot grant my Lord the cause upon his preface.

In the next place he makes certain distinctions of Liberty, and says he
means not Liberty from sin, nor from servitude, nor from violence, but from
Necessity Necessitation, inevitabilitie, and determination to one.

It had been better to define Liberty than thus to distinguish, for I
understand never the more what he means by Liberty, and though he say he means
Liberty from necessitation, yet I understand not how such a Liberty can be,
and it is a taking of the Question without proof, for what is else the Question
between us, but whether such a Liberty be possible or not?

There are in the same place other distinctions, as a Liberty of Exercise only
(which he calls a Liberty of contradiction, namely of doing not good or evil
simply, but of doing this or that good, or this or that evil respestively) and
a Liberty of specification and exercise also (which he calls a Liberty of
contrariety) namely a Liberty not only to do good or evil, but also to do or
not do this or that good or evil.

And with these Distinctions his Lordship says he clears the coast, whereas in
truth, he darkneth his own meaning and the Question, not only with the jargon
of exercise only, specification also, contradiction, contrariety, but also
with pretending distinction where none is; For how is it possible that the
Liberty of doing or not doing this or that good or evil, can consist (as he
says it does in God and good Angels) without a Liberty of doing or not doing
good or evil?

The next thing his Lordship does, after clearing of the coast, is the dividing
of his forces (as he calls them) into two squadrons, one of places of
Scriptures, the other of Reasons, which allegory he uses I suppose, because he
addresseth the discourse to your Lordship, who is military man, All that I have
to say touching this is, that I observe a great part of those his forces do
look and march another way, and some of them fight amongst themselves.

And the first place of Scripture taken from Numb. 30.14. Is one of those that
look another way; the words are. If a wife make a vow it is left to her
husbands choice either to establish it or make it void. For it proves no more
but that the husband is a free and voluntary Agent, but not that his choice
therein is not necessitated or not determined to what he shall choose, by
precedent necessary causes.

For if there come into the husbands mind greater good by establishing than
abrogating such a vow, the establishing will follow necessarily, and if the
evil that will follow in the husbands opinion outweigh the good, the contrary
must needs follow, and yet in this following of ones hopes and fears consists
the nature of Election. So that a man may both choose this, and cannot but
choose this, and consequently choosing and necessity are joined together.

The second place of Scripture is Joshua 24.15. The third is 2 Samuel 24.12.
whereby it is clearly proved, that there is election in man, but not proved,
that such election was not necessitated by the hopes, and fears, and
considerations of good and bad to follow, which depend not on the will, nor are
subject to election. And therefore one answer serves all such places, if there
were a thousand.

But his Lordship supposing, it seems, I might answer as I have done, that
necessity and election might stand together, and instance in the actions of
children, fools, or bruit beasts, whose fancies, I might say, are necessitated
and determined to one; before these his proofs out of Scripture desires to
prevent that instance, and therefore says that the actions of children, fools,
mad men, and beasts, are indeed determined, but that they proceed not from
election, nor from free, but from Spontaneous Agents. As for example that the
Be, when it makes honey, does it Spontaneously, and when the Spider makes his
web, he does it Spontaneously but not by election.

Though I never meant to ground my Answer upon the experience of what Children,
Fools, Mad men, and Beasts do, yet that your Lordship may understand what can
be meant by Spontaneous, and how it differs from voluntary, I will answer
that distinction, and show that it fights against its fellow Arguments.

Your Lordship therefore is to consider, that all voluntary actions, where the
thing that induces the will is not fear, are called also spontaneous, and said
to be done by a man's own accord. As when a man gives money voluntarily to
another for Merchandise or out of affection, he is said to do it of his own
accord, which in latin is sponte, and therefore the action is spontaneous
(though to give ones money willingly to a thief to a void killing, or throw it
into the Sea to avoid drowning, where the motive is fear, be not called
spontaneous.) But every spontaneous action is not therefore voluntary, for
voluntary presupposes some precedent deliberation, that is to say, some
consideration and meditation, of what is likely to follow, both upon the doing
and abstaining from the action deliberated of; whereas many actions are done of
our own accord, and are therefore spontaneous, for which nevertheless, as my
Lord thinks, we never consulted nor deliberated in our selves. As when making
no question nor any the least doubt in the world, but the thing we are about is
good, we eat and walk, or in anger strike or revile, which my Lord thinks
spontaneous, but not voluntary nor elective actions, and with such kind of
actions he says necessitation may stand, but not with such as are voluntary
and proceed upon election and deliberation. Now if I make it appear to your
Lordship, that those actions, which he says, proceed from spontanity, and
which he ascribes to Children, Fools, Madmen and Beasts, proceed from election
and deliberation, and that actions inconsiderate, rash, and spontaneous are
ordinarily found in those, that are by themselves and many more thought as
wise, or wiser than ordinarily men are, then my Lord Bishops Argument
concludes, that necessity and election may stand together, which is contrary
to that which he intends by all the rest of his Arguments to prove.

And first your Lordships own experience furnishes you with proof enough, that
Horses, Dogs, and other Bruit Beasts, do demur oftentimes upon the way they
are to take, the Horse retiring from some strange figure that he sees, and
coming on again to avoid the spur. And what else does a man that deliberateth,
but one while proceed toward action, another while retire from it, as the hope
of greater good draws him, or the fear of greater evil drives him away.

A Child may be so young as to do what it does without all deliberation, but
that is but till it have the chance to be hurt by doing of somewhat, or till it
be of age to understand the rod, for the actions, wherein he has once had a
check, shall be deliberated on the second time.

Fools and Madmen manifestly deliberate no less than the wisest men, though
they make not so good a choice, the images of things being by disease altered.

For Bees and Spiders, if my Lord Bishop had had so little to do as to be a
spectatour of their actions, he would have confessed not only election but
art, prudence and policy in them, very near equal to that of mankind. Of Bees,
Aristotle says, their life is Civil.

Again, his Lordship is deceived if he think any spontaneous action after once
being checked in it, differs from an action voluntary and elective, for even
the setting of a man's foot, in the posture for walking, and the action of
ordinary eating was once deliberated of how and when it should be done, and
though afterward it became easy and habitual so as to be done without
forethought, yet that does not hinder but that the act is voluntary and
proceeds from election. So also are the rashest actions of choleric persons
voluntary and upon deliberation, for who is there but very young children, that
has not considered when and how far he ought, or safely may strike or revile?
Seeing then his Lordship agrees with me that such actions are necessitated, and
the fancy of those that do them determined to the action they do, it follows,
out of his Lordships own doctrine, that the liberty of election does not take
away the necessity of electing this or that individual thing. And thus one of
his Arguments fights against another.

The 2 Argument from Scripture consists in histories of men that did one
thing, when if they would, they might have done another, the places are two.
One is 1 Kings 3.11. where the history says, God was pleased that Solomon, who
might if he would, have asked Riches, or Revenge, did nevertheless ask wisdom
at Gods hands; the other is the words of S. Peter to Ananias, Acts 5.4. After
it was sold, was it not in thine own power?

To which the answer is the same with that I answered to the former places,
that they prove there is elction, but do not disprove the necessity, which I
maintain of what they so elect.

The fourth Argument (for to the 3 and fifth I shall make but one answer) is to
this effect. If the decree of God, or his foreknowledge, or the influence of
the stars, or the concatenation of causes, or the physical or moral efficacy of
causes, or the last dictate of the understanding, or whatsoever it be, do take
away true liberty, then Adam before his fall had no true liberty. Quicquid
ostendes mihi sic incredulus odi.

That which I say necessitateth and determinateth every action, (that his
Lordship may no longer doubt of my meaning) is the sum of all things, which
being now existent, conduce and concur to the production of that action
hereafter, whereof if any one thing now were wanting, the effect could not be
produced. This concourse of causes, whereof every one is determined be such as
it is by a like concourse of former causes, may well be called (in respect they
were all set and ordered by the eternal cause of all things, God Almighty) the
Decree of God.

But that the foreknowledge of God should be a cause of any thing, cannot be
truly said, seeing foreknowledge is knowledge, and knowledge depends on the
existence of the things known and not they on it.

The influence of the Stars is but a small part of the whole cause,
consisting of the concourse of all Agents.

Nor does the concourse of all causes make one simple chain or concatination,
but an innumerable number of chains, joined together, not in all parts, but in
the first link God Almighty, and consequently the whole cause of an event, does
not always depend on one single chain, but on many together.

Natural efficacy of objects does determine voluntary Agents and necessitates
the will, and consequently the action; but for moral efficacy, I understand not
what he means.

The last dictate of the judgment, concerning the good or bad that may follow
on any action, is not properly the whole cause, but the last part of it, and
yet may be said to Produce the effect necessarily, in such manner as the last
feather may be said to break a horses back, when there were so many laid on
before as there wanted but that one to do it.

Now for his Argument that if the concourse of all the causes necessitate the
effect, that then it follows, Adam had no true liberty, I deny the consequence,
for I make not only the effect, but also the election of that particular
effect necessary, in as much as the will it self, and each propension of a man
during his deliberation, is as much necessitated, and depends on a sufficient
cause as any thing else whatsoever. As for example, it is no more necessary
that fire should burn than that a man or other creature, whose limbs be moved
by fancy, should have election, that is liberty, to do what he has a fancy to
do, though it be not in his will or power to choose his fancy, or choose his
election and will.

This doctrine, because my Lord Bishop says he hates, I doubt had better been
suppressed, as it should have been, if both your Lordship and he had not
pressed me to an answer.

The Arguments of greatest consequence, are the third and the fifth, and they
fall both into one, namely; If there be a necessity of all events, that it will
follow, That praise and reprehension, and reward and punishment are all vain
and unjust, and that if God should openly forbid, and secretly necessitate the
same action, punishing men for what they could not avoid, there would be no
belief among them of Heaven and Hell.

To oppose hereunto I must borrow an answer from S. Paul, Romans 9.11. From the
11 verse of the Chapter to the 18 is laid down the very same objection in these
words. When they (meaning Esau and Jacob) were yet unborn, and had done neither
good nor evil, that the purpose of God according to election, not by works, but
by him that calls, might remain firm, it was said unto her (viz Rebecca) that
the elder should serve the younger, etc. What then shall we say? Is there
injustice with God? God forbid. It is not therefore in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. For the Scripture says to
Pharaoh, I have stirred thee up that I might show my power in thee, and that my
name might be set forth in all the earth. Therefore whom God wills he has
mercy on, and whom he wills he hardens. Thus you see the case put by S.
Paul, is the same with that of my Lord Bishop, and the same objection in these
words following.

Thou will ask me then, why does God yet complain, for who has resisted his
will?

To this therefore the Apostle answers, not by denying it was Gods will, or
that the decree of God concerning Esau was not before he had sinned, or that
Esau was not necessitated to do what he did; but thus; Who art thou O man that
interrogatest God? shall the work say to the workman, why have thou made me
thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same stuff to make one
vessel to honor another to dishonor? According therefore to this answer of S.
Paul I answer my Lords Ojection, and say, the power of God alone without other
helps is sufficient justification of any action he does. That which men make
amongst themselves here by pacts and covenants, and call by the name of
justice, and according whereunto men are accounted and termed rightly just or
unjust, is not that by which God Almighties actions are to be measured or
called just, no more than his counsels are to be measured by humane wisdom.
That which he does is made just by his doing it, just I say in him, though not
always just in us.

For a man that shall command a thing openly, and plot secretly the hinderance
of the same, if* he punish him that he so commands for not doing it, it is
unjust. So also, his counsels are therefore not in vain, because they be his,
whether we see the use of them or not. When God afflicted Job, he did object no
sin unto him, justified his afflicting of him by telling him of his power. Have
thou, says God, an arm like mine? Where were thou when I laid the foundations
of the earth? and the like. So our Savior, concerning the man that was born
blind, said it was not for his sin, or for his Parents sin, but that the power
of God might be shown in him. Beasts are subject to death and torments, yet
they cannot sin, it was Gods will they should be so. Power irresistible
justifies all actions, really and properly, in whomsoever it be found, less
power does not, and because such power is in God only, he must needs be just
in all his actions, and we, that not comprehending his Counsels call him to the
Bar, commit injustice in it.

I am not ignorant of the usual reply to this answer, by distinguishing between
will and permission, as that God Almighty does indeed sometimes permit sins,
and that he also foreknoweth that the sin he permits shall be committed, but
does not will it, nor necessitate it.

I know also they distinguish the action from the sin of the action, saying,
that God Almighty does indeed cause the action whatsoever action it be, but not
the sinfullness or irregularity of it, that is, the discordance between the
action and the Law. Such distinctions as these dazzle my understanding; I find
no difference between the will to have a thing done, and the permission to do
it, when he that permits can hinder it, and knows that it will be done
unless he hinder it. Nor find I any difference between an action and the sin
of that action, as for example, between the killing of Vriah, and the sin of
David in killing Vriah, nor when one is cause both of the Action and of the
Law, how another can, because of the disagreement between them, no more than
how one man making a longer and a shorter garment, another can make the
inequality that is between them. This I know, God cannot sin, because his doing
a thing makes it just and consequently, no sin, as also because whatsoever can
sin is subject to another Law, which God is not. And therefore it is blasphemy
to say God can sin; but to say, that God can so order the world, as a sin may
be necessarily caused thereby in a man, I do not see how it is any dishonor to
him. Howsoever, if such or other distinctions can make it clear, that S. Paul
did not think Esaus or Pharaohs actions proceeded from the will and purpose of
God, or that proceeding from his will, could not therefore without injustice be
blamed or punished, I will, as soon as I understand them, turn unto my Lords
Opinion, for I now hold nothing in all this question betwixt us, but what
seems to me, not obscurely, but most expressly said in this place by S.
Paul, And thus much in answer to his places of Scripture.

To the Arguments from Reason.
OF the Arguments from Reason, the first is that which his Lordship says is
drawn from Zeno's beating of his man, which is therefore called Argumentum
baculinum, that is to say, a wooden Argument. The story is this, Zeno held,
that all actions were necessary, his man therefore being for some fault beaten,
excused himself upon the necessity of it, to avoid this excuse, his Master
pleaded likewise the necessity of beating him. So that not he that maintained,
but he that derided the necessity, was beaten, contrary to that his Lordship
would infer. And the Argument was rather withdrawn than drawn from the story.

The second Argument is taken from certain inconveniences which his Lordship
thinks would follow such an opinion. It is true that ill use might be made of
it, and therefore your Lordship and my Lord Bishop, ought at my request to keep
private what I say here of it. But the inconveniences are indeed none, and what
use soever he made of truth, yet truth is truth, and now the question is not,
what is fit to be preached, but what is true.

The first inconvenience he says is this. That the Laws, which prohibit any
action, will be unjust.

2. That all consultations are vain.

3. That admonitions to men of understanding, are of no more use, than to
children, fools, and mad men.

4. That praise, dispraise, reward and punishment are in vain.

5.6. That Counsels, Acts, Arms, Books, Instruments, Study, Tutours, Medicines,
are in vain.

To which arguments his Lordship expecting I should answer, by saying, the
ignorance of the event were enough to make us use the means, adds (as it were a
reply to my answer foreseen) these words. A lass! how should our not knowing
the event be a sufficient motive to make us use the means? Wherein his Lordship
says right, but my answer is not that which he expects, I answer.

First, that the necessity of an action does not make the Laws that prohibit it
unjust. To let pass that not the necessity, but the will to break the Law,
makes the action unjust, because the Law regards the will and no other
precedent causes of action. And to let pass, that no Law can possibly be
unjust, in as much as every man makes (by his consent) the Law he is bound to
keep, and which consequently must be just, unless a man can be unjust to
himself. I say what necessary cause soever precede an action, yet if the action
be forbidden, he that does it willingly may justly be punished. For instance,
suppose the Law on pain of death prohibit stealing, and that there be a man,
who by the strength of temptation is necessitated to steal, and is thereupon
put to death, does not this punishment deter others from Theft? is it not a
cause that others steal not? Does it not frame and make their wills to justice?

To make the Law, is therefore to make a Cause of Justice, and to necessitate
Justice, and consequently it is no injustice to make such a Law.

The intention of the Law is not to grieve the Delinquent for that which is
past, and not to be undone, but to make him and others just, that else would
not be so, and respects not the evil act past, but the good to come, in so
much as without the good intention for the future, no past act of a Delinquent
could justify his killing in the sight of God. But you will say how is it just
to kill one man to amend another, if what were done were necessary? To this I
answer, that men are justly killed, not for that their actions are not
necessitated, but because they are noxious, and they are spared and preserved
whose actions are not noxious. For where there is no Law, there no killing nor
any thing else can be unjust, and by the right of nature, we destroy (without
being unjust) all that is noxious both Beasts and Men, and for Beasts we kill
them justly when we do it in order to our own preservation, and yet my Lord
himself confesses, that their actions, as being only spontaneous, and not
free, are all necessitated and determined to that one thing they shall do. For
men, when we make Societies or Commonwealths we lay not down our right to
kill, excepting in certain cases, as murder, theft or other offensive action;
so that the right, which the Commonwealth has to put a man to death for
crimes is not created by the Law, but remains from the first right of nature,
which every man has to preserve himself, for that the Law does not take the
right away in the case of Criminals, who were by the Law excepted. Men are not
therefore put to death, or punished for that their theft proceeds from
election, but because it was noxious and contrary to men's preservation, and the
punishment conducing to the preservation of the rest, in as much as to punish
those that do voluntary hurt, and none else, frames and makes men's wills such
as men would have them. And thus it is plain, that from the necessity of a
voluntary action, cannot be inferred the injustice of the Law that forbids
it, or the Magistrate that punishes it.

Secondly, I deny that it makes consultations to be in vain, it is the
consultation that causes a man, and necessitateth him to choose to do one
thing rather than another, so that unless a man say that that cause is in vain
which necessitateth the effect, he cannot infer the superfluousness of
consultation out of the necessity of the election proceeding from it. But it
seems his Lordships reasons thus, If I must do this rather than that, I shall
do this rather than that, though I consult not at all, which is a false
proposition and a false consequence, and no better than this, if I shall live
till to morrow, I shall live till to morrow, though I run my self through with
a sword to day. If there be a necessity that an action shall be done, or that
any effect shall be brought to pass, it does not therefore follow, that there
is nothing necessarily requisite as a means to bring it to pass, and therefore
when it is determined, that one thing shall be chosen before another, it is
determined also for what cause it shall so be chosen, which cause, for the most
part, is deliberatio^ or consultation, and therefore consultation is not in
vain, and indeed the less in vain by how much the election is more
necessitated, if more and less had any place in necessity.

The same answer is to be given to the third supposed inconvenience, namely
that admonitions are in vain, for the Admonitions are parts of consultation,
the admonitor being a Counselor for the time to him that is admonished.

The fourth pretended inconveence is, that praise, dispraise, reward and
punishment will be in vain. To which I answer, that for praise and dispraise,
they depend not at all on the necessity of the action praised or dispraised.
For what is it else to praise, but to say a thing is good? good I say for me,
or for some body else, or for the State and Commonwealth? And what is it to
say an action is good, but to say it is as I would wish? Or as another would
have it, or according to the will of the State? that is to say, according to
the Law. Does my Lord think that no action can please me, or him, or the
Commonwealth that should proceed from necessity? things may be therefore
necessary, and yet praise worthy, as also necessary, and yet dispraised, and
neither of them both in vain, because praise and dispraise, and likewise Reward
and Punishment, do by example make and conform the will to good and evil. It
was a very great praise in my opinion, that Velleius Paterculus gives Cato,
where he says that he was good by nature, Et quia aliter esse non potuit.

To the fifth and sixth inconveniences, that Counsels, Arts, Arms, Instruments,
Books, Study, Medicines and the like would be superfluous, the same answer
serves as to the former, that is to say, that this consequence, If the effect
shall necessarily come to pass, then it shall come to pass without its causes
is a false one, and those things named Counsels, Arts, Arms, etc. are the
causes of these effects.

His Lordships third Argument consists in other inconveniences, which he
says will follow, namely Impiety and negligence of religious duties, as
Repentance, and Zeal to Gods service, etc.

To which I answer as to the rest, that they follow not. I must confess, if we
consider the greatest part of Mankind, not as they should be, but as they are,
that is, as men, whom either the study of acquiring wealth, or preferment, or
whom the appetite of sensual delights, or the impatience of meditating, or the
rash embracing of wrong principles have made unapt to discuss the truth of
things, I must I say confess, that the dispute of this question will rather
hurt than help their piety, and therefore if his Lordship had not desired this
answer, I should not have written it, nor do I write it but in hopes your
Lordship and his will keep it private. Nevertheless in very truth, the
necessity of events does not of it self draw with it any impiety at all. For
piety consists only in two things; one that we honor God in our hearts,
which is, that we think as highly of his power as we can, (for to honor any
thing is nothing else but to think it to be of great power.) The other is, that
we signify that honor and esteem by our words and actions, which is called*
Cultus, or worship of God. He therefore that thinks that all things proceed
from Gods eternal will, and consequently are necessary, does he not think God
Omnipotent? Does he not esteem of his power as highly as is possible? which is
to honor God as much as may be in his heart. Again, he that thinks so, is he
not more apt by external acts and words to acknowledge it, than he that
thinks otherwise? yet is this external acknowledgement the same thing which
we call worship. So that this opinion fortifies piety in both kinds, external
and internal, therefore is far from destroying it. And for Repentance, which is
nothing else but a glad returning into the right way after the grief of being
out of the way; though the cause that made him go astray were necessary, yet
there is no reason why he should not grieve; and again though the cause why he
returned into the way were necessary, there remained still the causes of joy.
So that the necessity of the actions takes away neither of those parts of
Repentance, grief for the error, and joy for returning.

And for prayer, whereas he says that the necessity of things destroy prayer,
I deny it, for though prayer be none of the causes that move Gods will (his
will being unchangeable) yet since we find in Gods word, he will not give his
blessings but to those that ask, the motive of prayer is the same. Prayer is
the gift of God no less than the blessing, and the prayer is decreed together
in the same decree wherein the blessing is decreed. It Is manifest that
Thanksgiving is no cause of the blessing past, and that which is past is sure
and necessary, yet even amongst men thanks is in use as an acknowledgement of
the benefit past, though we should expect no new benefit for our gratitude. And
prayer to God Almighty is but thanksgiving for Gods blessings in general, and
though it precede the particular thing we ask, yet it is not a cause or means
of it, but a signification that we expect nothing but from God, in such manner,
as he, not as we, will, and our Savior by word of mouth bids us pray thy will,
not our will, be done, and by example teaches us the same, for he prayed thus,
Father if it be thy will let this cup pass, etc. The end of prayer, as of
thanksgiving, is not to move but to honor God Almighty, in acknowledging that
what we ask can be effected by him only.

The fourth Argument from Reason is this, The order, beauty and perfection of
the world requires that in the universe should be Agents of all sorts; some
necessary* some free, some contingent. He that shall make all things necessary,
all things free, or all things contingent does overthrow the beauty and
perfection of the world.

In which Argument I observe first a Contradiction, for seeing he that makes
any thing in that he makes it, makes it to be necessary, it follows that he
that makes all things, makes all things necessarily to be; As if a workman
make a garment the garment must necessarily be, so if God make every thing,
every thing must necessarily be. Perhaps the beauty of the world requires
(though we know it not) that some Agents should work without deliberation
(which his Lordship calls necessary Agents) and some Agents with deliberation
(and those both he and I call free Agents) and that some Agents should work,
and we not know how (and their effects we both call Contingents) but this
hinders not but that he that electeth may have his election necessarily
determined to one by former causes, and that which is contingent and imputed to
fortune, be nevertheless necessary and depend on precedent necessary causes.
For by contingent, men do not mean that which has no cause, but that which
has not for cause any thing that we perceive; As for example, when a Traveller
meets with a shower, the journey had a cause, and the rain had a cause
sufficient to produce it, but because the journey caused not the rain, nor the
rain the journey, we say they were contingent one to another. And thus you see
that though there be three sorts of events, necessary, contingent, and free,
yet they may be all necessary without destruction of the beauty or perfection
of the universe.

To the first Argument from Reason, which is, that if liberty be taken away,
the nature and formel reason of sin is taken away, I answer by denying the
consequence; The nature of sin consists in this, that the action done proceed
from our will and be against the Law. A Judge in judging whether it be sin or
no which is done against the Law, looks at no higher cause of the action, than
the will of the doer. Now when I say the action was necessary, I do not say it
was done against the will of the doer, but with his will, and necessarily,
because man's will, that is every volition or act of the will and purpose of man
had a sufficient, and therefore a necessary cause, and consequently every
voluntary action was necessitated. An action therefore may be voluntary and a
sin, and nevertheless be necessary, and, because God may afflict by a right
derived from his Omnipotence, though sin were not, and because the example of
punishment on voluntary sinners, is the cause that produces justice, and
makes sin less frequent, for God to punish such sinners (as I have said
before) is no injustice. And thus you have my answer to his Lordships
Objections both out of Scripture and from Reason.

Certain Distinctions which his Lordship supposing might be brought to evade
his Arguments are by him removed.
HE says a man may perhaps answer, that the necessity of things held by him,
is not a Stoicall necessity, but a Christian necessity, etc. But this
distinction I have not used, nor indeed ever heard before, nor could I think
any man could make Stoicall and Christian two kinds of necessity, though they
may be two kinds of Doctrine. Nor have I drawn my Answer to his Lordships
Arguments from the authority of any Sect, but from the nature of the things
themselves.

But here I must take notice of certain words of his Lordships in this place,
as making against his own Tenet. Where all the causes, says he being joined
together and subordinate one to another do make but one total cause, if any one
cause (much more the first) in the whole series or subordination of causes be
necessary, it determines the rest, and without doubt makes the effect
necessary. For that which I call the necessary cause of any effect, is the
joining together of all causes subordinate to the first into one total cause.
If any of these says he, especially the first, produce its effect necessarily,
then all the rest are determined. Now it is manifest, that the first cause is a
necessary cause of all the effects that are next and immediate to it, and
therefore by his Lordships own reason all effects are necessary.

Nor is that distinction of necessary in respect of the first cause, and
necessary in respect of Second causes mine, it does (as his Lordship well
notes) imply a contradiction. But the distinction of free into free from
compulsion and free from Necessitation, I acknowledge, for to be free from
compulsion is to do a thing so as terror be not the cause of his will to do it;
for a man is then only said to be compelled, when fear makes him willing to
it. As when a man willingly throws his goods into the sea to save himself, or
submits to his enemy for fear of being killed. Thus all men that do any thing
for love, or revenge, or lust are free from compulsion, and yet their actions
may be as necessary as those that are done by compulsion; for sometimes other
passions work as forcibly as fear. But free from Necessitation. I say, no man
can be, and it is that which his Lordship undertook to disprove.

This distinction, his Lordship says, uses to be fortified by two reasons (but
they are not mine.) The first he says, is, that it is granted by all Divines,
that an Hypothetical necessity, or Necessity upon supposition, may stand with
Liberty. That you may understand this, I will give you an example of
Hypothetical necessity. If I shall live, I shall eat. This is an Hypothetical
necessity. Indeed it is a necessary proposition, that is to say, it is
necessary that that proposition should be true whenever uttered, but it is
not the necessity of the thing, nor is it therefore necessary that the man
should live, nor that the man should eat. I do not use to fortify my
distinctions with such reasons, let his Lordship confute them how he will, it
contents me; but I would have your Lordship take notice hereby, how easy and
plain a thing, (but withal false) with the grave usage of such terms as
Hypothetical necessity, and Necessity upon supposition, and such like terms
of Schoolmen may be obscured and made to seem profound learning.

The second reason that may confirm the distinction of free from compulsion,
and free from necessitation, he says is, that God and good Angels do good
necessarily, and yet are more free than we. This reason, though I had no need
of, yet I think it so farforth good, as it is true that God and good Angels do
good necessarily, and yet are free; but because I find not in the Articles of
our Faith, nor in the decrees of our Church, set down in what manner I am to
conceive God and good Angels to work by necessity, or in what sense they work
Freely, I suspend my sentence in that point, and am content that there be a
freedom from Compulsion, and yet no freedom from Necessitation, as has been
proved, in that a man may be necessitated to some action without threats and
without fear of danger. But how my Lord can avoid the consisting together of
freedom and necessity, supposing God and good Angels are freer than men, and
yet do good necessarily, that we must examine. I confess, says he, that God and
good Angels are more free than we, that is, intensively in degree of Freedom,
not extensively in the latitude of the object, according to a liberty of
exercise, not of specification.

Again, we have here two distinctions that are no distinctions, but made to
seem so by terms invented by I know not whom, to cover ignorance, and blind the
understanding of the Reader: For it cannot be conceived that there is any
liberty greater, than for a man to do what he will. One heat may be more
intensive than another, but not one liberty than another; he that can do what
he will, has all liberty possible, and he that cannot has none at all. Also
Liberty (as his Lordship says the Schools call it) of exercise, which is as I
have said before, a liberty to do or not to do, cannot be without a Liberty
(which they call) of Specification, that is to say, a liberty to do, or not to
do this or that in particular. For how can a man conceave he has liberty to
do any thing, that has not liberty to do this, or that, or somewhat in
particular? If a man be forbidden in Lent to eat this, and that, and every
other particular kind of flesh, how can he be understood to have a liberty to
eat flesh, more than he that has no license at all? You may by this again see
the vanity of distinctions used in the Schools, and I do not doubt but that
the imposing of them, by Authority of Doctors in the Church, has been a great
cause that men have labored, though by Sedition and evil courses, to shake them
off, for nothing is more apt to beget hatred, than the tyrannizing over men's
reason and understanding, especially when it is done, not by the Scriptures,
but by the pretense of Learning, and more judgment than that of other men.

In the next place his Lordship brings two Arguments against distinguishing
between free from compulsion and free from necessitation.

The first is, that election is opposite not only to Coaction or compulsion,
but also Necessitation or determination to one. This is it he was to prove from
the beginning, and therefore brings no new Argument to prove it, and so those
brought formerly I have already answered. And in this place I deny again, that
election is opposite to either, For, when a man is compelled for example to
subject himself to an enemy or to die, he has ^till election left him, and a
deliberation to bethink which of the two he can better endure. And he that
^^led to prison by force has election and may deliberate whether he will ^e
haled and traind on the ground, ^r make use of his own feet: Likewise when
there is no compulsion, but the strength of temptation to do ^n evil action,
being greater than ^he motives to abstain, it necessarily determines him to the
doing of it, ^et he deliberates while sometimes the motives to do, sometimes
the motives to forbear are working on ^im, and consequently he electeth which
he will. But commonly when we see and know the strength that moves us, we
acknowledge necessity; but when we see not or mark not the force that moves us,
we then think there is none, and that it is not causes but liberty that
produces the action. Hence it is that they think he does not choose this that
of necessity choose it, but they might as well say, fire does not burn because
it burns of necessity.

The second Argument is not so much an argument as a distinction, to show in
what sense it may be said that voluntary actions are necessitated and in what
sense not. And therefore his Lordship alleges as from the authority of the
Schools (and that which rippeth up the bottom of the Question) that there is a
double act of the will. The one he says is Actus imperatus, an act done at the
command of the will, by some inferior faculty of the soul; As to open or shut
ones eyes, and this act may be compelled, the other he says, is Actus
elicitus, an act allured or drawn forth by allurement out of the will, as to
will, to choose, to elect, this he says cannot be compelled. Wherein (letting
pass that metaphorical speech of attributing command and subjection to the
faculties of the soul, as if they made a Commonwealth or family within
themselves, and could speak one to another, which is very improper in searching
the truth of a question) you may observe, first, that to compel a voluntary
act, is nothing else but to will it, for it is all one to say, my will commands
the shutting of my eyes, or the doing of any other action, and to say, I have
the will to shut my eyes; so that Actus imperatus, here, might as easily have
been said in English a voluntry action, but that they that invented the term
understood not any thing it signified.

Secondly, you may observe, that Actus elicitus, is exemplified by these words,
to will, to elect, to choose, which are all one, and so to will is here made an
act of the will; and indeed as the will is a faculty or power in a man's soul,
so to will is an act of it according to that power; but as it is absurdly said,
that to dance is an act allured or drawn by fair means out of the ability to
dance, so is it also to say, so that to will is an act allured or drawn out of
the power to will, which power is commonly called the will. Howsoever it be,
the sum of his Lordships distinction, is, that a voluntary act may be done by
compulsion, that is to say, by foul means, but to will that or any act cannot
be but by allurement, or fair means. Now seeing fair means, allurements, and
enticements produce the action which they do produce, as necessarily as foul
means and threatening, it follows, that to will may be made as necessary as
any thing that is done by compulsion. So that the distinction of Actus
imperatus, and Actus elicitus are but words, and of no effect against
necessity.

His Lordship in the rest of his discourse, reckons up the opinion of certain
professions of men, touching the causes wherein the necessity of things (which
they maintain) consists. And first he says, the Astrologer deriveth his
necessity from the stars; Secondly, that the Physician attributes it to the
temper of the body. For my part, I am not of their opinion, because, neither
the stars alone, nor the temperature of the Patient alone is able to produce
any effect, without the concurrence of all other Agents. For there is hardly
any one action, how casual soever it seem, to the causing whereof concur not
whatsoever is in rerum natura, which because it is a great paradox, and depends
on many antecedent speculations, I do not press in this place. Thirdly, he
disputes against the opinion of them that say, external objects presented to
men of such and such temparatures, do make their actions necessary, and says,
the power such objects have over us, proceeds from our own fault, but that is
nothing to the purpose, if such fault of ours proceeds from causes not in our
own power, and therefore that opinion may hold true for all that answer.

Further he says, Prayer, Fasting, etc. may alter our habits; it is true, but
when they do so, they are causes of the contrary habit, and make it
necessary, as the former habit had been necessary if Prayer, Fasting, etc.
had not been. Besides, we are not moved or disposed to prayer or any other
action, but by outward objects, as pious company, godly preachers, of something
equivolent. Fourthly, he says a resolved mind is not easily surprised, as the
mind of Ulysses, who when others wept, alone wept not, and of the
Phylososopher, that abstained from striking, because he found himself angry;
and of him that poured out the water when he was thirsty, and the like. Such
things I confess have, or may have been done, and do prove only that it was
not necessary for Ulysses then to weep, nor for that Philosopher to strike,
nor for that other man to drink, but it does not prove that it was not
necessary for Ulysses then to abstain (as he did) from weeping, nor for the
Philosopher to abstain (as he did) from striking, nor for the other man to
forbear drinking, and yet that was the thing his Lordship ought to have proved.
Lastly, his Lordship confesses, that the dispositions of objects may be
dangerous to liberty, but cannot be destructive. To which I answer, it is
impossible; for liberty is never in any other danger than to be lost, and if
it cannot be lost (which he confesses) I may infer it can be in no danger at
all.

The fourth opinion his Lordship rejects, is of them that make the will
necessarily to follow the last dictate of the understanding; but it seems his
Lordship understands that Tenet in another sense than I do; for he speaks as
if they that held it, did suppose men must dispute the sequel of every action
they do, great and small, to the least grain, which is a thing his Lordship
(with reason) thinks untrue. But I understand it to signify, that the will
follows the last opinion or judgment immediately proceeding the action,
concerning whether it be good to do it or not, whether he have weighed it long
before, or not at all, and that I take to be the meaning of them that hold it.
As for example, when a man strikes, his will to strike follows necessarily that
thought he had of the sequel of his stroke, immediately before the lifting up
of his hand. Now if it be understood in that sense, the last dictate of the
understanding does necessitate the action, though not as the whole cause, yet
as the last cause, as the last feather necessitates the breaking of a horses
back, when there are so many laid on before, as there needed but the addition
of one to make the weight sufficient.

That which his Lordship alleges against this, is, First out of a Poet, who
in the person of Medea says, -- Video meliora, proboque
Deteriora sequor.
but that saying (as pretty as it is) is not true: for though Medea saw many
reasons to forbear killing her children, yet the last dictate of her judgment
was, that the present revenge on her husband out-weighed them all, and
thereupon the wicked action necessarily followed. Then the story of the Roman,
who of two competitors, said, one had the better reason, but the other must
have the office. This also makes against his Lordship, for the last dictate of
his judgment that had the bestowing of the office, was this, That it was
better to take a great bribe, than reward a great merit.

Thirdly, he objects that things nearer the sense move more powerfully than
reason; what follows thence but this, the sense of the present good is
commonly more immediate to the action than the foresight of the evil
consequence to come? Fourthly, whereas his Lordship says that do what a man
can, he shall sorrow more for the death of his Son than for the sin of his
soul, makes nothing to the last dictate of the understanding, but it argues
plainly that sorrow for sin is not voluntary, and by consequence, that
Repentance proceeds from Causes.

The last part of this discourse contains his Lordships opinion about
reconciling liberty with the prescience and decree of God, otherwise than some
Divines have done, against whom, he says, he had formerly written a Treatise,
out of which he repeateth only two things. One is, that we ought not to desert
a certain truth, for not being able to comprehend the certain manner of it. And
I say the same, as for example, that his Lordship ought not to desert this
certain truth, That there are certain and necessary causes which make every man
to will what he wills, though he do not yet conceive in what manner the will
of man is caused. And yet I think the manner of it is not very hard to
conceive, seeing we see daily, that praise, dispraise, reward and punishment,
good and evil sequels of men's actions retained in memory, do frame and make us
to the election of whatsoever it be that we elect, and that the memory of such
things proceeds from the senses, and sense from the operation of the objects of
sense (which are external to us and governed only by God Almighty) and by
consequence all actions, even of free and voluntary Agents are necessary.

The other thing that he repeateth is, that the best way to reconcile
contingence and liberty with Prescience and the decrees of God, is to subject
future contingencies to the Aspect of God. The same is also my opinion, but
contrary to what his Lordship all this while labored to prove. For hitherto he
held liberty and necessity, that is to say, liberty and the decrees of God
irreconcilable, unless the Aspect of God (which word appears now the first
time in this discourse) signify somewhat else besides Gods will and decree,
which I cannot understand. But he adds that we must subject them, according to
that presentiality which they have in eternity, which he says cannot be done
by them that conceive Eternity to be an everlasting succession, but only by
them, that conceive it as an Indivisible point. To which I answer, that as soon
as I can conceive Eternity to be an Indivisible point, or any thing, but an
everlasting succession, I will renounce all, that I have written on this
subject. I know S. Thomas Aquinas calls Eternity, Nunc. stans., an*
ever-abiding now, which is easy enough to say, but though I fain would, yet I
could never conceive it, they that can, are more happy than I. But in the mean
time his Lordship allows all men to be of my opinion save only those that
can conceive in their minds a nunc stans, which I think are none. I understand
as little how it can be true his Lordship says, that God is not just but
justice it self, not wise, but wisdom it self, not Eternal, but Eternity it
self, nor how he concludes thence that Eternity is a point indivisible, and not
a succession, nor in what sense it can be said, that an infinite point, and
wherein is no succession, can comprehend all time, though time be successive.
These phrases I find not in the Scripture, I wonder therefore what was the
design of the Schoolmen to bring them up, unless they thought a man could not
be a true Christian unless his understanding be first strangled with such hard
sayings. And thus much for answer to his Lordships discourse, wherein I think
not only his Squadrons of Arguments, but also his Reserve of Distinctions are
defeated. And now your Lordship shall have my doctrine concerning the same
question, with my Reasons for it, positively, and as briefly as I can, without
any terms of Art in plain English.

My Opinion about LIBERTY and NECESSITY.
FIrst I conceive, that when it comes into a man's mind to do or not to do some
certain action, if he have no time to deliberate, the doing it or abstaining
necessarily follow the present thought he has of the good or evil consequence
thereof to himself. As for example, In sudden anger, the action shall follow
the thought of revenge, in sudden fear the thought of escape. Also when a man
has time to deliberate, but deliberates not, because never any thing appeared
that could make him doubt of the consequence, the action follows his opinion of
the goodness or harm of it. These actions I call VOLUNTARY, (my Lord) if I
understand him aright that calls them SPONTANEOUS. I call them voluntary,
because those actions that follow immediately the last appetite are voluntary,
and here where is one only appetite, that one is the last. Besides, I see it is
reasonable to punish a rash Action, which could not be justly done by man to
man, unless the same were voluntary. For no action of a man can be said to be
without deliberation, though never so sudden, because it is supposed he had
time to deliberate all the precedent time of his life, whether he should do
that kind of action or not. And hence it is, that he that kills in a sudden
passion of Anger, shall nevertheless be justly put to death, because all the
time, wherein he was able to consider whether to kill were good or evil, shall
be held for one continual deliberation, and consequently the killing shall be
judged to proceed from election.

Secondly, I conceive when a man deliberates, whether he shall do a thing or
not do it, that he does nothing else but consider whether it be better for
himself to do it or not to do it. And to consider an action, is to imagine the
consequences of it both good and evil. From whence is to be inferred, that
Deliberation is nothing else but alternate imagination of the good and evil
sequels of an action, or (which is the same thing) alternate hope and fear, or
alternate appetite to do or quit the action of which he deliberateth.

Thirdly, I conceive that in all deliberations, that is to say, in at alternate
succession of contrary appetites, the last is that which we call the WILL, and
is immediately next before the doing of the action, or next before the doing of
it become impossible. All other Appetites to do, and to quit, that come upon a
man during his deliberations, are called Intentions, and Inclinations, but not
Wills, there being but one will, which also in this case may be called the last
will, though the Intentions change often.

Fourthly, I conceive that those actions, which a man is said to do upon
deliberation, are said to be voluntary, and done upon choice and election, so
that voluntary action, and action proceeding from election is the same thing,
and that of a voluntary Agent, it is all one to say, he is free, and to say,
he has not made an end of deliberating.

Fifthly, I conceive Liberty to be rightly defined in this manner; Liberty is
the absence of all the impediments to Action that are not contained in the
nature and intrinsecal quality of the Agent. As for example, the water is said
to descend freely, or to have liberty to descend by the channel of the river,
because there is no impediment that way, but not across, because the banks are
impediments. And though the water cannot ascend, yet men never say it wants the
liberty to ascend, but the faculty or power, because the impediment is in the
nature of the water, and intrinsecal. So also we say, he that is tied wants the
liberty to go, because the impediment is not in him, but in his bands, whereas
we say not so of him that is sick or lame, because the impediment is in himself.

Sixthly, I conceive that nothing takes beginning from it self, but from the
Action of some other immediate Agent without it self. And that therefore, when
first a man has an appetite or will to something, to which immediately before
he had no appetite nor will, the cause of his will, is not the will it self,
but something else not in his own disposing. So that whereas it is out of
controversy, that of voluntary actions the will is the necessary cause, and
by this which is said, the will is also caused by other things whereof it
disposes not, it follows, that voluntary actions have all of them
necessary causes, and therefore are necessitated.

Seventhly, I hold that to be a sufficient cause, to which nothing is wanting
that is needful to the producing of the effect. The same also is a necessary
cause. For if it be possible that a sufficient cause shall not bring forth the
effect, then there wants somewhat which was needful to the producing of it,
and so the cause was not sufficient, but if it be impossible that a sufficient
cause should not produce the effect, then is a sufficient cause a necessary
cause (for that is said to produce an effect necessarily that cannot but
produce it.) Hence it is manifest, that whatsoever is produced is produced
necessarily, for whatsoever is produced has had a sufficient cause to produce
it, or else it had not been, and therefore also voluntary actions are
necessitated

Lastly, should that Ordinary Definition of a free Agent, namely, That a free
Agent is that, which, when all things are present which are needful to produce
the effect, can nevertheless not produce it, implies a contradiction, and is
nonsense, being as much as to say, The cause may be sufficient, that is to
say, necessary, and yet the effect shall not follow.

My Reasons.
FOr the first five points, wherein it is explicated 1. what Spontanity is. 2.
what Deliberation is. 3. what Will, propension and appetite is. 4. what a free
Agent is. 5. what Liberty is, there can no other proof be offered but every
man's own experience, by reflection on himself, and remembering what he uses in
his mind, that is, what he himself means when he says an action is
Spontaneous, a man deliberates; such is his will, that Agent or that action is
free, Now he that, reflecteth so on himself, cannot but be satisfied, that
Deliberation, is the consideration of the good and evil sequels of an action to
come; that by Spontanity is meant inconsiderate action (or else nothing is
meant by it) that will is the last act of our Deliberation, that a free Agent
is he that can do if he will, and forbear if he will, and that Liberty is, the
absence of external impediments. But, to those that out of custom speak not
what they conceive, but what they hear, and are not able, or will not take the
pains to consider what they think when they hear such words, no Argument can be
sufficient, because experience and matter of fact is not verified by other men's
Arguments, but by every man's own sense and memory. For example, how can it be
proved that to love a thing and to think it good is all one, to a man that does
not mark his own meaning by those word? Or how can it be proved that Eternity
is not nunc stans to a man that says those words by custom, and never consider
how he can conceive the thing in his mind?

Also the sixth point, that a man cannot imagine any thing to begin without a
cause, can no other way be made known, but by trying how he can imagine it, but
if he try, he shall find as much reason (if there be no cause of the thing) to
conceive it should begin at one time as another, that, he has equal reason to
think it should begin at all times which is impossible, and therefore he must
think there was some special cause why it began then, rather than sooner or
later; or else that it began never, but was eternal.

For the seventh point, which is that all events have necessary causes, it is
there proved in that they have sufficient causes. Further let us in this place
also suppose any event never so casual, as the throwing (for example.) Ames Ace
upon a pair of dice, and see, if it must not have been necessary before 'twas
thrown. For seeing it was thrown it had a beginning, and consequently a
sufficient cause to produce it, consisting partly in the dice, partly in
outward things, as the posture of the parts of the hand, the measure of force
applied by the caster, the posture of the parts of the Table, and the like. In
sum there was nothing wanting which was necessarily requisite to the producing
of that particular cast, and consequently the cast was necessarily thrown, for
if it had not been thrown, there had wanted somewhat requisite to the throwing
of it, and so the cause had not been sufficient. In the like manner it may be
proved that every other ac^ident how contingent soever it seem, or how
voluntary soever it be, is produced necessarily, which is that that my L.
Bishop disputes against. The same may be proved also in this manner. Let the
case be put, for example, of the weather. It Is necessary that to morrow it
shall rain or not rain. If therefore it be not necessary it shall rain, it is
necessary it shall not rain, otherwise there is no necessity that the
proposition, It shall rain or not rain, should be true. I know there be some
that say, it may necessarily be true that one of the two shall come to pass*
but not, singly that it shall rain, or that it shall not rain, which is as much
as to say, one of them is necessary, yet neither of them is necessary, and
therefore to seem to avoid that absurdity, they make a distinction, that
neither of them is true determinate, but indeterminate, which distinction
either signifies no more but this, One of them is true but we know not which,
and so the necessity remains, though we know it not, or if the meaning of the
distinction be not that, it has no meaning, and they might as well have said,
One of them is true Titirice but neither of them, Tu patulice.

The last thing in which also consists the whole controversy, namely that
there is no such thing as an Agent, which when all things requisite to action
are present, can nevertheless forbear to produce it, or (which is all one) that
there is no such thing as freedom from necessity, is easily inferred from that
which has been before alleged. For if it be an Agent it can work, and if it
work, there is nothing wanting of what is requisite to produce the action, and
consequently the cause of the action is sufficient, and if sufficient, then
also necessary, as has been proved before.

And thus you see how the inconveniences, which his Lordship objecteth must
follow upon the holding of necessity, are avoided, and the necessity it self
demonstratively proved. To which I could add, if I thought it good Logic, the
inconvenience of denying necessity, as that it destroys both the decrees and
the prescience of God Almighty; for whatsoever God has purposed to bring to
pass by man, as an instrument, or foreseeth shall come to pass, a man, if he
have Liberty (such as his Lordship affirms) from necessitation, might
frustrate and make not to come to pass, and God should either not foreknow it,
and not decree it, or he should foreknow such things shall be, as shall never
be, and decree that which shall never come to pass.

This is all has come into my mind touching this question since I last
considered it. And I humbly beseech your Lordship to communicate it only to my
Lord Bishop. And so praying God to prosper your Lordship in all your designs,
I take leave and am,

My most Noble and most obliged Lord

Your most humble servant Thomas Hobbs.
Roven Aug. 20. (...).
FINIS.

