A TREATISE OF MARRIAGE, WITH A Defense of the 32th Article of Religion of the
Church of England; VIZ.

Bishops, Priests and Deacons are not commanded by God's Law, either to Vow the
state of single life, or to abstain from Marriage; therefore it is lawful for
them, as for all other men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall
judge the same to serve better to godliness.

Heb. 13.6. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: But
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge.

1 Timothy 3.2. A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife.

-- (...).

Theophylact. on Tit. 1.6. London, Printed by J. D. and are to be sold by R.
Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1673.

To the Worshipful Robert Raworth Esquire.
SIR,
THe Argument of this small Treatise is so great, that I presume I need not
Apologize for it: It Is Marriage, the Ordinance and Institution of God himself;
that which the Church of Rome holds a Sacrament, and the Church of England,
with other Reformed Churches, a Mystery. It Is that which our Blessed Lord and
Savior, Emmanuel, honored, by being born, though of a Virgin, yet of one that
was married to a Husband; by his presence at, and by working his first Miracle,
of turning water into Wine, at the Celebration of a Marriage at Cana in
Galilee. It Is that which the Holy, Ghost in the Scriptures honors, by
comparing therein the joys of Heaven to a Marriage Feast; and by making the
Bosom of Abraham, a married person, and the Father of the Faithful, the
Receptacle of all Saints in Heaven, whether they were married or single on
earth. It Is a subject, of which that great Scholar Erasmus has written,
namely, both de Laudibus, and de Institutione Matrimonii; as has also Ludovicus
Vives de Conjugii Origin and utilitate. It Is that which the zealous Martyr Dr.
Tailor blessed God for, and in commendation of which that Saint of the Lord,
(which one calls that Angel of God) Mr. Bradford, who when he was in Prison,
and there being some hopes of his deliverance and freedom, being asked what he
would do in case he should be released. Answered, he would marry; being, I
question not, of that holy Bishop Paphnutius his mind, who at the Council of
Nice declared, That the society of man and wife was a holy chastity. It Is the
shame of this Generation, that so many men and women live in common, as if they
understood that noted saying, All things are common amongst Friends, of a
Community of Women and of Wives also, as of other goods. My wish therefore is,
and it shall be my prayer, that the uncleanness and filthiness of this age, may
not be punished with a Deluge of Popery; I mean, by God's giving us over to
Spiritual Adultery, or the Idolatry of the Church of Rome. And now having
mentioned that Church, give me leave to say, that she is justly branded with
the name of, The Mother of Fornications, and those too Corporal as well as
Spiritual. What other Church in the world allows of public Stews and
Brothel-houses? where, but amongst her Sons, was it pleaded in their excuse,
that they are as necessary as a Pump in a ship, and a Sink in a house, to keep
all clean, And although they would make us believe, that their Church is pure
and clean, yea, both Militant and Triumphant in their holy Societies of Monks
and Nuns, that these are like the Nazarites, whiter than the snow: Yet if we
may give credit to their own Authors, such as Polydore Virgil, Book 7. cap. 5.
de Inventoribus rerum, speaking of their Orders of Monks, he says, That it
were behoveful that those dregs of men were cut off and burnt, and that with
their filth they should no longer defile God's service. And N. de Clemangis, a
Doctor of Paris, who in his Book de Corrupto statu Ecclesiae, c. 21. says of
the Nuns; Shame forbids me to speak of them, lest I should mention a company
of Virgins dedicated to God, but stewed, deceitful, impudent Whores, with their
Fornications and Incestuous works: For what, I pray, are Nunneries now adays,
but the execrable Brothel-houses of Venus, the Harbors of wanton young Women,
where they satisfy their lust? that now the vailing of a Nun, is all one, as
if you prostituted her openly to be a whore. So he. I say, if we may believe
these and other their own Authors; our Church, who has none of these Convents
for single persons, and who allows of the married life of the Clergy, is more
holy and honorable than Rome. And I doubt not, but our Ministers, though
married, multitudes of them will present themselves, and their modest, chaste
and pious Consorts, with innumerable others of their Congregations, as chaste
Virgins to Christ. And whereas the Papists tell us, there are three special
Crowns in Heaven, one for them that overcome the World, another for them that
overcome the Flesh, and a third for them that overcome the Devil: If so, I dare
promise many of our Doctors, though married, to each of them three Crowns in
Heaven, far beyond the Popes Triple Crown on Earth; namely, to our Learned and
Laborious Doctors, who by their Writings overcome the Devil; to our married
Doctors, who by their chaste Wedlock overcome the Flesh; to our courageous
Doctors, who are ready, if God call them, to Martyrdom; to ascend to Heaven,
like Elijah, in a fiery Chariot, and so overcome the world: I say, to these I
dare promise three Crowns in Heaven, besides a fourth to them and their
Religious, Modest and Chaste Consorts, viz. The Crown of Righteousness, which
is laid up in Heaven for all them that love the appearance of Jesus Christ.

Sir, Although neither the subject I treat on in the following Discourse, viz.
Marriage, nor the Church of England her Doctrine in the 32 Article of Religion,
which I defend, allowing persons in holy Orders to marry, need any Apology; yet
I humbly beg your pardon for any weakness or miscarriage you may find in my
manner of treating of these things. And I humbly present this small Piece to
you, coming into the World from, as it were, under your roof; and beg your
excuse at least, if not your Approbation and Patronage of it. If any of our
Romish Adversaries should quarrel the Doctrine of our Church on this occasion,
you have such Learned Friends and Acquaintance, and those who have
opportunities, advantages, and courage sufficient to defend their chaste
Mother, the Church of England, and their own chaste Wives, against the greatest
Goliath amongst the Romish Philistines.

Sir, I humbly thank you for your favors to me, and your care of the welfare
of our Society; and shall, according as my duty binds me, pray for you, and for
your good, your pious and charitable Consort, that God would crown you with all
the blessings of this and the other World.

Sir, I have one thing more to entreat of you both, which I am confident
neither of you, being such good friends to our Church and Clergy, will deny,
that is, to join with me in my prayers for the Tribe of Levi, Let thy Urim and
thy Thummim be with thy holy One, let the sound of Aarons bells be ever heard,
and the smell of his Pomegranates always perfume the Church of God, and let
there be found at last, of the Tribe of Levi amongst us, as of other Tribes,
twelve thousand sealed ones. And that there may never want a supply of able and
good men for the work of the Ministry, Let the Rod of Aaron, I mean the
Universities, ever flourish, and yearly bud, blossom and bring forth ripe
Almonds.

Your very much obliged, and very humble Servant, T.H.
July 1. 1673.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
Two things I desire to premise: First, That I do not pretend in this small
popular Tract, to teach Men, Brethren and Fathers of the Church, them, and
their Wives, Oeconomicks: But yet shall beg leave to transcribe a passage out
of Luthers Colloquia Mensalia, which I desire our Married Clergy would
consider, viz. That one cause of the unmarried lives of Priests (to wit, in the
Papacy) was, that the faults of the Priests wives were offensive, so that when
the Priests should reprove the wickedness of others, then the people would hit
them in the teeth again, and say, why did not they reform their own wicked
wives? And truly I could wish, that I might have cause to say of all the
Married Clergy, and of all others in the state of Matrimony, as confident, I
am, I may say of many, Ye have no need that I write unto you of Conjugal love
and duties; for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. To this
purpose it was we advised by a Right Reverend Father of our Church viz. the B.
of W. to all such as his Lordship married, often to read over the Office of
Marriage that so they might the better remember and d^ their duties each to
other. And truly I could heartily wish and beg of the Right Reverend the
Fathers of our Church, that if ever they should revise our Liturgy, which even
some good men desire, that the duties of Man and Wife, Parent^ and Children,
Masters and Servants, might b^ appointed to be read on the Lords days (after
the reading of the Commandments) out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, or
Colossians, or both.

The second thing I desire to premise is, that I do not present you with a
Regular and Scholastical Discourse, either of Marriage, or of the difference
betwixt the Church of England and Rome, concerning the Marriage of Priests, or
persons in holy Orders; but offer, as to the latter, some Collections out of
Dr. Field his Fifth Book of the Church Dr. Fulk and Mr. Cartwright their
Annotations on the Rhemists Testament, on Matthew. 8. and on the Epistles to
Timothy and Titus, Mr. Perkin' s his Demonstration of the Problem, Dr. John and
Dr. Francis White concerning this Argument, and others, together with some of
my own observations. The truth which is on our Churches side, is chiefty
maintained, and the Church of Rome confuted by the Authority of the holy
Scriptures. Bishop Hall in his Treatise of the Honor of the Married Clergy,
page 124. observes, that the Church of Rome teaches contradictory to the Holy
Scripture: The Spirit of God (says he) says, that a Bishop may be the husband
of one wife; the Church of Rome says, a Bishop may not be the husband of any
wife at all: The Spirit of God says, Marriage is honorable amongst all men; the
Church of Rome says, Marriage is dishonorable to some: The Spirit of God says,
to avoid fornication, let every man have his wife; the Church of Rome, like a
quick-huswife, says, some Order of men shall not have a wife, though to avoid
fornication. So that as another Author notes, amongst them, Marriage only, and
not Fornication, is inconsistent with the dignity of a Clergyman; and that
Fornication has been allowed to Priests and Friars, in compensation for their
restraint from Marriage; three or four Whores, as part of their spiritual
Preferment: And probably such foul Positions and Practices, made Luther so
zealous for Matrimony. I took a wife (said he) therewith to upbraid the Devil,
and to confound the whoring in Popedom; and in contempt of that nasty Letchery
in Popedom, which is very great and abominable, Luth. Col. Men's. The same
Author tells us, that under Pope Julius, was exercised an abominable Letchery
and Whoring in Rome. At the same time, says he, was a Cardinal that had a
married wife; the which being known, he was constrained to forsake her, but in
less than a years space he took her again: Now when the Cardinal dyed, his wife
wept bitterly, and said, she had an honest husband, who contented himself with
one woman: The Citizens of Rome wondering to hear the same, cried, O Sancta
Maria! for, says Luther, Chastity in those people is rare Venison.

And as we have the holy Text on our side, so have we the Fifth Canon of the
Apostles, the testimony of Paphnutius a holy Bishop; and with him concurred the
whole Council of Nice, the Sixth Council of Constantinople, Can. 13. and the
practice of the Greek Church to this day, so far as to justify the lawfulness
of Priests officiating about the holy things of their Function, notwithstanding
their being married.

And further, to justify our Church and the practice of our Clergy, we have
the Concessions of many of our Adversaries, as Franciscus a Sancta Clara
observes, that the Celibacy of Priests is not de Jure divino, but by the Law of
the Church; and that the Pope may dispense therewith, and some say does
dispense with the married Clergy in the Greek Church; and others in his name,
it is said, have made Overtures of the like favor to the English Clergy; and in
case they would be his dutiful and obedient Sons, be would be an Indulgent
Father to them.

Lastly, It is worth the consideration, on our behalf ^n this matter, that some
of the best men of the Church of Rome, such as Espencaeus, Aeneas, Sylvius,
Polydore Virgil, Erasmus, and others, have desired that the Law of forced
Celibacy might be taken away, to prevent the great scandal that is given by the
filthy lives of the Clergy. Forasmuch then as the English Clergy have had the
possession of their wives for above a thousand years after Christ; and again,
have had them restored to them by Law at the Reformation, they have no reason
to quit their so just and ancient Rights, and with one half of themselves; and
to be contented with Lemans, instead of Wives; and Nephews in room of Sons. I
shall dismiss thee, Reader, when I shall have told thee, that the fig leaves
wherewith the Romanists seek to hide the nakedness of their Church in this
cause, are eafily blown away by Dr. Field of the Church, Dr. Francis White his
Defense of his Brother Dr. John White, by Bishop Hall his Treatise of the
honor of the Married Clergy, and by Calixtus in his Book de Conjugio
Clericorum: And when I shall have begged thy pardon for the many faults ^hou
may possibly find in the Composing, Transcribing or Printing of these few
sheets. Farewell.

Thy Friend to serve thee, T.H.
July 1. 1673.
ERRATA.
Page 10. line 6. for (...), read (...). lin. 8. aft (...), add etc. P. 24.
instead of Friar Menolein, read Menotein. P. 28. instead of married married, r.
married persons. P. 66. instead of Matrimony, read Maimony. P. 74. In the
Margin, for Doctrine, r. Demonstration.
CHAP. I. Of Marriage.
GOD at first did not make a Pair, a Male and a Female, in Mankind, as he did
of the rest of living Creatures; but he made the one of the other, the Woman of
the Man; and thus Male and Female created he them, for to continue the Species
by propagation, and to be a mutual help and comfort each to other. The Angels,
which each fill a Species, and are a posteriori Eternal, were not made Male and
Female; and therefore the Heathens, who fansied their Deities, Male and Female,
and worshipped many Godds, and many Goddesses, must be conceived to have
worshipped dead Men and Women. The difference of the Sex was made for the
supply or remedy of our Mortality.

When we shall come to be like the Angels of Heaven, then we shall neither
Marry, nor be given in Marriage. Meat, Drink, Clothing, and Marriage, are all
provisions only for this state. In the Regeneration, there shall be no further
need or use of them.

Our Creator made the Woman of the Man, to show the near Union and Conjunction
which should be betwixt the Man and his Wife. 1. God himself made the Woman, as
of the Man, so for the Man, for his Comfort and Benefit, and to be one flesh
with him. And since Adam had his Marriage ordained and celebrated by God
himself in Paradise, and in the state of Innocence; Who are they that dispute
against God, against his Ordinance and Institution? Such as of old, Montanus
and Marcion, who condemned Marriage as uncleanness; and such as St. Jerome, who
spoke unbecomingly of it; such as Papists, who forbid Bishops and Priests to
Marry, and rather tolerate them the having of a Concubine than a Wife.

I cannot prefer the Woman before the Man absolutely, although it be granted,
she was made after the Man, and of the Man, and not of the common Earth
immediately. And that Anatomists tell us of a finer Structure in the Body of
the Woman than of the Man. For the Holy Scripture tells us, That the Man was
not made for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man; and therefore sure the Man
is the Head of the Woman, and to be preferred before her. The Light of Nature
taught the very Heathens to prefer the Male before the Female. When the Poets
would shame men, they call them Women. We read in Homer's Illid. B. (...). In
Virgil his Aeneids, B. 9. O mere Phrygie nequae enim Phryges. So Persius uses
the word Troiades, Sat. 1. instead of Trojani.

Good reason then that Wives should be subject to their own Husband; and that
that Law of Ahasuerus should be an Oecumenial Law, viz. That every Man should
bear rule in his own house.

The Holy Ghost in Scripture, it is observed, gives three Reasons of the
subjection of the Wife to the Husband.

First; Because that Adam was first formed, then Eve; whereas other Creatures
were created the Male and the Female together at the same time, 1 Timothy 2.13.

Secondly; Because the Woman was made to be a meet help and comfort for the
Man, 1 Cor. 11.9.

Thirdly; Because the Woman was made or built out of the Man, 1 Cor. 11.8.

And as a sign of the subjection that was due from the Wife to the Husband, the
Women in Eastern Countries used to wear a Vail on their Heads, and over their
Faces, and in so doing, the Wife was said to have power on her Head, because
she had a Vail, which did signify that she was under the power of her Husband,
and therefore she is commanded to fear her Husband, Ephesians. 5.33. Which, says
Reverend Mr. Bains on that place, did meet with the lewdness of many Women,
that think it their glory to know no awe; for pleasing, they stand on no such
points; if they like not, they may leave, say they, let them get others do it
better; to their Husbands moved, they will not stick to bid them go walk
themselves: For fearing them they cannot; why should they make such
bull-beggers of them, they are their Wives, not their Slaves? Should they be
pointed at for Sheep all the Town over? These things (says he) the Devil will
round you in the ear with; But know, that you had better be God's Sheep, than
the Devil's Shrews. -- So he.

And Mr. John R^binson, in his Essays, p. 126. says, If the Husband pass the
bounds of wisdom and kindness, yet must not she shake off the bond of
submission; but must bear patiently the burden which God has laid upon the
Daughters of Eve. The Woman in innocence was to be subject to the Man, but this
should have been without all wrong on his part, or grief on hers; but she being
first in transgression, has brought her self under another subjection; and,
the same to her grievor, etc. in regard of her Husband, often unjust, but in
regard of God, always most just; who has ordained that her desire should be
subject to her Husband, who by her seduction became subject to him. And albeit,
many proud Women think it a matter of scorn and disgrace thus to humble
themselves to God and their Husbands, and even glory in the contrary; yet they
but glory in their shame, and in their Husbands shame also; and whilst they
refuse a cross, choose a sin of rebellion, both against God and their Husbands.
Which shall not escape unpunished from God, though many fond Husbands nourish
them therein, and by pampering and puffing them up by delicate Fare, costly
Apparel, and Idleness, teach them to despise themselves and all others. So far
my Author.

And let me here have leave to say, That the pride and peevishness of some
Wives to their Husbands in our days, has brought an ill report on Matrimony;
and it is to be feared, has frighted many from the remedy of Marriage, into the
Disease of Adultery and Uncleanness. If Wives would, by their discretion, and
by their meck and quiet Spirits, they might gain their Husbands love and
affection, and they might do this kindness for those of their Sex that are
unmarried, they would raise and quicken the Market, so that Tradesmen that are
well stocked with Daughters, should not have cause to complain that their
Daughters are the veriest Drug they have about them. Let the Wife make it her
business to please her Husband in lawful things, and to the rest of her
Endowments, of Parts, Parentage, Beauty, Education, Portion, add that which
makes the rest, That they are not mere Ciphers in comparison and account;
namely, Let her study to frame and compose her self what may be, viz. lawfully,
to her Husband, in conforming her Manners to his. And let not the Husband
delight to domineer over his Wife, or please himself in showing always his
Authority, (which none but fools will do, says Mr. J. Robinson). Nabal was,
according to his Name, a very Fool, that was so churlish, that neither Wife nor
any body else could speak to him. It was Abigails wisdom to bear patiently with
him; as it was the wisdom of Socrates, that taught him to bear with his
Zantippe, her daily home-brawlings, and thereby learned him to converse quietly
and patiently with unreasonable, perverse, and peevish persons abroad.

The Husband should be able always to guide, counsel, and direct the Wife, to go
before her as a man of knowledge. His Wife he should use as a Comfort and
Helper, not, (says Sir Walter Rawleigh) as a Counselor. When Adam in
Innocence, (he observes) and Solomon, the wisest of Temporal Princes, took
counsel of their Wives, they both miscarried; no such wonder as lamentable then
that other men have been so allured to so many inconvenient and wicked
practices by the persuasions of their Wives, or other beloved Darlings. If Adam
in the state of perfection, and Solomon the Son of David, God's chosen Servant,
and himself a man endowed with the greatest wisdom, did both of them disobey
their Creator by the instigation, and for the love they bear to a Woman; It is
not so wonderful, etc. that others have done the like. So he.

CHAP. II. Of the Marriage of Persons in Holy Orders.
MArriage is honorable amongst all; our Savior graced a Wedding with his
presence at Cana in Galilee, John 2. and there manifested his Glory, by working
that Miracle, of turning Water into Wine: By which those who enter into that
state, might be put in mind, that their sorrows should be turned into joys. The
Apostle St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.32. makes Marriage a Mystery, and to set out the
relation and love 'twixt Christ and his Church. And lastly, It Is thought Heaven
is set out in Scripture by a Marriage Feast, Mat. 22. and the Joys of Heaven
represented by the joys of a Wedding, Rev. 19. The Nazarites that were whiter
than Snow, by reason of their vow of Holiness, were not defiled by their
Marriage.

Of the Marriage of Priests.
The High Priest under the Law, was not forbidden to Marry, only he must have
a Wife so and so qualified. Aaron the High Priest, the Saint of the Lord, a
Type of our Lord Christ, was Married, and the High Priesthood annexed to his
Family, and entailed on his posterity. It is made a Character of Antiochus
Epiphanes, or Epimanes rather, that he should not regard Women, or desire
Women, in the Old Testament, Dan. 11.37. And it is made a mark of the
Antichrist, and branded for a Doctrine of Devils, (according to our
Translators) to forbid to Marry in the New Testament, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3. And as
Priests and Prophets under the Law might lawfully marry, so might the Holy
Apostles and Ministers of our Lord and Savior under our Gospel. St. Peter the
first, or chief of the Apostles, as to a primacy of Order, was of this Order
himself. And St. Paul asserts his right and power to lead about a Wife or
Sister, as well as Cephas or Peter, and other of the Apostles of Christ.

The Scripture foreseeing (says a Reverend Author) the frenzy of this
Heresy, (viz. of forbidding marriage to Priests) made the Wall higher and
stronger, of the lawful marriage of the Ministracy; for besides the places
wherein generally it is (without all exception) permitted to all Orders of men
to Marry; it speaks especially of the lawful use of Marriage in the Ministry.
It speaks particularly of their Wives, likewise of their Children: which we
remember not to be done in any other estates; only of the Kings it is said,
That they should not marry many Wives: Wherefore the Ministers having not only
the common evidence which all other men have to hold their Wives by, but also
certain Specialties, and special Charters, whereby the quiet and peaceable
possession of them is warranted, it is evident that the Popish Court, which
impleadeth them, and condemns them for their Wives, is a lawless Court. So
Mr. Cartwright, in his Answer to the Rhem. Test. Annot. on St. Mat. chap. 8.

And amongst the Canons ascribed to the Apostles, it is decreed, Can. 5. If any
Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, under color of Religion, or reverence, put away his
Wife, let him be separate from his Ministry; if he abide in that mind, let him
be deposed.

This Canon (says the aforesaid Author) is of a contrary spirit to you; for
you sever men from their Wives, that sever themselves to the Ministry; and it
severeth men from the Ministry, that sever themselves from their Wives, under
pretense of the Ministry.

Again, Mr. Perkins, in his demonstration of the Problem, testifies, That the
Marriage of the Clergy, for the space of 300 years after Christ was a thing
always freely allowed without prohibition, or vow of perpetual continency.

Athanasius in his Epistle to Dracontius, says, (...). And there are many of
the Bishops, says Athanasius, that have not married; and contrariwise, many
Monks we see daily become Fathers of Children. Again you may observe many
Bishops to be Fathers of Children, and many Monks that have not sought to see
their own Generation; for this is lawful, and the other is not forbidden, but
every one as he likes, let him undertake to live. And whereas we read, says
the Decretal, c. 56. That the Sons of Priests have come to the honor of the
Papacy, we must not understand them to be begotten by Fornication, but by
lawful Marriage, which was lawful for the Priests every where, until the time
of prohibition; and in the East Churches is lawful to this day; The singleness
of Priesthood was instituted, because of the poverty of the Churches wanting
sufficient means to maintain many families of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. D.
28. c. d. Sir.

Pope Siricius, about the year 385. forbad Priests Marriage in the Western
Church. But that Decree had no Universal Admission in the Church until the time
of Pope Hildebrand 1007. And it is observed that Bishops and Priests married in
England until Anselms time, that is, about 1100 years after Christ, no Law
forbidding them. It Is an observation of Balsamon on the 5th Canon of the
Apostles, that it was lawful before the 6th Synod in Trullo, for the Bishops to
marry and have Wives, yea after they had received that dignity. And for my
part, I think, Archbishop Crammer the Martyr, no less a Saint, though once or
twice married, then if he had lived single. Archbishop Parker also, as I have
read, was a married Man; and our Church, since the Reformation, never forbad
any of her Fathers or Children to Marry, eo nomine, or else they could not be
Presbyters, Priests, Bishops, or Archbishops.

It was smartly replied by Dr. Featley, when some had charged it on the
Puritans, that they were Calvinistae tantum non in Sabbato, that their
Adversaries were Papistae tantum non in uxoratu. Certainly Bishop Mountague of
Norwich, Bishop Wren, and Bishop Cozens, were all Canonical Men, and yet all
Married. And Bishop Laud was one of the first that for a while was thought to
discountenance Marriage in men of Holy Orders, saying, That in disposing of
Ecclesiastical Preferments, he would prefer the single Man before the Married,
supposing the Abilities of the Persons were otherwise equal. But Dr. Heylin,
that wrote his Life, tells us, by what means and method, he sought to procure
other apprehensions of him; namely, by negotiating, not long after, a Marriage
between Mr. Thomas Turner, one of his Chaplains, and a Daughter of Windebank,
his old Friend; and he officiated the whole service of their Marriage in his
own Chapel, at London-House, joining their Hands, and giving the Nuptial
Benediction, and perfecting all other Ecclesiastical Rites which belong to the
Solemnization of Matrimony by the Rules of this Church. D. H. in his Life, p.
212.

I acknowledge that the Papists urge against the Marriage of our Clergy, the
ill manners and lives of their Children. I confess I cannot tell of any one of
our married Clergyes Wives, that can match that Whore, who, they say, was the
Mother of Gratian, Petrus Cornestor, and Peter Lumbard; yet doubtless there
have been famous men who have been Children of Bishops, the Fathers of the
Church, and of others in Holy Orders. Bishop King, late of Chichester, was the
Son of Bishop King, sometime Bishop of London. Bishop Hall, late of Chester,
was the Son of Bishop Hall, Bishop of Norwich, whose Works praise him in the
Gate. And it has been observed, that five Knightly Families descended from
Archbishop Sands, Archbishop of York. One of the greatest blots in our
English Bishops Escutcheons in this matter is, that Sir Toby Matthews, a great
Son of the Church of Rome, was a Son of Archbishop Matthews of York.

Let me add, for the honor of our Married Clergy, that Sir Francis Drake, that
famous Sea Captain, was the Son of a Minister in Devonshire.

Many at this day have attained to the honor of Knighthood, who owe their
Estates to Bishops and Archbishops: And it is no abatement to their Honor,
that the late reverend and renowned Bp. of Chester, Bp. Wilkins, his Mother was
the Daughter of a Minister, viz. Mr. John Dod, a man famous in his Generation
for Piety, and a learned Man, and who taught that excellent Critic of
Christ-Church, Mr. Gregory, and the great Bishop of Winchester, Hebrew.

It cannot be denied, that most of the Ancient Writers cry up the excellency of
Virginity; and that diverse of the Fathers pleading for the singleness of
Priests, do detract from the due praises of Marriage.

So Siricius stuck not to say, That they that are in the flesh, that is (says
he) in Matrimony, cannot please God.

And Ambrose, Offic. Lib. 1. Cap. ult. will have the Priests to be pure from
Marriage, and to be contaminated by Marriage. But the blessed Apostle St. Paul,
a greater than these, allows a Bishop to be the Husband of one Wife, that is,
one who lives chastely with one Wife alone at one time. And whereas some would
oppose Marriage and Chastity, the same Apostle, in Titus 2.4, and 5. teaches
us, that Wedlock and Chastity are not divorced or separated each from other,
but may dwell together in the same House and the same Bosom, exhorting Titus,
to teach the young Women to be sober, to love their Husbands, to love their
Children; to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own
Husbands. That which the Apostle Paul says, in 1 Cor. 7. That it is good for a
man not to touch a Woman, is to be interpreted, It Is not expedient, viz. that
if a man have the gift of continency, and with particular respect to the
Christian Church in that time of Persecution; for the Apostle says,
Nevertheless to avoid Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife, and let
every Woman have her own Husband, Verse. 2. of the same Chapter.

And Paphnutius, a good Man, and a Bishop in the Council of Nice, though
himself a single Person, named an honest Matrimonial Conjunction, a Godly
Chastity.

The Celibaty, or single-Life of the Clergy, and others in the Popedom, has
hindered much good, and given great occasion to abominable sins.

St. Vlrich, Bishop of Auspurgh, in an Epistle which he wrote, complained of a
fearful Spectacle at Rome; namely, that after Pope Gregory had decreed and
confirmed the unmarried kind of Life, he intended to fish in a deep Pond at
Rome, hard by the Monastery of the Nuns; the Water of the Pond being let out,
they found more than six thousand Heads of Children, which had been cast into
the Pond and drowned; these were the fruits of the unmarried life: Whereupon
Pope Gregory amazed at the sight, abolished that Decree concerning the
unmarried kind of life; but the succeeding Popes decreed the same again.

And in the Monastry of Neuburgh in Austria, where there had been Nuns who were
displaced for their ungodly leacherous doings, as my Author says, when the
Franciscan Friars, who were set therein, intending to build, dug up twelve
great Pots, in each Pot was a Carcass of a little Child.

We are told, that the Multitude of Bastards are so great at Rome, that they
are constrained to build particular Monastries, wherein they are brought up,
and that the Pope is named their Father; and that when any great Processions
are held in Rome, the said Bastards go all before the Pope. If the Pope be
accounted Father to all the Bastards, that may call the Whore of Babylon
Mother, I suppose he may have as many Children every day in the year, as that
Countess had at a Birth, namely, as many as there are days in the year.

Our Histories tell us, That John de Crema, a^ Italian Cardinal, was sent over
from Rome to England, with his bigness and bravery, to bluster our English
Clergy out of their Wives, he made, it is said, a most gaudy Oration in the
commendation of Virginity; and on the same Night at London he was caught in Bed
with a Harlot. See F. H. B. 3. p. 23. But the Cardinal might far sooner and
easier be permitted his Concubine or Harlot, than the English Clergy their
lawful Wives, the Pope being Judge.

We find afterward, that the Clergy paying a Fee or Fine to the Pope, were
tolerated their Concubines: And this custom was so general, and thought so
justifiable, that when one of the Priests pleaded he had no Concubine, it was
answered strait, Habeat si velit, solvat pecuniam, He may have one if he will,
let him pay his Money.

Yea, it has of late days been maintained, That Marriage in a Clergyman, is a
greater sin than Fornication, if not than Adultery; and yet their Schoolmen,
Thomas and Scotus, that in other things differ, agree in this, That the single
life of Priests, is not by Scripture prohibited, but by the Constitutions of
the Church.

What shall we say to these Men that make it a greater sin to break the Law of
the Church, than the Commandments of God? Sure we are, (...) Scripture
prohibits the Marriage of Priests or Ministers of the Church. The Apostles were
no more enjoined to forsake their Wives, than their Father and Mother, House
and Land; and that saying of our Savior, That whosoever did forsake father or
mother, or house and land, or wife for his sake, respected those that were not
Apostles, as well as them that were. It Is well noted by our Church Historian,
that Enoch walked with God, and begat sons and daughters: In which Enoch, says
he, met the threefold capacity of King, Priest and Prophet: He made not a
Prayer the less for having a child the more; and let us be but alike holy with
Enoch, and let others be more holy with Anselm and Dunstan, that opposed the
marriage of the Clergy here in England. They say of the latter, that he took
the Devil by the nose; how true that is I know not, but in this point,
forbidding to marry, being a doctrine of Devils, it is true enough, that the
Devil led him by the nose. If that place be urged, 1 Cor. 7.33. where the
Apostle says, that he that is married cares for the things of the world, how
he may please his wife. The Historian answers, These things are vitia m^^iti,
not matrimonli; uxoris, not uxoratus, flowing neither from the exercise of
marriage, but only from the depraved use thereof, which by Gods assistance and
man's best endeavors, may be rectified and amended. So he.

That other saying of the Apostle in the same Chapter, Defrand ye not one
another, except it be with consent, for a time, that ye may give your selves to
fasting and prayer, and come together again, that Satan tempt you not, by
reason of your not having the gift of continency, does not justify the Popish
Prohibition of marriage; for that Interdiction of the Marriage Bed is
voluntary, by mutual consent of the parties, and temporary only, durante been
placito: But the Popish Prohibition is impulsive, by the power of others; and
perpetual, to continue during their lives, F.H.b. 3. p. 22. Woe to them by whom
so great offenses and scandals come, as do daily in the Papacy, from the
forbidding to marry. If marriage be a Sacrament, why should the Priest be
Interdicted the use of it? and if it be uncleanness, as the Marcionites and
Manichees taught, why are the common people, the Laity indulged it? There were,
I know, the Scripture says, Mat. 19.12. some that made themselves Eunuchs for
the kingdom of heaven: But our Savior has laid upon his Disciples, whether
Ministers or ordinary Christians, no such unnecessary burden. If a man have
the gift of continency, which is not a common, but a proper gift, he may
receive it, but not in Origens sense, who allegorized other Scriptures, and
it is said, took this in a literal sense; by the same reason we should cut off
our right hands, and pluck out our right eyes, and dismember our selves, and
destroy our bodies, lest they should be occasions and instruments of sin to us:
But this way of interpreting those sayings of Christ in the Gospel, would be
contradictory to God's Law, viz. the Sixth Commandment. The Apostle Paul says
indeed, Mortify your members which are upon earth, which he expounds to be
fornication, uncleanness, evil concupiscence, etc. But whilst the Church of
Rome would compel her Priests and Nuns to be like the Angels of Heaven,
neither marrying, nor giving in marriage, it is too apparent, they occasion many
to be worse than Beasts, and to be delivered over to the unclean Spirit, or to
be possessed with an unclean Devil.

It is marked, that those who have neglected the remedy of marriage, which God
has prescribed, have in vain used other means and methods of cure. In vain, as
to the cure of Concupiscence, did St. Jerome strike his breast with stones, St.
Francis embrace and kiss the snow, to cool himself, and quench this fire of
Lust; and St. Benedict strip himself naked, and lie among the thorns. In vain
do the Romish Priests and Nuns make Vows os Celibacy, or Single-life; they Vow
that which is not in their power, that is, to live always single, and yet
chastely; whereas the gift of continency is a proper gift, and rarely given. If
they say, they will pray for this gift. But where has God promised to hear
such prayers, it not being necessary to salvation to live chastely, without
using the remedy. God gave not this gift to those he loved dearly, to Moses, to
Aaron, to Samuel, to David, to Isaiah, etc. Ignatius and Ambrose tell us, that
all the Apostles except John, were married; Philip the Evangelist had four
Daughters; and Platina in the Life of Cletus the first, says, that St. Luke
was married, and that his wife was in Bithynia.

It Is a fond saying, an imagination of these men's brains, that the Apostles had
wives, but that after their undertaking the Office of Apostleship, they never
accompanied with them; they may as well say, they left for ever all propriety
in their children, in their houses, in their fisher-boats: But we see that they
did not, St. John had his house, wherein he entertained the Blessed Virgin Mary
after the death of our Savior.

Again; as to the Vows of Monks and Nuns, ordinarily they are made unwillingly,
or without knowledge of what they do, and whether they shall have power to
contain. Men make their daughters Nuns at twelve years of age, and their sons
Monks at fourteen, when they know not what Concupiscence means, and which
after kindling, burns more violently, like cinders covered over with ashes, at
last break out violently into a flame. Witness the unchaste lives of many that
are under this Vow of Chastity. But if they cannot contain, it is better for
them to marry than to burn; better break an unnecessary and unlawful Vow, than
the Commandment of God; better a Priest, or Monk, or Nun, their Vow
notwithstanding, marry, than to break the Commandments of God, and their Vow in
Baptism. It Is horrid to think that the Popes forbid marriage, and permit or
tolerate fornication and adultery in their Priests as a less crime than
marriage.

Again, That although a man that has had two Wives, be accounted irregular in
the Papacy, yet he that has had diverse Concubines is not, as Pope Innocent
III. declares. If for the strengthening of their unlawful Vows, they urge that
of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. where he says, Refuse the young widows; for
when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry; having
damnation, because they have broken their first faith. This may be answered
from the context, namely, that younger widows should marry, and guide the
house, and not be received into the Office of Deaconesses, of being servants to
the Church, to relieve or look to the sick, and to succor the poor, because
such persons, if they should make such a promise to the Church, to continue in
that state all the days of their life, would be apt to break it, either by
being wanton against Christ, committing fornication, or else would be under the
power of their husband, and so not be at liberty to serve the Church. Now
therefore the Apostle concludes, that none should be received into the Church
as Deaconesses, under the age of threescore, at which time, says one, the Vow
of not marrying would be ridiculous. Therefore the Pope and his Clergy, says
Dr. Fulk, admitting other widows or virgins to profess or vow Continency, do
sin against the express Commandment of the H. Ghost. Nor was the want of
Monasteries, and Monkish and Nunish Rules and Orders in the Apostles times, the
occasion of this Prohibition or restraint: For, says my Author, the
Incontinency of Nuns and Monks in Cloisters, and under all your Rules and
Orders, has and does daily give sufficient proof, that Lust will not be kept
out by the walls of your Monasteries, nor by the Rules and Prescripts of your
Orders. So then as the experience of some younger widows that had followed
after Satan, was a sufficient reason to cause the Apostle to refuse all young
widows to the Office of Deaconesses; so the experience of so many Milch Nuns,
and filthy Monks and Friars, teach us, that no young persons are to be admitted
to any Vow or Profession of perpetual Continency. Let me add here what the said
Doctor has out of Wierus de Praestig. Demon. l. 3. cap. 9, 11. edit. 3. That
the Devil helps the Nuns in their abominable lusts, in diverse Nunneries in
Germany, namely, in the Province of Colen, where the Devil in the likeness of a
Dog, was seen to fall upon them in the day time, in most beastly manner, about
the year of our Lord, 1558. also in the Nunnery of Nazanth in Colen, the Nuns
in most filthy manner, suffered the same illusion oftentimes, in the sight and
presence of many, anno 1564.

The state of the Church, says Gerson Chancellor of Paris, is grown altogether
bruitist and monstrous; and should give an Item to the Overseers to enquire,
whether the Cloisters of Nuns, be not become the Stews of Harlots -- and who
would think, says the Author of the Triumph of Rome over despised Protestancy,
that so wise a man as Caesarius Branchedorus could so far overreach as to say,
that the lusts of whoredom and gluttony, and other shameful enormities, had
gotten such a head, that young men did pati muliebria, and Priests did facere
virilia; and that their Nuns did, as it were, openly profess unchastity; and at
last, that whosoever was noted to be a shameless Adulterer, or a wild Ruffian,
that had lavished out all his Patrimony, anu, pene, ventre, was sure to betake
himself to the Court of Rome as his Sanctuary. And again, Who could have looked
for such language to fall from so grave an Author as Espencaeus, that our
Ancestors wished, that our Clerks should turn their wives into their sisters;
but now our age turns them into Lemmans and Whores, and consequently their
lawful issue into Bastards. And again, God has taken away our sons, and the
Devil has given us Nephews; and could imagine that so learned and ingenious a
^^n as Erasmus would so far wrong his neighbors, as to say, that a number of
Monasteries are so degenerated, that the Stews are more chaste, and sober, and
modest then they.

The supplication of Beggars tendered to King Henry VIII. assured him, that by
virtue of the Sacred Votaries, there were a hundred thousand Whores in this our
Nation. Friar Menolem in the Pulpit cried to the Clergy, Ye my Masters of the
Church, do not damn your souls: Ye have now Birds in the Cage that chirp to you
by night; yt know my meaning, put them away. So the Author of Romes Triumph
over despised Protestancy, which some say was Bishop Hall.

Our Church Historian tells us, that King Stephen's fury fell most fiercely on
the Dean and Canons of Paul's, for crossing him in the choice of their Bishop;
for he sent and took their Focaria's, that is ( Roger Hoveden being
Interpreter) their Concubines, and cast them into the Tower of London; where
they continued many days, not without much scorn and disgrace, till at last
those Canons ransomed their liberty at a great rate, F. Hist. Book 3. p. 27.

From these premises, I hope we may safely draw this good and honest
Conclusion, That marriage is not to be prohibited to a whole Order of men
within the pale of the Church, neither directly, nor by consequence; and that
it is not expedient to suffer young men, and young maids or women to vow
Celibacy all their lives.

It was piously said of Pope Pius the second, That for great causes Priests
wives were taken from them, but that for greater causes they ought to be
restored to them again: See Platina in the life of the said Pope.

It is better to marry than to burn, says St. Paul; and the Canons of St.
Paul's Church aforenamed, had much better have had Wives than Focaria's,
Fire-makers, or Concubines.

How horrible is it that the Church of Rome does hold, That it is much better,
and less offense, for a Priest to use another man's wife, than to marry one of
his own, after that he has once accepted and married our dear Mother the holy
Church for his wife during life.

But leaving such Apocryphal Doctrine of the Romish Church, I come to the Canon
of the holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.2. To avoid fornication, let everyman (and
therefore Spiritual persons are not exempted) have his own wife, and every
woman (and therefore Nuns are not interdicted) have her own husband, and to
avoid fornication it is enjoined; and therefore all persons of both Sexes, who
have not the gift of Continency, are bound to marry; nor can any Vow or Oath be
vinculum iniquitatis, i. e. a Bond of Iniquity, and oblige against God's Law,
which says, Thou shall not commit Adultery; and, It is better to marry than to
burn. Besides, if two Oaths be taken, and the one contradict the other, the
first is obligatory, and not the second. Now all Priests and Nuns in Baptism
vowed to keep all God's Commandments, and therefore the Seventh, not to commit
Adultery.

Those Scriptures, Be ye holy, for I am holy; and, Pray continually, concern
all Christians, as well as Priests and Professed persons; and therefore if they
be interpreted to oblige from marriage, they oblige the Laity as well as the
Clergy, to use the ordinary distinction. Besides, Aaron and his Sons, though
married persons, were daily both morning and evening to attend upon the
Sacrifice, and to burn Incense every morning, Exodus 30.7. and this Incense was
a Type of Prayer, which every Christian, whether married or single, is bound to
offer up unto God daily. As for holiness, Matrimony is not inconsistent with
holiness, witness Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Aaron the servant of the Lord, and
Enoch that walked with God, and yet did not forsake his wife and children; and
it is observable, that the Bosom of Abraham, although a married person, is used
to set out Heaven by in the Scripture. If Heaven had been set out by the Bosom
of any Saint in Heaven, that had always led a single life on earth, what
triumphs would Rome have made on that occasion. And whereas it is said, Rev.
14.4. Those that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, these are they which
are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins. Certainly Christ is followed
whithersoever he goes, not only by the blessed Saints that have led a single
life, but also by married persons, as Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs, and
innumerable others, as the Scripture speaks, 2 Cor. 5.6. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. And
the Apostle speaks of all kind of true Believers, 2 Cor. 11.2. These are bought
from among men, to be first fruits unto God and the Lamb; these are dedicated,
as first fruits used to be, unto God. They are called ('it is thought) Virgins,
because they adhered to Christ, when the Whore of Babylon had made all the
Kings and Nations of the earth drunk with the cup of her fornication. It is
conceived this place may have reference to those Israelites that were enticed
to Idolatry by the Midianitish women; and it is frequent in Scripture to call,
or compare Idolatry to Adultery or Fornication; because God's people are
betrothed and married unto him, he is their Husband, and they his Spouse, and
when they go after Idols, they are said to give God a Bill of divorce, and to
go a whoring after other gods. Or, as Dr. Hamond on the place, These are they
which had kept pure from all the heretical Gnostick corruptions of uncleanness.
Where there is neither spiritual nor carnal Fornication or Adultery, there is
no defiling with women; for the marriage bed in Scripture-Dialect is the bed
undefiled, and to the pure all things are pure. The unbelieving husband, is
sanctified by the believing wife; and the unbelieving wife, by the believing
husband, and therefore are their children holy. If marriage was filthiness, or
uncleanness, or a vice, or that married persons could not please God, doubtless
the H. Ghost would never have said, Marriage is honorable amongst all, and
therefore amongst Clergy men; nor would our blessed Savior have been born of a
Mother, though a Virgin, yet espoused and married to a husband, namely to
Joseph. Marriage, one says, fills earth, and Virginity heaven; but if there
were no Saints in earth, how should there be any in heaven? if earth were
empty, how could heaven be full of Saints? He did not commend his Sex that
said, a woman was a necessary evil, for how evil then must man be deemed, for
whom such an evil is necessary? and I take him to be a fool as well as mad,
that being asked, whether he was married? he answered, He was never so mad yet;
for I dare say, there are more made sober than mad by marriage. I presume, that
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, a species of madness, does more seize and distract
single, than married married persons. And confident I am, as one says, that
the Patriarchs did converse with many wives more chastely, than many do now
adays with one; so that many live now more holily and chastely in Wedlock, than
others in their Cloisters and Cells. And if when a voice from heaven calls to
single persons, whether man or woman, whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal
persons, Let every man have his own wife, etc. Let them not say or reply, I do
not meddle with any state that is common or unclean. If they should, I reply to
them again, What God has cleansed, or rather always accounted a pure, holy and
undefiled estate, that call not thou common or unclean.

CHAP. III. Qualifications requisite in them that marry.
AS for the Qualifications of a Husband or Wife, I would advise all to look at
true Religion in the first place, that those that marry, may be said to marry
in the Lord. If I mistake not, this was that King James advised Prince Henry
unto, v. B.D. 2 b.p. 72. etc. When Solomon married the Daughters of a strange
god, then he fell to tolerate, if not to worship their Idols.

Next to Religion, I should commend a Suitable Disposition, and a Conformity in
Manners, that man and wife may delight in the society and converse one of
another. And as I would not have a man or woman marry merely o^ chiefly by
their eyes or fancies; so neither would I advise a marriage betwixt those that
have an aversness or antipathy at first sight each to other. I would have a
natural, free and unenforced affection before marriage. When there is no other
affection 'twixt parties than what is the fruit of Ratiocination, or
Syllogisms, I would never persuade a marriage: Syllogistical love, such as is
raised thus: Every man must love his wife: But this woman is my wife; Therefore
I ought to love her.


And so on the part of the woman in reference to her husband.

Every woman must love her own husband: This man is my husband; Therefore I
must love him.


I say, this love goes so far about, that it is like to be long before it bring
home affections. Nature is always at hand, and natural affections are up at
first view; but Reason, Religion and Grace too, are sometimes to seek, or held
off at distance by Passion. It Is true notwithstanding, that those that match
merely by the eye, many times meet with their match, an eyesore, or a very
thorn in their eye; and that beauty which was a Loadstone to attract their
love, proves a snare to others, and a torment to themselves, whilst it draws
others eyes to the same object, and occasions jealousy. And if neither of
these happen, as oftentimes both do, yet a disease, a sickness, or at least old
age changes the beautiful (...), into a Chaos; and the most lovely countenance,
into an object in which thou will say, I have no pleasure.

Next, let me advise you not to marry by the ear, not for honor, or great
parentage, and noble Titles; for these without virtue and money, are of small
value, an empty sound, a tinkling cymbal, yea, more discord than harmony for
the most part in such matches, and hence ordinarily is the worst sort of
marriage-musick. Imparity in birth and parentage makes odds, where all should
be even; the one often lords it in this case, and the other is but a servant, and
a servant to to their fellow yoke fellow, a servant, underling to all their
high kindred, and often despised by their own servants. It Is in such families
often as it is in the Family of Hawks, the males are the underlings, and the
females have the respect, the glory, the mastery.

I should further advise, not to marry by the hand or weight, merely for money:
To marry World or Mammon, this is next to marrying the Devil. It Is true, a wise
Counselor advised his Son to marry a wife with something, because nothing
could be bought in the Market without money: Yet a mateh merely for money, is
not of Gods making, nor man's making, God never appointed, nor ever approved of
such matches; and I have seen a Picture of three marriages, one said to be made
by God, another by Love, and a third by the Devil, and this third in the
Picture was, when two old covetous wretches married together, that they might
join house to house, land to land, and bag to bag. It was well observed by Mr.
Herbert Palmer, in his little piece of making Religion ones business, that he
never found in all the Scriptures, amongst all the ends of marriage, that God
ordained marriage to make one rich. And if so, then if we will make that the
chief end of marriage, which was never by our Maker and the Author of marriage,
intended or designed any end at all, how much are we degenerated! how have we
degraded our selves, and sunk Gods Ordinance into earth, mire and dirt! If I
mistake not, the Jews, and our Ancestors the Saxons, used to purchase their
wives with gifts or dowries: Hence the custom with us, of laying Gold and
Silver upon the Book, in the Solemnization of Matrimony, and the Minister's
giving it to the Bride; and perhaps also those words in the Office appointed on
the man's part, with a^ ^y (...) goods I thee endow; and the money given at that
time, was an earnest of the rest. A good wife at any rate, is a good bargain. I
had much rather give money to buy a wife, then sell my self to purchase a rich
one. Intolerabili nihil est quam faemina dives: he that marries for 100 s. and
1000 s. a 100, a 1000 to one but he is overwiv'd. As he that marries above
himself for honor, is like a ship that has too much sail for its ballast; so
he that marries below himself for money, is like a ship over-laden, that has
too much burden for its sails, and so is in danger of sinking. They that will
be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and dangerous
lusts, which drown men in perdition.

Well then, marry neither only or chiefly for beauty, by the eye; nor for
honor, by the ear; nor for money or wealth, by the hand; but find out a meet
helper, a suitable yokefellow, one whom you are sure you shall love, because
you do love her, and that too for her Virtues and Qualifications, so decently
lodged, that you cannot but be pleased to dwell with them.

To conclude this particular about the choice of a wife, and conversation with
a wife, let me mind you what Wisdom it self advises, namely, To marry in the
Lord, A woman that fears God, of a meek and quiet spirit, in whose lips is
the Law of kindness, in whom your heart can safely trust, a good housewife,
that will look well to the ways of her household, and will not eat the bread of
idleness, Prove. 31.

And that you may hope for such a blessing, the greatest earthly felicity; for
your preparation to marriage, take King James his advice to his Son Prince
Henry, Keep your body clean and unpolluted, till you give it to your wife, to
whom only it belongs; for how can you justly crave to be joined to a pure
Virgin, if your body be polluted? why should the one half be clean, and the
other defiled?

As for the time of your marriage, defer not to marry till your old age; for
marriage was ordained to quench the lust of youth. Marry not a woman unable,
either through age, nature or accident for procreation of children; neither
marry one of known evil conditions, or vicious education; for the woman is
ordained to be a helper, and not a hinderer to man. Add hereunto as accessions,
as that wife Prince advises, if they may be had, Beauty, Riches, and
Friendship by Alliance in your marriage; because Beauty increases your love to
your wife, contenting you the better with her, without caring for others; and
Riches and great Alliance, do both make her the abler to be a helper to you:
Marry especially to one of your own Religion, weigh and consider how you and
your wife can be one flesh, and keep unity betwixt you, being members of two
opposite Churches: Disagreement in Religion brings on with it, disagreement in
manners. When you are married, says the Royal Author, keep inviolably your
promise made to God in your marriage; and for your behavior to your wife, the
Scripture can best give you counsel therein: Treat her as your own flesh,
command her as her Lord, cherish her as your helper, rule her as your pupil,
and please her in all things reasonable, but teach her not to be curious in
things that belongs her not. Ye are the head, she is the body; it is your
Office to command, and hers to obey, but yet with such a sweet harmony, as she
should be as ready to obey, as you to command; as willing to follow, as ye to
go before: Your love being wholly knit unto her, and all her affections
lovingly bent to follow your will. Three Rules he especially gives the Prince
concerning his wife; Hold her at the Oeconomick Rule of the house, and yet all
to be subject to your direction -- Keep carefully good and chaste company about
her; for women are the frailest Sex -- And be never both angry at once, but
when you see her in passion, you should with reason danton yours. B.D. 2 b. p.
82.

CHAP. IV. Of Children.
ONe great end of Marriage, is the peopling the world with mankind, especially
planting the Church with a holy Seed; because men and women, the individuals,
dye, they seek lawfully and rationally, by marriage, the conservation of their
kind; and because men cannot avoid death, and live ever here, they seek to live
after death in their posterity; when they are dead in their own persons, they
have a kind of Resurrection in their children. Good and bad, Saints and
sinners, and those of both Sexes too, are desirous of children; What will thou
give me, says Abraham, seeing I go childless? and this Eliezar of Damascus, a
stranger, born in my house, is my heir; and, Give me children or else I dye,
said Rachel.

Increase and multiply, was one of Gods first blessings to his Creatures, after
their first creation. Fruitfulness is generally reckoned a blessing, as
Barrenness a curse in the holy Scripture. God our heavenly Father, that has
the key of the clouds, he keeps the key of the womb: he opened Sarahs womb,
that she conceived a Son in her old age, and he fast shut up all the wombs in
Abimelech's Court. Hence it is, that children are an inheritance of the Lord,
and that it is accounted one of God's prerogatives, that he makes the barren
woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children. And therefore
because the Patriarchs and Saints of the Lord were thus persuaded, they made
their humble addresses and petitions at the Throne of Grace for children.

The Jews tell us, that Abraham and Sarah put up their joint prayers to God for
a Son; so did Hannab the Mother of Samuel, and we may probably guess, Zachary
the Father of John the Baptist, whilst he ministered in the Temple and prayed;
for we read, Luke 1.18. the Angel Gabriel said to him, Fear not, Zacharias, for
thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth, shall bear thee a son, and thou
shall call his name John: And truly, if God give a child in answer to prayers,
it is to be hoped, that such child will answer the Parents prayers, and prove a
blessing; and so did Isaac, Samuel and John the Baptist. I confess, that
sometimes wicked men, who are described to be such, as call not upon God, have
their fill of children, Psalm. 17.14. and again, that they send forth their
children like a flock; yea, and their children dance, Job 21.11. But yet I say,
that children that are the fruit of prayers, are usually a double blessing;
when as children bestowed on wicked Parents, who pray not for them, oft-times
prove a dismal curse to them. In the one sort, God, as it were, lights in his
servants Families a Candle, that their names be not put out in obscurity: In
the other, he permits a fire to be kindled, and that to a kind of wildfire,
which soon consumes the whole house, with the timber thereof, and the stones
thereof. It Is a blessing to be fruitful, and to have our name continued; on the
contrary, it is a curse to be barren, and to have our names blotted out; and
therefore God provided, that if the elder Brother dyed childless, the next
Brother was to raise up seed unto his Brother, and that was to be called after
his Brothers name.

The causes of Barrenness, are oft-times:

1. Disobedience to Parents: It Is just and equal that they should dye
childless, that do not honor their Parents, by whom, under God, they had their
own Beings, Births and Lives.

2. Adultery and Uncleanness: Those who lie with other men's wives, are punished
with Barrenness in their own wives.

3. Notorious Wickedness, and obstinate Rebellion against God: When a man is
wicked overmuch, well may God in wrath say, Write this man Childless, or, there
shall no more of this man's seed be sown; and Job 18.19. He shall neither have
son nor nephew among his people, not any remaining in his dwelling.

4. An inordinate desire of great things in this world, and of the continuance
of our Name and Family, Psalm. 49.

5. Persecuting of Gods Saints and Servants, or afflicting the poor and needy,
Psalm. 109.13. Let his posterity be cut off, let his name be wiped out.
Certainly on the other side, Fruitfulness is a blessing; and as a good Wife is
the best Earthly blessing without us, so are Children a special gift of God.
See Psalm. 113.9. and Psalm. 127.3, 4. Children are an heritage of Jehovah; the
fruit of the womb his reward, or wages. Hebr. As Barrenness is threatened and
inflicted sometimes as a curse, so is Fruitfulness promised and bestowed as a
blessing; and yet God will be sought unto for this blessing. So did Abraham
seek God for a Son, and obtained him: After Isaac had lived with his wife
twenty years childless, they both (say the Jews) went to the Mount Moriah, and
prayed there for a child, and God heard them.

I should not advise Polygamy, as a means to be fruitful, and to multiply our
Progeny. One wife seems enough, and often too much for one man to govern; and
it is observed, that some who have allowed or indulged themselves the liberty or
license of many Wives, have had the fewest Children. Solomon's Wives and
Concubines made up a thousand, and yet we read but of three Children he had by
them all.

2. Next to Prayer for Children, let me advise a serious resolution to bring up
your Children which God shall bestow on you, in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord; resolve you and your Children will serve the Lord. Endeavor to be
able to say to God at last, when you come to give account of these Talents, Of
all thou have given me, have I lost none: There is never a son or daughter of
perdition amongst them, not a profane Esau, or a cursed Cham, nor a scoffing
Ishmael, never a wandering Dinah, nor a mocking Michal; Lo, here am I, and the
Children thou have given me.

3. Love God's Worship, the place of his Worship, and those that minister about
holy things. It was to Hannah, praying at Shiloh; to Zachary, ministering in the
Temple; and to the Shunamitish woman, that so courteously entertained the
Prophet Elijah; and to the Mariner and his Wife, that in Q Mary's Reign hid
that eminent Doctor and Confessor, Dr. Sands, after Archbishop of York, to whom
God gave Sons, after they had been childless a long time.

4. Be you your selves God's Children, his Sons and his Daughters, and he will
give you Children, Sons and Daughters, or at least a name better then of Sons
and Daughters, Isa. 58. and Psalm. 128. Blessed are all they that fear God, and
walk in his way -- Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine upon the walls of
thine house -- Thy children like Olive plants round about thy table -- Yea,
thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel. And this last
Clause, brings to mind that saying of our Savior, Luke 21.23. Woe unto them
that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days. If you ask why?
it follows, For there shall be great distress in the land, namely, of Israel,
and wrath upon this people. Else, save in case of war and desolation, or in
case of trouble and persecution, as the times were like to be when St. Paul
wrote to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. c. 7. Else, I say, Blessed are those wombs
that bear, and the paps that give suck; the blessings of the breasts and of the
womb, are the language of the Holy Tongue: And though in troublous times it is
not good, i.e. expedient to touch a woman, yet in Serene times, and of Adam in
Innocence, God said, it is not good for the man to be alone: And as we have a
woe in Luke to those that are with child, so have we a Ve soli, a woe to him that
is alone, in Ecclesiastes; distingue tempora and salves difficultatem,
distinguish the times when, or of which these things were spoken, and you will
easily reconcile our Savior's words and his Apostles, with those of Solomon's.
The Hebrew word Ben, which signifies a Son, comes from Banah, to build; and
those Mothers who bring forth children, are said in Scripture to build up the
house: So (...) prayed for Boaz his wife, Ruth, in this manner, The Lord make
the woman that is come into thy house like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did
build up the house of Israel; and I may say also, Which two did build up the
Church of God. And if they built up God's Church on Earth, they made ready a
people prepared for the Lord in Heaven: And as Jerusalem which is above, is
said to be the Mother of us all, so in another respect, Jerusalem that is
below, I mean the Church on Earth, does bring forth Sons and Daughters to God,
and is the Mother of all the Children of men, that are indeed also the Children
of God, and Members of the new Jerusalem in Heaven, or above.

CHAP. V. Of the Education of Children.
CHildren, of themselves a blessing, prove a cross and a curse too, unto their
Parents, if not cultivated or well managed by a good Education. Teach a Child
the way he should go, and he will not forsake it when he is old: Quo semel est
imbuta recens servabit ^dorem Testa diu. Although ragged Colts prove often good
horses, yet let the horses run till they are six or seven years old, wild and
unbroken, it will be a hard matter to tame and manage them. It Is good that a
man bear the yoke in his youth: Blaspheme not, saying, A young Saint will prove
an old Devil; rather, a young Devil is like to prove an old Beelzebub. You may
bend the Oak as well as the Osier, whilst it is young and tender: Now, now is
the time, the season, the very nick, article and joint of time, when you may
turn your Children which way you please. Oh then, now teach them, mind them to
remember their Creator in the days of their youth; bring them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord. Let God have the first fruits of their time, the
flower of their age; dedicate them to God betimes, by engaging them to him and
his service in the first place. God would have Children presented to him in the
Temple at forty days old, our Savior says, Suffer little children to come
unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God: And our Lord
was pleased with the Childrens Hosanna's, as he rode in Triumph to Jerusalem:
Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have ordained or perfected praise,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 8.

God of old called to young Samuel again and again, whilst he was a Child,
rather than to old Eli. We keep a day to Commemorate the young Infants of about
two years old, that were murdered for the cause of Christ, as well as of St.
Stephen the Protomartyr, and of St. Paul the aged, that were put to death for
the name of the Lord Jesus. God of old sealed the males amongst the Israelites
at eight days old for his own, his peculiar Treasure. And if God will own your
Children, why do not ye Parents present them to him? Children within the pale
of the Church, God looks on as his Children: And if ye take his Children, your
Sons and Daughters which you brought unto him, and offer them to Molock, to
Baal, to Idols, or bring them forth, and up, to the Murderer, or the Abaddon,
the Destroyer of souls, by evil or careless Education, a thousand times better
had it been they had never been born. How will Children in Hell curse their
Parents, that by their evil counsel, or evil example, or want of good Precepts,
and good Paterns, brought them to the place of torment? Oh therefore teach
them, by instilling good Principles into them betimes, and guide them by your
good example; always be able to say to them, Be ye followers of us, as we are
of Christ; or, Walk so, as ye have us for an example; drop good and precious
instructions daily into these narrow mouthed Vessels, and when they are old,
they will retain the good infused into them in their young days. Chasten them
if they offend, if you love them, but in measure, that it may appear you love
them. Correct them, but not in anger, lest they be discouraged, lest you
provoke them to wrath also; lest your bitterness to them, imbitter their
spirits toward you. Teach them Affability, Courtesy, Gentleness, Humility,
that as you love them, so may every body else; that so they may pass their time
in peace and quietness, both at home, in their own bosoms, and abroad in the
world.

Next after they are fitted by a competency of Learning, for some honest and
suitable Calling, be sure you dispose of them accordingly, considering what
Bishop Sanderson has left on Record in one of his Sermons, that Idle
Gentlemen, and idle Beggars, are the pests of the Commonwealth: Let yours
therefore be careful to maintain some honest Trades or Callings, that they be
not unfruitful. These things are good and profitable unto men. Whereas the
Grecians would have all Children to be bound to keep their Parents when old,
the Athenians put in this Exception, Unless their Parents had taught them no
Trade whereby to get their living. Every man, says Mr. Perkins, besides his
general Calling as a Christian, must have some personal, particular Calling to
walk in, either public or private, either in the Church, or Commonwealth, or
Family. Adam his personal Calling assigned him by God, was to dress and keep
the Garden; and Christ the second Adam, lived with Joseph, says Mr. Perkins,
in the calling of a Carpenter: And hereupon it was, that the Jews said, Is not
this the Carpenter, the son of Mary? Mark 6.3. Nor is it a calling to devote
your Sons and Daughters to be Monks and Nuns in the Monasteries beyond Seas.
The ancient Church, says the same Author, condemned all Monks for Thieves and
Robbers, that besides the general duties of Prayer and Fasting, did not withal,
employ themselves in some other Calling for their better maintenance,

Give your Children then Callings: If you ask what Callings? I answer, 1.
according to their Natural inclinations: And secondly, according to their
Natural parts and gifts. Those Children which excel in the gifts of the body,
bring them up to Mechanical Arts; those Children which excel in gifts of the
mind, bring them up to the Liberal Sciences, to Academical Learning, that they
may be serviceable thereby in Church or Commonwealth. Athanasius that famous
Bishop, was first put to Learning, because he was found by the Sea side, doing
the part of a Minister amongst a company of little Children like himself,
examining and baptizing them according to the solemn Order used in the
Congregation. The Athenians, before they placed their Children in any Calling,
did first bring them into a Public Place, where Instruments of all sorts were
laid; and they observed, with what kind of Instrument they took delight; to the
like Art after did they apply them with good success. Christians may do well to
follow the example of the Heathens in this so rational a practice: Choose
Callings for your Children for which they are fitted, and to which they are
inclined; they then will delight in there Employment, and their lives will be
comfortable to them, their very Callings will be Recreations.

After you have educated your Children, and trained them up in some honest
Calling, provide timely a suitable Match for them. It Is the Parents duty to
dispose of their Children in Marriage; as appears plainly by these Scriptures,
Deuteronomy. 7.3. Exodus 34.16. 1 Cor. 7.38. Where observe, says my Author, that the
Commandment touching the Marriage of the Child, Mr. Perkins.
is given to the Parent, not the Child. Thus Abraham took a wife for his son
Isaac, and Isaac suffered himself to be disposed of by his Father; afterward
Isaac commanded his son Jacob to marry in the house of Laban, Genesis 28. and
Jacob obeyed. I do not mean, that Parents may absolutely command their Child to
marry this or that person, but to marry one thus or thus qualified, according
to Rules of Scripture, and right Reason and Prudence, I say they may. Great is
the power of Parents over their Children. In some Countries, Parents have power
of life and death over their Children. Amongst the Jews, the Parents might sell
their Children, to free themselves out of debt; and in case Children were
disobedient and incorrigible, their Parents might bring them forth to be stoned
to death by Gods Law.

And this brings us to treat of the next Head or Argument (viz.) The duty of
Children toward their Parents, Honor thy Father and Mother, says the Law;
Which is the first Commandment with promise, says the New Testament, Ephesians. 5.
Parents must have a double honor, namely, of Reverence, and of Maintenance;
Thou shall fear thy Mother and thy Father. And again, according to our
Savior's Interpretation, the Pharisees Corban non obstante, Children were
bound to provide for their Parents, (...), to do or show kindness to their
Father and Mother; yea, those Christians who do not provide for their own
Parents, are worse than Infidels. It is sad to think of what Luther observes,
That one Father will more willingly maintain ten Sons, than ten Sons will
maintain one Father: but where Children are unnatural to their Parents, God in
just judgment suffers their Children to retaliate their unkindness unto
themselves.

It Is memorable, the Story of the Father, who being drawn by his Son to the
threshold of the house, by the hair of the head, cried to him, to draw him no
further, for that he had drawn his Father no further; v. Robinsons Essays, p.
548. It Is observable, that Children are apt to slight their Mother most, and
her especially in her old age. We are apt to break over the hedge where it is
lowest; but the Law of God is a Mound and a Hedge in this Gap, charging us not
to despise our Mother when she is old, Prove. 23.22. And there is a curse
denounced against him, that sets light by father or mother, and all the
people were to say, Amen to it, Deuteronomy. 27.16. How terrible is that place, Prove.
30.17. The eye that mocketh at his father, and despises to obey his mother,
the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.
And he that slights his Parents for the infirmities that accompany their old
age, or for their wrinkles, or hoary hairs, is very unreasonable. The natural
affection and kindness of the Stork to its Dam, may be a witness against such
Children, such worse than unreasonable men and women. Aeneas is called Pius
Aeneus by the Poet; and why? because he carried his Father Anchises upon his
back, at the destruction of Troy. We must do what we can to hide our Parents
nakedness: Remember Chams, or his son Canaans curse, who some say, first saw
his Grandfather Noah, and went and told his Father, and is therefore cursed: We
must think reverently of them, we must show outward reverence to them, bow down
to them, or rise up before them; we must speak awfully to them, and
respectively of them: We must obey their just and lawful commands; if they say,
Go, we must go; if, Come, we must come; if, Do this, we must do it. We must
provide necessaries for them if they want, afford them (...), we must thus
honor or reward them for their kindness to us. The Jews have a saying, What
honor is to be given to Parents? the answer is, To give them meat and drink,
and to cloth them and cover them. Let Us endeavor to procure their hearty
prayers for blessings to God upon us and ours, and dread the thoughts of their
ill Wishes, Curses or Imprecations.

It Is memorable what St. Austin in his Civ. Dei, b. 22. cap. 8. relates,
namely, Often Children, that being cursed by their Mother, went about quaking
and trembling from one place to another like Vagabonds. And I have been very
credibly told of a Son, that stamping on his Mothers grave, for madness because
she had given him no more, thereby broke his leg. Though a man must love his
Wife more than his Mother, yet he must reverence his Mother, rather than his
Wife. We should honor our Parents living and dead, with Civil honor and
respect; so Joseph fell on Jacob his Father, and kissed him when dead. Give
them decent burial; so Jacob and Esau too, buried their Father Ifaac; and weep,
or mourn, over them. David speaking of great sadness, says, he bowed down
heavily, as one th^^ mourned for his mother, Psalm. 35.14. and Joseph when he
buried his Father, it was with a great and solemn mourning, and of a long
continuance, Genesis 50.10. If the widows made great lamentation for the death of
Dorcas, and showed the Coats that she had made for them, Acts 9.39. how much
more should Children weep and mourn for their deceased Parents, from whom under
God they had their Beings, their Lives, Education, Food and Clothing, and
Portion and all.

CAAP VI. Of the loss of Children.
IF God have given you Children, and taken them away again, yet be not like
Rachel, weeping for her children, because they are not; Rather with Job say,
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job 1.21. Better, I think, to have had Children, though we see them go
before us to their grave, than to have been always Childless; for hereby God
has taken away the reproach and curse of Barrenness, and hereby you have
helped to fill Heaven, and your Children are not lost, but gone, or sent
thither before you. Job who had all his other goods doubled, had not a double
number of Children; and this reason some give of it, because these were not
lost, Job should meet with them again in Heaven. If your Children dye in the
womb, and never see the Sun, the Sun in the visible Heavens, yet may they for
ever see the Sun of Righteousness in the highest Heavens; and surely it is a
pleasant thing always to behold this Sun, in the vision and fruition of whom
consists so much of our happiness. What though your children dye in the womb,
or go out of the world presently after they are born into it, yet may they see
God, notwithstanding the opinion of the Father, that Duras Infantum Pater; and
not withstanding the hard-heartedness of the pretended Mother Church of Rome,
in this a Stepmother, rather than a true Mother to her Children. The Hebrew
Children that dyed before the eighth day; and consequently before they were
circumcised, and those Bethlemitish Children that were baptized in their own
blood; and that child that being born, was also baptized and buried in the
flames, being thrown into the fire again, the arms of that Midwife that
delivered the Martyred Mother of a live child, doubtless were not excluded
Heaven for want of a Sacrament, which they did in no wise neglect or contemn,
but could not have; these being comprehended in the Covenant made and sealed
to, and with their Parents had a right and title to the heavenly inheritance,
were of with God, and coheirs with Christ.

Again consider, That God may have taken away your Children from the evil to
come on the place where they lived. When Storms, Tempests and Troubles are
abroad, you Parents call home your Children, and so does God. God says by his
Providence in these cases to his Children, though your Children also, Come my
Children, enter into your Chambers, and shut the door, till all these
calamities be overpast. It Is a common saying, Quem diligit Dous moritur
Juvenis, he whom God loves, dies young; and sometime, and in some cases, God
calls the sins of Parents to remembrance, and slays their Children. If so it
be, this is a Lamentation, and ought to be for a lamentation: But upon your
Repentance, God may give other Children in room of them he has taken from you,
or himself be better than ten Sons, than all Sons and Daughters could be unto
you. Learn of Aaron the Priest of the Lord, who when he had lost Nadab and
Abihu, both in one day, and after an extraordinary manner, did not say, If it
be so, why is it thus? but says the Text, And Aaron held his peace, Levit.
10.3. he was dumb, and opened not his mouth, because God had done it. Jonah was
angry because God had smitten and withered the Goard, that came up in a night,
and perished in a night, but Aaron acquiesced in Gods handiwork, though he
slew his two Sons by fire in an extraordinary manner, in all this Aaron sinned
not, nor charged God foolishly. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? Who
will say unto him, what do thou? If thou art either barren, or by the death
of thy child childless, thou may do well to educate others Children, you may
adopt some Kinsman, or Friend, or Neighbors Child, and cultivate them, and sow
the seeds of Virtue and Learning in them, and make such your heirs; else make
the Church, or Poor your heirs, and do not prodigally therefore waste your
Estates, or live idly and wastefully.

Again, If you have no Child, be humbled under the want of this blessing, for
Children are so, and then increase and abound more in your Devotions toward
God; the less you are to care for the things of the world, the more reason you
have, and the more care you should have, how to serve and please God, 1 Cor. 7.

CHAP. VII. Of Parents that have bad Children.
IF Parents have Children, and they prove crosses to them, how great is that
cross! If blessings, prove curses; if comforts, turn to sorrows; and your light
be darkened in the Heavens thereof, how great is that darkness! And yet this may
be the case of a good man or woman; for Parents are Parents, as men and women,
and not as Christians; and Grace and Virtue is not Ex traduce, is not
propagated. A righteous Noah, had a profane Cham; a good David, a rebellious
Son Absalom. Of some Children we may say, Blessed is the womb that bare them,
and the paps that gave them suck! of others, It had been good for them, and for
their Parents too, if such children had never been born: It Is more tolerable to
have none, than wicked Children. It is the Speech and Protestation of King
James in his Preface to his Book to the Prince, I protest before that great
God, I had rather not be a Father, and Childless, than be a Father of wicked
Children. I charge you (says he) as ever you think to deserve my fatherly
blessing, to follow and put in practice, so far as lies in you, the Precepts
hereafter following: And if ye follow the contrary course, I take the great God
to record, that this Book shall one day be a witness betwixt me and you, and
shall procure to be ratified in Heaven, the Curse that in that case here I give
unto you. And I find in the life of Reverend Mr. Robert Bolton, that he had
told his Children so much, both in the time of his sickness, and before, he
verily believed that none of them durst think to meet him at that great
Tribunal, in an unregenerate estate. I confess; it is a sad Meditation for a
Parent to think of the life or death of a wicked Child. David, that was
presently comforted for the death of the young Child he had by Bathsheba,
refused to be comforted for the death of Absalom, sorely lamenting, Oh Absosom,
my Son, my Son, I would to God I had dyed for thee, Oh Absalom, my Son, my Son,
2 Samuel 18.33. It is thought it was for the manner of his death, the ill
condition he dyed in, and for his Soul, that he pierced his heart so deeply,
and that he wept so sorely. Let good Parents that have bad Children, give them
good counsel, and good example, and pray daily with all earnestness, for the
return of their Prodigals. St. Austins Mother Monica, her Prayers for her Son,
when a Manichee, were heard at last, and he was converted, and became one of
the greatest and best Lights of the Church since the Apostles times. It Is
thought one cause why Hezekiah wept so sore at the tidings of death was,
because he was then Childless; but could the Prophet have told him, that he
should have such a Son as Manasseth, that should commit such abominations, how
needs must such tidings have made his ears to tingle, and pierce his heart
thorough with many sorrows. Yet this may somewhat alleviate Parents grief that
have bad Children, Manasseth when he was in Chains, sought the Lord, and was
found of him at the last, and that out of his loins, by his Son Amon, came the
Mirror of Kings, King Josiah. And if thou have matter of sorrow from thy own
immediate Child, thou may have abundant cause of rejoicing from thy
Grandchild; thy Childrens Children may praise the Lord, and this may be part of
thy happiness, thus to see thy Childrens Children, and peace upon Israel. And
since so it is, that sometimes godly Parents have ungodly Children, this should
moderate your desire of Children, and your grief for the want of them. Let none
be so impatient or passionate as Rachel, saying to God, or their own Husbands,
Give me Children, or else I dye. It may further be considered, that if yet good
Parents have diverse towardly Children, yet if they have one profane person, as
Esau, it may break your hearts more than all the rest can comfort you. Like as
in the Natural body, there is more grief by the aching of some one part, though
but a tooth, than ease and comfort in all the rest that are found and well. And
this consideration, though it ought not to make us judge Children no blessings,
or not the gift of God, or to be lightly esteemed; yet may it put us upon being
as earnest, for to have our Children to be born again, as to be born at first;
to have them Gods Children by Grace, as ours by nature; and to have his Image
and likeness on their Souls, as ours on their bodies. When the Parents are in
Covenant with God, and endeavor their utmost to educate their Children in the
fear of God, it usually follows, that their labor is not in vain in the Lord.
The Israelites, the holy Scriptures tell us, their Sons and their Daughters,
which they had born unto God, they sacrified unto Devils, Psalm. 106. 37. Which
in a Spiritual sense we do, says one, if we either neglect instructing them,
or praying to God for them; or walking exemplarily as we ought before them. or
correcting them duly, or any such means as by which the seeds of Grace may grow
and prosper in them, Rob. Ess. p. 532, 533.

CHAP. VIII. Of Adultery and Fornication, etc.
ALL sin is accounted filthiness and uncleanness, and compared to the filthiest
things, Scum, Mire, Vomit; but this sin is signanter, called the fin of
Uncleanness; it is caled also Abomination, Ezekiel. 22.11. and Neighing, Jer. 5.8.
These sins are usually secret sins, and therefore most frequently committed,
pleasing sins; stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret: and men are
prone to forget these sins: the Whore wipes her mouth, and thinks all well.
It Is observed, that the Sacrifice which was offered for the woman suspected of
Adultery, was called an Offering of Memorial, because it was not offered to put
away sin, but to bring it to mind, or to remembrance, if it was committed.
Adultery by God's Law, was punished with death, either, as the Rabbis say, by
strangling, or they were to be thrust thorough with a Javelin, as Phineas
executed Zimry or Cosby; or they were to be stoned with stones, if the Damsel
that was defiled was betrothed; see Deuteronomy. 22.23, 24. or else by burning with
fire, if she that played the Whore was a Priests Daughter, and in her Fathers
house, Lev. 21.19. One expounds this, of hot Lead poured into her mouth: This
punishment was called, Combustio animae; this punishment, they say, was used in
aftertimes in imitation too of Gods punishing with Lightning, whereby the
outward parts are not hurt, and the inward burnt up, as in the example of Nadab
and Abihu.

If any wonder at what was said before, (viz.) that the punishment of her that
was betrothed, in case she was defiled or vitiated, that it was greater by
God's Law, than of her that was married; Grotius gives this Reason, Because she
was not in her husbands custody; as stealing a sheep out of the field, was
punished more severely, than stealing a sheep out of the fold. Another Author
gives these Reasons, 1. Because she gave away her Virginity, which her husband
most esteemed. 2. She brake her promise in so doing, Deuteronomy. 22.23. 3. She
wrought folly in her Fathers house, Deuteronomy. 22.19. 4. She was not only dishonest
to her husband in her first love, but dishonored also her firstborn (whose
honor and privilege amongst the Jews was very great) and you must not say her
punishment should be less, because she was not another man's wife, for she is
called a neighbors wife, Deuteronomy. 22.24. and therefore she is said, v. 22. to be
married to an husband, as if the party were her husband before: If so, we know
God accounts Idolatry committed by his people Advltery, although the Church is
but, as it were, espoused and betrothed to him here, and the wedding and
wedding-supper to be in Heaven.

Amongst the Nations, in some Countries, Adultery was punished by the loss of
both eyes; in some by death. Amongst the Egyptians, by cutting off the nose, if
he vitiated a free woman. In some Country, illi virilia execantur: The which
also, says Alexander ab Alexandro, was used amongst the Romans. The same
Author, Genesis D. l. 4. c. 1. tells us, The Partbians punish no crime more
grievously; that Opilius Macrinus condemned such to be burnt with fire; and
that amongst the Arabians and other Nations, Adultery was always punished
capitally: That diverse Philosophers have accounted Adultery a greater crime
than Perjury. In the Christian Church of old, those that admitted such to
Communion who had fallen after Baptism, excepted those who were guilty of
Adultery, Murder and Idolatry. Many and great are the threats against such
sinners in the holy Scripture; disgrace and dishonor is threatened to their
name, wasting and consumption to their bodies and estates, a dart shall strike
through their liver: Lust is lodged in the Liver, and there it is especially
punished; Whoremongers and Adulterers, especially, God will judge, Hebr. 13.4.
Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9.

Dr. Heylin our Historiographer, writing of them any divisions in Hungary, into
Romanists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Yet, says he, all these different parties do
agree in this, to punish Adultery and Fornication with no less a punishment
than death; the Father forcing his Daughter, the Husband his wife, and the
Brother his Sister to the place of Execution, H. G. p. 542. King James in his
Advice to the Prince, with much zeal dehorts him from this sin of Uncleanness,
p. 74. etc. Hear God (says this English Solomon, this King-Preacher)
commanding by the mouth of St. Paul, to abstain from Fornication, declaring
that the Fornicator shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; and by the mouth
of St. John, reckoning out Fornication amongst other grievous sins, that debars
the Committers, amongst Dogs and Swine, from entry into that spiritual and
heavenly Jerusalem. And because, says he, sibbest examples touches us nearest,
consider the difference of success that God granted in the Marriages of the
King my Grandfather, and me your own Father; the reward of his incontinency
(proceeding from his evil Education) being the sudden death, at one time, of
two pleasant young Princes, and a Daughter only born to succeed him, whom he
had never the hap so much as once to see or bless before his death; leaving a
double curse behind him to the Land, both a Woman of Sex, and a new born Babe
of age to Reign over them. And as for the blessing God has bestowed on me, in
granting me both a greater Continency, and the fruits following thereupon, you
self and sib folks to you, are (praise be God) sufficient witnesses. And page
81. Have the King my Grandfathers example before your eyes, who by his
Adultery, bred the wreck of his lawful Daughter and Heir, in begetting that
Bastard, who unnaturally rebelled, and procured the ruin of his own Sovereign
and Sister. And this brings to mind, that excellent Captain General Gideon, who
had by his Wives Threescore and ten Sons, and by his Concubine but one, viz.
Abimelech, and he slew all these Threescore and ten Sons, except Joash, who
escaped his hands, Judge. chap. 8 and 9. It Is a sin to beget a Bastard, and a
shame to be born one. It Is noted on Job 31. 10. where Job says, Let my wife
grind unto another man, and let others bow down upon her; the Septuagint render
the last words, Let my children be abased. Jeptha, though a valiant, and a
gallant, and good man, yet is recorded the base Son of Gilead, Judge. 11.1. It Is
a reproach to be thus born, in Scripture-Heraldry; notwithstanding I have been
told, that William the Conqueror, King of England, did use to style himself,
Gulielmus Bastardus Rex Angliae, etc. God forbad a Bastard to enter into the
Congregation of the Lord, to bear any Office, until the tenth Generation, Deuteronomy.
23.3. Yet that such persons may not be discouraged, let them know we have one
example, though but one, and that is the example of Jeptha, a Judge, and a
valiant man, and one eminent for his Faith, Hebr. 11.32. ranked amongst David,
Samuel and the Prophets. It Is a blot to be base born, but this may be taken
away, in a great measure, by good Education. And then, says one, this should
be no more a blot unto them, than if they wanted a hand or a leg; and as we
blame not the stolen seed, when it is sown and grows up, but those who
stole the seed, so we should not blame the Child begotten out of Marriage (if
he follow not his Fathers footsteps) but only his Father who begat him. There
has been, says he, profitable men in the Church, who have been basely born,
as Lumbard, Gratian, and Petrus Comestor, the Sons of one Whore, and Darius
Nothus among the Persian Kings, and Hercules, Weem 3 Vol. p. 145. I know the
Jews stood upon their Pantofles, and took it in great dudgion, that our Savior
should tell them, they did not act like the Children of Abraham; they retort
presently, John 8.1. We are not born of fornication. Yet I should dissuade from
casting such an ones birth into his dish, or into his teeth, because never in
his power to help it: And I should exhort such who are so base born, to
endeavor to be born again, and then they are truly Noble and Honorable, the
Sons of God, and Coheirs with Jeptha the Saint of the Lord.

CHAP. IX. Of Second Marriages, and of the Qualifications of Ministers or
Priests Wives.
OF old they were accounted Bigamists, or Digamists, who had two Wives, not
only at one and the same time, but successively one after another; and such
were enjoined Penance by the Council of Laodicea, and Neo-Caesarea; and by the
latter Council, a Presbyter was forbidden to be present at the Wedding-feast,
lest he should seem to consent to such Marriage; and Bigamists were not
received to the Communion without prayer and fasting, and repentance first
enjoined and exercised: And by the ancient Canons, Bigamists were not to be
admitted to holy Orders, Council. Andegavense, Can. 11. Council. Romanum, an.
467. Can. 2. Council. Arelatense, 3. Decr. 2. Council. Hispalense 2. Cap. 4. and
the same is forbidden in the Apostolical Canons, Can. 17. And by the same
Canons, such as otherwise might be capable of being Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons, are made incapable of being such, if they married a Widow, or a Whore,
or one that was cast out by her own Husband, aut aliquam de iis quae publicis
spectaculis mancipantur, Can. 18. or one that was a notorious frequenter of the
Spectacles in that time.

By the Law of God, the High Priest was not to marry a Widow, or a divorced
Woman, or profane, or an Harlot; But he shall take, says the holy Text, a
Virgin of his own people to wife, Lev. 21.14. Another Priest was forbidden to
take a Wife that was a Whore, or profane, or any woman put away from her
husband, Lev. 21.7. but was not forbidden to marry a Widow: If the woman was
not a Daughter of Israel, or had married to one that it was not lawful for her
to marry, or had beeen defiled by constraint or unwillingly, or had been
suspected of Whoredom by her Husband, though she had not been put to drink the
water of Jealousy, yet by the Law (according to Matrimony) the Priest might
not lawfully marry with her. The Priests of the old Law were not forbidden
(except only the High Priest, a special type of Christ) to marry a Widow. The
High Priest was not to marry a Widow, but a Virgin; ('it is thought) that so he
might have her first love; and 2. lest she should prove with child, and bring
in a strange seed into the Priesthood, provided against, Lev. 21.15. Again, he
must not marry a divorced woman, because it was conjectured she was put away
for some miscarriage or misdemeanor. 3. He must not marry one defiled, either
voluntarily or violently, such a blot must not lie on his wife, lest it stain
his Function. The Law allows the High Priest to marry, but a Virgin; Because,
says one, she may be more easily guided and ruled, and won to frame her self
to duty and obedience. And in Ezekiel. 44.22. he was allowed to marry the Widow of
a Priest; for it may be presumed, that such an one has been already trained to
Modesty, to Sobriety, to a chaste and sweet Behavior, beseeming the wife of a
Priest. Now although the Ministers of the New Testament are not prohibited, but
expressly allowed to marry; yet must their wives be grave, not slanderers,
sober, faithful in all things, and he that is in holy Orders, must be sure to
order and rule his own house well, having his children in subjection with all
gravity, 1 Timothy 3.4. and 11. This care being had, they being married, says my
Author, shall be as holy and honorable in their Function, as the Priests of the
Old Testament, who being married, were said to have the Crown of God upon their
heads, and to offer the bread of God, and to be after a special manner holy.
And where it is said, 1 Timothy 3.2. and Tit. 1.16. that a Bishop must be the
husband of one wife, etc. the meaning must be, that he must not be married to
two wives at once, according to the custom of the Jews, nor have a Concubine,
together with a lawful wife, accordng to the practice of the Gentiles; or he
might not marry a second woman, after he had put away the first, without any
lawful cause: But it seems to be very improbable, that the Apostle should
seclude from the Calling of a Bishop or Presbyter, one that married a second
wife, after the death of his former. Observe, it is not said, that a Bishop
must be such a one as has been the husband of one wife in time past; but he
uses the present time, both in Timothy and Titus. The High Priest himself
under the Law, might have a wife after his first wife, if she was dead; if he
married a maid, which was a figure of Christ's Spouse, the Church, which was to
be presented holy, and as a chaste Virgin to Christ: By the same reason that
they may drive Ministers from their wives, they may also deprive them of all
use of wine; and they may deprive Ministers of all use of meat, and command
them to fast always, that they may be fit to pray always, as well as always to
abstain from their wives: We never read, that the Levites that taught in the
Synagogues (into the place of which our Churches succeed) were barred from the
company of their wives. And consider, it may be as necessary to marry the
second time, as the first, and sometime, and in some cases, perhaps more
necessary [says Dr. Hamond.] The wife may dye presently after Marriage, and
without Children, and the second Marriage in that case tending as much to the
ends of Matrimony (Comfort of life, Propagation, remedy of Lust) as the former
can be supposed to do; it would then be strange to debar a Bishop or Presbyter
in such a condition. Chrysostom and Theodoret, with diverse others, plainly and
clearly teach this place to be understood as we do, that a Bishop should not
have two wives at once. Erasmus upon the place, disliked the then practice of
the Church of Rome, in forbidding Marriage to Bishops and Priests: Admittitur,
says he, incestus, admittitur homicida, admittitur pirata, admittitur
Sodomita, sacrilegus parricida, denique quis non? solus digamus excluditur ab
hoc honor, qui solus nihil admisit: And further, considering the times, and
the ill consequence of the single life amongst their Clergy and Monks, he
inclines to think they had better much to allow Matrimony to these persons:
Nunc caelibes habet Mundus quamplurimos, castos perpaucos. Grotius says, I
confess, that amongst all Nations, second Marriages were less honored, and
amongst some, these were restrained by punishments. And that Tertullian is
fierce against second Marriages, condemning them as unlawful, and interprets
this of the Apostle, against a Bishops being twice married. Notwithstanding
which Authorities, let the Scripture and right Reason be heard, and what has
been premised on this Argument considered, and you will have good ground and
cause, not to call good, evil; I meann not to condem second Marriages, whether
in Laymen or Clergy. And if a Bishop may, without sin, marry a second wife,
after he has buried his former, surely then he may lawfully marry at first: If
he cannot contain, let him marry, he sins not, only let him marry in the
Lord, an honest, grave, sober person, that may adorn, and not blemish his holy
Function.

The Romanists say, there are three special Crowns reserved in Heaven; one for
Martyrs, a second for Virgins, and a third for Doctors: The Virgins, overcome
the flesh; the Martyrs, overcome the World; and the Doctors, overcome the
Devil. They have no such Crown for married persons; but although they have none
for them, God has laid up for them a Crown of Righteousness, even the like
Crown of Righteousness for every one that loves the appearing of Christ, the
Judge of quick and dead, as that Virgin Apostle, as most say, the Doctor of the
Gentiles, and eminent Martyr, St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Virginity, says one, is
not a Virtue in it self, and no more acceptable to God than Marriage is; and
this he proves, Because all Virtues by Repentance may be restored: But
Virginity cannot be restored, and therefore it is not a Virtue. Again, Because
all Virtues in time and place are commanded: But Virginity is left free, and
only Paul gives his advice to it, 1 Cor. 7. therefore it is not a Virtue. The
same Author says, That Virginity is not good in it self, but good for another
end; when a man having the gift of Continency, lives a single life, that he may
be more fit or free to serve God. The Papists glossing on the Parable of the
Sower, say, That Virginity brings forth an hundredfold; Widowhood, seventy
fold; and Marriage, but thirty-fold.

Great is the difference 'twixt the Ancient Church of God amongst the Jews, and
the present Church of Rome in this matter; there in Psalm 78.63. The Virgins
were not given in Marriage; or, were not praised, so the Hebrew signifies: But
in this Church, the Virgins which are not married are most praised. Celibacy is
made here a state of Perfection, or Supererogation and Meritorious; but if but
one half be true which we find in our Chronicles, it had been happy for our
Votaries, very many of them at least, that they had never known their Cells and
Cloisters; they might have gone as near a way to Heaven out of the World, as
out of their Monasteries. Bale, in his Book of the Acts of the Roman Bishops,
says. That when the Kings Visitors in England, in the year, 1538. visited the
Abbeys, they found in some of their Styes, rather than Religious Houses, five,
in some ten, in some twenty Sodomites and Adulterers; of which some kept five,
some seven, some twenty Harlots. And a later Historian tells us, That Barkley
Nuns were all with child at once, and how Sir Henry Colt caused a Buckstal to
be set in the narrowest place of the Marsh, from Cheshnut Nunnery to Waltham
Abbey, and therein took the Monks of Waltham as they passed homewards in the
night; and the next morning he brought and presented them to the King, namely,
to King Hen. 8. who had often seen sweeter, but never fatter Venison; D.F.H. 6
b. p. 317. And it is reported that Dr. Smith, who disputed at Oxford against
Peter Martyr, and who had written a Book for the Celibacy of Priests, was taken
himself at Oxford in the manner, or in the very act. This is enough to prove,
That it is much easier to make an Eloquent Speech, or write a Learned Book in
Commendation of Single-life, and of Chastity in that condition, than to live
so. If you Object the practice and praise of the Monks of Ancient times: I
answer, That the Monks of old times, and our present Votaries of the Church of
Rome, are very different.

1. They lived single, without any Vow of Continency, these are Votaries.

2. They had Callings, and got their bread in the sweat of their brows; these
live idle most of them, and like Drones, consume the honey which others have
gathered.

3. They did not look upon that condition, as a state of greater perfection,
and in it self Meritorious; these do.

4. Some of them, as I take it, had wives; and these not, but esteem it more
lawful to have a Concubine than a Wife.

Those Monks were none of the Popes licensing or founding; these are. We read
of 12000 Monks of Bangor, that were destroyed by the King of Northumberland,
for not stooping to Austin the Monk, upon the instigation as (History tells us)
of Austin. The Original of Monkery, or the Pattern or Platform of it, is not
taken in the Mount; viz. in or from the holy Scriptures; although perhaps, some
would pretend that they imitate Jeptha's Daughter, or Elijab, and Elizeus, or
the Nazarites, or St. John Baptist, or the Children of Jonadab the Son of
Rechab. But who has required these things at their hands, now under the
Gospel, to tread in the steps of those beforementioned? and yet Jeptha's
Daughter bewailed her Virginity, and so it is thought did yearly the Daughters
of Israel lament on her account, or for her sake. As for our Nazarites, they
might marry, and some were married, as Sampson and Samuel. Again, the Monks and
Anchorites of old, were necessitated to that Solitary life; these live so out
of choice, voluntarily obliging themselves to this course. Elijah, Elisha, and
John the Baptist, were all extraordinary Persons and Prophets, had
extraordinary Calls, and are not to be imitated by ordinary Christians. It is
noted by Mr. Perkins, that Jerome says, in the life of Hilarion, that there
was no Monk in Syria, See his Doctrine of the Problem.
before Hilarion, who was the Founder of that Profession in that Province. And
Chrysostom in the 25 Hom. ad Hebraeos, says, That in Paul's time there was no
sign nor step of any Monk. Monastical Profession began in the Church about 260
years after our Redemption, by Paul a Thebane; or rather, says my Author,
about the three hundredth year by Antony. These Monks, or Hermites, lived alone
in Fields or Deserts.

Basil, it is said, first invented Monasteries, and was head of the Monks.

Basil, himself, Ep. 65. says, That the Neo-Caesarians objected the Novelty of
Monastical life against him. Besides, these Monks of old were Laymen, and not
Clergymen; and Athanasius in his Epistle to Dracontius, says, That he knew
many, both Monks and Bishops that were married, and had Children. There were no
Nuns, says Mr. Perkins, until about two hundred years after Christ, and these
lived continent and freely, privately, out of Monasteries. In Rome, Marcella
was one of the Nuns, about the year 400. vid. Hieron. in Epitap. Marcellae. St.
Austine does not approve of the idle lives of Monks. The Solitary life, says
one, is inferior to the common and ordinary life, because it is full of
importunate cogitations, etc. neither do we speak this out of bare conjecture,
but have learned it of those who have tried it, to be true. Ivo Carnotensis. Ep
258.

I shall now give some Answer to the Objections against the married lives of
the Clergy, or of men in holy Orders, taken from the Scriptures. The Scriptures
that have been, are, or may most seemingly be alleged to the contrary are
these, Those that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8. Be ye holy, for
I am holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. Defraud not one another, except it be by consent, for a
season, that ye may give your selves to prayer and fasting, 1 Cor. 7.5. It Is
good for a man not to touch a woman, 1 Cor. 7.1. He that is unmarried, cares
how to please the Lord; but he that is married, cares how to please his wife,
1 Cor. 7.33. No man that is chosen to be a Soldier, intangleth himself with
the affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2.4. Whosoever has left Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or House, or Land, for my sake, or the Gospels, shall receive a
hundredfold in this life, Mat. 19.29. There are that make themselves Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of Heaven; he that can receive it, let him receive it, Mat.
19.12. Younger widows reject; for when they wax wanton against Christ, they
will marry, having damnation, because they have forsaken their first faith, 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. The unmarried woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she
may be holy both in body and spirit; but she that is married, cares for the
things of this world, how she may please her husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. To these
Objections from Scripture, I answer in general;

1. That the Scripture directly and plainly allows Marriage to Ministers,
equally as to any sort of men, 1. Saying, That Marriage is honorable among all
men (and therefore amongst Clergymen) and the bed undefiled, Hebr. 13.4.2. And
again, Let every man have his own wife, 1 Cor. 7.2. and if every man, then a
Priest, or Presbyter may lawfully have a wife. 3. A Bishop must be the husband
of one wife; and one that has his children in subjection, with all gravity, 1 Timothy 3.4.

2. I say, That the High Priest and Priests of the old Law, had liberty to
marry; that Aaron the Saint of the Lord was married, and had Children; Nadab
and Abihu, etc. that diverse of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior were
actually married; that St. Peter, whose Successor the Pope, or Bishop of Rome,
claims to be, was married, our Savior healing S. Peter's wives Mother of a
Fever, Mat. 8.14, 15. Nor does it any where appear, that they did wholly
forsake society with their Wives, any more than their Houses, Trades, Ships, to
which they certainly sometime after, at least for a time, returned.

3. That Scotus, Aquinas, Bellarmine, Franciscus a Sancta Clara, diverse in the
Council of Trent, and of the Romish Church, hold, that the Celibacy, or single
life of Priests, is not de Jure Divino; and therefore cannot be proved out of
Scripture, either by Precept, Institution, or Example.

To the particular Scriptures, besides what has been said before to several of
them, I answer, That Romans 8.8. Those that are in the flesh, cannot please God;
must not be interpreted or understood, those that are in Wedlock cannot please
God; because we know, that many Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, were married,
and yet pleased God; and Enoch walked with God, and God took him up to Heaven,
that he saw not death; for before he was translated, he had this Testimony,
that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5. But by those that are in the flesh, must be
meant, either those that adhere to the old Law, and slight the Gospel; or else
those that are in a state of Nature, in an unregenerate estate, never as yet
renewed in the Spirit of their minds, but still remain carnally minded, and
drowned in the corruptions and sinful lusts of the flesh. To that of Peter, Be
ye holy, for I am holy; it concerns all Christians, and if Marriage and
Holiness could not consist together, neither Laymen nor Clergymen should
marry; and again, Moses and Aaron, and God's people of old, to whom these words
were spoken, were married persons, and not commanded thereby to put away their
wives. To the third, 1 Cor. 7.5. Defraud not one another, etc. that it is said
to all indifferently Laymen, as well as Clergymen, and that it forbids to
separate the man from the society of the woman, or his wife, wholly and
perpetually, but only for a time, and that too, that they might give themselves
to fasting and prayer, and so come together again; and this too, was to be done
by the mutual consent of man and wife.

Here may be condemned then, the Romanists barring persons in holy Orders from
Marriage, or in case they have been married before, from Conjugal fellowship
with their wives whilst they live, and that whether the wife will or no. We
never read, that the Apostles so left their wives, nor that ever they asked
their consent so to do; and their saying, that the Apostles, although they were
married, yet after they were called to the Apostleship, never did accompany
with their wives any more, is gratis dictum, a mere say-so, a fancy of their
own brain, without any good ground or foundation from Scripture, or sound
Reason, or good Authority. To the fourth Scripture, viz. That it is good for a
man not to touch a woman. I answer, Good there, is taken for expedient, and
that by reason of the present distress, and the danger of persecution; in a
married state or condition in such times, they should meet with troubles. To
the fifth, viz. 2 Timothy 2.4. I say, that Soldiers do not use, whilst they are
engaged in Military employment, to undertake and entangle themselves with
merchandise or husbandry, etc. But this notwithstanding, the Apostle Paul did
work with his hands to maintain himself, that he might not be chargeable to the
Church of Corinth, because of false Teachers, who would have taken advantage,
if he had been chargeable to that Church. And nevertheless, the Romanists do
allow persons in holy Orders, to be Justices of the peace, Lord Chancellors,
Ambassadors of Princes: And the Apostle Paul did allow of the Apostle Peter his
having a wife; and I have been told, that Ecclesiastics wives take on them,
and off from their husbands, the cares of the Household and Family: so that by
Marriage, they are freed from worldly cares, rather than immerst in them.

The case is not now with Clergymen, as in the Apostles days; then the Church
was poor and destitute, now she is rich, and her Officers are well provided
with Houses, Glebe and Tithes, and necessaries for Housekeeping and
Hospitality; and now a Housekeeper, especially in times of peace, may be as
expedient, as it was inexpedient in the Apostles time, and days of persecution.
To the sixth, viz. Mat. 19.29. I answer, That if the times be so, that a man
cannot be a good Christian, or follower of Christ, except he leave or forsake
his wife, house, lands, etc. then he must leave all, or deny all these things
and relations, rather than deny Christ; and that this concerns the Laity, as
well as the Clergy. If our Savior had ever taught any such Doctrine, as to
part man and wife for the sake of his Religion, and as part of his Religion,
how would the Scribes and Pharisees have replied unto him from his own mouth,
That which God has joined together, let not man put asunder. Besides, it no
where appears, that the holy Apostles did wholly and perpetually forsake the
society of their wives; but rather, when they were to fly, took them with them,
in case they would accompany them in their travels. To the seventh Scripture, I
say, He that has the gift of Continency may, if he sees that Marriage will
prove a snare to him, and entangle him so in the cares of the world, that he
shall not be free and able to serve God as he ought: I say, let not (...)
marry; but this is far from proving, that all (...) in holy Orders, whether
they have the gift or not, should vow Continency, or abstain from Marriage, in
case of a man's not being able to contain. The blessed Apostle, who knew the
mind of his and our Lord, has left us a general Rule, Notwithstanding to avoid
Fornication, let every man have his own wife, 1 Cor. 7.2. To the eighth
Scripture, viz. 1 Timothy 5.11, 12. I answer, That as therefore because younger
widows were likely (after they had made promises to live to their lives end (as
Deaconnesses, to minister to the Church; in attending the sick and weak) to
change their minds, and marry perhaps to Infidel husbands, and so be in danger
of forsaking their Christian Religion, and prove a great scandal to
Christianity, making it be ill thought of by the world; therefore the Apostle
Paul would not by any means have these younger widows admitted into such
Offices, but only such widows as were above threescore years old, and so out of
the danger of desires of marriage, or altering their condition. So I could
heartily wish, that no vow of Single life or Continency, might be put upon
young persons of either Sex, upon pretense of admitting them to any Office, or
of separating them to any special devotion, lest they be tempted to break such
their Vows. This is the right and best use we can make of this Testimony. To
the ninth Scripture, viz. 1 Cor. 7.34. I say, that it does not condemn
Marriage, ^^ uncleanness or unholiness; but it imports and implies, that single
persons, taken off from the care and solicitude about the world, may more
commodiously serve God; and having the gift of Continency, they may purely
serve God with body and soul, not being overcome with any temptation to
Fornication or Uncleanness: Not but that he or she that is married, may and
ought to be, and oft-times are pure, chaste and holy both in body and soul.
Marriage is honorable amongst all, and the bed undefiled; and the married as
well as unmarried, may keep their vessel in Sanctification and honor, 1 Thessalonians.
4.4. To that about Carefulness, etc. I say, That if God call his servants to a
married condition, he can and will, if sought unto, give Grace to overcome
those lets, and bear these persecutions they meet withal, so, as they may turn
to helps and furtherances in the Kingdom of God, and to a richer Crown of Glory
in the same, than the Virgins come unto; which because they never wrestled with
such mighty temptations, cannot wear the like Crown of Victory that they do, v.
T. C. in loc.

The last place of Scripture that is alleged, is Rev. 14.4. These are they
which are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins; these are they which
follow the Lamb, whithersoever he goes; these were redeemed from amongst men,
being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. By Virgins, we are to
understand all those pure Christians, who had kept themselves pure from the
Gnostics Corruptions and Uncleanness, or from Idolatry, which is Spiritual
Fornication; and have loyally adhered to Christ, the only Bridegroom of the
Church, 2 Cor. 11.2. By those that are said not to be defiled with women, we
must not understand those that are not married, as if they that were in that
state were defiled with women; the Scripture reaches the contrary, Heb. 13.4.
The Marriage Bed, is the bed undefiled; and Christ is followed wheresoever he
goes, not only by the blessed Saints that have led a single life, and were not
married; but also by married persons, as Patriarchs, Apostles, Martyrs, and
innumerable others, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. It Is observed, that there is nothing said of
these Virgins, which agrees not to all the faithful. 1. They have all the name
of the Lamb, his Father, and written in their foreheads; and all God's servants
are sealed in their foreheads, Rev. 7.3. 2. All God's servants are to sing the
new Song, Rev. 5.9, 10. all are redeemed from the earth, by the blood of the
Lamb, chap. 5.9. The believing Jews, they are all a kind of first fruits unto
God, James 1.18. Lastly, The Jesuits at Rhemes confess, that these are the
same number of the Elect that were sealed, chap. 7. where in the Margent they
note, That by the number there spoken of, are understood all the Elect, both of
the Jews, and of the Gentiles, vid. T. C. in loc.

These Virgins then are those, that would not be polluted or defiled with the
Idolatry, or Spiritual Fornication of the Whore of Babylon, mentioned in Verse
8. of the 14 Chapter of the Revelations. Whatever Papists or old Heretics say
against the lawful Conjugal society of man and wife, as if it were a work of
the flesh; the holy Apostle Paul does not rank or condemn it for a work of the
flesh, in that black Catalogue of the works of the flesh, on Record, Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. But on the other side it is observable, that those who decry Marriage,
without a just cause, and cry up single life more than they have cause, as the
Papists do, they are verily guilty of Idolatry, which is Spiritual Adultery or
Fornication; witness their worship of the Cross with Religious worship; their
worship of Images, of Saints, and particularly of the B. Virgin; their worship
of Angels, with Invocation, with Adoration. They tell us a story, that at the
Synod held at Winchester, when there was a difference 'twixt the married Clergy
and the Monks, and Archbishop Dunstan had a mind to introduce the Monks, The
Cross spoke humano more, with man's voice, against the married Priests. This was
in the days of King Edgar, who began his Reign, 959. It seems then that there
were married Priests in England in those days.

If it be Objected, That many Ancient Councils have ordained Celibacy for
Priests, as the first Elibertine Council, an. 310. or 311. Can. 33. The second
Council of Cartharge, about the year 396. Can. 2.

Concilium Agathense, Can. 9. about the year, 506.

The third Council of Orleans, Can. 1. about the year 537. The fourth Council
of Orleans, an. 547. Can. 17. etc.

My Answer is, That we have the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
for the lawfulness of Priests or Presbyters marriage, the Canons of the
Apostles, Can. 5. and the General Council of Nice, rejecting the Proposal about
prohibiting of it; as also the sixth General Council of Constantinople, etc. in
the year, 692. and the Council of Toledo, an. 400. chap. 4. and 7. which
testifies that the Clergy had wives. I might also have alleged Concilium
Gangrense, cap. 4. in or about the year, 324. which Anathematiseth those who
held it unlawful to receive the blessed Sacrament at the hands of a married
Priest; and many Councils which forbid Priests second Marriage, or to marry a
widow, etc. All which supposed it lawful for him to marry. Whatever the Canons
decreed, certain it is, that the Greek Church unto this day, allow of a married
Clergy; and that diverse Nations and Countries, for a long time in the West, did
not admit of this necessary Celibacy, but tolerated their Clergy to be married.
In England they had their wives, for above a thousand years, almost twelve
hundred years after Christ. So in Ireland, till the days of Henry the second of
England, who began his Reign, 1155.

Pope Pius II. who sat about the year, 1458. was a great man in the Council of
Basil, his saying was, That Marriage was better for the Clergy than single
life, and turned out diverse cloystered Nuns to take their liberty.

De facto many Priests were married of old. So Novatus a Priest, permitted by
Cyprian to live with his wife. Tertullian was married, as appears by his Book
written to his wife.

Gratian tells of the Sons of Presbyters and Bishops, that were promoted to the
Papal Dignity, Did. 56. So was Bonifacius the Pope, the Son of Jucundus the
Presbyter; Foelix the Pope, the Son of Foelix the Presbyter; Agapetus the Pope,
Son of Gordianus the Presbyter; Theodorus the Pope, Son of Theodorus the
Bishop; and many more, he says, there were; and adds, we are not to
understand them as born out of lawful Marriages, which were lawful to Priests,
before the Prohibition, ibid. Chrysostom agrees with Athanasius, and Clemens
Alexandrinus, in 1 Timothy 3. and says, That Marriage is in so high a degree
honorable, that men with it may ascend into the Episcopal Chairs, and yet live
with their wives. For though it be a hard thing, yet it is possible so to
perform the duties of Marriage, as not to be wanting in the performance of the
duties of a Bishop.

Sozomen says of Spiridion, that though he had a Wife and Children, yet he was
not therefore any whit the more negligent in performing the duties of his
Calling; and of Gregory Nyssen it is reported, that though he was married, he
was no way inferior to his worthy Brother, that lived single: And howsoever in
Thessaly; Thessalonica, Mandonia, they did not admit into the Ministry any
single persons, yet all the Bishops of the East besides, were then left unto
their own liberty; and though some went about to take away their liberty in
some places, yet the worthiest men the Church had, stood in defense of it. So
Synesius, when they of Ptolemais would needs have him to be their Bishop (which
thing he little desired) he made them acquainted with his present condition,
and resolved purpose for the time to come: God (says he) the Law, and the
sacred hand of Theophilus, have given to me a wife, I therefore tell all men
aforehand, and testify unto all, that I will neither suffer my self to be
altogether estranged and separated from her, neither will I live with her
secretly as an Adulterer; for the one of these is no way pious and godly, and
the other no way lawful: But I will desire and pray unto God, that exceeding
many and most good and happy Children may be born unto me: Neither will I have
him that is chief in ordaining of me, to be ignorant hereof. Synesius ad
fratrem Ep. 105. (...), etc. This liberty the Council in Trullo impeached in
respect of Bishops, but in respect of Presbyters, it continues in all the East
Churches of the world unto this day, Greek, Armenian and Ethiopian; warranted
unto them by the Canons of the Apostles judgment of Bishops, Canons of
councils, etc. Dr. Field of the Chapter l. 5. p. 708. Some attempts were made in
the East, by Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia; in Armenia and in the West by
Siricius, and Innocent the first his Successor; and some Canons were made in
the second, or rather last Council of Carthage to the contrary. Yet by degrees
these Canons and Severities against the married Clergy lay dormant, being found
a burden too heavy for the Church to bear. We find, that in the time that
Hildebrand climbed up into the Papal Chair, namely, anno 1075. and long before,
that Priests had wives publicly: This was he, that was neither chosen by
Emperor or Clergy, but intruded himself; this was he, that threw the Sacrament
into the fire; this was he, that forced the Emperor, whom he had
Excommunicated, to come with his Empress and Son bare footed, in the cold of
Winter, to his Castle at Canusium, and there to wait three days fasting, until
he might have audience; which at length was obtained by the mediation of Madam
Matilda the Popes Minion, that left her husband to live with the Pope, vid.
Plat. this was he, that Sainted his Predecessor Liberius the Arrian; and this
was he, that restrained and forbad Priests Marriage; but by so doing, stirred
up the whole Nation of Clergymen against him, crying out, that he was an
Heretic, and a man damnably erring in his judgment, etc. And it is so far
from being true, that Bellarmine says, That the Priests beginning to marry in
Gregory's days, was the cause of the great contempt of the Sacrament, and of
the Confusions and Prophanations of Sacred things in those days, that it was
clear contrary; as Nauclerus testifies, de Clericis, lib. 1. cap. 19. that it
was an old and confirmed custom, that was not easily to be altered; and the
Priests rather in Gregory's time ceased, than began to marry, by reason of the
attempts and endeavors of Gregory to restrain them from marriage; and the
causes of the Confusions of those times, were occasioned rather by the
forbidding the Priests to marry, than by their beginning then to marry. And now
since the Church of Rome has forced this single life on Clergy men, very many
Learned men of later times, have desired the Law of single life may be taken
away.

Durandus in his Book de Modo celebrandi Concilii, proves by many Reasons,
that it were fit that the liberty of Marriages were again restored to Priests,
in a General Council. Aeneas Sylvius, after Pope Pius the second, was of this
mind, So was Polydor Virgil and Erasmus; the first of these in Book 5. chap. 4.
de Invent. rerum, says thus, I dare confidently say, that it has been so far
from being true, that this enforced chastity has excelled that which is in
Marriage: That no sinful crime has brought greater disgrace to the Order of
the Ministry, more evil to Religion, or made a greater and deeper impression of
sorrow in all good men, than the stain of the impure lusts of Priests. Erasmus
in Declam. de laudibus Matrimonii, affirms, that in his conceit, he should not
ill deserve, nor take the worst course, for the furthering of humane affairs,
and the right informing of the manners of men, which should procure liberty of
Marriage (if it might be) both for Priests and Monks: Read also his Annotations
on the first Epistle to Timothy, chap. 3.1. And Sigismund the Emperor, a little
before the Council of Basil, declared and published, That forasmuch as more
evil comes by the forbidding of Marriage than good, it were better and more
safe to permit Clergy men to live in the state of Marriage, according to the
custom of the Oriental Churches, than to forbid them so to live.

Antiochus aforementioned, a Figure of Antichrist, Dan. 11.37. did not regard
women, or the desire of women, or of wiving; and the Antichrist forbids to
marry, and commands to abstain from meats. The ancient Romans liked and
encouraged Marriage. Thus the Figure and Forerunner of Antichrist, he himself
and his followers, decry wiving, and cry up single life; and by Friars and
Monks, the great Adorers of single life, and Observers of distinctions of
meats, the Doctrine of Image Worship was brought and spread, and propagated in
the Church; as is proved by Mr. Mede in his Apostasy of the latter times.

Some of these Hermites, Anchorites, or Monks and Coenobites, might be honest
and good persons, abating them their error about overmagnifying the single
life; yet the generality of them he condemns as hypocrites: For the lawfulness
of Marriage of persons in holy Orders, we have the Old and New Testament, and
the practice of the Church, and the Doctrine of the Church at the Council of
Nice; and after, till the time of Siricius, about the year, 385. Afterward we
have the Marriage of these allowed by all those Councils which forbid such
persons to marry widows, such as Concilium Epaunen. Canon 2. Aurelianum the
first Council, Can. 15. Concilium Toletanum 1.and chapter 1. the 3. And we find the
Council of Carthage made diverse Canons, about the Government of the Sons and
Daughters of Bishops and Clergymen, such as the 11. That they should not make
or go to the Spectacula Secularia, c. 12. That their Sons and Daughters should
not marry to Heathens, Heretics or Schismatics, c. 14. That they suffer not
their Sons to go free out of their power and Government, till they are assured
of their manners, and of such age, ut possint ad eos propria pertinere peccata.
This Council was held, says Coriolanus, 397. The first Council of Toledo, an.
400. c. 1. Ordains de Presbyteris and Deaclnis, si post ordinationem filios
genuerint, ad altiorem gradum non ascendant. Yet they might continue in their
station, though not rise higher in the Church.

In the year, 506. Consilium Agathense, in the time of Pope Symmachus, cap. 1.
although Bigamists, and those that had married widows, being Presbyters or
Deacons, might not consecrate or minister; yet they might retain the name of
Presbyters and Deacons. Hence it is to be supposed, that Presbyters and
Deacons, who were not Bigamists, nor had married widows, might consecrate and
minister, notwithstanding their marriage.

If it be Objected, That there were endeavors to make the Clergy content
themselves without wives. I say, yet in many places it would not prevail; not
in England, till above Eleven hundred years after Christ; not in Ireland, till
the days of Henry the Second of England, who subdued Ireland. I read, that
Celsus the great Apostle of Armagh, and High Primate of Ireland, had both a
wife and children, in the time of his Archbishopry, according to the usage of
the Country, vid. Bernard in vita Malachiae. And we are told, that Pope
Adrian, and Pope Alexander, did stir up Henry the Second to subdue Ireland,
because the people withstood their proceedings against the Marriage of Bishops
and Priests.

It is certain de facto, that many Eminent Persons, in holy Orders, were
actually married: So Gregory Nazianzen's Father was a Bishop, and begat him
after he was Presbyter, if not after he was advanced to the Bishopric.

Gregory the Great, was Grandchild to Foelix Pope of Rome, who was Pope, 590.
and he is said to have cancelled his Decree against Priests Marriages, upon the
finding of 600 Infants skulls in a fish pond. Pope Adrian II. was Son to Bishop
Tallerus, had a Daughter by his Wife Stephania, both which were killed after he
was Pope, which was, an. 863.

Christopher Patriarch of Jerusalem, about the year, 900. had children, viz.
two Sons, and two Daughters.

In Armenia, the Secular Priests are all enjoined to marry, else they must not
be admitted to the Priesthood, Neque permittitur aliquis Sacerdotium assumere
qui uxorem non duxit. Berchard. p. 95. The Prebendaries of Cathedrals, out of
which number they choose their Bishop, are not allowed to marry. In Biscay,
they allow not any Priest to live in their Villages, except ^he bring his
Concubine with him, conceiving it impossible for them to keep their wives unto
themseves, if the Curate has not a woman of his own. D. H. G. p. 256. At the
Council of Trent, the Emperor and Duke of Parma, made instance to the Pope, and
said it would be of great moment, to grant that Priests that are separated
because they are married, may be reconciled, and retain their wives, and that
hereafter, where there is not a sufficient number of Priests married, men of
good life and fame may be admitted to the Priesthood. Vid. History of the
Council of Trent, p. 813. And we find in the History of that Council, that the
more common Opinion was, the Marriage of Priests might be dispensed withal.
It Is true, that this was thought by some dangerous, because that married
Priests would turn their affections and love to their wives and children, and
by consequence to their house and Country; so that the strict dependence which
the Clergy has on the Apostolic See, would cease; and to grant Marriage to
Priests, would destroy the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, and make the Pope to be
Bishop of Rome only. Council of Trent, p. 680. Yea, the famous saying of Pope
Pius II. was then in the mouth of many, That Priests were by the Occidental
Church forbid to marry, for good reason; but there was stronger reason to
restore Marriage to them again. The two great Reasons urged at the Council
were, Scandal given by incontinent Priests; and want of continent persons fit
to exercise the Ministry, Hist. of C. Trent, p. 679, and 806. It was in the
same Council alleged, that the Constitution of the Church, forbidding to marry
might be taken away by the Pope; or, in case the Constitution remain still, the
Pope may dispense with it: They alleged the examples of those who have been
dispensed with; and the use of Antiquity, that if a Priest did marry, the
Marriage was good, but the man was separated from the Ministry, C. T. p. 679.
And whereas, as some thought; that persons who were bound to Continency by
solemn Vow, could not be dispensed withal by the Pope; others maintained, that
the Pope might dispense with these also, and marvelled at those, who granting
the dispensation of simple Vows, did deny that of Solemn, as if it were not
most clear, that every Solemnization is de Jure positivo. They brought places
out of S. Austin, by which it does manifestly appear, that in his time, some
Monks did marry; and howsoever it was thought, they offended in it, yet the
Marriage was lawful; and St. Austine reprehendeth those who did separate them.
And as for Marriage of Priests, Innocent II. was the first, that ordained there
should be a nullity in the Marriage. This Pope sat in the Sea, 1130. Innocent
III. who bore a heavy hand over our King John, and Interdicted the Kingdom for
six years together, was the terrible man against Priests Marriages: Whereupon
we have these Verses by an Oxford man.

Prisciana Regula penitus cassatur,
Sacerdos per hic and haec olim declinatur
Nunc per hic solum articulatur
Cum per nostrum praesulem hec amo veatur.
[Prid. Intro. to Histri. 123.] Old Priscians Rule henceforth must hold no more,
'Twas hic and haec Sacerdos heretofore:
But now poor Hic must lie alone perforce,
For his dear Haec our Prelate does divorce.
This Pope Innocent, was Pope first, an. 1198. If we may credit History, diverse
Popes have had their Concubines. Sixtus IV. provided for his Concubine Tiresia
shoes covered with Pearl; builded Stews at Rome, which brought him 2000
Ducats yearly in-come; he granted the Cardinal S. Lucia the use of unnatural
lusts for three months in the year, June, July and August. Innocent the eight a
Genoway, he had diverse base children, Vid. B. Pride. Hist.
and gave a great dowry to his Daughter Theodorina. It Is said of him, Octo
Nocens pueros genuit totidemque puellas
Hunc merito poteris dicere Roma Patrem.
Eight Lads, and twice four Girls Nocens got,
And might not Rome him Father term? why not?


Pope Alexander the sixth heaped all upon his Bastards, and carnally used his
own Daughter Lucretia.

Hence those Verses:

Hic jacet in Tumulo Lucretia nomine sed re Thais, Alexandri, filia, sponsa,
nurus. Lucrece by name here li^s, but Thais in life,
Pope Alexander's Child, Spouse, and sons wife.
This Pope entered on the Popedom, an. 1492. Paul the third prostituted his
Sister Julia Fornesia to Alexander the Sixth, that he might be made Cardinal,
committed incest with his own Daughter Constantia, and poisoned her husband
Bosius Sforsia, to enjoy her the more freely; he became Pope, 1534. B. Pride.
Hist. p. 145.

Yet I shall grant, 1. That single life is in some respects to be preferred, as
most free ordinarily from trouble and care, and in times of persecution, and to
unfixed persons, as to their habitations, affording better opportunity to serve
God, or to suffer for him, and fewer and lesser temptations to deny him. 2. I
grant, that those who have made a vow of Celibacy, before or at their entrance
into the Ministry, or on some other occasion, if they have they have the gift
of Continency, are bound to keep it. 3. That it is possible some Votaries of
both Sexes, may be free from the gross vices and crimes charged on most of our
Votaries, in the days of K. H. 8. at the dissolution of Abbeys. 4. That in
Colleges, for training up youth in Learning, it is expedient, that those that
are Tutors and Readers to youth, be, during such their employment, single. 5.
That Presbyters or Priests, at times of extraordinary Humiliation, and at times
of more solemn Celebration of the Lord's Supper, shall do well to observe the
old Canons, that forbid the society of their Wives for a time.

But then I assert and avow with the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 13.4. 1. That
Marriage is honorable among all men, and therefore among persons in holy
Orders, and the bed undefiled: And therefore 2. That the society of a
Clergyman with his wife, whether he was married to her before his Ordination,
or after, is lawful; no Adultery, no Uncleanness. 3. That for a person at his
Ordination to make an absolute vow of single life for all his days, is a rash
and unlawful Vow. 4. That if a man have made such a Vow, and find he have not,
nor cannot obtain the gift of Continency, in that case he ought to marry. 5.
That the Marriage of Luther with Katherine Bora, on supposition they could not
contain, was lawful. 6. That the Church of Rome sins grievously, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the Disciples of Christ, that officiate in holy things, which
neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear. 7. That the Church of Rome may,
and ought to reverse and repeal her Laws, Canons or Constitutions, enjoining
Celibacy on the Clergy; so contrary to Scripture, the Apostles Canons, the
Council of Nice, and the continued practice of the greatest part of the
Christian Church to this day. 8. That that Church of Rome's admitting young
Youths and Virgins to make and engage in absolute solemn Vows, that they will
live all their days in Celibacy, is a great snare, a grievous sin, and contrary
to the Apostles advice concerning young widows, 2 Timothy 5.14. is opposite to the
prime blessing, Crescite and multiplicamini, Increase and multiply; is a great
scandal to Religion, is a damage to Kingdoms and States, where such are
educated idle and useless to the Public; is a weakening to their Country, a
destruction of their Race and Family, an occasion of grievous and horrid lusts
and wickednesses. 9. That Marriage, notwithstanding it is lawful to all Ranks,
Orders and Degrees of men, and consequently to men in holy Orders, yet it is no
Sacrament. 10. That the Church of Rome, by advancing Matrimony to be a
Sacrament, lays claim to the Administration of it, and to the judging and
deciding Matrimonial causes, and so brings store of grist to her Mill. And by
forbidding Marriage to Priests, does enrich the Church with that which should
otherwise be expended on wives and children, and keeps the Clergy in a
dependence on Rome, having no such near relation as wives and children to
withdraw their affections from it. 11. That to assert that for a man in holy
Orders (suppose he have made a Vow of Celibacy) to marry, and to accompany with
his wife, is worse than Fornication, yea, than Adultery, is an erroneous and
dangerous Position; contrary to the holy Scriptures, to sound Reason, to the
Ancient Councils and Fathers; vid. Austine de Bono viduitatis: And if this Book
be questioned, whether it be his or not, see his Epistle to one Bonifacius, who
had vowed a Monastical, retired and single life, and yet afterward did marry;
his words are these, Thy wife hinders me that I cannot exhort thee to this
kind of life, without whose consent it is not lawful for thee to contain, etc.
Of this opinion also was Jerome, the great Patron of Virginity, Ep. 47. de
Suspecto contubernio vitando. Of the same judgment was Epiphanius, Haeres. 61.
who indeed makes it (...), i. e. a thing evil, and such as God will judge and
punish, to forget, neglect, and not perform a Vow made to God; but not (...),
i. e. a thing which casts men into the condemnation of Hell fire, and
plungeth them in everlasting destruction, as to live in Adultery. He thinks it
better for a man (though he have committed a fault in breaking his Vow, which
he may repent of, and be forgiven) to marry, than by living in continual
Adultery, to add one sin to another, and to plunge himself in endless
destruction. And it is an absurd and irrational thing for any man to say, that
it is better to burn, than to marry, because either of his Vow, or of the
Command of the Church; for neither a Vow of our own, nor any Command of the
Church, can make void the Law of God: if he cannot contain, let him marry, and
to avoid Fornication, let every man have his own wife. Our Savior says
nothing to the contrary, when he says, he that can receive it, let him receive
it. We speak only of those who cannot receive it, who cannot contain; and in
such case, we must not make void the Laws of God against Adultery and
Fornication, in seeking to confirm or observe the Laws and Constitutions of the
Church. In this case, Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye. I
shall not here go about to show, that the Answers of Bellarmine and others, to
the Authorities that are brought on our side, are but fig leaves to cover the
nakedness of their cause, and easily blown away; but I shall direct my Reader
to Bp. Jewel his Defense of his Apology, Dr. Field of the Church, B. 5. chapter 57.
to Mr. Cartwright, and Dr. Fulk's Answer to the Rhemist's Testam. on Matthew. 8.
and on 1 Timothy 3.8. to Calixtus de Conjugio Clericorum, to Bishop Hall's Honor
of the married Clergy. Nor shall I go about to answer the particular sayings of
some Fathers to the disparagement of Marriage. It suffices, that the Church of
England has the holy Scripture, and the Ancient Church on her side; the
desires of many Learned, Worthy men that have been in the Church of Rome; the
practice of the greatest number of Christian Churches in the world at this day;
so far as to justify the lawfulness of married men, to be admitted to holy
Orders, and to officiate in and about holy things, notwithstanding their having
wives; and that the blessing of God is, and has been upon our married Clergy,
no other Nation excelling them in Learning, Piety, or the gift of Preaching;
that saying still holding good, notwithstanding their Marriage, Stupor mundi
Clerus Britannicus. If it be objected, That this Marriage does spoil our
Charity and Hospitality, and proves a temptation to Covetousness. I answer,
That Solomon, Eccles. 4.7, 8. says, There is a vanity and dissatisfaction, and
unprofitableness in heaping up riches, even by single persons. And it is
observed by a sober and learned Casuist of our own [Mr. Capel] That single
persons, and those that have but few children, oft-times prove more covetous,
than those that are married, and have many children; alleging, that the latter
are by daily and frequent experiences and layings out, habituated to part with
money, and so a penny comes not (as from some others, like a drop of blood from
their hearts. I say further, that great things have been done by the married
Clergy, and other married persons in our days, if it were necessary, we might
instance in particulars. It has been said, That Pater Noster built Churches,
and Our Father pulled them down; but it has been proved and published to the
world, that as many and great Acts of Piety and Charity have been done in
England since the Reformation of Religion, as in the like number of years in
times of Popery. And whatever is or may be said or pretended to the contrary,
as if the allowing of the marriage of the Clergy was an impoverishment of the
Church and Country, and a damage to the Kingdom; I dare say, they that would
remove the married Clergy, to bring in the Monks, could never be able to
recompense the Churches, their Countries, and the Kings and Kingdoms damage. Who
can more earnestly pray for, and endeavor the weal of their own King and
Country, than those who have such great bonds and interests to desire and
endeavor it? And who is like to be most at home amongst his own people, if not
he that has amongst them continually a wife, the desire of his eyes, and
children, which he loves as his own eyes?

FINIS.

