SOME CONSIDERATIONS OF Present Use: Wherein is shown That the Strong ought to
Bear with the Weak, and the Weak not Clamor against or Censure the Strong: IN
WHICH The true Notion of the Strong and Weak is Stated.

Delivered in a Farewell-Sermon at St. George Buttolph-Lane, London.

By Benjamin Hoffman, Master of Arts, of Baliol College, Oxford, and late
Lecturer there.

Romans 15.1. We therefore that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak.

Romans 16.17, 18. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them: For
they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

LONDON, Printed for F. Gardener at the White-horse in Ludgatestreet, 1683.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE DANIEL EARL OF NOTTINGHAM, BARON of DAVENTRY, And one
of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
HOW great a Stranger soever I may be to Your Lordship, I am not much at a loss
for an Apology for the Boldness of devoting this mean Present to Your
Honorable Name. The inexpressible Favors I had the Honor to receive from
Your Noble Father, have justly entitled Your Lordship to the best of my
Performances: 'Twas His generous Charity made me what I am; and what the
Product of that may be, is and shall be a due Tribute to Your Lordship. His
Virtues Your Lordship inherits; and nothing can more fully complete the utmost
Aim of my Ambition, than an Opportunity of showing my self Grateful to Your
Lordships Father's Immortal Memory, and of manifesting my self (in what
Circumstance soever)

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient Servant, B. Hoffman.

To the Parishioners of St. George Buttolph-Lane, and St. Buttolph's
Billingsgate.
Gentlemen,
IT is not unknown to most Persons that have known me, what Relation for
several years last past I have stood in to you, and since we lived so friendly
and kindly together for so long a time, I was resolved to do all in me lay, to
part as fairly at the last, and to leave some certain Testimony of my Respect
behind me: And since it is at this time the Endeavor of diverse Learned Men in
the Church, to Sweeten and Reconcile Men's Minds to the Doctrine and Discipline
of the Church of England, that so the Civil Power may not surprise them,
without due warning, and weighty Reasons given, why they ought now especially
to endeavor an Union: Since several others are upon this Charitable, and
Seasonable Design, I thought my Words might come among you with more Esteem and
Reception than a mere Stranger's: And though I every way fall short of the
worth of those other Persons, that have bended their Purposes this way, yet
when I consider the Kindnesses I have received from most of you, in all other
Cases, I cannot in the least imagine I shall be disappointed in my
Expectations, now, in this last piece of Respect I am showing to you; and if it
does (in the perusal) any Person Service, I shall heartily thank God, and
really Rejoice in my Brothers return.

I am Your Faithful Servant, Benjamin Hoffman.

Romans XV. 5, 6, 7. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be
like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus,

That you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ:

Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the glory of
God.


BEfore I proceed to the distinct speaking to the Words of my Text, it is
necessary that I first lead you to the Consideration of the Apostle's Method
and Design in two or three of the foregoing Chapters.

Now the sum of that which the Apostle is arguing, is laid down in the 13th
Chapter of this Epistle: In the whole he is managing the Jewish and the
Christian Professors, and such as were partly of one, and partly of the other
Persuasion, with all the caution and wariness that can be possibly, that he may
give none offense to either: And in order to this he lays down Rules that ought
to be universally received by Men of all Pretensions. And these he begins with
in the 13th Chapter and first Verse, Let every soul, says he, be subject to
the higher powers, for there is no power but of God; therefore let your lesser
Disputes be of what nature they will, if you believe a God, you must be
Obedient, for the powers that be are ordained of God; as if he had said,
Nothing in Christianity ought to be pretended, or made use of, to give any man
Immunity from Obedience; for this from all Subjects, of what Quality soever, is
due to those to whom Allegiance belongs. And this Doctrine he pressed in
opposition to some that St. Peter and St. Jude reprehended, viz. Such as
despise Government, and are self-willed and presumptuous, and that are not
afraid to speak evil of Dignities, 2 Pet. 2.10. And this Obedience he presses
v. 5. that it must be from the heart: It Is possible a cunning Rebel, or
prosperous Oftender, may avoid Wrath and Punishment, and therefore his
Obedience must not be for fear of Wrath only, i. e. not only so far as will
keep him from a Fine, a Prison, or a Gallows; but it must be from his
Conscience, i. e. in Obedience to the Constitution of God, whose Officer he is:
For every Supreme Magistrate, Legally placed in any Kingdom, has, and must be
thought to have, Commission from God, though he be an Heathen.

And after the Apostle had managed this Argument thoroughly, how Christians
should carry themselves toward their Governors, he then descends to tell us
how they should carry themselves one toward another; and for this he lays down
Love and Charity, and Bearing one with another, as the Foundation and
Groundwork of all good Christian Conversation; and here at the time of writing
this Epistle he found great Divisions and Dissentions already crept into the
Church of Jewish Believers, not only against the Gentiles, but likewise among
themselves, some Converts clearly discerning that they had a freedom from the
Judaical Yoke, and others conceiving themselves still to be under that
Dispensation; and hence came the Quarrel, viz. That those that were zealous for
the Mosaical Law, condemned and were angry at all others, as Breakers of God's
Law, that did not observe them as they did; and on the other hand, they that
were instructed in the Knowledge of their Christian Liberty, were resolved to
maintain that Liberty which was purchased by Christ, and were apt to despise
and contemn those that still continued scrupulous in the abolisht Judaical
Rites, and so between the one and the other, the Christian Communion was likely
to be broken, and an inveterate Separation to be made among them; and to both
of these St. Paul applies himself, Those of you that do not think your selves
bound to observe those Laws, you that understand better, do not you reject the
scrupulous or erroneous Judaizer, but receive him to your Communion; Him that
is weak in the Faith receive ye, but yet so receive him, as that he may not
thereby be encouraged to take too much upon him; receive him, but not to
doubtful disputations; as if he had said, If he be weak and erroneous in
himself, let him not be censorious and troublesome to others; do not you
despise and reject him, neither persuade I that he should molest you; so that
this Chapter was writ, and this Advice here given, that the strong might be
gentle and courteous toward the weak, and not the weak from hence be clamorous
against the strong, as some (especially in these days) make this and such like
advice in Holy Writ, to be as it were a Shelter and a Sanctuary for them to do
and say what they please, under the pretense of Weakness, and that prudent and
legal Restraints must not be talked of, without grieving or judging our Brother.
But there is a great deal of difference between mildly and wisely endeavoring
to reduce men to Catholic Communion, and between offering any Offense, or
Despising them, as I shall show farther anon; and St. Paul plainly does it in
the following Chapter; for if, says he, after so much Charity and Tenderness
and Good Will that the strong bear toward the weak, they do not hearken, then
the Offense lies on their side, and at their doors and Consciences, Romans 16.17,
18. Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses,
and if after all the friendly Offers you make to Communion, they will not
comply, avoid them, for they which are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own belly and interest, and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple. And thus for the introducing my ensuing Discourse, I
have showed you the Design of the Apostle; which is as I showed you,

1. To lay down hearty Obedience to Magistrates, as the indispensible Duty of
all Christians, and Men that own a God.

2. To have Christians friendly toward each other, the strong not to Despise
or Scorn the weak, and the weak not to Clamor at and Censure the strong; that
the strong should more value his Brother's Soul, than a needless humouring and
pleasing himself, chapter 15. v. 1. and that the weak should not be Loud and
Positive in Disputations that he does not understand: And that all in their
several places may do this, he proposes both the Fountain and Example of all
Heavenly and Christian Graces, Now the God of patience and consolation grant
you to be like minded one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, wherefore
receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the glory of God.

Upon these Words I shall briefly and plainly discourse upon these following
things.

1. Give a short and easy Explication of the Words of the Text.

2. In some few Words touch upon the Duty of Obedience to Magistrates.

3. I shall principally endeavor to show you how we ought to carry our selves
toward each other with reference to Communion, the Strong to the Weak, and the
Weak to the Strong; which may serve as a Method or Incitement to us to be
like-minded one toward another, that we may with one mind and one mouth
glorisie God, and receive one another as Christ also received us, to the glory
of God.

4. Conclude with some Practical Reflections upon the Whole.

As for the Text, the Apostle is here wishing a very great Blessing upon the
Infant Christian-Church; and he founds the Rise of all Blessings in God: And so
the meaning of the Words is this; Now (says he) I have laid down as amply and
as plainly as I can the Duty of Christians one toward another, I beseech God,
who is the Fountain of Patience and Consolation, the God of Patience and
Consolation, i. e. the God from whom all Patience and Consolation comes, make
you to be like minded one toward another, i. e. cause that you may all think
and own the very self-same thing, lest through diversity of Opinions, there
arise Discords, Hatreds, Separations, Offenses, and Scandals, to the great
damage of the Church and Glory of God: Or if there be some little difference in
Opinion among you, don't separate, and break asunder, and rend the Communion of
the Church of Christ; yet still be like minded one toward another, i. e. come
with equal degrees of Charity and Love one toward another, and hope the best
one of another: for that the sense no doubt is, that by like-mindedness is
meant agreeing in the same Truths, (...), to think the very same thing. So that
the plain meaning no doubt is this; God grant, says the Apostle, that your
Heats and Differences being laid aside, whether about the Observation of Meats,
or Days, or the like, that you may think and agree mutually in the same thing,
and that according to Christ Jesus: This is added, to restrain them from
agreeing in any false or erroneous Opinions; but wishes their sense of Religion
to be agreeable to Christ, the Author of all Truth.

That you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God: That when you come to
pray to, or praise God, you may not only do it in the same Form and sound of
Words, but also with all your Minds full of mutual Affection one toward
another, without any surly demeanor, contempt, hatred, or censuring of each
other, that you may do it so unanimously, as if there were but one Mind and one
Mouth among you. He would have the Weak and the Strong lay aside their
Differences, and join in the Fundamentals, to glorisie God together.

Wherefore, says he, receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to
the glory of God: i. e. Look upon each other as Brethren; in all humility of
kindness and condescension, embrace and succor one another: In stead of
despising and driving Men from your Communion, help up them that are fallen,
let one endeavor to bring the other to himself, the Strong reduce the Weak,
the Learned the Ignorant, and the believing Gentile, the prejudiced Jew: and
let him cherish, and instruct, and be tender of him, with a Brotherly Care and
Affection.

Even as Christ also received us, to the glory of God. Christ did much more
than all this for us, that he advises us to do one for another. Christ did not
disdain us, that are more unworthy of his Presence, than we are of each others.
So our Savior says by St. John, chapter 17. v. 24. Father, I will that those whom
thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which
thou have given me. So that Christ received us into the Fellowship and
Partnership of the Glory of God, and therefore we ought to receive one another.

So that the whole meaning of the Text is, The Apostle beseeches God to grant
them the same Sentiments and Understanding of the true Religion of Christ; or
if they have not just the very same Sentiments of things in every Particular,
(as it may be few Men have) yet that they would not rend and tear Christ's
Church, but would lay aside their dislikes of each others private Opinion, and
with one Heart and one Mouth join together in Public Duties and Ordinances,
and receive one another in the visible Communion of the Christian Church: that
the Weak should not as Malcontents go to separate themselves, and throw away
their Souls; nor the Strong (as having a clearer Understanding) disdain to join
with the Weak; but that we should receive one another, to the helping each
other forward in Grace, as Christ also offers to receive us to the Eternal
Being with him in Glory. And now having spoke distinctly to the Words of Text,
I shall pass to the second thing, which I shall insist on very briefly. And
that is,

2. To consider that great Duty of Obedience to Magistrates. And this I should
not have mentioned now, but only that St. Paul lays it down as the first step
to Peace and Order in the Christian Church; and likewise because the Dispute of
Days and Meats, etc. is out of doors between us and our Brethren the
Dissenters, and because they seem as much blunder'd and puzzled about the extent
of Obedience to our Laws, as the Jews were of theirs; which is the reason why I
touch upon this Duty as I go. And indeed their being so much mistaken in the
extent of Christian Obedience, is that (I fear) which makes them take so little
notice of the Laws of a Reformed Christian Prince: for if the Power of a
Heathen Prince be from God, and that he that resists him, shall receive
damnation to himself; much more, when one (as I may say) after God's own heart
is in the Throne, when he countenances that same Religion which we pretend to
love at our very Hearts, and which our Forefathers sealed with their Blood.

These Considerations (methinks) might make us run Volunteers in Obedience to
him, and cause us to stifle all the little Tricks and Humors of our own, when
God and the King go thus together in our Israel. Nay, besides all this, our
Laws are not the Breath of one single Person only, but proceed from the mature
Deliberation of Men of our own choosing, to represent our Grievances, and take
care that no heavier Burdens be laid on our Bodies, or Minds, than themselves,
as Fellow Subjects, are ready to bear. And yet strange it is, that after all
these wonderful Privileges, we should have some repining at, and others
defying our admirable Form and Methods of Government; that they should allow
none to be Lords over them; and that the Pretense of Christian Liberty, should
fight and set it self against the Laws of God and Man: and this we see by too
sad and daily experience it does. Whereas were our Prince in his Judgment a
Heathen, in his Power furnished to be arbitrarily and uncontrolably Cruel, and
in his Will and Inclinations delighting to crush and grieve his Subjects; yet
to this Power we must be obedient. In short, be the Prince what he will, God
requires a through Obedience one way or other; and therefore the thoughts of a
Gracious, a Merciful, and a Reformed Prince, should make us so proud of, and
pleased with our Governor, as not to thwart him upon Straws and Trifles. No
Master, tho never so mean, but expects Dutifulness from his Servant: No Father,
tho never so poor, but requires Obedience from his Child. And why should a
Prince (who is above us all) suffer himself to be mocked, when no body else
will? Why should he be called a Lawmakers of his Country, if every humourous
fanciful Person may control his Authority when he pleases? This seems a great
Affront to the Supreme Power on Earth, especially a Power so great as to be
ordained of God: Tho I really fear many Christians do not know what they do,
when, to the indulging some Humors of their own, they bid Adieu to all
Authority, and do what in single Persons lies to the dividing Christians, and
confounding Church Order and Discipline. But I hope better of you, my Brethren;
and therefore I shall not insist any more upon this Head, only adding that of
the Apostle, That you must be subject, not only for wrath, but conscience sake,
i. e. You must make Obedience to Governors as sincerely your Desire and
Endeavor, as any other Gospel-duty whatsoever. But I designed only to touch
upon this Head; and therefore shall pass to the next Head; and that is,

3. How Christians should carry themselves toward each other with reference to
Communion, viz. the Strong to the Weak, and the Weak to the Strong, that so we
may be like minded one toward another.

The Strong are those that have an exact Knowledge of Things both Lawful and
Unlawful, and which think nothing that is Lawful to be Unlawful.

The Weak are those that think one or more Things that are Lawful, to be
Unlawful: and their Weakness consists in their doubting and mistaking Judgments
about Things that are Lawful.

The Strong in the Apostles days were those that thoroughly understood what
Liberty they had by Christ from the Jewish Ceremonies.

The Weak in those days were those that thought well of Christianity, and yet
for all that were unwilling quite to throw off the Ceremonial Law, that stood
upon Meats and Days, etc. tho the Gospel acquitted them.

The Strong in our days are those that are heartily obedient to all the Laws of
Magistrates, that are not forbidden in Gods Word; and that are satisfied that a
Prince has Power to enjoin any thing in our Worship, that is not excepted
against in the Gospel.

The Weak in our days are those that either cannot or will not distinguish between
Articles of Faith, and Modes of Worship; that think they are not obliged, nay,
that they ought not to obey their Governors, as to the enjoining Indifferent
Things in their Worship, because they are not commanded in Words at length in
the New Testament.

And now having named to you the Men and the Thing, I shall proceed humbly to
offer some Rules to your Consideration, and so conclude.

And in these I shall apply my self to the Strong and the Weak; and because St.
Paul in this Chapter begins with the Strong, I shall do so too. We therefore
that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, especially if the
Weak are as they were in those days, (and perhaps had some reason to be) in a
great strait which to take; for it was doubtless very hard for Men then,
especially those that were Zealous, to throw off a Religion almost wholly, and
run with immediate satisfaction into another. It was doubtless a great Surprise
to them, that after a Religion had flourished about Four thousand years, and
had been owned by God as the True in all Ages before: I say, 'twould make any
Man at a stand, to see one Person come and tell us of a sudden, That neither
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision availed any thing; that Meats and Days were all
alike; and that the Old allowed and established Law, must give way to a New
Gospel. I question, if any of us had lived in those days, and been bred up in
the strictest Knowledge of the Law, how many of us would instantly have turned
Christians; especially since so many of us now stumble, and are mistaken about
the Gospel, tho the World has been so long inured and accustomed to its
Doctrine: so that there was great reason in those days for the Strong to bear
with the Weak, because the Difficulties of rightly judging and discerning
Things were very strong and masculine, enough to throw down weak Minds But when
Weakness is pretended, to make way for Confusion; when Men will pretend they
are weak at one time, and will take it amiss when you go to instruct them as
such at another; this looks rather like Wilfulness, than the Weakness St. Paul
here means.

But I am very well aware, that there is a very popular and current Observation
in our days, which seems a great Objection against what I have hitherto said;
and that is, That Men can no more be supposed to be alike in Judgment, than
they are in Features. But the Case is not at all the same. Men would, no doubt,
be all exactly Featured alike, if God had designed they should be so, and had
drawn them all as Copies from the same Original: But he has given us all the
very self-same Law and Rule; he has given us the same Faculties to judge with;
and therefore it might justly be expected we should all think the same things.
One Soul has no unlikeness to another, but only from the different Humors
and Sentiments it receives: And if the Rules be all the same to manage our
Souls by, whence comes the Unlikeness? Not from the necessary impressed Features
of the Soul, but from the wrong Apprehension and Management of the Rule. So
that it is no fault not to be alike in outward Features, because God never
designed us all the self-same external Aspect: But it is a Crime not to think
the self-same truth, according to Christ Jesus; because this was the Reason of
Gods giving us one unalterable Rule, that we should with one mind and one heart
glorify him. But I must pass to the several Considerations, some to the
Strong, and some to the Weak, and so conclude.

1. To the Strong, I desire them to consider these following Things, with
reference to the Weak. By the Weak I mean those that are really so, and not
such as use it for an obstinate and ungovernable Pretense.

1. I desire the Strong to consider, That their weak Brethren seem to have
somewhat to say for themselves. When I hear a Man telling me that he has been
educated in such an Opinion, and his Parents before him, nay, and that he does
not owe his Opinion only to the Font, but that he has strove, and prayed, and
read, and considered, and conferred; that after all his Examination, he cannot
find that he has any love for any Opinion, more than his unconquerable
Persuasion fixes him: I say, when we hear a Man sincerely, and from the bottom
of his Heart, saying, That he cannot distinguish things as others can; that he
cannot think that Indifferent which others do; that he cannot admit things that
are really Lawful in others Opinion, to appear so in his: A Man that is Strong
ought to pity such a ones Weakness: Tho, to my apprehension, it is very strange,
if what these Men tell us, be true; it is very odd, that a Man out of the Church
shall tell us, by his Eyesight, that a House is a House, a Tree a Tree, and a
Man a Man, and see these things as clearly as any Man else; and yet have this
Man into a Church, and you cannot persuade him, but that a plain whited Wall is
a Carved or a Molten Image: For this is really the Case; Take these Men in
Worldly Business, and they are as intelligent and as strong and as rational as
others: but in Religion they are as odd and aukerd and untractable: Tho,
methinks, it is very sad, that that Religion which Christ designed to enlighten,
should cloud and maze their Understandings: But yet thus we often see it is, Men
are thus either in pretense or reality weak; however that be, we must leave
them to God, bear with their Weakness, and be glad to see them in our
Communion. And if I can any thing judge of the Temper of those that are of the
Church of England, I dare vouch for the wiser and soberer part of them, that
they do not disdain Communion with the weakest Brother. But alas! the Case is
now altered from that in St. Paul's days; the VVeak refuse Communion with the
Strong, which seems to give a great contradiction to their pretended Weakness;
for those that really know themselves weak, would not throw themselves out to
the wide World, and pretend to take greater care for themselves, than God in
his Providence, and their Governors by their great Care offer to them. But,

2. The Strong ought to bear with and pity the Weak, in that they expose their
Persons and Fortunes to the Censure of the Magistrate, upon Needless things.
Real Martyrdom, and laying down our Lives and Estates for the Truth, is highly
commendable in the Eyes of God and Man: But to withstand and contend with the
Supreme Magistrate, when he is doing the true part of his Duty, is really a
very great Evil; for a good Magistrate is the great Crown and Blessing of a
Nation; for by prudent Exercise of good and righteous Laws, he reduces many to
a good and right Understanding of Things, that it may be would not else mind or
consider about Religion: And if the Magistrate does not take care of his
Subjects Souls, as well as their Bodies, he bears the best part of his Sword in
vain; for People are very apt to run into strange Enthusiasms, when every Man
may cut out what Religion he pleases; and we may well think a Prince
blameworthy in this Particular, if God own him as his Deputy and Vicegerent,
and yet he does nothing for God in all his Government. And indeed we have all
the reason in the World to give all due respect to the Laws (especially) of
Good Princes; for the higher the Office, the greater the Grace that descends
upon them. But yet notwithstanding the Prince, as a part of his Duty, takes
care to see Religion exercised; yet too many there are that dare to offend, and
expose their Lives and Fortunes to the dint of his Laws, and that for little,
potty, trivial things: And these the Strong ought to pity; they seem to be in
earnest, when their Blindness will enable them to part with that which is dear
to them, rather than obey. Therefore when we see any of our weak Brethren in
trouble because of their Weakness, let us not deride and contemn them because
of their Weakness, but pity them, that they do not see tho Mercies of God; in
so good a Prince, and such good Laws. Let us not, I say, despise them; for, as
the Apostle argues, Who made thee to differ? Was it not the Grade of God that
rescued thee from this Weakness? And indeed the Sufferings even of a notorious
Malefactor are pitiable, as we have a general Respect for Humane Nature. And
this will induce our weak Brother to think that we are loving, and tender, and
Christian-like, when we do not mock at, but pity their Calamity. Tho it is very
fit and meet that good and righteous Laws should take place, and be executed
upon Offenders; yet 'twould be hard, if those that are to execute these Laws,
or any other, should superadd any Censure, or intermingle any sort of
Treatment, that the Laws will not directly allow or do not expressly enjoin.
It Is no Persecution to put good and justifiable Laws in Execution; but it looks
like one, when those that are to do it, rejoice in their Brothers Sufferings.
But,

3. The Strong should consider and pity the Meanness and Confusion of their
Faith and Understanding. Now Faith, as the Scripture says, comes by hearing;
and therefore this Fault I shall rather choose to lay upon their Teachers, than
upon them; tho it is in part their fault, to make no better a Choice. And I must
confess, I take it to be the particular sleight of their Preachers to cut out
Work for themselves, to make their Hearers of nice and bogling Consciences,
that they may have them under their Dominion, to raise such Scruples that they
and none else care to answer, and render Religion an odd and unintelligible
Undertaking. I must confess, I have not much heard their Sermons; but I have
perused some of their Books, where a great deal of what they say is very
formidable, and some again unintelligible Doctrine; where Nineteen Marks of
Grace are set down, and strictly required, when Two, or it may be never a one
of them, will serve the turn. Now, for my part, I heartily pity any Hearer,
that with Awe and Reverence puts his Soul into the Hands of a Teacher that is
not Faithful, that drags him through a rough and tempestuous Way, when a much
plainer and casier is nigh at hand. Christ came to make Religion plain and
easy; and if any Man that puzzles and entangles it, be his true Ambassador,
judge ye. But having some Considerations to add to the other sort of Men, the
Weaker Brethren, I shall pass to them, and speak but briefly to them, and so
conclude. And to these my Request is,

1. To have a competent and becoming Reverence for Authority. And here I do not
go persuade these Men into the Notion of Infallibility, as if all their
Governors did or said were as infallible as any part of the New Testament; but
to desire them to have in themselves ductile, obedient, governable, and
persuasive Frames of Spirit; not to be morose, or peevish, or sour, or
obstinate: And let the Consideration of his being the Power and the Ordinance
of God, carry them beyond all their little Doubtings and Objections. A meek,
and a quiet, and a submissive Frame of Spirit, is in the sight of God of great
price.

2. My Desire to the Weak of our days is, seriously to consider, That the
Government can never provide against all the petty Exceptions of every
particular Person; and that it is impossible that all the Dissenters can be
pleased. Is not this to be proved within our Memory, when the Presbyterian and
Independent (tho now they love so dearly) were as much Antichristian one to
another, as now We are to Both? And if at this time the Government goes to
comply with the Conscience of the Presbyterian, what then will become of the
Independent? If the Mouths of both these can be stopped, what must be done for
the Anabaptist? Or if these could be complied with too, what shall we do for
the great Numbers of Dissenting Quakers? All these come in with a pretended
equal Cry and Loudness of Conscience; and if these Dividers cannot condescend
to each others Weakness, how can they expect the Government should? Therefore
when they desire that the Governors should make such Laws as shall suit every
Man's Conscience, that is impracticable, nay, and impossible, without bringing
absolute Confusion into the Church and State: Nay, themselves, I dare say, do
not desire the Laws should be made so loose, as to take in all the several
Sects of Dissenters; and if it takes in one Party that is blinded and weakened
by his Conscience, why not another? If they object, That a little Condescension
would take in some: I beseech them, On whose side ought the Condescension to
lie? Is it not more feasible that particular Persons may come into the Church,
than that the whole Form of Church and State-Government must be new-molded for
them? If this be an humble or modest Demand, I leave every Man (that can) to
judge; and I think we may safely undertake that the Government will grant, when
all the Dissenters are agreed what to ask, I mean, that will make us all one,
according to Christ Jesus.

3. My Desire to the weak Brethren is, not to place Religion, or the Suspension
of it, in little trifling Indifferent Things. This was that our Savior highly
blamed in the Pharisees: Nay, is it not the extreme Dotage of some in our days,
that think a Tag more the Gospel-mode than a Ribband, or a short Black Coat
more Edifying and Evangelical, than a Gown or a Surplice? This is that which we
really and truly call Superstition in the Church of Rome, that a Stick set on
cross should be more Reverend and Venerable, than in any other Posture. The
Substance and Truth of Religion lies in great and weighty Matters; and these
(thanks be to God) our Dissenters own we retain in the Doctrine of the Church
of England: And therefore why do they fly us by reason of our Ceremonies? All
that we say for them, is, That they are Ancient, and Decent; and who fitter to
judge of Order and Decency, than our Governors? If they object, Had these
things been used in our Saviors time, they had not scrupled them: But how are
we assured that they speak truth in this Matter? The Sacraments were used in
our Saviors time, and yet a great number of our Dissenters scruple them: The
Creed was compiled in the Apostles time, and yet most of them boggle at some
part of it, viz. The Communion of Saints, and the truest and most intelligible
Notion of the Holy Catholic Church. Besides, Christ and his Apostles had then
neither Room, nor External Authority to plant and perfectly settle a Visible
Church; they could instill their Doctrines, and General Rules of Faith, but
could not descend to all the Particular Modes of Worship: these we derive as
faithfully as we can from the Primitive Christians, which all sober and wise
Men have a great Veneration for. And indeed the Apostle has given fair Power
and Encouragement to Magistrates to be doing, when he bids them take care that
all things be done decently and in order. And who is the best Judge of Order
and Decency, the Magistrate (the Ordinance of God) or the Weak Brother, I shall
leave to Wise Men to determine. And whereas they often object, That the
Government must not enjoin any thing but what is expressly commanded in the
Scriptures: If they will turn the same Argument fairly, it will amount to thus
much directly against themselves, viz. That they must not deny Obedience in any
thing that is not positively and in plain Words forbidden; unless they think
the Scripture allows them more Liberty than it allows the Magistrate, or that
they shall have Liberty to disobey in those very Cases, in which the Prince
shall not have Power to enjoin: And then let them show us where the Scriptures
deny a Surplice, or any other of our Ceremonies retained and used. And do they
deny Compliance because of the Tenderness of their Conscience? The Magistrate
does likewise, out of his tender Love and Care for the Church, and Uniformity
in our Worship, enjoin them; as well knowing, that some External Form of
Church Government is absolutely needful; and none yet, after several Trials,
can be pitched upon, that are more decent, and less offensive.

4. My last Desire to weak Brethren is, that they would not throw themselves
out of the Communion of Christ's Catholic Church. By this they frustrate the
Design of Christ's coming into the World, and Dying for us. He came to make us
all one: And, I perceive, they take it mightily in dudgeon to be
Excommunicated; which (as they manage the Case) is only a Public Confirmation
of what they themselves have done long before. St. Paul does not seem to
imagine, that they would throw themselves out of Communion; but was afraid that
the Strong would not Communicate with them: And this we desire with all our
Souls to do; but, the mischief of it is, our weaker Brethren think themselves
Holier and Wiser, and, if so, much Stronger than we. And to these I may well
use those Words of the Wiseman, only advisable in such Cases as these,
Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self over wise; for
why should thou destroy thy self? And why should these Men, under a needless
and unjustifiable Pretense of Sanctity, hazard their Souls, by rending the
Communion of Christ's Church, and by Disobedience to Gods Governors? and their
Bodies and Estates, by undergoing the Penalty of our National Laws? Who has
required this at their Hands, that they should set up for Martyrs, before they
are called to bear witness to the Truth of Christ? And I wish to God these Men
would seriously consider, what it is to be out of the Communion of the Catholic
Church. If there be but One Church, why do they not Communicate with us? why do
they go out from us? If there be Two Catholic Churches, what becomes of an
entire Article of our Creed? Indeed there is no sense in that Assertion. But I
must not, I need not add any more to these Particulars. I hope what I have
said, will not be looked upon either as sharp, uncharitable, or unseasonable:
What I have said, is spoke out of a real desire that you would be like minded
one toward another, that you would receive one another, as Christ also
received us, to the Glory of God. I am well aware, that Men are not like Iron,
to be hammered when they are heated, or to be hectored and jeered into
Communion and Religion; and therefore I have been all along pleading for the
contrary: But I hope no Man will be angry, when we modestly and sincerely tell
him the Truth, as I have endeavored plainly to do: Especially, I would not
leave any Distaste with you, as to my Person or Temper, now in this last
Exercise I am performing among you; for this would be ill Policy with respect
to my Future Undertakings, and an ill Requital to that Kindness I own I have
received from all Parties among you. I shall only beg your Prayers and
Well-wishes for my Future Undertakings, and Success in my Performances, and
conclude all with those Words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13.11, 14. Finally,
Brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with, bless, preserve, and
guide you, from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stilfleets
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.

An Answer to the Dissenters Objections against the Common Prayers, and some
other Parts of Divine Service Prescribed in the Liturgy of the Church of
England.

The Case of Kneeling at the holy Sacrament Stated and Resolved. Wherein these
Queries are considered, 1. Whether Kneeling at the Sacrament be contrary to any
express Command of Christ, obliging to the observance of a different Gesture?
2. Whether Kneeling be not a Deviation from that Example which our Lord set us
at the first Institution? 3. Whether Kneeling be not unsuitable and Repugnant
to the Nature of the Lord's Supper, as being no Table Gesture? The first Part.

Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the
Change of our Church Government.

1. A Persuasive to Communion with the Church of England.

2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect Church Communion.

3. The Case of indifferent things, used in the Worship of God, Proposed and
Stated by considering these Questions, etc.

4. A Discourse about Edification.

5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the Church of England' s
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

6. A Letter to Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion.

7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the Lawfulness of Joining
with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship. The first Part.

8. The Case of Mixed Communion. Whether it be lawful to Separate from a Church
upon the account of promiscuous Congregations and Mixed Communions?


