SOME THOUGHTS ON A Convocation, And the Notion of its DIVINE RIGHT. WITH SOME
Occasional Reflections ON The Defense of the Vindication of the Deprived
Bishops.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Child, at the White-Hart, the West End of St.
Paul's-Charch-yard, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall only thus far endeavor to prepossess the Reader in Favor of the
following Papers, as to assure him, That the Author is not Conscious to himself
of having advanced any Notion that is repugnant to the Sense of Scripture, or
Antiquity; To the Articles of our own Church, or the Opinions of its greatest
Divines who have treated this Subject. The Authority of the King over our
Convocations has indeed been of late disputed by some; and a Learned Treatise
that was writ in Defense of it, has had the Misfortune of meeting with a great
many Enemies, that are very free in their Censures upon it; what their Reasons
are themselves best know: For they are so kind as not to let them appear in
Public.

But these Papers are only designed to give as true a State and Notion of the
Controversy as the Authors Enquiries could lead him into, and not for a
Vindication of others Opinions: And if they should chance to fall in with any
of those delivered in that forementioned Treatise, it was no other than a sober
and impartial View of the Subject that occasioned it. And I cannot but think
that they who assent to the Articles of our Church, can hardly deny joining in
the same Notions.

It is very common with the Managers of Disputes of late, to fix Characters of
Ignominy upon those who dissent from them. And some who have engaged in this
Controversy, for want of other Arguments, have thought I suppose to carry the
Cause by insulting over their Adversaries as Latitudinarians and Erastians. And
therefore, least they should fix the same Titles upon the Author of these
Thoughts, he desires they would first answer these two Queries.

Whether he who advances no other Doctrine than what has always been maintained
by the Church of England, and is entirely agreeable to its 39 Articles, can
justly be charged by any Member of that Church, as a Latitudinarian in point of
Doctrine?

And whether he who subscribes to the Government of the same Church as by Law
Established, and maintains no other Notions but what our Convocations have
agreed to, and are at this Day the standing Rules delivered to us in her
Ecclesiastical Canons and Constitutions, can by any Member of the Church of
England be reasonably charged as an Erastian in point of Church Government?

And if he that guides himself by these Methods is in the wrong, the Church
must answer for his Errors, and not he for being obliged to defend her. And
therefore the Church must be taxt with our false Principles, if they are such,
or it ought to be shown, wherein we have differed from her.

It may probably be one Objection against these Papers, that a Book of
Grotius's is sometimes cited in them, which lies under the Censure of Erastian
Principles. It is foreign to my present Business to engage in its Defense; Ger.
Vossius Epis. 23.
gives it the Character of a most Excellent Book, and offers to defend it
against all Opposers. But it is enough to my purpose, that there is nothing
cited from him, that is disagreeable to the Doctrines of our Church: And it was
not his Authority, but the strength of his Argument, that occasioned his being
introduced in the Debate.

But I hope the other Authorities that are here made use of can have no such
Objections against them. Though if these Papers are condemned they can hardly
escape, notwithstanding the Characters they have always bore in the World ought
to secure them from such Treatment, since if this Author is an Error, it is they
who have led him into it.

SOME THOUGHTS ON A Convocation, etc.
THE stating the Rights and Authority of the Clergy, must be confessed to be a
very nice and tender Point; and in Attempts of this Nature, it is almost
impossible not to offend.

Let a Man deliver his Opinions with never so much Sincerity and Caution; yet
after all, he must expect to find that some Party or other will be displeased.

The asserting the Privileges of the Clergy, but even as far as those Bounds
which Religion and the Laws of the Land have set them, and the Nature of their
Function requires, is almost a downright Affront to a sort of Men, who think
the whole Order useless, and their Office only an Imposition upon the Rights
and Liberties of the rest of Mankind.

And the not carrying their Authority to a higher pitch, than the Constitution
of the State does or can admit of, or than the Law of God has allowed; or even
to such Immunities, as some Men's mistaken Zeal would challenge to belong to
them, is represented as an Indignity to Religion, and an open Violation of the
Rights and Honors of that Profession.

I shall not concern my self in determining whose Censure it is most safe to
fall under.

But this seems very apparent, That the pretending to too unlimited a Power, is
as great a Prejudice, and of as dangerous Consequence to the Clergy, as the
parting with some of their just Rights and Privileges: Either of these Extremes
may be fatal; and therefore the more Caution is required to avoid them.

It is certainly a great Weakness in any Clergy, to raise themselves Enemies in
the State, by laying Claim to an Authority which is none of theirs. The
intolerable Usurpation of the Sea of Rome on the Rights of Princes, and the
Revolutions occasioned by it, in a great many parts of Europe, afford us
Instances enough of this Nature.

Let us, in God's Name, maintain the Honors and Privileges of the Holy
Function, as far as of right we may; but let us not extend them to such a Power
and Superiority, as neither the Laws of God will justify, nor those of the
Land admit of; and which the first Ages of the Church (after the State was
Christian) never exercised.

The whole Controversy about a Convocation may be, I think, reduced to this.
Either that the time and manner of its sitting, acting or debating, is to be
determined by the Laws of the Land, and the Prudence of the supreme Authority;
or that the Clergy have a Power by Divine Right, independent on the State, to
assemble themselves, decree and enact Ecclesiastical Laws, without the Consent
of the secular Authority.

If the latter of these Notions be true, it is plain, That all human Laws to the
contrary, can be of no force: A Divine Institution being unalterable by any
other Power. And if any other Power has decreed any thing in Opposition to it,
it is a Sin to submit to its Commands.

But in Cases of this Nature, where such a Right is pretended, it ought to be
made very clear and indisputable from the express Declaration of Scripture; or
at least, from the Practice of the first Christians, where any Parallel
Instances can be produced: Though I think this latter is an Argument of far
less Authority than the former; and if there had been Instances of Convocations
like ours in the Apostles Days, yet this would not prove their Divine Right,
unless there could be showed a Command of God for it; for a great many Examples
have not the force of Precepts, even in Scripture it self, but are of an
inferior Nature, and serve for no other Purpose than to direct what may be
most proper to be done in like Cases. As the Order of Deaconesses and others,
though as early as the Apostles Age, is now wholly laid aside. The end of its
Institution ceasing, which was to instruct the younger Women in the Faith, when
there were stronger Reasons for the abolishing it. Prudence is to judge how far
such Examples are to be followed.

Now whether this Notion of a Divine Right has any Foundation in Scripture, or
can be grounded upon any Examples in the Primitive Church or not; it is past
all Controversy, that our Kings have an Authority devolved on them by our
Laws, and acknowledged as of Right belonging to them over our Convocations; and
that the Clergy neither have, or can pretend to have, by our Constitution, the
Liberty or Power to meet after that manner without their Assent. This is very
evident from the Writs, by which they are summoned to assemble.

And as they cannot meet but by the King's Writ, so neither when met, can they
make any Canon, or Constitution, without his License and Approbation.

There is indeed a Convocation always summoned, whenever a Parliament is
called, according to the ancient Constitution: And hence some have thought,
That they ought to claim the same Right and Liberty to enact Laws for the Good
of the Church, as the other for the Advantage and Welfare of the State.

But the Case is very different; the Reasons of calling the Clergy anciently,
every Parliament, was upon a Political Account; because they were then looked
upon as a Member of the Parliament, and could not be taxt but by their own
Grants: But that Reason is now, in great measure, out of Doors. And though they
are still summoned, that they may be ready upon all Occasions, to advise and
counsel the King in making Provisions for the Security of Religion, and the
Preservation of the Church; yet as there is not always the same Necessity for
their sitting and acting, as for the Parliaments, so the King is made the sole
Arbiter of it.

But this Particular has lately been so fully and largely discussed by a very
learned Pen, that there is no need of farther Addition. Dr. Wake.


And indeed, if we may stand to the Decision of the Laws of the Land, this
whole Controversy will soon be at an end: For it is no difficult matter to be
resolved about the Power the King is invested with, by being Head of the
Church; and what Privileges are reserved for the Clergy by their own Suffrage
and Decree in Convocation, and by Act of Parliament.

The King, by his Power, is to call the Convocation, they are to assemble only
by his Writs, they are to debate upon such Matters as he shall offer, and are
to constitute no Orders, or make any Laws without his Consent.

This is very apparent from the Act of Parliament, where the King's humble and
obedient Subjects, Act. Parl. An. 25. Hen. VIII. Upon the submission of the
Clergy, and restraint of Appeals.
the Clergy of this Realm of England, have not only acknowledged according to
the Truth, That the Convocations of the same Clergy, is, always has been, and
ought to be assembled only by the King's Writ, but also submitting themselves
to the King's Majesty, have promised in Verbo Sacerdotis, That they will never
from henceforth, presume to attempt, allege, claim or put in ure, enact,
promulge, or execute, any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial, or
other, or by whatsoever other Name they shall be called in the Convocation,
unless the King's most Royal Assent and License may to them be had, to make,
promulge and execute the same; and that His Majesty do give His most Royal
Assent and Authority in that Behalf. And where diverse Constitutions,
Ordinances, and Canons Provincial, or Synodal, which heretofore have been
enacted, and be thought not only to be much prejudicial to the King's
Prerogative Royal, and repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, but
also overmuch onerous to His Highness and His Subjects; the said Clergy has
most humbly besought the King's Highness, That the said Constitutions and
Canons may be committed to the Examination and Judgment of His Highness, and of
two and thirty Persons of the King's Subjects, whereof sixteen to be of the
upper and nether House of the Parliament of the Temporalty, and other sixteen
to be of the Clergy of this Realm; and all the said two and thirty Persons, to
be chosen and appointed by the King's Majesty. And that such of the said
Constitutions and Canons, as shall be thought and determined by the said two
and thirty, or the more part of them, shall be approved to stand with the Laws
of God, and consonant to the Laws of this Realm, shall stand in their full
Strength and Power; the King's most Royal Assent first had and obtained to the
same. Be it therefore now enacted by Authority of this present Parliament,
according to the said Submission and Petition of the said Clergy, That they, ne
any of them, from henceforth shall presume to attempt, allege, claim, or put
in ure, any Constitutions or Ordinances Provincial, or Synodal, or any other
Canons: Nor shall enact, promulge, or execute any such Canons, Constitutions,
or Ordinances Provincial, by whatsoever Name or Names they may be called, in
their Convocations in time coming (which always shall be assembled by Authority
of the King's Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the King's most Royal
Assent and License, to make, promulge, and execute such Canons, Constitutions,
and Ordinances Provincial, or Synodal, upon pain of every one of the said
Clergy, doing contrary to this Act, and being thereof convict, to suffer
Imprisonment, and make Fine at the King's Will.

They are indeed left at Liberty, to give what Judgment they think fit, upon
such Matters as are offered to them; and their Determinations and Decisions
about them, are solely in their own Breasts: But they cannot have the Force of
a Law, unless he will be pleased both to approve and confirm them.

And this is the Nature of Ecclesiastical Synods, amongst us by our
Constitution. And as this preserves the Authority of the Sovereign, so does it
not infringe the Liberty of the Clergy. No Ecclesiastical Canons or
Constitutions, can be made without them: Nothing can be accounted Heresy, or
censured as such, but what by lawful Synods has been already condemned; decreed
to be such, with the King's Consent by our own Convocations; whose Acts have
been ratified and confirmed by Parliament.

Thus, though the Clergy cannot, by their own Power, meet in Convocation, nor
decree or enact any Ecclesiastical Laws without the Sovereign Authority; yet
neither can any Ecclesiastical Canon be made, or any new Heresy be declared,
without their Advice and Approbation.

Grotius is indeed of Opinion, De Imperio sum. Potest. circa Sacra. c. 7.
That the supreme Civil Authority, has a Right to make Laws, without the
Consent of the Clergy for the Government of the Church. Because if it could
not, it would receive some Right of governing from the Synod, and consequently
could not be supreme; whereas the highest Power being subject to God alone, has
under him the sole Right of Governing. Besides, if the supreme Power could not
enforce the Observance of that without a Synod, which it might with one, then
it should receive part of its Right and Authority to govern from thence: And by
Consequence some part of the Government must be lodged in the Synod. Which it
can neither challenge by Human or Divine Right. God having nowhere committed
such a Power to the Church; and therefore not to Synods. And for these Reasons,
he is of Opinion, That the highest Power has a Right to make Orders for the
Government of the Church without a Synod. And to confirm it, he adds the
Examples of the Hebrew Kings, and some of the first Christian Emperors, that
have exercised their Authority about things sacred, without any such Convention
of the Clergy.

But though these Reasons should prove such a Right in General, to belong to the
supreme Power, yet it cannot be doubted but that the same Power may so far
dispense with the Execution of it, as to consent, That no Laws shall be made
relating to Religion, without the Counsel and Approbation of the Clergy.

But if it may be thought reasonable to have the Advice of the Clergy, in all
Matters of such Importance, it must be also absolutely necessary, That the
Civil Power which is to enforce the Observance of the Injunctions, resolved on
by the Spiritual, should have the Right of judging of its Determinations;
especially, where all Men's Consciences, as well secular as Ecclesiastical, are
to be concluded by them.

This is most certain, That it is a Duty incumbent on the Prince, whether the
Clergy give their Opinions or not, to reform and correct Abuses in the Church,
See Bp. Taylor's Duct. Dub. L. 3. C. 3.
and he must answer for his Neglect to God, if he does not do so. And if before
any Declaration of the Judgment of the Clergy, he has a Right to order what is
necessary in sacred Affairs, it is plain, That his Power is superior to theirs;
and that it cannot be less at the meeting of a Synod, than it was before it.
The supreme Authority continues the same, whether it acts by the Counsel of
others, or without it. And there can be no Obligation to comply with it, but
that of Reason and Prudence.

The Notion of the King's Supremacy, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, established by our Laws, owned and asserted by
our Clergy, and very frequently vindicated with much Strength and Learning by
the greatest Men of our Church, ever since the Reformation, grants all that
Right and Power to the King, over Convocations that we contend for.

This Power, Eccl. Polity. l. 8. p. 462.
says the Excellent Mr. Hooker, being sometime in the Bishop of Rome, who by
sinister Practices, had drawn it into his Hands, was for Just Considerations by
Public Consent, annexed unto the King's Royal Seat and Crown; from thence the
Authors of Reformation, would translate it into their National Assemblies or
Synods: Which Synods are the only Helps, which they think lawful to use against
such Evils in the Church, as particular Jurisdictions are not sufficient to
redress. In which Cause, our Laws have provided, That the King's Super-eminent
Authority and Power shall serve: As namely, when the whole Ecclesiastical
State, or the Principal Persons therein, do need Visitation and Reformation;
when in any part of the Church, Errors, Schisms, Heresies, Abuses, Offenses,
Contempts, Enormities are grown; which Men in their several Jurisdictions
either do not, or cannot help. Whatsoever any Spiritual Power and Authority,
(such as Legates from the Sea of Rome, did sometime exercise) has done, or
might heretofore have done, for the Remedies of those Evils in lawful sort,
(that is to say, without the Violation of the Laws of God, or Nature in the
Deed done) as much in every Degree our Laws have fully granted, that the King
for ever may do, not only by setting Ecclesiastical Synods on work, that the
thing may be their Act, and the King the Motioner unto it, for so much perhaps,
the Masters of the Reformation will grant: That Clause of the 1st. Eli. which
gave the King Power to make such high Commissioners in Ecclesiastical Causes,
is now repealed.
But by Commissions few or many, who having the King's Letters Patents, may in
the Virtue thereof, execute the Premises as Agents in the Right, not of their
own peculiar and ordinary, but of his Super-eminent Power.

This Passage, as though designed on Purpose against the present Opposers of the
King's Supremacy, is not only an Account of the Power our King has over his
Convocations by the Law of the Land, but also a Vindication of that Law, in
investing him with such Authority. And I the rather thought it deserved to be
taken notice of, that I might oppose the Judgment of this great and learned Man
to the Censures of two late Authors, Municip. Eccles. Preface. Defense of the
Vind. of the deprived Bishops, p. 104.
who have taken a great deal of Freedom in blackening the Memory of the
Convocation in Henry the 8th's Reign, for surrendering up to the King the Right
and Liberty of meeting without his Leave.

The Author of the Municipium Ecclesiasticum, in his Preface, insults over that
Convocation, as under the lash of a Praemunire, and from thence, seeks to
prejudice the Authority of the Convocation-Act. But this is a great Blunder;
for the Praemunire was off at least three Years before, See Rast. Stat. 22. H.
VIII.
and released by Act of Parliament, in the 22d of Henry the 8th, the
Convocation-Act being not till the 25th.

But to let that pass, this whole Eighth Book of Ecclesiastical Polity, is
designed for a Vindication of the Kings Power in that Particular, as also of
our Laws, and the Consent of the Clergy, by which it was confirmed.

Except therefore, we make the King's Authority over the Clergy, Ecclesiastical
Polity, p. 469.
less in the greatest things, than the Power of the meanest Governors is in all
things over those which are under them, how should we think it a Matter decent,
that the Clergy should impose Laws, the supreme Governors Assent not asked?

But lest some sort of Men should pretend, that this 8th Book is not so much,
and truly Mr. Hooker's, as those which are published by himself, which however
is not questioned by the last of these Authors mentioned, that quotes from it,
how much to his purpose, I shall consider hereafter. Preface p. 44. Ed. Land.
1682.
I shall add a Passage out of his Preface. There was (says he, speaking in
Reference to some who had a Dislike to the Constitution of the Church, then
established by Law) in my poor Understanding, no Remedy; but to set down this
as my final resolute Persuasion, Surely the present Form of Church Government,
which the Laws of this Land have established, is such as no Law of God, nor
Reason of Man, has hitherto been alleged of Force sufficient to prove they do
ill; who, to the uttermost of their Power, withstand the Alteration thereof.
Contrariwise, the other, which instead of it, we are required to accept, is
only by Error and Misconceit, named the Ordinance of Jesus Christ, no one Proof
as yet brought forth, whereby it may clearly appear to be so in very deed.

Thus far I have chiefly considered what Power the King has over the Meetings
of Ecclesiastical Synods, by our Constitutions. And if, in Opposition to this,
any Laws had been made whilst we were under the Popish Tyranny, and Usurpation,
that had exempted the Clergy from any such Subjection to the supreme Authority,
as it is certain there were none, Vid. Stat. 16. R. 2. against purchasing Bulls
from Rome.
the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being always asserted against the
Encroachments of the Pope and Clergy upon it; I think we might justly have
denied them to be any Argument in the present Controversy.

But all that we can urge from our Laws, will prove little in the Case before
us, if the Clergy had an Antecedent Right to meet in Convocation by a Divine
Commission; or are invested with a separate Authority, by the Law of God, of
making Orders for the Government of the Church, whether the Sovereign Power be
Christian or not; and of obliging all Men in Conscience to observe them,
without any Consent or License from thence.

Now it is strange, if there should be any such Divine Right, that the Clergy
not only at the Reformation, but to this very time, should be so very ignorant
of it, as not only by a tacit Consent to submit to, but in all their Writings,
acknowledge and publicly defend this superior Power in the Prince, either to
prevent their meeting, or forbid their making any Canons, unless they had first
obtained his Order and License. If this Divine Right had been plainly declared
in Scripture, it could not have been over looked; and if it is not plainly
there, it can with no tolerable show of Reason be pretended to.

And that this Notion of a Divine Right of Convocations, is altogether
precarious, seems evident upon these two Accounts. First, That all the first
Synods, where the Emperor was Christian, were summoned and convened by his
Authority; and Secondly, That this Power of the Emperor's, G. Voss. Ep. 23.
was never disputed by the Clergy as an Usurpation upon their Rights; but on
the contrary, was always approved of by them.

For the Practice of the Church, in those times, is of great Moment in the
present Controversy: For if there is such a Divine Right lodged in the Clergy,
of meeting, either to decide Disputes, or make Ecclesiastical Laws without the
Consent of the Sovereign Power; it is strange, that the Clergy in those early
Ages of Christianity, should so quietly part with their Privilege; or that an
Emperor, who was so mighty zealous for Religion, as Constantine was, should
violate the Rights of the Church in so notorious a manner, and overthrow its
Constitution even contrary to a Divine Appointment, by summoning Councils, as
he did, by his own Authority.

If the Clergy had such a Right, as is now pretended, it could not so soon be
forgotten, as in Constantine's time; nor could they have given it up, or the
Emperor have taken it from them, without sin.

It must then be confessed, to be a good Argument against the Divine Right of
any thing, where the Scripture is silent, that the contrary was practiced,
within three or four Ages after Christ, even by Men, who are allowed on all
sides, to be of the most Orthodox Principles, who could not but know the Rights
of the Church; and who, if they did know them, would never suffer them to be
violated.

Now that Christian Princes have pretended to this Authority of assembling
General Councils and National Synods; and that the Clergy have met, upon their
Summons, is undeniable: And it is also evident, That the Clergy, when the State
was first Christian, never thundered out any Anathema's against it, for this
pretended Authority; that they never censured it as an Usurpation upon their
unalienable Privilege, but always quietly and readily submitted to the Prince's
Summons, without disputing from whence he derived that Power over them.

Indeed before the supreme Authority was Christian, the Clergy had a Right to
convene themselves, to make what Orders might seem requisite for the Good of
the Church. See Canon, 1640. Can. 1.
In this Case, the Church has a Right like that of the State: In the Vacancy of
the Government, the Members of each may assemble, consult, and make Orders, as
the Exigencies of the Church or State may require.

Some, I know, have insisted upon this as an Argument, to prove an independent
Authority in the Church from that of the State; and they are of Opinion, That
the same Liberty which the Clergy then exercised, in meeting upon Affairs of
the Church, is still their Right in Equity, though the State be Christian. For
the Church ought not to lose any of these Rights and Privileges by the
Conversion of Princes, which it enjoyed before.

But the Case is widely different, and therefore the Reason cannot be the same.
The Church and the Commonwealth were then two different Societies, very
opposite to each other. But where they profess the same Religion, are
incorporated into the same Society, and are under one common Governor, they
are both subordinate to that Power, and no Laws can be made to bind either, but
what shall be approved of by him: As for the Right which the Clergy had, before
the State was converted, it was only prudential, and was theirs no longer, than
whilst the supreme Power was Heathen. When the chief Authority had no Relation
to the Church, it could not be under its Government, but the Care of it must
belong to the Clergy, who were then most immediately to be concerned for it.
But this Power was to cease, when the chief Governor became Christian, who upon
that Account, engaged to defend and protect the Church; and the Reason of the
things, and the Nature of Government, do both require that it should be lodged
there.

It was the Misfortune of the Church, and the Necessity of the Clergy's taking
care of it in a State of Persecution, that made them do it: It was no Privilege
belonging to their Function; and therefore, a Christian Ruler coming, the Power
was to return to the right Channel, and the Clergy lost not a Privilege, but
were freed from the Burden and Care they had before.

For in those things, where there is no Prohibition or Caution in the Divine
Law, the Church is to be subject to human Government. See Bishop Andrews's
Sermon before the King at H. C. Canons 1640 Can. 1.
What is commanded by God, must not be omitted by the Church; but in Matters
which are left purely to human Prudence, the supreme Governor is to be obeyed,
and there is a Law of God for it.

Now, I think, the Mistake about the Divine Right of Convocations is grounded
upon this, That Christ having constituted spiritual Governors in his Church,
they consequently must have the supreme Right over it, in all things that
concern Religion, either for making any new Orders or Offices, that may tend to
the Advantage of the Church; and that no humane Authority, can of Right
interfere with, or hinder it.

It cannot indeed be denied, but that Christ has instituted and ordained a
Succession of Pastors of his Flock, and committed certain proper Functions to
them, such as the preaching the Word, the Administration of the Sacraments, the
Power of the Keys, and the like; and that there shall be such, no Power on
Earth has a Right to forbid, so far there is a Divine Institution. But that the
supreme Governor, to whom these Pastors are subject, has not a Power over them
in all those things, which the Scripture mentions nothing of, and which are not
any part of the Ministerial Office or Function; this we absolutely deny.

All human Institutions must be subject to human Laws, and since Convocations
are such, because not appointed by any Divine Law, all the Power they have,
must be derived from that Authority to which they are subject.

If it be said, That if the Prince has this Power, he may make a wrong use of
it; yet this does not prove against his Right. Our Abuse of any thing, is not
an Argument that we have no Rightor Title to it.

If indeed the Prince should happen to be of a different Religion, and disclaim
all Right to his Supremacy over the Church, or abuse it to the Destruction of
it; I see no Reason, See Bishop Andrews Sermon at Hampton Court.
but if the Necessities of the Church should require it, the Clergy now may
have the same Privilege, as the Primitive Christians, and may assemble of their
own accord, as they might have done, when their Emperors were Heathen.

Common Prudence will direct what is proper in such Cases. As Right Reason, and
the Laws of Equity would advise, That the chief Power over Ecclesiastical
Affairs, should be committed to the Sovereign Authority, when Christian; which
is supposed, upon that Account, to be as much concerned for the Good of the
Church as of the State.

And indeed, See Bishop Taylor's Duct. Dub. L. 3. C. 3.
where nothing is determined on either side, this must necessarily be fixed
there. Because there is no other that can either by Divine or human Right, lay
claim to the like Authority.

There is no other possible way of determining the Bounds of the supreme Power,
Vid. Grot. de Imp. sum. Pot. cir. Sacra C. 3.
but by the Law of God or Nature; Its Right extends over all things, but what
are either commanded or forbidden by them.

Now then allowing Mr. Hooker's Opinion, That as for supreme Power in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, the Word of God does nowhere appoint, Eccl. Pol. p.
444.
that all Kings shall have it, neither that any should not have it; yet for
this very Cause it seems to stand altogether by human Right, that unto
Christian Kings there is such Dominion given.

As for the Law of Nature, I think it must be granted, to be no way concerned
in the present Controversy. Grotius does indeed allow, C. 7. de Synodis.
That the Original of Synods, is derived from the Law of Nature: For Man being
a sociable Creature, does naturally associate himself with those, who pursue
the same Methods and Manner of Life. So Merchants for the Improvement of
Traffic, so Physicians and Lawyers meet and consult together, for the
examining the Mysteries of their Art, and for the advancing their Profession.
But then to prevent Mistake, he distinguishes between an absolute Law of
Nature, which cannot be changed, as to worship God, honor our Parents, and to
do no Injury to the Innocent; and that which is natural, after a sort, as being
most reasonable, and allowed of by Nature, till human Laws interpose: Thus
every thing by Nature is common, all Men are free, the nearest Relation is
Heir; till by human Appointment and Consent, Propriety, and Subjection were
introduced, and the Inheritance disposed of by Will. In this latter Sense, he
allows it to be natural to hold Synods; but he denies it to be so in the other,
because then, no Bishops would ever have petitioned the Emperors for leave to
meet; and St. Hierom's Argument to prove a Synod unlawful, would be invalid;
Show me, says he, what Emperor commanded the meeting of that Council. Synods
therefore are to be accounted in the number of those things, which being
allowed of by the Law of Nature, are yet subject to human Constitutions; and
may be assembled, or prohibited by them.

And if in the Reigns, even of the Pagan Emperors, any Laws or Imperial Edicts
had been published against holding Synods, and the Necessities of the Church
not evidently required their meeting; but especially, had those heathen Powers
allowed them all the Liberty of meeting for Prayers, and performing other
Duties which Christ had appointed, and were necessary to be done by them, in
Obedience to his Commands; I know no Right the Clergy could have pretended for
their assembling. It is certain, That the Church might subsist, and be
preserved without them. And thereupon, the Bishops were very careful not to
offend or provoke their Governors, by their Synodical meeting, whatever
Occasions there might be for them. St. Cyprian, as Grotius observes, has shown
in several Places, That when in times of Persecution, there arose a hot
Contest, about receiving the lapsed into Communion, and for the putting an end
to it, nothing seemed more necessary, than for the Clergy to meet and consult
together in common; yet the Bishops deferred the meeting, till the Storm was
blown over; which certainly they ought not to have done, if Synods had been
enjoined by a positive Law, either Divine or Natural; and could have been no
more dispensed with, than the Duties of worshipping God, and honoring our
Parents.

Since then there appears no Authority from Scripture, or from the Practice of
the Church, after the State was Christian; or from the Law of Nature, to found
this Pretense upon, of the Clergy's having a distinct Right from the State of
assembling themselves in Convocation; it is evident, That the Laws of the Land,
and the Suffrage of the Convocation in Henry the 8th's Reign, and of all the
Convocations that have been held since; which by common Consent, have invested
the King with this Power, and have submitted to it, were not so rash and
irreligious, as some Men would insinuate. Even the Convocations in Queen Mary's
Reign, when that Law was abrogated, yet met and acted by her Authority.

But it is to be observed, See the Defense of the Vind. of the Deprived
Bishops. Municip. Eccl.
That the Arguments which are now produced to prove the Church Independent on
the State by a Divine Right, are the same which Mr. Hooker taxed as the Errors
of some in his time, who asserted the Unlawfulness of the Prince's exercising
any Authority in the Affairs of the Church.

The Causes of common received Errors, in this point, seem to be especially
two: One, That they who embrace true Religion, living in such Commonwealths as
are opposite thereunto, p. 439.
in other public Affairs, retain civil Communion with them. This was the State
of the Jewish Church, both in Egypt and Babylon, the State of Christian
Churches a long time after Christ. And in this Case, because the proper Affairs
and Actions of the Church, as it is the Church, has no Dependence on the Laws,
or upon the Government of the civil State, an Opinion has thereby grown, That
even so it should be always. This was it which deceived Allen, in the writing
his Apology; The Apostles (says he) did govern the Church in Rome, when Nero
bare Rule, even as at this Day, in all the Churches Dominions, the Church has
a spiritual Regiment without Dependence, and so ought she to have amongst
Heathens or with Christians. Another Occasion of which Mis-conceit, is, That
things appertaining to Religion, are both distinguished from other Affairs, and
have always had in the Church, spiritual Persons chosen to be exercised about
them. By which Distinction of spiritual Affairs, and Persons therein employed
from temporal, the Error of personal Separation always necessary between the
Church and Commonwealth, has strengthened it self.

These Notions have been often made use of by the Papists, in their Disputes
against the King's Supremacy; and it is strange they should be now revived, when
they have been so learnedly considered and refuted by Mr. Hooker, See Bishop
Bramhal against the Scotch Discipline.
Dean Nowel, Bishop Jewel, and other great Men of our Church. And I may add,
That some of our present Adversaries Opinions are much the same, with those of
the Scotch Disciplinarians refuted by Bishop Bramhal.

The Author of the Defense of the Vindication of the deprived Bishops, p. 109.
has told us, That Mr. Hooker (for whom he pretends a very great Respect, though
for what Reasons I know not, since they differ in every thing) is against him,
in making the Church one Body with the believing State. And therefore, I
suppose, he would have it taken for granted, That his Reasons are more
conclusive in making them distinct.

Indeed it was necessary for this Author's Purpose, That the Church and State
should be separate Societies; for all the Weight of his Arguments, depends upon
it; and if this should fail, his whole Fabric must sink of Course. It was
certainly time for him to call a new Cause; and, since the Practice of the
whole Church is against him, to omit Authorities, and the Sense of Antiquity,
and to retire to downright Reason. But he would have done well, to have
considered and answered Mr. Hooker's Arguments, before he had produced any
others on the contrary side.

For certainly, Eccl. Pol. 467.
if the Commonwealth be Christian, if the People which are of it do publicly
embrace the true Religion, this very thing does make it the Church. And to make
it a separate and independent Society from the State, where all Men's Principles
are the same, is a Notion neither agreeable to Scripture or Reason. p. 440,
441, etc.
But I shall not pursue an Argument, which has been already so fully and
learnedly managed by Mr. Hooker, to whom I shall refer the Reader.

But I think my self obliged to do Mr. Hooker Justice in a Passage cited from
him by this Author, Defense of the Vind. of the deprived Bishops, p. 108.
as though it made for him; and which appears to me, to be designed to prove
directly contrary. This Author, it seems, would persuade us, that Mr. Hooker is
of his Opinion, That the Deprivation of spiritual Persons, by the Civil Power,
is not justifiable by even our present secular Laws. And to this end, he cites
these Words; Eccl. Pol. p. 464.
all Men are not for all things sufficient, and therefore public Affairs being
divided, such Persons must be authorized Judges in each kind, as common Reason
may presume to be most fit. Which cannot of Kings and Princes, ordinarily be
presumed in Causes merely Ecclesiastical; so that even common Sense does rather
adjudge this Burden to other Men. This, indeed, looks plausibly, as it is here
set down, without its Connection with what goes before and follows it. But
however, all that it can prove by its self, is only, That it may be more proper
for spiritual Persons to judge in Causes merely Ecclesiastical. But then it
denies not, That if Princes are so pleased, they may judge themselves; this
takes not away their Right, though it may be Prudence in them to appoint others
to sit in their stead.

But let us see the full Scope and Extent of Mr. Hooker' s Words. As, says he,
the Person of the King may, for just Considerations, even where the Cause is
civil, be notwithstanding withdrawn from occupying the Seat of Judgment, and
others under his Authority be fit, he unfit himself to judge; so the
Considerations for which it were happily not convenient for Kings to sit and give
Judgment in spiritual Courts, where Causes Ecclesiastical are usually debated,
can be no bar to that Force and Efficacy, which their Sovereign Power has over
those very Consistories: And for which we hold, without any Exception, That all
Courts are the King's. And then follows; All Men are not for all things
sufficient, etc. And after that he goes on, We see it hereby a thing necessary,
to put a difference as well between that ordinary Jurisdiction which belongs
unto the Clergy alone; and that Commissionary wherein others are for just
Considerations appointed to join with them, as also between both these
Jurisdictions, and a third, whereby the King has transcendent Authority over
both: Why this may not lawfully be granted unto him, there is no Reason.

Now take the whole together, and the Argument turns on the other side; and
proves, That the Judgment of the supreme Power is in all manner of Causes to be
the highest.

But hour, See the History of the Troubles and Trial of Arch-Bp. Laud, p. 309.
were Ecclesiastical Courts alone to judge of spiritual Matters, and there
could be no Appeals from their Decisions, (which yet the supreme Power has a
Right to receive) yet these Courts do not exercise any Power that is not
derived from the Supremacy, either mediately or immediately. The Laws by which
they act, and exercise their Jurisdiction, proceed from thence, and the Courts
are constituted by its Authority. So that all that is done there, is by Virtue
of the King's Commission.

But besides, if the King had no Power at all in spiritual Cases, yet it does
not appear, That the Cause of the deprived Bishops is purely spiritual; they
are as much Ecclesiastical Persons now, as they were before their Deprivation.
And though they may not exercise any part of Episcopal Power in the King's
Dominions, yet they still retain their Office, and have a Right to perform all
the Duties of it, where and whenever the Sovereign Power will authorize them
to it.

It was the Opinion of Archbishop Laud, lb. p. 309.
That the Use and Exercise of his Jurisdiction, in Foro Conscientiae, might not
be but by the Leave and Power of the King, within his Dominions.

If his Majesty should forbid a Physician to practice within his Dominions, for
some Crime committed by him; it is plain, That by this means, he is not degraded
from his Profession; nor will it follow, That his Majesty ought to be
acquainted with that Art, before he pronounces Sentence against him. If his
Offense had been against some of the Rules of his own Profession, 'twould be
more proper for the College of Physicians to judge of the Nature and Manner of
it: But where the Crime has no Relation to the Profession, there is required no
Skill in Physic to judge of it.

If a Person be convicted of Heresy, it is just he should be tried by the
spiritual Power, and according to what has been judged by them so to be. But if
his Offense be against the King or the Public, if he refuse Allegiance to his
Majesty, or Obedience to his Laws, be he a spiritual Person or not, there is no
doubt, but his Majesty has a Right to forbid him the Exercise of any Office or
Function within his Territories. The King does not judge herein of his
Qualifications as a Divine, but of his Duty as a Subject. And as such has a
Right to command his Obedience, and to punish him as he thinks fit for his
Disloyalty.

But if what the Author of the Defense of the Vindication of the deprived
Bishops, urges, is of any Force; as, That the Church and State, though Christian,
are two distinct Societies; and that spiritual Persons, though defended and
preserved by the Sovereign Power, have yet as such, no Dependence upon it, and
are not subject to its Authority. How advantageous soever this may prove to the
Church, it will be very inconvenient and dangerous to the State.

For if the Prince has no just Power over spiritual Persons as such, it must
follow, That in several Cases, he can have no Authority over them as temporal.
As suppose any of that Body should be guilty of a Crime, which requires such a
Punishment, as cannot be inflicted without depriving him of his Ecclesiastical,
as well as his Civil Rights; it is plain, according to that Author's way of
arguing, That in such a Case, the State can have no Authority to punish. And if
the Clergy will not pass Sentence against him, he must go unpunished: For how
guilty soever he may be, the King can pretend no Authority, either to imprison
or banish him. Because, according to this Author, the supreme Power has no
Right upon any Account whatsoever, to prohibit him the Exercise of his
Ecclesiastical Function; which he must do, if he punishes him either of the
forementioned ways. The same Reasons will, I think, also forbid the Civil
Authority, from having any Right of sentencing an Ecclesiastical Person to
Death, as well as to perpetual Imprisonment, be his Offense of what Nature
soever. The Consequences of such Notions, are more than sufficient Confutations
of them.

The great Grotius, De Impersum. Potest. Circa Sacra, Chap. 10.
who could have no Interest or Prejudice to mis-guide his Judgment, in Relation
to this Controversy, is of Opinion, That the Right of removing a Pastor from
the Cure of any certain Place, ought always to remain in the highest Power. So
Solomon deposed Abiathar from being Priest. The Vindicator of the deprived
Bishops has been at some pains, to prove that Abiathar was not high Priest.
Which whether true or no, is little to his Purpose; for if he was a Priest, and
deprived by a Lay Power, it is sufficient. So the Bishops of Rome, were more
than once deposed, by the Imperial Authority, as is owned by Bellarmine
himself. And to prove this, says Grotius, is not difficult: For if the supreme
Authority has a Right to forbid any one the City or Province, he must of
Necessity have a Right, to prohibit him the Ministry of that City or Province.
For this is included in the other: For he who has a Power over the whole, must
have the same, no doubt, over the part. And he adds, That if the Sovereign
Power had not this Right, the State could not be able to provide for its own
Security.

But what seems to me most absurd in the Management of this Controversy by the
Vindicator of the deprived Bishops, is this, That he condemns all those of
Schism, who go upon different Principles, or that conform with these who fill
the Sees of the deprived Bishops. For by this means, he not only involves the
Christians of several Centuries in the same Guilt, even from Constantine's
time, till Papal Usurpations were introduced; who submitted to Bishops put into
the Places of others deprived by the Emperors, as has been learnedly shown in a
great many Instances, By Doctor Hody.
beyond all Possibility of a Reply: But he also condemns and contradicts
himself. For I believe his Practice has been contrary to his present Opinion.
Since, if I mistake not, he held Communion with the Church of England, till the
late Revolution. And I believe this Doctrine of the Prince's Authority over
spiritual Persons, was the same then as now. If not, what can those Words
signify, That the King is over all Persons and in all Causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, Supreme? Mr. Hooker tells us, That the Prince has by
this, the same Power over Ecclesiastical Persons, as the Pope had usurped
before the Reformation. And indeed, if these Words do not imply, See Dean
Nowel, against Dorman.
That Ecclesiastical Persons as such, are subject to the King's Authority, they
signify nothing. And if they carry such a Sense with them, they must also
denote the Sufficiency of the King's Authority, for depriving Bishops of their
Sees upon a just Cause. And though it be granted, there were no Instances of this
Nature in the late Reigns; yet the Case is much the same, if such a Doctrine was
then held and maintained by the Church. And if it is a Sin to communicate with
the Bishops, who are put into the Sees of them, who were deprived by the
Supreme Power, it is a Sin also not to separate from that Church, which requires
all its Members to acknowledge and believe such a Right to belong to that
Power. For the Nature of the Church is the same, whether the King exercises
that Authority or not; if it be owned and allowed by the Church to belong to
him.

But this Author pretends that he has the Church and the Laws on his side, See
the Doctrine of the Church of England, concerning the Independency of the
Clergy on the Lay-Power, by the Vindicator of the deprived Bishops.
since Queen Elizabeth's Time; and that he will agree to the Supremacy as then
stated by her, and as it is expressed in the 37th Article. If he will put the
Cause upon this Issue, we must also submit to be determined by it. For we
cannot desire to carry the Supremacy farther than it was in that Queen's Time,
and as it is specified in that Article. But then we demand, That the Words may
be explained according to the most easy and natural Sense of them, and not
understood only as this Author would interpret them. Vid. Bp. Burnet's Hist. of
the Reform. Vol. 2, p. 399.
The Queen lays claim to the same Authority over Ecclesiastical Affairs and
Persons, that was Exercised by all Godly Princes in Scripture, and which at all
times belonged to the Imperial Crown of England: And this must include the
Power which was given to her Predecessors Henry the 8th, and Edward the 6th.
The 37th Article allows the King all that Power which we contend for, and
asserts his Supremacy over all sorts of Persons as well Spiritual as Temporal
in all Causes. See Dean Nowel, who was Prolocut. of the Convocat. when the
Articl were made in his Books against Dorman.
And all the Limitations that either the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, or
that Article has set to the Regal Power, is, That Kings have not, or do not
pretend to have, any Authority to minister Divine Service in the Church, which
we are not Disputing for. But if this Author will be concluded by Queen
Elizabeth's Notion of the Supremacy, he must carry it I am afraid something
farther than he is aware of. For she thought her Supremacy extended to the
giving Commissions to Lay-Persons to proceed by Ecclesiastical Censures. Hist.
of the Reform. Vol. 2. p. 400.
And accordingly the Earls of Shrewsbury, Derby, and others, were made Visitors
of Ecclesiastical Matters, and acted as such. This then we may be positive in
asserting, That the Supremacy, as it was confirmed and settled in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, is a sufficient Vindication of our Principles, and directly
opposite to his. Upon the whole, that Author's Censures are either too far
stretched, or too much confined.

Every Man, I think, ought to be very tender in fixing the Charge of Schism
upon a whole Church; especially where it has the practice of all Antiquity on
its side. Charity certainly would rather oblige a Man to distrust the strength
of his own Arguments, where he has neither the Authority of Scripture, and the
ancient Church to support them, than pass so severe a Censure from the bare
result of his own Thoughts and Opinions. If we are in the wrong, we err with
the whole Catholic Church for some Ages together, and I believe I may add with
the Scriptures themselves, I am sure not against them; and we have moreover our
Canons and Articles for us, the Judgment of some of the greatest Men of the
last Age, who could have no other Motives to mislead them, but the impartial
discovery of Truth, who were of the same Opinion with us.

Indeed, I think we ought to pay a great deal of respect to Men that go upon
sincere Principles of Conscience; but then it were to be wished, That they
would not judge too rashly of other Men; but consider, that they who dissent
from their Notions, may not be less sincere and conscientious than themselves.
It cannot be supposed, that Men, who believe Religion, should be so fond of the
little interest of a short Life, as to forfeit all pretenses to a better, for
the sake of it. Surely, Men that know the present value of things, ought to
think them very inconsiderate Motives for the byassing a Man's Conscience one
way or other.

There are a great many who cannot comply with us, whom we must, and do
entertain a very high Opinion of, and who deserve and command our Esteem. The
late Service which one of them has done the Church and Clergy, by the
vindicating them from the Contempt and Abuses of the Stage, in his admirable
and just Reflections upon the Immorality and Profaneness of that Place, ought
always to be acknowledged with the highest returns of Gratitude.

But to return to our Convocations; if we should grant that Revelation has not
in express Terms determined this Matter, yet we may venture to lay this down
for a certain Principle; That in a Christian Commonwealth, that Order ought
most to be observed, which is most subservient to its Peace and Unity; and that
such a method of Government cannot be lawful, which will necessarily confound
and destroy it.

Now, if the Clergy should have the sole Power among themselves of meeting, and
Establishing what Laws they please, for the Government of the whole Church; and
of subjecting all Christians to the observance of them, whether they will
consent to them or no, it will probably occasion great confusion, and raise
perpetual Heats and Jealousies in the State.

The State does not challenge such a superiority over the Clergy in Civil
Affairs; no Temporal Laws are made to bind them, but such as themselves have
assented to: The same Reasons will hold in Christian Discipline; none ought to
be bound to obey any Constitutions, but such as are made by their own consent;
or, which is the same thing, by that of the Supreme Authority, which represents
the whole State.

Nor indeed, See Bp. Taylor's Duct. Dubitant. l. 3. c. 4.
can the Clergy plead such a Privilege; their Business being only to deliver
their Opinions, and to declare their own, and the Sense of the Church,
concerning any Point in Religion, and no farther than this does their Authority
extend.

G. Vossius has proved this at large, Ep. 23.
and tells us, That the Clergy are forbid by the Scripture to Exercise
Authority; Cap. 4.
and Grotius tells us, That they are called in Holy Writ by the Titles of
Ambassadors, Messengers and Teachers, to signify, that it is their Part, to
declare the Authority and Power of another, and not to oblige Men by their own.
The Government therefore which is committed to them, when they are said to
Guide, to Rule, to Feed, to be set over the Church, ought to be interpreted of
the declarative kind, or of that which consists only in persuasion: When the
Apostles are any where said to have commanded, it is to be understood in such a
figurative Sense, as they are said to remit and retain Sins; that is, to
declare them remitted or retained. He farther proves, That the Church can have
no commanding Power by Divine Right, because the Sword, which is the instrument
of Power, and denotes Authority, is not committed to them.

There can no Power naturally belong to the Pastors of the Church, because no
such thing is included in the nature of the Function. Under the Mosaical Law,
when there was neither King nor Judge, the Supreme Power in Civil, as well as
Ecclesiastical Affairs, devolved on the High Priest. But during the Regal
Dignity, Vid. Seldom. de Synedriis.
the High Priests Jurisdiction was always under that of the King; so Aaron was
under that of Moses.

The Trust that is committed to the Ministers of the Church, by the Law of the
Gospel, and which comes nearest to Jurisdiction, though it is distinct from it,
are those Actions which were either peculiar to the first Christians only, or
are still continued to the Pastors of the Church. Such was that Sharpness which
the Apostle threatens the Corinthians with, which denotes according to Grotius,
a certain miraculous Virtue of imposing Punishment. Thus Ananias and Sapphira
fell down dead; Elymas was smitten with blindness, and others were delivered to
Satan, which was plainly an Act of miraculous Power exercised by God himself;
who, at the Denunciation of the Apostles, commanded Men to be vexed and
tormented with Diseases, and seized on by Devils. Grotius, upon this observes,
That before the Civil Powers exercised their Authority in the Church, God
himself supplied by Divine Assistance, what was defective in Human Laws. But as
Manna ceased, after the Israelites were possessed of the Holy Land; so, after
Emperors took upon them to protect the Church, their Office being to punish all
that any way disturbed its Peace, these Divine Executions of Justice were
dis-continued. But however, all those Divine Punishments were the Acts of God,
not of Men, and the whole Work was his, not the Apostles.

As for the use of the Keys which is perpetually annexed to the Pastoral Office,
that implies no Jurisdiction. The denouncing the Divine Threats and
Punishments, and the enjoining restitution of Goods unjustly gotten, are only
so many declarations of the Divine Law: Excommunication is of the same kind.
The denying the Sacraments to notorious Offenders, is not Exercising any
Dominion over them, but is only a Suspension of the Pastors own Act, and
therefore is not any part of Jurisdiction.

From the whole it appears, That the Authority which was committed to the
Clergy, does not reach to the making of Laws, or to oblige any Persons to be
subject to their Injunctions by Virtue of their own Power. They may do both by
the consent and permission of the Supreme Authority, but of themselves they can
pretend no Right. They are only allowed by the Scriptures to declare and
deliver their Opinions about any Religious Matters, See Vossius, Ep. 23. Duct.
Dubitant. l. 3. c. 4.
but the Sovereign Power alone can confirm them, and give them the force of
Laws.

But however, if at any time there may seem to be absolute necessity for a
Convocation to meet, for the condemning Errors and Heresies, which may have
crept into, and have disturbed the Peace of the Church; Though the Prince in
such a Case will not consent to the Assembling the Clergy, they may
notwithstanding, as many of them as think fit, give their Opinions, concerning
such false Notions. And if their Opinions have any weight in them, they may be
perhaps as much regarded, by the judicious part of the World, as the Judgment
of a whole Convocation.

For when Men Publish their Reasons concerning any Opinions, every Body is at
liberty to Discuss and Examine them, to search into the strength of their
Arguments; be able to discover whether their Thoughts are well weighed, or
whether they are not the effects of a peevish, mis-guided Zeal, rather than of
a serious, deliberate Judgment.

The World can then judge whether Men's Enquiries into others Notions, and their
Censures of them, are impartial or not; whether a Man's prejudice, or perhaps
his Ignorance, or both, do not biass or mis-lead his Apprehensions.

It is not impossible that Men may side with a Party in a Convocation, only
because it is the greatest; may judge against Men and their Opinions, only
because they are theirs; but the World may be best satisfied of the Reasons and
Motives of every Man's Judgment, when they are submitted to Public Examination.

Besides, the Consent of a Church may be known by the unanimous Writings of all
the Great Men of that Church, Cap. 7. De Synodis.
that have treated of such Subjects. For the Affairs of Religion, have been
more often managed this way, and the Consent of the Church more frequently
signified by Communication of Letters, as Grotius observes, than by Synods.

I would not be thought to derogate from the usefulness of Convocations, and
from that Respect and Submission which is justly due to their Decisions.

Whenever the King shall be pleased to give them leave to sit and Act, every
Man is obliged to be determined by their Orders and Decrees, as soon as ever
they are legally confirmed.

But there is not at all times a necessity for their Meeting, and there may be
often greater Reasons to urge against, than for it:

Grotius assigns these as two of the chief Ends of having Synods; Cap. 7. De
Synodis.
one is, to counsel and direct the Prince in the advancement of Truth and
Piety; the other, that the Consent of the Church may be Established and made
known. But a Synod is not absolutely necessary upon either of these accounts:
Counsel is not necessary for a Prince in things that are sufficiently plain by
the Light of Nature, or Supernatural Revelation. Who doubts, but he that denies
a God, a Providence, or a Judgment to come; that calls in question the Divinity
of Christ, or the Redemption purchased by him; who, I say, can doubt, that a
Man so profane may not be put out of Office, or banished the Commonwealth,
without the advice of others?

Besides, the Prince has the Judgment of former Synods to assist and guide him
in such Cases, so that he need not be obliged to call a new one. He has the
perpetual Consent and Determinations of the most Serious and Learned Men, who
have lived in all other Ages, as well as the present, so that a Synod cannot be
absolutely necessary for this End.

As for the Consent of a whole Church, there may be other Methods, as was
already observed, of declaring that without the Meeting of a Convocation.

If then the Ends for which Convocations are to be called are not indispensably
necessary, certainly their Right to sit cannot be Divine. But however it may
be, this to me seems very apparent; that they are guilty of a very great Sin
against God, and their own Consciences, if any such there are, that either
publicly maintain, or secretly believe the Divine Right of Convocations
independent on the Supreme Civil Authority, and yet submit to be Members of
such a one, as has no Power to Sit, or Act, but what depends solely upon the
Pleasure of the State.

If they are convinced that the Clergy have a Divine Commission to Assemble
themselves, and that the Concessions made by the Clergy in Henry the Eighth's
Time were unjust and sinful, why don't they Act agreeably to themselves? Why
don't they protest against the Power of the Prince to call them; refuse his
Writs, and disobey his Summons? For the very Meeting by his Appointment, is an
acknowledgment of his Power, and an actual Surrendering of those Rights, which
they pretend are only theirs, by Virtue of the Divine Institution; and
consequently are in the very least degree for ever unalienable.

If then there are any, (as I would willingly believe there are not) who plead
for such a Divine Right, and yet submit to be called to Convocation by a
Lay-Authority; they must grant at least, that their Practice is very
inconsistent with their Notions. But this I leave to the Consideration of the
Elaborately confused Author of the Municipium Ecclesiasticum: But yet, in
asserting the King's Authority over Convocations, we don't mean, that he may
prescribe, what himself thinks good to be done in the Service of God: How the
Word shall be taught, how the Sacraments Administered: Vid. Eccle. Polity. p.
461.
That he may by judicial Sentence decide Questions which may arise about
Matters of Faith and Christian Religion; that Kings may Excommunicate; Finally,
that Kings may do whatsoever is incident unto the Office and Duty of an
Ecclesiastical Judge. But, to give Mr. Hooker's Words, we mean, That the King's
Royal Power is of so large compass, that no Man Commanded by him, can plead
himself to be without the limits and bounds of that Authority. And that Kings
should be in such sort Supreme Commanders over all Men, we hold it requisite,
as well for the ordering of Spiritual as Civil Affairs; in as much as without
universal Authority in this kind, they should not be able when need is, to do
as Virtuous Kings have done. As Iosia and Hezekiah in the Old Testament did,
when they Assembled the Priests and Levites to renew the House of the Lord, and
to Celebrate the Passover. The like before them did David and Solomon, for
removing the Ark, and Dedicating the Temple. Such Authority as the Jewish Kings
Exercised over Ecclesiastical Affairs and Persons, the like we claim to belong
to our Kings; and those that deny them the same Authority, are to be
Excommunicated, according to the Doctrine of the Church of England.

But since there is an Argument now again insisted upon from the New Testament,
to prove the Right which belongs to the Clergy to Assemble, and make
Ecclesiastical Laws without the leave of the Supreme Authority, which in Mr.
Hooker's Time was brought for an Objection against such a Supremacy in the
King, I shall take the freedom to set it down in his Words, with his Answer to
it.

It will be (says that Excellent Author) perhaps alleged, That a part of the
Unity of Christian Religion is to hold the Power of making Ecclesiastical Laws
a thing appropriated unto the Clergy in their Synods; P. 467.
and whatsoever is by their only Voices agreed upon, it needs no farther
Appropriation to give unto it the strength of a Law, as may plainly appear by
the Canons of that first most venerable Assembly: Acts 15.
Where those things the Apostles and James had concluded, were afterward
published, and imposed upon the Churches of the Gentiles abroad as Laws; the
Records threof remaining still in the Book of God for a Testimony, that the
Power of making Ecclesiastical Laws, belongs to the Successors of the
Apostles, the Bishops and Prelates of the Church of God.

To this we Answer, That the Council of Jerusalem is no Argument for the Power
of the Clergy to make Laws; For first, There has not been since, any Council of
like Authority to that in Jerusalem: Secondly, The Cause, why that was of such
Authority came by a special Accident: Thirdly, The Reason why other Councils
being not like unto that in Nature, the Clergy in them should have no Power to
make Laws by themselves alone, is in Truth so forcible, that except some
Commandment of God, to the contrary can be showed, it ought notwithstanding the
aforesaid Example to prevail.

The Decrees of the Council of Jerusalem, were not as the Canons of other
Ecclesiastical-Assemblies, Humane, but very Divine Ordinances: For which Cause
the Churches were far and wide, commanded every where to see them kept, no
otherwise than if Christ himself had personally on Earth been the Author of
them. The Cause why that Council was of so great Authority and Credit above all
others which have been since, is expressed in those Words of principal
Observation, Unto the Holy Ghost, and to us it has seemed good: Which form of
Speech, though other Councils have likewise used, yet neither could they
themselves-mean, nor may we so understand them* as if both were in equal sort
assisted with the Power of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, in as much as the Council
of Jerusalem did consist of Men so enlightened, it had Authority greater than
were meet for any other Council besides to challenge, wherein such kind of
Persons are, as now the State of the Church does stand; Kings being not then
that which now they are, and the Clergy not now that which then they were. Till
it be proved that some special Law of Christ, has for ever annexed unto the
Clergy alone the Power to make Ecclesiastical Laws, we are to hold it a thing
most Consonant with Equity and Reason, that no Ecclesiastical Laws be made in a
Christian Commonwealth, without consent as well of the Laity as of the Clergy,
but least of all without consent of the highest Power.

The Opinion of the Learned Grotius being more short and decisive in our
present Case, Chap. 7. De Synodis.
upon that forementioned place of the Acts, I shall also give an account of it.
The Original of Synods, says he* is usually taken from that History in the 15th
Chap. of the Acts. But whether that Assembly may be properly termed a Synod, as
we now understand that Word, may very well be questioned. There arose a
Controversy between Paul and Barnabas, and certain Jews of Antioch, concerning
the Obligations of the Mosaic Law: Paul and Barnabas are sent with some of
Antioch, to know the Opinion of the Pastors; but were they those of all Asia,
Syria, Cilicia and Judea, Assembled together in one place, that were to give
their Judgment? No certainly; but of the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem; the
Company of the Apostles, was a College, not a Synod; and the Elders of one
City, could not certainly be called a Synod. One Church therefore alone is
consulted; or more truly and properly speaking, the Apostles only are
consulted, and they alone give Judgment; to whose Authority the Elders and
Brethren of Jerusalem yield their Consent and Approbation. Thus, I think there
cannot be the least shadow of an Argument brought from Scripture for a Divine
Institution of Synods.

But to return once more to Mr. Hooker; Were it so, (adds that judicious
Author) that the Clergy alone might give Laws unto all the rest, is it not
easy to see, how injurious this might prove to Men of other Conditions? Peace
and Justice are maintained by preserving unto every Order their Right, and by
keeping all Estates, as it were in even balance, which thing is no way better
done, than if the King their Common Parent, whose Care is presumed to extend
most indifferently over all, do bear the chiefest sway in making Laws, which
all must be ordered by; wherefore of them which attribute most to the Clergy, I
would demand, what Evidence there is, whereby it may clearly be showed, that in
ancient Kingdoms Christian, any Canon devised alone by the Clergy, in their
Synods, whether Provincial, National or General, has by mere force of their
agreement, taken place as a Law, making all Men constrainable to be Obedient
thereunto, without any other approbation from the King, before or afterward
required in that behalf?

This was the Sense of that Great-Man; and the very same Opinion and Notions
they are, and no other, (as far I can judge,) which are maintained by them, who
at present defend the King's Authority in calling Convocations, and in other
Ecclesiastical Affairs. And I cannot yet apprehend, how those who so warmly and
furiously oppose them, can reconcile their Notions with the Doctrines which
have been always received in the Church of England.

But it may probably be urged, That though the Clergy's Right to Assemble
themselves, and make Laws for the Government of the Church by their own Power
could not be proved by Revelation, yet in Reason it ought to be allowed to
them; because the security of Religion depends upon it. For if the Clergy alone
may not make any new Orders which may seem wanting, nor pass a general Censure
upon any false Opinions or Innovations in Religion, by a judicial Sentence
against them in Convocation, without the Pleasure of the State; The Church will
by this means be deprived of its Liberty, and never be in a Capacity of
deciding any Controversies which may disturb its Peace and Unity. And if the
Prince be Heretical, as it is not impossible, and will not suffer the Meeting of
a Convocation, our Religion will then very probably be corrupted by Errors and
Heresies, and the Church unable to relieve it, by being divested of the Power
of summoning its Clergy; by whose united Opinions and Decrees, a timely stop
might be put to all false Doctrines and Divisions.

To this I answer, That the Case is the same wherever the Power shall be
lodged. Let us suppose in a Metropolitan. Now it is not impossible, but he also
may be a Heretic, and will not suffer a Convocation of the Clergy. For if the
Authority is in him, the inferior Order must be as much subject to his Will, as
to that of the Civil Governor, and may as equally be deprived of their Liberty
of Meeting, by the one as the other; and so it may be, let the Authority be
placed in any other Hands.

But perhaps it may be thought that the Civil Power is not a proper Judge of
the Necessities of the Church, when its Faith or Discipline are in danger of
being corrupted or destroyed.

Let it be granted, That there may be others more fit to judge of these things,
though it may happen, that even some of the Clergy themselves may be mistaken in
these Matters, and may be sometimes very unfit Judges of the most proper Times
for calling a Convocation: Yet I hope the King is not to be precluded from all
Council and Advice in such Cases. If any of the Clergy had the Power, they
would not, I presume, make use of it, upon their own single Opinion: They would
certainly ask the Advice of the most Wise and Judicious in such Matters. And
why the King may not have the same Privileges and Opportunities of Enquiry, I
can see no Reason.

But it is objected, That the Office of the Clergy is distinct from that of the
Civil Power, and they receive no Parts of it from thence, and therefore cannot
be under its Jurisdiction.

So it was also among the Jews, yet their Kings had the Supreme Power over
their Priests. The Power and Authority of the King is Spiritual, though he is
not invested with the Spiritual Office. The King indeed seems in some Cases to
be subject to the Priestly Office; as he is to receive the Sacraments,
Absolution, and the like from them: So also is he subject to his Physician as
to his Health, he is to be governed by his Rules and Methods for preserving
Life. Yet this does not diminish his Authority over either. His Right over
them, as Supreme Governor still remains the same.

But it is again objected, That the Care of Souls is the particular and
immediate Business of the Clergy: And the observance of the true Religion being
necessary to that end, it is undeniable that they ought to have a Power of
endeavoring to preserve it by such ways as may seem most effectual and proper
for it.

To this we may answer, That the Supreme Governor has the same Care incumbent
upon him; Voss. Epist. 23.
he is obliged to preserve and defend the true Religion, to see it rightly
observed, and to punish those that do Evil: Cap. 1. De Imperio.
For which Reason, G. Vossius, as well as Grotius, is of Opinion that Princes
have the Supreme Authority in Sacred Matters by a Divine Right. For if they are
the Ministers of God for Good, they must have the Supreme Command in Religious
Matters, See Bishop Andrew's Sermon at Hampton Court.
whereby to enforce Obedience to them. And indeed, if the Commission given by
God to Moses, and Exercised afterward by Joshua, and the Jewish Kings, and
never abolished by our Savior, does give the same Right and Authority to
Christian Kings now, to call Ecclesiastical Assemblies as they did, it cannot be
denied that they also Act by a Divine Commission. And it is one great Business
of theirs, that Divine Things should be rightly ordered, and the Salvation of
Men procured. They are the Defenders and Guardians of the Divine Law: The
Inspectors of the Actions of all Men; and have accordingly a Power to Reward
and Punish.

It Is also necessary that Kings should have the chief Command in Religious
Matters, because Religion is of mighty Service to the Civil Government; nothing
more advantageous for the preserving Peace and Unity, Love of our Country,
Justice, Equity, and all other Moral Duties, which it is a Princes Duty to
maintain: And which he has no means of effecting so well, as by his Sovereign
Power in all Sacred Concerns. And therefore to deprive him of this Power, is to
forbid him the Exercising those Commands which a Virtuous King is obliged to.

Upon the whole then, it cannot be denied, That by our Constitution, the King
has the sole Power of calling and dissolving Convocations, and that they have
no Authority to Act but what is derived from him. And whoever takes the Oath of
Supremacy grants as much. That this Power is no other, than what was Exercised
by the Jewish Kings, See Bishop Andrew's Sermon at Hampt. Court.
and afterward by the first Christian Emperors; and was never disowned and
protested against by the Clergy. That the Practice of the Christians before the
Conversion of the Supreme Authority, is not concerned in the Dispute; and that
the Scriptures are either for us, or wholly silent in the Matter. Though I think
we may fairly urge, That the Examples of the Jewish Kings, and the general
Authority given to Princes by God, do sufficiently prove even from Scripture,
that this Power does belong to them.

That the Ends of Government require, That where all profess the same Religion,
they should all be subject to the same Common Head, in Spiritual as well as
Civil Affairs. And that He, to whom the chief Care of the Church is committed,
and to whom it principally belongs to preserve and defend the Orders and
Constitutions of it, should also have the Principality of Power in Approving
and Establishing them.

But if the Clergy have the sole Power by a Divine Commission of making
Ecclesiastical Laws, it will follow, That it is the Prince's Business, to
maintain and see them observed, whether he is willing to consent to them or
not. He cannot refuse to obey them himself, nor to oblige others to submit to
them. Nay, more, if the Clergy have a Divine Right to meet and constitute any
Orders without the leave of the Supreme Power, they have a Right also to Decree
and Enact what Laws they may judge beneficial to the Church, how opposite
soever to the Constitutions of the State. They may declare what Doctrines they
please to be taught in the Church, provided they be not repugnant to the Law of
God. For if their Right is Divine, their Power is Absolute and Uncontrollable,
where Scripture has not determined the bounds and measures of it.

Every one sees what Distractions such a Power might occasion; and therefore we
cannot pay too great a Veneration to our Laws, which have wisely provided
against them: That have entrusted this Power with the Prince, whose Interest it
is as much to preserve the Church, as the State. And I hope we have no Reason
to believe, but that he makes it as truly and sincerely his concern to
vindicate the Cause of Religion, as any amongst us.

If there are such Dangers threaten the Church, that nothing but a Convocation
can prevent, no doubt but he will think it a great Obligation upon him to call
one: But yet, it is not at all times necessary; Men's Heats will not always
suffer it. And if it should chance to fire their Tempers instead of cooling
them, it would be then very Prejudicial.

We confess indeed, Cap. 7.
with Grotius and Others, That Synods are often times very useful to the Order
and Government of the Church; yet we also join with them, that there may be
such a time, when they are far from being convenient, Vid. Bp. Bramhal against
the Scotch Discipline.
much less necessary. But our greatest wonder is at the Boldness of some Men,
who maintain, That, even when the Powers take on them the Protection of the
Church, whether they will or no, Synods may lawfully and rightly be Assembled.
Of another Mind, Vossius Epist. 23.
says Vossius, were all those, who have hitherto defended the Cause of the
Protestants against the Papists; and he cites several Authorities for it.

As for the Assertors of a Divine Right of Synods, it is something difficult to
know their meaning; they seem too much to distrust their Cause to speak plain
enough to be understood. If they mean no more by that Expression, than that
Christ has so constituted his Church, as to leave a Power of Government with
the Bishops of it, for the better ordering its Affairs; who accordingly may
either by Consent meet themselves, or by their Authority call together their
Clergy, and agree on such things as are necessary for the ordering of it: This
is what, in States not Christian, will never be denied by us. But if they
pretend to a Power from God of Meeting and Acting independently on the
Sovereign Authority, though Christian, and of Making and Establishing
Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions without his Consent; this is what we
utterly deny. And I would desire to know of the Author of The Vindication of
the deprived Bishops, by what Authority, either from the Scripture or the
Practice of the Church, he will oppose this, or with what Justice he can so
severely reflect on the Memory of the first Reformers, for being of the same
Opinion. But to return, supposing we should allow this jus divinum which they
contend for; yet after all, it must be left to human Prudence to determine,
when it is proper for Convocations to meet; and then, who is it that must judge
of the proper Seasons for it? Who of the Clergy have a divine Commission to
judge of the Reasons, and fix the time for it? Or suppose the Clergy should
differ in their Judgments, who is the supreme Arbiter that must decide when it
is most convenient, and accordingly shall have the Power of summoning all the
rest? Superiority in Bishops over each other is an act of human Authority,
since Christ did not appoint a Head; and therefore any one of those cannot have
a Power by Divine Right of summoning all the rest: Where then must the Power be
placed? For they who urge such an Institution against us, ought to assign where
they would have the divine Power of summoning the Convocation to be lodged.

After all, it is Reason that must direct in these Cases; when a Convocation
ought to be Assembled; of what Number of the Clergy it ought to consist; where
their Power is to be fixed and limited, and to whom the chief Authority ought
to belong of Calling and Dissolving them, and of giving their Resolutions, the
Force and Sanction of a Law. This the Wisdom of the Nation, has entrusted with
the Sovereign Power; Vid. Bp. Tailor, Ductor Dubitamium, Archbp. Bramhal
against the Scots Discipline, etc.
and the Church of England has ever since the Reformation, owned and
acknowledged it to be its peculiar Province.

As for the Author of the Municipium Ecclesiasticum, poor Man, he is rather to
be Pitied then Censured, as to the arguing part of his Book; he writes so much
backwards and forwards, for and against himself, and withal so very obscurely,
that the most charitable Opinion of him, is, That he knew nothing of what he
writ. He is so strangly bewildred in his own Notions, and so fond of
Ill Nature, that he is neither to be understood or convinced.

All he has urged in defense of the Divine Right of Convocations, will as much
prove a Divine Right of Constables and Churchwardens, or any other Officers
that may be useful for punishing Immorality, or for supporting or advancing the
Interest of the Church. And for all the Argument I can find in his Book, he
might as well have called it a Criticism upon Honer's Iliads, as an Answer to
Dr. Wake.

This Author is one great Instance, why I think a Convocation necessary, that
Malice and Uncharitableness may have their just Reward; that he may be
convinced, that he who writes at all adventures upon every thing he least
understands, must not think to carry a Cause only by abusing and defaming his
Adversary; which is all that I can find he pretends to, in all his Prints: And
lastly, that he may be satisfied that his Ill-breeding, which he values himself
so much upon, is but one way Meritorious.

I should not have digressed into this way of Writing, was it not to inform
this Author, that there is a difference between Railing and Argument: That the
one is rude and indecent, even when mixed with the other; but without it, it is
insufferable.

Thus have I run through all the parts of this Dispute, about a Convocation,
which I thought necessary to be considered and discussed; I have endeavored to
reduce the Controversy, into as narrow a compass, and to set it in as clear
and true a Light as I could. And as I have given my Thoughts freely, so I have
not been misled by any Prejudice, or a desire of pleasing any Party. My first
Designs were to get a clear view of the Controversy; and since there had been
of late some heats about it, I thought it not improper to expose my Enquires to
public Examination. I consulted the best and most rational Authors that I
could find had writ upon the Subject; though I thought it unnecessary to fill out
a Volume with Quotations. Vos. Ep. 23.
But I shall add what the Learned Vossinus as well as Grotius, says upon this
occasion; namely, That besides the Divines, all the Writers of Polity, De
Imperio sum. Potest. circa Sacra.
that are worth the Reading, have declared the supreme Authority of Princes,
over Ecclesiastical Persons and Causes, to be one of the principal parts of the
Imperial Right. Dr. Wake, as well as all the other Writers upon this Subject,
is wholly unknown to me: But I cannot but think, upon an impartial Enquiry into
the Controversy, that he has given us a very just and learned. Account of it;
and that he agrees with the most judicious and eminent Men, that have treated
the Subject before him. What a piece of daring Confidence must it then be, to
tax those as mercenary designing Writers, that only espouse a Cause, which some
of the greatest and most learned Men in the World, have before defended. But I
shall urge nothing more, but only, That I have delivered what I judged to be
Right, without either Hopes or Fears.

FINIS.

