CONTEMPLATIONS MORAL AND DIVINE.

By a Person of great Learning and Judgment.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, Martii 13. 1675/6.

Antonius Saunders, Reverendissimo Dno, Domino Gilberto Archi-Episc. Cant. a
Sacris Domesticis.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, for William Shrowsbury at the Bible in
Duke-lane, and John Leigh at the Blew Bell in Fleetstreet near Chancery Lane.

M. DC. LXXVI.

The PREFACE.
THe Author of these Writings is a person of great Learning, great Judgment and
Wisdom, and of great Virtue and Piety. He has written diverse learned and
complete Works upon other subjects; but for these Writings here published, they
were written, as were also many others of the like nature, ex tempore, and upon
this Occasion: It has been his custom for many years, every Lord's Day in the
afternoon after Evening Sermon (between that and Supper-time) to employ his
thoughts upon several subjects of Divine Contemplations; and as things came
into his thoughts, so he put them into writing; which he did for these two
Reasons: 1. That he might the more fix his thoughts, and keep them from
diversion and wandering. 2. That they might remain, and not be lost by forget
fullness or other interventions.

And as this was the occasion and manner of his writing them, so this doubtless
was all that he intended in them, unless moreover to communicate them to his
Children or some particular Friends in private upon occasion: but for
publishing them, certainly he had not the least thoughts of any such thing;
much less has he revised them for that purpose; nor so much as read over some
of them since he wrote them; nor indeed so much as finished some of them. Nay
so far was he from any thoughts of publishing them, that when he was importuned
but to give his consent to the publication of them, he could not be prevailed
with to do it. And therefore that they are now published, the Reader must know
that they are published not only in their native and primogenial simplicity,
but without so much as the Author's privity to it.

And thus much I thought my self obliged even in justice to the Author to
acquaint the Reader with, and ingenuously to acknowledge, and take upon my self
the fault; if any thing less perfect and complete, or any wise liable to
exception shall appear in these Papers, seeing they were neither written with
any intention to be published, nor revised by the Author, nor are published
with his knowledge.

But this again on the other side obliges me to render some Account of my
doing herein. I confess I approve not the thing in general, that is, the
publication of another's Writings without his consent or privity: but yet I
know very well that those things which in the general are for the most part
unlawful, may yet be so circumstantiated in a particular case, as that they may
become not only lawful, but very commendable to be done in that case: and such
a special case I take this to be. And though I think my self accountable to the
Author chiefly, if not to him alone, for what I have done in this case, yet
some account thereof I shall give to the Reader, so far at least as concerns
these Writings, or is necessary for him to be acquainted with.

When I first met with some of these Writings and obtained the perusal of them,
I thought them well worth my pains to transcribe: which I did partly for my own
use; and partly, seeing them written in loose and scattered papers, to preserve
them from that danger of perishing, from which I conceived the Author's larger
and more complete works to be more safe and secure. And having collected a
pretty considerable stock of them, I communicated some of them, as I saw
occasion to some friends, some of them persons of good judgment and learning,
who very much commended the same: and scarce any that saw them, but said 'twas
great pity but they should be printed. But besides the Approbation of them by
all to whom I did communicate them, I perceived that they had a real effect to
the good and benefit of some who perused them: and this experience of the good
effects which they produced by my communication of them to a few friends in
private, did further confirm my own opinion of them, that they must certainly
do much good if published; and being made common have the same good influences
upon many, which I found they had upon some of those few to whom they were
communicated in private: but for the Manuscript Copies which I had, they were
not sufficient for all those fair opportunities of doing good with them, which
I saw even among my own friends and acquaintance. Whereupon I solicited the
Author to publish them, or at least to give his consent to the publication of
them; but could not prevail with him for either, although I know that no motive
or argument is more prevalent with him than that of Doing Good. But when I
perceived, as I thought, that the chief reasons why he would neither publish
them himself, nor give his consent to the publication of them, were such as
would be of no force against the publication of them without his privity or
knowledge, I began to consider of doing that.

But before I resolved upon it, I sent two of the largest of them to a person,
whose Judgment I know the Author does much esteem, to have his opinion of them,
not letting him know either who was the Author, or who sent them to him; and
having received his opinion and commendation of them, and that he judged them
like to do much good, and such as would be very seasonable to be published, I
began further to consider whether and how they might be published without
either Wrong or Injury on the one side, or Offense on the other, to the Author.
And for the former I reckoned that his concern in it was either in respect of
the Disposal of the Copy wherein would be no great difficulty; or more
especially in respect of the Writings to be published, if either there should
occurr any thing therein not fit to be made public; or if they were not so
well polished and perfected as might be for his credit and reputation.

And although this might seem to be provided for in some sort by Concealing his
Name (which truly I should much rather have made known, but that I knew I must
then venture doubly to incurr his displeasure) yet I looked upon this as but a
weak and insufficient provision, in as much as it is not unusual for Learned
men even from the very style and genius of writings to discover the writers; an
expriment whereof I had seen in a person of learning and parts, to whom upon
occasion I once showed one of the writings of this Author, but purposely
concealed who the author was, whom notwithstanding be soon discovered from the
writing it self, telling me he knew no man that did think at that rate, but
such a person, who was the Author indeed. And the truth is, these Writings do
not obscurely speak their author, being a most lively representation of him,
that is, of his Mind and Soul, and of that Learning, Wisdom, Piety and Virtue,
which is very eminent and conspicuous in him; particularly that of the Great
Audit, which I use to look upon as his very picture, wherein representing the
Good Steward passing his Account, it was impossible for him not to give a
lively Representation of himself; as every Character of a truly wise and
virtuous person must needs agree with him who is really such; and they who are
eminently such can hardly be unknown: and therefore it is not impossible that
some, even from the consideration of the work, may discover the work man,
besides many other occasions of discovery which may happen.

But as I thought this too weak and insufficient, so I could not but think it
altogether needless, and unworthy both the excellent Author, and these his
pious and excellent meditations, to be made use of to that end; and should much
rather have abstained from publishing them at all, than have relied upon such a
shift, if I had thought that they had stood in any need thereof. But as it was
only their ^^al worth and Excellence, and Usefulness which moved me to desire
their publication, so I was verily persuaded, and as well assured as I could be
in any writings of my own, and that not upon my own opinion only, but upon the
judgment of others also, that nothing liable to exception does occurr in them,
or any thing considerable that is questionable, which has not other approved
authors who say the same: and the truth is, the subject of them is such as is
not like to afford much matter of that nature; these being Moral and Practical
things, whereas they are for the most part matters of Speculation, and of
curious (I had almost said presumptuous) and unnecessary, if not undeterminable
Specntation, which make the great stirrs, and are the matter and occasions of
greatest controversy, especially among them of the Reformed Religion.

And though these Writings never underwent the last Hand or Pencil of the
Judicious Author, and therefore, in respect of that perfection which he could
have given to them, be not altogether so complete as otherwise they might have
been, yet if we consider them in themselves, or with respect to the Writings
which are daily published, even of learned men, and published by the Authors
themselves, these will be found to be such as may not only very well pass in
the crowd, but such as are of no vulgar or common strain. The Subjects of them
indeed are common Themes, but yet such as are of most weight and moment in the
Life of Man, and of greatest concernment; as in Nature those things, which are
of greatest use and concernment, are most common. But the matter of his
Meditations upon these subjects is not common: For as he is a man that Thinks
closely and deeply of things, not after a common rate, so his Writings, his
most ex tempore Writings, have a certain Genius and Energie in them much above
the common rate of Writers. And though these were written ex tempore, and in
such manner as has been said before, yet the matter of them is for the most
part such, as he had before well digested, and, as a Scribe instructed to the
Kingdom of Heaven, had treasured up in his heart, and out of this good treasure
of his heart and the abundance of it be produces these good things; things
which be looked upon as of greatest concern, and most worth his serious
consideration, and had accordingly weighed and considered. And for the Style,
it is suitable to the Matter, Significant, Perspicuous and Manly; his Words are
Spirit and Life, and carry Evidence and Demonstration with them, Moral and
Experimental Demonstration: Vox non ex ore, sed ex pectore emissa. And if we
take these Writings all together, and weigh them duly and heartily, without any
vain humor of critical and pedantick censeri^usness, we may therein no less
observe the worth and excellence of their Author, especially considering in
what manner they were written, than in his more elaborate Works: and being
written and published in this manner they do more evidently demonstrate the
reality of his Honest, Virtuous, and Pious Principles, than had they been
designed to be published, and been published by himself; which perhaps may
render them not less acceptable to some Readers not of the lower rank.

So that considering the Writings themselves I could not think that there was
any thing therein, whether of matter or form, which could render the
publication of them injurious or prejudicial to the Author in the least in any
of the respects before mentioned. Yet notwithstanding for the greater security I
thought it might be fit, and but just to give this true and ingenuous account
both of the occasion and manner of his writing, and of the publication of of
them without his privity or knowledge. And this I conceived might be a just and
sufficient means to secure the Author against all exceptions, as that which
would wholly acquit him in the judgment of all reasonable men, and transferr
the blame, if any should be, to my self, which yet was no more than what I must
have resolved to have undergone had they been my own Writings which I had
published.

It remained therefore only to consider how this might be done, as without
Injury in other respects, so without Offense to the Worth Author. And for this,
two things did not a little encourage me. I. The Honesty of my Desig^ and
Sincerity of my Intentions in it: and 2. The Candor and Goodness of the Author.
His Candor I knew to be such, that I doubted not of (...) fair and favorable
construction of my Desig^ and Intentions. And I knew his Goodness Affection and
Readiness to do Good, to be such that he could not but approve my Design, that
is, to do Good; the doing whereof I knew to be a thing of greater weight with
him than all hi^ reasons against the Publication: And that much good may be
done by the publication of these writings, I could assure him upon my own
experience of the effects I had seen already produce^ by them in Manuscript.
All which, when h^ should consider, I was persuaded, though perhaps he might at
first be a little surprised with the unexpected publication of them, yet he
could not be much offended at it. And then if I could publish them without
either Injury or Offense to him, I reckoned it all one in effect as if I had
had his consent before to it. And hereupon I ^^^^zed at last upon it; and upon
these con^^erations have made thus bold with this excel^^^ person and my very
good friend for the G^od of others, which I should not have done for any
private advantage to my self whatsoever.

I doubt not but the Reader will be very desirous to know who the Author of
these Excellent Meditations is; and truly I was no less desirous that he should
know it; and that for no inconsiderable reasons: 1. As it has always been one
of the most usual and constant Means and Methods, which Almighty God has, in
all Ages and Nations, used for the promotion of the Good of Mankind, to raise
up eminent Examples of Virtue; so he has been pleased to make this Author one
of them in this Age and Nation: and because the Efficacy of the Examples of
Virtuous Actions does no less depend upon the Principles from whence they
proceed, than does the intrinsic Virtue and Goodness of the Actions
themselves, the Publication of these Writings, which so plainly manifest his
Principles, could not but be of great use to render his Excellent Example the
more effectual, and so become subservient to the Gracious Designs of the Divine
Providence. 2. In like manner ^n the other side, the known Worth, and Virtue,
and Learning, and Prudence of the Author, would certainly have made these his
Writings, how Excellent soever of themselves, yet more prevalent with many. 3.
And because he is well known to be a person of extraordinary and admirable
sagacity, dexterity, and impartiality in the search and the discovery of the
truth matters in question, and has (though that not so generally known) with
much care (...) diligence, considered and examined the Reas and Evidences, both
Natural and Moral Religion; these Writings, which so plainly (...) nifest,
though upon another occasion, his S^ and Judgment of the Christian Religion,
mi^^^ be of good use to ease many of the doubts, (...) seruples of some
persons, and to check the (...) and inconsiderate presumption of others, ab^^^
Religion. And his Judgment in the case is (...) more considerable, as in
respect of his gr^^^ ability, and the care and diligence which has used in the
examination of it; so in spect of his freedom from all those thing whether of
Natural constitution, or of pro^sion, or worldly interest, which may be by
(...) suspected to prejudice or bias the Judgment of others. And therefore I
doubt not but so^^^ who have a great respect for his person, (...) may perhaps
not have the same thoughts Religion which he has, when they should his
Judgment in the case, might by the Aut^^^rity thereof be moved to a further and
bet^^^ consideration of it. It Is true, the life of (...) ligion is very visible
in his Life and Action which are all the genuine product of a so^^^ and
well-grounded persuasion of the Truth that Faith, which overcomes the World,
(...) has indeed set him up much above it, yet because common Prudence may
move a sober and considerate man to an external conformity to so reasonable a
Religion, and to the practice of those excellent Virtues which it requires,
these Writings may possibly give more satisfaction to some concerning his
Judgment in the case, than his Life and Actions. And in that respect they may
possibly come forth with some advantage, being written and published in this
manner; for here we may read his most intimate and retired Thoughts.

And for these reasons I much desired to have prefixed his Name, or at least to
have let the Reader know who he is; but I know that that would certainly have
been displeasing to him; and therefore having made so bold with him in the
Publication of these his Writings, I would not presume further to discover who
he is, though for so just and honest ends; but have purposely left out some
passages which would too plainly have made him known.

Being far distant from the Press, there may possibly be some few Typographical
Errata, more than otherwise there should have been; but I hope that care has
been taken, that they are not many, nor very considerable; the sense will
enable the Reader to amend them.

The several Treatises now published are these, which should have been printed
in this Order: Of the Consideration of our Latter End. Of Wisdom, and the Fear
of God. Of the Knowledge of Christ Crucified. The Victory of Faith over the
World. Of Humility. Jacob's Vow. Of Contentation. Of Afflictions. A good Method
to entertain unstable and trouble som^times. Changes and Troubles: A Poem. Of
the Redemption of Time. The Great Audit. Directions touching the Keeping of the
Lord Day, in a Letter to his Children. Poems upon Christmas Day.


Ut Nox longa quibus mentitur amica, Diesque Longa videtur opus debentibus, ut
piger Annus Pupillis, quos dura premit custodia matrum: Sic mihi tarda fluunt
ingrataque tempora, quae spem Consiliumque morantur agendi graviter id quod
Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque, Aeque neglectum pueris,
senibusque nocebit. ERRATA.
Page 25 lin 16, 21, 26 read emanant p.36. l. 24. 1. T^ose, p.44. l. 15. r. and
instructed l.1^. dele and. p.52. l. 4. r. ^reach of. p. 56. l.13. feasible, r.
sensible. p.119. l.22. r. accom^^. p. 121. l.23. r. ^ounting. p. 122. l. 3.
Interest, r. action. p. 144. l. ^. we are. r. were. p. 202. l. 23. r. ^o less.
p. 240. l. 7. r. (...) the him as. p. 267 l. 11. r. doubr^^ngs of i^. p. 2^1.
l. 2^., (...), r. (...). p. 277. l. 1. r. ^ear in relation to. p 301. l. 8.
o^ertune, r. over-(...). p. 310. l. 8. r. (...). p. 323. l. 14. (...), r.
^a^cs. p. 343. l. 12. East, r. Constable. p. 348. l. 16. r. de^erence. line 21. a,
r. one. l. 23. he, r. another. p. 352. l. 24. r. Deposit^^. p. 356. l. 15. r.
intensive. p. 363. l. 11. as, r. us l.1. (...). Second Part, p. 12. l. 13.
There. Th^s.. p. 26. l. 10. ^ ^ffectualy. l. 21. act, r. art. p. 27. l. 28. 10,
r. in. p. 28. l. 22.1. ^ut there are. p. 33. l. 5. r. now it is. Great Audit.
p. 20. (...). 24. Master, r. Maker. p. 21. l. 25. r. improved. p. 23. l. 13. r.
^ad signal. p. 2^. l. 8. up, r. out. p. 31. l.10. These, r. Those p. 41. (...)
Now. p. 52. l. 16. dele sels. p. 87. l.23. that two. r. the. p. 34. l. 15. r.
or Nation. p. 96. l. 23. In^amy, r. In^ancy, p. 97. l. 14 r In^ancy, p. 101. l.
24. that, r. the. p. 102. l. 18 r. infold. p 106 l. 3. r. ^e we meant. p. 107.
l. 2. the woulds r. her Makers. p. 108. l. 1. step, r. stoop. p. 117. l. 26. r.
Cottagers. (...) Day. p. 87. l. 23. r. the Mymus and Creeds.

OF THE CONSIDERATION Of our LATTER END, AND The BENEFITS of It.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXII. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end!
IT may be probably thought that the principal intention of this wish of Moses
was, That the People of Israel had a due consideration of their final
rejection; the ten Tribes for their Idolatry, and the two Tribes for their
Crucifying of the Messiah; and not only of that state of rejection, but the
causes of it, namely, Idolatry and r^jection of the Messiah; which
consideration would have made them wise and prudent^ avoid those great
Apostasies which shou^ occasion so terrible a desertion and rejecti^^ by God.

But certainly the words contain an ev^dent truth, with relation to every
particul^ person, and to that latter end that is common to all mankind,
namely, their lat^end by death, and separation of the Soul a^^ Body; the due
consideration whereof is great part of Wisdom, and a great mea^ to attain and
improve it; and very man of the sins and follies of mankind, as the do in a
great measure proceed from t^^ want of an attentive and serious consi^^ration
of it, so would be in a great meas^cured by it.

It is the most certain, known, experien^ truth in the World that all men must
d^^ that the time of that death is uncertai^ that yet most certainly it will
com^^ and that within the compass of no lo^ time: Though the time of our Life
mig^^ be protracted to its longest period, yet^ is ten thousand to one that it
will not exce^ fourscore years; where one man attai^ to that age, ten thousand
dit before it; a^^ this Lecture is read unto us by the many casualties and
diseases that put a period to the Lives of many in our own experience and
observation, by the many warnings and monitions of Mortality that every man
finds in himself either by the occurrences of diseases and weaknesses, and
especially by the declinations that are apparent in us if we attain to any
considerable age; and the weekly Bills of Mortality in the great City, where
weekly there are taken away ordinarily three hundred persons: The Monuments and
Graves in every Church and Churchyard do not only evince the truth of it,
whereof no man of understanding doubts, but do uncessantly inculcate the
remembrance of it.

And yet it is strange to see that this great truth, whereof in the theory no
man's doubts, is little considered or thought upon by the most of mankind: But
notwithstanding all these monitions and remembrances of Mortality, the living
lay (...) not to heart, and look upon it as a bu^^ness that little concerns
them, as if they were not concerned in this common condition of mankind, and
as if the condition of Mortality only concerned them that actually die, or are
under the immediate Harbingers of it, some desperate or acute diseases, but
concerned not them that are at present in health, or not under the stroke of a
mortal sickness. The Reasons of this Inconsiderateness seem principally these:
1. That men are not willing to entertain this unwelcom thought of their own
latter End; the thought whereof is so unwelcom and troublesome a Guest, that it
seems to blast and disparage all those present enjoyments of Sense, that this
Life affords: Whereby it comes to pass that, as Death it self is unwelcom when
it draws near, so the thoughts and apprehensions of it becomes as unwelcom as
the thing it self. 2. A vain foolish conceit that the consideration of the
latter End is a kind of presage and invitation of it; and upon this account I
have known many superstitiously and foolishly to forbear the making of their
Wills, because it seemed to them ominous and a presage of Death; whereas this
consideration, though it fits and prepares: man for Death, it does no way
hasten or presage it. 3. A great difficulty that ordinarily attends our humane
condition, to think otherwise concerning our condition than what at present we
feel and find. We are now in health, and we can hardly bring our selves to
think that a time must and will come wherein we shall be sick: We are now in
life, and therefore we can hardly cast our thoughts into such a mould to think
we shall die; and hence it is true, as the common Proverb is, That there is no
man so old, but he thinks he shall live a year longer.


It is true, this is the way of mankind to put far from us the evil day and
the thought of it; but this our way is our folly, and one of the greatest
occasions of those other follies that commonly attend our lives; and therefore
the great means to care this folly and to make us wise, is wisely to consider
our latter end. This Wisdom appears in those excellent effects it produces,
which are generally these two: 1. It teaches us to live well. 2. It teaches
us to die easily. For the former of these, the consideration of our latter end
does in no sort make our lives the shorter, but it is a great means to make our
lives the better.

1. It is a great monition and warning of us to avoid Sin, and a great means to
prevent it. When I shall consider that certainly I must die, and I know not how
soon, why should I commit those things, that if they hasten not my latter end,
yet they will make it more uneasy and troublesome by the reflection upon what I
have done amiss? I may die to morrow, why should I commit that evil that will
then be gall and bitterness unto me? would I do it if I were to die to morrow?
why should I then do it to day? perchance it may be the last act of my Life,
and however let me not conclude so ill; for, for ought I know, it may be my
concluding Act in this Scene of my Life.

2. It is a great motive and means to put us upon the best and most profitable
improvement of our time. There be certain Civil and Natural actions of our
lives that God Almighty has indulged and allowed to us, and indeed commanded
us with moderation to use: As the competent supplies of our own Natures with
moderation and sobriety; the provision for our Families, Relations, and
Dependances, without covetousness or anxiety; the diligent and faithful walking
in our Callings, and discharge thereof: But there are also other businesses of
greater importance, which yet are attainable without injuring our selves in
those common concerns of our Lives: namely, our knowledge of God, and of His
Will; of the doctrine of our Redemption by Christ; our Repentance of Sins past;
making and keeping our Peace with God; acquainting our selves with Him; living
to His Glory; walking as in His Presence; Praying to Him; learning to Depend
upon Him; Rejoicing in Him; walking Thankful unto Him. These, and such like as
these, are the great Business and End of our Lives, for which we enjoy them in
this World; and these fit and prepare us for that which is to come: And the
consideration that our Lives are short and uncertain, and that Death will
sooner or later come, puts us upon this resolution and practice to do this our
great work while it is called to day; that we loiter not away our day, and
neglect our task and work while we have time and opportunity, lest the night
overtake us when we cannot work; to gain Oil in our Lamps before the door be
shut: And if men would wisely consider their latter Ends, they might do this
great business, this one thing necessary, with ease and quietness; yea, and
without any neglect of what is necessary to be done in order to the common
necessities of our Lives and Callings; it is not these that disable us and rob
us of our time: But the Thieves that rob us of our time, and our one thing
necessary, are negligence, excess of pleasures, immoderate and excessive cares
and solicitousness for Wealth, and Honor, and Grandeur; excessive eating and
drinking, curiosity, idleness; these are the great consumptives that do not
only exhaust that time that would be with infinite advantage spent in our
attainment, and perfecting, and finishing the great work and business of our
lives; and then when Sickness come, and Death come, and God Almighty calls upon
us to give up the Account of our Stewardship, we are all in confusion, our
business is not half done, it may be not begun, and yet our Lamp is out, our
day is spent, night has overtaken us, and what we do is with much trouble,
perplexity, and vexation; and possibly our Soul takes its flight before we can
finish it: and all this would have been prevented, and remedied, by a due
consideration of our latter End; and that would have put us upon making use of
the present time, and present opportunity, to do our great work while it is
called to day, because the night comes when no man can work.

3. Most certainly the wise consideration of our latter End, and the employing
of our selves, upon that Account, upon that One thing necessary, renders the
life the most contenting and comfortable life in the World. For as a man, that
is a man aforehand in the World, has a much more quiet life in order to
externals, than he that is behind-hand; so such a man, that takes his
opportunity to gain a stock of grace and favor with God, that has made his
peace with his Maker through Christ Jesus, has done a great part of the chief
business of his Life, and is ready upon all occasions, for all conditions,
whereunto the Divine Providence shall assign him, whether of life or death, or
health or sickness, or poverty or riches; he is as it were aforehand in the
business and concern of his everlasting, and of his present state also. If God
lend him longer life in this World, he carries on his great business to greater
degrees of perfection, with ease, and without difficulty, trouble, or
perturbation: But if Almighty God cut him shorter, and calls him to give an
account of his Stewardship, he is ready, and his accounts are fair, and his
business is not now to be gone about; Blessed is that Servant whom his Master
when he comes shall find so doing.

2. As thus this Consideration makes the Life better, so it makes Death easy.

1. By frequent consideration of death and dissolution, he is taught not to
fear it; he is, as it were, acquainted with it aforehand, by often preparation
for it. The fear of death is more terrible than death i^ self, and by frequent
consideration thereof a man has learned not to fear it. Ever^^^ Children by
being accustomed to what was at first terrible to them, learn not to fear.

2. By frequent consideration of our latter End death becomes to be no surprise
unto us. The great terror of death is when it surpriseth a man unawares; but
anticipation and preparation for it takes away any possibility of surprise upon
him that is prepared to receive it. Bilney the Martyr was used, before his
Martyrdom, to put his Finger in the Candle, that so the flames might be no
novelty unto him, not surprise him by reason of unacquaintedness with it; and
he that often considers his latter end, seems to experiment death before it
comes, whereby he is neither surprised nor affrighted with it, when it comes.

3. The greatest sting and terror of death are the past and unrepented Sins of
the past life; the reflection upon these is that which is the strength, the
elixir, the venom of death it self. He therefore that wisely considers his
latter end, takes care to make his peace with God in his life time; and They
true Faith and Repentance to get his Pardon sealed; to enter into Covenant with
his God, and to keep it; to husband his time in the fear of God; to observe His
Will, and keep His Laws; to have his Conscience clean and clear: And being thus
prepared, the malignity of death is cured, and the bitterness of it healed, and
the fear of it removed: and when a man can entertain it with such an Appeal to
Almighty God, as once the good King Hezekiah made, in that sickness which was
of it self mortal, Isa. 38. 3. Remember now, I beseech thee O Lord, how I have
walked before thee with a perfect heart, etc. it makes as well the thought, as
the approach of death, no terrible business.

4. But that which, above all, makes death easy to such a considering man, is
this: That by the help of this Consideration, and the due improvement of it, as
is before shown, death to such a man becomes nothing else but a Gate unto a
better life; not so much a dissolution of his present life, as a change of it
for a far more glorious, happy, and immortal life: So that though the Body
dies, the Man dies not; for the Soul, which is indeed the Man, makes but a
transition from her life in the Body, to a life in Heaven: no moment intervenes
between the putting off the one, to the putting on the other: And this is the
great Privilege, that the Son of God has given us, that by His death has
sanctified it unto us, and by His life has conquered it, not only in Himself,
but for us; 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be unto God, who has given us the victory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; and our Victory, that is thus given us, is this,
1. That the sting of death is taken away, and 2. That this very death it self
is rendered to us a Gate and passage to life eternal; and upon this account it
can neither hurt, nor may justly affright us. It is reported of the Adder that
when she is old, she glides through some strait passage and leaves her old skin
in the passage, and thereby renews her vigor and her life. It is true, this
passage through death is somewhat strait, and uneasy to the Body, which, like
the decayed skin of the Adder, is left by the way, and not without some pain
and difficulty to it; but the Soul passes through without any harm, and
without any expense of time, and in the next moment acquires her estate of
Immortality and Happiness. And this is the Victory over Death, that all those
have, that by true Repentance and Faith are partakers of Christ and the
benefits of His Death and Resurrection, who has brought Life and Immortality
to light by the Gospel.

And now having gone through the benefits of this wise consideration of our
latter ends, I shall now add some Cautions that are necessary to be annexed to
this Consideration: We are to know that although Death be thus subdued and
rendered rather a benefit than a terror to good men, yet,

1. Death is not to be wished or desired, though it be an object not to be
feared; it is a thing not to be coveted, for certainly life is the greatest
temporal blessing in the World. It was the passion, not the virtue, of that
excellent Prophet Elijah, that desired to dye, because he thought himself only
left of the true worshippers of God; 1 Kings 19.4. We are all placed in this
World by Almighty God, and a talent of life is delivered to us, and we are
commanded to improve it; a task is set every one of us in this life by the
great Master of the Family of Heaven and Earth, and we are required with
patience, and obedience, and faithfulness to perform our task, and not to be
weary of our work, nor wish our day at an end before its time. When our Lord
calls us, it is our duty with courage and cheerfulness to obey His call; but
until He calls, it is our duty, with patience and contentedness, to perform our
task to be doing of our work. And indeed in this life our Lord has delivered
us several tasks of great importance to do; as namely, 1. To improve our graces
and virtues, our Knowledge and Faith, and those works of piety and goodness
that he requires: the better and closer we follow that business here, the
greater will be our reward and improvement of glory hereafter: And therefore as
we must, with all readiness, give over our work when our Master calls us; so we
must, with all diligence and perseverance, continue our employment out till he
calls us, and with all thankfulness unto God entertain and rejoice in that
portion of life he lends us, because we have thereby an opportunity of doing
our Master the more service, and of improving the degrees of our own glory and
happiness. 2. And besides the former, he has also set us another task, namely,
to serve our Generation; to give an example of virtue and goodness; to
encourage others in the ways of virtue and goodness; to provide for our
Families and Relations; to do all good offices of Justice, Righteousness,
Liberality, Charity to others; cheerfully and industriously to follow our
Callings and Employments; and infinite more as well Natural, Civil, Moral
employments, which though of a lower importance in respect of our selves, yet
are of greater use and moment in respect of others, and are as well as the
former required of us, and part of the task that our great Lord requires of us,
and for the sake of which he also bestows many Talents upon us to be thus
improved in this life, and for which we must also at the end of our day give
our Lord an account; and therefore for the sake of this also we are to be
thankful for our life, and not be desirous to leave our post, our station, our
business, our life till our Lord call us to Himself in the ordinary way of His
Providence, for He is the only Lord of our lives, and we are not the Lords of
our own lives.

2. A second Caution is this, That as the business, and employments, and
concerns of our life must not estrange us from the thoughts of death, so again
we must be careful that the overmuch thought of death do not so much possess
our thoughts as to make us forget the concerns of our life, nor neglect the
businesses which that portion of time is allowed us for: As, the business of
fitting our Souls for Heaven, the businesses of our callings, relations, places
stations: Nay the comfortable, thankful sober enjoyments of those honest lawful
comforts of our life that God lends us, so as it be done with great sobriety,
moderation as in the presence of God, and with much thankfulness to Him; for
this is part of that very duty we owe to God for those very external comforts
and blessings we enjoy. Deuteronomy. 28.47. A wise and due consideration of our latter
ends is neither to render us a sad, melancholy, disconsolate people, nor to
render us unfit for the businesses and offices of our life, but to render us
more watchful, vigilant, industrious, soberly cheerful and thankful to that God
that has been pleased thus to make our lives serviceable to Him, comfortable
to us, profitable to others, and after all this to take away the bitterness and
sting of death through Jesus Christ our Lord.

OF WISDOM AND The Fear of GOD, That that is True WISDOM.
JOB XXVIII. 28. And to man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord that is
wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.
THe great pre-eminence that Man has over Beasts is his Reason, and the great
pre-eminence that one man has over another is Wisdom; though all men have
ordinarily the privilege of Reason, yet all men have not the habit of Wisdom.
The greatest commendation that we can ordinarily give a man is that he is a
wise man, and the greatest reproach that can be to a man, and that which is
worst resented is to be called or esteemed a fool; and yet as much as the
reputation of wisdom is valued and the reputation of folly is resented, the
generality of mankind are in truth very fools and make it the great part of
their business to be so, and many that pretend to see^ after wisdom do either
mistake the thing or mistake the way to attain; commonl^ those that are the
greatest pretenders (...) wisdom and the search after it, place it i^ some
little narrow concern, but place i^ not in its true latitude commensurate to
the nature of mankind: And hence it is tha^ one esteems it the only wisdom to
be (...) wise Politician or Statesman, another t^ be a wise and knowing
Naturalist, another to be a wise acquirer of Wealth, and the like; and all
these are wisdoms in their kind and the World perchance would be much better
than it is, if these kind of wisdom were more in fashion than they are: bu^ yet
these are but partial wisdoms, the wisdom that is most worth the seeking and
finding is that which renders a man a Wise Man.

This excellent man Job after a diligen^ search (in the speech of this Chapter)
after Wisdom, what it is, where to be found does at length make these two
Conclusions; viz. 1. That the true root of wisdom, and that therefore best knew
where it was to be found and how to be attained, is certainly none other but A
mighty God, verse. 23. God understands the way thereof and knows the place
thereof; and 2. As he alone best knew it, so he best knew how to prescribe unto
mankind the means and method to attain it. To man he said, to fear God that is
wisdom; that is, it is the proper and adequate wisdom suitable to humane nature,
and to the condition of mankind: and we need not doubt but it (is) so, because
he, that best knew what was the best rule of wisdom, prescribed it to man, his
best of visible creatures, whom we have just reason to believe he would not
deceive with a false or desicient rule of wisdom; since as wisdom is the beauty
and glory of man, so wisdom in man sets forth the glory, and excellency, and
goodness of God. And consonant to this David a wise King, and Solomon the
wisest of men, affirm the same truth, Psalm. 111 10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have they that do his commandments.
Prove. 1.7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools
despise wisdom and instruction: and 9.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom, and the knowledge of the holy is understanding. And when the wise
man had run all his long travel of Experiments to attain that which might be
that good for the children of men, in the end of his tedious chase and pursuit,
he closes up all with this very same conclusion, Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear
the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for
this is the whole duty of man; and he gives a short, but effectual Reason of
it, For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. And hence it is that this wise man,
who had the greatest measure of wisdom of any mere man since the creation of
Adam; that had as great experience and knowledge of all things and persons;
that made it his business to search and to enquire, not only into wisdom, but
into madness and folly; that had the greatest opportunity of wealth and power
to make the exactest enquiry therein: This wise, and inquisitive, and
experienced man, in all his Writings, styles the man fearing God and obeying
him, the only wise man; and the person that neglects this duty, the only fool
and mad man.

And yet it is strange to see how little this is thought of or believed in the
World: Nay, for the most part he is thought the wisest man who has the least
of this principle of Wisdom appearing in him; that shakes off the fear of God,
or the sense of his presence, or the obedience to his will, and the discipline
of Conscience; and by craft, or subtilty, or power, or oppression, or by
whatsoever method may be most conducible, pursues his ends of profit, or power,
or pleasure, or what else his own vain thoughts and the mistaken estimate of
the generality of men render desirable in this World: And on the other side, he
that governs himself, his life, his thoughts, words, actions, ends, and
purposes, with the fear of Almighty God, with sense and awe of his presence,
according to his word, that drives at a nobler end than ordinarily the World
thinks of, namely, peace with Almighty God, and with his own Heart and
Conscience, the hope and expectation of Eternity, such a man is counted a
shallow, empty, inconsiderate, foolish man, one that carries no stroke in the
World, a man laden with a melancholy delusion, setting a great rate upon a
World he sees not, and neglecting the opportunities of the World he sees.

But upon a sound and true Examination of this business, we shall find that the
man that fears God is the wisest man, and he that upon that account departs
from evil is the man of greatest understanding. I shall show therefore these
two things; 1. What it is to fear God; 2. That this fear of God is most
demonstratively the best Wisdom of mankind, and makes a man truly and really a
wise man.

1. Touching the first of these, Fear is an affection of the Soul that is as
much diversified as any one affection whatsoever; which diversification of this
affection arises from the diversification of those objects by which this
affection is moved. I shall mention these four: 1. Fear of Despondency or
Desperation, which arises from the fear of some great and important danger
that is unavoidable, or at least so apprehended; and this is not the Fear that
is here commended to mankind. 2. Fear of Terror or Affrightment, which is upon
the sense of some great important danger, that though possibly it may be
avoided, yet it carries with it a great probability and immediate impendency,
as the fear of Mariners in a storm, or a fear that befalls a man in some time
or place of great confusion or visible calamity. And this kind of fear of
Almighty God is sometimes effectual and useful to bring men to Repentance after
some great displeasure of Almighty God by Sin or Apostasy; but this is not that
fear that is here, at least primarily and principally, meant, but those two
that follow. 3. A Fear of Reverence or Awfulness; and this fear is raised
principally upon the sense of some object full of glory, majesty, greatness,
though possibly there is no cause of expecting any hurt from the person or
thing thus feared: Thus a Subject bears a reverential fear to his Prince, from
the sense of his majesty and grandeur; and thus much more the majesty and
greatness of Almighty God excites reverence and awfulness, though there were no
other ingredient into that fear. Jer. 5.21. Will ye not fear me says the Lord,
will ye not tremble at my presence, etc. Jer. 10.7. who would not fear thee, O
King of Nations! 4. A Fear of Caution or Watchfulness. This is that which the
Wise man commends, Prove. 28.14. Blessed is the man that fears always: And
this fear of Caution is a due care and vigilance not to displease that person
from whom we enjoy or hope for good; the fear of a Benefactor, or of that
person from whom we may, upon some just cause or demerit, expect an evil, as
the fear of a just and righteous Judge. And these two latter kinds of fear,
namely the fear of Reverence, and the fear of Caution, are those that are the
principal ingredients constituting this fear of God that these excellent men
commend to us as true Wisdom.


Now this fear of God arises from those right and true apprehensions
concerning Almighty God, that do with a kind of connaturality and suitableness
excite both these two kinds of Fear; and those seem to be principally these
three: 1. A true and deep sense of the Being of God, namely, That there is a
most excellent and perfect Being, which we call God, the only true God, the
Maker of all things: But this is not enough to constitute this Fear, for
Epicurus and Lucian did believe that there was a God, yet were without the fear
of him. 2. A true and deep sense, knowledge, and consideration of the
Attributes of God. And although all the attributes of God are but so many
expressions and declarations of his perfection and excellency, and therefore
all contribute to advance and improve this fear, especially of Reverence, yet
there be some attributes, that seem in a more special manner to excite and
raise this affection of fear, as well the fear of reverence, as that of caution
and vigilance; as namely, 1. The Majesty and Glory of God, at which the very
Angels of Heaven, that are confirmed in an unchangeable estate of happiness,
carry an inward, and express an outward reverence. 2. But Majesty and Glory
without Power is not perfect, therefore the sense and knowledge of the almighty
Power of God is a great object of our fear: He does whatsoever he pleases, all
things had their being from him, and have their dependence on him. 3. The deep
knowledge of the Goodness of God, and that Goodness not only Immanent in
himself, but Emanent and Communicative: and from this diffusive and
communicative Goodness of God all things had their actual being, and from him
they do enjoy it. And both these Goodnesses of God, the Immanent and Emanent
Goodnesses are the noblest exciter of the noblest fear, a fear springing from
Love, and that love fixing upon the Immanent goodness of God which is
altogether lovely and perfect, and also upon the Emanent and Communicative
goodness of God, as he is our Benefactor; and wherever there is this love,
there is this fear both of Reverence and Caution. We cannot choose but honor
and reverence, and be careful to observe and please whatsoever we thus love;
the intrinsic nature of that which we love for its own worth and perfection
binds us by a kind of natural bond or result to reverence and honor, and the
extrinsick emanation of that goodness unto us binds us to reverence and esteem,
and honor it as our Benefactor by a double bond, viz. first, of Gratitude or
Benevolence to him that communicates this good; secondly, by a bond of Prudence
and self-preservation not to disoblige him from whom we have our good and upon
whom we have our dependence, lest a disobligation should occasion his
substraction or abatement of that good from us. Wheresoever there is
dependence, as there must be naturally love to that upon which is our
dependence, so there must be necessarily a fear both of Reverence and Caution,
even upon principles of self-love, if there were nothing else to command it. 4.
A deep sense, knowledge and consideration of the Divine Omniscience. If there
were all the other motives of fear imaginable, yet if this were wanting, the
fear of God would be in a great measure abated; for what avails reverence or
caution, if he to whom it is intended do not know it? and what damage can be
sustained by a neglect or omission of that fear, if God Almighty now it not?
The want of this Consi^eration has made even those Atheists that ^et
acknowledged a God, such were Epi^rus, Diagoras, Lucretius, Lucian and others
among the Philosophers; and such was Eli^has his oppressor, Job 22.13. How does
God now? and can he judge through the thick cloud? ^r David's fool, Psalm. 94.7.
The Lord shall ^ot see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard. But the
All-knowing God searches the very thoughts, and knows the Heart and ^ll the
actions of our lives; Not a word in ^ur tongue but he hears it, and knows our
thoughts a far off. 5. A deep sense of the Holiness and Purity of God, which
must needs cause in him an averseness unto and abhorrence of whatsoever is
sinful or impure. Lastly, the sense of the Justice of God, not only an inherent
Justice which is the rectitude of his nature, but a transient or distributive
Justice, that will most certainly distribute rewards to obedience, observance,
and the fear of his Name, but punishments to the disobedient and those that
have no fear of him before their Eyes. The deep consideration and sense of
these attributes of the Divine perfection must needs excite both the fear of
Reverence, and the fear of Caution, or fear of offending either by commission
of what may displease God, of omitting of what is pleasing to him. 3. But
although this knowledge of Almighty God and his Attributes may just excite a
fear both of Reverence and Caution, yet without the knowledge of some thing
else that fear will be extravagant and disorderly, and sometimes begets
Superstition or strange exorbitancy in this fear or in the expressions of it,
and a want regularity of duty or obedience; if a man know that Almighty God is
just, and will reward obedience and punish disobedience yet if he knows not
what he will have done or omitted, he will indeed fear to displease him, but he
will not know how to please, or to obey him: therefore besides the former there
must (be) a Knowledge of the Will or Law of God in things to be done or
omitted. This Law of God has a double Inscription, 1. In Nature, and that is
again twofold; first, the natural rudiments of Morality and Piety written in
the Heart: secondly, such as are deducible by the exercise of Natural reason
and light; for even from the notion of God there do result certain consequences
of Natural Piety and Religion, as that he is to be prayed unto, to be praised,
that he is to be imitated as far forth as is possible by us; therefore as he is
holy, beneficent, good, ^erciful, so must we be. 2. But we have more excellent
Transcript of the Divine Will, namely the Holy Scriptures, which therefore a
man that fears God will study and observe and practice, as being the best ^ule
how to obey him. And the very fear of God arising upon the sense of his Being
and Attributes will make that man very ^ollicitous to know the will of God, and
^ow he will be worshipped and served, and what he would have to be done or not
^o be done. And therefore since the glorious God has so far condescended, as
by his Providence to send us a Transcript of his Mind and Will and Law, he will
be very thankful for it, very studious of it, much delighted in it, very
curious to observe it, because it is the Rule and direction how he may obey and
consequently please that great God whom he fears; this Word he believes and
prizes as his great Charter, and in this Word he finds much to excite and
regulate and direct his fear of God: he sees Examples of the Divine Justice
against the Offenders of his Law, of the Divine Bounty in rewarding the
obedience to it; Threatenings on one Hand, Promises on the other; greater
manifestations of the Divine Goodness in the Redemption of mankind by Christ
Jesus, and therefore greater ob^^gations as well to fear as to love such
Benefactor.


And thus far of the kinds of the fear of God, and of the causes or objects
exciting it: Now let us see how it does appear the this fearing man is the wise
man, and how the Fear of God discovers it self to be the true and best and only
Wisdom; which wi^^ appear in these particular Consideration following.

1. Many Learned men considering that great similitude and image of
ratiocination in some Brutes especially, have therefore declined to define a
Man by his Reason, because of that analogical ratiocination which they find in
brutes, but define a man by his Religion, Homo est animal religiosum; because
in this they find no communication or similitude of natures or operations
between men and brute beasts: for man i^ the only visible creature that
expresses any inclination to Religion or the sense of a Deity, or any exercise
of it. I do not stand to justify this Opinion in all particulars, only those
things are most certain; 1. That only the Humane nature seems to have any sense
or impression of any regulary Religion upon it: 2. That the sense of a Deity
and Religion resulting from it, is the great ennobling, and advance, and
perfection of the Humane nature: 3. That take away the fear of God, all sense
and use of Religion falls to the ground. So that the Fear of God is the great
foundation of Religion, and consequently the great ennobling and advance of
Humane nature, that seems almost as great a prelation of a man truly religious
above an irreligious man, as to operations and use, as there is between an
irreligious man and a brute. As Religion advances, so Irreligion embaseth the
Humane nature.

2. Justice is of two kinds; Distributive, which is the justice of a Magistrate
or Judge distributing rewards and punishments, favor and displeasure, and due
retribution to every man according to the merits of his cause. 2. Commutative,
which is in all Civil contracts and dealings between persons; as dealing
honestly, keeping promises, and using plainness, sincerity, and truth, in all a
man says, or does: and both these kinds of Justice are effects of excellent
Wisdom; without these States, and Societies, and persons fall into disorder,
confusion, and dissolution: and therefore those very men that have not this
justice and righteousness, yet honor and value those that have it, and use it.
And the fear of Almighty God is that which begets and improveth both these
kinds of Justice. Hence it was that Moses, in his choice of Judges, directs
that they should be men fearing God and hating covetousness. Jehosaphat, in his
Charge to his Judges, thought this the best expedient to contain them within
the bounds of Justice, to put them in remembrance before whom, and for whom,
they are to judge. And the very Heathens themselves were some of them used to
set an empty Chair in the place of Judicature, as an Emblem of the presence of
God, the invisible, and yet all-seeing God, as present in the Courts of
Justice, observing all the Judges do; and this they esteemed an excellent means
to keep Judges to their duty, by representing to them the glorious God
beholding them. And as thus in distributive Justice, the fear of God is a great
means to keep and improve it; so in commutative Justice, the fear of God gives
a secret, and powerful Law to a man to keep and observe it. And hence it is
that Joseph could give no greater assurance to his Brethren, of his just
dealing with them than this, Genesis 42.18. This do, for I fear God; and on the
other side Abraham could have no greater cause of suspicion of ill and unjust
dealing from the People with whom he conversed, ^han this, that they wanted the
fear of God, Genesis 20.11. Because I thought the fear of God was not in this
place, etc. The sense of the Greatness; and Majesty, and Power, and Justice;
and all-seeing Presence and Command of Almighty God lays a greater obligation
and engagement upon a Heart fearing God to deal justly and honestly, than all
the terrors of Death it self can do.

And if any one say, How came it to pass that the Heathen that knew not, and
therefore feared not the true God, were yet great assertors, maintainers and
practisers of all Civil Justice and Righteousness between man and man? I say,
though they knew not the true God, they knew there was a God, whom (though
ignorantly) they feared: And this imperfect and broken fear of God was the true
cause of that Justice and Righteousness that was sincerely, and not for
ostentation, practiced among them; and though they mistook the true God, yet in
this they were not mistaken that there was a God; and this truth had that great
prevalence upon them to do justly: And if that imperfect fear of God in them
did so much prevail as to make them so just, how much more must the true
knowledge and the fear of the true God prevail to advance Righteousness and
Justice in them that have that fear of God in their Hearts?

3. It is a great part of Wisdom that concerns a person in the exercise of the
Duties of his Relations, and indeed it is a great part of Justice and
Righteousness. Now the fear of Almighty God has these two great advantages
therein. First, the will of God instructs exactly all relations in their Duties
of these reciprocal relations; and this will of God is revealed in his Word,
which contains excellent Precepts of all kinds, suitable to every several
relation. Secondly, the fear of God sets these Directions close upon the Heart,
and is a severe and constant obligation to observe them: And so this fear of
God does effectually fit, habituate, guide, and oblige a man to the Duties of
his several relations: it makes a good Magistrate, a good Subject; a good
Husband, a good Wife; a good Father, a good Child; a good Master, a good
Servant; in all those several kinds of goodness that are peculiar and proper to
the several relations wherein a man stands.

4. Sincerity, Uprightness, Integrity and Honesty are certainly true and real
Wisdom. Let any man observe it while he will, an hypocrite, or dissembler, or
double-hearted man, though he may shuffle it out for a while, yet at the long
run, he is discovered, and disappointed, and betrays very much folly at the
latter end; when a plain, sincere, honest man holds it out to the very last; so
that the Proverb is most true; that Honesty is the best Policy. Now the great
Privilege of the fear of God is, that it makes the Heart sincere and upright,
and that will certainly make words and actions so: For he is under the sense of
the inspection and animadversion of that God that searches the Heart, and
therefore he dares not lie; nor dissemble, not flatter, not prevaricate,
because he knows the pure, all-seeing, righteous God, that loves truth and
integrity, and hates lying and dissimulation, beholds and sees and observes
him, and knows his thoughts, words and actions. It is true, that vainglory,
and ostentation, and reputation, and designs, and ends may many times render
the outward actions specious and fair, when the Heart runs quite another way,
and accordingly would frame the actions, if those ends and designs and
vainglory and ostentation were not in the way; but the fear of God begins with
the Heart, and puri^^fies and rectifies it; and from the Heart thus rectified
grows a conformity in the life, the words, the actions.

5. The great Occasion and Reason of the Folly of mankind are, 1. The
unruliness and want of government of the sensual appetite on Lusts: hence grows
intemperance and excess in eating and drinking, unlawful and exorbitant lusts;
and these exhaust the Estate, waste and consume the Health, embase and
impoverish the Mind, destroy the Reputation, and render men unfit for Industry
and Business. 2. The exorbitancy, and unruliness, and irregularity of the
Passions; as excessive love of things that are either not lovely, or not
deserving so much love; excess of anger, which oftentimes degenerate into
malice and revenge; excess of joy in light, trivial, inconsiderable matters;
excess of fear, where either no cause of fear, or not cause of so much fear is:
And these exorbitances of Passions betray the succors of Reason, break out
into very foolish, vain, imprudent actions, and fill the World with much of
that folly and disorder that is every where observable. 3. These diseases and
distempers of the Mind, as pride, vainglory, ambition of honor and place, and
power, insolency, arrogance, envy, covetousness and the like, these I say are
so many Sicknesses and Cankers and rotten Ulcers in the Mind; and as they, like
the Furies that were let loose out of Pandora's Box, do raise most of those
storms and tempests that are abroad in the World, so they disease and disorder
and beset the Mind wherein they are, and make their lives a torment to
themselves, and put them upon very foolish, vain and frentique actions and
deportments, and render men perfect fools, mad men, and without understanding;
and their folly is so much the greater and the more uncurable, that like some
kind of frentique men they think very goodly of themselves, think themselves
passing wise men, and applaud themselves; though it is most apparent to any
indifferent by-stander, that there are not a sort of vainer foolish persons
under Heaven. Now as we are truly told that the first degree and step of wisdom
is to put off folly, -- Sapientia prima est,
Stultitia caruisse --
so it is the method of the fear of God, the beginning of all true wisdom, to
disburthen a man of these originals and foundations of folly: It gives a law to
the Sensitive appetite, brings it in subjection, keeps it within the limits and
bounds of Reason, and of those instructions and directions that the wise God
has prescribed; it keeps it under discipline and rule: It directs the Passions
to their proper objects, and keeps them within their due measures, and with in
the due lines and limits of moderation, and as becomes a man that lives in the
sight and observation of the God of glory, majesty, and holiness: It cures
those diseases and distempers of the Mind by the presence of this great
preservative and cathartick, the Fear of God. If Pride or Vainglory begins to
bud in the Soul, he considers that the God he fears resists the proud: this
fear puts a man in remembrance of the glorious Majesty of the most glorious
God; and what is a poor Worm, that he should be proud or vainglorious in the
presence and sight of that mighty God? If Ambition or Covetousness begin to
appear, this fear of God presently remembers a man that the mighty God has
prohibited them, that he has presented unto us things of greater moment for
our desires than worldly wealth, or honor; that we are all of his household,
and must content our selves with that portion he allots us, without pressing
beyond the measure of sobriety or dependence upon or submission unto him: If
Revenge stir in our Hearts, this fear of God checks it, tells a man that he
usurps God's prerogative, who has reserved vengeance ^o himself as part of his
own Sovereignty: ^f that vermin Envy begins to live and crawl in our Hearts,
this fear of God crusheth ^t by remembering us that the Mighty God prohibits it,
that he is the Sovereign Lord and dispenser of all things: if he has given me
little, I ought to be contented; if he has given another more, yet why should
my Eye be evil because his Eye is good? Thus the fear of the Lord walks through
the Soul, and pulls up those weeds and roots of bitterness and folly that
infect, disquiet, disorder, and befool it.

6. Another great cause of folly in the World is Inadvertence,
Inconsiderateness, Precipitancy, and over-hastiness in speeches or actions. If
men had but the patience many times to pause but so long in actions and
speeches of moment as might serve to repeat but the Creed or Lord's Prayer,
many follies in the World would be avoided that do very much mischief both to
the parties themselves and others: And therefore inadvertence and precipitancy
in things of great moment, and that require much deliberation, must needs be a
very great folly, because the consequence of miscarriage in them is of greater
moment. Now the fear of the Lord of Heaven and Earth, being actually present
upon the Soul, and exerting it self, is the greatest motive and obligation in
the World to consideration and attention touching things to be done or said.
When a man is to do any thing or speak in the presence of a great earthly
Prince, the very awe and fear of that Prince will give any man very much
consideration touching what he says or does; especially to see that it be
conformable to those Laws and Edicts that this Prince has made. Now the great
God of Heaven and Earth has, in his Holy Word, given us Laws and Rules
touching our words and actions; and what we are to say or do is to be said and
done in no less a presence than the presence of the ever-glorious God, who
strictly eyes and observes every man in the World, with the very same
advertence as if there were nothing else for him to observe: And certainly
there cannot be imagined a greater engagement to advertence, and attention, and
consideration than this: And therefore if the action or speech be of any
moment, a man that fears God will consider, 1. Is this lawful to be done or
not? if it be not, how shall I do this great evil and sin against God? 2. But
if it be lawful, yet is it fit, is it convenient, is it seasonable? if not,
then I will not do it, for it becomes not that Presence before whom I live. 3.
Again, ^f the thing be lawful and fit, yet I will ^onsider how it is to be
done, what are the most suitable circumstances to the honor and good pleasure
of that great God before whom I stand. And this advertence and consideration
does not only qualify my actions and words with wisdom and prudence in
contemplation of the duty I owe to God, but it gives an excellent opportunity
very many times, by giving pause and deliberation in reference to my duty to
God, to discover many humane ingredients of wisdom and prudence requisite to
the choice of actions and words, and the manner of doing them: So that besides
that greater advantage of consideration and advertence, in relation to Almighty
God, it does superadd this advantage also for opportunity thereby of humane
prudential considerations, which otherwise by haste and precipitance in actions
or words would be lost; and it habituates the mind to a temper of caution, and
advertence, and consideration in matters as well of smaller as of greater
moment, and so make a wise, attentive, and considerate man.

7. It mightily advances and improveth the worth and excellency of most Humane
actions in the World, and makes them a nobler kind of thing than otherwise
without it they would be. Take a man that is employed as a Statesman or
Politician, though he have much wisdom and prudence, in commonly degenerates
into craft and cunning and pitiful shuffling, without the fear of God: but
mingle the fear of Almighty God with that kind of wisdom, it renders it noble,
and generous, and staid, and honest, and stable. Again, take a man that is much
acquainted with the subtiler kind of Learning, as Philosophy; for instance,
without the fear of God upon his Heart, it will carry him over to pride,
arrogance, self-conceit, curiosity, presumption: but mingle it with the fear of
God, it will ennoble that knowledge, carry it up to the honor and glory of
that God that is the Author of Nature, to the admiration of his Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness; it will keep him humble, modest, sober, and yet rather with an
advance than detriment to his knowledge. Take a man industrious in his Calling,
without the fear of God with it, he becomes a drudge to worldly ends, vexed
when disappointed, overjoyed in success: mingle but the fear of God with it, it
will not abate his industry, but sweeten it; if he prosper, he is thankful to
God that gives him power to get wealth; if he miscarry, he is patient under the
will and dispensation of the God he fears; it turns the very employment of his
Calling into a kind of religious duty and exercise of his Religion without
damage or detriment to it.

8. The fear of God is certainly the greatest wisdom, because it renders the
mind full of tranquillity and evenness in all states and conditions: for he
looks up to the great Lord of the Heavens and Earth, considers what he commands
and requires, remembers that ^e observes and eyes all men; knows that his
Providence governs all things, and this keeps him still even and square without
any considerable alteration, whatever his condition is. Is he rich, prosperous,
great? yet he continues safe, because he continues humble, watchful, advertent
lest he should be deceived and transported; and he is careful to be the more
thankful, and the more watchful, because the command of his God, and the nature
of his condition requires it: is he poor, neglected, unsuccessful? yet he
remains still patient, humble, contented, thankful, dependent upon the God he
fears. And surely every man must needs agree, that such a man is a wiser man,
than he who is ever changed and transported with his condition; that if he be
rich or powerful, there is nothing more vain, proud, insolent than he; and
again let his condition become poor, lo^ despised, there is nothing under Heav^
more despondent, dispirited, heartless, d^ contented and tortured than such a
man and all for the want of the fear of Almigh^ God, which being once put into
the Hea^ like the Tree put by Moses into the Water cures the disorder and
uneasiness of (...) conditions.

9. In as much as the true fear of God always mingled with the knowledge of the
Will of God, and that Will is contain^ most fully in his written Word, it mu^^
needs be that a man that truly fears the Lord must be instructed in the word of
God and the Precepts thereof must needs b^ deeply digested into his mind. Now
a^ this Word is the Word of the ever-wi^ God, and therefore certainly must be
fu^ of most wise Directions: So let any ma^^ but impartially and deeply
consider th^^ Precepts contained in the word of God, h^^ shall assuredly find
the best directions in th^^ in the world for all kind of moral and divine
Wisom: And I do confidently say that in all other Books of Morality there a^^
not so sound, deep, certain, evident Instructions of Wisdom (yet most strictly
joined with Innocence and Goodness) as there are in this one Book, as would be
easily demonstrable even to a reasonable judge^ent; but this is too large a
Theme for ^^is place.

10. But besides all this, there is yet a ^cret, but a most certain truth that
highly. ^proveth that wisdom, which the fear of ^^e Lord brings, and that is
this, That ^^ose that truly fear God have a secret ^^idance from a higher
wisdom than what (...) barely humane; namely, by the Spirit of Truth and
Wisdom, that does really and truly ^ut secretly prevent and direct them. And
(...) no man think that this is a piece of ^^anaticism. Any man that sincerely
and ^^uly fears Almighty God, relies upon him, ^^alls upon him for his guidance
and dire^^ction, has it as really as the Son has ^he counsel and direction of
his Father: and though the voice be not audible, nor ^he direction always
perceptible to sense, ^et it is equally as real as if a man heard ^he voice
saying, This is the way, walk in it: And this secret direction of Almighty God
^^s principally seen in matters relating to the good of the Soul; but it may be
also found ^^n the great and momentous concerns of this ise, which a good man,
that fears God and ^egs his direction, shall very often if not at all times
find. 2. Besides this direction, a good man, fearing God, shall find His
Blessing upon him. It is true that the portion (...) men fearing God is not in
this life, often times he meets with crosses, afflictions and troubles in it,
his portion is of a high^^ and more excellent state and condition that this
life; yet a man that fears God hat^ also his blessing in this life, oven in
^^lation to his very temporal condition: for either his honest and just
intentions an^ endeavors are blessed with success an^ comfort, or if they be
not, yet even hi^ crosses and disappointments are turned into a blessing; for
they make him more humble and less esteeming this present World, and setting
his Heart upon a better: For it is an everlasting truth, Romans 8.28.
That (...) things shall work together for the best to them that fear and love
Almighty God, and therefore certainly such a man is the wisest man.

11. But yet further; certainly it is one of the greatest evidences of Wisdom
to provide for the future, and to provide for those things for the future, that
are of greatest moment, importance and use. Upon this account the Wise man,
Prove. 30. 25. admires the wisdom of the Ant, that little creature, that yet
provides his meat in the Summer: and we esteem it the folly of Children and
Prodigals in this, that they have no prospect for the future how they shall
subsist hereafter. Now the wisdom of a man that fears God discovers it ^elf
in this, that it provides and lays up a good and safe store for the future, and
that ^n respect of these three kinds of futurities; (...). For the future part
of his life: 2. For the future evil days: 3. For the future life that is to
take place after this present short uncertain and transitory life.

1. In respect of the future time of his life. It is true, our lives in this
world are but short at best, and together with that shortness, they are very
uncertain. But yet the man fearing God makes a due and safe provision for that
future portion of his life, how short or how long soever it be. I. By a
constant walking in the fear of God he transmits unto the future part of his
life a quiet, serene, and fair Conscience, and avoids those evil fruits and
consequences which a sinful life produces, even in the after time of a man's
life. The bruises and hurts we receive in youth are many times more painful in
age, than when we first received them. Our lives are like the Husbandman's
seed-time; if we sow evil seeds in the time of our yourh, it may be they may
lie five, ten or more years before they come up to a full crop, and possibly
then we taste the fruit of these evil ways in an unquiet mind or conscience, or
some other sour effects of that evil seed. All this inconvenience a man
fearing God prevents and instead thereof reaps a pleasing and comfortable fruit
of his walk in the fear of God, namely, a quiet Conscience and an even, settled,
peaceable Soul. 2. But besides this, by this means he keeps his Interest in and
Peace with Almighty God, and makes sure of the best Friend in the world for the
after time of his life, to whom he is sure to have access at all times and upon
all occasions with comfort and acceptance; for it is an infallible truth, That
God Almighty never forsakes any that forsake not him first.

The Second futurity is the future Evil day which will most certainly overtake
every man, either the day of feeble and decrepit age, or the day of sickness,
or the day of death; and against all those the true fear of God makes a safe
and excellent provision: so that although he may not avoid them, he may have a
comfortable passage through them; and in the midst of all these black clouds,
the witness of a good conscience fearing God, and the evidence of the divine
favor will shine into the Soul like a bright Sun with comfort, when a man
shall be able with Hezekiah, Isa.38.3. to appeal to Almighty God, Remember now
O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and in
uprightness of heart, and ^ave done that which was good in thy sight: this will
be a cordial under the faintness of old age, a relief under the pains of
sickness, and cure of the fear of death it self, which to such a Soul will be
only a gate and passage to a life that will be free from all pains and
infirmities, a life of glory and immortality.

3. The third futurity is the Life and State after Death. Most certain it is
that such a state there will be, and that it is but of two kinds, a state of
everlasting happiness, or a state of everlasting mi^^ry; and that all men in
the World do most certainly belong to one of these two states or conditions:
and as it is most just and equal, so it is most true, that they that truly fear
God, and obey him through Jesus Christ, shall be partakers of that everlasting
state of blessedness and immortal happiness: And on the other side, they that
reject the the fear of God, contemn and disobey his will, shall, without true
repentance, be subject to a state of everlasting misery. Now herein the truest
and the greatest ^isdom of a man appears, that he duly provides against the
latter, and to obtain the former; all other wisdom of men, either to get humane
Learning, Wealth, Honor, Power, all wisdom of Statesmen and Politicians, in
comparison of this wisdom, is but vain and trivial. And this is the wisdom that
the fear of God teaches and brings with it into the Soul; 1. It provides
against the greatest of evils, the everlasting state of misery and infelicity
and eternal death: 2. It provides for and attains an everlasting estate of
blessedness and happiness, of rest and peace, of glory and immortality, and
eternal life; a state of that happiness and glory that exceeds expression and
apprehension, for Eye has not seen, nor car heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man the things that God has laid up for them that love him, 1
Cor. 2. and they only truly love God, that truly fear him; Mal. 3.13. And they
(namely, that fear God) shall be mine, says the Lord, in that day when I make
up my jewels.

And now for the Conclusion of this whole matter, let us now make a short
Comparison between the persons that fear not God, and those that truly fear
him; and then let any man judge who is the fool, and who is the wise man. A man
has but a very short uncertain time in this life, which, in comparison of
eternity, is less than a moment. The great God of Heaven in his Word assures
(us) that there is an estate of Immortality after this life, and that that
immortal estate is but of two kinds, an estate of never-dying misery, or an
estate of endless glory; and tells them, If you fear me, and obey those easy
Commands, that are contained in the Book of the Holy Scriptures, which I have
given you, you shall infallibly attain everlasting life and happiness, and,
even in this present life, shall have the influence and presence of my favor
to support, to direct and bless you: On the other side, if ye refuse my fear,
and reject my commands, and prefer the unlawful and vain delusions of this
present life, before the obedience of my will, and persist impenitently in it,
your portion shall be everlasting misery. And now everlasting life and
everlasting death being set before the children of men, there are a sort of
men, that rather choose to disobey the command of God, reject his fear, and all
this, that they may enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season, those pleasures
that are fading and dying, that leave behind them a sting, that renders their
very enjoyment bitter, and that make even that very little life they enjoy, but
a life of discomfort and unhappiness in spite of all their pleasures, or be
they as sincere as their own hearts can promise them, yet they are but for a
season, a season that in its longest period is but short, but is uncertain
also, a little inconsiderable accident, the breath of a vain... an ill air, a
little ill digested portion of that excess wherein they delight, may put a
period to all those pleasures, and to that life, in a year, in a week, in a
day, in an hour, in an unthought of moment, before a man has opportunity to
consider, to bethink himself, or to repent; and then the door of life and
happiness is shut. Again, there are a sort of men that consider this great
Proposal, and choose the Fear of Almighty God, and with it Eternal Life, and
are content to deny themselves in things unlawful, to obey Almighty God, to
keep his favor, to walk humbly with him, to accept of the tender of Life and
Salvation, upon the terms propounded by Almighty God: And in the practice of
this Fear they enjoy His favor, and presence, and love; and after this life
spent, whether it be long or short, and whether their death be lingering or
sudden, are sure the next moment after death to enjoy an immortal life of glory
and happiness. Judge then which of these is the truly Wise man, whether this be
not a Truth beyond dispute: The Fear of God that (...) (...), and to depart
from evil is Under^ana^^.

OF AFFLICTIONS, THE Best Preparation for them, and Improvement of them, and of
our Delivery out of them.
JOB V. 6, 7. Although affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground: Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks
fly upward.
JOB's Friends, though in the particular Case of Job, they were mistaken, yet
they were certainly very wise, godly, and observing men; and many of their
Sentences were full of excellent and useful Truths, and particularly this
Speech of Eliphaz, which imports these two useful Propositions.

1. That the general state of man in this world is a state of Trouble and
Affiiction; and it is so common to him, so incident to all degrees and
conditions of mankind, that it seems almost as universal, as that natural
propension in the sparks to fly upward: No person of whatsoever age, sex,
condition, degree, quality, profession, but has a part in this common state of
mankind; and although some seem to have a greater portion of it than others,
some seem to have greater and longer vicissitudes and intermissions and allays
thereof than others, yet none are totally exempt from it: yea it is rare to
find any man, that has had the ordinary extent of the age of man, but his
troubles, crosses, calamities, afflictions have overweighed and exceeded the
measure of his comforts and contentments in this life.

2. That yet those Afflictions and Troubles do neither grow up by a certain,
regular and constant course of Nature, as Plants and Vegetables do, out of the
ground, neither are they merely accidental and casual; but they are sent,
disposed, directed, and managed by the conduct and guidance of the most wise
Providence of Almighty God: and this he proves in the sequel of this Chapter.
And as in all things in Nature the most wise God does nothing at random, or at
a venture, so in this part of his providential dispensation toward mankind, he
does exercise the same, with excellent wisdom, and for excellent Ends; even for
the very good and advantage of mankind in general, and particularly of those
very persons that seem most to suffer and be afflicted by them: sometimes to
punish, sometimes to correct, sometimes to prevent, sometimes to heal,
sometimes to prepare, sometimes to humble, always to instruct, and teach, and
better the children of men.

And indeed, if there were no other end but these that follow, this seeming
sharp Providence of Almighty God would be highly justified: namely, first, to
keep men humble and disciplinable. Man is a proud vain creature; and were that
humor constantly fed with prosperity and success, it would strangely pust up
this vain humor: Afflictions and troubles are the excellent and necessary
correctives of it, and prick this swelling impostumation of pride and
haughtiness, which would otherwise render men intolerable in themselves and
one to another. Secondly, to bring mankind to recognize Almighty God, to seek
unto him, to depend upon him: This is the most natural and specifical effect of
Afflictions, Hos. 5.15. In their afflictions they will seek me early; Jo^ah 1.
the rough and stubborn Mariners, in a storm, will cry every one to his God.
Thirdly, to tutor and discipline the children of men in this great L^sson, That
their Happiness lies not in this World, but in a better; and by this means,
even by the crosses and vexations and troubles of this World, and by these
plain and feasible documents to carry mankind up to the end of their beings.
God knows those few and little comforts of this life, notwithstanding all the
troubles and crosses with which they are interlarded, are apt to keep the
hearts, even of good men, in too great love of this World. What would become of
us, if our whole lives here should be altogether prosperous and contenting,
without the intermixture of crosses and afflictions? But of these things more
hereafter.

Now since the state of mankind in this World is for the most part thus cloudy
and stormy, and that ordinarily we can expect it to be no otherwise, there are
these Considerations which become every wise and good mind to acquaint himself
with.

1. What Preparation is fittest to be made by every man before they come. 2.
How they are to be received and entertained and improved, when they come, and
while they are incumbent. 3. What is the best and safest temper of mind when
any of them are removed.
Touching the first of these, namely, Preparation before they come; and the
best preparatives seem to be these:

1. A right and sound conviction and consideration of this most certain
experimental truth, namely, That no man whatsoever, how good, just, pious, wise
soever can by any means expect to be exempt from them, but must be more or less
subject to Affliction, of one kind or other, at one time or another, in one
measure or another; for man is certainly born to trouble, as the sparks sly
upward: And this certain truth will be evident, if we consider the several
kinds of affliction that are common to mankind; and herein I shall forbear the
Instances which concern our childhood and youth, as such, which yet
notwithstanding are subject to afflictions, that though they seem not such to
men of riper years, yet are as real and pungent, and deeply and sensibly
grievous to them, as those that seem of greater moment to men of riper years:
But I shall apply my self to those Instances which are more evident, and of
which those that have the exercise of their reason may be more capable.

Afflictions seem to be of two kinds, 1. Such as are common calamities,
befalling a Nation, City, or Society of men: 2. Or more personal, that concern
a man in his particular.

Touching the former of these, namely, common calamities, such are Wars,
Devastations, Famines, Pestilences, spreading contagious Epidemical Diseases,
great Conflagrations, experience tells us, and daily lets us see that they
involve in their extent the generality of men, good and bad, just and unjust,
pious and profane: And although the gracious God is sometimes pleased, for ends
best known to himself, strangely to preserve and rescue as it were, some out of
a common calamity, yet it is that which I do not know how any man can promise
himself, though otherwise never so pious and just, because I find not that any
where under the Evangelical dispensation God Almighty has promised to any
person any such immunity; and common experience shows us that good and bad are
oftentimes involved in the effects and extremities of the same common calamity:
and indeed it would be little less than a Miracle, and somewhat above the
ordinary course of the Almighty's regiment of things, to give particular
exemption in such cases. If a man receive any such blessing from God, he is
bound eminently to acknowledge it as a signal, if not miraculous intervention
of the divine mercy; but it is not that which a man can reasonably expect,
because, although upon great and momentous occasions Almighty God is pleased
not only to give out Miracles, but even to promise them also, as in the
justifying of the truth of the Gospel, in the first publication thereof, yet it
is not equal for any particular person to suppose, that for the preservation of
a particular interest or concernment, God Almighty should be as it were engaged
to put forth a Miracle, or little less than a Miracle; and the Reasons hereof
are:

1. Because under the Evangelical dispensation, the rewards of goodness, piety,
and obedience are of another kind, and of a greater moment, namely, Eternal
happiness, and not exemption from temporal calamities; if Almighty God grant
such an exemption, it is of bounty and abundance, not of promise. It is true,
under the Old Covenant with the people of Israel, their Promises were in a
great measure of temporal benefits, and the Administration of that Church, as
it was in a great measure typical, so the Divine Administration over them was
very usually miraculous, both in their blessings, preservations and exemptions:
And there was special reason for it; for they were to be a monument to all
Mankind, and also to future Ages, of a special and signal Divine Regiment; and
consequently the obedient might upon the account of the Divine Promise expect
blessings and deliverances, even in public calamities that might befall the
People in general: But we have no warrant to carry over those promises of
Temporal benefits and exemptions to the obedience under the Gospel, which as it
is founded upon another Covenant, so is it furnished with better Promises.

2. Because the best of men in this life, have sins and failings enough, to
justify the Justice of Almighty God, in exposing them to temporal calamities;
and yet his mercy, goodness and bounty (is) abundantly magnified in reserving a
reward in Heaven far beyond the merit of their best obedience and dutifulness:
So that though they are exposed to temporal calamities, Almighty God still
remains not only a true and faithful, but a liberal and bountiful Lord unto
them in their everlasting rewards. What are light afflictions and but for a
moment in comparison to an eternal weight of glory? 2 Cor. 4.17. Romans 8.18.
And the latter is the reward of their Obedience under the Gospel, whiles the
former may be possibly the punishment or at least correction for their Sins.

And therefore, although at the intercession of Abraham, the Lord was pleased
to grant a relaxation of the destruction of Sodom, for the sake of ten
Righteous, it was an act of his bounty; and so it was when he delivered Lot and
his Family: Yet he had not been unjust if he had swept them away in that common
temporal calamity, because possibly the sins of Lot himself might have been
such, as might have acquitted the justice of God in so doing: for the highest
temporal calamity is not disproportionate to any one Sin: And although he were
pleased in mercy to spare Lot and his two Daughters, yet neither was he wholly
exempted from that great calamity, for his House, Goods and the rest of his
Family perished in that terrible Conflagration.

And upon this consideration, we have just cause to blame two sorts of persons;
namely, 1. The rash censure of some inconsiderate persons, that are too ready
to censure all such as fall under a common calamity, whether of Fire, Sword, or
Pestilence; as if so be they were therefore greater sinners than those that
escape: the error reproved by our Savior in the instance of the Galileans,
Lu. 13.1, 2.v. Jos. 9.2, 3.
and those upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell. 2. The mistaken apprehension of
men concerning themselves, that upon an opinion of their own righteousness or
desert, think themselves exempted from the stroke of common calamities, or are
ready to accuse the Divine Justice, if they are not delivered from them. If
they truly considered the just demerit of any sin, and their own sins or
failings, they would both acknowledge the Justice and Goodness of God, if he
reserve an eternal reward of their obedience, though he expose them to the
worst of temporal evils.

1. Concerning Personal Evils, they are of several kinds; 1. such as befall the
Body, 2. such as befall the Estate, 3. such as befall the Name, 4. such as
befall a man's Friends or Relations.

Touching the first of these Evils, namely, that befall the Body, they are of
two kinds; 1. Some that are not so Epidemical or universal upon all men; such
as are casualties or accidental hurts, diseases springing from the particular
complexion or temperament of persons, such as are hereditary diseases, diseases
incident to certain ages, infectious diseases arising from contagion,
putrefaction, ill disposition of the Air or Waters. 2. Some diseases are
incident unto every man in the World. If a man lives to a great old age, his
very age is a disease, and the decay of natural heat and moisture does in time
bring the oldest man to his end; but if he live not to the attainment of old
age, most certainly as he meets with death in the conclusion, so he meets with
some disease or other that makes way for his dissolution. So that upon the
whole account, though this or that man may not meet with this or that
particular disease, casualty or distemper, that it may be attaques another, yet
as sure as he is mortal, so sure shall some disease, distemper, casualty or
weakness meet with him that shall bring him to the dust of death. That person
therefore that is subject to the universal Edict and Law of death, is and must
be subject sooner or later to those diseases, sicknesses, casualties or
weaknesses that must usher in his death and dissolution. And although one man
may escape a chronical disease, another an acute disease; one man may escape a
Contagion, another a Consumption; one man may escape this disease or casualty,
another that, yet most certain it is that every man shall infallibly meet with
some disease, distemper or casualty that shall be sufficient to dissolve his
composition, and put a period to his life.

2. Concerning afflictions that particularly concern a man in his Estate. It is
very true that some are more afflicted in this kind than others. The more
wealth any man has, the more he is obnoxious to losses; and the more any man
loves wealth, the deeper the affliction of this nature wounds (him:) And this
is generally true in all worldly matters whatsoever; the more a man's heart is
set upon it, the deeper and the more bitter the cross or affliction is therein.
But though afflictions in this kind pinch some closer than others, yet there
are very few that totally escape in this kind. The poor man reckons it his
affliction that he wants wealth; and the rich man is not without his affliction
either in the loss of it, or the fear of such losses; which create as real a
trouble as the loss it self: Fire and shipwreck, envy and oppression, false
accusations, robbers, a prodigal Heir. or a false Friend, thousands of such
like avenues there are to a rich man's Treasure; and either they do actually
attach it, and then they cause sorrow; or they do continually menace it, and so
they cause fear. Nay sometimes a rich man has as great an affliction in his
not knowing where or how to dispose of his Wealth, as he has that wa^^s it.

3. Touching affliction in the Name: Most certainly of all things in the World,
a good name is most easily exposed to the injury of any person; a false
accusation, or false report, an action or word misinterpreted. A man has no
security of his Wealth against invasions of other; but he has much less
security touching his Name, because it is in the keeping of others, more than
of the man himself; and it is visible to every man's experience, that he that
has the greatest name is most exposed to the envy, and therefore to the
detraction and calumnies of others; and he that values his name and reputation
most, is easiest blasted and deeper wounded, by a calumny though really false,
than he that has little reputation, or that esteems it lightly.

4. Touching Friends: There are two things that induce the loss of friends: 1.
That which seems casual, yet very common, whereby either friends become
enemies, or at least grow into neglect; which is sometimes done by
misrepresentations, false reports, by prevalence of factions, by differences in
matters of interest, by the declination of a man's condition. 2. That which is
certain: Death takes away a man's friends and relations from him, or him from
them; the more friends and relations any man has, the more losses of them or
in them (he) shall necessarily have, upon this account: because every one of
them is subject to all those casualties, that any one of them is subject to,
whether in estate, name, body, or (death,) and consequently, the more friends
and relations, the more crosses, and calamities; for all the crosses or losses
that befall any of my friends are communicated to me, and in a manner made
mine: and the greater my number of friends and relations are, the more losses
of them and in them I am subject to; for every one of them is subject to the
same calamities with my self, which become in effect mine by participation. So
that the more friends and relations I have, and the dearer and nearer they are,
the more crosses I have, by participating theirs: and every bitter Arrow that
wounds any of them, glanceth upon me, and makes my wounds the more by how much
the more friends and relations I have; and makes them the deeper, by how much
the nearer or dearer those friends or relations are to me. It is true, that in
a multitude of good and dear friends and relations there is a communication of
more comforts; but since generally the Scene of every man's life is fuller of
crosses than comforts, the troubles and afflictions of my many friends or
relations out-ballance and over-weigh those comforts.

And these crosses and afflictions in body, estate, name, and friends, though
possibly they may not all come together, or in their perfection, at one time,
upon any one man; yet as no man is exempt from any of them at any time by any
special privilege, so sometimes they have saln in together in their
perfection, even upon some of the best men that we read of: Witness that great
and signal Example of Job, who at one time suffered the loss of all his
Children, of all his Servants, of all his Goods, of his great and honorable
esteem among men, of his health; and beside, all this lay under severe
afflictions in his mind, and under the imputation of an Hypocrite with his best
and judicious friends.

Upon all this that has bin said, a man may, and upon evident reason and
experience, ought to conclude, That even the m^st sincere Piety and Integrity
of Heart and Life cannot give any man an exemption or pri^^led^e from
Affi^ctions of some, or indeed of any, kind.

And this Consideration alone is sufficient, 1. To silence and quiet, that
murmuring and unquiet, and proud distemper that often arises in the minds of
good men themselves; that are ready to think themselves much injured if they
fall under the calamities incident to mankind: whereas the just and wise God
never gave any promise or privilege or exemption from external calamities and
troubles to those whom yet he owns as his Children. 2. This consideration is
sufficient to quiet the mind of persons thus afflicted, against that comm^n
temptation, which is apt to arise upon this ^^^asion, as if they were hated or
sor^aken of God, because sorely afflicted. Where as most certainly the favor
or love of God is not to be measured simply by externals; (...)
but rather the Gospel teaches us a quite con^^^^ (...) that God ^-pleased to
chasten those whom he loves best. 3. This consideration is sufficient to cheek
that censorious humor, that is in many, who like the Barbarians, Act. 28.4.
presently conclude that person or place to be more sinful than others, because
they suffer more, it may be, than others. This was the uneharitable and indeed
unreasonable error of Job's Friends, of old, and of many at this time in
reference both to public and personal visitations.

2. The second good Preparative against Affliction is a frequent practical
supp^sition, where with we are to entertain our selves, even in the time of our
greatest Prosperity, That the Case may, and probably will be altered with us;
and so to cast our selves as it were into the mold of an afflicted condition.
For instance, I am now in health; what if I were now to enter into the valley
of the shadow of death, into some acute, or painful, or desperate disease; how
am I sitted with patience, resignation of my self into the hand of God,
contempt of the World; for such an estate (as) this I must come to sooner or
later; how shall I bear or carry my self in it, or under it, were it now upon
me? I have now a plentiful Estate, external affluence; what if at this moment,
I were bereft of all; either by Fire or Depredation, how were my mind fitted
with humility and patience to submit to a poor, strait, wanting condition: I
have now a good Husband, Wife, Children, many Friends that esteem me and are
faithful to to me; what if God should in a moment deprive me of all these? what
if my dearest Friends should become my bitterest Enemies, how should I bear my
self under these changes? I have a great Name and Esteem in the World; what if
in a moment, a black cloud of Infamy and Scorn and Reproach were drawn of it,
and that I should become a scorn and reproach, with Job 30.8. among children of
fools: yea children of base men viler than the earth: how were I fitted with
humility and evenness of mind to comport with such a condition, till it
pleases God by his Providence and the manifestation of my Innocence, if he
think sit, to scatter this black cloud of Calumny and Reproach, or if not, yet
quietly under it to enjoy the testimony of a good conscience and my own
integrity. These and the like anticipations of troubled and afflicted
conditions, would habituate and fit our minds to bear them, furnish us with
suitable tempers for them, render them casie to us when they come, and keep our
Souls in a due state of moderation and watchfulness before they come: As the
good Martyr Bilney before his martyrdom, by often putting his Finger into the
Candle, made the Flames which he was after to endure more familiar and
tolerable.

3. The third Preparative against Affliction and calamitous seasons, is to
reason our selves off from overmuch love and valuation of the World, and the
best things it affords. Philosophy has made some short essay in this business,
but the Doctrine of the Gospel has given us far more noble and effectual
topics and arguments, than any Philosophy ever did or can: 1. By giving us a
plain and clear estimate and valuation of this World and all that seems most
valuable in it; but this is not all, but 2. by showing us plainly and clearly a
more valuable, certain and durable estate after death, and a way of attaining
(it) with much more ease and contentation, than we can attain the most splendid
temporals of this World. Certain it is that the weight and and stress of
afflictions and crosses lies not so much in the things themselves which we
suffer in them or by them, as in that overvaluation that we put upon those
conveniences which afflictions or crosses deprive us of. When news was brought
to that noble Roman of the death of his Son, it was a great pitch of patience
that even that Moral consideration wrought in him, Novi me genuisse mortalem;
though perchance, it was not without a mixture of Stoical vainglory. We set
too great a value upon our health, our wealth, our reputation; and that makes
(...) unable to bear, with that evenness and contentedness of mind, the loss of
them, by sickness, poverty, reproach. We set too great a rate upon our temporal
life here, because we set too great a rate upon this World, to the enjoyment
whereof this life here is accommodated and proportioned; and that makes us fear
death, not only as the ruin of our nature, but as that which puts a period to
all our comforts: Whereas had we but Faith enough to believe the Evangelical
truths touching our future happiness, it would make us not desire death,
because we might in the time of this life secure unto our selves that great and
one thing necessary; and it would make us not to fear death, because we see a
greater fruition to be enjoyed after it, than all the glory of this present
World can yield.

4. The next Preparative against Afflictions is to keep Piety, Innocence, and a
Good Conscience before it comes. As Sin is the sting of death, so it is the
sting of affliction; and that which indeed gives the greatest bitterness and
strength unto affliction: and the reason is this, because it weakens and
disables that part in man, which must bear and support it. This is that which
the Wise man observes, Proc. 18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? which is no more than this; It
is the mind and spirit of man rightly principled, that does bear and carry a
man through those difficulties and afflictions and infirmities, under which he
is; but if that spirit or mind which should carry and bear those evils, be hurt
or wounded, or faint or infirm, what is there left in a man to bear that which
indeed (should be) our support? Innocence and a Good Conscience keeps the mind
and spirit of a man in courage and considence: and indeed it has an influence
and suffrage and attestation and support from the God of Heaven, to whom a good
conscience can with an humble confidence appeal as Hezekiah did under a great
affliction, Isa. 38. and this access to Almighty God does give new supplies,
succors and strength to the Soul to bear it up under very great and pressing
afflictions. But on the other side, Sin does disable the Soul to bear
affliction till it be thoroughly repented of; 1. Because it does in a great
measure, emasculate and weaken the spirit of a man, makes it poor, cowardly and
unable to bear it self up under the pressure of afflictions. 2. It does in a
great measure obstruct the intercourse between God and the Soul, and that
influence that might and would otherwise be derived to the spirit or mind of a
man by the God of the spirits of all flesh.

Therefore the best preparative against affliction is, to have the Soul as
clear as may be from the guilt of Sin: 1. By an innocent and watchful life in
the time of our prosperity, before affliction attach us: 2. Or at least, By a
speedy, sincere and hearty Repentance for Sin committed; and this repentance to
be speedy, before affliction come: For although it is true that many times
affliction is the messenger of God to awaken a sinner to repentance, and that
repentance is accepted by the merciful God, yet that repentance is most kindly
and easy, and renders afflictions less difficult and troublesome, which
prevents affliction, and performs one great end and use of afflictions before
it comes. He that has a Soul cleansed by Faith and Repentance from the guilt
of Sin, before the severity of affliction comes upon him, has but one work to
do, namely, to fit himself with patience to undergo the shock of affliction:
But he that defers his repentance, till driven to it by affliction, his work is
more difficult, because it is double, namely, to begin his repentance, and to
bear his affliction.

And because in many things we offend all, and the best have their failings and
sins of daily incursion, a daily revising and examining of our own failings,
and renewing of our repentance for our daily faults is of singular use to
render afflictions easy, because repentance cleanses the Soul, and renders a
man in God's acceptance as if he had not offended.

5. The next preparative against affliction is to gain an humble Mind. When
affliction meets with a proud heart, full of opinion of its own worth and
goodness, there arises more trouble, and tumult, and disorder, and
discomposure in the contest of such a heart against the affliction, than
possibly can arise from the affliction it self; and the struggling of that
distemper of pride with the affliction, galls and intangles the mind more than
the severest affliction, and renders a man very unfit for it and unable to bear
it. Isa. 51.20.
The Prophet describes it, her Sons at the head of every street were like a
wild Bull in a net. But on the other side, an humble, lowly mind is calm and
patient, and falls with ease upon an afflicted condition; for the truth is, the
great evil of suffering is not so much in the thing a man suffers, as in the
mind and temper of spirit of the man that meets with it; an humble mind is a
mind rightly prepared with the greatest facility to receive the shock of any
affliction, for such a mind is already as low as affliction can ordinarily set
it.

And certainly, if any man consider aright, he has many important causes to
keep his Mind always humble; 1. In respect of Almighty God, the great and
glorious King of Heaven and Earth, whom if a man contemplate, he will put his
mouth in the dust, acknowledge himself to be but a poor worm, and therefore
unworthy to dispute the Divine dispensations, providence or permissions 2. In
respect of himself. He that considers aright himself, his sins and failings and
corruptions, will have cause enough to humble himself, and reckon that he is
justly obnoxious to the severest crosses and afflictions. Why does the living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? Lam. 3.39.
it is mercy enough that the affliction extends not yet so ^^r as his life, a
living man to complain, carnes a reprehension in it self of the complaint.

6. Another most singular pr^paration against affliction, is a steady resolved
Resignation of a man's self to the will and good pleasure of Almighty God, and
that upon grounds of the greatest reason imaginable. For 1. it is a most
sovereign will; for his will must be done whether we will or not: therefore it
is the highest piece of folly imaginable to contest with him, that will not,
cannot, may not be controlled. It is true we have commission to pray to him, to
deliver us from evil, but when we have so done, we must withal desire that his
will may be done; this pattern the Son of God has given us, Matthew. 26.39.
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, yet not my will but thy
will be done. Willingly therefore submit to that will which whether thou will
or no, thou must, thou shall endure: for his will is the most sovereign will,
the will of the absolute Monarch of Heaven and Earth. 2. As it is the most
sovereign will, so it is the most wise will; what he wills he wills not simply
pr^^^mperio, but his will is founded upon and directed by a most infinite
wisdom: and since thou can not, upon any tolerable account, judge thy will
wiser than his, it becomes thee to resolve thy poor, narrow, inconsiderate
will, into the will of the most wise God. 3. As it is a most wise will, so the
will of God is most certainly the most benificent and best will; what reason
have thou to suspect the benificence of his will, whose will alone gave thee
thy being, that he might communicate his goodness to that being of thine, which
he freely gave thee. It is true, it may be thou do not see the reason, the
end, the use of his Dispensations, yet be content with an implicit submission
to resign thy self up to his disposal, and rest assured it shall be best for
thee, though thou yet can not understand what it means. If he has given thee
an Heart to resign up this will unto his, be confident he will never mislead
thee, nor give thee cause to repent of trusting him. It was a noble pitch of a
Heathen's mind, namely, Epictetus, Enchirid. cap. 78. In quovis incepto hae^
optanda sunt; Due me, o Jupiter, and t^ fatum, eo quo sum a vobis destinatus;
sequar enim alacriter: quod si noluero, and improbus ero, and sequar
nihilominus. Which may be thus better Englished:;In every Enterprise this ought
to be our Prayer; Guide me O God, and thou Divine Providence according to thine
own appointment; I will with cheerfulness follow: which, if I shall decline to
do, I shall be an undutiful man, and yet shall nevertheless follow thy
appointment, whether I will or not. But Christians have learned a Reason of a
nobler descent, namely, Romans 8.28.
That all things shall work together for good, to those that love God: and
certainly there can be no greater evidence [of thy love to him] than to make
the Will of God the guide, rule and measure of thine own.

7. I shall conclude with that great Preparative, which is indeed the
completion of all that is before said, and in a few words includes all, Labor
to get thy Peace with God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: when this is once
attained, thou art set above the love of the World, and the fear of
afflictions, because thou have the assurance of a greater Treasure than this
World can give or take away; Heb. 12.28.
a Kingdom that cannot be (shaken,) a hope and most assured expectation that is
above the region of afflictions, and that renders the greatest and forest
afflictions, as they are, namely light and momentany: And yet because thou art
notwithstanding this glorious expectation, yet in this lower region, and
subject to passions and perturbations, and fears, the merciful God has engaged
his promise to support thee here under them, to better and improve thee by
them, to carry thee through (them) by his all-sufficient grace and mercy: The
strokes thou receivest are either managed and directed, or at least governed
and ordered by him that is thy Father, and that in very love and faithfulness
does correct thee, Psalm. 119.75.
that has a heart of compassion and love to thee, even when he seems in his
Providence to frown upon thee; that while thou art under them, will make them
work together for thy good, and that will never take from thee those
everlasting mercies which are thy portion; that has all thy afflictions,
crosses, troubles, whatever they are or may be, under the infallible conduct of
his own wisdom and power: And that as on the one side he will never suffer thee
to be afflicted beyond what he gives thee grace to bear and improve; 1 Cor.
10.13.
so on the other hand he will so manage, order and govern thy light
afflictions, which are here but for a moment, that in the end they shall be a
means to bring thee a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. 2 Cor.
4.17.
If therefore thou would be soundly armed against afflictions, and prepared
with ease and comfort to bear them, this one thing necessary is sufficient to
render thee such, and to fit thee also with all those advantageous helps before
mentioned, which will necessarily follow upon this attainment.

2. Secondly, I come to the second general, namely, How Afflictions incumbent
upon us are to be received, entertained and improved; and this will be in a
great measure supplied by what has been before said touching our preparation
of heart before they come: for a mind so prepared and habituated, will be
sufficiently qualified to receive and entertain them as becomes a good man and
a good Christian. Nevertheless some things I shall subjoyn in order to the
bearing and improving of afflictions while they are incumbent upon us; and they
are these:

1. It becomes a man under afflictions in the first place to have a very
diligent, frequent, attentive and right consideration concerning Almighty God,
that he is a God of infinite wisdom, power, justice, mercy and goodness: That
he hates not any thing that he has made, but has a great love and benificence
to all his Creatures, that he designs their good and benefit, even in those
dispensations that seem most sharp and severe: that if he had not a good will
to his Creatures, he would never have done so much for them as he has done:
that whiles he exercises discipline to the children of men, it is evident they
are under his care: that oftentimes there is a greater severity of the Divine
displeasure, in his leaving mankind to themselves, than in exercising them with
afflictions: and that he equally discovers the love and care of a Father in his
corrections, as (well as) in his more pleasing administrations.

2. And farther, that afflictions rise not out of the dust, but are sent and
managed by the wise disposition and regiment of Almighty God: it is his
Providence that sends them, that measures out their kind, weight, continuance;
and that they are always, as commissionated by him, so under the conduct of his
power, wisdom and goodness, and never exceed the line and limits of his power,
wisdom and goodness: if he bids them go, they go; if he bids them return, they
return; if he commands the most tumultuous and tempestuous storms of
afflictions, peace, be still, there will be a calm: as mankind is never out of
the reach of his power to afflict and correct, so it is never out of the reach
of his power to relieve and recover.

3. That as no man has an exemption from afflictions, so it is most evident
that even the best of men are visited with them, and it is but need they
should; for where one man is the worse by afflictions, a thousand are the worse
for want of them, and as many the better by them; and the wise and gracious God
that knows our frame, better than we our selves, does for the most part in very
faithfulness afflict us. The egresses of the Divine Counsels have ever in them
a complication of excellent ends, even in afflictions themselves: they are acts
of Justice oftentimes to punish, and of Mercy to prevent distempers and to heal
them; and this is that lot which our Blessed Lord bequeathed unto his own
People, In the world ye shall have tribulation, Joh. 16.33. so that a good man
may have as great cause to suspect his own integrity in the absence of them, as
in the suffering under them.

4. That all the Divine dispensations of comforts or crosses are so far
beneficial or hurtful as they are received and used: comforts, if they make us
thankful, sober, faithful, they become blessings; if they make us proud,
insolent, secure, forgetful, they become judgments: afflictions, if they are
received with humility, patience, repentance and returning to God, they are
blessings; if they are received with murmuring, impatience, imcorrigibleness,
they become judgments, and a forerunner of greater severity.

5. The consequences of all these Considerations do evidently lead us unto
these Dutics, whenever we are under the pressure of Affliction: 1. To receive
it with all Humility, as reached out unto us from the hand, or permission at
least, of Almighty God. There were a sort of Philosophers that thought it a
virtue to put on a resolved contempt of all crosses and afflictions; not to be
moved at all with them, but to bear them with a stout apathy: this is not that
temper that becomes a Christian; it is all one, as if a Child should resolve to
receive the correction [of his Father] with a stubborn resolution not to care
for them, or to be affected with them: such a stubbornness under affliction
renders it unuseful to its end, and commonly provokes the great Lord and Father
of Spirits totally to reject such a mind, or to master it with sharper and
severer and multiplied afflictions, till it yield, and till that uncircumcised
Heart be humbled and accept of the punishment of its iniquity. Levit. 26.41. 2.
To receive (it) with Patience and subjection of mind; and without either
contesting with Almighty God, charging his Providence with error or injustice,
or swelling and storming against the affliction, or the Divine dispensation
that sends it: This has two singular benesits; first, it renders the
affliction it self more easy and tolerable; secondly, it is one of the
readiest ways to shorten or abate it: For as yielding and humble submission to
the hand of God, so patience and submission of will to the Divine dispensation
are two of the great ends and business of affliction, which when attained by
it, it has performed a great part of its errand for which it was sent. 3. To
return unto God that afflicts or permits it: Affliction misseth its end
and use when it drives a man from his God, either to evil or unlawful means, or
to shift and hide himself, or keep at a distance from him; and as it loses its
end so it is contrary to its natural effect, at least where it meets with a
nature of any understanding or ingenuity. In their affliction they will seek me
early. God Almighty sends afflictions like messengers to call home wandering
Souls; and if a man will shist away, get farther off and estrange himself more
from him that strikes him, he will either send more importunate messengers,
afflictions of a greater magnitude, to call and fetch him, as want and famine
did the young Prodigal in the Gospel; or, which is far worse, let him go
without farther seeking him: Whereas the man that by affliction, as it were at
the first call, comes home to God, or gets nearer to him, for the most part
prevents severer monitors, and renders his suffering more short, or at least
more easy, by drawing near to God the fountain of peace and deliverance.


And if the affliction befalls such a man that has not estranged himself from
Almighty God, nor departed from him in any greater offenses or backslidings,
yet affliction is not without its end or use, even to such a man. Thou have
walked closely in the duties toward God, have depended upon him, approved thy
self in his sight; yet is it not possible that for thy says, industry,
obedience, dependence may be more, more constant, more firm? If it may be, as
sure it may be, then though affliction solicit not thy return to him from whom
thou have not departed, yet it solicits thy improvement.

4. To Pray unto God: and this is the most natural effect of affliction,
especially if it be severe and eminent. In the storm the Sailers call every one
upon his God; and the reason is, because in such a season, a man's own shifts,
the help and advice and assistance of friends, and other humane confidence
appear too weak and ineffectual; and therefore the man is driven to that which
indeed is the unum magnum; namely, invocat on of Almighty God, for help,
support and comfort. It is therefore a sign of a desperate mind that will not
come unto God in prayer, at least when afflictions grind him. And although a
man be not of the number of those that restrain prayer before God, yet
afflictions naturally will make the prayer of such a man more earnest, fervent,
constant; it sets an edge and adds life to the prayers of a praying man. 5. To
Depend and Trust upon God, both for support under, and seasonable deliverance
from afflictions. Keep thy recumbence upon his goodness and mercy, even under
the blackest night of afflictions: Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him:
and with David (Psalm. 23.4.) even in the valley of the shadow of death to rest
upon his Rod and his Staff: And though it becomes the best of men to have an
yielding and a soft spirit under the afflicting hand of God, yet be careful to
bear up thy self under the power and goodness of God from fainting and
despondence. 6. To be Thankful unto God under affliction, and that upon very
great and important motives: 1. Thankful that they are no worse or greater:
Thou have losses, but yet have thou lost all at once? Job did; or if thou have
lost all externals, yet have thou not something thou valuest more than all,
namely, innocence, peace with God and thy own Conscience? 2. Thankful that God
Almighty rather chooses to afflict thee, than to forsake thee. As long as
Almighty God is pleased to afflict thee it is plain thou art under his
discipline, his care; no man's condition is desperate so long as the Physician
continues his administration: nor is any man wholly forsaken of God, nor past
his care, so long as he is under affliction: for it is a medicine that without
thy own default will either recover or better thee. 3. Thankful that God has
been pleased to discover so much of his mind and design and affections toward
mankind in his Word, as to assure us that the measure of his love toward or
displeasure against the children of men, is not to be taken by external
prosperity or adversity: But on the contrary to bear up our Souls under the
pressures of afflictions, assures us that they are the effects for the most
part of his fatherly love and care (rather) than of his heavy displeasure; that
they may indeed sometimes be symptoms of his anger, but not of his hatred; they
may be for corrections, but not for confusion: he may correct those, whom yet
he accounts his Children and resolves to save. 7. To put us upon a due search
and Examination of our Hearts and Ways. Certainly there is not (the) best man
living, but upon a strict and impartial search of himself may find sewel for
affliction; demerit enough to deserve it; somewhat amiss that requires
amendment; some corruptions growing into exorbitancy; some errors, that stand
in need of Physic to cleanse them; some budding disorders, that stand in need
of a medicine to prevent them. It is the great business of affliction, the
great message that it brings from God to man, is to search out and see what is
amiss, what is defective; and to ransack our Souls and Hearts and Lives, and
search whether there be not something offensive to God. 8. To put a man to a
double Duty upon this search; namely, if upon an impartial serutiny, thou find
thy Conscience clear from great and wasting Sins, humbly bless God for his
grace, that has preserved thee from the great transgression: but yet humble
thy self for thy sins of daily incursion, for thy sins of omission, for thy
coldness in thy devotions, for thy want of vigilance over thy pulions, for thy
ne^lect of opportun^tl^, (...) doing good. As thou have mitter of thankfulness,
for escaping those 0303 0 ^^eater and wasting sins, when others (...); ^^r t^^^
have matter of humi^^^tion and repentance, for those sins that (...) of a
lesser magnitude, whereunto thy 0303 0 (...) inadvertence and humane trailty
unders thee liable, and to set a stricter ^^rch upon thy self even in reference
to ^ere. Again, on the other side, if upon ^^ch, thou find thy self guilty of
any (...) which has not been repented (...), thy ^^iction brings likewise a
double (...) unto thee. First, a message of hu^^^^tion and repentance for thy
great ^^^^gr^^lion; and t^^ning to God, with ^perfect resolution of amendment:
and a ^^sage of gratitude and thankfulness to (...) that has sent this
messenger of af^^^^ (...) awaken thee to repentance and mendment; and has
given thee an as^^^ce (...) pardon and forgiveness upon thy ^^^^^ce and
amendment, through the (...) Sacrifice of Christ Jesus. So that whatsoever
person affliction meets with, it brings with it a useful and profitable message
from Heaven: If it meet with a person under the guilt of some great unrepented
sin, it brings him an errand of humiliation, repentance, amendment and
thankfulness: if it meet with a good man, such a man as Job, who had the
witness of God in himself, that he was a perfect man and an upright, yet it
brings him also a message of the like nature, a message of gratitude to that
God, that has preserved him from the great transgression; a message of
humiliation and repentance for his often failings and offenses; a message of
advice to proceed with greater vigilance, and to a farther degree of Christian
per fection in the whole course of his life. 9. To wean a man from the love of
the world, and to carry up the thoughts and hopes and desires to that Country
where unto we are appointed. If all things went well even with good men in this
life, they would be building of Tabernacles here, and set up their rest and
hopes on this side Jordan, as the Reuhenites did in the Country of Bashan,
when they found it rich and fruitful. God Almighty therefore in mercy makes
this World unpleasing, to good men by affliction, that they may set the less
value upon it, and fix their hopes and desires and endeavors for that City
which is above.
This is the voice of the Rod and of Him that has appomted it, which every
wise man ought to hear and answer with (...) obedience, submission and
thankfulness: And when affliction has wrought this effect, us business is in a
great measure ended: and for the most part it is thereupon ^^sed or removed.

Above all the Temptations that befall good men in A^^i^citons, this commonly
is that which does most greatly prevasl, and ^^th them the most hurt, namely,
when (...) ^ddigent search they find their Con^clences clear from any great
offenses, they (...) apt to magnify their own inte^^^ toexpostulate the
reasonableness and (...) the divine dealing with them, to (...) of hard ^sage
from him. This (...) fault, (...) is too apt to be the (...) of ^^od men,
though neither equal ^^^m in their persecatons or aff^ff^ctions: ^uch courise
nevertheless is 1. Very un^^ and unreasonable; for the best of men ^ave sins
enough to ^^stifie the Justice of God in his severest dea^ing with them; and
^^^ptions enough to grow into greater ^^^mities, which although they perchance
see not, yet the all-knowing God sees, and in mercy and with wisdom prevents,
by the corrosives and catharticks of affliction: infomuch that even that good
man, when Almighty God opened his ear to discipline, saw and acknowledged, and
therefore abhorred lumself in dust and ashes. 2. As it is extremely unjust, so
it is extremely foolish and vain: For as it is not the way to remove the
affliction, so when God is pleased to remove it in mercy and compassion, it
makes a man justly ashamed upon his deliverance, of that folly and pettishness
that he showed under his affliction against Almighty God, who even then had
thoughts of mercy and deliverance for him. And this very Consideration had been
enough to have made Job's deliverance yet full of trouble and shame, for his
frowardness in his affliction, unless the gracious God in a strange
condescension of goodness and gentleness had prevented it, by giving so great a
suffrage unto his integrity, and covering the errors and passionate excursions
of his affliction, as a Father does the errors and follies of his Child, by an
indulgent commendation: Ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, is my
servant Job.

And thus far of the carriage that becomes us to have under affliction, and our
due improvement of it, to the ends for which Almighty God sends it: by which
Almighty God receives the honor of his sovereignty, his justice, his goodness,
his wisdom, his truth; and man receives the benefit of prevention from sin,
deliverance out of it, improvement of his graces, perfecting of his Soul, and
advancement of his glory, through the mercy of God, and his blessing upon this
bitter cup, the cup of affliction.

I come to the third General Consideration, namely, that temper and disposition
of mind that becomes us to have upon and after deliverance from afflictions.

1. Upon our deliverance from afflictions, we ought in a special and solemn
manner to return our humble and hearty Thanks to Almighty God, to acknowledge
him to be the Author of it, to return unto him our humble and serious praises,
that he has been pleased to answer our Prayer, and has given us a plain
testimony that he has a regard to us: this is the Tribute that he expects most
justly from us. As he in a special manner requires our Prayers unto him, when
we are under affliction, so he requires that we should take notice of the
Returns of our Prayers, and to pay him the tribute of Praise upon our
deliverance. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. The truth is, when we are under extremities, we are
easily persuaded to call to God for deliverance; the very natural pressure of
afflictions drive us to him, we know not whither else to fly: But as soon as
the Rod is gone, we are dull and backward in returning glory to God; and we are
most apt to take notice of the means that immediately went before. If we or any
of our relations are delivered from sickness, we have it presently upon our
tongues ends, that we had a careful or skilful Physician, a strong
constitution, favorable weather, some lucky accident that happened unto us;
and the like we are apt to do upon other deliverance: and rarely, or at least
not with that sincerity, acknowledge the mercy of God, and the hand of God to
be that which raised us up. It is true, means are not to be neglected, it is a
presumption and tempting of God: but it is the providence of God that gives us
means, and the blessing of God that makes them successful, that sometimes
blesses poor and weak and unlikely means to produce desired effects; sometimes
makes those very things we call accidents, that seem to import the very
destruction of a man, to be the means of his recovery, and sometimes brings
about the effect without any visible means. We are no less to acknowledge his
goodness and influence, when we seem to be delivered by means, than if we were
delivered by miracle. It is true, we are apt to fasten our thoughts and reasons
upon means, because we see them; but if our Eyes could be so opened as the
Prophet's servant's were, 2 Kings 6.17.
when he saw the Chariots of fire in the Mountain, we should see another kind
of regiment and government and ordering and disposing of things than now we
see. Many, if not most, of those signal deliverances that a Man or a Nation
has, are wrought not so much by the efficacy of means, as by a secret
invisible Hand of Providential government which we see (not.) If therefore thou
art delivered from any great distress of any kind, in such a manner that thou
can not attribute it to means, or possibly above or beyond means, the Hand of
thy deliverer is more signal and conspicuous, glorify his mercy and goodness:
And if thou do obtain thy deliverance by means, vet still glorify his mercy
and goodness; for it is his providence that sends means, his power and goodness
that blesses it to its desired success: the efficiency and energy of the
principal cause is that which gives efficacy to the means and makes it
effectual.

2. Endeavor to express thy thankfulness by a sincere and faithful Obedience
to the will of that God, that has thus delivered thee. A true and hearty
thankfulness of mind will not content it self with bare verbal praises and
acknowledgements, but will study and endeavor to find out and do all that may
be well-pleasing and delightful and acceptable to his great Benefactor; and
wherever the Heart is truly affected with the sense of the favor, goodness,
and love of God, and that the deliverance it has had, it has had from his
hand, will think nothing too much to be done, that may be well pleasing to him.
Great acclamations and verbal praises and acknowledgements without an honest
and sincere endeavor to please and obey him, are but a piece of mockery and
hypocritical complement; and a mere frustration and disappointment of Almighty
God, in the and and design of his mercy to us; which is, to make us really
better, more dutiful, more capable of greater and everlasting mercies; to make
us better Examples to others, who may thereby (be) invited to follow us in
piety and goodness. A man that has received great and signal mercies and
deliverances, becomes a great and efficacious Example, and of much good, or
much evil, according as he carries himself after eminent mercies received: If
he become more pious, virtuous, just, sober than before, he becomes a forcible
motive and encouragement to others, to be like him; again, if he either remain
or degenerate into impiety, vanity, or vice, he discourageth goodness, and
becomes a great temptation to others to be like him.

3. Take beed lest after great deliverance, thy Heart be lifted up into
presumption upon God, pride and vainglory, and a conceit of thy own goodness
and worth. This is the common temptation that grows upon much mercy received;
and therefore the wise Lawgiver did very frequently caution the people of
Israel against this, Deuteronomy. 9.4. Speak not in thy heart after the Lord thy God
has cast them out, saying, For my righteousness the Lord has brought me to
possess this land, etc. Let thy afflictions find thee humble, and let thy
afflictions-make thee more humble; but let thy deliverance yet increase thy
humility; the more mercy God shows to thee, the more humble ever let thy Heart
be, upon a double account: 1. Thy deliverances does or should make thee know
Almighty God the more; and the more thou know him, the more humble it should
make thee: Job 42.5. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the car; but now
mine eyes have seen thee: wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. 2. Thou
have need to double thy guards of humility, because upon great deliverance thou
must expect that the temptation and assaults of pride and vain glory will be
most busy with thee: And if in all thy preparations for afflictions thou have
studied humility, if under all thy afflictions thou have improved thy humility,
yet if now, upon thy deliverance, thou art lost in pride and vainglory, thou
have lost all the benefit both of thy preparations, and of thy afflictions, and
of thy deliverance also: thou art like an unhappy Ship that has endured the
Sea, and born the Storm, and yet sinks when she is come into the Harbor.

4. And upon the same account be vigilant and watchful. It is true, thou have
weathered a great Storm, out of which by the mercy of God thou art delivered;
but still be upon thy guard, thou know not how soon thou shall meet with
another; take heed it surprise thee not unprovided. Though thou have endured,
it may be, a long and dark storm of affliction, and God has mercifully
delivered thee; yet thou have no promise from Almighty God that thou shall meet
with no more. These three Consider ations should keep thee watchful and
vigilant, notwithstanding great deliverance from great afflictions: 1. Thou art
thereby better fitted and prepared to receive it; if it come, it shall not
surprise thee unaware nor find thee sleeping. 2. Most certainly, if any thing
be a more likely means, as to preserve thee under, so from affliction, it is a
prepared, watchful, vigilant mind: for, if I may so speak, afflictions have no
great business with such a man; for, he is already in that posture and and
frame of Heart, that affliction is ordinarily sent to give a man. 3. There is
nothing more likely to procure affliction than security and unpreparedness of
mind: And that, First, in respect of the goodness, mercy, and justice of God,
who, though with most unblameable justice, yet with singular mercy, is very
likely to send affliction to awaken him and amend him, and to recall him from
that tendency to Apostasy, that security is apt to bring upon him. Secondly, in
respect of the malice and vigilance of the great Enemy of mankind; who, as he
never wants malice, so he often gets a permission to worry a man whom he has
under this disadvantage of unpreparedness and security.

5. Be careful to keep, as great afflictions, so also great deliverance in
memory. Most men upon the fresh receipt of mercy and deliverance, have a quick
and lively apprehension of it; and accordingly their affections of
thankfulness, and practices and purposes of Obedience are lively and diligent:
but in process of time, and as the man is further distant from his deliver^nce,
so the memory of it does gradually, and possibly suddenly, vanish and decay:
and as the remembrance of the deliverance decays and grows weaker and weaker,
so do these affections or dispositions of the Soul that are before mentioned:
The thankfulness grows faint; and so does the obedience, and so does the
humility, and so does the watchfulness: and as the water that has been heated,
being removed from the fire, grows by degrees colder and colder, till at last
it comes to its old coldness that it first had; so in a little time the
affliction is forgot, and the deliverance is forgot, and the man is grown into
the very same state, as if he had never felt either, and possibly worse.
Therefore keep deliverances and afflictions too, fresh in thy memory; call thy
self frequently to account for them, use some expedient that may frequently
remind thee of them with all their circumstances: set them down in writing;
mention them often, recollect them often, and recollect what thoughts,
purposes, temper of mind and spirit was then upon thee, when thy afflictions
were upon thee, or thy deliverances freshly given to thee. Cast with thy self,
how if these were now as fresh to thee as they were then, with what motions or
dispositions of Soul thou should receive them; and reason thy self into the
same temper and habitude of thankfulness, as then thou had. By this keeping
thy memory of these afflictions and these deliverances fresh under all its
circumstances, thou will with them, and in the same degree as thy remembrance
is of them, revive and excite and preserve and keep alive and quick and active,
the same gratitude, the same humility, the same obedience, the same vigilance,
that these afflictions or these deliverances wrought in thee, when they were
freth with thee or upon thee. The vigorous perpetuating of the remembrance of
them, will be an effectual means to perpetuate the due fruit of them in their
life, vigor and intention.

JACOB's VOW: OR, The Modesty and Reasonableness OF JACOB'S Desire.
GENESIS XXVIII. 20. And Jacob Vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me, and
will keep me in the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment
to put on; so that I come (again) to my father's house in peace: then shall the
Lord be my God, etc.
THE only thing that I intend to consider upon this place of Holy Scripture, is
the Modesty and Reasonableness of Jacob's Desire. He does not desire greatness
of wealth, or honor, or power, or splendor, or great equipage in this World;
but all that (he) demes, in reference to this World, is, 1. That the
comfortable presence and sense of the favor and love of God should be with
him; If God will be with me: 2. That the Protection of the Divine Providence
may be continually over him; and will keep we in the way that I go: 3. That he
would supply him, not with curiosities or delicacies, but with necessaries; and
will give me bread to eat and ra^ment to put on.

And the truth is, this should be the Rule und Measure of every good man, in
reference to this life, and the enjoyments of it, and the desires of them,
until he come to his Father's house in peace; that house wherein there are many
mansions, that the great Father, of whom all the Family in Heaven and Earth is
named, has provided for such as fear, and love, and obey him.

Indeed the two former of these, though they be no more than what the bountiful
God freely affords to all that truly love him, and depend upon him, are of a
strange and vast extent. First, the comfortable presence of God supplies
abundantly all that can be desired by us, and abundantly countervails
whatsoever else we seem to want; it is better than life it self: And when the
Ancients would express all that seemed beneficial or prosperous in this life,
they had no suller and comprehensive expression of it, than that God was with
him: Joseph, Genesis 39. 3. And when his master saw that the Lord was with him,
and that the Lord made all that he did to prosper: 1 Samuel 18. 14, 28. the
wisdom and courage and success of David (is) resolved into this one thing, The
Lord was with him.

But certainly, though the Divine presence should not manifest it self in
external successes and advantages, the very sense of the savor and comfortable
presence of God carries with it an abundant supply of all other deficiences.
Psalm. 4. 6, 7. The light of the countenance of Almighty God is the most
supereminent good, and occasions more true joy and contentment, than the
redundance of all external advantages. Secondly, the Divine protection and
providence is the most sure and safe protection, and supplies the want of all
other. The munition of Rocks is thy defense; and all other desences and refuges
without this, are weak, impotent, and failing defenses. Except the Lord watch
the city, the watchman watches but in vain.

That therefore which I shall fix upon is the last of his three desires: If he
shall give me meat to drink and raiment to put on.

The desires of a good man, in relation to the things of this life, ought not
to be lavish and extravagant; not to be of things for grandeur, or delicacy, or
excess: but to be terminated in things of necessity for his present
subsistence, convenient food and raiment. If Almighty God give more than this,
it is matter of the greater gratitude, as it was to Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. I am
not worthy of the least of all the mercies, etc. for with my staff, I passed
over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands: But if he gives no more, we
have enough for our contentation. Almighty God, who is never worse than his
word, but most commonly better, has not given us any promise of more, neither
has he given us commission to expect or ask for more. If he gives more than
necessary, he exalts his bounty and benificence: and yet, if he gives no more,
it is bounty that he gives so much; and is matter both of our contentation, and
gratitude.

This the wise man Agur made his request, Prove. 30. 8. Give me neither poverty,
nor riches: seed me with food convenient for me. This our Lord teaches us to
ask, in his excellent form of Prayer; Give us this day our daily bread: and
this is that which the Apostle prescribes, for the Rule of our contentation, 1 Timothy 6.8. And having food and raiment, let us be therewith content.

And truly, if it pleases God to allow us a sufficiency and competency, for
the necessity of our nature, we have very great Reason to be contented with it,
not only as it is (a) duty enjoined unto us, but upon most evident conviction
of sound Reason, both in regard unto Almighty God, in regard of our selves, and
in regard of others. I shall mingle these Reasons together.

1. It becomes us to be contented, because whatsoever we have, we have from the
free allowance, bounty, and goodness of God: he owes us nothing; but what we
have, we have from free gift and bounty. If a man demands a debt of another, we
think it just he should be paid what he demands; but if a man receive an alms
from another, we think it reasonable he should be content with what the other
gives, without prescribing to the measure of his bounty. But the case is far
stronger here: we are under an obligation of duty to be charitable to others
wants, by virtue of a Divine Command but Almighty God is under no other law of
conferring benefits, but of his own bounty, goodness, and will.

2. It becomes us to be content, because our measure and dole is given unto us,
as by him that is absolute Lord of his own bounty, so by him that is the wisest
dispenser of his own benefits: he knows, far better, than we our selves, what
proportion is fittest for us: he has given us enough for our necessity, and we
are desirous to have somewhat more; the wise God knows, it may be, that more
would do us harm, would undo us; would make us luxurious, proud, insolent,
domineering, forgetful of God. The great Lord and Master of the great Family of
the World, knows who are, and who are not able to bear redundancy: And
therefore if I have food convenient for me, I have reason to be content,
because I have reason to believe the great and wise God knows what proportion
best sits me; it may be, if I had more, I were ruined.

3. We must know that we are but Stewards of the very external blessings of
this life; and at the great Audit, we must give an account of our Stewardship,
and those Accounts will be strictly perused by the great Lord of all the Family
in Heaven and Earth. Now if our external benefits be but proportionable to our
necessities and necessary use, our Account is easily and safely made: Imprimis,
I have received so much of thy external blessings as were necessary for my food
and clothing, and for the feeding and clothing of my Family: But on the other
side, where there is a superfluity and redundance given over and above our
necessary support, the account is more difficult. where much is given, much
will be required. There will be an account required, how the redundant overplus
was employed; how much in Charity, how much in other good works: and God knows
that too too often very pitiful accounts are made of the surplusage and
redundancy of a liberal Estate; which will be so far from abating the account,
as it will enhance it: Item so much in excess, debauchery, and riot; so much in
costly apparel; so much in magnificence and vain shows, and the like.

4. Our natures may be well enough supplied with little; Natura pancis
contenta; and whatsoever is redundant, most commonly turns to the damage and
detriment of our nature, unless it meet with a very wise proprietor: For the
excess in the abuse of superfluities in eating and drink ing, and gratifying
our appetites; or the excess of care and pains in getting, or keeping, or
disposing superfluities and redundance, commonly does more harm, even to our
natural complexions and constitution, than a mediocrity proportionate to the
necessities of nature.

5. Whatsoever is more than enough for our natural support, and the necessary
supply of our Families, and so emplyed is in truth, vain, useless,
unserviceable; and such a man is rich but in fancy and notion, and not in truth
and reality: For the use of externals is supply of our natural necessity; if I
have a million of Money, and yet a hundred Pounds is sufficient, and as much as
I shall use to bring me to my Grave; the rest is vain and needless to me, and
does me no good: it is indeed my burden, and my care, and my trouble; but is
of no more use to me in my Chest, than if it were in the center of the Earth.
It is true, I have thereby a happy opportunity, if I have a large and a wise
Heart to dispose it for the glory and service of God, and the good of mankind,
in works of piety, charity, and humanity: but if I keep it in my Chest, it is
an impertinent trouble, neither useful for my self, because I need it not, I
have enough without it; nor as I order it is it useful for others, no more than
if it were an hundred fathom under gr^und.

6. A state of Mediocrity or supplies proportionate to my necessity, is
infinitely more safe to me, even in respect of my self, than an estate of
glory, wealth, power, and abundance; an estate of mediocrity and
commensurateness to our exigence and necessity is the freest of any condition
in the world from perturbations and temptations; a state and condition of want,
and too narrow for our necessities, is an estate subject to some troubles and
temptations: But of all conditions in the world, a redundant and over-plentiful
condition is most subject to the most dangerous and pernicious temptations in
the world: as namely, forgetfulness of God, self-dependence, pride, insolence,
oppression, injustice, unquietness of mind, excess, luxury, intemperance,
contempt of others: and I have very often known those persons that have carried
themselves steadily and commendably in a condition of mediocrity, nay have been
able to bear with vict^ry the shocks of those temptations that arise from want
and poverty, yet when in the late times they were advanced to wealth, power and
command, were lost and could not bear the temptations that attended grandeur,
wealth and power; and the Sun of wealth and prosperity quickly disrobed them of
that mantle of innocence, piety and virtue, that they kept about them against
the storms and assaults of wants and necessities. So that certainly it requires
a greater vigilance, attention, industry and resolution, to oppose and conquer
the temptations of grandeur, wealth, and power, than the temptations of want,
necessity, and poverty: Some patience and humility will do much to subdue the
latter; but he that will acquit himself from the temptations of the former,
has, and has need of, great wisdom, moderation, sobriety, and a low esteem of
the world, and especially, a great and practical exercise of the Fear of God,
Faith in his promises, and a fixed hope and prospect of the promises of
immortality and glory, whereby they may overcome the slattering and deceiving
world.

7. A state of externals proportionate to our necessities is a far more serene
and safe estate in reference to others; than an estate of external grandeur,
and wealth and power: And the reasons are, first, because the former has
nothing that others do covet or desire, but the latter has gotten the golden
Ball, that the generality of mankind are fond to have, and are restless till
they have gotten (it (...) which makes the man's estate unquiet and unsafe,
because he has many competitors for what he enjoys, which are continually
endeavoring to trip up his heels: just as we see when a Bird has gotten a
booty or prey, all other Birds of prey are following and catching after it, and
ever molesting him that has it. Secondly, because he that enjoys much, either
of honor, or wealth, or power, is the object of the envy of other men, which
is a busy, restless, pernicious humor, and ever picking quarrels and finding
faults, and studying and endeavoring the ruin of its object: Whereas a state
of mediocrity, is a state of quietness, and free from the assaults and shafts
of this pestilent companion.

8. We see that all worldly matters are by a kind of inbred and connatural
necessity subject to mutations and changes. When grandeur, and honor, and
wealth are at their highest pitch, like the Sun in the Meridian, it stays not
long there, but has its declination. Now the changes that are incident to
greatness and wealth, are always for the worst; they most commonly take their
wings and sly away, when they seem to be in their highest pitch of plenty and
glory: And this creates in a man very great anxiety and restless fear, lest he
should lose what he has; and infinite struglings and shistings to keep it when
it is going; and extreme disappointment, vexation and sorrow when it is gone.
On the other side, a state of mediocrity may have its changes too; and as it
(is) seldom for the worse, so it is most ordinarily for the better; whereby the
man has great peace and tranquillity. We need not have a better instance of
both these conditions than in Jacob, the person in the Text: While he was in a
state of mediocrity, and rather indeed, in a strait, than in an ample
condition; when he had nothing but his Staff, and his supplies of Bread to eat,
and Clothes to put on, he was in a state of great tranquillity; and that change
which befell that condition, was a change not for the worse, but for the
better, at least in relation to externals, his supplies increased; but as soon
as he once arrived at great wealth, under his Uncle Laban, though, it is true,
the Divine Providence kept him from a total loss of it, yet he soon found that
prosperous condition full of thorns and difficulties: 1. His Uncle and his Sons
began to envy his wealth, and he began to be in great fears and jealousies lest
he should be deprived of all. 2. Then to avoid that fear, he flies, and his
Uncle pursues him; and then he was under a new fear of loss of all he had got.
3. When that fear was over, then he fears that the rumor of his wealth, and the
former displeasure of his Brother Esau might make him and all his wealth a prey
to his Brother; and certainly, had not the immediate providence of Almighty God
strangely interposed, he had not only selt the difficulties and unquietness of
his great wealthy condition (which were profitable for his instruction) but he
had suffered a total deprivation of it, either by Laban, or Esau, or at least
by the neighbors of the Shechemites, exasperated by the treachery and cruelty
of his two Sons Simeon and Levi.

Upon these and many more Considerations, it is most evident, That a state of
mediocrity in externals is to be preferred before an estate of much wealth,
honor, or grandeur; that of the two extremes, poverty on the one side, or very
great wealth and glory on the other; the latter is in truth more dangerous and
difficult than the former; but that Agur's Prayer, a state of mediocrity,
neither poverty nor riches, but food convenient for a man's coudition is the
most desirable state in this life, and that which avoids the difticulty of
both extremes.

I would willingly from these Considerations therefore learn to attain such a
temper and disposition of Soul as might be safe and useful for me in relation
to all these three Conditions of Life, which-soever of them the Divine
Providence should send unto me.

1. In reference to a Mediocrity or such a state of externals, as might be
suitable to the exigence and nature of my condition in this life: I should make
such a state my choice, and not my trouble; I should with all thankfulness
acknowledge both the goodness, and wisdom of Almighty God, in giving me so
competent, and so safe a condition; that has by his Providence delivered me
from the difficulties, and inconveniences, and dangers, and temptations of
both extremes, namely, great want, and great wealth: and I shall bear my lot,
not only with great patience and quietness, but with great contentation and
thankfulness.

2. In reference to an estate of Want or Indagence: If it should please the
Divine Providence to appoint that condition to me, I should nevertheless
comfort and support my self with such Considerations as these: 1. Though my
condition be narrow and necessitous, yet it is that, which the great wise Lord
of the great Family of the World, has appointed to me; I will therefore bear
it with patience and resignation. 2. Though it be an estate of indigence and
narrowness, yet it is such as affords me and my Family life and subsistence,
though not without much pains and difliculty: it might have been worse, and it
may please;God to make it better, when he sees fit; I will therefore bear it
with contentedness, as well as patience. 3. Though my state be very narrow and
pinching, yet it is possibly much more safe, than an estate of grandeur and
affluence: my account is the less; my temptations not so dangerous; my cares
fewer; my lessons of dependence upon God, of humility and lowliness of mind, of
temperance and sobriety, of contempt of the World, of valuation of Eternity and
provision for it, are better learned in this extreme than in the other: I shall
therefore endeavor to improve the opportunities, even of this hard condition,
and bear it not only with contentedness, but thankfulness.

3. In reference to an estate of Redundance and Affluence of externals, an
estate of wealth and plenty, of honor and grandeur, of power and authority and
pre-eminence; I will consider, 1. That this is an estate full of temptations,
and temptations of the greatest size and the most dangerous nature; as, pride
and insolence, forgetfulness of God, luxury, intemperance, carnal confidence
and security, contempt of others, and infinite more; and if any of these get
the advantage, they will do me more mischief, than all my wealth will do me
good. 2. Therefore I will learn and exercise very great vigilance and
attention, that I be not cheated into these temptations. 3. I will take a true
estimate of the World, and of all these goodly appearances that I am attended
with from it; and I will not take my measure and estimate of them by common
opinion of the world, or by their splendid outside, but I will look more
strictly into them, and find whether they are not uncertain, deceiving things;
what stability there is in them; what good they will do me after death; what
quietness or tranquillity of mind they will give me, or rather take from me;
whether they have in themselves any real influence to make me better or wiser.
4. Upon these Considerations (if) I find, as find I shall, that they have not
that real worth in them that the vain World imagins, I will not set my Heart
upon them, nor lay any confidence upon them, nor lay out much of my love unto
them, or any great esteem for them. 5. I will set my Heart to a true and
serious consideration of those durable riches and glory and honor that our
dear Lord has provided for us in the life to come; and that eternal weight of
glory will infinitely outweigh all the wealth, and honor, and glory that I do
or can enjoy in this World. 6. And upon this consideration also I will rectify
my judgment concerning this World, and the greatest glory of it; and thereby
habituate my self to a low esteem of the wealth I have, or can have, and set up
my hopes and treasure in more noble and durable enjoyments. 7. I will consider
I am but a Steward when all is done, and the greater my wealth or honor is,
the greater my account must be, and the more difficult to keep them fair. 8.
That in as much I am but a Steward, I will be very careful, that my management
of my trust may be such as will bear my Lord's scrutiny. I will not employ my
stock of wealth or honor to the dishonor of my Lord, in riot or excess, in
vanity or oppression; but will do as much good with it as I can, according to
the trust committed to me, that I may give a just and fair and comfortable
account of my Stewardship when my Lord and Master calls for it. 9. That in as
much as those very externals are in themselves blessings, if well employed,
though not the blessings of the greatest magnitude; I will with all humility
and thankfulness acknowledge the Divine Bounty to me, in trusting me with
Abundance, and will employ it to his Honor.

Seneca Thyest. Act. 2.
STet quicunque volet potens
Auloe culmine lubrico:
Me dulcis saturet quies,
Obscuro positus loco,
Leni perfruar otio,
Nullis nota Quiritibus
Altas per tacitum fluat.
Sic cum transierint met
Nullo cum strepitu dies,
Plebeius moriar senex.
Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
LEt him that will, ascend the tottering Seat
Of courtly Grandeur, and become as great
As are his mountain Wishes; as for me,
Let sweet Repose, and Rest my portion be;
Give me some mean obscure Recess, a Sphere
Out of the road of Business, or the fear
Of Falling lower, where I sweetly may
My Self, and dear Retirement still enjoy.
Let not my Life, or Name, be known unto
The Grandees of the Times, tossed to and fro
By Censures, or Applause; but let my Age
Slide gently by, not overthwart the Stage
Of Public Interest; unheard, unseen,
And unconcerned, as if I never had been.
And thus while I shall pass my silent days
In shady Privacy, free from the Noise
And busles of the World, then shall I
A good old Innocent Plebeian die.
Death is a mere Surprise, a very Snare,
To him that makes it his life's greatest care
To be a public Pageant, known to All,
But unacquainted with Himself, does fall.
OF CONTENTATION, AND The MOTIVES to It, BOTH MORAL and DIVINE.
PHIL. IV. II. For I have learned in Whatsoever estate I am therewith to be
content.
THere are Three excellent Virtues which especially refer to our condition in
this life, and much conduce to our safe and Comfortable passage through them.

1. Equality of Mind, or AEquanimity. 2. Patience. 3. Contentedness.
1. Equality of Mind or Equanimity, is that virtue which refers both to
prosperity and adversity, whereby in all conditions of that kind we carry an
even and equal temper, neither overmuch lifted up by prosperity, nor overmuch
depressed in adversity.

2. Patience properly refers to crosses, disappointment, afflictions, and
adversity, whereby we carry a quiet and submissive mind, without murmuring,
passion, or discomposure of spirit, in all afflictions, whether sickness, loss
of friends, poverty, reproach, disgrace, or the like.

3. Contentation; which differs from equality of mind, because that respects as
well prosperity as adversity, this only adversity; and in some respects differs
also from Patience (though this always accompanies it) 1. In the extent of the
object, for patience respects all kinds of affliction; contentedness, in
propriety of speech, respects principally the affliction of want or poverty. 2.
In the act it self, for patience, in propriety of speech, implies only a quiet
composed toleration of the evils of adversity, but contentedness imports
somewhat more, namely, not only a quietness of mind, but a kind of cheerful,
free submission to our present condition of adversity, a ready compliance with
the Divine Providence, and, in effect, a choice of that state wherein the
Divine Dispensation places us, as well as in bearing it.

These, though they may in strictness give a distinction between Patience and
Contentation, yet we must observe that Contentation is never without Patience,
though it be something more: and that in the common acceptance and latitude of
the word, Contentation does not only extend to the condition or affliction of
poverty, but even to all other outward afflictions reached to us by the
inflicting or permitting hand of Divine Providence: and in this large
acceptance I shall here apply and use it.

Content therefore, in its large acceptance, is not only a quiet and patient,
but also a free and cheerful closing with that estate and condition of life,
which the Divine Dispensation shall allott unto us, whether mean, or poor, or
laborious, and painful, or obscure, or necessitous, or sickly, or unhealthy, or
without friends, or with loss or absence of friends, or unkindness of friends,
or any other state that seems ungrateful to our natures or disposition. For we
need not apply this virtue to a state of high prosperity in all things, wherein
(though men are not ordinarily contented) yet they have but small temptations
to discontent from the estate it self wherein they so are.

This lesson of Contentation was learnt by this Apostle, which imports these
things: 1. That it is a lesson that is possible to be learned, for the Apostle
had learned it. 2. That it is a lesson that requires something of industry and
pains to acquire it, for he learned it before he attained it. 3. That it is a
lesson that deserves the learning, for he speaks of it as of a thing of moment
and great use, well worth the pains he took to attain it. And the truth is, it
is of so great importance to be learned, that without it we want the comfort of
our lives, and with it all conditions of life are not only tolerable but
comfortable. And hence it is that this excellent Apostle does very often
inculcate and press and commend this lesson in many of his Epistles. 1 Timothy
6.6. Godliness with contentment is great gain. Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation
be without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have; for he
has said, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Again, 1 Timothy 6.8. And
having food and raiment let us be therewith content.

I shall therefore set down those Reasons that may persuade and encourage us to
contentation with our condition, and likewise to patience under it; for
patience and contentation cannot be well severed. And the Reasons are of two
sorts; 1. Moral, 2. Divine and Evangelical. Neither shall I decline the use of
Moral Reasons, considering how far by the help of these many Heathens (that had
not the true knowledge of God revealed in his Word and Son) advanced in the
practice of these virtues. The Moral Reasons therefore are these: 1. Very many
of the external evils we suffer are of our own choice and procurement, the
fruits of our own follies and inadvertence and averseness to good counsel: And
why should we be discontented, or impatient under those evils which we our
selves have chosen, or repine because these trees bear their natural fruit? 2.
The greatest part of evils we suffer are of that nature and kind, that are not
in our power either to prevent or help: Some come from the very condition of
our nature, as sicknesses, death of friends; and of absolute necessity, the
more relations any man has, the more evils of this kind we may suffer: And can
we reasonably expect that the very natures of things should be changed to
please our humor? Again, some come from the hands of men that it may be are
powerful, more subtle and malicious: Why should we discontent our selves or be
impatient because others are too strong for us? Others again come by
occurtences natural (though disposed by the hand of the Divine Providence) as
losses by storms and tempests, by unseasonable weather, by intemperateness of
the air or meteors. Can we reasonably expect that the great God of Heaven and
Earth should alter his settled Laws of Nature for the convenience of every such
little Worm as you or I am? It may be that storm or intemperate season that may
do you or me some prejudice, may do others as many and as good, or it may be
more and better, a benefit: that wind that strikes my Ship against the Rock,
may fetch off two or more from the Sands. Let us be content therefore to suffer
Almighty God to govern the World according to his wisdom and not our will,
though it may be a particular detriment to you or to me: or if we repine
against it, we must not think thereby to obtain our own wills. 3. The texture
and frame of the World is such, that it is absolutely necessary that, if some
be rich and powerful, or great, or honorable, others must be poor, and subject,
and ignoble: If all were equally powerful, there would be no power nor
government, because all would be equal; if all were equally rich, it would be
but only nominally, indeed none would be rich, but all would be poor, there
could be no Artificers, no Laborers, no Servants. Since therefore it is of
necessity, in the order of the World, that some must be poor, or less rich or
powerful than others, why should I be so unreasonable, or unjust, to desire
that lot of poverty or lowness of condition should be another's and not mine?
Or, why should not I be contented to be of the lower fort of men, since the
order of the World requires that such some must be? 4. Let any man observe it
whiles he will, he shall find that whatsoever of worldly advantages any man
does most plentifully enjoy, and most men most greedily desire, of necessity he
must thereby have more crosses and afflictions. A man desires many Children,
Friends, Relations; the more he has of these, the more mortal dying comforts
he has; the more he has that must be sick, and suffer affliction, and dye:
and every one of these afflictions or losses in a man's Relations, are so many
renewed afflictions, and crosses, and troubles to himself. A man desires
wealth, and has it; the more cares and fears he has; and the more he has the
more he has to lose, and of necessity he must have more losses the more he
has: as he that has a thousand Sheep must in probability lose more in a year
than he that has but forty: And besides, Wealth is the common mark that every
man shoots at, and every man will be pulling somewhat from him that has much,
because every man thinks he has enough for others as well as himself. A man
desires honor, power, grandeur, and he has it: but every man envies him, and
is ready to unhorse him, and a small neglect, reproach or misfortune sits
closer to such a man, than to a meaner man; and the more of honor or power he
has, the more of such breaches he shall be sure to meet with. A man desires
long life, and accordingly enjoyes it: but in the tract of long life a man is
sure to meet with more sicknesses, more crosses, more loss of friends and
relations, and over-lives the greatest part of his external comforts, and in
Old age becomes his own burden. 5. If a man desire much wealth or power, and
enjoyes it, yet it is certain so much the more thereof he has, so much the
less others have; for he has that which might otherwise be divided among many.
Why therefore should a man desire it, or discontent himself, if he have it not,
since what he thus enjoys is with another's detriment and loss, who would have
a share in it, if he had it not alone? And why should I covet that, or be
discontented if I have it not, since if I have it, I shall procure the like
discontent in others. 6. It is certain in the course of the World, there are
and must be a greater number of crosses and troubles, and of greater moment
than there are of External Comforts, nay there is searce any comfort that any
man has, but like Jonah's Gourd, it has a Worm growing at the root of it,
which does not only wither the comfort it self, but most times creates greater
trouble and sorrow, than the comfort it self has good if entirely enjoyed. A
man has many Children, it may be they are all very good and hopeful, yet they
are mortal, and if they dye, the death of such a Child is so much the more
grievous, by how much the more good and towardly he was. But if any of them
prove vicious, foolish or naught, by how much a Child is nearer than a
stranger, by so much the more his vices give trouble, sorrow, and care to his
Parent: So that in all worldly things, the stock of troubles is greater three
to one, than that of comforts; so true is that of Job, A man is born to
troubles as the sparks fly upwards. Why therefore should a man sink into
discontent, because the World does but solitum obtinere, and follows its own
natural complexion and state. 7. We are generally greatly mistaken in the
nature of Good and Evil, and have not the true measures of it. That is truly
relatively Good which makes a man the better, and that truly Evil in its
relative nature, which makes a man the worse. If prosperity and success make me
thankful, watchful, charitable, benificent, then is prosperity good to me, for
it makes me better; but if it make me proud, haughty, insolent, domineering,
vainglorious, it is evil to me. If adversity make me clamorous, murmuring,
envious, spightful, injurious, then it is evil to me; but if it makes me humble,
sober, patient, then it is good to me. And let any man impartially take the
measure of the very same man or diverse men in each condition, he shall find ten
to one receive more mischief by prosperity than by adversity. Why should I then
not content my self with that condition which is more sase to me, and makes me
the better man, though not, the richer or greater. 8. Which is but a farther
explication of what is said next before. It is certain that a good man is like
the Elixir, it turns Iron into Gold, and makes the most sour condition of life
not only tolerable, but useful and convenient. If I be such, I mould and frame
my worst condition into a condition of comfort and contentment by my patience
and contentation. Why should I then be discontented with my condition, since by
the grace of God I am able to make it what I please? If I can content my self
with the good temper and disposition of my own Heart and Soul, I have no reason
to be discontented with my condition, for if I find it not good I can make it
such by the equality, patience, and temper of my own mind: And that the mind is
the principal matter in contentation or discontent, we need no other instance
than that of Ahab and Haman; the one a great King, the other a great Favorite
of a mighty Monarch, full of wealth and honor; yet a covetous mind in one and
a proud mind in the other, made the former sick for a little spot of ground,
and the latter grow to so high a degree of discontent for want of the knee of a
poor Jew, that it withered all his enjoyments. 1 King. 21.5. Hest. 5.13. 9.
Discontent and Impatience galls a thousand times more than the cross or
affliction does. We owe more of the evil of crosses, troubles, and afflictions,
to the unquiet, restless, impatient, distemper of our mind, than to them. We
are like men in a Fever, that infinitely increase their heat by their tossing
and tumbling more than if they lay still, and then they complain of the
uncasiness of their Bed: Like the Prophet's wild Bull in a Net we entangle and
tire our selves worse with our struggling than if we were more patient and
still; or like the Ship, it is not broken by the Rock, but by its own violent
motion against it. Why then should I discontent and disquiet my self with my
condition, when I make it and my self thereby worse and more uneasy? 10. As my
discontentedness and unquietness renders my condition the more uneasy, so it no
way conduces to my rescue from it: For since I cannot be so brutish as to
think that the occurrences which befall men are without a Divine Conduct, so it
is certain that all his Dispensations are wise and directed to a wise end; and
even afflictions themselves have their errand and business, to make men more
humble, watchful and considerate. If I correct my Child for his fault, and he
continue still more stubborn, I shall correct him longer till he return to his
submissiveness and duty. Why then should I discontent my self, and be impatient
under my affliction, when it is not only vain and fruitless thereby to expect
deliverance, but in all probability the likelyest way to keep me still under
it. 11. As thus my condition is not amended, but made the worse, more severe,
and lasting by my impatience and discontent, so Patience and Contentation will
give me these great advantages: 1. In all probability it will shorten my
affliction, because it has obtained its effect and end, and the message it
brings is duly answered. 2. But howsoever it will make in infinitely more easy,
the less I struggle under it. 3. And, which is the best of all, it gives me the
possession of my own Soul, internal peace and tranquillity of mind, a kind and
comfortable serenity of spirit. I remain Master of my passions, of my
intellectuals, of my self, and am not transported into another thing, than what
becomes a reasonable man: though there be storms and tempests and rolling seas
without me, yet all is calm and quiet within. Contentation and patience renders
my outward condition of little concernment to me, so long as it gives me the
opportunity to possess and enjoy me self, my virtue and goodness, and the
attestation of a good Conscience. 12. Though I want somewhat that others have,
yet it is ten to one that I have somewhat that many as good, if not better,
want. It may be I want wealth, yet I have health; it may be I want health, yet
I have Children, that others want. I will learn contentment. by considering
others wants and my enjoyments, and not learn discontent from others enjoyments
and my own wants.


These be the Moral Considerations, and truly they be of great weight, moment,
and use, and, as I said, carried the Heathen a great way in the virtues of
Contentation and Patience: But yet they oftentimes failed, and were too weak to
compose the mind under a storm of crosses, losses, and afflictions; and
therefore Almighty God has furnished us with a more excellent way, which lets
me into the Second Consideration, namely, the Divine and Evangelical Helps to
Patience and Contentation: Their number will not be so many as the former, but
their weight and efficacy greater, and they are such as these: 1. The worst I
here suffer is less than I deserve, and the least that I enjoy is more than I
can in justice expect; it is but gift and bounty: I have therefore reason to be
content and thankful for the least merey, and to be patient and quiet under my
greatest evil. 2. There is no affliction, cross, or condition of life, but is
reached out to us from the Hand or Permission of the most glorious Sovereign of
all the World, to whom we owe an infinite subjection, because we have our being
from him: And therefore it is but just and reasonable for us to content our
selves with what he is pleased thus to inflict: and the greatest cross or
affliction of this life, is not answerable to his bounty and goodness in giving
us being. 3. He is not only the absolute Sovereign of us, and all the World,
but he is the most Just and wise Governor of it, and all men, and all the
dispensations of his government are directed to most just, wise, and excellent
ends: And therefore we have all imaginable reason, not only patiently to
submit, but cheerfully and contentedly to bear any condition that he
dispenses, and, with an implicit faith, to resign our wills to his, as being
assured it is infinitely more wise and just than ours. Sometimes they are the
acts of his Justice to punish us for some past offense; but always the acts of
his Wisdom, either to try us, to reclaim us, to prevent us from worse evils; or
to amend us, to make us more humble, watchful, dutiful, circumspect; to draw us
off from too much resting on the World; to make us bethink our selves of our
duty, and returning to him by repentance, faith and obedience. 4. He is not
only a Wise and Just Governor, but a most Merciful and tender Father, and one
that out of very faithfulness, love, and goodness corrects us, as a Father does
his Son he entirely loves: and upon this account we may rest assured, 1. That
he never afflicts, or sends, or permits any cross to fall upon us, but it is
for our everlasting, and many times for our temporal, good: 2. That no cross or
affliction shall lie longer or heavier upon us, than is conducible to our good:
3. That he does, and will always, send along his Staff with his Rod, his Grace
with his Affliction, to tutor and instruct us, to support and comfort us; and
if we find not this support in our greatest affliction, it is not because it is
wanting to us, but because we are wanting to it, to lay hold upon it, and
improve it. 5. For our farther assurance of his love to us and care of us, we
have the word of the great Monarch of the World, the Mighty, Faithful, and
All-sufficient God. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.5. 6. He
has given us the greatest pledge of his love and goodness, that the most
doubting or craving Heart in the World could ever desire; his Son to be our
Sacrifice: And how shall he not with Him give us all things needful, useful and
beneficial? Romans 8.32.


This Son of his he made the Captain of our Salvation, and yet he made him a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isa. 53.3. and made perfect by
sufferings, Heb. 2.9, 10. And this Son of God did bear, not only with patience,
but with resignation, and contentation of mind: Matthew. 26.39. Not as I will,
but as thou will: Lu. 12.50. I have a baptism to be baptized withal, and how am
I straightened till it be accomplished? and when all was done, Jesus, that was
made a little lower than the Angels, for the suffering of death, was crowned
with glory and honor; That he by the grace of God should taste death for every
man. For it became him, for whom are all things and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sens to glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings. Heb. 2.9. and this was done (besides that Expiatory
Sacrifice thereby made for us) for these admirable Ends: 1. That we might see
before us, the ordinary method of the Divine Dispensation, his own Eternal Son,
that knew no sin, yet was made a man of forrows: and then why should we, poor
sinful men, expect to be exempted and privilege more than the Eternal Son, in
whom God from Heaven proclaimed himself well pleased? 2. That we might have an
Example before us: He, that is made the Captain of our Salvation, was likewise
to be the common pattern and image, whereunto all his disciples and followers
are to be conformed, both passively and actively: he was exhibited as the
Firstborn among many Brethren; the common image according to which, all his
disciples and followers should be conformed. Romans 8.29. As he was made perfect
by sufferings, so must we; and as he through a vail of Sufferings passed into
Glory, so must we; that if we suffer with him, we may be glorified with him: He
was exhibited, as the common standard and pattern of a Christian's condition,
in the lowest estate that can befall him in this life: and surely we have
reason to be contented to be conformed, and subject to the condition of the
Captain of our Salvation. 3. That as he was thus exhibited as a passive example
of our conformity, so he became an active example for our imitation; full of
quietness, composedness, submission, patience, and contentation, to give us an
example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. and to imprint upon us the same temper and frame of
mind, Phil. 2.6. that whiles we behold his example, we may, by a secret
sympathy, be transformed, as it were, into the same mould and image. 4. That we
might have this great pledge and assurance, that he who once lived in this
world, and had experience of the difficulties and troubles of it, and is now
translated to the right hand of the glorious Majesty of God, and has the
prospect of all our wants, and needs, and sorrows, and troubles, and
sufferings, and of the degrees of strength we have to bear it, and has the
plenitude of power to support, to strengthen and deliver us; I say, that we may
be assured, that he is a merciful and faithful High Priest, sensible, and
compassionate of our condition; Heb. 2. 18. for in that he himself suffered,
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted.

Thus it has pleased the goodness of Almighty God, (who knows our frame and
considers that we are but dust) to use as much indulgence and compliance, as is
possible for a most tender Father to his weak and froward Children: That since
he knows, affliction and crosses are as necessary for us as the very best of
all our blessings, yet he gives us all the helps and supplies that are
imaginable, with the greatest suitableness to our nature, to make them easy,
supportable, and profitable; and to bear us up to bear them, with the greatest
patience and contentation. We cannot be without them, for then we are very apt
to grow proud and secure, self-conceited, insolent, to set our rest, and be
building of Tabernacles here, to dread and fear death beyond all measure and
order, and to be utterly unprovided for it, to be desirous to take our portion
in this life, and to make our Heaven on this side death; as the two Tribes
desired their lot on this side Jordan, because they found it convenient. ( Number.
32.) And though we cannot well be without them, yet we frand in need of daily
helps to bear them patiently, contentedly, and and profitably; and we are
accordingly, by the Divine Goodness, furnished with helps suitable to our
condition and frame.

As all the afflictions, crosses, and troubles of this life, are managed by the
wise Providence and Government of the most wise and merciful God, and have
their voice, errand, and message from him to us, (Hear the Rod and him that
has appointed it:) So, he has given us the inestimable Jewel of his Word, to
expound and unriddle what he means by them, and to instruct us how to carry our
selves under them; how to improve them all for our spiritual and everlasting
good; how with patience and cheerfulness to undergo them; how to be drawn the
nearer to God by them. And to this end he has given us most divine and wise
counsels touching them; great assurance of his love, goodnrss, and the light of
his countenance, to carry and conduct us with comfort and dependence upon him
in them; and has given us admirable Examples, which are as so many
Commentaries and Expositions upon them, and to show us what he means and
intends in them and by them: As the examples of the Jewish Church and People;
the examples of his best Saints and Servants, and their sufferings, and the
reasons of them, and their deportment under them, and wherein they failed, and
wherein they benefited by them; as Abraham, Job, Moses, David, Hezekiah,
Josiah, and all the Apostles and Primitive Christians: in whom we may with
great clearness and satisfaction observe how much advantage they got by their
afflictions; what losses they we are at by their peevishness, frowardness and
discontent with their afflicted conditions; what comfort, satisfaction, and
benefit they attained by their patience, quietness, equality of mind, voluntary
submission to the Divine Providence, and contentation with their estates,
though never so troublesome and uneasy.

But above, all the bountiful God has brought Life and Immortality to light
through the Gospel: He has given us the clearest conviction imaginable that
this world, and our life in it, is not our principal End and Scope, but the
place of our Pilgrimage, at best our Inn, not our home; our place of trial and
preparation for a better state: He has showed us that it is but our passage,
and such a passage as must and shall be accompanied with afflictions, and, it
may be, with persecution by evil men, evil Angels, evil occurrences: that it is
the place of our warsare; a troublesome and tumultuous stormy Sea, through which
we must pass before we come to our Haven: that our Country, our home, our
place of rest and ^^ppiness, lies on the other side of death, where there shall
be no sorrow, nor trouble, nor fears, nor dangers, nor afflictions, nor tears,
but a place of eternal and unchangeable comfort, fullness of most pure and
uninterrupted pleasures, and that for evermore: that through many tribulations
and afflictions we must enter into that Kingdom, as his ancient People entered
into their Canaan through a red Sea, a tiresom and barren Wilderness, firey
Serpents, wants, enemies, and unintermitted dangers and difficulties: that our
light afflictions, which are here but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Our afflictions and incoveniences in
this world, 1. are light in comparison of that exceeding, far more exceeding
weight of glory: 2. As they are but light, so being compared with that eternal
weight of glory, they are but for a moment: The longest life we here live is
not ordinarily above threescore and ten years, and though the more troublesome
and uneasy that life is, the longer it seems, yet compared with the infinite
abyss of Eternity, it is but a moment, yea less than a moment, if less can be,
yet such is the longest stay in this life if compared with Eternity.

And the gracious God has presented this greatest, and most important truth to
us, with the greatest evidence and assurance that the most desponding and
suspicious Soul can desire. 1. He has given his own Word of Truth to assure us
of it. 2. He has given his own Son, to seal it unto us, by the most powerful
and convincing evidence imaginable; by his mission from Heaven on purpose to
tell us it; by his Miracles; by attestations from Heaven, by the laying down
his own Life in witness of it; by his Resurrection and Ascension; by the
miraculous Mission of his Holy Spirit visibly and audibly. Again, 3. He has
confirmed it to us, by the Doctrine and Miracles of his Apostles; by their
Death and Martyrdom; as a Witness of the Truth they taught; by the numerous
Converts, and Primitive Christians, and godly Martyrs, who all lived and dyed
in this Faith, and for it; who made it their choice rather to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, declaring plainly that they sought a better City and Country, that is,
a heavenly, Heb. 11.15, 25. and this Country, and this City they had in their
Eye, even whiles they lived in this troublesome world: And this prospect, this
hope, and expectation, rendered this lower world of no great value to them, the
pleasures thereof they esteemed but low and little, and the troubles and
uneasiness thereof they did undergo patiently, cheerfully, and contentedly; for
they looked beyond them, and placed their hopes, their treasure, their comfort
above them: And even whiles they were in this life, yet they did, by their
faith and hope, anticipate their own happiness, and enjoyed by faith, even
before they actually possessed it, by fruition; for Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, Heb. 11. and makes those things present by the firmness of a
sound persuasion, which are in themselves future and to come.

And this is that, which will have the same effect with us, if we live and
believe as they did; and be but firmly, and soundly persuaded of the truth of
the Gospel, thus admirably confirmed unto us. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by faith.
2 Cor. 5.7. We live by faith, and not by sight; and excellent is that passage
to this purpose, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. For which cause we faint not, but though
our outward man perish, yet our inward man is renewed day by day. For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, but
the things which are not seen, are eternal.

And therefore if we do but seriously believe the truth of the Gospel, the
truth of the life to come, the best external things of this world will seem but
of small moment to take up the choicest of our desires or hopes, and the worst
things this world can inflict will appear too light to provoke us to impatience
or discontent. He that has but Heaven and everlasting glory in prospect and a
firm expectation, will have a mind full of contentation in the midst of the
lowest and darkest condition here on Earth. Impatience and discontent never can
stay long with us, if we awake our minds, and summon up our faith and hope in
that life and happiness to come. Sudden passions of impatience and discontent,
may like clouds arise and trouble us for a while, but this faith, and this hope
rooted in the Heart, if stirred up, will, like the Sun, scatter and dispell
them, and cause the light of patience, contentation, and comfort to thine
through them.

And as we have this hope of immortality and blessedness set before us, so the
means and way to attain it is easy and open to all; no person is excluded from
it, that wilfully excludes not himself. Isa. 51.1. Ho every one that thirsts
come ye to the waters, and he that has no money come ye, buy and eat without
money and without price. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will, let him take of the waters
of life freely. Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. The way to everlasting happiness, and
consequently to contentation here, is laid open to all. It was the great reason
why God made mankind, to communicate everlasting happiness to them; and when
they wilfully threw away that happiness, it was the end why he sent his Son
into the world, to restore mankind unto it. And as the way is open to all, so
it is easy to all; his yoke is easy and his burden light. The terms of
attaining happiness, if sincerely endeavored, are easy to be performed, by
virtue of that grace, that God Almighry affords to all men, that do not
wilfully reject it: namely, to believe the truth of the Gospel, so admirably
confirmed, and sincerely to endeavor to obey the precepts thereof, which are
both just and reasonable, highly conducing to our contentation in this life,
and consummating our happiness in the life to come: And for our encouragement
in this obedience, we are sure to have, if we desire it, the special grace of
the Blessed Spirit to assist us, and a merciful Father to accept of our
sincerity, and a gracious Savior to pardon our failings and deficiencies. So
that the way to attain contentation in this life, and happiness in the life to
come, as it is plain and certain, so it is open and free, none is excluded from
it, but it is free and open to all, that are but willing to use this means to
attain it.

And I shall wind up all this long Discourse touching Contentation with this
plain and ordinary Instance. I have before said that our home, our Country is
Heaven and Everlasting Happiness, where there are no sorrows, nor fears, nor
troubles; that this World is the place of our travel, and pilgrimage, and at
the best our Inn: Now when I am in my journey, I meet with several
inconveniences; it may be the way is bad and foul, the weather tempestuous or
stormy; it may be I meet with some rough companions, that either turn me out of
my way, or all dash and dirt me in it, yet I content my self, for all will be
mended when I come home: but if I chance to lodge at my Inn, there it may be I
meet with bad entertainment, the Inn is full of guests, and I am thrust into an
inconvenient lodging, or ill diet, yet I content my self, and consider it is no
better than what I have reason to expect, it is but according to the common
condition of things in that place; neither am I solicitous to furnish my
lodging with better accommodations, for I must not expect to make long stay
there, it is but my Inn, my place of repose for a night, and not my home; and
therefore I content my self with it as I find it; all will be amended when I
come home. In the same manner it is with this world; perchance I meet with an
ill and uncomfortable passage through it, I have a sickly Body, a narrow
Estate, meet with affronts and disgraces, lose my friends, companions and
relations, my best entertainment in it is but troublesome and uneasy: But yet I
do content my self; I consider it is but my pilgrimage, my passage, my Inn; it
is not my country, nor the place of my rest: this kind of usage or condition
is but according to the law and custom of the place, it will be amended when I
come home, for in my Father's house there are Mansions; many Mansions instead
of my Inn, and my Savior himself has not disdained to be my Harbinger; he is
gone thither before me, and gone to prepare a place for me, I will therefore
quiet and content my self, with the inconveniences of my short journey, for my
accommodations will be admirable when I come to my home, that heavenly
Jerusalem, which is the place of my rest and happiness.

But yet we must withal remember, that though Heaven is our home, the place of
our rest and happiness, yet this World is a place for our duty and employment,
and we must use all honest and lawful means to preserve our lives and our
comforts by our honest care and diligence. As it is our duty to wait the time
till our Lord and Master calls, so it is part of our task in this world given
us by the great Master of the Family of Heaven and Earth, to be employed for
the temporal good of our selves and others. It is indeed our principal business
to fit our selves for our everlasting home, and to think of it, but it is a
part of our duty and an act of obedience, whiles we are here, to employ our
selves with honesty and diligence in our temporal employments: Though we are
not to set our hearts upon the conveniences of this life, yet we are not to
reject them, but to use them thankfully and soberly, for they are blessings
that deserve our gratitude, though they ought not entirely to take up our
hearts. Again, though crosses and afflictions must be the exercise of our
patience, we must not wilfully choose them, nor run into them. Let God be still
the Master of his own Dispensation, for he is wise, and knows what is fit for
us, when we know not what is so fit for our selves. When he sends them, or
permits them, our duty is patience and contentation, but commonly our own
choice is headstrong and foolish.

It was the error of many new Converts to Christianity, that they thought,
that when Heaven and heavenly-mindedness was pressed, that presently they must
cast off all care of the World, desert their callings, and busily and
unnecessarily thrust themselves into dangers, that so they might be quit of all
worldly cares and business, and of life it self. This the Apostles frequently
reprove, and show the error of it, and that justly: For the truth of it is,
our continuance in this life, and in our honest employments and callings, our
thankful use of external blessings here, and our honest endeavors for them;
the endeavor to do good in our places, so long as we continue in them; our
prudent prevention of external evils, are part of that obedience we owe to our
Maker, and part of that exercise or task that is given us by him to perform in
this life, and our cheerful, faithful, diligent conversation herein, is so far
from being incompatible to Christianity, that it is a part of our Christian
duty, and of that service we owe to our Maker; and it is indeed the exercise of
our patience, and the evidence of a contented mind. For whosoever presently
grows so weary of the World, that presently, with froward Jonah, he wishes to
dye, or throws off all, it is a sign of want of that contentation that is here
commended: because true Contentation consists in a cheerful and ready
compliance with the will of God, and not in a froward preference of our own
will or choice. It was part of our Savior's excellent prayer for his
Disciples, Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou should keep them from the evil.

The business therefore of these Papers is to let you see, what are the Helps
to attain Patience and Contentation in this World, that our passage through it
may be safe and comfortable, and agreeable to the will of God, and to remedy
that impatience and discontent which is ordinarily sound among men: To teach
men how to amend their lives, instead of being weary of them; and to make the
worst conditions in the World easy and comfortable, by making the mind quiet,
patient and thankful. For it is the discontented and impatient mind that truly
makes the World much more uneasy than it is in it self.

OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF CHRIST CRUCIFIED.
1. COR. 11.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.
AS the Understanding is the highest faculty of the reasonable creature,
because upon it depends the regularity of the motions or actings of the will
and affections; so Knowledge is the properest and noblest act or habit of that
faculty, and without which it is without its proper end and employment, and the
whole man without a due guidance and direction. Hos. 4.6. My people perish for
want of Knowledge.

And as knowledge is the proper business of that great faculty, so the Value of
that Knowledge, or employment of the understanding, is diversified according to
the subject about which it is exercised: For though all knowledge, of the most
differing subjects, agree in this one common excellence, viz. the right
representation of of the thing as it is, unto the understanding; or the
conformity of the image created in the understanding, unto the thing
objectively united to it, which is truth in the understanding: Yet it must
needs be that according to the various values and degrees of the things to be
known, there arises a diversity of the value or worth of that knowledge; that
[which] is of a thing more noble, usesul, precious, must needs be a more noble,
useful, precious Knowledge, and accordingly more to be desired.

There have been doubtless many excellent understandings that have been
conversant about an exact disquisition of some particular truths, which though
as truths they agree in a common value with all others, yet in respect of their
nature, use and value, are of no great moment, whether known or not: As
concerning the precise time of this or that passage in such a profane History,
the criticism of this or that Latin word, and the like: which though by
accident, and by way of concomitance, they may be of considerable use, when
mixed with, or relating to, some other matter of moment; yet in themselves have
little value, because little use. Others have spent their thoughts in acquiring
of the knowledge in some special piece of Nature; the fabric of the Eye; the
progression of generation in an Egg; the relation and proportion of Numbers,
Weights, Lines; the generation of Metals: and these as they have a relative
consideration to discover and set forth the wisdom of the great Creator, or to
public use, have great worth in them; but in themselves, though they have this
excellence of truth in them, and consequently in their kind feed and give a
delight to the understanding, which is a power that is naturally ordained unto,
and greedy of, and delighted in truth, though of a low or inferior
constitution, yet they are not of that eminence and worth as truths of some
other, either higher, or more useful, or durable nature.

As once our Savior, in relation of things to be done, pronounced One thing
only necessary, Luke 10.42. so the Apostle, among the many things that are to
be [known,] fixes in the same One thing necessary to be known, Christ Jesus
and him Crucified.

There are three steps.

1. Not to know any thing. Not as if all other knowledge were condemned: Moses
learning was not charged upon him as a sin; Paul's secular learning was not
condemned, but useful to him; to be knowing in our calling, in the qualities
and dispositions of persons, in the Laws under which we live, in the modest and
sober inquiries of Nature and Arts, are not only not condemned, but commended,
and useful, and such as tend to the setting forth the glory of the God of
Wisdom. Even the discretion of the Husbandman God owns as his, Isa. 28.26. for
his God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him. But we must
determine to know nothing in comparison of that other knowledge of Christ
Jesus, as the Apostle counted what things were gain, yet to be loss for Christ,
Phil. 4.7. so we are to esteem that knowledge of other things otherwise
excellent, useful, admirable, yet to be but folly and vile in comparison of the
knowledge of Christ. And this requires:

1. A true and right Estimate of the Value of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus
above other knowledge, and consequently an infinite preferring thereof before
all other knowledge in our judgments, desire, and delight; and the
preponderation of the knowledge of Christ above other knowledges excells most
knowledge in all the ensuing particulars, but excells all knowledge in some,
and those of most concernment:

1. In the Certainty of it. Most other knowledge [are] either such as we take
in by our Sense and Experience; and therein, though it is true, that the gross
part of our knowledge, that is nearest to our sense, has somewhat of certainty
in it, yet when we come to sublimate, and collect, and infer that knowledge
into universal or general conclusions, or to make deductions, ratiocinations,
and determinations from them, then we fail, and hence grew the difference
between many Philosophers. Again, the knowledge that we elicit from sense, is
but very narrow, if it staid there: for the forms of things, the matter or
substance, which is the subject of Nature, are not easily perceptible by sense;
we see the color, and the figure, and the variations of that, but we do from
thence only make conjectures concerning the forms, ^^bstances, and matter: Or
they are such as we receive by Tradition, whether historical or doctrinal; and
the former depends upon the credit of the relator, which most an end depends
upon another's credit, and so vanishes into much incertainty, unless the
authors be very authentical and eyewitnesses: and as to matters doctrinal,
still that depends upon the opinion of a man, it may be, deduced upon weak
convictions, crossed by persons of as great judgments, and so breeds
uncertainty, distraction, and dissatisfaction in the knowledge. But in the
knowledge of Christ, we have greater certainty than can be found in any of all
these other Knowledges: 1. A constant tradition and reception by millions,
before he came, that the Messiah was to come; and since he came, that in truth
he is come. 2. The Apostles, Evangelists, and Disciples, that were purposely
chosen to be witnesses of Christ, his Miracles, Doctrine, Suffering, and
Resurrection. 3. The Miracles he did, that are witnessed to us, by a greater
consent of testimony, than any one part of any History of that antiquity. 4.
The Purity, Sanctity, and Justness of his Doctrine, which was never attained
unto in the teaching of the Philosophers, nor ever any could, in the least
measure, unpeach or blame. 5. The Prophecies, styled most justly by the Apostle
a more certain evidence, than the very vision of his Transfiguration, and a
Voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. I.19. and so in truth is a more undeniable argument
than any is, for [it] is not capable of any fraud or imposture. 6. The
wonderful prevailing that the knowledge of Christ had upon the World, and this
not only de facto, but backed with a Prophecy, that it should be so. 7. The
admirable concordance and symmetry, that this mystery of Christ makes in the
whole method of the proceeding of God in the World, as will be casily
observable upon the collation of these things together: The Creation; the Fall;
the Law; the State of the Jews; the Immortality of the Soul; the Necessity of a
Satisfaction for Sin if pardoned; the Types and Sacrifices; the Prophecies; the
Rejection of the Jews; the Calling of the Gentiles; the Progress of the Gospel
to the new discovered parts of the World successively as discovered; that a due
collection being made of all these and other Considerations, it will appear
that the doctrine of Christ Jesus, and him crucified, is that which makes the
dispenstation of God toward the children of men to be all of a piece, and one
thing in order to another, there, and Christ the Mediator, in whom God has
gathered together all things in one, Ephesians. 1.10. made it as one System,
Body-fabrick. 8. Besides the undeniable Prophecies, there bears witness to this
truth, the secret powerful witness of the Spirit of God convincing the Soul of
the truth of Christ, beyond all the Moral persuasions in the world, beyond the
conviction of demonstration, to believe, to rest upon, to assert it, even unto
the loss of life and all things.

2. As in the certainty, so in the Plainness and Easiness of the truth. The
most excellent subjects of other knowledge have long windings, before a man can
come at them; and are of that difficulty and abstruseness, that as every brain
is not fit to undertake the acquiring of it, so much pains, labor, industry,
advertency, assiduity is required in the best of judgments, to attain but a
competent measure of it: witness the studies of Arithmetic, Geometry, Natural
Philosophy, Metaphysics, etc. wherein great labor has been taken to our
hands, to make the passage more easy, and yet still are full of difficulty.
But in this knowledge it is otherwise: as it is a knowledge fitted for a
universal use, the bringing of mankind to God, so it is fitted with a universal
fitness and convenience for that use, easy, plain, and familiar. The poor
receive the Gospel, Matthew. 11.5. and indeed the plainness of the doctrine was
that which made the wise world stumble at it; and thence it was, that it was
hid from the wise and prudent, Matthew. 11.25. who, like Naaman with the Prophet,
could not be contented to be healed without some great ostentation; nor were
contented to think any thing could be the wisdom of God, and the power of God,
unless it were somewhat that were abstruse, and at least conformable to that
wisdom they had; and were troubled to think that that wisdom or doctrine, that
must be of so great a use and end, should fall under the capacity of a
Fisherman, a maker of Tents, a Carpenter. But thus it pleased God to choose a
Doctrine of an easy acquisition, 1. That no slesh should glory in his sight, 1
Cor. 1.29.2. That the way to Salvation, being a common thing propounded to all
mankind, might be difficult to none. Believe, and thy sins be forgiven.
Believe, and thou shall be saved. Believe, and thou shall be raised up to
Glory. Joh. 6. 40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that
sees the Son and Believes on him, may have eternal life, and I will raise him
up at the last day.

3. As in the Certainty and Plainness, so in the Sublimity and Loftiness of the
subject: And hence it is that Metaphysics is reckoned the most noble
knowledge, because conversant with and about the noblest subject, substance
considered in abstract^ from corporeity, and particular adherents falling under
other Sciences. But the subject of this knowledge is of the highest
consideration: Almighty God; the dispensation of his counsel touching man in
reference to the everlasting condition of mankind; the true measure of just and
unjust; the pure will of God; the Son of God and his miraculous Incarnation,
Death, Resurrection and Ascension; the great Covenant between the Eternal God
and fallen man made, sealed, and confirmed in Christ his great transaction with
the Father in their Eternal Counsel; and since his Ascension, in his continual
Intercession for man; the means of the discharge and satisfaction of the breach
of the Law of God; the state of the Soul after death in blessedness or misery;
these and many of these are the subject of that knowledge that is revealed in
the knowledge of Christ, such as their very matter speaks them to be of a most
high nature: the great transactions of the counsel and administration of the
mighty King of Heaven, in his Kingdom over the children of men: such as never
fell under the discovery, or so much as the disquisition, of the wisest
Philosophers, and such as the very Angels of Heaven desire to look down into, 1
Pet. 1. and behold with admiration that manfold wisdom of God, which is
revealed unto us, poor worms, in Christ Jesus.

4. As the matters are wonderful, high, and sublime, so they are of most
singular Use to be known. There be many pieces of Learning in the World that
are conversant about high subjects: as, that part of Natural Philosophy
concerning the Heaven and the Soul; the Metaphysics; the abstruser parts of
the Mathematics; that are not in order to practice. But as it may fall out
that the knowledge of the subject is unaccessible in any certainty, so if it
were never so exactly known, it goes no farther, and when it is known there is an
end, and no more use of it. Whereas many times subjects of an inferior nature
are more useful in their knowledge; as practical Mathematics, Mechanics,
Moral Philosophy, Policy; but then they are of an inferior nature, more useful
but perchance less noble. But here is the privilege of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus, that as it is of Eminence and Height, so it is of Use and Convenience,
and that in the highest measure; as it is a Pearl for Beauty, so it is for
Value. This knowledge is a kind of Catholicon of universal use and convenience.
In reference to this life: Am I in Want, in Contempt, in Prison, in Banishment,
in Sickness, in Death? This knowledge gives me Contentedness, Patience,
Cheerfulness, Resignation of my self to his will, who has sealed my Peace with
him, and Favor from him, in the Great Covenant of his Son; and I can live upon
this, though I were ready to starve; when I am assured that if it be for my
good and the glory of his Name, I shall be delivered; if not, I can be
contented, so my Jewel, the Peace of God and my own Conscience, by the Blood of
Christ be safe. Am I in Wealth, Honor, Power, Greatness, Esteem in the world?
This knowledge teaches me Humility, as knowing from whom I received it;
Fidelity, as knowing to whom I must account for it; Watchfulness, as knowing
the Honor of my Lord is concerned in some measure in my carriage, and that the
higher my employment is, the more obnoxious I am to temptation from without,
from the that watch for my halting, and from within, by a deceitful heart: And
in all it teaches me not to overvalue it, nor to value my self the more by it
or for it; because the knowledge of Christ Jesus presents me with a continual
object of a higher value, the price of the high calling of God in Christ: it
teaches me to look upon the glory of the World as rust, in comparison of the
glory that excels, and the greatest of men as worms, in comparison of the
great God. And as thus in reference to the temporal condition of my life, this
knowledge of Christ is of singular use, and makes a man a better Philosopher
than the best of Morals in reference thereunto: So it guides me in the
management of all Relations: 1. To God; it presents him unto me in that
representation that is right, full of Majesty, yet full of Love, which teaches
me Reverence and yet Access with boldness, Love and Obedience. 2. To Man;
Justice, giving every man his due, for so the knowledge of Christ teaches me,
Do as ye would be done by; Mercy, to forgive; Compassion, to pity; Liberality,
to relieve; Sobriety, in the use of creatures, and yet Comfort in the enjoying
of them; a right use of the World, and yet a contempt of it, in comparison of
my hope: It makes death not terrible, because a most sure passage to life: Here
I find a way to get all my sins pardoned, whereas without this, all the world
cannot contrive a Satisfaction for one; I find a way to obtain such a
righteousness as is valuable with God, and perfect before him, even the
righteousness of God in Christ. And here I find, the means, and only means, to
avoid the wrath to come, the terror of the judgment of the great day;
Everlasting life unto all Eternity, with the Blessed God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, and all the blessed Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect.
Thus this knowledge is useful for this life, and [that which is] to come, and
that in the highest degree; which all other knowledge comes short of, and
attains not to any one of the least of these ends.

5. In the Duration and Continuance of it. Many subjects of knowledge there
are, wherein by time, or at least by death, the knowledge proves unuseful, or
at least, the labor therein unprofitable and lost. For instance, I study to be
very exact in Natural Philosophy, the mixtures or conjunctions of qualities,
elements, and a thousand such enquiries: What use will this be, when the World
with the works thereof, shall be burnt up? Or if it should not, what great
benefit would this be to a separated Soul? which doubtless shall either know
much more therein, without any pains, and so the labor here lost, or in shall
be such a knowledge as will [be] unconsiderable or unuseful to it: And so, and
much more for the studies of Policy, Methods of War, Mechanical Experiments,
Languages, Laws, Customs, Histories, all these within one minute after death
will be as useless as the knowledge of a Tailor or Shoemaker: they are all
dated for the convenience and use of this life, and with it they vanish. But
here is the privilege and advantage that this knowledge has; as it serves for
this life, so it serves for that to come; and the more it is improved here, the
more shall it be dilated hereafter; the higher measure thereof I attain here,
the greater measure of glory hereafter. As the more knowledge I have of the
mystery of Christ here, the greater is my sight and admiration of the wisdom,
and goodness, and love of God; the greater my joy, and complacence, and delight
in that sight and sense, and the more my Soul carried out in the love, and
praise, and obedience unto him: So in the life to come, that knowledge shall
improve, and consequently the sense of the wisdom, mercy, and love of God; and
consequently the flame of the Soul, of love, and praise unto him, and delight,
and joy in him, shall increase unto all eternity.

2. As thus the knowledge of Christ Jesus and him crucified excells all other
knowledge, and so in comparison thereof, all other knowledge, upon a right
judgment, is as nothing; so the Soul being rightly convinced thereof, sets a
higher price upon that knowledge, than upon all other knowledge besides; it
priseth it highly in it self and others; reckons all other knowledge without
it, but a curious ignorance, or an impertinent knowledge, and contents it self
abundantly in this knowledge, though it want other.

3. Because that which is of most concernment requires my greatest diligence to
attain it, I am contented and greedy to spend more time in attaining this than
that; and I will rob other studies and disquisitions of the time, that
otherwise might be conducible to attain the knowledge of them, rather than
those studies should consume that time, that should be allotted to this. My
Time is part of that Talent, which my Maker has put into my hand, and for
which he will at the great day demand an account; and if I have spent that
talent in unprofitable employments, or in less profitable than I should, my
arrear is so much the greater: If I have consumed my time in studying my
preferment, honor, or wealth in this world; in studying how to please my self
with vain and unnecessary recreations; in unlawful or excessive pleasures; in
unlawful or immoderate curiosities; which I might better have spent in the
study of the mystery of Christ, or the conformity unto that Will and Testament
he left me, or improving my interest in him, I have committed two follies at
once: 1. Lost my talent of time and opportunity, for which I am accountable, as
misspent. 2. Lost that advantage which I had in my hand to improve my interest
in God, and favor from him, and love to him; and though I have done so much,
as may perchance preserve the main, yet I have omitted so much as might have
more increased my stock of Grace and Glory; my talent might have gained ten,
and at most it has gained but two. And surely when death comes, the most
comfortable hours, that can return to our memories, will be those we spent in
improving the true and experimental practical knowledge of Christ Jesus, and
him crucified.

4. Consequently where this knowledge and the other knowledge of an inferior
rate justle and cross one another, it is the best wisdom to side with this, and
to deny the other; to become a fool that he may be wise. 1 Cor. 3.18.

2. Thus concerning the first Consideration: I determined not to know any
thing, viz. nothing in comparison of this knowledge of Christ, nothing rather
than not that: Save Christ Jesus. And truly well might the Apostle make all
other knowledge give place to this; first, for the Excellency of it, whereof
before: secondly, for the Amplitude and Compass of it; for though it [be] so
excellent, that a small dram of it is sufficient to heal and save a Soul, if it
be a right knowledge as is before observed, yet it is so large, that when the
best knowledge has gone as far as it can, yet there is still aliquid ultra:
One consideration of it, even the Love of God has a breadth, and length, and
depth, and height, passing knowledge, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. and yet there be other
depths and heights in it than this, so that well might the Apostle conclude as
he does, 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness,
God manifested in the flesh. Therefore for the present we shall consider,

1. The Wonderful Wisdom of God in contriving and ordering the Redemption of
Mankind by Christ Jesus; and [it] is manifest in these particulars among
others: 1. That though he made Man the eminentest of all his visible Creatures,
for a most eminent manifestation of his power and glory, and to be partaker of
everlasting blessedness, and yet in his Eternal Counsel resolved to leave him
in the hands of his own liberty, and did most certainly foresee that he would
fall; yet he did substitute and provide, even from the same Eternity, a means
whereby he might be restored to the honor and glory of his creature, and his
creature to blessedness and [the] vision of his Creator. 2. That he so ordered
the means of man's Redemption, that a greater glory came even by that
Redemption, that if man had never fallen, and a greater benefit to mankind: For
the latter it is apparent, that, if there had been no Mediator sent, the least
sin that any of the sons [of] men had committed, had been inexorably fatal to
them, without any means of pardon: And as Adam, though in his full liberty and
power, was misled by temptation, so might have he been, or any of his posterity
though he had stood that shock; which now is admirably provided against, by the
satisfaction of Christ Jesus: And as thus it is better with the children of
men, so the glory of God is wonderfully advanced by it; for, if man had stood
in his innocence, God had had only the glory of his justice in rewarding him;
or, if he had fallen, the glory of his justice in punishing him: but there had
been no room for that glorious attribute of his Mercy in forgiving, without
violation to his Purity, Truth and Justice; that glorious attribute by which he
so often proclaims himself, Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God Merciful,
Gracious, Long-suffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, and yet that will by no
means clear the guilty. 3. That he so wonderfully ordered the Redemption of
Man, that all his Attributes were preserved inviolable: His Truth, The day thou
eatest thou shall dye; his Justice, yet his Mercy; his Love to his creature,
yet his Hatred to Sin: his Son shall dye to satisfy his Truth and Justice, yet
the sinner shall live, to satisfy his Mercy: the sin shall be punished, to
justify his Purity, yet his creature shall be saved, to manifest his Love and
Goodness. And thus his Wisdom overruled Sin, the worst of evils, to the
improvement of his glory, and the good of his creature. 4. His wisdom is
manifested in this, that by the redemption of man, all those ways of his
administration before the coming of Christ, do now appear to be excellently
ordered to the redemption of man, and the making of it the more effectual: The
giving of a severe and yet most just Law, which was impossible for us to
fulfill, shows us the wretchedness of our condition; our inability to fulfill,
what was just in God to require, shows us the necessity of a Savior, drives us
to him, and makes this City of refuge grateful and acceptable, and makes us set
a value upon that mercy, which so opportunely and mercifully provided a
Sacrifice for us in the Blood of Christ; and a Righteousness for us, in the
Merits of Christ; and a Mediator for us in the Intercession of Christ: And by
this means also all those Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, and Observations enjoined
in the Levitical Law, which carried not in themselves a clear reason of their
institution, are now by the sending of Christ rendered significant. 5. The
wisdom of God is magnified and advanced in this, in fulfilling the Prophecies
of the sending the Messiah to satisfy for the sins of Mankind, against all the
oppositions, and casualties, and contingencies that without an overruling
wisdom and guidance might have disappointed it: And this done in that
Perfection, that not one circumstance of Time, Place, Person, Concomitants
should, nor did fail in it: and so bearing witness to the infinite Truth,
Power, and Wisdom of God in bringing about his Counsels in their perfection,
touching this great business of the Redemption of Man, which was the very end
why he was created and placed upon the earth; and managing the villainy of men,
and the craft and malice of Satan, to bring about that greatest blessing that
was or could be provided for mankind, besides, and above, and against the
intention of the Instrument. Act. 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have
crucified and slain. 6. The unsearchable Wisdom of God is manifested in that he
provided such a Mediator that was fit for so great a work; had all the world
consulted that God must suffer, it had been impossible; and had all the world
contrived that any man, or all the men in the world should have been a
satisfactory Sacrifice for any one Sin, it had been deficient. Here is then the
wonderful Counsel of the most high God: the Sacrifice that is appointed shall
be so ordered, that God and Man shall be conjoined in one Person; that so as
Man, he might become a Sacrifice for Sin; and as God, he might give a value to
the Sacrifice. And this is that great Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in
the flesh.

2. The wonderful Love of God to Mankind: I. In thinking upon poor sinful
creatures, to contrive a way for a Pardon for us, and rescuing us from that
Curse which we had justly deserved: 2. Thinking of us for our good, when we
sought it not, thought not of it: 3. When we were enemies against God, and
against his very being: 4. Thinking of us not only for a Pardon, but to provide
for us a state of Glory and Blessedness: 5. When that was not to be obtained,
saving his Truth and Justice, without a miraculous Mediator, consisting of the
divine and humane nature united in one person, in the Person of our Lord Jesus
Christ; here was Love and Goodness of the greatest magnitude that ever was, or
ever shall be heard of, and sufficient to conquer our Hearts into admiration
and astonishment. But yet it rests not here. As God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life: Joh. 3.16. so the only begotten Son of God was not
behind in this wonderful Love. No sooner (as we may with reverence say) was the
Counsel of the Father propounded for the sending of his Son, but presently the
Son says; Lo, I come. Psalm. 40.7. Heb. 10.7. And now we will consider upon
[what] terms he must come, or else the redemption of mankind must dye for ever:
I. He must come and empty himself of his Glory of his personal Majesty, and
take our nature, yet without sin; he must go through the natural infirmities of
infancy and childhood. 2. And not only must he undergo this abasement, but he
must undergo the condition of a mean, a low birth, born of a poor Virgin, in a
Stable, laid in a Manger, under the reputation of a Carpenter's Son. 3. And not
only thus, but as soon as he is born, must use the care of his Mother to shift
for his life away to Egypt, to prevent the jealousy and fury of Herod. 4. And
when grown up to youth, he must undergo the form of a Servant, become a poor
Carpenter to work for his living, without any patrimony or so much as a house
to cover him. 5. He comes abroad into the World to exercise the Ministry, and
the Prologue to his own Tragedy; still poor, despised of his own Countrymen,
and of those that were of reputation for Learning and Piety, scandalized under
the name of an Impostor, a Winebibber, a friend to Publicans and sinners, a
worker by the Devil, mad and possessed with a Devil: These and the like were
his entertainments in the World; and, which is more, often put to shift for his
life; and in sum, what the Prophet predicted concerning him fulfilled to the
uttermost: Isa; 53.3. Despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief; and all this to befall the Eternal Son of God under the
vail of our flesh: And all this voluntarily undertaken, and cheerfully
undergone, even for the sakes of his Enemies, and those very people from whom
he received these indignities.

3. But all these were but like small velitations, and conflicts preparatory to
the main Battle. We therefore come to the Third Consideration: Christ Jesus and
him Crucified; there is the account of the Text: As Christ Jesus is the most
worthy subject of all knowledge, so Christ Jesus under this consideration, as
Crucified, is that which is the fullest of wonder, admiration, love: And
therefore let us now take a survey of Christ Jesus crucified; as that is the
highest manifestation of his love, so it is the eye, the life of the Text;
Christ above all other knowledge, and Christ Crucified above all other
knowledge of Christ.

And now a man upon the first view would think this kind of knowledge so much
here valued, were a strange kind of knowledge; and the prelation of this
knowledge a strange mistake in the Apostle. 1. Crucified: Death is the
corruption of nature; and such a kind of death by crucifixion, the worst, the
vilest of deaths; carrying in it the punishment of the lowest condition of men,
and for the worst of offenses; and yet, that death, and such a death should be
the ambition of an Apostle's knowledge, is wonderful. 2. Christ crucified
carries in it a seeming excess of incongruity; that he, that was the Eternal
Son of God, should take upon him our nature, and in that nature anointed and
consecrated by the Father, full of Innocence, Purity, Goodness, should dye, and
that by such a death, and so unjustly: Could this be a subject, or matter of
knowledge so desirable, as to be preferred before all other knowledge? which
should rather seem to be a matter of so much horror, so much indignation, that
a man might think it rather fit to be forgotten, than to be affected to be
known. 3. Jesus crucified; a Savior, and yet to be crucified: it seems to
blast the expectation of Salvation; when the Captain of it must dye, be slain,
be crucified; it carries in it a kind of victory of death and hell over our
salvation, when the instrument thereof must suffer death, and such a death.
When the Birth of Christ was proclaimed, indeed it was matter of joy, and
worthy the proclamation of Angels: Luke 2.12. To you is born this day a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord: and can the death of that Savior be a thing
desirable to be known? The Birth of Christ seemed to be the rising Sun, that
scattered light, hope and comfort to all Nations: but can the setting of this
Sun in so dark a cloud, as the Cross, be the choicest piece of knowledge of
him? which seems as it were to strangle and stifle our hopes; and puts us as it
were upon the expostulation of the dismayed Disciples, Luke 24.21. But we
trusted it had been he which should have redeemed Israel.

But for all this, this knowledge of Christ Jesus crucified will appear to be
the most excellent, comfortable, useful knowledge in the world, if we shall
consider these Particulars: 1. Who it was that suffered. 2. What he suffered.
3. From whom. 4. How he suffered. 5. For whom he suffered. 6. Why, and upon
what Motive. 7. For what End he suffered. 8. What [are] the fruits and Benefits
that accrue by that suffering. All these Considerations are wrapped up in this
one subject; Christ Jesus and him crucified.

1. Who it was that thus suffered. It was Christ Jesus the Eternal Son of God,
clothed in our flesh; God and Man united in one Person; his manhood giving him
a capacity of suffering, and his Godhead giving a value to that suffering; and
each nature united in one person to make a complete Redeemer; the Heir of all
things; Heb. 1.2. the Prince of Life; Acts 3.15. the Light that lighteneth
every man that comes into the world; Joh. 1.9. as touching his Divine nature,
God over all blessed for ever; Romans 9.5. and as touching his Humane nature,
full of Grace and Truth; Joh. 1.14. and in both, the beloved Son of the Eternal
God, in whom he proclaimed himself well pleased; Math. 3.17. But could no other
person be found, that might suffer for the sins of Man, but the Son of God? Or
if the business [of] our Salvation must be transacted by him alone, could it
not be without suffering, and such suffering as this? No. As there was no other
Name given under Heaven, by which we might be saved, nor was there any found
besides, in the compass of the whole World, that could expiate for one sin of
man; but it must be the Arm of the Almighty, that must bring Salvation: Isa.
63.5. So if the Blessed Son of God will undertake the business, Heb. 5.9.
and become the Captain of our Salvation, he must be made perfect by suffering;
Heb. 2.10. and if he will stand in the stead of man, he must bear the wrath of
his Father: if he [will] become sin for man, though he knew no sin, he must
become a curse for man. And doubtless this great mystery of the person that
suffered, cannot choose but be a very high, and excellent subject of knowledge;
so full of wonder and astonishment, that the Angels gaze into it: And as it is
a strange and wonderful thing in it self, so doubtless it was ordained to high
and wonderful ends, bearing a suitableness unto the greatness of the
instrument. This therefore is the first Consideration that advances the
excellency of this knowledge; the person that was Crucified.

2. What he suffered. Christ Jesus and him crucified: though all the course of
his life was a continual suffering, and the preamble or walk unto his death,
which was the end of his life; yet this was the completing of all the rest; and
the tide and waves of his sufferings did still rise higher and higher, till it
arrived in this: and the several steps and ascents unto the Cross, though they
began from his Birth; yet those which were more immediate, began with the
preparation to the Passover. The Council held by the chief Priests and Scribes,
for the crucifying of our Savior, was sat upon two days before the Passover,
Matthew. 26.2. Mark 14.1. and this was the first step to Mount Calvary: And
doubtless it was no small addition to our Savior's Passion, that it was
hatched in the Council of the chief Priests and Scribes, the then external
visible Church, the Husbandmen of the Vineyard: Matthew. 21.33. But this is not
all; as the visible Church of the Jews is the Conclave where this Council is
formed, so Judas a member of the visible Church of Christ, one of the Twelve,
is the Instrument to effect it; Matthew. 26.14. he contracts with them for Thirty
pieces of Silver, to betray his Master unto them: And surely this could not
choose but be a great grief to our Savior, that one of his select Apostles
should turn Apostate, and thereby brought a blemish upon the rest.

Upon the day of Eating of the Passover, called the first day of the Feast of
unleavened bread, our Savior and his Disciples keep the Passover together in
Jerusalem; and there the two memorials of our Savior's Passion meet: that of
the Passover instituted by God, and the Israelites going out of Egypt; and the
Bread and Wine after Supper instituted by our Savior, to succeed in the place
of the former: and each did questionless make a deep impression upon our
Savior, in which he anticipated his Passion, and lively represented to him
that breaking and pouring out of his Blood and Soul, which he was suddenly to
suffer: And doubtless here began a great measure of our Savior's Passion in
the apprehension which he had of that imminent Storm, that he must speedily
undergo. From the Supper they go together to the Mount of Olives, and there he
acquaints his Disciples of a speedy and sorrowful parting they must have; the
Shepherd is to be smitten that night, and the Sheep to be scattered: and as he
foresaw Judas treachery, so he foresees Peter's infirmity; the storm should be
so violent that Peter himself, the resolutest Apostle, shall deny his Master
that night, and deny him thrice: And surely the foresight of the distraction
that should befall his poor Disciples, could not choose but add much to their
tender Master's affliction; Matthew. 26.31. All ye shall be offended because of
me this night.

And now let us follow our Blessed Lord from the Mount of Olives into the
Garden, called by the Apostles Gethsemane, with the affections of love and
wonder in some measure becoming such an entertainment of our thoughts. The Time
that he chose for this retirement was the dead time of the night; a season that
might the more contribute to the strength of that sadness, which the
pre-apprehension of his imminent Passion must needs occasion. The Place that he
chose, a solitary retired Garden, where nothing might, nor could interrupt, or
divert, the intensiveness of his sorrow and fear: And to make both the time and
place the more opportune for his Agony, he leaves the rest of his Disciples,
and takes with him only Peter and the two Sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 26.37. and to
these he imparts the beginning of his sorrow, that they might be witnesses of
it, Matthew. 26. 37, 38. My sold is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; but
yet commands their distance, verse. 38. Tarry ye here and watch with me, and he
went a little further. Watch with me: The confusion of his Soul was so great,
that the only Son of God distrusts his own [humane] ability to bear it; and yet
his submission to this terrible conflict [was] so willing, that he leaves them
that he had appointed to watch with him. He went a little farther. The three
Disciples had doubtless a sympathy with their Master's sorrow; and yet the will
of God so orders it, that their excess of love and grief must not keep their
Eyes waking, notwithstanding it was the last request of their sorrowful Master.
The disciples slept. Matthew. 26. 40. And thus every circumstance of Time, Place,
and Persons contribute to a sad and solitary opportunity for this most terrible
and black conflict. And now in this Garden the mighty God puts his Son to
grief, lades him with our sorrows, Isa. 53.4. withdraws and hides from him the
light of his favor and countenance; interposeth a thick and black cloud
between the Divinity and the humane nature; darts into his Soul the sad and
sharp manifestations of his wrath; overwhelms his Soul with one wave after
another; sends into him the most exquisite pre-apprehensions of those sad and
severe sufferings he was the next day to undergo; begins to make his Soul and
Offering for Sin, and heightens his sorrow, confusion, and astonishment unto
the uttermost. In sum, the mighty God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, who
knows the way into the Soul, and how to fill it with the most sad and black
astonishment and sorrow, was pleased at this time to estrange and eclipse the
manifestation of his light and love to his only Son, as far as was possibly
consistent with his secret and eternal love unto him; to throw into him as sad
and amazing apprehensions of his wrath, as was possible to be consistent with
the humane nature to bear; to fortify and strengthen his sense of it and
sorrow for, and under it, unto the uttermost, that so his grief and sorrow and
confusion of soul might be brim-full, and as much as the exactest constitution
of a humane nature could possibly bear. And thus now at this time the Arm of
the mighty God was bruising the Soul of his only Son; Isa. 53.16. And certainly
the extremity of this agony within, must needs be very great, if we consider
the strange effects it had without: 1. That pathetical description thereof that
our Savior himself makes of it; My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death, Matthew. 26.37. so sorrowful, exceeding sorrowful, sorrowful unto death:
and the expressions of the Evangelists; Matthew. 26.37. He began to be sorrowful
and very heavy, Mark 14.33. He began to be sore amazed and to be very heavy. It
was such a sorrow as brought with it an amazement, an astonishment. 2. Again,
that strange request to his three Disciples, Tarry ye and watch with me; as if
he feared the sorrow would overwhelm him. 3. Again, his Prayer, and the manner
of it, evidence a most wonderful perturbation within; Matthew. 26.39. He fell on
his face and prayed; and what was the thing he prayed? Father if it be possible
let this cup pass from me; Or, as Mark 14.36. Abba, Father, all things are
possible unto thee, take away this cup from me, etc. although that this was the
very end for which he came into the World; the Cup which in former times he
reached after, and was straightened till it were fulfilled; yet such a
representation there is thereof to his Soul, that though, in the will of his
obedience, he submits; Not my will but thine be done: Yet his nature shrinks
and starts at it; and he engages Almighty God, as much as, upon as great
arguments, as was possible, to decline the severity of that wrath which he was
now to grapple with: 1. Upon the account of his Omnipotency; All things are
possible to thee: 2. Upon the account of his Relation; Abba, Father: It is not
a stranger that importunes thee; it is thy Son; that Son in whom thou did
proclaim thy self well pleased; that Son whom thou hear always; it is he
that begs of thee; and begs of thee a dispensation from that, which he most
declines, because he most loves thee, the terrible, unsupportable hiding thy
face from me: And this was not one single request, but thrice repeated,
reiterated and that with more earnestness, Mark 14.39. And again he went away,
and prayed, and spoke the same words: Luke 22.44. And being in an agony he
prayed more earnestly. Certainly, that impression upon his soul, that caused
him to deprecate that for which he was born, to deprecate it so often, so
earnestly, must needs be a sorrow and apprehension of a very terrible and
exceeding extremity. 4. Such was the weight of his sotrow and confusion of
soul, that, it even exceeding the strength of his [humane] nature to bear it,
it was ready to dissolve the Union between his Body and Soul; insomuch that to
add farther strength unto him, and capacity to undergo the measure of it, an
Angel from Heaven is sent, not [meerly] to comfort, but to strengthen him; to
add a farther degree of strength to his humane nature, to bear the weight of
that wrath, which had in good earnest made his Soul sorrowful unto death, had
it not been strengthened by the ministration of an Angel, Luke 22.43. and this
assistance of the Angel, as it did not allay the sorrow of his Soul, so neither
did it intermit his importunity to be delivered from the thing he felt and
feared, but did only support and strengthen him to bear a greater burden of it:
And as the measure of his strength was increased, so was the burden which he
must undergo increased; for aster this he prayed again more earnestly the third
time, Luke 22.43. the supply of his strength was succeeded with an addition of
sorrow, and the increase of his sorrow was followed with the greater
importunity; He prayed more carnestly, Heb. 5.7. With strong crying and tears,
Luke 22. 44. And being in an agony be prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was
as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. This was his third
address to his Father, Matthew. 26.44. and here was the highest pitch of our
Savior's passion in the Garden. His Soul was in an agony, in the greatest
concussion, consusion, and extremity of sorrow, fear, anguish and astonishment,
that was possible to be inslicted by the mighty hand of God on the soul of
Christ, that could be consistent with the purity of the nature of our Savior,
and the inseparable union that it had with the Divine nature: Insomuch, that
the confusion and distraction of his soul under it, and the struggling and
grapling of his soul with it, did make such an impression upon his body, that
the like was never before or since. The season of the year was cold; for so it
appears, Joh. 18.18. the Servants and Officers had made a fire of coals, for it
was cold: and the season of the time was cold, it was, as near as we may guess,
about midnight, when the Sun was at his greatest distance, and obstructed in
his influence by the interposition of the Earth: for it appears they came with
Lanthorns and Torches when they apprehended him, Joh. 18.3. and he was brought
to the high Priest's Hall, a little before Cock-crowing, after some time had
been spent in his Examination, Math. 26.69. And yet for all this, such is the
agony, and perturbation of our Savior's soul, that in this cold season it puts
his body in a sweat, a sweat of blood, great drops of blood, drops of blood
falling down to the ground; and certainly it was no light conflict within, that
caused such a strange and un-heard of symptom without. Certainly the storm in
the soul of Christ must needs be very terrible that his blood, the seat of his
vital spirits, could no longer abide the sense of it, but started out in a
sweat of blood, and such a sweat, that was more than consistent with the
ordinary constitution of humane nature. And during this time, even from the
eating of the Passover until this third address to his Father was over, the
suffering of our Savior lay principally, if not only, in his soul. Almighty
God was wounding of his spirit, and making his soul an offering for sin: And
though the distinct, and clear manner of this bruising of our Savior's soul
cannot be apprehended by us; yet surely thus much we may conclude concerning
it: 1. He was made sin for us, that knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. he stood under
the imputation of all our sins; and though he were personally innocent, yet
judicially and by way of interpretation, he was the greatest offender that ever
was; for the Lord laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Isa. 53.6.2. And
consequently he was under the imputation of all the guilt of all those sins,
and stands, in relation unto God, the righteous Judge, under the very same
obligation to whatsoever punishment the very persons of the offenders were,
unto the uttermost of that consistency that it had with the unseparable union
unto the Father: and this obligation unto the punishment could not choose but
work the same effects in our Savior, as it must do in the sinner, (desperation
and sin excepted;) to wit, a sad apprehension of the wrath of God against him.
The purity and justice of God, which has nothing that it hates but sin, must
pursue sin wherever it find it: and as when it finds sin personally in a man,
the wrath of God will abide there so long as sin abides there; so when it finds
the same sin assumed by our Lord, and bound as it were to him, as the wood was
to Isaac when he was laid upon the Altar, the wrath of God could not choose but
be apprehended as incumbent upon him, till that sin that by imputation lay upon
him were discharged. For as our Lord was pleased to be our Representative in
bearing our sins, and to stand in our stead, so all these affections and
motions of his soul did bear the same conformity, as if acted by us: As he put
on the person of the sinner, so he puts on the same sorrow, the same shame, the
same fear, the same trembling under the apprehension of the wrath of his
Father, that we must have done: And so as an imputed sin drew with it the
obligation unto punishment, so it did, by necessary consequence, raise all
those confusions and storms in the soul of Christ, as it would have done in the
person of the sinner, sin only excepted. 3. In this Garden as he stands under
the sin, and guilt of our nature, so he stands under the curse of our nature,
to wit, a necessity of death, and of undergoing the wrath of God for that sin
whose punishment he has undertaken for us: the former, the dissolution of his
body and soul by a most accursed death, and the latter the suffering of his
soul; and this latter he is now under. God is pleased to inflict upon him all
the manifestations of his wrath, and to fling into his soul the sharpest and
severest representations of his displeasure that might possibly befall him
under that bare imputed guilt, considering the dignity of his Person. And
surely this was more terrible to our Savior than all his corporal sufferings
were: under all those not one word, no perturbation at all, but as a Sheep
before his shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth: but the sense of the
displeasure of his Father, and the impressions that he makes upon his soul,
those he cannot bear without sorrow, even unto death, without most importunate
addresses to be delivered from them, and a most strange concussion and agony
upon his soul and body under the sense of them. And the actual manifestation of
the wrath of God upon his Son consisted in these two things principally.

1. Filling his soul with strange and violent fears and terrors, insomuch that
he was in an amazement and consternation of spirit; the Passion-Psalm renders
it, Psalm. 22.14. My heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels:
the God of the spirits of all flesh, that knows how to grind and bruise the
spirit, did bruise and melt his soul within him with terrors, fears, and sad
pre-apprehensions of worse to follow.

2. A sensible withdrawing, by hasty and swift degrees, the light of the
presence and favor of God: He is sorrowful and troubled, and he goes to his
Father to desire it may pass from him, but no answer; he goes again, but yet no
answer; and yet under the pressure and extremity; he goes again the third time
with more earnestness, agony, a sweat of blood; yet no, it cannot be; and this
was a terrible condition, that the light of the countenance of the Father is
removed from his Son, his only Son, in whom he was well pleased, his Son whom
he heard always: And when he comes to the Father under the greatest obligation
that can be, with the greatest reverence, with the greatest importunity; once,
and again, and a third time; and that, filled within with fears, and covered
without with blood; and yet no answer, but all light and access and favor
intercepted, with nothing but blackness and silence: Certainly this was a
terrible Cup, yet thus it was with our Savior Christ; The light of the favor
of God, like the Sun in an Eclipse, from the very institution of the Sacrament,
began to be covered one degree after another; and in the third address to the
Father in the Garden, it was even quite gone: But at that great hour, when our
Savior cried My God, my God why have thou forsaken me! then both lights, that
greater light of the favor of God to his only Son, together with the light of
the Sun, seemed to be under a total recess, or Eclipse; and this was that which
bruised the soul of our Savior, and made it an Offering for Sin; and this was
that which wrung drops of blood from our Savior's body, before the Thorns, or
the Whips, or the Nails, or the Spear, had torn his veins.

And now after this third application for a deliverance from this terrible Cup
of the wrath of God, and yet no dispensation obtained, he returns to his
miserable comforters, the three Disciples; and he finds them the third time
asleep: These very three Disciples were once the witnesses of a glorious
Transfiguration of our Savior in the Mount, and in an ecstasy of joy and fear,
they fell on their faces, Matthew. 17.6. and now they are to be witnesses of a
sad Transfiguration of their Lord under an agony and sweat of blood; and now
under an ecstasy of sorrow they are not able to watch with their [Lord] one
hour. Our Savior calls them, but whiles they were scarce awakened, they are
rouzed by a louder alarm, Matthew. 26.47. whiles he yet spoke, Judas, one of the
twelve, came, and with him a great multitude, with swords and staves from the
high Priests, Joh. 18.3. with lanthorns and torches: And though this was little
in comparison of the storm that was in our Savior's soul; yet such an
appearance, at such a time of the night, and to a person under such a sad
condition, could not but be terrible to flesh and blood; especially, if we
consider the circumstances that attended it. 1. An Apostle, one of the twelve,
he it is that conducts this black Guard, Matthew. 25.47. Whomsoever I shall kiss,
that same is he, hold him fast; one that had been witness of all his Miracles,
heard all his divine Sermons, acquainted with all his retirements; he, whose
feet his Master with love tenderness had washed, who within a few hours before
had supped with him, at that Supper of of solemnity and love, the Passover:
this is he that is in the head of this crew: certainly this had in it an
aggravation of sorrow to our Blessed Savior, to be betrayed by a Disciple. 2.
The manner of it, he betrays him by a kiss; an emblem of homage and love is
made use of to be the signal of scorn and contempt, as well as treachery and
villainy. 3. Again, the carriage of his Disciples, full of rashness, and yet of
cowardice; they strike a Servant of the high Priest, and cut off his Ear,
Matthew. 26.57. which, had not the meekness and mercy of our Savior prevented by
a miraculous cure, might have added a blemish to the sweetness and innocence of
his suffering: He rebukes the Rashness of his Disciple, and cures the wound of
his Enemy: again, of Cowardice, Matthew. 26.56. Then all the disciples forsook
him and sled; and Peter himself, that but now had professed the resolution of
his love to his Master, follows, but a far off, Matthew. 26.58. in the posture
and profession of a stranger and a spectator. So soon was the love and honor
of a Master, deserved by so much love, and purity, and miracles, lost in the
Souls of the very Disciples.

After this he is brought to the high Priests, the solemn assembly of the then
visible Church of the Jews, in the persons of the greatest reverence and esteem
among them, the high Priests, Scribes and Elders; and before them accused, and
convicted of those crimes that might render him odious to the Jews, Romans, and
all good men, Blasphemy, and by them pronounced worthy of death, Matthew. 26.66.
and after this, exposed to the basest usage of the basest of their retinue; the
Servants spit on him, buffet him, expose him to scorn, saying, Prophecy unto
us, thou Christ, who is he that smote thee, Matthew. 26.67. injuries less
tolerable than death to an ingenuous nature: and, to add to all the rest,
Peter instead of reproving the insolence of the abjects, and bearing a part
with his Master in his injuries, thrice denying his Master, and that with an
oath, and cursing. So far was he from owning his Master in his adversity, that
he denied he knew him; and this in the very presence of our Savior, Luke
22.61. and the Lord turned and looked upon Peter; certainly that look of our
Savior, as it carried a secret message of a gentle reprehension, so also of
much sorrow, and grief in our Lord: as if he should have said, Ah Peter, can
thou see thy Savior thus used, and will thou not own me? Or if thou will not,
yet must thou needs deny me, deny me thrice, deny me with oaths, and with
execrations? The unkindness of a Disciple, and such a Disciple, that have been
privy to my Glory in my Transfiguration, and to my Agony in the Garden, cuts me
deeper than the scorns and derision of these abjects. But that is not all, this
apostasy of thine, these denials, these oaths, these execrations, will lie
heavy upon me anon, and add to that unsupportable burden that I am under; the
Thorns, and the Whips, and the Nails, that I must anon suffer, will be the more
envenomed by these Sins of thine; and thou castest more gall into that bitter
Cup, that I am drinking, than all the malice of mine enemies could do. In sum,
though thou go out, and weepest bitterly, yet these Sins of thine would
stick unto thy Soul unto eternity, if I should not bear them for thee; they
cost thee some tears, but they must cost me my blood.

The next morning the high Priests and Elders hold a second consultation, as
soon as it was day, Luke 22.66. their malice was so sollicitous, that they
prevent the morning Sun; and after they had again examined him, and in that
Council charged him with Blasphemy, the Council and the whole multitude lead
him bound to Pilate; and there they accuse him, and, to make their accusation
the more gracious, charge him with Sedition against the Romans; and though he
had no other advocate but silence and innocence, for he answered them nothing;
yet the Judge acquits him, Luke 23.23. I find no fault in him; and yet, to
shift his hands of the employment, and to gratify an adversary, he sends him
to Herod, and his accusers follow him thither also, Luke 23.10. the chief
Priests and Scribes vehemently accuse him: Herod when he had satisfied his
curiosity in the sight of Jesus, to add to the scorn of our Savior, exposes
him to the derision of his rude Soldiers, and clothes him in a gorgeous Robe,
and remands him to Pilate. Thus in triumph and scorn he is sent from place to
place: first to Annas; then to Caiphas; then convented before the Council of
the Priests; then sent into the high Priest's Hall; then re-convened before the
Council; then sent bound to Pilate; and from thence to Herod; and from him back
again to Pilate: and in all those translations from place to place, exposed
unto, and entertained with new scorns, and derisions, and contempts.

At his return to Pilate, he again the second time declares his Innocence; that
neither he nor Herod found any thing worthy of death, Luke 23.15. and yet to
gratify the Jews, he offers to have him scourged, whom he pronounces
innocent; yet to avoid the gross injustice of a sentence of death offers to
release him, to observe their custom; but this could not not satisfy: To
preserve their custom, and yet to fulfill their malice, they choose the reprieve
of Barabbas a murderer, and importune the crucifying of the innocent Jesus; and
now the third time Pilate pronounces him innocent, Luke 23.22. and yet
delivers [him] over to be crucified. The Executioners did it to the uttermost,
and, and to add pain and scorn to his scourging, put upon him a Crown of
thorns: and in this disguise of blood and contempt, he brings him forth, shows
him to his prosecutors, Joh. 19.5. Behold the man; as if he should have said,
You Jews, that that have accused this man, must know I find no fault in him,
yet to satisfy your importunity, I have delivered him over to the severest and
vilest punishment next unto death, Scourging and Scorn; here he is, see what a
spectacle it is, let this satisfy your Envy. But all this will not serve,
there is nothing below the vilest of deaths can satisfy; all cry out, Crucify
him: and when yet the Judge professes he finds nothing worthy of death, they
impose a Law of their own; We have a law, and by our law he ought to dye,
because he made himself the Son of God. But when this rather made the Judge the
more cautious, they engage him upon his fidelity to Casar his Master: He that
makes himself a King, speaks against Casar: But all this was not enough; but
at length the importunity of the Priests and people prevailed: and Pilate who
had been before warned by the monition of his Wife, and had these several times
pronounced him innocent, yet against the conviction of his own Conscience, to
satisfy and content the Jews, adds this farther cruelty and unjustice to what
he had before done, gave sentence that it should be as they required, Luke
23.24. delivered him over to that cursed and servile death of Crucifixion: and
yet his persecutors malice and envy not satisfied; but, after his judgment,
pursue the execution of it with as great malice, scorn, and cruelty, as they
had before used in obtaining it: His Crown of thorns upon his head; a purple
Robe upon his body; the Blood of his scourging and thorns all covering his
visage; a Reed in his right hand; and the base and insolent multitude with
spittings, and strokes, and reproaches, abusing him, till his Cross be ready:
and then the purple Robe is taken off, and he conducted to the place of his
Execution; and, to add torment to his shame, our Blessed Lord, wearied with an
agony and long watching the night before; and from the time of his apprehending
hurried from place to place; and his blood and spirits spent with the
scourging, and thorns, and blows; and, which is more than all this, a soul
within laden with a weight of sorrow, and the burden of the wrath of God, which
did drink up and consume his spirits: yet, in this condition, he is fain to
bear his burdensome Cross toward the place of his Execution, Joh. 19.17. till
he was able to carry it no longer, but even fainted under it; and then Simon of
Cyrene is compelled to bear it to the place.

When he comes to the place of Execution, he is stripped stark naked, and his
clothes afterward divided by lot among the Soldiers, Matthew. 27.35. and his
naked body stretched upon the Cross to the uttermost extension of it, Psalm.
22.17. I may tell all my bones, they look and stare upon me: and at the
uttermost extension, which the cruel Executioners could make of our Savior's
body, his hands and his feet nailed to that Cross, with great Nails through
those tender parts full of nerves and arteries, and most exquisitely sensible
of pain. And in this condition the Cross with our Savior's body is raised up
in the view of all; and, that even in this his execution, that the shame and
ignominy of the manner of his death might have a farther accession of scorn and
reproach, he is placed between two Thieves, that were crucified with him, with
an Inscription of derision upon his Cross, in all the most universal Languages
of the World, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; and the people and Priests standing by
with gestures and words of derision, Matthew. 27.39, 43. and, even to a letter,
assuming those very gestures and words, which were so many hundreds of years
predicted in the Passion-Psalm 22.78. He trusted in God, let him deliver him,
if he will have him; and one of those very Thieves, that was even dying as a
malefactor, yet was filled with such a devilish spirit, that he upbraids and
derides him.

And now our Savior is under the torments and shame of this cursed execution:
but, though these his sufferings of his body and outward man, were very
grievous, in so much that it could not but extremely afflict him; yet it is
strange to see how little he was transported under them, in all his
contumelies, reproaches and accusations, scarce a word answered: He answered
them nothing in all his abusings, strokes, ridiculous garments, crown of
thorns, tearing of his body with scourging; yet not a word; but, As a sheep
before the shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth; Isa. 53.7. in all his
rackings upon the Cross, and nailing of his limbs to it, and all the anguish
that, for the space of six hours, from the third hour, wherein he was
crucified, Mar. 15.25. until the ninth hour, wherein he gave up the ghost,
Matthew. 27.46. not a word of complaint; but he refused those very supplies which
were usually given to suppress the violence of the pain, vinegar and gall.
Matthew. 27.34. But when we come to the Afflictions of his Soul, they were of a
higher dimension in the Garden when no other storm was upon him, but what was
within him: He falls down upon his face and prays; and again; and a third
time; and is amazed, and sorrowful to death; and sweats drops of blood: and
doubtless whiles he was under the reproaches, and buffetings, and whippings,
and thorns, he was not without a terrible and confused sadness and heaviness
within, which though they did not mitigate the torments of his body, yet they
did infinitely exceed them. The spirit and the soul is most exquisitely
sensible, and it is that which feels the pains inflicted upon the body.
Certainly therefore the wound of the spirit it self, the fountain of sense,
must needs be exceedingly grievous: And hence it was, that though all the
injuries and torments of our Savior could scarce wring a complaint from him,
yet the weight of that wrath that lay upon his soul, now made an offering for
sin, did wring from him those bitter and terrible cries, that one would wonder
should proceed from him, that was One with the Father; Matthew. 27.46. My God, my
God why have thou forsaken me? From the sixth hour to the ninth darkness was
over all the land, Matthew. 27.45. such a darkness as bred an astonishment even
in strangers and other Counties. The darkness of the World, though a suitable
dress for such a time wherein the Son of God must dye, and the Sun of
Righteousness be eclipsed; yet it was nothing in comparison of that dismal
shadow, that covered our Savior's soul all this time. About the ninth hour our
Savior cried that bitter cry, My God, my God why have thou forsaken me?
manifesting the depth of his sorrow, and the perfect sense he had of it; why
have thou forsaken me? more could not have been suffered or been said; every
word carries in it an accent of horror. Thou, that art the great God, from
whom, and in whom every thing has its being and comfort; surely if in thy
presence is fullness of joy, in thy withdrawings must be fullness of horror, and
confusion; and yet it is thou that have forsaken me. Forsaken: Had thou never
been with me, as I had not known the blessedness of thy fruition, so I could
not have measured the extremity of my loss; the excess of the happiness that I
had in thy presence, adds to the excess of my misery in the suffering of thy
absence. Forsaken me: not withdrawn thy self to a distance, but forsaken me;
and forsaken me at such a time as this, when I stand more in need of thy
presence than ever; when I am forsaken of my contrymen, of my kindred, of my
Disciples: then to be forsaken of thee, when I am under the shame, and pains of
a cruel, and a cursed death; under the scorns, and derisions of those that hate
me; under the weight, and pressure of all the sins of the world; under the
struglings with terrors in my soul, sent from thy mighty hand; under the
visible approach of death, the king of terrors; under a vail of darkness
without, and the seeming triumph of the power of darkness within; then to be
forsaken, and forsaken of thee, whom I had only left to be my support. Forsaken
Me: It is not a stranger that thou forsakest; it is thy Son; thy only Son; in
whom thou did heretofore proclaim thy self well pleased: that Son whom though
thou now forsakest, yet forgets not his duty unto thee, nor dependence upon
thee; but still lays hold on thee: and though thou shakest me off, yet I must
still [call] upon thee, with the humble confidence of My God, My God still. why
have thou forsaken me? To be forsaken, and to be forsaken of God, of my God; of
him that is not only my God, but my Father; and that at such a time; and yet
not to know why. Oh blessed Savior, the Prophets that spoke by thy own Spirit
did tell thee why: and that very Psalm, out of which thou take this bitter
cry, does tell thee why: and thou thy self within some few days, or hours
before, did tell us why; and do thou now ask why? Did thou not choose
even that which thou now groanest under; and were willing to put thy soul in
our souls stead, and bear the sin of those which are now thy burden? Certainly
we may, with all humility and reverence conceive, that at the time of this
bitter cry, our Savior's soul was, for the present, over-shadowed with so much
astonishment and sorrow, that it did for the present overpower and cover the
actual and distinct sense of the reason of it; at least in that measure and
degree in which he suffered. This cry of our Savior was about the ninth hour,
a little before his death; and having fulfilled one Prophecy in this terrible
cry, contained in the very words of Psalm. 22. he fulfills another; he says, I
thirst, Joh. 19.28. and presently they give him vinegar to drink. And between
this and his death there intervene these passages: 1. His proclaiming to the
world, that the work of our Redemption was finished; Joh. 19.30. When he
received the vinegar, he said, It is finished. 2. A second cry with a loud
voice, Matthew. 27.50. the words are not expressed of his second cry; only both
Evangelists, Matthew and Luke, testify it was a cry with a loud voice; to
evidence to the world that, in the very article of his giving up of the ghost,
the strength of nature was not wholly spent, for he cried with a loud voice. 3.
The comfortable resignation of his soul unto the hands of his Father, Luke 23.
46. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: And although, but even now the
black storm was upon his soul, that made him cry out with that loud and bitter
cry, yet the cloud is over, and with comfort he delivers up his soul into the
hands of that God, whom he thought, but even now, had forsaken him. It is more
than probable that that bitter cry was uttered at the very Zenith of all his
pains, and when he had taken the vinegar, and proclaimed that it is finished;
though they were all wrapped up in a very small time, about the end of the ninth
hour, yet now there remained no more, but for him to give up his spirit, which
he instantly thereupon did, Joh. 19.30. He said, It is finished, he bowed the
head, and gave up the ghost. Now the things wonderfully observable in the death
of our Savior are many. 1. That it was a voluntary delivering up of his
spirit: this is that which he said, Matthew. 10.18. No man takes it from me, but
I lay it down: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again:
this commandment have I received of my Father. And truly this voluntary
delivering up of his soul, was well near as great an evidence of his Divinity,
as his resuming it again: so that this very delivering up of his soul converted
the Centurion, Mar. 15.39. When he saw that he so cried and gave up the ghost,
he said, Truly this man was the Son of God. Now that he thus voluntarily gave
up his spirit is evident; 1. By the strength of nature, that was yet upon him,
in the very article of his death, he cried with a loud voice: 2. That the
Thieves, who were crucified at the same time, dyed not till there was a farther
violence used by breaking their legs, Joh. 19.32. [but] he expired to prevent
the violence of the Soldiers, and to fulfill the type and prophecy; Not a bone
of him shall be broken. Joh. 19.36.3. That the suddenness of his death caused
admiration in those, that well knew the lingering course of such a death; in the
Centurion, Mar. 15.39. in Pilate, Mar. 15.44. which might probably be the cause
that the insolent Soldier, to secure the assurance of his death, pierced his
side with a spear, Job. 19.34. and thereby fulfilled that other Scripture which
he never thought of. Job. 15.37.

Now the wonderful occurrences that accompanied our Savior's death were very
many, and considerable. 1. A strange, and particular Fulfilling of the
Prophecies, and Types, that were concerning our Savior's death, and the very
individual circumstances that attended it; and all to consirm our Faith, that
this was indeed the Messiah, and that he was thus delivered over to death, by
the most certain and pre-determinate Counsel of God: The Time of his Death so
exactly predicted by Daniel, ch.9.v.25, 26. the parallel circumstances with the
Paschal Lamb, Isa. 53.7.
in the nature of him, a Lamb without spot, Exodus 12.5. in the time of his
delivery over to death, at the Feast of the Passover, and the very evening
wherein the Passover was to be eaten: In the Manner of his Oblation, not a bone
to be broken, Exodus 12.46. again, the Manner of his Death, by piercing his
hands and his feet, Psalm. 22.16. the very Words used by him, Psalm. 22.1. Matthew.
27. 46. the Words used of him, Psalm. 22.8. Matthew. 27.43. the crucifying of him
between Malefactors, Isa. 53.12. the Whippings, Isa. 53.5. the Dividing of his
Garments, and casting Lotts upon his Vesture, Psa. 22.18. the Thirst of our
Savior upon the Cross; and the giving him Vinegar and Gall, Psalm. 69.21.

2. A strange and miraculous Concussion of nature, giving testimony to the
wonderful, and unheard of dissolution of our Savior's body and soul; Darkness
from the sixth hour until the ninth hour. And it is observable in the night
wherein he was born, by a miraculous light the night became as day, Luke 2.9.
but at his death, a miraculous darkness turned the day into night for three
hours; Matthew. 27.45. at his birth, a new Star was created to be the lamp and
guide unto the place of his birth, Matthew. 2.9. but at his death, the Sun in the
firmament was masked with darkness, and yielded not his light, while the Lord
of life was passing into the vail of death. Again, another prodigy that
accompanied the death of Christ was an Earthquake, that rent the rocks, and
opened the graves, and struck amazement and conviction into the Centurion, that
was watching him, Math. 27.52, 53, 54. When our Savior was entering into the
earth by death, the earth trembled; and so it did when he was coming out of it
by his Resurrection. Matthew. 28.2.

3. Again, the Graves were opened, and the dead bodies of the Saints arose: As
the touch of the bones of Elisha caused a kind of resurrection, 2 Kings 13.21.
so our Savior's body, new saln to the earth, did give a kind of particular
resurrection to the Saints bodies, to testify that by his death he had healed
the deadliness of the Grave, and that the satisfaction for Sin was
accomplished, when Death, the wages of Sin, was thus Conquered.

4. Again, the Vail of the Temple was Rent in twain from the top to the bottom,
Matthew. 27.57. the Vail was that, which divided the most holy place from the
rest of the Tabernacle, Exodus 26.33. and in that most Holy place were contained
the mysterious Types, the Ark of the Covenant, and the Mercy-Seat; and within
this Vail only the high Priest entered once a year, when he made an atonement
for the People and for the Tabernacle, Levit. 16.33. Heb. 9.7. and now at our
Savior's death, this vail was rent, from the top to the bottom; and it
imported diverse very great Mysteries: 1. That now our great High Priest was
entering into the most holy, with his own blood, having thereby made the
atonement for us; Heb. 9.12. By his own blood, he entered once into the most
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. 2. That the Means,
whereby he entered into the most holy place, was by the Rending of his Humanity,
his soul from his body, typified by the rending of that vail; and therefore his
flesh, that is, his whole humane nature, was the vail, Heb. 10.20. Consecrated
through the vail, that is, his flesh. 3. That now by the death of Christ all
those dark Mysteries veiled up formerly in the most holy, the Ark of the
Covenant, and the Mercy-Seat, are now rendered open, and their Mysteries
unfolded. Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant, and the Seat of Mercy and
Acceptance, unto all believers founded and seated upon him, and thereby that
Life and Immortality, which was wrapped up in the mysteries of the Old covenant,
and yet those mysteries veiled, and enclosed up, within the vail, is now
brought to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. and the vail rent in twain,
that as well the meaning of those mysteries and types under the Law is
discovered. 4. That now the use of the Ceremonial Law is at an end, the
greatest and most sacred mystery of the Tabernacle, and indeed of the whole
ceremonial Law, was this that was within the vail, the most holy place, wherein
were the most holy and revered mysteries, the Ark and the Mercy-Seat: But now
the vail is rent, the use abolished, the covenant of the people is given; the
Body of Christ, typified by the Temple, separated, and so the use of the other
Temple, Tabernacle and the holy Places, Vessels, Instruments thereof ceased. 5.
That now the Kingdom of Heaven, the most Holy Place, is open unto all
believers: Christ our High Priest is entered in with his own blood, and has not
closed the vail after him, but rent it in sunder, and made and left a passage
for all believers to follow him, with our prayers and access to the glorious
God, and hereafter in our persons; Heb. 10.19, 20. Having therefore bloldness
to enter into the Holiest, by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way,
which he bath consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh;
let us draw near with a true heart.

And now we have gone thus far with our Lord unto his death, we shall follow
him to his Grave. Joseph of Arimathea, having an honorable mention by all four
Evangelists, Matthew. 27.57. a rich man, and Jesus disciple; Mar. 15.43. an
honorable Counselor, who waited for the Kingdom of God; Luke 23.50 a
Counselor, a good man and a just, who had not consented to the counsel or deed
of the Jews, and waited for the Kingdom of God; Joh. 19.38. a disciple of
Christ, but secretly for fear of the Jews: this man manifested his faith, and
love to his Master, when he was in his lowest condition; goes to Pilate boldly,
and begs his Savior's body; he wraps it in a clean linen cloth, laid it in a
Tomb provided for himself, and hewed out of the rock, and rolled a great stone
upon the door of the Sepulcher. And as by his death with the malefactors, so by
his burial in this rich man's Sepulcher, he fulfilled both parts of the
Prophecy, Isa. 53.9. He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in
his death. The high Priests continued their malice, and their jealousy, even
against the dead body of our Savior; and, to secure themselves against the
suspicion of his Resurrection the third day, take order for making the
Sepulcher sure, till the third day was past, Matthew.27.60. they seal the stone
and set a watch. And it is very Observable, how the almighty Counsel of God
made use of the very malice and jealousy of these people, for the confirming
of his own truth, Christ's Resurrection, and our Faith; Their malicious and
curious industry, to prevent the possibility of a fictitious Resurrection,
abundantly and uncontrollably convincing the reality of our Savior's death and
true Resurrection. He is laid in the grave the evening of the day wherein he
suffered; a Stone rolled upon the mouth of the grave, such as required a
considerable strength to remove it, insomuch that the women that came the first
day of the week to embalm the body, were in a great difficulty how it should be
removed; Mar. 16.3. for it was a Great stone; Matthew. 27.60. and this stone
Sealed: and, as if all this were too little, and the bonds of death and the
grave were too weak, they add a Watch of Soldiers to secure the body. Matthew
27.66. And here we leave for a while our Savior's body interred with Spices,
Joh. 19.39. in a new Sepulcher, wherein never before any lay, Joh. 19.41. hewn
out of a rock in the garden, Joh. 19.42. that as in the garden, death at first
laid hold of the first Adam, so in the garden the second Adam undergoes the
state of death, and gains the victory over the grave: his agony in a garden,
and his interrment in a garden; his body rests in the grave, and his soul
translated into Paradise; for so he witnessed of himself, This day thou shall
be with me in Paradise: Luke 23. 43. For at the instant of his dissolution our
Satisfaction was made; and the work of our Redemption, so far as it depended
upon his suffering, finished: So that had it not been for a witness of the
reality and truth of his death, and of the power and reality of his
Resurrection, and the fulfilling of the decree of God, manifested in the
Scriptures, he might have reassumed life in the next instant after his death:
For the debt to the Justice of God was fully satisfied, and his continuance in
the grave until the third day, was not by the power of death which he
vanquished in the instant of his dissolution, but a voluntary subjecting of
himself unto that state, for the strengthening of our faith, and the fulfilling
of the Scriptures.

And now we come to the Consideration of the Resurrection of our Lord; by which
he was declared to be the Son of God with power; and by which the fullness and
compleatness of our Redemption by him, is abundantly manifested. He chose that
Time to dye, when the Passover was slain; that time wherein Adam was created,
the sixth day of the week at even. He chose that time for his body to rest in
the grave, and for his soul to rest in Paradise, wherein his Father rested from
all the great work of the Creation; the seventh day of the week; and he chose
that day to rise again, which his Father chose to begin the Creation, the first
day of the week; that the same day might bear the inscription of the Creation
and of the Resurrection of the World: and that as in that day the Lord God
brought light out of darkness, so this light, the light that enlightneth every
man that comes into the world should arise from the land of darkness, the
grave: This is the day that the Lord has made, let us be glad and rejoice
therein. The Time of the Day, wherein our Lord arose, was very early in the
morning of the first day of the week, as it began to dawn, Matthew 21.1. while it
was yet dark, or scarcely full light, Joh 17.1. And the Manner of it was full
of wonder and astonishment. An Angel from heaven comes down to draw the curtain
of our Savior's grave, and with an Earthquake rolls away the stone that
covered it; the Keepers, who had watchfully observed the command of their
Commanders, were stricken with astonishment, and became as dead. Matthew. 28.2,
3, 4. Our Lord who had power to lay down his life, and power to take it up
again, Joh. 10.17. reassumes his body, which though it had tasted death, yet
had not seen corruption, and arises, and thereby proclaimed the completing of
our Redemption; and therefore not possible he should be longer holden of it,
Acts 2.24. his victory over death and the grave for us, 1 Cor. 15. When our
Lord raised up Lazarus, he came forth of the grave bound hand and foot with
grave-cloaths, Joh. 11.44. though he was for the present rescued from death by
the power of Christ, yet he must still be a subject to it: he is revived, but
yet rises with the bonds of death about him; he must dye again: But when our
Lord rises, he shakes off his grave-cloaths; the linen that wrapped his body
in one place, and the linen that bound his head in another, Joh. 20.6, 7. Our
Lord being risen, dies no more; death has no more power over him. Romans 6.9.

And thus we have considered the History of Christ's Passion and Resurrection,
the first and second general Consideration: Who it was that suffered; and What
it was he suffered. The Third Consideration follows.

3. From whom he suffered all these things, the consideration of which does
highly advance the Sufferings of Christ. 1. He suffered this from the hands of
his Own Father; it was he, that bruised him, put him to grief, made his soul an
Offering for Sin, Isa. 53.10. it was he, that reached him out this bitter cup
to drink, Joh. 18.11. The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink?
it was he, that bound that burden so close upon him, that made him sweat great
drops of blood in the garden, and though thrice importuned for a dispensation
from it, yet would not grant it: it was he, that, when the greatest extremity
of pain and sorrow lay upon him, to add thereunto, withdrew the sense of his
presence from him, which wrung from him that bitter cry, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? The injuries of an Enemy are easily born, but the
forsakings of a Father are intolerable. 2. The immediate Instruments and
Contrivers of his suffrerings, were such as had a nearness of relation to him;
people of the same Nation, and his kinsmen according to the flesh; the seed to
Abraham; people of his own Religion; that worshipped the same God; acknowledged
the same Seripture; the visible Church of God; and chief representatives of
that Church; most eminent in place, reputation, and pretense of holiness; the
chief Priests, and Elders, and Scribes: people that he had never injured in his
life; but obliged them with his many miraculous cures, his precious and
heavenly instructions, his tenderest and dearest love and compassion: That very
Jerusalem, which he wept over, and would have gathered as a hen gathers her
Chicken under her wings, is now that brood that seeks the destruction of him,
that came to save them; and in that vile competition offered to them between
their Redeemer and a murderer, chose rather to save a malefactor, and to
deliver their innocent and merciful Savior: And these were they that, beyond
the examples even of common humanity, pursued their Kinsman, their Benefactor,
their Redeemer with such exact bitterness, and malice, and scorn, and cruelty,
that as it seemed barbarous to the heathen Judge, so it has out-gone the
practice of the heathenish Tyrants: Psalm. 55.12. It was not an enemy that
reproached me, then could I have born it, but it was thou, mine acquaintance.

4. Let us consider How he suffered all these things; and this does infinitely
advance the Excellence and Value of his Suffering. 3. He Suffered Innocently;
Isa. 53.9. he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth, yet it
pleased the Lord to bruise him: 2 Cor. 5.21. he made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin: the companions of his suffering justify him, Luke 23.41. We
indeed justly, but this man has done nothing amiss: his Persecutors justify
him; and yet their malice rested not, but sought out false witness against him,
Math. 26.60. and when they themselves were convinced of their own injustice, in
prosecution of an innocent, yet what they could not avouch upon the account of
justice, they do upon the point of expedience; Joh. 18.14. Caiaphas gives them
counsel, that it was expedient that one should dye for the people: Judas that
betrayed him, justified him; Matthew. 24.4. I have sinned, in that I have
betrayed the innocent blood: his Judge acquits him; and in a signal testimony
of his judgment, Matthew. 27.24. He took water, and washed his hands before the
multitude, saving, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: and yet
though, in testimony of the satisfaction of his judgment, he washes his hands
in water before them, yet he condemns the person that he acquits, and stains
those hands in the blood of our Lord, whom yet he pronounces innocent. And
this Innocence of our Savior was not only a Negative Innocence, an absence of
guilt, but a Positive Innocence; he suffered that had not only done no ill, but
that had done nothing but good: he healed their sick, cured their lame, their
blind, their deaf, their lepers, cast out their devils, and, which was more
than all this, showed them the way to Eternal Life, to the saving of the Souls
of many, and the convincing of the Consciences of all that heard him, Joh.
7.46. Never man spoke like this man: And well might he ask as once he did, upon
another occasion, For which of all my good works do ye stone me, do ye crucify
me? Blessed Lord, they crucify thee for all thy good works: if thou had been
guilty, possibly thou might have been spared in the stead of Barabbas; nay
if thou had been only innocent, it is possible thy persecutors might not have
been altogether so violent against thee: but thou sufferedst for the very good
thou did; it was not only an act of injustice that spared not thy
innocence, but an improvement of envy that did malign thy very goodness. Math.
27.18. For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

2. He suffered all Patiently; Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter; and as a sheep before her shearer is dumb, so he opens not his
mouth: Betrayed by his Disciples, hurried away by the black guard that
apprehended him, reproached and vilified by the high Priests and Elders,
forsaken and denied by his followers, stricken, spit upon, and basely injured
by the abjects in the high Priests Hall, derided by Herod, insulted upon by
Pilate; Know thou not that I have power to condemn thee? whipped, clothed in
scorn with purple, and crowned with a crown of thorns, and in that disguise
saluted in scorn with Hail King of the Jews: forced to bear his burdensome
Cross, which must afterward bear him; and then, as one of the basest of men
and vilest of malefactors, nailed to the Cross with most exquisite torment; and
then, by one of his companions in death, by the general rabble that were about,
[him,] by the superstitious Scribes and Elders, reproached as a blasphemer, as
an impostor: and yet in the midst of all this usage, scarce a word spoken, and
those that he spoke, not savouring of any impatience, or complaint against his
persecutors, but full of mildness, gentleness, sweetness, goodness, and whiles
his persecutors are busy in revilings and tormentings, he as industrious to
pray for them; Luke 23.34. Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

3. Which is yet a higher step, he suffered all this Willingly and Cheerfully:
Joh. 10.18. No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self; Luke
12.50. I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be
fulfilled? and this willingness of our Lord's suffering appears in these
particulars: 1. In that when he had power to prevent it, and to rescue himself
from the insolence of his persecutors, yet he uses it not: one Angel armed by
commission from God in one night destroyed a vast Army of the Assyrians; and
upon the desire of our Lord no less than twelve legions were ready for his
Guard: but yet this must not be; How then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled?
Matthew. 27.53, 54. When the company that were sent to apprehend him heard those
words, I am he, they went backward and fell to the ground, Joh. 18.6. the same
power by which they fell, could have so bound them never to have risen again;
but our Lord, though he manifested this power to evidence his Divinity, yet he
uses it not so far as to impede his Passion; and, as it were, resumes and
calls back that manifestation of his Deity, lest it might be a means to
interrupt the service which he was about to perform for mankind. He asked them
again, whom sock ye? 2. In that he corrects and checks all things that might be
either an impediment of his passion, or that might, in the least degree, betray
an unwillingness for him to undergo it. Doubtless there was an adequate
representation unto him of the dreadfulness of that conflict he was to undergo
with the wrath of God, and yet upon all occasions he corrects that sear and
those sad apprehensions which caused his humane nature to shrink at it; Job.
12.27. Father, save me seem this hour, but for this cause came I to this hour;
Matthew. 26.39. Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will: That even whiles the infirmity of
his humane nature started at the apprehension of what he was to suffer, and
prayed against it, yet the freeness and purity of his obedience carried [him]
on to it, and made him, as it were, un-pray what he had before prayed: And
though his soul startled at the discovery of that dismal vale that he was now
to pass through, yet his love to mankind and his resolution of obedience to his
Father's will carried [him] on with willingness to suffer that which he [was]
troubled to see: again, how does he check all impediments to his suffering; he
foreseeth shame and pain, he arms himself against both, Heb. 12.2. with
patience against the latter, he endured the Cross; with resolution against the
former, he despised the shame: again, when Peter began to play the Politician
in advising our Lord to decline his suffering, how severely does he take him
up? Get thee behind me; the cup which my Father has given me to drink, shall I
not drink it? again, when the forward zeal of the Disciple drew his Sword, and
cut off a Servant of the high Priest's Ear, our Lord checks the assailant, and
cures the wound; lest any thing should retard the execution of that thing for
which he came into the world, or import the least argument of backwardness in
him to undergo it. Matthew. 26.52. Joh. 18.11. It is very observable to see how
Pilate was ready to fluctuate upon every occasion, and shisted from place to
place, and from point to point, to decline the condemnation of our Lord: when
he answered him nothing, he marvelled, and was at a stand upon his silence,
Matthew. 27.14. when he heard his accusation to be, because he made himself the
Son of God, he was the more afraid; Joh. 19.8. he had secret checks from his
own Conscience, and weighty advertisements from his Wife, that doubtless did
put him to a great perplexity of mind, which was scarcely conquerable by the
importunity of the Jews: And, if in the midst of this unresolvedness and
hesitancy of mind, our Savior should in any one answer of his [have] sent
forth that majesty and strength of conviction, that he could easily, and upon
former occasions had done, certainly the Jews must have expected the coming of
another deputy to have been the executioner of this purpose: But our Lord was
so far from declining this great work of our Redemption by his blood, that he
seems purposely to decline that majesty of speech, wherewith he could have
confounded his Judge; and either answered him with silence, or with such
expressions, as might not too much affright him from the proceeding in that sad
employment; Joh. 19.11. Thou couldct have no power at all against me, unless it
were given thee of God. Though he blamed the malice of his accusers, he admits
and asserts the authority of his Judge.

5. Let us consider For whom he suffered all this. 1. The Persons for whom he
suffered deserved it not: The expressions of the Scripture [are] full in this,
Romans 5. 7, 8. Peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye; but God
commends his love toward us in that, while we were yet sinners Christ died
for us; the objects upon which he looked upon in his sufferings were darkness,
Ephesians. 5.8. Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world. Ephesians. 2.12. See but what a monster the best of us were in our natural
condition, when every power of our Soul and Body [was] quite corrupted from the
use and end, for which they were made. Romans 3.9, 10, etc. 2. As it was for
those that deserved it not, nor any deliverance by it, so it was for a company
of creatures that were no way solicitous for, nor sought after redemption; such
as were ignorant of their own misery, and no ways endeavoring after mercy.
Thus He was found of them that sought him not; and surely little seeking could
be found of such as were in such a condition, Ephesians. 2.1. Dead in trespasses and
sins. 3. Not only for those that neither deserved, nor sought after
deliverance, but his sufferings were for those that were Enemies; Romans 5.10. If
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son; Col.
1.21. And you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now has be reconciled: And the Enmity was so perfect that it
corrupted the best habits of our minds, and turned those into an abstracted
kind of enmity; the very wisdom of the flesh, earthly, sensual and devilish.
Jam 3.15. So that there was not only in our [nature] an absence of any good
that might move God to do any thing for us, and an absence of that life that
might be sollicitous for it self; but there was a positive malignity in our
nature against that God, that should pardon; against that Christ that should
satisfy; against that Grace and Spirit that should apply: We were actuated
with those vile affections and lusts, that looked upon a Savior with no less
aversion and spite, than those devils did, that cried out of the possessed man,
Art thou come to torment us before our time? And yet for these, and such as
these, our Savior dyed; nay some of these (who) had actually their hands in
his blood, Heb 12.24.
found the efficacy of that very blood, which they shed, not crying for revenge
against them, but for merey for them, and healing those who had cruelly spilt
it; the efficacy of that blessed prayer of his; Father, forgive them, they know
not what they do, within some few months after his death, did first wound their
hearts with a sense of their guilt, and then healed them with the infusion of
his blood. Act. 2.23, 37.

6. From the consideration of the former particulars, it will easily appear
what was the Motive of this great work. We have seen in the creature [nothing]
but sin and enmity against God, and consequently a just obligation to
Everlasting wrath and misery: so there we can find nothing that might upon any
account of merit or desert draw out such merey as this. We must seek for the
motive in the Author of it; and in him there was no necessity at all to bind
him to it: It was his own free will that at first gave man a being, and a
blessed being; and when he had sinned against the law and condition of his
Creation, there was a necessity of justice for his eternal punishment, but no
necessity at all for his Restitution. God made all things for his glory, not
because he stood in need of it; for he had in himself an infinite
self-sufficiency and happiness, that stood not in need of the glory of his
creation, nor was capable of an accession by it: And if it had, yet the great
God could have enjoyed the glory of his justice, in the everlasting punishment
of unthankful man, and yet had glorious creatures enough, the blessed Angels,
to have been the everlasting partakers and admirers of his goodness: And if
there had been yet an absolute necessity of visible intellectual creatures, to
be the participants of his goodness, and the active instruments of his glory;
the same power that created man at first, could have created a new generation
of men, that might have supplied the defection of our first parents and their
descendants. What then is the original of all this goodness to poor sinful man?
to purchase such a worthless creature at such an invaluable price as the blood
of the Son of God? Nothing but Love; free undeserved love; love that loved
before it was sought; that loved when it was rejected: Deuteronomy. 7.7. The Lord did
not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more; but because
the Lord loved you; he loved you because he loved you: As Almighty could not
define himself by any thing but himself, I am that I am, Exodus 3.14. so he can
resolve his love into no other motive than his love; he loved you because he
loved you: And here is the spring, the fountain of all this strange and unheard
of goodness of God in Christ; nothing but the free love of God; Joh. 3.16. So
God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. 1 John 4.10. Here
is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a
propitiation for our sins; and that very same individual love that was in the
Father to send, was in the Son to come, and to dye for us. It was he that loved
and washed us with his own blood; washed us because he loved us. When we lay
like Ezekiel's wretched infant, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. polluted in our blood; when no
eye pitied us, then this love of God passed by us, and said unto us, live; yea
said unto us, when we were in our blood, live: And when that life was not
acquirable for us, but by the death of the Eternal Son of God, then to purchase
that life for us, he sold his own; and to wash us from the pollutions of our
blood, freely spent and shed his own. This was The love of Christ, which
passes knowledge. Ephesians. 3.19.

7. Now let us consider the End and Scope of this admirable Love of Christ: and
as it looks upward toward God, so it looks downward toward [us;] as he was
the Mediator between both, so the end of his Mediatorship had a respect to
both: 1. In reference to God, and so the Ends of our Lord's suffering were
principally these:

1. To Restore unto Almighty God the active service and glory of his creature.
Almighty God did at the first create man in such a constitution, that he might,
not only passively and objectively, bring unto him the glory of his Power and
Wisdom in the framing of such a creature, as the Heavens, the Stars and other
creatures below an intellectual nature, do; but to be a beholder of himself and
his works, to be an observer of his will, and to glorify his Maker in the
admiration of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness, and in the Obedience and
Observance of his Law and will: and to his own glory had by an eternal bond
annexed his creature's perfection and blessedness. Man rebelled, and thereby as
he became unserviceable to the end of his creation, so he lost the blessedness
of his condition: Christ came, and by his own blood purchased, as unto Man his
blessedness, so unto God the glory and service of his creature: This was old
Zachary's collection, Luke 2. 74, 75. That we being delivered out of the hands
of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness:
Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and pur^sie unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. And this was
the chief part of that account, that our Lord gives unto his Father, in that
blessed prayer that he made a little before his Passion, Joh. 17.4. I have
glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do. As if he should have said, Thou have sent me into the world about a great
and weighty business, the restitution of thy fallen creature; and, that therein
as thy creature may partake of thy goodness, so thou may reap the glory of
thy creature's service: And now behold according to that command of thine, I
here return unto thee thy creature healed and restored, that [it] may be as
well a monument, as a proclaimer of thy goodness and glory, unto all Eternity.

2. To manifest unto Men and Angels the Glory and infinite Perfection and
Excellence of all his blessed Attributes: The glory of his Wisdom in
contriving, and of his Power in effecting such a deliverance for the children
of men, by a way that exceeded the disquisition of Men and Angels; the glory of
his Mercy, that could not have been possibly so conspicuous to mankind, if man
had never fallen. In the Creation of Man he manifested the glory of his Goodness,
that communicated a ^^ing to him. that so he might communicate his goodness to
him: But in the Redemption of Man he manifested his Mercy in forgiving and
healing a rebellious and miserable creature: the glory of his Justice, that
would not pardon the Sin till he had a Satisfaction for the sin; that would not
spare the Son, when he chose to be the surety for the sinner.

2. In reference to Man: and so the ends of our Lord's suffering were
principally these:

1. To absolve and deliver him from guilt, the consequence of sin, and misery
the fruit of guilt; Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins: and surely had the fruit of Christ's death rested here, it
had been a great degree of mercy; if we rightly weighed the heaviness of the
burden of guilt, the severity of the wrath of God, and the extremity of that
misery that does and must attend it. If a man under the guilt and horror of
some hideous Treason, under the severe and inexorable sentence of the Law
against [him,] under the imminent infliction of most exquisite and continuing
torments, should but hear of a Pardon and discharge from this, how welcome
would it be, though the residue of his life were to be spent in exile? But our
Lord's purchase rests not here.

2. To Reconcile God unto his Creature: So that it does not only remove the
effects of the anger of God, which is punishment; which may be removed, and yet
the anger continuing: nor does it only remove the anger of God, and leaves a
man in a kind of state of indifferency, as it is between persons that never
were acquainted one with another: But it is a state of Reconciliation, Ephesians.
2.16. That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having
slain the enmity thereby; 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. And certainly this is a
great addition unto [the] former, that God in Christ should hot only pass by
our sins, but should no longer look upon us as strangers, but as persons
reconciled unto him: And surely a soul sensible of the unhappy condition of
being estranged from God, how highly would he prize a state of reconciliation,
though it were in the meanest and lowest relation? Luke 15.19. I am no more
worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants: So that I
may not be estranged from thee, reconcile me unto thy self, though in the
condition of thy meanest servant. But neither does the happy fruit of ^ur
Lord's suffering rest here.

3. To restore unto us that near and blessed relation of being Sons of God:
Gal. 4.5. That we might receive the adoption of sons; 1 John 3. 2. Behold now
we are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be. This was
that dear expression of our Lord, after his resurrection, Joh. 20.17. Go to my
brethren, and tell them I ascend unto my Father and your Father, to my God and
to your God: he seems to interess them in this blessed relation in a kind of
equality with himself; my Brethren, my Father and your Father; and the sweet
and comfortable consequents of this are incomparable. Is he my Father? then I
know he can pity me as a Father pitieth his Children, Psalm. 103.13. he can
pardon and spare me as a Father spares his Son that serves him. Mal. 3.17. Is
he my Father? then whither should I go but to him for protection in all my
dangers? for direction in all my difficulties? for satisfaction in all my
doubts? for supply in all my wants? This I can with confidence expect from a
poor earthly Father, according to the compass of his abilities: If ye then
being evil know how to give good things unto your children, how much more shall
your Father who is in heaven, give good things to them that ask him? Matthew.
7.11. Mercy, and Compassion, and Love, is a virtue in a man, in an earthly
Father, a piece of that image of God which at first he imprinted in man; and
yet passion and humane infirmity, as it has much weakened the habit thereof in
us, so it may suspend the exercise thereof to a near relation: But in Almighty
God these virtues are in their perfection, and nothing at all in him that can
remit it. Mercy and tenderness are attributes which he delights in; mercy
pleases him; it was that great attribute that he proclaimed his name by, Exodus
34.6. and so diffusive is his mercy that it extends to all, he is good to all,
and his tender mercies are over all his works, Psalm. 145.9. and not only to the
just and good, but even to the unkind; causing his Sun to shine upon the evil
and the good: and surely he that has Mercy and Goodness for an Enemy, cannot
deny it unto a Child. Can a mother forget her sucking child, etc. Yea she may
forget; yet will I not forget thee, says the Lord. Isa. 49.15.

4. To restore us to a most sure, everlasting and blessed inheritance in
heaven. Gal. 4.7. If a son, then an heir of God through Christ: and here is the
complement of all; not only absolved from the guilt of sin, reconciled to God,
put into the relation of a Child of God; but after all this, to be
everlastingly and unchangeably stated in a blessed condition unto all Eternity:
and all this from the condition of a most vile, sinful, lost creature, and by
such a price as the Blood of Christ. More need not, cannot be said.

5. And by what has been said, it is easy to see what the Fruits and Effects
of all this are. God will not be disappointed in the end of so great a work,
and therefore we cannot be disappointed in the fruit of it; and those are
either such as are enjoyed in this life, or principally appropriated to that
which is to come. 1. Those Benefits that naturally arise from Christ crucified,
and are enjoyed in this life, are these:

1. Justification and Acceptance in the sight of God: he looks upon us as
those that [have] satisfied his justice when his Son suffered; and as those
that performed his will, when his Son performed it: So that as our Lord imputed
our fins to our Redeemer, so he imputes his righteousness unto us; and as he
was well pleased with him, so he was well pleased in him, with as many as are
received into this Covenant.

2. Peace with God. This is the natural consequence of the former, Romans 5.1.
Being justifica by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ:
the only cause of breach between God and his creature is sin, and this being
quite removed, the enmity between God and his creature is removed, and peace
and love restored between them.

3. Free Access unto God: for we are restored unto peace with him, and
consequently access unto him; and indeed it is a part of that duty which he
expects from us: our access to him, is not only our privilege, as the access
of a Subject to his Prince, or a child to his father, but it is our duty, as a
thing enjoined unto us in testimony of our dependence and love unto him.

4. Consequently Peace with our selves and our own Conscience; and that upon a
double ground: 1. Because our Conscience is sprinkled by the blood of Christ,
which defaceth and oblitereth all those black Items, that otherwise would be
continually calling upon us. 2. Because Conscience ever sideth with God, whose
vicegerent she is in the Soul, and has the very same aspect, for the most
part, that heaven has, and therefore if it be clear above, it is ordinarily
quiet within; and if God speaks peace, the Conscience, unless distempered, does
not speak trouble.

5. An Assurance of a continual supply of sufficient Grace, to lead us through
this vale of trouble, without a final apostasy or falling from him. Were our
Salvation in our own hands, or managed by our own strength, we should utterly
lose it every moment; but the Power, and Truth, and Love of God is engaged in a
Covenant of the highest solemnity that ever was, sealed in the blood of the Son
of God, for our preservation: and it shall be as impossible for us to fall from
that condition, as for the Almighty God to be disappointed: No, his counsel and
truth, the constant supply of the blessed Spirit of Christ, shall keep alive
that seed of life, that he has thrown into the soul. 1 John 3.9. For his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

6. Sufficient Grace to preserve us from, or support us in, or deliver us out
of temptations. We stand more in need of Grace, than we do of our bread;
because the consequence of the want of the former, is of more danger than the
latter, by so much as the Soul is more valuable than the Body: If our Father is
pleased to furnish us with our daily bread, v. Romans 8.32.
how shall he then deny us our daily and hourly supplies of his Grace?
Especially since our interest therein is founded upon the covenant made in the
blood of Christ. 2 Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee.

7. A favorable Acceptance of our duties, since they are the performances of
children; and therefore not measured according to their own worth, but
according to the relation and affection from whence they proceed.

8. A Gentle and Merciful Pardoning of our Failings, even as a Father pitieth
and pardons the infirmities of a Child; and though he does not dispense with
Presumptuous Offenses, yet he either observes not or forgives their many
Infirmities. And it is a Privilege of high concernment to us, that as in our
first conversion, the blood of Christ washes away a whole life of sins at
once, so after our conversion the same fountain stands open, whereunto we may
and must resort, to cleanse our daily Failings. Christ received by faith in the
heart, is a continual Sacrifice, which I may present unto the Father, for my
sins committed after my conversion.

9. A comfortable Restitution of a just Interest in the creatures. When man
forsook the Allegiance he owed to his Maker, the interest he had in the
creature did as it were escheat to the Lord: and though his goodness after
permitted him the use of them, yet it was still, as it were, upon account: And
as the sons of men have a great Account to give unto God for their sins, so
they have for his creatures; Christ has restored unto us a better propriety in
that, which Civil right has made ours, than what we had before.

10. A Comfortable and Sanctified Use of all Conditions: in Prosperity,
Moderation; in Adversity, Contentedness; in all, Sobriety. For as our Lord has
purchased for us Grace, to use all things aright; so he has obtained for us an
inheritance, that renders the best the world can give us, unworthy to be
valued; and the worst it can give us, unworthy to be feared, in respect of the
blessedness which he has settled upon us.

11. Consequently Contempt of the World, because higher matters are in my eye,
such as the best the world can yield, cannot equal; nor the worst it can
inflict, cannot take away. And all this upon,

12. A Lively Hope: a hope that makes not ashamed; even of that Glory which my
Savior came down from heaven to purchase by his blood; and the assurance
whereof he has sealed with his blood: Joh. 14.2, 3. I go to prepare a place
for you, and if I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, ye may be also: A hope of a blessed
Resurrection after death; a hope of that blessed appearance of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ; a hope of that glorious sentence in the presence of Men
and Angels, Come ye blessed; and an hope of an Everlasting estate of
Blessedness and Glory in the presence of the great God, and the glorified
Saints and Angels, unto all Eternity. And the efficacy of this hope dipped in the
blood of Christ brings us Victory: 1. Victory over Sin. Sin shall not have
dominion over you, for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace: Romans 6.14. He
that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 1 John 3.3.

2. Victory over the World, in the best it can afford us; its flatteries and
favors: these are too small and inconsiderable, when compared with this hope;
they shine like a Candle in the Sun; and are ineffectual to win over a Soul
that is fixed upon this hope; and victory over the worst the world can inflict:
Our Lord has conquered the world in this respect for us: Be not afraid, I have
overcome the world, Joh. 16. 33. and conquered it in us; This is the victory
that overcomes the world, even your Faith, 1 John 5.4.

3. Victory over Death; which now, by means of this blessed hope is stripped, as
well of her terror as of her power: Thus thanks be unto God, who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 15.57.

And now, though the nature of this argument has carried my meditations to a
great height, yet to avoid mistakes some things I must subjoyn.

1. That when I thus aggravate the sufferings of our Lord under the imputed
guilt of the sins of mankind; yet we must not think, that his sufferings were
the same with the Damned, as not in duration, so neither in kind, nor in
degree; for this could neither consist with the purity of his Nature, nor
innocence, nor dignity of his Person, nor the hypostatical union of both
Natures in him: But he suffered as much as was consistent with these
considerations; and, as considering the dignity of his person, was equivalent
to the sin and demerits of all Mankind.

2. That his righteousness imputed to us, does not exempt us from acquiring a
righteousness inherent in us: this were to disappoint the end of his suffering,
which was to redeem us from our vain conversation, and make us a peculiar
people zealous of good works.

3. That this purchase of Salvation by Christ for Believers, is not to render
them idle, or secure, or presumptuous; where there is such a disposition of
Soul, it is an evident Indication, that it is not yet truly united unto Christ
by true Faith and Love; his Grace is sufficient to preserve us, and always
ready to do it, if we do not wilfully neglect or reject it.

THE VICTORY OF FAITH Over the WORLD.
I. JOH. V.4. For whosoever is born of God, overcomes the world, and this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith.
THese things are herein considerable: 1. The Act which is here declared,
Victory or Overcoming. 2. The Person that exercises this act, or concerning
whom this act is affirmed, described by this description, a person that is born
of God. 3. The Thing upon which this act of victory is exercised, viz. the
world. 4. The Instrument or Means, by which this act is exercised, viz. Faith..
5. The Method or Order, or Formal Reason whereby faith overcomes this world.


Some few Observations I shall deliver touching all these in the order proposed.

I. Victory or Overcoming is a subjugation or bringing under an opposing party
to the power and will of another: and this victory is of two kinds, complete
and perfect, or incomplete and imperfect. 1. The notion of a complete victory
is when either the opposing party is totally destroyed, or at least when
despoiled of any possibility of future resistance: Thus the Son of God, the
Captain of our Salvation overcame the World, Joh. 16.33. Be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world; and thus when we are delivered from this body of
death, we shall overcome the world: this complete victory will be the portion
of the Church and Christian triumphant. Again, 2. There is a victory but
incomplete, such as the victory of the children of Israel was over the
Canaanites, which though they were subdued, as to any possibility of a total
reacquiring of a superiority or equality of power, yet they were not subdued
from a possibility of annoying, disquieting and rebelling; they remained still
thorns to vex and disturb, though not to subdue their conquerors; there was
still an overbalance of power in the victors, though not wholly to extirpate
them: And this is the condition of the Christian militant in this world: he
keeps the world in subjection, and every day gets ground upon it; but he cannot
expect to obtain a perfect, complete and universal conquest of it, till he can
truly say with our Blessed Lord, Joh. 14.30. The prince of this world has
nothing in me: Which cannot be till our change comes; for till then we carry
about with us lusts and passions and corruptions; which, though with all
vigilance and severity kept under and daily impaired in their power and
malignity, will hold a correspondence with the world and the prince thereof,
and be ready to deceive and betray us, though never to regain their empire and
sovereignty; and the reason is significantly given by the same Apostle, 1 John
3.9. For his feed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.
Indeed he may and shall have sin as long as he has flesh about him, 1 John
1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But although we have sin still abiding in us, and like the the bias in (a)
Bowl warping us to the world, yet that vital seminal principle of the grace of
God in Christ always keeps its ground, its life, and tendency toward heaven,
and wears out, wastes, and gradually subdues the contrary tendency of sin and
corruption.

II. The Person exercising this act of victory and conquest, he that is Born of
God. All men by nature may be said in some sense to be born of God; the Apostle
tells the Athenians, Act. 17.28. We are all his offspring: But in this place,
this heavenly birth is a second, a supervenient birth from God, and hence it is
called Regeneration, the New birth, birth of the water and the Spirit, birth of
the Spirit, the formation of Christ in the soul; and the creature so new born
styled the New creature, the New man, a partaker of the divine nature, born not
of the will of man nor of the will of the flesh, but born of the will of God:
And all these and the like expressions are figurative, and seem to carry in
them a double analogy; first, to (the) first creation of mankind; and secondly,
to the ordinary generation of mankind since their first creation: 1. As to the
former analogy, we know by the Holy Word that the first man was the root of all
mankind, stamped with the signature of the image of Almighty God, principally
consisting in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness, and stood or fell as the
common representative of all mankind: This image of God was in a great measure
lost and defaced by the fall of man, and more every day spoiled by the actual
sins and acquired corruptions of his descendants: Christ the second Adam had
instamped upon him a new inscription of the glorious God, came to be a common
head, root, and parent of as many as are united unto him by faith, love, and
imitation, and to instamp anew upon them that lost and decayed image of God;
who thereby put on the New man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. and so becoming a New creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Galat.
5.6. renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him, Coloss.
1.10. they receive a new stamp and impression from this great exemplar Christ
Jesus the true image of the invisible God. 2. The second analogy is to the
ordinary generation of mankind; wherein as a little, but powerful, vital
principle, which we call the Soul, forms and moulds the foetus according to the
specifical nature of man in all his lineaments and proportions, and never gives
over its operation till it has completed that bodily mass into its full
complement of parts, and afterward gradually augments and perfects it in his
organs and faculties: So by a vital principle derived from God, through Christ,
into the soul, the same is molded, fashioned, formed, increased and perfected
according to this new principle of life, which is usually called Grace: Whereby
it comes to pass (that) as the soul is the vital and conforming principle of
the body, so this grace is the very life, and vital and conforming principle of
the soul: And hence this formative principle is called the life of the soul;
the quickening spirit; and the conformation of the soul unto the will of God
thereby is called the forming of Christ in them, the life of Christ, the
indwelling of Christ in the heart by faith. And this new principle exercises
in the soul all the acts analogical to that natural vital principle in the
body, giving to it as it were the image, lineaments, proportion, increase
conformable to the image of God in Christ, as true Wisdom, Righteousness,
Justice, Holiness, Integrity, Love of God, Submission to his will, Dependence
upon him, and translates them into all the communicable relations that Christ
himself had, and invests them in his communicable privileges: If he be a Son
of God by nature, so are they by By Adoption, and participation of the Divine
nature. 2 Pet. 1.4.
interpretation; is he an heir of heaven? so are they coheirs with him; is he
accepted of God? so are they; is he an heir of glory? so are they. And as this
conformation of the body by this vital principle is performed by a seminal
principle (at least as the instrument of its activity) derived from the parent;
so the analogy holds here: we find a double seminal principle in this
conformation, and both derived from Christ our head; viz. one External, another
Internal. 1. The External seminal principle is the word and message of the
Divine doctrine, exemplary and holy life, singular love of Christ and of God
through him to mankind, whereby we understand what he would have us do, the
danger if we do otherwise, the blessed reward of obedience, the great
engagements of the love of God in sending his Son to dye for us, the plain,
familiar, easy way of attaining of happiness; and because we often learn
better by example than by precept, the same word exhibits to us a lively
picture of his holy conversation, his humility, meekness, obedience, love,
patience, goodness: And this external means is in it self a great moral means
to conform our wills and lives thereunto; and therefore it is called the
incorruptible seed of the word of God whereby we are born again, 1 Pet. 1.23.2.
The Internal seed is that Spirit of grace sent out from Christ, which does
derive a quickening lively power to the word and to the soul, whereby it makes
it effectual to its end, and therefore called a Spirit of Life and Power, a
Quickening Spirit: and this, not by transfusing a new substance or substantial
nature which before it had not, but by its lively yet secret operations
changing and moulding it suitable to the image of him whose Spirit it is, and
adding energy and efficacy to that other seed of the word, as the Sun does to
the seminal principles of vegetables and animals.

III. Touching the Thing upon which this victory is obtained and conquest made,
it is the world: which comprehends in its latitude a double world; the world
within us, and the world without us.

The world within us, which may therefore be so called principally in this
respect, that a great part of its relation and tendency is toward the world,
which is for the most part the object upon which it fixes, the subject after
which it reaches, and the business upon which it fasteneth and exercises: and
hence it is that the Apostle St John divides the world without us with relation
to the world within us, viz. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life. 1 John 2.16. The world that is within us takes in the two
great faculties or powers, viz. 1. the Passions of the soul, and 2. the Sensual
Appetite; both these are in their own nature good, placed in us by the wise God
of Nature for most excellent ends and uses. Our business is therefore to keep
in order and subjection, not to extirpate and root them out; for they are
radicated in our nature by the God of Nature. But of this more particularly.

1. Our Passions: such as are Love, Hatred, Anger, Hope, Fear, Joy, Sorrow;
these and the like passions of the humane Soul are not simply in themselves
evil; nay, being rightly placed and duly ordered and regulated they become
serviceable to excellent ends and uses; and therefore simply in themselves they
are not the subject of a Christian's victory: But then they become such when
they become the world in the Text, and that is principally in these Cases; 1.
When they are misplaced; as when we love the things we should hate, hope for
the things we should fear, rejoice in that we should grieve, etc. or e
converso. 2. When they are immoderate or excessive about their proper objects:
which comes to pass, when in those things about which we may exercise our
passions lawfully, we exceed that measure or proportion that is due to them:
For instance, I may lawfully love a competency of worldly subsistence, but I
exceed in this, that I love it too much and beyond the worth that is truly in
it: I may lawfully be angry with him that injures me, but I exceed in the
measure, or degree, or time, or duration, and become implacable. 3. When my
affections or passions are not acted to that height they ought to be: All
finite objects of our passions require a proportionate degree of our passions;
but where the object is infinite, my affections may err in being too remiss,
but not in the excess: I cannot love God too much, for I am to love him with
all my might; but I may love him too little, and then my affection errs: I
cannot hate sin too much, because I cannot love God too much; but I may hate it
too little. 4. When my affections or passions are acted unseasonably, either in
respect of the time or in respect of the competition between objects of several
values: I may, nay I must love my Father; but if I love my Father more than my
Savior, my Savior has pronounced me unworthy of him. 5. When my passions
degenerate into vices and corruptions, and so become not so much powers or
faculties as diseases and sicknesses of the soul: as when anger degenerates
into malice, revenge; when self-love degenerate into envy; when desire of, or
delight in, the profits or honors of the world degenerates into covetousness
or ambition; and the like. 6. When my passions are not under the management,
guidance or conduct of my superior faculties, my reason and judgment; but
either go before they are sent, or go beyond what they are sent, or return not
and subside when recalled: and then they breed infinite perturbation in the
soul, invert the order of nature, and become furies and tempests, and imprison
and captivate the mind and understanding, and become a worse part of the world
than that which is without us. Under these conditions our passions and
affections are part of that world which is the object of a Christian's warfare
and victory.

2. The other part of this world within us are the motions and tendencies of
our Sensual Appetite. This sensual appetite is in it self good, placed in us by
the God of Nature for excellent ends; viz. for the preservation of the
individual nature, as eating and drinking, and those invitations of sense
subservient thereunto; or for the preservation of the species, as the desires
of sexes. But they then become a sinful part of this inferior world, 1. when
they become inordinate, 2. or excessive, 3. or unseasonable; or generally, 4.
when they are not subordinate in their actings to the government of reason
enlightened by moral or religious light. A Christian has no such enemies
without him, as unruly and undisciplined lusts and passions within him; and it
is a vain thing to think of overcoming the world without us, until this world
within us be brought into subjection; for without the corruptions and lusts
within, the world, and the evil men of the world, and the evil one of the
world, could not hurt us.

-- Non vulnus adactis
Debetur gladiis, percussum est pectore ferrum.
The wedge of gold was an innocent thing, but Achan's covetous heart within
gave it strength to do harm. We come into the world as into a great shop full
of all variety of wares accommodate to our senses, lusts and affections; and
were it not for these; those wares would lie long enough upon the hands of the
prince of this world, before they could get within us or corrupt us.

2. The world without us is of three kinds; 1. The Natural world, which is the
work of Almighty God, most certainly in it self good; and is not evil but
accidentally, by man's abuse of himself or it. It does contain a general supply
of objects answerable to the desires of our vegetable and sensible nature, and
the exigences and conveniences of it; is a great shop full of all sorts of
wares answerable.... there is wealth and places and delights for the senses,
and it becomes an enemy to us by reason only of the disorder and irregularity
of those lusts and passions that are within us, and by reason of the overvalue
that we are apt to put upon them; they are indeed temptations, but they are
only passive, as the wedge of gold did passively tempt Achan, but it was his
own lust and covetousness that did him the harm: the rock does not strike the
ship, but the ship strikes the rock and breaks it self. This world, as it is
not evil in it self, so most certainly it is full of goodness and benevolence
to us: it supplies our wants, is accommodate to the exigences and conveniences
of our nature; furnishes (us) with various objects and instances of the divine
goodness, liberality, bounty; of his power and majesty and glory; of his
wisdom, providence and government; which are so many instructions to teach us
to know, and admire and magnify him; to walk thankfully, dutifully, and
obediently unto him; to teach us resignation, contentedness, submission, and
dependence upon him. A good heart will be made better by it; and if there be
evil in it, it is such as our own corrupt natures occasions or brings upon it,
or upon our selves by it: and it is a great part of our Christian warfare and
discipline to teach us to use it as it ought to be used, and to subdue those
lusts and corruptions that abuse it, and our selves by it. Again secondly,
there is another world without us, the malignant and evil world, the world of
evil Angels and of evil Men, Mundus in maligno positus; and the great mischiefs
of this world are of two kinds; viz. 1. Incentives and temptations from it,
that are apt to bring the rest of mankind into the evil of sin and offense
againft God; such as are evil examples, evil commands, evil counsels, evil
persuasions and solicitations. 2. The troubles, and injuries, and vexations,
and persecutions, and oppressions, and calumnies, and reproaches, and
disgraces, that are inflicted by them: And the evil that arises from these are
of two kinds; viz. such as they immediately cause, which is great uneasiness,
and griefs, and sorrow; and again, such as consequentially arise from these,
namely, the evil of sin, as impatience, discontent, unquietness of mind,
murmurings against the Divine Providence, doubtings of, letting go our
confidence in God, disturst, unbelief, and putting forth our hands to iniquity
to deliver our selves from these inconveniences, either by unlawful or
forbidden means, by sinful compliances with the sinful world, by falling in
with them to deliver our selves from their oppressions, persecutions or wrongs,
by raising commotions, engaging in parties, and infinite more unhappy
consequences. And thirdly, there is a third kind of world which is in a great
measure without us, namely, the accidental, or more truly the providential
world in relation to man and his condition in this world, and is commonly of
two kinds, viz. prosperous or adverse. External or worldly Prosperity consists
in an accommodate condition of man in this world; as, health of body; comfort
of friends and relations; affluence, or at least competency of wealth, power,
honor, applause, good report and the like: The dangers that steal upon mankind
in this condition are pride, haughtiness of mind, arrogance, vainglory,
insolence, oppression, security, contempt of others, love of the world, fear of
death and desires of diversion from the thoughts of it, luxury, intemperance,
ambition, covetousness, neglect and forgetfulness and a low esteem of God, the
life to come, and our duty. 2. Adversity; as, sicknesses and diseases, poverty,
loss of friends and estate, public or private disturbances or calamities, and
the like: And though oftentimes these are occasioned by the evil or malignant
world, yet many times they seem to come accidentally, and are apt to breed
impatience, discontent, unquietness of mind, distrust of Providence, murmuring,
envy at the external felicity of others, and that common discomposure which we
ordinarily find in our selves and others upon like occasions.

IV. The fourth considerable is, what is this Faith which thus overcomes the
world; which is nothing else but a deep, real, full, sound persuasion of and
assent unto those great truths revealed in the Scriptures of God, upon the
account that they are truly the word and will of the Eternal God, who is truth
it self, and can neither deceive nor be deceived: and herein these two matters
are considerable; 1. What are those divine truths which being really and
soundly believed does enable the victory over the world, or the special objects
of that victorious faith: 2. What is that act of faith or belief of these
excellent objects which thus overcomes the world.

1. For the former of these, although the whole body of divine truths is the
adequate object of faith, yet there seem to be certain special heads or parts
of divine truths that have the greatest influence into this victory over the
world. I shall mention some of them: namely, 1. That there is one most
Powerfyl, Wise, Gracious, Bountiful, Just and All-seeing God, the Author of all
being, that is present in all places, knows our thoughts, our wants, our sins,
our desires, and is ready to supply us with all things that are good and fit
for us beyond all we can ask or think; has incomprehensible Wisdom, and
irresistible Power to effect what he pleases; that leaves not any of his
works, especially mankind, without his special care and superintendence over
them; without whose will or designed permission nothing befalls us. 2. That
this most Wise and Just and Powerful God has appointed a law or rule,
according to which his will is that the children of men should conform
themselves; and according to the upright endeavors of the children of men to
conform thereunto, he will most certainly give rewards; and according to the
wilful transgressions thereof he will inflict punishments: and that he is a
most strict and infallible observer of all the ways of the children of men,
whether of obedience or disobedience thereunto. 3. That this law and will of
his he has communicated and revealed unto the children of men in his Holy
Word; especially by the mission of his Son Jesus Christ, who brought into the
world a full and complete collection of those holy Laws of God, whereunto he
would have us conform. 4. That he has given unto mankind, in and through
Christ Jesus, a full manifestation of a future life after this of rewards and
punishments; and according to that law of his thus manifested by his Son, he
will, by the same Jesus Christ, dispense and execute the sentences of rewards
and punishments, and judge every man according to his works. 5. And that the
reward of faith and obedience, in that other life to come, shall be an eternal,
blessed, happy estate of soul and body in the glorious Heavens, and in the
presence and fruition of the ever Glorious and Eternal God. 6. And that the
punishment of the rebellious and disobedient unto this will and law of God thus
manifested by his Son, shall be an eternal separation of soul and body from the
presence of God, and the conclusion of them under chains of darkness and
everlasting torments in hell fire. 7. And that the Son of God has given us the
greatest assurance imaginable of the truth of this will of God, of this
happiness and misery, by taking upon (him) our nature, by his miracles, by his
death and resurrection and ascension into glory, and by his mission of the
Spirit of wisdom and revelation into his Apostles and Disciples, both to
instruct the world in his trust, and to evidence the truth of their mission
from him. 8. That Almighty God, though full of justice and severity against
obstinate and rebellious, yet, is full of tenderness, love and compassion
toward all those that sincerely desire to obey his will and to accept of terms
of peace and reconciliation with him, and is ready upon repentance and
amendment to pardon whatsoever is amiss, and has accordingly promised it: And
that he has the care and love and tenderness of a father toward us; that in
our sincere endeavor of obedience to him, we shall be sure of his love,
favor, and protection; that in all our afflictions and troubles he stands by
us, and will not leave us; that he will most certainly make good every promise
that by Christ he has sent unto us, for the life that is present and that
which is to come; that the Law he has sent us by Christ to submit unto is an
easy and good Law, such as will perfect our nature and fit it to be partaker
of his glory; and that all his thoughts toward us in our faithful endeavor to
obey him, are thoughts of love, favor, peace, bounty and goodness. And of this
he has given the greatest assurance that is possible for mankind to expect or
desire, even the sending of his Eternal Son into the world to take upon him our
nature, to acquaint us with his Father's will and love, to live a life of want
and misery, and to dye a death full of shame and horror, to rise again to
dispatch Messengers into all the world to publish the good will of God to
mankind, to ascend up into glory, and there to make intercession for us poor
worms at the right hand of God: giving us also hereby assurance of our
resurrection, and of his coming again to judge the world, and to receive his
obedient servants into eternal glory. These be some of those principal Objects
of that Faith that overcomes the World, being soundly received, believed and
digested.

2. As touching the act it self; it is no other than a sound, real and firm
belief of those Sacred Truths: And therefore it seems that they that perplex
the notion of Faith with other intricate and abstruse definitions or
descriptions, either render it very difficult and scarce intelligible, or else
take into the definition or description those things that are but the
consequents and effects of it. He that has this firm persuasion will most
certainly repent of (his) sins past, will most certainly endeavor obedience to
the will of God, which is thus believed by him to be holy, just and good, and
upon the obedience or disobedience whereof depends his eternal happiness or
misery, will most certainly depend upon the promises of God for this life and
that to come; for those are as natural effects of such a firm persuasion, as it
is for the belief of a danger to put a man upon means to avoid it, or for the
belief of a benefit to put a man upon means to attain it. Some things are of
such a nature that the belief or knowledge of them goes no further, but it
rests in it self, as the belief or knowledge of bare speculative truths: But
some things are of such a nature as being once truly and firmly believed or
known, carry a man out to action: and such are especially the knowledge or
belief of such things as are the objects of our fears or of our hopes; the
belief of such objects do naturally and with a kind of moral necessity carry a
man out to action; to the avoiding of such fears, and the attaining of such
hopes: And therefore faith and belief in reference thereunto comes often in the
Scripture under the names of hope and fear, as being the proper effects of it.
Instances we have of both, 2 Cor. 5.10, 11. For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men. 1 John.3.2, 3. But we know
that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is;
and every man that bath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

Therefore we need not be so sollicitous touching the nature of faith, what
kind of faith it is that must save us: certainly if it be a true and real
assent of the mind to these great truths of God, it must be operative,
according to the nature of the things believed which are in order to working;
and therefore if it have not that effect, it is not faith nor assent; if it
have it but weakly and imperfectly, it is evident that the assent is weak and
fluctuating; if it have that effect at some times but not at others, it is
evident that the assent is suspended, or intermitted, or not actually exercised
at these intermissions: If a man were really and fully persuaded that if he
take such a journey to morrow he should certainly break his leg, he would as
certainly not go: or if he were under a certain persuasion, that if he took
such a drink, he should certainly recover his lost health, it were as certain
he would drink it: and if a man were actually and fully persuaded that, if he
used such a means, he should attain everlasting happiness, or, if he should
commit such a sin, he should certainly lose it, it were scarce morally
possible, that a reasonable man in his wits would omit the one or commit the
other.

And to say, this is but an historical faith, and that the devils have as much,
they believe and tremble, and they do as fully assent to divine truths as any
can do, yet it avails them not, concludes nothing: the reason is evident,
because the salvation to be attained, the faith which is the instrument to
attain it, concerns them not, neither are they in a state to be advantaged by
it; but it is otherwise with men. If I should acquaint a stranger that if my
Son does such a thing, I will give my Son five pound, though the stranger
believes it as really true as any thing in the world, it puts not him upon the
action, because as he is not concerned in the reward, so he is not concerned in
the means: but according to the belief that my Son has, it will or will not
put him upon the action: if he believe me not, he will not do it at all; if he
believe it faintly and doubtingly, he will perform the action accordingly; but
if he believe it truly and fully, and set any value upon the reward, he will
perform it cheerfully; for he is concerned in the reward, and in the means to
attain it.

Faith therefore is a firm assent to the sacred truths, whether the truths
relate to things past, as that God made the world, that Christ the Messiah is
come in the flesh, and c. or to things present, as that Almighty God beholds
all I do, and knows all I think, or that he is a reconciled Father unto me in
Christ Jesus; or things to come which principally excite those two great movers
of the Soul, Hope and Fear, the future life of rewards and punishments.

V. I come to the fifth thing, viz. How Faith overcomes the World, which takes
in these two Considerations; 1. How that is, in what degree: 2. How that is, by
what method or means. Touching the former of these, touching the degree of the
victory that faith gives, it is a victory, but not a victory to utter
extermination: The Captain of our Salvation indeed overcame the world, totally,
perfectly, Joh. 16.33. our victory is not complete nor perfect on this side
death, but it is such a victory as leaves still an adversary to contest with
us, though not to subdue and conquer us. It is a victory, but yet not without a
continued warfare.

2. Touching the Method whereby our faith overcomes the world, I shall say
something in general, something more particularly with relation to the world
under the former acceptations.

In general therefore, the great method whereby faith overcomes the world, is
by rectifying our judgments, and removing those mistakes that are in us
concerning the world and our own condition. 1. Some things there are in the
world, which we set an esteem and value and love upon, which deserve rather our
hatred and detestation: As, our sins, the irregula^^es of our lusts and
passions, and those degenerate plants that arise from them; as pride, ambition,
revenge, intemperance, and c. these we account our right hands and our right
eyes, in our state of natural darkness: Faith rectifies this mistake of our
judgment, by showing us the Law and will of God revealed by Christ, whereby we
find that these are our diseases, distempers and sicknesses repugnant to the
will, image and command of God; that they are our loss and our danger and our
ruin, and therefore not to be entertained but mortified and crucified. 2. Some
things there are in the world, that we may allow somewhat of our affections
unto, but we overvalue them: We reckon wealth, and honors, and powers the
greatest happiness imaginable, and therefore intensly desire them; sicknesses,
and afflictions, and injuries, and losses the greatest misery imaginable, and
therefore we fear them excessively, we are intollerably discontented under
them. Faith rectifies our mistake herein, gives us a just value of these
things, shows us the Law of God, checking and forbidding immoderate affections
or passions to be exercised about them, assures us that we are, as well under
the view and observation, as under the care and regiment of the great Lord of
heaven and earth, and therefore expects our great moderation in relation to
externals. 3. And principally, for the most part the children of men esteem
this life the uttermost term or limit of their happiness or misery, and
therefore make it their whole business, by all means possible, to make their
lives here as splendid and glorious, as delightful and pleasurable, as is
possible; and use all means, whether honest or dishonest, fit or unfit, to
secure themselves in the good they have, and to avoid any thing that is
grievous or troublesome: and if they cannot compass it they sink, and despond,
and murmur, and dye under it, as the only Hell imaginable; or if they have any
thoughts of a future estate after death, yet they are but languid, faint, and
searce believed in any tolerable degree, and suspected rather as the
impostures of Politicians, or fables of Poets, than having any real truth in
them. Faith rectifies this mistake, and assures us there is a judgment to come,
a state of rewards and punishments of a far higher nature than this world can
afford, or indeed apprehend; that the happiness of that life out-bids all the
greatest and most glorious entertainments that this world can afford, and will
infinitely exceed the greatest losses or crosses that this world can yield: And
on the other side, the punishments of that life will infinitely overbalance
all the pleasures and contentments that this life here can yield, and the
memory of them will but enhance the rate and degree of those torments: and that
accordingly as men spend their lives in this short transitory life, either in
obedience or disobedience unto the divine will, accordingly the retribution of
everlasting rewards and punishments will be there given. This view of the
future state, presented by faith to the Soul, will have these two great
effects, in order to the subduing and conquering of the world without us, by
rendering it poor, inconsiderable, contemptible in comparison of those
everlasting joys and happiness of the next life; and the world within us, by
chaining up our exorbitant lusts and passions under the fear of the judgment to
come, and by ordering, composing and regulating them in contemplation of the
great reward annexed to our dutiful obedience unto God in this life.

But I shall come to particulars, and follow that tract that is before given,
in the distribution of the world, as well within, as without us; and consider
the particular method of faith in the subduing and conquering them. 1.
Therefore in reference to the world within us, namely, 1. our Passions, 2. our
Lusts.

1. As to our Passions: 1. Faith directs their due placing upon their proper
objects, by discovering what are the true and proper objects of them, out of
that large and comprehensive law of God which presents them as such to the
soul, and to be observed under the pain of the displeasure of the glorious and
Almighty God. 2. Upon the same account it teaches our passions and affections
moderation in their exercise, even about their proper objects, and due
subordination to that supreme love a man owes to the supreme good, God
Almighty. 3. Upon the same account it teaches us, under our obligation of duty
to God, to cut off, crucify and mortify the diseases and corruptions of
passions, as malice, envy, revenge, pride, vainglory, ostentation

2. In reference to our Desires: 1. Natural, it teaches us great moderation,
temperance, sobriety; it tells us these very natural propensions are apt to
grow unruly and consequently hurtful, and therefore that we are to keep them in
subjection and under discipline both to Religion and to Reason: And this it
does, by assuring us that such is the will and law of our Creator; by assuring
us that the same Almighty God is the constant observer of all our most intimate
deportments; it assures us that the Son of God died to redeem us from the
captivity of our lusts; that if we be kept still in servitude under them we
make an ungrateful return to his love, and what in us lies, disappoint him of
the end of his sufferings: It shows us the great falseness, deceit and
treachery of these lusts, that they are ready upon every occasion to rebel
against God and his Law placed in our souls; that they are upon every occasion
ready to betray us to our worst enemy, and if they once get loose from
discipline and subjection, they are hard to be reclaimed; and therefore must be
kept under a careful, vigilant and austere discipline; that if we do so order
them, we are safe in a great measure from the temptations of the world and the
devil, who could not hurt us without the compliance, inordinateness, treachery,
and correspondence of these close enemies within us. 2. As touching those
degenerate and corrupt lusts, as, Covetousness, Malice, Envy; faith does first
of all in general show us, that they are prohibited by the great Lord and
Lawgiver of heaven and earth, and that under severe penalties; again secondly,
it shows us that they are the great depravers and embasers of our nature, the
disturbers of the peace, serenity, and tranquillity of our minds; again thirdly,
if shows us, that they are vain, impertinent, and unnecessary perturbations,
such as can never do us any real good, but feed our vain imaginations with
deceits instead of realities. But particular instances in relation to these
several lusts will render these truths more evident. 1. Therefore for
Covetousness or immoderate desire of wealth, ambition, the immoderate desires
of honor or power, we shall see how faith or true assent to the truths of God
revealed in his Word does correct and crucify this lust, and that principally
by these ensuing Considerations: 1. Faith discovers to us that the great Lord
of heaven and earth, to whom we owe a most universal and indispensible
obedience, has forbidden this lust, has told us we must not be
over-sollicitous for the things of this life, and we have no reason to suspect
his wisdom in such prohibitions, for he is infinitely wise, and knows best what
is fittest for us to do or not to do; neither have we cause to suspsect his
love to us, or to think he envies us in his commands, either to enjoin what
might be hurtful for us, or to forbid what might be beneficial to us; for it
was his free and immense love that gave us at first our being, and therefore
certainly can never envy us any thing that might be good or convenient for that
being, which he at first freely gave and still freely continues to us. 2. Faith
shows us the vanity and lowness of such desires, re-minds us that when death
comes all these objects will be utterly insignificant; that they are transient,
uncertain objects, such as are not only fitted barely for the meridian of this
life, but such as oftentimes take wings and fly away from us before we leave
them, such as in their very enjoyment satisfy not, but instead of satisfaction
are oftentimes vexations and thorns to afflict us. 3. Faith presents us with
better things, more safe to be desired, more easily to be attained, more
securely to be kept, namely, our peace with God, and the firm and sound
assurance of everlasting happiness. 4. Faith presents us with an assurance of
the divine particular Providence, which gives and takes away, and grants or
denies the things upon which our desires are thus fixed, and therefore renders
our immoderate cares and thoughtfulness for the businesses of this life either
needless or vain: Your Heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things, commands us to cast our care upon him, for he cares for us that knows
what is fittest for us; if abundance, he is able to supply us without torturing
our selves with care or sollicitousness; if the contrary, either we covet in
vain and our endeavors shall be disappointed, or at least they shall be given,
but a curse and vexation with them, given us in anger, given us to our hurt:
and the same may be said in all points in relation to ambition and desire of
honors or power. 2. Again, in relation to malice or envy against the
prosperity of others, faith shows us how vain and foolish a thing it is, and
the rather because the wise and great God is the dispenser of all things, has
the absolute and unlimited propriety in them, disposes them according to his
own good pleasure. What reason has any man to envy that disposal which the God
of heaven makes. Again, 3. For revenge, the great Lord of the world has
reserved that as (a) branch of his own supreme Prerogative; vengeance is mine,
says the Lord: what have you or I to do to invade his prerogative? it is his
own right, and he best knows when, and where, and in what degree to exercise it.

2. I come to the consideration of the world without us, as that which possibly
is here principally intended, and the victory of the Christian by his faith
over it, and first in relation to the Natural World. This world, as has been
observed, is in it self very good, and the evil that arises from it is only
occasional. Which is thus, it is a goodly Palace fitted with all grateful
objects to our senses, full of variety and pleasantness, and the soul fastening
upon them is ready with Peter in the Mount to conclude that it is good to be
here, and therefore grows careless of the thoughts of another state after
death, or to think of the passage to it, or making provision for it; but to set
up its hopes and happiness and rest in it, and in these delights and
accommodations that it yields our senses. Faith overcomes this part of the
world, by assuring the soul, that this lower world is only the place of our
probation, not of of our happiness; our Inn, not our home: It presents to the
mind a state of happiness, to be attained after death, infinitely surpassing
all the contents and conveniences that this world can yield; and that one great
means to attain it, is by setting our hearts upon it, and not upon the world,
but using this present world not as the end of our hopes, but as our passage to
it; and to carry a watchful hand over our desires and delights toward it, or
in it; that it steal not away our heart from out everlasting treasure; to carry
a sober and temperate mind toward it, and use of it as in the sight of that
God, that lends it us, to excite our thankfulness and try our obedience, not to
rob him of the love, and service, and duty we owe unto him. In short, the
methods whereby faith overcomes this part of the world are these: 1. By giving
us a true estimate of it, to prevent us from overvaluing it: 2. By frequent
re-minding of us, that it is only fitted to the meridian of this life, which is
short and transitory and passes away: 3. By presenting unto us a state of
future happiness, that infinitely surpasses it: 4. By discovering our duty in
our walk through it, namely of great moderation and vigilance: 5. By presenting
unto us the example of the Captain of our Salvation, his deportment in it, and
toward it: 6. By assuring us that we are but Stewards unto the great Lord of
the Family of Heaven and Earth for so much as we have of it, and that to him we
must give an account of our stewardship: 7. By assuring us that our great Lord
and Master is a constant observer of all our deportment in it: 8. And that he
will most certainly give a reward proportionable to the management of our trust
and stewardship; viz. if done sincerely, faithfully, and obediently to our
great Lord and Master, a reward of everlasting happiness and glory; but if done
falsely, sinfully, and disobediently, then a reward of everlasting loss and
misery.

2. As to the second kind of world, the Malignant World of evil men and evil
Angels, and therein first in relation to the evil Counsels and evil Examples
that solicit or tempt us to breach of our duty to God, the methods whereby
faith overcomes this part of the malignant world, are these: 1. It presents
unto us our duty that we owe to God, and which we are bound indispensibly to
observe under the great penalty of loss of our happiness. 2. It presents us
with the great advantage that we have in obeying God, above whatsoever
advantage we can have in obeying or following the sinful examples, counsels, or
commands of this world; and the great excess of our disadvantage in obeying or
following the evil examples or counsels of the world; and this makes him at a
point with these follicitations, peremptory to conclude it is better to obey
God than man; and with Joseph, How can I commit this great wickedness, and sin
against God? 3. It presents Almighty God strictly observing our carriage in
relation to these temptations. 4. It presents us with the displeasure and
indignation of the same God, in case we desert him, and sollow the sinful
examples, or counsels of men; and with the great favor, love, approbation, and
reward of Almighty God, if we keep our fidelity and duty to him. 5. It presents
us with the noble example of our Blessed Savior. 6. It presents us with the
transcendent love of God in Christ Jesus, who to redeem and rescue us from the
misery of our natural condition, and from the dominion of sin, and to make us a
peculiar people zealous of good works, chose to become a curse and dye for us,
the greatest obligation of love and gratitude and duty imaginable: And then it
leaves the Soul impartially to judge which is the better of the two, and
whether this malignant World can propound any thing that can be an equivalent
motive to follow their commands or examples, or that can equal the love of our
Savior, the reward of eternal life, and the favor of the ever-glorious God;
and which must be denied and lost by a sinful compliance with evil counsels,
commands, or examples of an evil world. It is true, the world can perchance
reward my compliance herein with honor, and applause, and favor, and riches,
or they can punish my neglects with reproach, and scorn, and loss, and poverty,
and it may be with death: but what proportion do these bear to the favor and
love of God, and an eternal recompense of glory and endless happiness? The
terms therefore of my obedience to the loving and gracious God (to whom I owe
my utmost duty and obedience, though there were no reward attending it) do
infinitely out-bid, and out-weight whatsoever a sinful world can either give or
inflict. And secondly, as to the other part or Scene of this malignant world,
Persecutions, Reproaches, Scorns, yea Death it self, Faith presents the soul
not only with the foregoing considerations and that glorious promise, Be
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life, but some other
considerations that are peculiarly proper to this condition: viz. 1. That it is
that state, that our blessed Savior has not only foretold, but has annexed a
special promise of blessedness unto, Blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness sake, (for) theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 2. That there have
gone before us a noble Cloud of Examples in all Ages, yea the Captain of our
Salvation was thus made perfect by suffering. 3. That though it is troublesome,
it is but short, and ends with death, which will be the passage into a state of
incorruptible happiness: And this was that which made the Three Children at a
point with the greatest Monarch in the world ready to inflict the severest
death upon them; Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, etc. but if not,
know O king that we will not worship thy graven image which thou have set up.
And therefore our Blessed Lord redoubles the injunction of our fear toward him
that can destroy both body and soul in hell, but forbids any fear of such
persecutors, who can only destroy the body and then can do no more. And
certainly that man that has full assurance of favor and esteem with the great
God of heaven and earth, of an incorruptible weight and crown of glory the next
moment after death, must needs have a low esteem of the reproaches and scorns
and persecutions of men for righteoufness sake; and so much the rather because
that very favor with God, and that very crown of happiness that he expects, is
enhanced by those very scorns and those very afflictions. For, Our light
afflictions which are here for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory.

3. Concerning the third kind of world, namely, the Providential world,
consisting in external dispensations of adversity or prosperity. And first
concerning the dark part of this world, namely, Adversity, as casualties,
losses of wealth or friends, sicknesses, the common effects whereof are
impatience, distrust, murmuring, and unquietness: Faith conquers this part of
the world, and prevents those evil consequences, which either temptations from
without, or corruptions from within, are apt to raise. 1. Faith presents the
soul with this assurance, that all external occurrences come from the wise
dispensation or permission of the most glorious God; they come not by chance.
2. That the glorious God may, even upon the account of his own Sovereignty, and
pro imperio, inflict what he pleases upon any of his creatures in this life.
3. That yet, whatsoever he does in this kind, is not only an effect of his
power and sovereignty, but of his wisdom, yea and of his goodness and bounty.
No affliction can befall any man but it may be useful for his instruction or
prevention. 4. That the best of men deserve far worse at the hands of God than
the worst afflictions that ever did or ever can befall any man in this life. 5.
That there have been examples of greater affliction, that have befallen better
men in this life: witness Job, and that excellent pattern of all patience and
goodness, even as a man, our Lord Christ Jesus. 6. That these afflictions are
sent for the good even of good men; and it is their fault and weakness, if they
have not that effect. 7. That in the midst of the severest afflictions, the
favor of God to the soul, discovering it self like the Sun shining through a
cloud, gives light and comfort to the Soul. 8. That Almighty God is ready to
support them, that believe in him, and to bear them up under all their
afflictions, that they shall not sink under them. 9. That whatsoever or how
great soever the afflictions of this life are, if the name be blasted with
reproaches, the estate wasted and consumed by fire from heaven, if friends are
lost, if hopes and expectations disappointed, if the body be macerated with
pains and diseases, yet Faith presents to the believer something, that can bear
up the Soul under these, and many more pressures, namely, that after a few
years or days are spent, an eternal state of unchangeable and perfect happiness
shall succed; that death the worst of temporal evils will cure all those
maladies, and deliver up the soul into a state of endless comfort and
blessedness: and therefore he bears all this with patience, and quietness, and
contentedness, and cheerfulness, and disappoints the world in that expectation
wherein its strength, in relation to this condition, lies, namely, it conquers
all impatience, murmuring, unquietness of mind.

2. As to the second part of this Providential world, namely Prosperity, which
in truth is the more dangerous condition of the two, without the intervention
of the divine grace, the foils that the world puts upon men by this condition,
are commonly pride, insolence, carnal security, contempt or neglect of duty and
religion, luxury, and the like. The method whereby Faith overcomes this part
of the world and those evil consequences that arise upon (it) are these: 1.
Faith gives a man a true and equal estimate of this condition, and keeps a man
from overvaluing it or himself for it; lets him know it is very uncertain, very
casual, very dangerous, and cannot out-last this life: death will come and
sweep down all these cobwebs. 2. Faith assures him that Almighty God observes
his whole deportment in it, that he has given him a law of humility, sobriety,
temperance, fidelity, and a caution not to trust in uncertain riches; that he
must give an account of his stewardship also to the great Master of the Family
of Heaven and Earth, that he will duly examine all his Items, whether done
according to his Lord's commission and command; and it lets him know that the
more he has, the greater ought his care to be, because his account will be the
greater. 3. Faith lets him know, that the abundance of wealth, honor, power,
friends, applause, successes, as they last no longer than this short transitory
life, and therefore cannot make up his happiness, no nor give a man an ease or
rescue from a fit of the Stone, or Colic; so there is an everlasting state of
happiness or misery that must attend every man after death: And on the one
hand, all the glory, and splendour, and happiness, that this inferior world can
afford, is nothing, in comparison of that glory, that shall be revealed to, and
enjoyed by them, that believe and obey. 1. Nothing in respect of its duration;
if a man should live a thousand years, yet that must have an end, and the very
pre-apprehension of an end is enough to dash, and blast, and wither any
happiness even while it is enjoyed; but that happiness that succeeds after
death is an everlasting happiness. 2. Nothing in respect of its degree; there
is no sincere, complete, perfect happiness in this world; it is mingled with
evils, with fears, with vicissitudes of sorrow and trouble; but the happiness
of the next life is perfect, sincere, and unmixed with any thing that may allay
it: And upon these accounts, faith, which is the substance of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen; and therefore by a kind of anticipation
gives a presence to the Soul of those future joys, renders the best happiness
this world below can yield, but languid and poor, like the light of a Candle in
the presence of the Sun. On the other side, the misery that after death attends
the misspent present life, over-ballanceth all the good that this life can
yield, both in its degree and duration, and therefore, with the
pre-apprehension of it, it sowres and allays all the good that is in the
greatest happiness of this life. 4. Faith does assute every believing Soul,
that, as sure as he now lives, and enjoys that worldly felicity it has, so
surely, if he, in belief and obedience to the will of God revealed in and
through Christ, shall use his stewardship thereof soberly, faithfully, and
obediently, he shall enjoy that everlasting happiness that thus out-weigheth
the best temporal felicity: And on the other side, if he shall use his
prosperous condition vainly, proudly, insolently, unfaithfully, intemperately,
this short felicity, that he has here, shall be attended with an endless and
excessive misery unto all eternity. And now thus upon these accounts and
methods faith overcomes this world of external prosperity. The corruption in
the heart, and the temptations of the evil one, and of evil men, would
presently improve this condition to make the man proud, insolent, intemperate,
luxurious, secure, trusting in uncertain riches, forgetful of God, and of
Religion: But, by the means before mentioned, faith conquers the world herein,
disappoints the corruption of the heart, the subtilty of the devil, the
temptations of evil men, and brings the man into a low esteem of his own
external happiness; keeps him in a high and just valuation of Heaven; keeps him
temperate, sober, watchful, humble, faithful, just; makes him mindful of his
account, and studious, and industrious for the attaining and securing of an
everlasting state of happiness, and that when death shall render all his
wealth, and honor, and applause, and successes, and glory, to be poor, empty,
insipid things, yet he may have and enjoy a fixed, permanent, everlasting state
of blessedness and glory with the ever-glorious God, the blessed Redeemer, the
holy Angels and the Spirits of just men made perfect.

OF HUMILITY, ITS OPPOSITE VICES, BENEFITS, and MEANS to acquire It.
Prove. 3.34. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. God resists the pround, and gives grace
to the humble.
Pride and Humility are two opposite habits or dispositions of the mind: and
therefore the discussion and examination of the latter, will of it self give me
a discovery of the former; and the discovery of the benefits and advantage of
the virtue of Humility, will give us also an account of the mischiefs and
inconveniences of Pride, that is its opposite vice.

In the examination of the true nature of Humility, we must take notice that
there are two, Extremes, and between these the virtue of Humility is placed.

The two Extremes are in the excess, which is Pride; and in the defect,
Baseness of mind.

Pride arises from an over-valuation of a man's self, or a want of a due sense
of his dependency upon Almighty God. And, though all pride be an extreme
foolish distemper of the mind, yet some kind of pride is far more unreasonable
and vain than other; namely, that kind of pride, that arises upon such
objects, that are less valuable in themselves, or less his own that grows proud
of them.

It is a foolish thing for a man to be proud of the Endowments of his Mind; as
Wit, Memory, Judgment, Prudence, Policy, Learning, nay of a man's Goodness,
Virtue, Justice, Temperance, Integrity: for though these be most a man's own,
yet he has them by the Bounty and Goodness of that God, to whom he owes his
being; what have thou which thou have not received? These are matters indeed to
stir up thy Gratitude to the Giver of them, but not sufficient grounds to make
thee proud. Again, though the things themselves be excellent, and more thine
than any other outward things, yet thou art but a temporary owner of them; a
violent Fever, or a fit of a Palsy, or Apoplexy, may rob thee of all these
endowments, and thou may possibly over-tune thy Wit, thy Parts, thy Learning;
and if thou escapest these concussions, yet if thou live to old age (a thing
that naturally all men desire) that will abate, if not wholly antiquate, thy
Wit, Learning, Parts; and it is a foolish thing for a man to be proud of that
which he is not sure to keep while he lives, and must lose at last in a great
measure when he dies, even by reason of that very pride which accompanies them
here. Again, that very pride, which accompanies those excellent parts and
habits, is the very thing that either spoils, or very much debaseth, and
disparageth both in the sight of God and man; it is like the dead flies in the
confection, the worms at the bottom of the gourd, that taints and withers these
excellencies, and renders them either contemptible, or at least much less
valuable. The more a man values himself for those things, the less he is valued
by others; and it is a thousand to one that this foolish vain humor of pride
mingles some odd, faneiful, ridiculous, or unsavory ingredients in the actions
or deportments of such men though of eminent parts and abilities, that they
receive more reproach or censure by their pride, than they receive applause by
their parts; for as God resists the proud so does mankind also, and their very
pride gives their adversaries advantage. And as pride of parts and habits of
the mind, is a foolish thing, so pride of bodily endowments is yet more foolish
and vain; because it is raised upon a thing of a baser allay than the former;
such as are Beauty, Stature, Strength, Agility; for though these are a man's
own, yet they are things that are, not only subject to more casualties than the
former, but they are but of an inferior nature.

Again, yet more vain and foolish is that pride, that is raised upon things
that are either purely Adventitious or Foreign, or in the mere power of other
men; as pride of Wealth, of Honor, of Applause, of succident Successes in
actions, of Titles, gay Clothes, many Attendants, great Equipage, Precedence,
and such like accessions: And yet it is admirable to observe the Vanity of the
generality of mankind, in this respect; there is scarce a man to be found
abroad in the world, who has not some elation of mind, upon the account of
these and the like petty, vain, inconsiderable advantages; in all professions,
as well Ecclesiastical as Secular; in all ranks and degrees of men, from the
Courtier to the Page and Footboy; in all ages, as well old, as young; almost
every person has some hobbyhorse or other wherein he prides himself.

And this humor of pride does rarely contain it self within the breast of that
person wherein it lodges, (though it went no farther it is foolish enough) but
spreads it self into numerous Branches; such as are contempt and scorn of
others, contention and animosity against those, that in any degree cross them;
ambition, envy against any that are above them; vainglory and ostentation,
hunting after applause; desire and delight in flattery and adulation of them;
impatience of control, or contradiction, or disappointment of what they affect;
detraction from the worth or value of others.

And, besides the disturbance that it makes abroad, it is an untollerable
Disease in the Soul that is possessed therewith, renders his life miserable,
and puts him in the power of every man to be his tormentor: If a poor man, a
Mordecai, deny but his cap or his knee, it makes Haman stark sick and half mad,
Hest. 5.13. all his Honor and Glory and Favor avail not, so long as Mordecai
sat in the Gate, and did him no reverence: any small neglect or affront; any
cross in expectation; any little inconsiderable disappointment in what he sets
his mind upon, disorders him even to distraction.

The other Extreme is Baseness and Sordidness of Mind, which though it carries
the shadow of humility, yet it is quite another thing. And though sometimes, as
in pride, so in this of baseness of mind, the complexion and temperament may
have an influence, yet it is most commonly upon another account; namely, when a
man is forlornly given over to the love of Wealth or Honor or bodliy Pleasures
or Lusts, this does make him prostitute himself to any base sordid means, or
compliances, to compass and attain those ends; there is nothing so base, or
unworthy, that such a man will not undertake, or do, to the attainment of what
he thus designs; such as are base Flattery of Men in Power; ugly Compliance
with their humors, though most nauseous, unsavory; creeping and cringing even
almost to Adoration of them; making pitiful Addresses to their meanest
dependents, even as low as Pages and Foot-boys, performing the most
unwarrantable offices for them; and many times an external disguise, a shape of
lowliness and humility in gesture, shape, habits and deportment, till they can
attain their ends; like the Monk, that was always looking upon the earth, in a
shape of humility, till he was chosen Abbot, and then changed his figure, and
being questioned for his sudden change by one of his Covent, answered, in his
former posture he was only looking for the keys of the Abbey, but now he had
found them, he needed not the former posture.

And this baseness of mind is many times also the effect of the Fear of Men,
which many times works so much upon the mind, that it carries men to base and
unworthy compliances. But true Humility is a virtue and temper of mind of
another nature, and arising from better principles. It is a lowly frame and
habit of spirit arising from the due sense of the Glorious Excellency of the
Almighty God, and our own frailty and infirmity, and our infinite dependence
upon his Bounty, Goodness, Mercy, whereby we are under a constant, firm, and
sound conviction, that all the good that is in us, or that is enjoyed, or can
be expected by us, is from the free and undeserved liberality of that Glorious
God.

So that although, possibly the helps of complexion, and constitution, and
education may be contributory to the more easy acquest and exercise of this
virtue; yet it is in it self the effect of a mind truly, and foundly
principled, the Spirit of a sound mind. And this humility of mind is not barely
in the external habit or counterfeited deportment: many times a Cynical,
intolerable Pride is clothed with the mantle of Humility: but principally it
is rooted in the very mind it self, and for the most part evidenceth its being
by these ensuing particulars: 1. A most awful and sincere Reverence 0130 0 and
Fear of the Great and Glorious God, a habitual prostration of our souls always
before him, as the great and glorious Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, in whose
presence we always are, and to whom we owe an infinite subjection and
dependence.

2. A most high and constant Gratitude and Thankfulness of heart and soul to
him, for all the good we have in us, or that is or can be enjoyed by us,
recognizing him, as the giver of our Being, of our Faculties, our abilities,
and strength of Mind and Body, our Wealth, our Honor, our Comforts, our Hope
and Expectations; that he is not only the giver of them, but the Sovereign Lord
of them, and as may resume them when he pleases.

3. And consequently upon this, that we owe to that great and Sovereign Lord a
due Employment of all, that he has thus given us, to his Glory and Service;
and that we must therefore be accountable for them, to him who is our great
Lord or Proprietor and Master.

4. A constant Vigilance and Attention of mind upon all our thoughts, words and
actions; but especially, lest we forget that habitude of mind that we thus owe
to Almighty God, and lest pride, arrogance, vanity, or vainglory steal in upon
us; checking and plucking up the first ebullitions and risings, the first buds
and motions thereof.

5. Which is but the consequence of the former, a Sober Opinion concerning our
selves and all we can do, and say; not thinking of our selves above what we
ought to think: and, since self-love so naturally adheres to us, to be very
jealous over our selves; especially in those actions that are good, or that
meet with some applause in the world, lest we either value them too high, or
overvalue our selves by reason of them, or lest we are short in giving to
Almighty God that Honor that is due to him, and to him only, for them.

6. A diligent, and impartial, and frequent Consideration, and Examination, and
Animadversion of, and upon, our defects and failings; for these, and these only
are truly and properly our own. There are a sort of artificial Pictures, that
if a man look upon them one way, they represent some beautiful comely person;
but if we look upon them another way, they present some deformed misshapen
Monster: Our own partiality to our selves prompts us to look upon the Picture
of our lives and actions, in that position or posture that renders nothing but
beautiful and virtuous; and we have seldom the patience to look upon it, in
that position that may render our Deformities and Vices; and thereupon we give
our selves the denomination accordingly of Good and Virtuous, and either do not
observe, or do not consider our own failings and defects. If we did as well
consider our sins which we commit, as the duties which we perform: and if in
the consideration of our duties, we did but consider how much more of duties we
omit than we perform; and in the duties we perform, if we did consider how much
deadness, formality, hypocrisy, vainglory, selfseeking, and other unhandsom
ingredients were mingled with them; and should lay our sins, our omissions, our
defects in one scale, and that which were really and truly duty, and good, and
worthy in another scale, the best of mankind would soon find that that which
was truly good, in the whole course of his life, were a pitiful, slender
scantlet, and would be infinitely out-weighed by his sins, omissions, and
defects; and the due comparison and prospect of this, would quickly give him a
Lecture of Humility; the Good we do would indeed make us Thankful, but the good
we omit, the evil we commit, and the deficiencies of our duties, would make us
Humble.

7. Charitable Opinions of the persons of others, as far as possible may be. It
is true that neither Religion, nor Charity commands, or allows, any man to say
or think that that which is in it self a sin, is not so; as that Drunkenness
and Whoredom, or Pride, or Vainglory are not sins; the Law of God, and the Law
of Nature tells us they are sins: But an Humble man, sensible of his own sins
and failings, will not presently be over-censorious of persons, or pronounce
them reprobates, or men wholly destitute of the hope of salvation; but will
pity their failings and backslidings; but yet not exterminate them from heaven.
And herein there must be duly considered the difference between a private
person and a public person, whether Minister or Magistrate; the former,
namely, a private person, humility must teach him compassion, charitableness,
gentleness; but the latter, being entrusted in a public ministration or
office, does alternis vicibus agere, his personal humility, as a private
person, must teach him to be charitable, but yet not to be remiss or unfaithful
in the exercise of his office.

The farther consideration of the principles and companions of humility will
appear in the consideration of the Fruits, and Advantages, and Benefits of true
Humility.

And these I shall reduce to these three Relations; I. in relation to Almighty
God; 3. in relation to the humble person himself, 3. in relation to others. It
is true that all Virtues, if they be true and real, have a connection one with
another; they are never single; for the same principle that begets one,
begets all the rest, and habituates, and influenceth the soul in all its
motions; but especially this Virtue of Humility, when it (is) genuine and true,
is ever accompanied with all those excellent Habits and Graces, that perfect
the soul; as the Fear and Love of God; Obedience to him; Dependence on him;
Benificence and Charity to mankind, and the like. But yet in pursuit of the
fruits and advantages of Humility, I shall apply my self to such as do most
naturally, and with a kind of special reason and appropriation, belong to, or
flow from, this virtue as such, and as do belong to its nature in a kind of
abstract consideration.

First therefore, in relation to Almighty God, the Humble Man has in a special
manner these two great Advantages: 1. He receives Grace or Favor or Honor
from God; 2. He receives Direction, Guidance and Counsel from God: Both which
are singularly promised, and, by a kind of suitableness and congruity,
conferred by Almighty God upon his humble soul.

First, Favor, Honor, and Grace from God is a special portion of the Humble
Man. The Wise man tells us here, He gives Grace to the Humble. And although
Grace is a comprehensive word, and includes in it self, not only Favor and
Acceptance with God, but also those other accessions of the gifts of his Bounty
and Goodness, which come from this Great Giver of every perfect gift; as
Wisdom, Peace, Righteousness, Purity of heart, and the like, which are all also
the portion of a truly humble man; yet I think the former is that which is
specially intended here; namely Favor, Honor, and Acceptance with God, so
often expressed in the Old and New Testament, by the phrase of finding Grace in
the sight of God: Genesis 19. 18. Behold now I have found grace in thy sight. Luke
14. 9, 10, 11. He that bid thee shall say unto thee, Friend, come thou up
hither, then thou shall have worship or grace in the presence of them that sit
at meat with thee; for he that exalts himself shall be abased, and be that
abaseth himself shall be exalted. So that by Grace is intended principally
Favor, Acceptance, Honor and Esteem with the Great and Glorious God of Heaven
and Earth: And certainly were there no other reward of Humility, than
Acceptance and Favor with the Great Sovereign of the World, it were reward
enough. We see daily what pains, and charge, and expense, and servitude men
undergo, to attain the favor of a Prince or great man, though he be but a poor
mortal worm; and how men please themselves, when they have attained some little
unprofitable respect from a great man: But what is that in comparison of being
in Grace and Favor with the King of kings, the Lord of Heaven? Especially,
when we consider that the Favor or Acceptance of the Glorious God is not a
bare unprofitable Esteem or Grace, such as many times the great Favorites of
Princes obtain from them: But the favor and acceptance of God is always
accompanied with Bounty and Benificence; As he is the Sovereign Ocean of all
good, so we may be sure, he will be communicative and liberal of it, to such as
he favors. He, whose benignity is hourly extended to the meanest of his
Creatures, nay to the very worst of men, cannot be parsimonious or
strait-handed to those whom he accepts, and esteems, and honors. So that the
humble man finds Grace in the sight of the Glorious God, and, as an Effect of
that grace, the bountiful communication of all necessaries, good, from the
Munificence, Bounty and Liberality of him, that thus favors him: and this is
reward enough for the most profound Humility.

The Reason why Almighty God accepts thus an Humble person, is the very same
that makes him resist the Proud, which is this; The Great God made all things
in the world for two Ends: viz. 1. Thereby to communicate his own diffusive
Goodness and Benificence, and principally for the Glory of his own Greatness,
Wisdom, Power, and Majesty; and although he receives no addition of Happiness
by the return of Glory from his Creatures, yet it is a thing he values: his
Glory he will not give to another; and it is unbecoming the Excellency of his
Majesty to be disappointed in his End. Glory is out of its place, when it is
not returned to the God of Glory, or in order to him. It is the natural, as
well as the reasonable, Tribute of all his Creatures, and a kind of proper
Refiection of the Bounty and Splendour of all his works unto the God that made
them. Now the Proud man usurps that Glory which is due to his Maker, and takes
it to himself; intercepts that due and natural return and reflection due unto
the Creator of all things, takes that tribute that is due to God, and applies
it to himself; puts glory out of its place and natural course, which it should
hold toward the glorious God, as the Rivers do to the Sea: And this
usurpation, as it is a kind of rebellion against God, so it inverts and
disorders the true and just natural course of things; and therefore as the
proud man herein walks contrary to God, so God walks contrary to him: They that
honor me, I will honor; they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed: 1 Samuel 2.30. And as this is a most reasonable act of Divine Justice, so they seem
two things, that even upon an account of natural congruity must needs make the
condition of a Proud man uneasy and unhappy, in relation to Almighty God: 1.
Every thing is beautiful, and useful, and convenient in its proper place; but
when it is out of its place, it becomes troublesome and disorderly, like a Bone
out of joint, it causes discomposure. When therefore the Proud man arrogates
to himself Glory, and intercepts its free return to the God of Glory, to whom
it belongs, Glory is out of its place, and disorders, and discomposeth the
usurper of it, so that he grows sick of it, sometimes to madness, but always to
distemper and discomposure. 2. The Proud man is so full of himself, and of the
Honor, and Glory, which he usurps and attracts to himself, that he is
incapable of an accession of Grace or Favor from God: for he thinks he has
enough of his own, and this obstructs the accesses and irradiation of the
Divine Favor, Grace, and Benediction. Intus existens prohibet alienum. It is
the empty Soul, empty I mean of Pride, Self-conceit, and Vainglory, that is
capable of satisfaction with the Divine Goodness.

But on the contrary, the Humble man has these two opposite advantages: 1. He
carries Glory and Honor to him, to whom it belongs, to its proper center and
country, namely, to the Everlasting God, and that Ocean of Goodness and
Perfection that resides in him; and this gives the man ease, and quietness, and
composure of mind; for he does not intercept the Tribute that is due to his
Maker, but pays it over to the right owner. If he does any good, noble, or
becoming action, he checks the first motion of pride and ostentation in
himself, and receives not the applause of others, but directs all the Praise
and Glory of it, to that God, that has done it by him, or in him, or for him:
Not unto us, but unto thy name give the Glory: And this gives him singular
quietness, serenity, and evenness of mind, because he is not surcharged with
that which belongs not to him, nor under those tortures and boylings of mind,
which this Tribute due to his Maker raises, when usurped by a man to whom it
belongs not. Again, 2. By this Humility and Lowliness of mind the soul is
empty, not of what it should have, but of what it should not have; and by that
means becomes receptive and capable of blessing from the God of Heaven, who
fills the hungry with good things, but sends the rich empty away. And this
seems to hold congruity to the very nature of every Intellectual agent, that
acts with an Understanding and Will: We find, even in the regulated motions of
our own nature, a secret aversness to gratify a proud and haughty man; for he
either scorns or rejects a kindness, as beneath him; or arrogates and owns it
as his due, and not a bounty: But a person truly humble is sensible of a
benefit, thankful for it, gets within us, invites benificence. And surely,
though the blessed God be not at all under the impotency of humane passions,
yet he is a God of infinite Wisdom, and places his best benefits, where they
will be best received and used. 2. It seems to hold congruity and proportion
with the very course and nature of things natural: The Divine Benignity is much
more diffusive than the Light, the Air, the most communicate Element, and
fills every thing according to its measure and capacity of reception; is that
which communicates it self to Vegetables in life and vegetation, but not in
sense, because not receptive of it; to Animals, in life and sense, but not in
reason or understanding, because not receptive of it; to Man in life, sense and
understanding that is common to the whole species; and if they have but room in
them for it, and do not wilfully throw it from them, in grace also and favor
and acceptance, in the bettering and improving of their Soul, in the
influences of his love, direction and guidance: And such a vessel is the humble
Soul, empty of Pride, Selfattribution, Vainglory; one that is glad of such
guests, as the Grace and Favor and Acceptance of God; has room for them in
his heart, and so becomes a fit Tabernacle for the Influences of that God, that
revives the spirit of the humble. Isa. 57.15.

And here by the Benignity and Favor of God I do not mean heaping of Temporal
Honors or Wealth upon men; these are but small inconsiderable things; such as
are common to proud, and many times denied to the humble: But they have a
better exchange, namely, Peace with God, inward testimonies of his Favors,
secret indications of his Love, directions and instructions by the secret
whispers and informations of his Spirit, quietness and tranquillity of mind, and
pledges of Immortality and Happiness, those.

-- Animi bona, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
And these are things of a far greater value than external Weath and Honor;
and as far before them, as the Mind and Soul it self is. But of this more in
the next.

2. The second great advantage of the humble soul is, that he shall be sure of
Direction and Guidance and Counsel from the best of Counselors, the glorious
God of Wisdom; Psalm. 25.9. The meek will he guide in judgment; the meek will he
teach his way. Meekness and Humility are but the same thing under different
names.

And this guidance and direction of Almighty God is of two kinds, relating to a
double end: 1. Guidance and direction in relation to his Everlasting End, the
Salvation and Happiness of the Soul; namely, what he is to Believe, and Know,
and Do, in order to that greatest and important End. And therefore it is
observable that although the Mystery of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, the common
Instrument of the Salvation of mankind, is the most wise and profound Design
and Mystery, and of the greatest importance that ever the world was acquainted
with; yet the most Wise and most Glorious God did vail and dress that great and
glorious Mystery quite contrary to the Wisdom and Grandeur of the World;
insomuch that to the most knowing people of the world, and that were full of
their own Knowledge, the Jews, it became a stumbling block; and to the Greeks,
the most learned and wise people in the world, and that were full of the sense
of their own Wisdom and Learning, it was accounted foolishness; 1 Cor. 1. After
that by wisdom the world knew not God, it pleased him by the follishness of
preaching, namely, of the things preached, Christ Crucified, to save them that
believe: And accordingly in the Primitive Times it succeeded accordingly, the
Wise Rabbis of the Jews and the Learned Philosophers of the Gentiles, for the
most part, derided or rejected it: Not many Wise, not many Mighty entertained
it; for the Wisdom of God ordered the Wisdom and Mystery of the Gospel quite
counter to that wisdom that was in vogue in the World: And we now see the
reason why it was fitly and wisely so designed, for it was designed to thwart
and cross and confound that corrupt Wisdom of the world, which had before
corrupted the world by Wisdom and knew not God. But on the contrary, the Meek
and Humble and Lowly minds, and such were some learned, as well as unlearned,
these received the Gospel: The Poor receive the Gospel; the poor in spirit,
lowly, meek: He that receives not the kingdom of God as a little child, shall
in no wise enter into it. It was fitted, and ordered, and modeled in such a
dress, and such a method, that it was suitable to the reception of such Souls,
and none but such were receptive of it.

Again, humility disposes the Glorious God to give, and the humble mind to
receive direction and guidance in all the walk and concern of this life. A
proud heart ordinarily disdaineth and undervalueth all other wisdom but his
own, and all other counsel but such as suits with his own Wisdom: And therefore
the most Glorious God most commonly crosses and disappointeth him, or leaves
him to the headiness and misery of his own counsels, and to eat the bitter
fruit of his own rashness and folly. For, whatever the blind men of the world
think, the actions of men and their successes are under the regiment of the
Divine Will and Providence; and it is no wonder if he, that invisibly governs
the Events of the world, take the wise in their own craftiness, and mingles
giddiness and disappointment in their counfels, and breaks the head of all
their contrivances; for he has a thousand ways with ease and facility to do
it. We may every day see what small intervention quite shatters, and disorders,
and overturns the most politic, subtle, secret, and well laid designs in the
world: so that in one moment a pitiful small unexpected occurrence wholly
breaks in pieces a design of men laid together with long deliberation and
forecast; with huge prospect and precaution of difficulties; with great
reserves and preparations against all imaginable obstacles; with all the
advantages of secrecy, power, combination of parties, connection and
contignation of subsidiary ayds; and yet one poor unthought of accident cracks
in sunder, and breaks all to shivers the whole elaborate Machina; so that in a
moment the shivers thereof lie all broken and disjoynted like a potshered dashed
against a wall; or the whole contrivance disappears like the fabulous enchanted
Castles.

But on the other side, an humble man leans not to his own understanding; he is
sensible of the deficiency of his own power and wisdom, and trusts not in it;
he is also sensible of the all-sufficient Power and Wisdom and Goodness of
Almighty God, and commits himself to him for Counsel, Guidance, Direction, and
Strength. It is natural for any man or thing, that is sensible of his own
deficiency, to seek out after that which may be a support and strength to him;
and as Almighty God is essentially Good and Perfect, so he is (if I may use the
expression) most Naturally Communicative of it, to any that seeks unto him for
it in humility and sincerity: The Air does not more naturally yield to our
attraction in respiration, v. Antonin. 1.8 se. 45. Hand minw vis Intellectrix
ubique circumfusa est, and omni qui trahere potest se ingerit, quam communis
hic aer, omni spirare volenii.
or to insinuate in self into those species that are receptive of it, than the
Divine Assistance, Guidance, and Benisicence does to the Desires and Exigences
and Wants of an humble Soul, sensible of its own emptiness and deficiency, and
imploring the Direction, Guidance and Blessing of the most Wise and Bountiful
God. I can call my own Experience to witness, that even in the External
actions, occurrences, and incidences of my whole Life, I was never disappointed
of the best Guidance and Direction, when in Humility and sense of my own
deficiency, and diffidence of my own ability to direct my self, or to grapple
with the difficulties of my Life, I have with humility and sincerity implored
the secret Direction and Guidance of the Divine Wisdom and Providence: And I
dare therein appeal to the vigilant and strict observation of any man's
Experience, whether he has not found the same Experience in relation to
himself, and his own actions and successes, and whether those counsels and
purposes which have been taken up after an humble invocation of the Divine
Direction have not always been most succesful in the end.

2. And as this Humility is of admirable use, in relation to the Glorious God
and the Effluxes of his Blessing and Direction; so it is of singular advantage,
in relation to the Humble man himself, as may appear in these ensuing
Considerations.

1. Humility keeps the Soul in great Evenness and Tranquillity: the truth is,
that the storms and tempests and disorders of the Soul do not so much (if at
all) arise from the things without us, as from the passions and distempers of
the Soul it self, especially that of Pride and Haughtiness, which as the Wise
man says, is the mother of Contention, and that within the very Soul it self,
as without it is that which blows up the passions of Anger, and Revenge, and
Envy, and Hatred, and Impatience, and Ambition, and Vainglory; and from hence
it is that the passions do rage, and swell, and roll one upon another, like the
Sea troubled with a storm. What is it, that upon any disgrace, or disrepute, or
affront put upon a man, makes him vex himself, even to death, that he has not
leisure scarce for one quiet or composed thought? What is it that makes him
jealous of another man's advancement; that makes him hate and envy another that
has attained greater dignity than himself; that makes his thoughts and
endeavors restless, till he get to be greater or richer than others; and yet
when he has attained not resting in it, but still aspiring higher; that fills
him with fears, and torturing cares, lest he should either miss what he aims
at, or lose what he has attained; that fills him with revenge against all that
oppose him, or stand in his way, with impatience under any cross or
disappointment, many times almost to the extremity of madness and frenzy; that
makes him unquiet and discontented with his present condition, and raises a
thousand such disorders and discomposures in the minds of men? All these are
most plainly resolvable into this cursed distemper of Pride and Haughtiness of
mind, as might most evidently be made out to any that will but trace back these
disorders unto their root and original; and certainly therefore the state of
such a man's mind must needs be marvelous disorderly and unhappy.

But Humility cures this disease, this Fever of the mind; keeps the passions
cool, and calm, and quiet, and low, and keeps under hourly discipline, throws
cold water upon them. Have I received an affront, a disgrace with great men,
contempt from my equal or inferior, reproach and scandal, disappointment in my
expectation of some external advantage? Am I like to be turned out of office,
to be made poor, or the like? I have two Considerations, that keep me still in
an equal temper, and that silence all those passions, which presently in a
proud man would be all on fire, and in a hurly-burly: 1. I know that those
things come not without the Divine commission, or at least permission; and
shall I not quietly submit to that will of my great Sovereign Lord, to whom I
owe myself, and whose will I pray daily may be done? It was an adorable
instance of this humility in David, when, to add to his present sad condition,
Shimei cursed him so bitterly, and although he had power and opportuleft him to
revenge it, yet he forbad it, for it may be the Lord has bid Shimei curse. And
again, 2. What am I, that I must not be crossed, or reproached, or contemned,
or disappointed? Alas, a poor weak sinful man, I cannot be made lower in the
esteem of the world, than I am in my own. If the world reproach, spoil me of
what I have; if I am poor, or scorned, it is but what I deserve, and less than
I deserve for my sins at the hand of God: Though perchance I am slandered, or
falsely accused by them, yet I know ill enough of my self to make me bear
patiently even a false accusation; and they cannot make me more low, and vile,
in the esteem of others, than I am in my own. And thus Humility breaks and
quenches the passions, and keeps the mind serene and undisturbed under all
external occurrencies. But to descend to particulars more distinctly.

2. Humility gives Contentation in any condition or station. And the reason is,
because an humble mind is never above that station or condition of life that
the Divine Providence orders, but rather under or below it, or at the most
holds pace with it. When the mind runs beyond the condition of a man, it is
like a spend-thrift, that lives beyond his Estate, and therefore becomes
necessarily poor, and never enjoys what it has, because it busies it self
evermore in anxious pursuit of what it has not: And that mind, that in
relation to the things of the world, runs beyond its station, can never be
contented nor quiet; and though he attain this year, what he anxiously pursued
the last year, yet still his mind will be running farther, and still keep
before his acquests, as the fore-wheel of the Coach will still run before the
hinder-wheel: But an humble man is ever contented, with what the Divine
Providence and Honest Industry allotts him, and enjoys it comfortably and
thankfully, and can sit down with a narrow fortune with this contenting
contemplation, That which I have is given by the Bountiful God, of liberality,
not of debt; if I had less, it were more than I could deserve; for I can with
Jacob say, out of the sense of my own unworthiness, I am less than the least of
all thy mercies, blessed therefore be his name.

3. Humility gives always Patience under all Adversity of what kind soever it
be; and this is always an effect and companion of true humility upon these
ensuing Considerations: 1. The greatest cause of Impatience is not so much,
from the pressure and force of any external cross or calamity, as from the
great disturbance and reluctance of the mind of him that suffers it; and this
it is that raises up the waves and billows within: the cross or calamity it
may be is rough and beyond the power of him that suffers it to extricate or
control: And on the other side, when it meets with a mind as tumultuous and
contumacious as the calamity or cross, it raises a storm, as when the wind and
tide are contrary, or like that state of Paul's voyage in the Adriatic Sea,
where two Seas met, Act. 27. which oftentimes endangers the vessel. He that
violently and impetuously contends against a calamity, is like one bound with a
strong yoke or bond, his struggling, like a wild Bull in a net, galls him more
than the yoke it self otherwise would do; and a proud and haughty spirit,
commonly miscalled courage, contributes more to his own uneasiness than his
cross does: But an humble, lowly mind is naturally more able to bear his cross
with more patience, because it is evident that the softness, humility, and
quietness, and calmness of his mind breaks the force of the calamity, and
renders it more easy by submission to it. 2. Again, every true humble man
looks upon the worst condition that he is under, to be less than he deserves.
As long as a man lives in the world, there is no condition so troublesome, and
painful, and uneasy, but it may be worse; and an humble man always thinks that
that condition or circumstance of his life, which may be worse, is not the
worst that he deserves. It may be I am poor, but yet I am well esteemed, I
deserve both poverty and disesteem; it may be I am poor, and under a cloud also
of ignominy and reproach, yet I have my health of body, and composedness and
steadiness of mind, and this is more than I deserve: It may be I am, with Job,
under a confluence and complication of calamities, loss of Estate, of Children
and Relations, censured by my very friends as an hypocrite and one under the
displeasure of Almighty God, my body macerated with diseases, yet I have life,
and where there is life there is hope; Wherefore does the living man complain,
a man for the punishment of his sins? Lam. 3.39. the living man has no cause
to complain, because although he suffer the loss of all other things, yet his
life is spared and given him for a prey. The humble man is patient therefore
under his sufferings of any kind, because he carries with him the due sense of
his own unworthiness and demerit, and upon a judicious account looks upon his
meanest, lowest, worst condition, as better than he deserves at the hand of
God. 3. The humble man is patient under all conditions, because he always bears
a mind entirely subject and submitting to the will of the great Sovereign Lord
of Heaven and Earth, and whom he knows to be the Sovereign Lord of all his
Creatures; to be the great dispenser or permitter and rector of all the events
in the world; to be the most Wise, Just and Gracious God; and therefore he does
not only submit to his will, as an act of Necessity which we cannot control, or
as an act of Duty in obedience to his Sovereign, but as an act of Choice, of
Prudence, and because the will of his Maker is wiser than his own, and more
eligible than his own; and therefore he makes the will of his Maker his own
choice, and upon the account of true judgment concludes that whatsoever the
most Powerful and Irresistible, the most Wise and Prudent, the most Just and
Merciful Will of God appoints for him, is not only fit for him to submit unto,
but also to choose, and as well cheerfully and thankfully, as patiently and
quietly to follow and elect: And therefore since he well knows that all the
successes of his life are under the regiment, government and providence of the
most Glorious, Sovereign, Wise and Merciful God, even those that seem in
themselves most troublesome, uneasy, and grievous, he patiently and cheerfully
comports with the Divine Will in the tolleration of them, and waits upon his
All Sufficiency and Goodness in his due time, either to remove them, or to
support him under them.

4. Humility gives great Moderation and Sobriety and Vigilance in the fullest
enjoyments of Temporal Felicity of any kind whatsoever. There is a strange
Witchcraft in Prosperity to rob a man of Innocence: How many in the world have
I in my time seen, that under the greatest pressures of crosses and calamities,
of poverty and reproach, have kept their Consciences fair and clean, their
Innocence, Integrity, Piety and Goodness within them and about them, that yet
by the warm beams and sunshine of external Prosperity have cast off their
Innocence, as the Traveller did his Cloak in the Fable, made shipwreck of their
Consciences, and became as great oppressors, as disorderly and debauched
livers, as proud and insolent, as perfect worldlings, as if they had never
heard of a Heaven or a Hell, of a God or a Redeemer, or of a Judgment to come?
True Humility is a great guard upon the Soul of a man against these rocks and
hazards. An humble man looks upon all his plenty and prosperity, not as his
own, or the reward of his desert, but as the depositum of the great Master of
the Families of Heaven and Earth, talents entrusted to him as a Steward and an
Accountant to employ for his Master's use, service and honor, not for his own
grandeur or pleasure; he considers the more he has, the greater is his
Account, and the greater his Charge, and in it finds no matter to advance his
thoughts concerning himself, or to make him proud, but to make him the more
careful to employ it: And his humility is not diminished by his plenty, but
rather increased, and this keeps him sober and moderate in the use of what he
has; for he looks upon all he has, as none of his own, but his Master's; to
whom he is accountable; and as it makes him sober and moderate in the use of
what he has, so it makes him studious to employ it to the honor of his
Master, and faithful in that employment. Again, as he looks upon the things of
this world as deposited in his hands for the account of his Lord, so he looks
upon them as dangerous temptations to deceive him of his innocence and
integrity; and both these make him evermore strictly vigilant over himself,
lest the present gains and glory and opportunity of prosperity get ground upon
his mind or his virtue, especially upon his humility: for worldly grandeur
secretly steals away that virtue, or impairs it, fooner than any other. Pride
is a kind of shadow, or rather a Devil, that ordinarily haunts and waits upon
worldly greatness and prosperity, and therefore he keeps a strict guard over
his heart, and watches narrowly the first blooming or blossoming of
Worldly-mindedness, Self-dependance, Trusting in uncertain Riches, making them
his Hope or his Confidence; but especially upon swellings of Vainglory, Pride,
Self-applause, and those other vermin that commonly breed in the Soul, by the
worm-influences of prosperity: and he never suffers these unclean Birds to
roost or rest in his Soul; checks and rejects the very first motions of them,
and crushes these viperous eggs in the very first appearance: and to prevent
the very first opportunities of their production, he watches himself upon all
occasions; seruously reflects upon the danger he is in; carefully tryes every
emergent Thought, Word and Action, whether it has any secret tincture of Pride
or Vanity, and if he find the least rising of them, he suppresses and stifles
them.

5. Humility is an excellent Remedy against the passion of Fear, even of the
worst of evils, Death it self, and much more against the fear of Reproaches,
Losses, and all external calamities whatsoever; gives patience under an
incumbent evil, does naturally, and by a kind of necessary consequences, arm a
man against the fear of an imminent or impendent evil, and upon the very same
grounds and reasons, and therefore they need not be again repeated. Commonly
Surprise and Unexpectedness of any evil renders the Fear more terrible; and
because it takes a man upon the sudden, and before he can compose himself, or
rally those Succors of Hope and Reason to support him against it; it is like a
sudden disease, that surpriseth the body that labors under ill humors, before
it can allay or moderate them by preparative helps or Catharticks, whereby a
sudden combustion arises, and many times more danger arises from the
discomposure of the humors, than from the malignity of the disease it self. But
humility keeps the mind in a sober well prepared temper; keeps the passions
under discipline, and is always in a readiness to receive the shock of a danger
or evil imminent or impendent, without any great disorder or astonishment: An
humble man has no such great value for himself, as to think he is to be exempt
from calamities; and therefore is not much startled at the approaching of them:
he reckons he has portion enough in this world, if he can keep his Innocence,
the Peace of his Conscience, and Quietness within; as for matters of the world,
as he makes not their enjoyment the object of his hope, so he makes not their
loss any great motive of his fear; God's will be done is the language of his
Soul in relation to them. Is he threatened with the Loss of his Estate, of his
Friends and Relations, of his Honor and Esteem, and has he the news of his
Death either from without, by violencies or persecution, or from within by the
forerunners of it, sickness or old age: yet is he by no means tormented with
fear by these messengers.

1. The Evenness of his own mind furnishes him with the opportunity and use of
his Reason to check his fear as a vain, foolish and unserviceable passion, that
may torment him, and by present anticipation make his present condition worse
and more troubelsom, but not cure the danger.

2. The sense of his subordination to the Divine power and pleasure, quiets his
mind with this thought: My Maker wants not power to reseue me from the danger,
if he please; but if he be not pleased, it is my wisdom and my duty to submit
to his good pleasure; it is the Lord that does inflict or permit, his will be
done.

3. Upon the approach of such dangers or evils he retires into himself; What am
I, that I should think to be exempt from those imminent evils. what title have
I to any the least good I enjoy: is it not the mere bounty of my Maker. If the
danger I foresee leave me any thing, if they leave my life, they leave me more
than I deserve; if they be such as menace the loss of that also, they yet
cannot take away my innocence, my integrity, my peace with God, and with my
self; and it is an admirable bounty that the God of heaven has preserved that
to me, and accepts this little poor small good that he finds, or rather makes,
in me, so as to reward with his favor and acceptance and peace with him. Good
God! when I look upon that which I call my Innocence, what a spotted piece it
is, that I am even ashamed to call it innocence; when I look upon my Integrity,
with what a deal of secret hypocrisy hangs about it, that it deserves not the
name of integrity which is truly such; it is his gift to me that is pleased to
own and reward it as mine, with peace and favorable acceptance; and as long as
he is pleased to continue to me what indeed is his, and thus to accept it as if
it were my own, what reason have I to fear the loss of all things else, even
life it self: since still I enjoy much more than I deserve, and which no man or
devil, no calamity or danger, no not death it self can deprive me of. And thus
far of the advantages of Humility in relation to a man's self.

3. The Advantage of humility in relation to Others is of two kinds; 1. The
advantage the humble man has to others: 2. The advantage the humble man
receives from others upon the account of his Humility.

1. As to the former of these; we may brings to Mankind, by considering the
Evil that Pride or a Proud man brings thereunto. If a man duly considers most
of the mischiefs that happen to mankind and follow them to their Original, he
shall find that the most of them owe their original to this root. Let a man but
look abroad in the world, he shall find a sort of evil Spirits, or Furies in
this, that fill it with infinite disorders and misery: For instance, Atheisin,
Hatred, Strife, Contention, Wars, disparaging Powers, Heresies, Envy, Ambition,
Sedition, Oppression, Persecution, Detraction, Slandering, Cruelty, Contempt,
Uncharitableness, Censoriousness, and a thousand more such devilish Furies,
that fill the world with blood, and confusion, and disorder. And now let us but
trace those or any of those to their original, we shall find that for the most
(part) Pride is that Pandora's Box, out of which they spring and issue. Let us
take an estimate of some of them: Atheism, that cuts in sunder all the bonds of
Religion, Government, and Society, whence comes it? but by the Pride of men's
Hearts, that cannot endure to have a Sovereign Lord above them, but that they
may be self-dependent; or the Pride of men's Wits, that out of seorn of any
thing they think vulgar, and to magnify themselves, dare attaque the most
sovereign truth in the world, the Being or Providence of God. So for
Contention, Strise, Disobedience to Parents, Rebellion against Governors, they
all spring most ordinarily from the same root of Pride: by Pride comes
Contention; men that cannot endure to be controlled, either by Laws or
Governors, by Parents or Superiors, but think their own Will and Lusts must be
the uncontrollable rule of all their actions. So again for Wars, there is
rarely any war between Princes or States, but either of both sides, or at least
of one side, Pride and Desire of Domination is the true root and cause of it,
though it be gilded over oftentimes with other pretenses. Again, for the most
part, the Disputes among persons of Learning, or pretending to it, arise from
these lusts of Pride contending for sovereignty in Wit or Learning, impatient
of contradiction, eager and implacable, contesting for reputation, victory, and
the maintaining of what they have once asserted, and scorning the least
retraction. So that many times, upon petty, inconsiderable, unuseful, inevident
trisles, men are as hotly engaged, as if Heaven were at stake upon it: And from
hence many times comes Heresies, when men pretending to greatness of wit or
learning, but in truth of haughty ungovernable spirits, either upon the score
of vainglory and reputation, or upon some conceived affront or neglect from
the Orthodox, set up for themselves, draw parties to them, and begin a Scheme
of Religion of their own dressing: From the same root comes Envy, Ambition,
Detraction from others, because they think all preferment due to their own
worth, and that any good that happens to others is a kind of derogation from
themselves; aspiring thoughts, and parties endeavoring to crush and ruin all
that stand in their way to that mark of grandeur that they aim at. And the like
instances might be given in almost all those turbulent Lusts and Passions among
men, that break out to the common disturbance of mankind, and all humane
Societies.

And therefore certainly, whatsoever virtue or temper or habit (or whatever
else we shall call it) there is, that cures this mad, unruly, and exorbitant
lust of Pride among men, must needs be one of the most benevolent, and useful,
and advantageous things to mankind and humane society; and this is that
excellent virtue of Humility and Lowliness of the mind.

If this virtue did obtain among all men, it were not possible that those
blustering Storms, that disquiet and disorder mankind, would be found in the
world; but instead thereof Peace and Love, mutual offices of Kindness and
Charity, Sweetness of Conversation, every one giving preserence to one another,
rather than invading him, his reputation or interest, benificent to all.

But it is true, there is little hope that all mankind will arrive to such a
temper; and this indeed is that which is the only considerable Objection
against it, which may be thus improved: You commend Humility, as the great
sovereign Antidote against Pride, the common disturber of mankind; and
certainly what you say is demonstratively true, if all the world could be
persuaded to it; but this never was, nor never can be expected; as there are
Wolves, and Lions, and Bears, and Foxes among brutes, as well as Sheep, and
other innocent brutes; and as there are Kites, and Vultures, and Hawks among
birds, as well as Doves, and other innocent birds; so among men there ever
(have been) and ever will be men of Pride and Haughtiness, of Ambition and
Vainglory, of Savage and Cruel Domineering spirits: And therefore unless all
could be persuaded to be Meek and Humble, it were as good and better that none
should be, upon these two accounts; viz. 1. That as long as the most of mankind
are guilty of this passion of Pride, nay if it were bmang mut an equal, nay a
less number in proportion to those that are humble and meek, the world would
still be as tumultuous as ever: a violent wind coming out of one East, would
make the Sea as troublesome, as if it came out of a many. 2. Again, those that
were meek and humble would be exposed, as a common prey, to all the rest, and
their condition would be so much the worse in the world, by their humility and
meekness: their case in the world would be like a fair Gamester, that plays
fairly, meeting with a foul or cheating Gamester, he were sure to go by the
loss: Therefore since Pride, the mother of Violence, will be used in the world
by some, and it may be the greatest part of mankind, it is better to be of the
same make, to deal with them at their own weapon, to be as proud, and
consequently as violent, as the rest of mankind, (for it is part of the Game of
the world) and Humility makes his case worse: Veterem ferendo inju^^m invit is
novam. Where the Country is full of Wolves and Tigers, it is better be a Wolf
or a Tiger, as well as they, than be a Sheep and expoted to their Violence.

I Answer to this Objection: 1. As to the former part, that though it be true,
that it can never be expected that all the world should be persuaded to be
Humble, no more than it can be expected that all should be persuaded to be
Virtuous, Just, or Honest, but yet if there were some, though the lesser part,
of mankind truly Humble and Lowly, it would make very much to the abating of
those Evils that arise by the Pride and Haughtiness of men: 1. Because the more
Humble men there are in the world, it necessarily follows there are the fewer
Proud men, and consequently fewer common Disturbers of the peace and welfare of
mankind and humane society. 2. When the contest comes by the proud man against
the proud man, indeed there is the same tumult between them, as if there were
none humble; but when the contest is by the proud man against the humble man,
the strife is quickly at an end: it is a true Proverb, It is the second blow
makes the sray: the humble man gives way to the wrath and insolence of the
proud man, and thereby ends the quarrel; for Yielding pacifieth wrath, Effles.
10.4
says the Wise man, and I have very often observed that the Quietness of
spirit and Humility of a man attaqued by a Proud man has subdued and conquered
his Pride and Animosity to a wonder, and made him tame, that by opposition
would have been furious and implacable. Soft words breaks the bones, v. Prove.
25.15. A sofi tongue breaks the bone.
and a Sword is sooner broken by a blow upon a Cushion or Pillow that yields,
than upon a bar of Iron that resists. But if it should fall out, that the Proud
man's Violence is not broken by the Gentleness and Facility of the Humble man,
whereby he suffers in his own particular, yet there be two advantages that
hereby happen to the public: viz. 1. That the contention is soon at an end;
the proud man has got the day, and the parties are quiet. 2. It gains a secret
compassion from the beholders to the injured humble man, and a general
resentment and detestation of the injury committed to the humble man that
receives the injury with so much Humility, and bears it with so much Patience;
and thereby Pride and Oppression become the common objects of the general
detestation of insolence, pride, and oppression; and the generality of mankind
thereupon look on them as beasts of prey, with hatred and abhorrence, and
endeavor means to secure themselves against it. 3. A third advantage is this,
That though oftentimes humble and good men are exposed to the injuries of the
proud, violent and insolent, yet they are a kind of ferment or leaven in the
places where they live, and by the secret influences of their virtues, the
commendableness of their conversation, and the secret interest that virtue has
in the Soul, not only of good but even of the worst men, it does work upon
mankind, assimulates in some measure to it self, and makes others good and
humble by a kind of secret Magnetism that that virtue has upon the minds of
men: and the more such are in number in the world, the more effectual and
operative their example and influence will be upon those with whom they
converse.

2. As to the second, namely, the Damage and Detriment that the humble man
receives in the world upon the very account of his humility, I answer; First,
that Detriment is abundantly recompensed with the quiet and tranquillity and
evenness and composedness of his own mind: As a man possesses his own Soul by
patience, so he does by humility, namely, the composedness, right temper, and
due estate of his own mind, which no proud, or violent, or impatient man does
or can. But, secondly, it (is) most certain, that though an humble man, may
upon the very score of his humility and meekness, receive a brush in the world,
yet at the long run he gains advantage thereby, even in this present life. When
I first read the saying of our Savior, Matthew. 5. Blessed are the meek, for
they (shall) inherit the earth; I looked upon it as a mere Paradox, if applied
to the comforts of this life, and therefore thought it must be merely, and only
intended of that new Heaven and new Earth wherein dwells the righteous; but
upon deeper consideration I found it, in a great measure, true also of the
former; for, 1. It is most certain, that no proud man is truly loved by any but
himself, but, so far as relates to his pride, every man hates him: One proud
man perfectly hates another, and looks upon him as his enemy; and those very
actions of pride that his own self love makes him approve, or at least allow in
himself, he scorns, derides, abhorrs in another: and though an humble man has
a common love to every man, though proud, or otherwise vicious, as being one of
mankind, yet in relation to his pride he loves him not nor approves. That very
Consideration therefore, that renders a proud man hated or not loved, renders
an humble man loved and approved; yea and by the very proud man himself, for he
looks upon him as no obstacle or impediment to the attaining of his ends, as
one that is injurious to none, benificent to all, gentle, and one that stands
not in his way, giving all due respect, honor and difference suitable to his
place and dignity; he wishes all the world were such as he, except himself,
and therefore he respects and tenders him; yea and we shall by daily experience
see in the world, that if a proud man injure or oppress an humble man, it is a
thousand to one he undertakes his patronage, defense, and vindication, and very
oftentimes is a means of his protection and deliverance. 3. But farther, it is
a certain and experienced truth, that Virtue and Goodness, especially that of
Humility, has a secret party and interest love, or at least approve it in
another, though they practice it not themselves; for Virtue and Goodness and
Humility has a secret congruity to the true and genuine frame of the humane
nature; and though men's lusts and passions in a great measure obscure the
consonancy to it, they can never extinguish it, but the mind and conscience
will give a secret suffrage, wherever it finds it. 4. It is a thing observable,
that though the generality of mankind abound with pride, intemperance,
injustice, and almost all kind of vicious dispositions, yea though the best of
men are not without the irruptions of some of those distempers, and though it
must needs be, that where there is the greatest number there is the greatest
external force either to make such laws as they please, or to make such
Governors as may be suitable to their disposition; yet it is rare and a very
prodigy to find any Nation to make Laws in favor of pride, ambition,
intemperance, luxury, oppression, violence, injustice, etc. or to choose such
Magistrates or Governnours (where it is in their choice) as are apparently
inclinable to those Vices; but in their choice they choose such, as may rather
suppress those vices, and maintain and encourage sobriety, humility, meekness,
benificence, as things most convenient to humane society; and in their choice
of Governors they rather commit the trust of themselves, and their Estates, and
properties to those hands that they find sober, temperate, humble, just; than
those that are loose, intemperate, proud, ambitious, high-minded, insolent,
which is not only an Indication but even a Demonstration, that although men's
passions and lusts may transport thousands into those vices, yet their
judgments and principles are against them: And by this means it comes commonly
to pass, that though an humble or a virtuous man may meet with justles and rubs
from the proud and insolent, yet at the long run he comes off with advantage,
because he has the greatest protection and countenance, not only from the
great Sovereign of Heaven and Earth, but also of humane Laws and Governors,
which next under God is the greatest protection that can be imagined in this
world, which very commonly makes good, even ad literam, the saying of our
Savior, The meek shall inherit the earth; and the saying of the Wise man,
Prove. 11.12. Before honor is humility; and Prove. 16.19. Better is it to be of
an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud; Prove.
22.4. By Humility and the Fear of the Lord are Riches and Honor and Life.
These and the like Sentences, as they proceed from the Wisest of mere Men, so
they were not spoken at a venture, but upon sound deliberation, judgment and
experience, and from the true nature and circumstances of things.

And now the due consideration and digestion of what has been said, as it
affords excellent and effectual Motives to the following of this virtue of
Humility, so they contain excellent Means to attain it; because they may put
men upon due consideration and descending unto themselves; the want of which is
the only or principal cause of Pride; for so much of Pride as any man has, so
much of Folly, Inadvertence and Inconsiderateness he has; and true Humility on
the other side, is a kind of necessary result of wise and deliberate and
attentive Consideration.

Yet some things I shall add as Means naturally and immediately conducing to
the ingenerating and improving this virtue in the mind of men: 1. Consider
whatsoever good thou have, which may occasion Elation of mind, is but what thou
have received from the free bounty and goodness of thy Maker: What have thou
which thou have not received?

2. Consider that the good thou have so received thou have not received as an
absolute Proprietor, but only as a Steward to improve to thy Lord's use; and
the more thou have of any such good, the greater is the aceouat; whether it be
of Wit, of Wisdom, of Learning, of Honor, of Power, of Wealth. If thou art a
Receiver, a Treasurer, a Bailiff, a Steward of another man, and perchance upon
that account have a great Treasure of Wealth or Money in thy hands, thou have
indeed great occasion of Care, and Vigilance, and Fidelity, and Circumspection,
to husband well and faithfully, to keep thy accounts fair and even; but no
cause to make thee proud: it is indeed thy burden, rather than benefit or
advantage: to whom much is given, of him shall much be required. Be humble
therefore, thou will perform thy trust the better; for thou art but an
Accountant, a Steward, and depository of what thou have received.

3. Consider what it is thou pridest thy sels in, and Examine well the nature
of the things themselves, how little and inconsiderable they are, or at least
how uncertain and unstable they are, every age, every complexion, every
condition and circumstance of life commonly afford to inconsiderate souls some
little temptation to pride and vanity, which yet if men did well weigh and
consider, they would appear to be but little bubbles, that would quickly break
and vanish. Thou have fine gay Clothes, and this makes children and young men
and women proud even to admiration: But thou art not half so fine and gay as
the Peacock, Ostridge, or Parrot: nor is thy bravery so much thine own, as
theirs is; but it is borrowed from the Silkworm, the golden Mines, the
industry of the Embroiderer, Weaver, Tailor; and it is no part of thy self: And
have thou the patience to suffer thy self to be abused into this childish
pitiful foolish pride? Thou have it may be wealth, store of Money, but how much
of it is of use to thee? that which thou spendest is gone; that which thou have
is as insignificant as so much dirt or clay, only thy care about it makes thy
life the more uneasy: Besides, the more thou have, the more thou art the mark
of other men's rapines, envy, and spoil. It Is a thousand to one thou carriest
not thy Wealth to thy Grave, or if thou do, thou can not carry it farther,
but leave it, it art thou proud of that which is of no great use to thee while
thou have it; and commonly the faster thou think to hold it the sooner it is
lost, like him that gripes Calice Sand in his fist: Thou have Honor, Esteem;
thou art deceived, thou have it not, he has it that gives it thee, and which
he may detain from thee at pleasure. The respect, and honor, and esteem thou
have, depends upon the pleasure of him that gives it.

Again, how brittle and feeble a thing is Honor, Esteem, and Reputation? a
false calumny well and confidently broached is able many times to give it an
irrecoverable shock: The displeasure of the Prince, or a greater man than thy
self, makes thy Sun set in a cloud; and a popular jealousy, imputation, or
misrepresentation in a moment dasheth the Applause, Glory, Honor and Esteem
that a man has been building up twenty or thirty years: And how vain a thing
it is to be proud of the breath either of a Prince or people, which as theirs
to recall every moment? But suppose it were as fixed and stable a reputation and
honor as a rock of Marble or Adamant, and that it were the best kind of honor
imaginable, namely, the result of thy virtue and merit, yet still it is but a
shadow, a reslexion of that virtue or worth, which if thou art prond of, thou
embasest and degradest into vanity and oftentation: And can thou think it
reasonable to be proud of the shadow, where thou ought not to be proud of
that worth that causes it?

Again, thou have Power, art in great place and Authority; But thou art
mistaken in this, the Power thou have is not inherent in thy self: one of the
meanest of those, whom it may be thou oppressest, is inherently as powerful as
thee, and could it may be over-match thee in Strength, Wit or Policy: but the
Power thou have is (next under the dispensation of the Divine Providence) from
those men, that either by their Promises, Faith, or Voluntary Assistance have
invested thee with this Power: This power is nothing inherent in thee; but it
depends upon the Fidelity or Assistance of others, which if they either by
Perfidiousness to thee, or Resistance against thee, or withdrawing their
Assistance to thee, shall call again home to themselves, thou art like Samson
having lost his locks, Judge. 16. 17. thy strength will go from thee, and thou will become weak, and be like another man. And how have the Histories of all
Ages, and our own experience, shown us by very frequent examples, men
unexpectedly, and upon many moments and occurrencies seemingly most small and
inconsiderable, been tumbled in a moment from the most eminent and high degree
of Power, into a most despised and despicable condition? Power has very
oftentimes, like Jonas his Gourd, been externally fair and flourishing, when at
the same time there lies a Worm at the root of it unseen, but in a moment gnaws
asunder the roots and [heart] of it, and it withers; and for the most part, the
more extensive and immensive Humane Power grows, the sooner it falls to pieces,
not only by the Divine Providence checking and rejecting, but by a kind of
natural result from its own exorbitance and excess: for the greater it is, the
more difficult it is to manage; it grows top-heavy, and the Basis grows too
narrow and weak for its own burden. Besides it is the common mark of Envy and
Discontent, which watches sedulously all occasions to unhorse it, and
oftentimes prevails. When power proves too grievous and over burdensome, it
loses the end for which it was conferred, and makes people desperate and
impatient. Entia nolunt male gubernari. If it be managed with Prudence and
Moderation, it is the greatest Benefit to Humane society: But it is the burden
of him that has it, if it be managed tyrannically and exorbitantly; if fills
the Master full of fears, the People full of rage, and seldom proves
long-lived. And what reason have thou to be proud of what is most certainly thy
burden, or thy damage, or both?

Again thou have Strength, or Beauty, or Agility of Body. Indeed this thou have
more reason to call thy own, than any of the former: but yet thou have no cause
to pride thy self in it; thou can not hold it long at best, for age will
decay that Strength and wither that Beauty, and death will certainly put a
period to it; but yet probably this Strength or Beauty is not so long-lived as
thy self, no nor as thy youth; a disease, it may be, is this very moment
growing upon thee, that will suddenly pull down thy Strength, and raze this
Beauty, and turn them both into rottenness and loathsomness. Nay let any
observe it that will, that strength and beauty that raises pride in the heart,
is of all other shortest-lived, even upon the very account of that very pride:
For the oftentation and vainglory of Strength puts it forth into desperate and
dangerous undertakings, to the ruin of the owner; and pride of Beauty renders
the owner thereof fond of the praise of it, and so expose it to the view of
others, whereby it becomes a temptation to lust and intemperance both to the
owner of it and others, and in a little while becomes at once its own ruin and
shame. But it may be thou have Wit and Judgment, a quick and ready
Understanding, and have improved them by great Study and Observation in great
and profound Learning: This I confess is much more thy own, than any of the
former Endowments; but most certainly if thou art proud of any of these, thou
art not yet arrived to the highest improvement of Understanding, namely,
Wisdom. Folly and Madness may be consistent with a witty, nay a learned man,
but not with a truly Wise man: and this thy pride of these endowments or
acquests still pronounces and proclaims thee a fool, for all thy wit and all
thy learning. For consider with thy self thy Wit and Learning are but pitiful
narrow things, in respect of the amplitude of the things that are to be known:
Maxima pars little qua scimus, est minima pars little qua nescimus. Take the most
Learned Observant Philosopher that ever was in the world, he never yet was
fully acquainted with the nature of those things that are obvious to ordinary
observation and near to him; never was the person yet in the world, that could
give an accurate account of the nature of a Fly, or a Worm in its full
comprehension, no nor of a spire of grass; much less of himself, and of his
nobler Faculties; much less yet of those glorious bodies that every day and
night object themselves to our view. What a deal of Uncertainty in Evidence,
and Contradiction, do we find in the determination of the choicest wits and men
of greatest learning, even in things that are obvious and objected in their own
sight, to all their senses? So that the greatest Knowledge that men attain to
in the things of Nature, is little else but a specious piece of Ignorance,
dressed up with fine words, formal methods, precarious suppositions, and
competent confidence.

2. Consider how brittle and unstable thing thy Wit, thy Parts, thy Learning
is. Though Old Age may retain some broken monuments of thy wit and learning
thou once had, yet the floridness and vigor of it must then decay and
gradually wither, till very Old Age make thee a Child again, if thou live to
it: But besides that a Fever, or a Palsy, or an Apoplexy may greatly impair,
if not wholly deface and obliterate thy Learning, deprive thee of thy Memory,
of thy Wit and Understanding: Never be proud of such a privilege or endowment,
which is under the mercy of a disease, nay of a distemper in thy blood, an
adust humor, a Hypocondriacal vapor, a casual fume of a Mineral, or a fall,
whether thou shall hold it or lose it.

3. But yet farther, mark it while thou will, and thou will then sooner
perceive it in another than in thy self, Wit and Learning in any man never in
any case receives more foils, more disadvantage, more blemish, more impair more
than by Pride: He that is proud of his own knowledge is commonly at his non
ultra, and rarely acquires more, scorns instruction, and stops the farther
advance of his faculties, knowledge or learning, and undervalues, and therefore
neglects, what he might learn from others. Again, Pride casts an Unseemliness,
Undecency, and many times even a Ridiculousness upon the greatest Parts and
Learning: it is like the dead Fly in the Apothecary's Confection, that makes
the whole unsavory: How common and rife is this unhappy censure, that attends
the commendation of such a man's wit and learning; indeed he is a pretty man, a
good Scholar, of fine parts, good understanding, but he knows it too well; his
proud self-conceitedness, vainglory, spoils it all, and renders the man under
the just repute of a fool, and ridiculous, notwithstanding all his Clerkship
and Learning. But yet farther, Pride, by a kind of physical and natural
consequence, very oftentimes robs men, even of their Wit and Learning, wherein
they pride themselves, by carrying up into the brain those exhaled, hot,
choleric humors, and fumes that break the staple and right temper and texture
of the brain. More learned men grow mad and brainsick with the pride of that
learning they think they have attained, than in the pursuit and acquest of it.
Therefore beware of Pride of thy Wit, Learning, or Knowledge, if thou intend to
keep it, or to keep thy just esteem or reputation of it. On the other side
Humility and Lowliness of mind is the best temper to improve thy faculties, to
add a grace to thy Learning, and to keep thee Master of it: it cools and
qualifies thy spirits, and blood, and humors, and renders thee fit to retain
what thou have attained, and to acquire more.

4. In all thy reflection upon thy self and what thou have, never Compare thy
self with those that are below thee in what is worthy or eminent, but with
those that are above thy self. For instance in point of Learning or Knowledge,
thy partiality and indulgence to thy self will be apt to put thee upon
comparing thy self with those, that are ignorant or not more learned than thy
self, as we see ordinarily idiots, or fools, or men of weak intellectuals,
delight to converse with those they find or think more foolish than themselves,
with a thought that they are the wisest in the company: but compare thy self
with those that are more learned or wise than thy self, and thou will see
matter to keep thee humble. If thou think thou art a pretty proficient in
Philosophy, compare thy self with Aristotle, with Plato, with Themistius, or
Alexander Aphrodisaeus, or other great Luminaries in Philosophy; if thou
think thou art a pretty proficient in School-Learning, compare thy self with
Aquinas, Scotus, Suarez; if thou think thou excellest in the Mathematics,
compare thy self with Euclide, Archimedes, Tycho, etc. and then thou will find
thy self to be like a little Candle to a Star. The most of the Learning that
this Age glories of, is but an Extract or Collection of what we find in those
men of greater parts; only we think we have done great matters if we digest it
into some other method, and prick in here and there a small pittance of our
own, or quarrel at something that the Ancients delivered in some odd
particulars.

And yet even in this very essay Selflove plays such a part, that unless there
be a great excess and admirable advantage of others that are above as in any
learning or knowledge, we are ready to exalt our selves above our standard, and
seem in our own eyes to be at least equal to those that exceed us, or by envy
and detraction to bring down others below our selves, especially if we hit upon
some little caprichio that we think they said not.

5. And lastly, consider the great Example of our Lord and Master Christ Jesus,
who was the only Son of the glorious God, full of Wisdom, Knowledge, Power,
Holiness, Goodness and Truth, and notwithstanding all this, humbled himself and
became of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, emptied
himself, and humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of
the Cross; Philipp. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Christ Jesus brought with him from heaven the
Doctrine of Holiness and Righteousness, ness, and in all his Sermons there is
not any one Virtue that he commends and commands more than Humility and
Lowliness of Mind, nor any one Vice that he sets himself more against than
Pride and Haughtiness of Mind. In his Beatitudes, Matthew. 5.35. Poverty of
Spirit has the first promise, and Meekness and Humility the third. Matthew.
23.6, 7. He checks and disparageth the Pride of the Pharisees, commands his
Disciples to run quite counter to their method; He that will be great among
you, shall be your servant. Again, Matthew. 18.1. Luk.9. Mar.9. 34. when the
bubble of Ambition arose among the Disciples, who should be greatest, he checks
their Pride with the pattern and commendation of a little Child: And what he
thus taught, he lived. One of the great Ends of the mission of Christ into the
world, was that he should not only be a Preacher of Virtue, Goodness; and
Piety, but also an Example of it: And if we look through the whole life of
Christ, there is not one virtue that he did more signally exercise, or by his
example more expressly commend to the imitation of Christians, than Humility. I
do not remember that he says in any place Learn of me to do Miracles, for I am
mighty in power; no nor yet Learn of me, for I am Holy, for I am Obedient to
the Law of God, for I am Liberal, though in all these he was exhibited as an
excellent Example of Holiness, Obedience, and Charity, and must be the pattern
of our imitation: But as if Humility and Lowliness of Mind were the great
Masterpiece of his Example, he calls out, even when he was in one of the
highest Ecstasies of spirit, that we find until his Passion, Matthew. 11. 25, 29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls: And in that signal advice given by the Apostle, Phil.5. Let the same
mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man;
and being found in the fashion of a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient to death, even the death of the cross.

But Blessed Savior! was there nothing else for us to learn of thee, but thy
Meekness and Humility? was there not something else wherein we were to bear in
Mind, thy Image, and write after thy Excellent Copy? was there not thy
Holiness, Purity, Obedience, Patience, Trust in God, and all that Constellation
of Virtues that appeared in thy Doctrine and Life?

Surely yes, he was exhibited both as a Prophet to Teach, and an Example to be
Imitated in all these also, but in his Humility, if we may say with reverence,
before all:

1. Because the instance and example of his Humility was the most signal and
wonderful of all the rest of his admirable virtues; that the Eternal Son of the
Eternal God should condescend so low, as to become a man, born of a woman, and
live upon earth such a despised life, and dye such an accursed death, is an
instance of Humility, not only beyond all example, but an instance is
impossible in nature to be paralleled.

2. Because Pride and Vainglory is so unhappily rivetted in the corrupt nature
of man, and it is so hard a thing to bring him to be humble and lowly,
notwithstanding all the benefits and advantages of it, that it did not only
stand in need of the most explicit Doctrine of Christ to teach and commend it,
the most unparalled Example of Christ to win men over to it, but also the
most plain and direct and explicit explication of that Example by that
remarkable and special invitation of our Lord to it, Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly; and again by his Apostle, Let the same mind be in you which was in
Christ Jesus, etc.

3. Because without Humility to prepare and mellow the hearts of men, it would
not be morally possible for them to receive the Faith of Christ. It was Pride
that made the Doctrine of Christ only to be to the Jews a stumbling block, to
the Greeks foolishness, but to them that are called, viz. that obey the call of
Christ, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, etc.
Learn of m^ for I am meek and lowly in heart; it is Christ the Power of God and
the Wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.

4. Because, without Humility, all the rest of those Excellent Virtues, that
were taught in the Doctrine, and exhibited in the Example of Christ, had been
but unacceptable: A visible Holiness, yet accompanied with Pride and
Ostentation, is but a disguise of holiness, that accursed hypocrisy, that our
Savior condemned in the Pharisees and others, Matthew. 6.16. Obedience to the
Law of God, Good works, Fasting, Prayers, yet if done with Pride, Ostentation,
and Vainglory, are dead and unacceptable. Matthew. 23.5. Charity, Alms, and
Benificence, if done with Pride, and Ostentation, and to receive Glory of men,
loses its worth and reward. Matthew.6.12. So that Humility and Lowliness of Mind
is the substratum and groundwork, the necessary ingredient into all acceptable
duties toward God or Men.

A GOOD METHOD TO ENTERTAIN Unstable and Troublesome TIMES.
THe first expedient is to Expect them before they come; the very state of the
World is Uncertain and Unstable, and for the most part Stormy and Troublesome.
If there be some intervals of Tranquillity and Sedateness, they are commonly
attended with longer periods of unquietness and trouble; and the greatest
impressions are then made by them, when they surprise us, and come unexpected.
When the mind is prepared for them by a kind of Anticipation, it abates the
edge, and keenness, and sharpness of them. By this means a man, in a great
measure, knows the worst of them before he feels them, which renders the very
incumbence of them not so smart and troublesome to sense, as otherwise they
would be. This Pre-apprehension and Anticipation of troubles and difficulties
is the mother of Prevention, where it is possible; and where it is not, yet it
is the mother of Patience and Resolution when they come. Bilney the Martyr, was
wont before he suffered, to put his Finger in the Candle, to habituate himself
to a patient undergoing of his future Martyrdom; by this means, he in a great
measure knew the worst of it, and armed himself with resolution and patience to
bear i^. Men are too apt to feed their fancies with the Anticipation of what
they hope for and wish in this World, and to possess it in imagination, before
they attain it in fruition; and this makes men vain: and if they would have the
patience sometimes to anticipate what they have just cause to fear, and to put
themselves under a Pre-apprehension of it, in relation to crosses and troubles;
it would make them wise, and teach them a lesson of Patience and Moderation,
before they have occasion to use it; so that they need not then begin to learn
it when the present and incumbent Pressure renders the lesson more difficult.
This was the Method our Blessed Lord took with his Disciples, frequently to
tell them beforehand what they must expect in the world, Math. 10. and in
diverse other places, telling them, they must expect in this world the worst of
temporal evils, that they might thereby be prepared to entertain them with
Resolution and Patience, and might habituate their minds for their reception.

2. The second expedient is, that we use all diligence to gain such a Treasure
as lies above the reach of the Storms of this world; a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken; namely, our Peace with God in Christ, the Pardon of our Sins, and a
well-grounded Hope, and assurance of Eternal Life. These be things that lie out
of Gunshot, and will render the greatest troubles that can befall this lower
world, or us in it; not only tolerable, but small and inconsiderable, when in
the midst of all the concussions of this world, in the midst of Losses of Goods
or Estate, in the midst of Storms, and Confusions, and Disasters, and
Calamities, a man can have such deep and settled considerations as these:
Though I can see nothing but Confusions, and little hopes of their amendment,
yet I have that which is out of the reach of all these; that which is
infinitely more valuable to me, than all the best the World can give; that
which I can please and comfort my self in, not with standing all these worldly
distractions and fears; namely, the assurance of my Peace with the great God of
Heaven and Earth. The worst that I can suffer by these discomposures, and the
most I can fear from them, is but death; and that will not only put a period to
the things I suffer, or can fear in this life, but will let me into the actual
possession of my hopes, even such a state of glory and happiness as can never
be ended, nor shaken. Such a hope, and such an assurance as this, will keep the
soul above water, and in a state of peace and tranquillity in all the Tempests
and Shipwracks that can befall either this inferior World, or any person in it.

3. The third Expedient is this, that a man be Resolvedly constant to keep a
good Conscience, both before the approach of Troubles, and under them. It is
most certainly true, that the very Sting and Venom of all Crosses and Troubles,
is Sin, and a Consciousness of the guilt of it. This is that which gives
Troubles and Crosses, and Calamities their vigor, force, and sharpness; it is
the Elixir, the very Life of them, when a man shall be under extreme outward
Calamities, loss of Goods, loss of Liberty, loss of Country, all outward hopes
failing, and still greater Billows, and Waves, and Storms, and Fears, in
prospect, and within an angry, unquiet, avenging Conscience, then indeed
troubles have their perfection of Malignity. But if a man, in the midst of all
these black and stormy appearances, has a Conscience full of Peace, and
Integrity, and comfortable Attestation, this gives a Calm in the midst of all
these Storms; and the reason is apparent: for it is not the Tempestuousness or
Tranquillity of Externals, that creates the trouble or the quietness of the
Man, but it is the Mind, and that state of composure or discomposure that the
mind is put into occasionally from them; and since there is nothing in the
world that conduces more to the composure and tranquillity of the mind, than
the Serenity and Clearness of the Conscience; keep but that safe and untainted,
the mind will enjoy a calm and tranquillity in the midst of all the storms of
the World; and although the Waves beat, and the Sea works, and the Winds blow,
that mind that has a quiet and clear Conscience within, will be as stable and
as safe from perturbation, as a Rock in the midst of a Tempestuous Sea, and
will be a Goshen to, and within it self, when the rest of the world without,
and round about a man, is like an Egypt for Plagues and Darkness. If therefore,
either before the access or irruption of troubles, or under their pressure, any
thing or person in the world solicit thee to ease or deliver thy self by a
breach or wound of thy Conscience, know, they are about to cheat thee of thy
best security under God, against the power and malignity of troubles; they are
about to clip off that Lock, wherein next under God, thy strength lies.
Whatever therefore thou do hazard or lose, keep the integrity of thy
Conscience, both before the access of troubles and under them. It is a Jewel,
that will make thee Rich in the midst of Poverty; a Sun, that will give thee
Light in (the) midst of darkness; a Fortress that will keep thee safe in the
greatest danger, and that is never to be taken, unless thou thy self betray it,
and deliver it up.

4. The next Expedient is this; namely, an Assurance that the Divine Wisdom,
Power, and Providence, does Dispose, Govern, and Order all the things in the
world, even those that seem most confused, irregular, tumultuous, and
contumacious. This, as it is a most certain truth, so is it a most excellent
expedient to compose and fettle the mind, especially of such a man who truly
loves and fears this great God, even under the blackest and most dismal
Troubles and Confusions, for it must most necessarily give a sound, present,
and practical Argument of Patience and Contentation. For even these black
dispensations are under the government and management of the most Wise and
Powerful God. Why should I, that am a foolish vain Creature, that scarce see to
any distance before me, take upon me to censure these Dispensations, to
struggle impatiently with them, to disquiet and torment my self with vexation
at them? Let God alone to govern and order the world as he thinks fit: as his
Power is infinite and cannot be resisted, so is his Wisdom infinite, and knows
best what is to be done, and when, and how. 2. As it gives a sound Argument of
Patience and Contentedness, so it gives a clear inference of Resignation of our
selves up unto him, and to his will and disposal, upon the account of his
Goodness. It is the mere Bounty and Goodness of God that first gave being to
all things, and preserves all things in their Being; that gives all those
Accomodations and Conveniences that accompany their Being; why should I
therefore distrust his Goodness? As he has Power to do what he pleases;
Wisdom to direct and dispose that Power, so he has infinite Goodness, that
accompanies that Power and that Wisdom. As I cannot put my will into the hands
of greater Wisdom, so I cannot put my will into the hands of greater Goodness:
His Beneficence to his Creatures is greater than it is possible for the
Creatures to have to themselves. I will not only therefore patiently Submit to
his Power and Will, which I can by no means resist, but cheerfully Resign up my
self to the disposal of his Will, which is infinitely best, and therefore a
better rule for my disposal, than my own will.

5. The next Expedient is Faith and Recumbence upon those Promises of his,
which all wise and good men do, and must value above the best Inheritance in
this World: namely, that he will not leave nor forsake those that fear and love
him. Heb. 13.5. How much more shall your Heavenly Father give good things to
them that ask him, Matthew. 6.30 Matthew. 7.11. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Romans 8. 32. All things shall work together for good to them that love
God, Rom 8. 28 Upon the assurance of these Divine Promises, my heart may quiet
it self in the midst of all the most dark and tumultuous concussions in the
world. Is it best for me to be delivered out of them, or to be preserved in or
under them? I am under the Providence and Government of my Heavenly Father, who
has said, He will not leave me, nor forsake me; who takes more care of me, and
bears more love to me than I can bear to my most dutiful Child; that can in a
moment rescue (me) from the calamity, or infallibly secure me under it; that
sees and knows every moment of my condition, and a thousand expedients to
preserve or relieve me. On the other side, do I fall in the same common
calamity, and sink under it without any deliverance from it, or preservation
under it? His will be done; I am sure it is for my good, nay, it is not
possible it should be otherwise. For my very death, the worst of worldly evils
will be but the transmission of me into a state of Blessedness, Rest, and
Immortality; for, Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they rest from their
labors and (their) works follow them.

6. The next Expedient is Prayer. The glorious God of Heaven has given us a
free and open access to his Throne, there to sue out by Prayer, those Blessings
and Mercies which he has promised. It is not only a Duty that we owe in
recognition of the divine Sovereignty; a Privilege of greater value than if we
were made Lords of the whole Earth; but a Means to attain those Mercies, that
the Divine Wisdom and Goodness knows to be fittest for us; by this means we may
be sure to have deliverance or preservation, if useful or fit for us; or if
not, yet those favors and condescentions from Almighty God, that are better
than deliverance it self; namely, Patience and Contentedness with the Divine
Good Pleasure; Resignation of our wills to him; great Peace and Tranquillity of
mind; Evidences and Communications of his Love and Favor to us; Support under
our weaknesses and despondences: and many times Almighty God, in these
Wildernesses of distractions and confusions, and storms, and calamities,
whether public or private, gives out as a return to hearty and faithful
prayer, such Revelations of his Goodness, and Irradiations of his Favor and
Love, that a man would not exchange for all the external happiness that this
world can afford; and Recompenceth the loss and troubles in relation to
externals, with a far greater measure of the Manifestations of his favor, than
ever a man did receive in his greatest confluence of external advantages. Yea,
and possibly, the time of external storms and troubles is far more seasonable
for such returns of faithful and humble prayer, than the times of external
affluence and benefits: and the devotion of the soul by such troubles raised to
a greater height, and accompanied with more Grace and Humility and Fervency,
than is ordinarily found in a condition of external peace, plenty and serenity.

Changes and Troubles.
Peace way-ward Soul! let not those various storms,
Which hourly fill the World with fresh Alarms,
Invade thy Peace; nor discompose that Rest,
Which thou may keep untoucht within thy Breast,
Amidst those whirlwinds, if thou keep but free
Thy Intercourse betwixt thy God and thee.
The Region lies above these Storms: and know
Thy thoughts are earthly, and they creep too low;
If these can reach thee, or access can find,
To bring or raise like Tempests in thy Mind.
But yet in these disorders something lies,
That Is worth thy notice, out of which the Wise
May trace, and find that Just and Powerful Hand,
That secretly, but surely does Command
And Manage these distempers with that skill,
That while they seem to Cross they Act his Will.
Observe that Silver Thread, that steers and bends
The worst of all disorders, to such Ends,
That speak his Justice, Goodness, Providence,
Who closely guides it by his Influence.
And though these Storms are land, yet listen well,
There is another message that they tell:
This World is not thy Country; it is thy Way;
Too much contentment would invite thy stay
Too long upon thy journey; make it strange
Unwelcome News, to think upon a Change:
Whereas this rugged entertainment send
Thy thoughts before thee to thy journeys end;
Chides thy desires homeward; tells thee plain,
To think of resting here it is but vain;
Makes thee to set an equal estimate,
On this uncertain World, and a just rate
On that to come: It bids thee wait and stay,
Until thy Master calls, and then with joy
To entertain it. Such a Change as this,
Renders thy Loss thy Gain; improves thy Bliss.
OF THE REDEMPTION OF TIME How, and why it is to be REDEEMED.
I Would consider these Particulars: 1. What that Time is which we are to
Redeem. 2. What it is to Redeem that Time. 3. How that Time is to be Redeemed.
4. Why that Time is thus to be Redeemed.

The first of these, what that Time is, that is to be Redeemed. The
Philosophers trouble themselves much what time is, and leave it very difficult;
but we shall not need to trouble our selves with that inquiry. The Time that is
here meant, seems to be under this double Relation: First, in relation to some
apt season for any thing to be done; and then it is properly called
Opportunity; which is nothing else but the co-incidence of some circumstance
accommodate to some action suitable to it: as the Time for the Husbandman to
Reap his Corn, is when the Corn is ripe, and the weather seasonable. It is time
for the Smith to forge his Iron when it is hot, and therefore malleable; and so
in matters moral: It is a time to show mercy when an object of misery occurrs,
and a power to give relief. This, as I take it, is that which the Greeks call
(...), or Opportunity. Secondly, In relation to that continuance of the
duration of the reasonable Creature in life, in this world, or the time of our
life.

2. To Redeem Time therefore, is in relation to both these, viz. 1. In relation
to Seasons or Opportunities: the Redemption of Time in this respect is 1.
Diligently to watch and observe all fitting Seasons and Opportunities of doing
all the good we may, whether in relation to Almighty God, his Service and
Glory; in relation to others, in all acts of Charity and Justice; in relation
to our selves, in improvements of Knowledge, Piety and Virtue. 2. Industriously
to lay hold of all these opportunities, and not to let them slip, but to apply
suitable actions to suitable opportunities, when they occurr. 2. In relation to
the times of our lives; and so we are said to Redeem our Time. 1. When we
constantly employ our time, and leave as few vacuities and interstitia in it
without employing it; the opposite to this is Idleness, or doing nothing. 2.
When we employ our time constantly in doing something that is answerable to the
value and usefulness of our time. 3. The opposites to this, are first, the
sinful employment of our time, which is indeed worse than Idleness: Or
Secondly, the vain, and impertinent, and unprofitable employment of our time,
as Domitian did in killing of Flies. When we employ our time not only in things
profitable, but in such things as are of greatest use and importance; and
therefore such employments as are of greatest importance and concernment, ought
to take up the greatest and most considerable part of our time; otherwise we
are imprudent and irrational in the Improvement or Redemption of our Time. And
therefore this Redeeming of our Time is ordinarily called Husbanding of our
time, in resemblance of the Husband-mans proceeding with his ground. If the
Husbandman does not at all Till and Sow his ground, but is idle; or if he takes
much pains in Tilling of his ground, and Sowes nothing but Cockle and Darnel,
or such hurtful Seeds; or if he Sowes not that which is hurtful, but Sowes
light or unprofitable Corn; or Sowes that ground with a more ignoble and
unuseful Grain, which would with more reason and advantage be employed to a
more noble grain, that would yield more prosit; or if he Sowes a suitable
grain, but observes not his season proper for it, that man is an ill Husband of
his ground: And he that with the like negligence, or imprudence Husbands his
time, is an ill Husband of his time, and does not redeem it as he is here
directed. But of this more in the next.

3. How Time is to be Redeemed. The particular Methods of Husbanding of Time
under both the former relations, viz. in relation to opportunity, and in
relation to our time of life, shall be promiscuously set down. Now the actions
of our lives may be distinguished into several kinds, and in relation to those
several actions, will the employments of our times be diversified. 1. There are
actions Natural, such as are Eating, Drinking, Sleep, Motion, Rest. 2. Actions
Civil; as Provision for Families, bearing of public Offices in times of Peace
or War; moderate Recreations and Divertisements; employments in civil
Vocations, as Agriculture, Mechanical Trades, Liberal Professions. 3. Actions
Moral, whether relating to our selves, as Sobriety, Temperance, Moderation,
(which though they are rather habits than action, and the actions of them
rather consists in Negatives than Positives, yet I style them actions) or
relating to others, as acts of Justice, Charity, Compassion, Liberality. 4. Or
last, Actions Religious, relating to Almighty God, as Invocation, Thanksgiving,
Inquiringinto his Works, Will, Obedience to his Law and Commands, observing the
solemn seasons of his Worship and Service, and, which must go through and give
a tincture to all the rest, a habit of Fear of him, Love to him, Humility and
Integrity of heart and soul before him; and in sum, a habit of Religion toward
God in his Son Jesus Christ; which is the magnum oportet, the one thing
necessary, and over-weighs all the rest upon this account. 1. In respect of the
excellency and sovereignty of the Object, Almighty God, to whom we owe our
Being, and the strength and flower of our Souls. 2. In respect of the nobleness
of the end thereby and therein to be attained; for whereas all the rest serve
only to the Meridian of this Life, the latter has a prospect to an eternal
Life. 3. In respect of the nobleness of the habit it self, which has an
universal influence into all the rest of the beforementioned relations, and
advances and improveth, and innobleth them. It would be too long to prosecute
the methods of Redeeming the Time in the particular relations to all these
actions in this sheet of paper; therefore in this pursuit of the manner of
Redeeming the Time, I shall set down only these generals.

1. We are to neglect no opportunity that occurs to do good; but 1. To watch
all opportunities, that offer themselves in order thereunto. 2. To seek for
them, if they offer not themselves. 3. To use them, and not to let them slip.

2. In the co-incidence of opportunities of several kinds, and suiting to
several actions, to give those the praelation that correspond to the most
worthy actions; and in the co-incidence of opportunities for actions of equal
moment to prefer such as are most rare, and probably of unlikelihood to occur
again, before those that are under a probability of frequent occurrence.

3. We are to be very careful to leave no banks or interspersions of idleness
in our lives. Those men that have most employment, and of the most constant
nature, cannot choose but have certain interstitia between tween the varieties
of business, which may be fitted with employments suitable to their length or
qualities; and it becomes a good Husband of his time to have some designations
and destinations of businesses that may be suitable to the nature, quality,
seasons, and morae of those vacant interstitia. An industrious Husbandman,
Tradesman, Scholar, will never want business fitted for occasional vacancies
and horae subsecivae. Gellius, his Noctes Atticae have left us an experiment of
it: And a Christian, even as such, has ready employments for occasional
interstices, Reading, Praying; the crumbs and fragments of time would be
furnished with their suitable employments; it is precious, and therefore let
none of it be lost.

4. Much time might be save dand redeemed in retrenching the unnecessary
expenses thereof in our ordinary sleep, attiring and dressing our selves, and
the length of our Meals, as Breakfasts, Dinners, Suppers; which, especially in
this latter Age, and among people of the better sort, are protracted to an
immoderate and excessive length: There is little less than ten or twelve hours
every day spent in these refections, and their appendancies which might be
fairly reduced to much less.

5. Take heed of entertaining vain thoughts, which are a very great consumption
of time, and is very incident to Melancholy and Fanciful persons, whom I have
known to sit the greatest part of several days in projecting what they would do
if they had such Estates, Honors, or Places, and such kind of unprofitable and
vain meditations; which humor is much improved in them that lie long in bed in
a Morning.

6. Beware of too much Recreation. Some bodily exercise is necessary, for
sedentary men especially; but let it not be too frequent, nor too long.
Gameing, Taverns, and Plays, as they are pernicious, and corrupt Youth; so if
they had no other fault, yet they are justly to be declined in respect of their
excessive expense of time, and habituating men to idleness and vain thoughts,
and disturbing passions and symptoms, when they are past, as well as while they
are used. Let no Recreations of any long continuance be used in the Morning,
for they hazard the loss or discomposure of the whole day after.

7. Visits made or received, are for the most part an intolerable consumption
of time, unless prudently ordered; and they are for the most part spent in vain
and impertinent discourses. 1. Let them not be used in the Morning. 2. If the
visits be made to, or by persons of impertinence, let them be short, and at
such times as may be best spared from what is more useful or necessary, viz. at
Meals, or presently after. 3. But if the persons to be visited, are men of
Wisdom, Learning, or Eminence of parts, the visits may be longer, but yet so as
the time may be prositably spent in useful discourse, which carries with it, as
well profit and advantage, as civility and respect.

8. Be obstinately constant to your Devotions at certain set times; and be sure
to spend the Lords day entirely in those Religious duties proper for it; and
let nothing but an inevitable necessity divert you from it. For, 1. It is the
best and most prositably spent time; it is in order to the great end of your
being in this World. 2. It is in order to your everlasting happiness; in
comparison of which, all other businesses of this life are idle and vain; it is
that which will give you the greatest comfort in your Life, in your Sickness,
in your Death; and he is a Fool that provides not for that which will most
certainly come. 3. It is the most reasonable tribute imaginable unto that God,
that lends you your time, and you are bound to pay it under all the obligations
of duty and gratitude: And 4. It is that which will sanctify and prosper all
the rest of your time, and your secular employments. I am not apt to be
superstitious, but this I have certainly and infallibly found true, that by my
deportment in my duty toward God, in the times devoted to his Service,
especially on the Lords day, I could make a certain conjecture of my success in
my secular occasions the rest of the week after: If I were loose and negligent
in the former, the latter never succeeded well; if strict, and conscientious,
and watchful in the former, I was successful and prosperous in the latter.

9. Be industrious and faithful in your Calling. The merciful God has not only
indulged unto us a far greater portion of time for our ordinary occasions, than
he has reserved to himself, but also injoyns and requires our industry and
diligence in it. And remember that you observe that industry and diligence, not
only as a civil means to acquire a competency for your self and your Family,
but also as an act of obedience to his Command and Ordinance; by means whereof,
you make it not only an act of civil conversation, but of obedience to Almighty
God, and so it becomes in a manner spiritualized into an act Religion.

10. Whatever you do, be very careful to retain in your heart a habit of
Religion, that may be always about you, and keep your heart, and your life
always as in his presence, and tending toward him. This will be continually
with you, and put it self into acts, even although you are not in a solemn
posture of Religious worship, and will lend you multitudes of Religious
Applications to Almighty God, upon all occasions and interventions, which will
not at all hinder you in any measure in your secular occasions, but better and
further you; it will make you faithful in your Calling, even upon the account
of an actual reflection of your mind upon the presence and command of the God
you fear and love: It will make you actually thankful for all successes and
supplies; temperate and sober in all your natural actions; just and faithful in
all your dealings; patient and contented in all your disappointments and
crosses; and actually consider and intend his Honor in all you do; and will
give a tincture of Religion and Devotion upon all your secular employments, and
turn those very actions, which are materially civil or natural, into the very
true and formal nature of Religion, and make your whole life to be an
unintermitted life of Religion and Duty to God. For this habit of piety in your
soul, will not only (not) lie sleeping and unactive, but almost in every hour
of the day will put forth actual exertings of it self in applications of short
occasional Prayers, Thanksgivings, Dependence, resort unto that God that is
always near you, and lodges in a manner in your heart by his fear, and love,
and habitual Religion toward him. And by this means you do effeually, and in
the best and readiest manner imaginable, doubly Redeem your Time. 1. In the
lawful exercise of those natural and civil concerns which are not only
permitted, but in a great measure enjoined by Almighty God. 2. At the same time
exercising acts of Religious duties, observance and Vencration unto Almighty
God, by perpetuated, or at least frequently reiterated, though short acts of
devotion to him. And this is the great act of Christian Chemistry, to convert
those acts that are materially natural or civil, into acts truly and formally
Religious; whereby the whole course of this life is both truly and
interpretatively a Service to Almighty God, and an uninterrupted state of
Religion, which is the best, and noblest, and most universal redemption of his
Time.

11. Be very careful to prefer those actions of your life that most concern
you; be sure to do them first, to do them chiefest, to do them most. Let those
things, that are of less moment, give place to those things that are of
greatest moment. Every man of the most ordinary prudence, having many things to
do, will be sure to be doing of that first and chiefest which most concerns
him, and which being omitted, and possibly wholly disappointed, might occasion
his most irreparable loss. We have, it is true, many things to be done in this
life, Ars longa, vita brevis; and we have seasons and opportunities for them;
but of these many things, some are barely conveniences for this life: Some,
though they seem more necessary, yet still they rise no higher, nor look no
surther, nor serve no longer, but only for the Meridian of this life, and are
of no possible use in the next moment after death. The Pleasures, the Prosits,
the Honors, the most florid accommodations of great humane Learning, stately
Houses and Palaces, goodly Possessions, greatest Honors, highest Reputation,
deepest Policy, they are fitted only to this life; when death comes, they are
insignisicant pitiful things, and serve nothing at all to the very next moment
after death; nay, the diseases and pains, and languishings that are the
praeludia of death, render them perfectly vain, if not vexatious and torturing.
But there are certain businesses that are not only excellently useful in this
life, but such as abide by us in sickness, in death; nay, go along with us with
singular comfort into the next life, and never leave us, but state us in an
eternal state of rest and happiness, such as may be with much ease acquired in
the times of health and life, but very difficult to be attained in the time of
Sickness, and the hour of death, but never to be gotten after death; such as
are of that necessity, that in comparison of them, all other things are
impertinent and vain, if not desperately noxious and hurtful. There is no
necessity for me to be Rich, and to be great in the World; to have such a title
of Honor, such a place of Dignity, or Profit; to leave such an Inheritance or
titular Dignity to my Son, or to have so many thousand pounds in my Inventory,
when I die; but certain matters of absolute necessity to me, such as if I am
without, I am undone and lost, and yet such as if not attained here in this
life, can never be attained: and therefore, as it concerns me in the highest
degree to attain them; so it concerns me in the highest degree to attain them
in this life, and to take all opportunities imaginable in order thereunto, and
to redeem every minute of time for that purpose, lest I should be for ever
disappointed, and not to be like the foolish Virgin, to be getting of Oil when
the door is ready to be shut; and with the Truant-Scholar, to trifle away my
time allotted me for my lesson and then to begin to learn it when my Master
calls for me to repeat it; and those businesses are such as these: the Knowledge
of Christ Jesus, and him Crucified; the attainment of Faith in God through him;
the acquaintance of my self with the will God; the comparing of my self with
that will; the exercise of true and serious Repentance for sins past; the
steady resolution of Obedience to his will for the time to come; the attaining
of the pardon of my sins, and peace with God through Christ our Lord; the
subduing of my Lusts and Corruptions; the conformation of my will and life to
the holy will of God, and the perfect pattern of Holiness, Christ Jesus; the
working out my salvation with fear and trembling; the giving all diligence to
make my Calling and Election sure; the fitting and purging of my self to be a
Vessel of Glory and Immortality, and fitted for the use of my great Lord and
Master; the casting of my self into such a frame and posture of mind and life,
that I may be fitted and ready to die, and give up my account to my Lord with
peace and cheerfulness, and comfort; so that if I should, either by the hand of
some disease or casualty, or other providence, receive this solemn message, Set
thy House in order for thou shall die. I might receive it with as much
readiness, willingness, and cheerfulness, as a faithful and diligent Servant
would receive this command from his Master; You must take such a Journey for me
to morrow. These, and such like businesses as these, besides the constant tenor
of a just, virtuous, and piou^ life, are the most important businesses of (...)
Christian. First, such as are of absolute necessity to him, he may not, he
cannot be without them. Secondly, such as cannot be done elsewhere than in
this life; this world is the great Elaboratory for perfecting of souls for the
next; if they are not done here, they cease to be done for ever; death shuts
the door, and everlastingly seals us up in that state it finds us. Thirdly: And
every season of this life is not at least so suitable for it; sickness, and
pain, and wearisome and froward old Age have business enough of themselves to
entertain us; and any man that has had experience of either, will find he has
enough to do (to) bear them, or to struggle with them. And fourthly: We know
not whether the grace and opportunities that God has lent us, and we have
neglected in our lives, shall ever be afforded again to us in the times of our
Sicknesses, or upon our Deathbeds; but a little portion of time in our lives
and healths are furnished with thousands of invitations and golden
opportunities for these great works. Let us therefore redeem those portions of
time that our life and health lends us, for this great and one thing necessary.

And now, if a man shall take a survey of the common course, even of the
Christian world, we shall find the generality of Mankind the veriest Children,
Fools, and Madmen, that ever Nature yielded. The very folly of Children in
spending their time in Rattles, and Hobbyhorses, is more excusable than theirs,
whose reason and experience should better instruct them. There is not any man
so senseless, but he knows he must die, and he knows not how soon he shall hear
of that sad Summons; and if he were so brutish as not to think of it, or
believe it, yet the weekly Bills of Mortality gives him daily instances of it:
and yet if we do but observe the world of men, they do for the most part wholly
trifle away their time in doing that which is evil; or in doing nothing; or in
doing nothing to any purpose, or becoming a reasonable Nature. One man trifles
away his time in Feasting and Jollity; another in Gaming or vain and
unnecessary Recreations, in Hunting, Hawking, Bowling, and other wastful
expenses of time; another in fine Clothes, Powderings, and Painting, and
Dressing; another in hunting after Honors and Preferments, or heaping up of
Wealth and Riches, and lading himself with thick clay; another in trivial
speculations, possibly touching some criticisme or Grammatical nicety; and all
these men wonderfully pride themselves, as the only wise men, look big and
goodly; and when they come to die, all these prove either vexations and
tortures of a misspent time; or at least, by the very appearance of sickness
and death, are rendered poor, empty, insipid, and insignificant things; and then
the Minister is sent for, and Sacraments, and nothing but penitence and
complaints of the vanity of the world, the unhappy expenses of time, and all
the Wealth and Honor would be presently Sacrificed for the Redemption of those
misspent hours, and days, and years that cannot be recalled nor redeemed by
the price of a world. But the great misery of mankind is this, they cannot, or
will not, in the times of health, anticipate the consideration of death and
judgment to come; nor put on any apprehensions or thoughts that the time will
come when things will be otherwise with them than now is; or that (they) will
be driven into another kind of estimate of things than now they have; and this
their way is their Folly. Man being in Honor, in Health, in Life,
understands not, but becomes like the Beasts that perish.

4. I come to the Reasons why we ought thus to Redeem our Time, which may be
these.

1. Our time is a Talent put into our hands by the great Lord of the whole
Family of Heaven and Earth, and such whereof we are to give an account when our
Master calls; and it will be a lamentable Account, when it shall consist only
of such Items as these: Item, So much of it spent in Plays, and Taverns, and
Gaming. Item, So much of it spent in Sleeping, Eating, Drinking. Item, So much
spent in Recreations and Pastimes. Item, So much spent in getting Wealth and
Honor, etc. and there remains so much which was spent in doing nothing.

2. Our time is a Universal Talent, that every man that lives to discretion
has. Every man has not a Talent of Learning, or of Wealth, or Honor, or
Subtilty, of Wit to account for; but every man that lives to the Age of
Discretion has time to account for.

3. Every man has not only a Talent of Time, but every man has a Talent of
Opportunity, to improve this Talent in some measure put into his hand. The very
works and light of Nature, the very principles of natural Religion are lodged
in the hearts of all men; which by the help of his natural reason, he might
exercise to some acts of Service, Duty, and Religion toward God. But the
Christian has much more.

4. The Redemption and Improvement of our Time, is the next and immediate End
why it is given, or lent us, and why we are placed in this life; and the
wasting of our time is a disappointment of this very end of our being; for
thereby we consequently disappoint God of his Glory, and our selves of our
happiness.

5. Upon the management and disposal of our time, depends the everlasting
concernment of our Souls. Ex hoc momento depende^ (...). If it be redeemed,
improved, and imploved as it ought to be, we shall in the next moment after
death, enter into an immutable, eternal, and perfect state of glory; (...) be
either sinfully or idly spent, we fall into an everlasting, irrecoverable and
unchangeable state of misery.

6. The business we have to do in this life, in order to the cleansing of our
souls, and fitting them for glory, is a great and important business, and the
time we have to live has two most dangerous qualities in reference to that
business. 1. It is short; our longest period is not above 80. years, and few
there be that arrive to that Age. 2. It is very casual and uncertain; there be
infinite accidents, diseases, and distempers that cut us off suddenly; as acute
diseases, such as scarce give us any warning; and considering how many strings,
as it were, thereare to hold us up, and how small and inconsiderable they are,
and how easily broken, and the breach or disorder of any of the least of them
may be an inlet to death, it is a kind of Miracle that we live a month. Again,
there be many diseases that render us in a manner dead while we live, as
Apoplexies, Palsies, Frenzies, Stone, Gout, which render our time either
grievous, or very unuseful to us.

7. Time once lost, is lost for ever: It is never to be recovered; all the
Wealth of both the Indies will not redeem nor recall the last hour I spent; it
cease for ever.

8. As our time is short, so there be many things that corrode and wast that
short time; so that there remains but little that is serviceaable to our best
employment. Let us take but out of our longest lives, the weakness and folly of
Childhood and Youth, the impotency and morosity of our old Age, the times for
eating, drinking, sleeping, though with moderation, the times of sickness and
indisposedness of health, the times of Cares, Journeys and Travel, the times
for necessary Recreations, interview of Friends and Relations, and a thousand
such expenses of time, the residue will be but a small pittance for our
business of greatest moment, the business I mean, of fitting our souls for
glory; and, if that be misspent, or idely spent, we have lost our treasure,
and the very flower and jewel of our time.

9. Let us but remember that when we shall come to Die, and our Souls sit as it
were hovering upon our lips, ready to take their flight, at how great a rate we
would then be willing to purchase some of these hours we once trifled away, but
we cannot.

10. Remember that this is the very Elixir, the very Hell of Hell to the damned
Spirits, that they had once a time, wherein they might upon easy terms, have
procured everlasting rest and Glory, but they foolishly and vainly misspent that
time and season, which is now not to be recovered.

FINIS.
THE Great Audit: WITH THE ACCOUNT OF THE Good Steward.


