HUMBLE PROPOSALS FOR THE Relief, Encouragement, Security and Happiness of the
Loyal, Courageous Seamen of England, in their Lives and Payment, in the Service
of our Most Gracious King William, and the Defense of these Nations.

Humbly Presented to the Two Most Honorable Houses, the Lords and Commons of
England, in Parliament Assembled.

By a Faithful Subject of his Majesty, and Servant to the Parliament and
Nation, and the Seamen of England; in order for Safety and Security of all
aforesaid, W. Hodges.

To which is added, A DIALOGUE concerning the Art of Ticket-buying.

In a Discourse between Honesty, Poverty, Cruelty and Villainy. concerning that
Mystery of Iniquity, and Ruin of the Loyal Seamen.

Printed in the Year 1695.

To the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
Humbly shows,
THAT the Providence of our most gracious God, having stirred me up to see, and
consider, and lament the most dreadful Ruin and Destruction of the Loyal Seamen
of England, in their Lives and Pay, that ever these Nations did behold, and to
Represent the same in all Humility to your Honors; and considering also, that
some of their Miseries were, in my Judgment, against Grace, and Reason and
Common Sense; and also sometimes against those other Four Things that used to
be esteemed of as Jewels in England; that is, Religion, Liberty, Property, and
their Lives: To say nothing of the Fifth, without Law, made me to dread the
Consequent; and I did observe that it was hidden from his Majesty and your
Honors so long, until there was the Loss, as I represented to you, of the
Lives of above Forty Thousand, and of the Pay of above Sixty Thousand of them;
and if there had been occasion to question the Truth of it, I would have proved
at any time by the King's Books, in twenty Four Days time, without Two Pence
Charge to the King or Nation; and considering that his Majesty has spoken for
their Relief, and your Honors, who had raised money enough before to have kept
them from Ruin, and to have spared a Million or Two of it by Capt. St. Lo's
Rule.

Besides, if they had been but managed as the English Seamen were in former
days, and as the Dutch and the French do at this day, to save near half their
money, and most of their Seamens Lives. But I say, Your Honors being now also
Resolved to study their Relief, I presume, in all Humility, to cast in my Mite
also. Now, in order to the same, which I would entreat your Honors to accept
of, as Rough and Unframed Timber, to be squared and fitted to what part your
Honors please; and one thing is, many crooked pieces are made use of in the
building of Shipping, that when placed aright not only serve to strengthen the
Ship, and help to preserve the Lives of the Seamen, but formally use to help
tohold the Ships together, while they daily beat their Enemies; and tho these
Pieces may not be always so readily known to all Landmen, I will presume some
may serve now, and some another time.

And I do assure your Honors, if I had better at hand, I would present them to
you: But they are my own, and so saved me the trouble of begging, borrowing, or
which is worse, stealing; and I entreat your Honors Patience; for their
Miseries being so dreadful, and so many years a growing, and so many times Ten
Thousands, as they could not have been easily represented, except one should
have said, their Case was almost all together Miserable: But blessed be God
that it is not: They have a good King and good Country for their Friends, if
their Cases are not blinded from them: And as to their Remedies, it requires a
great deal of Care and Inquiry: And when I look back to what I represented
before; and forward, to what strange need there is of them now, and when I hear
that a great many there is that are in Droves, traveling in other Countries
without Shoes or Stockings, seeking to enter into the Service of the Merchants
of England there, or to serve other Nations, and Run away from che
Merchant-Ships also, and lose their Pay, some of them not being willing to come
home, for fear of the Press; This makes my Heart dread the Effects of it, and
do suppose these Two Things would be worth while to be inquired into by the
Parliament, to know how the Case stands with them in these respects.

First, Let every Man of War's Book, that has been in the Streights, or Spain,
or Portugal, be searched, to see what Numbers Run away out of any Ship, or
every Ship, at any Port or Place.

And, Secondly, To have an Account of the Men of War and Merchant-Ships lost
this Eighteen Months to the French, with the whole Number of Men taken in each
Ship, and in the whole Shipping lost; and then have also the Number of Men
returned from France in that time, that did belong to those Ships, and what is
wanting may be supposed to be entered into the French Service, if not dead; and
if of the East India Ships taken, there be come home short, near an Hundred of
those men that were taken; it is to be feared, the rest will stay until warm
weather, and then get some Money and Clothes, if our Press is so great this
Winter, that they meet the poor Captive Wretches when they Return home in their
Lousie Clothes from France, and beg their way near an Hundred and Fifty Miles;
then before they come to London, catch them, and carry them on Board, Rags and
Lice, as they Run; put them down in the Hold of the Vessel, to lie on the
Boards or Ballast, or what they please, if they be without Bedding; and as
Queen Esther said, if they perish, they perish.

This is a Notable Age to tame Prodigals in, if they be ordinary Seamen; but if
they be Double-Pay Officers, then it may be they Run up and down, and be as bad
or worse than before; and so it may be will not be worth, some of them, a Groat
a Dozen, when the War is over; tho they most times Live; For the Officers that
have Liberty to come on Shore, die very few of them. But this by the way. But I
am too large in the Introduction.

I did think to say something more as to the Seamen's Encouragement, in this
Preface; as that without the Seamen be paid off yearly on Shore, and have a
Fortnight's or Month's Liberty to Recruit their Healths, I am afraid they will
never be encouraged to come into the Service, neither stay there; and if they
do, and die, it is as bad as Running; for if they Run away in England, and the
Merchants get them, it is an help to Trade, and the King may have them again;
and I could never know the Reason of that pretense of keeping the Seamen in
such slavery in their payments, in this Age more than any other, to be paid on
Board; as if his Majesty's Service was not as good as in any Age of the World.
For my part, I say, according to the money raised, there could never have been
better Pay for the Seamen in the world. And indeed I would not have the Seamen
of England say Justly, That God and the King sent good Meat, but the Devil sent
them Cooks that spoiled it half in dressing.

But in short, I cannot see how the Nation, in the general, can answer the
Seamen's being left to Ruin:

For, First, as I said, it is against Grace, against the gracious Law of
Christ, not to do to them as we would others should do to us; which is taught
the Children in their Catechisms.

2. It is against the gracious Providence of God to these Nations, who did, by
a Miracle, send over our gracious King William, to be a means to secure our
Religion, Liberties and Properties; and if the Nation, who enjoys all these in
Peace at home, should let the Seamen be Ruined, and lose all together, and
their Lives into the bargain; I am afraid Christ will tell us another word in
our Ears, That the Scripture shall not fail; and the same measure men mete,
shall be meted to them again.

And so much to their being managed contrary to Grace.

2. Contrary to Reason; for Reason tells us, other Ages encouraged their
Seamen, and paid them on Shore; and other Nations do so now. And Reason may
tell those who have understood the Nature of the paying on Board, That the
Seamen's Families and Relations have not enjoyed the Benefit of little more
than half their Pay, to their Familie's Comfort.

3. It is contrary to common sense, to think that if Seamen do usually die,
great part, where they are kept 2 or 3 years on board, that they should have
any Policy to keep them until they die, rather than to pay them off, to Recruit
their Health and Lives.

And indeed, who could be ever imagined to come freely into that Service where
nothing but Death can part again, and then the Widow denied their Money
oft-times at last. And besides the Loss of the Seamen's Lives, there is
extraordinary Charge to the Nation, and no benefit to the public; but it may
be the Commanders that had abused the Seamen all the War, could not get more,
and would want a Ship to get Money in, and so might want bread, while our brave
Commanders would have Men enough But those who have driven away the Seamen from
their Ships, and could have a supply by turning over men from other Ships,
these might be at a Loss for Men next Year. But my Skill in Sea Affairs is too
small: Did it but attain to the height of my Faithulness to his Majesty, and
Love to my Native Country, I would, if the Lord assisted me with Life and
Health, write such an History of the Knavery, Folly, Cowardice, Treachery, Ruin
and Destruction of this War; in the Sea-Affairs, the Land would admire at; and
would write every Line, to the best of my Judgment, what would be found true,
not only in another Age, where they will speak plainly, how his Majesty, and
the Parliament, and Nation, and Merchants are cheated and abused. But I would
write what I believe will be found true in the Day of Judgment, where all
Cloaks will be thrown off; and then it will be known, that God did not send
Mankind into the world to be like Fishes, the great ones to devour the little
ones; and I bless the Lord, who kept me from being one of the Devourers of the
Age; for I have had an opportunity with ease to be a Monster, when I laid out
an hundred Pound a week, or two, in Seamen's Pay, if I had bought at half
Profit, or Twelve Shillings in the Pound Profit, as some Monsters did, I should
have doubled my Money so often, to have been able to have swallowed up 3 or 4
Seamen's Pay for a Breakfast, besides what I had for Dinner and Supper; and
then I should never have said a word of the Ruin of the Seamen, but should have
been forced to have kept all Counsel, if the King had been cheated of a quarter
of his Money, and the Seamen of above half their pay.

But I presume it will be well to look back to the most happy state of our
Ships of War, when we did most effectually beat our Enemies, and encourage our
Seamen, and see if we do not find the neglect of their method has been the
Loss of half our Seamen, and many of our Ships.

And, Secondly, Whether their way was not to go out in the Summer, and take all
Opportunities to sight and destroy their Enemies, and come in again with the
greatest part of the Fleet, and pay off the Seamen, and save their Lives and
Pay.

Whether if this had been done, the Seamen would not have been encouraged to
come freely into the King's Service, as in other Ages, as into a place where
there was Money, and Liberty, and Release, and not perpetual Bondage. And if at
last discharged by reason of Sickness, and had Tickets signed by all the
signing Officers, for the same to be deprived, otherwise cheated publicly of
their money, to the shame of the Pay, and the Ruin of the discharged; and
whether any can now, on the last Terms, be safe to serve their King and
Country: and it may be questioned, whether it be not a shameful thing, when
poor Seamen have had their Pay received by false Powers, they should be denied
the sight of the Ship's Books, to see who received it; and therefore whether
also this, and the denying them otherwise the knowledge of their Case, be not an
unjust and unreasonable thing to let poor Creatures be Cheated and Ruined, and
hide it from them. And what advantage it is to the Government, to let their
poor Seamen be so managed, besides the King's being at extraordinary Charge to
pay them so far from London, and the City deprived of the benefit of taking
their money, as in other Ages, wherein the City of London was not used to be so
slighted, neither the Seamen so Ruined.

But I shall presume to say more in the Body of my Book; for whoever pleases
to read it at their leisure, what my Thoughts are; and if the Honorable Houses
pardon me, I shall not need much to trouble my self with the Offenses any
others may take at it; for I write for good, and not to please, but to hinder
Cheating the King, and Ruining the Seamen; and not to flatter those that would
have it all smuggled up in silence; which makes me think of one lately, that
because he could not find any thing false in my book, had this supposition, and
that was, That he supposed if I had Represented so much in France, the French
King would have hanged me.

Now to that, being only a Supposition, I will answer it with other
Suppositions: As,

1. I must have been a Fool or a Knave to have writ it, if I did not consult
before I writ it, whether I could, with a good Conscience, have suffered Death
for the same; and if I could, that might have been an easier Death than the
Stone or the Gout. And,

2. I suppose, by his Leave, if the French King's Subjects are Ruined and
Destroyed, it is by his Knowledge and Appointment; and not Ruined and destroyed
without his knowledge, and the knowledge of his Nobles, as I presume our
Seamen's Ruin are hid from the King and Parliament, and the blame must at last
lie somewhere; and it may be the next Age will wonder at she History of it;
therefore I take pains to inform the King and Parliament, that they may let the
blame and shame be laid on those who have been Unjust, and Cruel, and Barbarous
in the management of the Ruined Seamen and their Families: And indeed I suppose
also,

3. That the French King, tho he plagues almost all Mankind, yet he incourages
his Seamen, let us them come on shore every Year, and money in their Pocket;
lends them his Men of War to Privateer in, gives them his Tenths; and in short,
if they have gotten Three Millions of Riches this Year from us, his Seamen's
Share is more Hundreds of Thousands of Pounds than would pay our Ruined Seamen
all their Q's and R's.

4. I suppose if he had seen his Seamen had been half dead, or frightened away,
or Cheated of their Pay, and he not known it beforehand, I protest I do not
only suppose, but really conclude they would have been more likely to have
hanged some that ruined his Seamen, for being Knaves to do it; and those that
seemed honest, for being Tools to consent to it; and that might have escaped
well next time, or at least had as good Quarter for telling as they for acting.

And suppose one Supposition more, That if the French King did know that his
Admiralty, and Navy-Board, and Commanders of Ships did Ruin and destroy his
Seamen's Lives and Pay, the Seamen would not so constantly go home to France
again as they do; neither would he have Men enough to man his Fleet; neither
would any other means secure his Seamen's Lives and Pay, without Managers that
were as merciful to them as good men are to their Beasts, who do not let them
groan and cry, and languish away for want of that Provender that is due to them
for their Labor, for that day's work wherein they fell sick under their
Burden, which is too sad, and too tedious to enlarge on.

And if your Honors think it to be too tedious, it may be considered, That the
Miseries of the Seamen in England, have been of more various Kinds, and
peradventure various Numbers than the Miseries of all the Corporations of
England, and cannot be Represented in a few Words; besides all their other
Miseries of their Families that they are subject to, equal with the lost of
Mankind; And as their Diseases are many, they require honest faithful Doctors,
in order to their Cure, and not leave them in the hands of hard hearted
Wretches, to Ruin them. But I could write until I tire your Honors and my
self. But I beg your Honor's Gracious Pardon, and do lay my self at your
Honor's Feet, and beg of God to give his Majesty Wisdom, as an Angel of God;
and that God would fill your Honors with all Wisdom, and that in his and your
Prosperity the Nation may be happy and blessed; and then I hope I shall in
mercy enjoy a share of the same; Who subscribe my self a faithful Lover and
Servant to his most Gracious Majesty King William, and all your Honors, and
all good men, while I remain,

Hermitage-Bridge, Jan. 44. 1695. W. Hodges.

Proposals, etc.
THE Subject of Encouraging and Increasing of our English Seamen, is of greater
Consequence than abundance of Mankind does readily apprehend; and we being an
Island, cannot be safe or happy in Peace or War without them; which makes me
admire what senseless Stuff the Brains of those are, or what hardened metal
their Hearts are, that have so greatly Ruined and Oppressed many of them and
their Families; and I have admired and lamented with Tears, to understand their
Ruin: And if God himself commanded the Jews so strictly, That if they saw their
Enemie's Ox or Ass fall down under their Burden, they should help them up; Then
God forbid I should have my Heart harder than a Jew, that when I see not my
Enemie's Asses, but my most gracious Sovereign King William's, and my dear
Country's Seamen, many dead under their burdens, and others in Ditches of
misery, if I should not endeavor to help them up, I should be worse than a
Jew. And I considering, and seeing their miseries thrown on them, and
endeavoring some Years to help them out, until I did almost fall in my self, I
cried out for help to their Master and Dame, who immediately sent a large
supply of Money to their Managers and Drivers, to assist them and help them up;
and at first they had help. But the poor Cattle being kept traveling so long,
until they fell sick by Droves; and when they that drove them saw they were
sick, and could be drove no farther, either let them die with the Load on their
backs, but if others let them out to Pasture, then there was an Order, That if
they could not be well, to come into the same Drove in 28 Days, they must then
run the hazard to lose all the Hay and Corn due to them and their Young; although
it may be many of them died within a few Days after they were in Pasture; or it
may be the Drove, they belonged to, was gone 300 miles before they were well;
and it may be they went into the next Drove of their Masters they met with, if
they lived, and were well; or it may be they continued sick, and were sent into
some Stable for Cure, and there did continue long after their Drivers had
ruined the Rest of their Fother: And I considering what a Scarcity of others to
bear the Burdens, and so Extraordinary Charge to buy more, that I thought it
better to keep them there was, and prevent that hazard and Charge, especially
considering besides, That it was a sign of men's being wicked, whose tender
mercies were cruel; And also, that the young ones they bought, did many times
die before they were a Year used to the Pack-Saddle.

And to conclude, I dreamed, That without there were honest, faithful Managers,
Drivers and Hostlers, the poor Cattle would be ruined at last.

But I had need to beg pardon for telling so much of my Dream: I will forbear
the rest; for perhaps it would be an hour longer, and they that understand the
interpretation, find it all true.

But now for the Seamen's Encouragement to serve his Majesty, I will propose
some few things, always provided, That if I propose such and such honest ways
and means, it may not be misunderstood: As for Example, if I say, that there
must be good Commanders, and honest Pursers, or they will be miserable at last,
and run away indeed, many of them. This must not be understood as if I were so
uncharitable as to reflect on all in those Places; for we have some Worthy
Admirals and Commanders, whose Names I honor, and who will neither abuse the
Seamen themselves, neither suffer their Officers to abuse them; and for every
honest Purser I love them.

But my Head being so like a Land-Flood, overflowing with the last Stormy
Times of Misery and Knavery, that some of it will overflow the Banks before I
can get any Materials ready to secure the Country from a further inundation.

And now I will begin to propose some Materials that I do suppose will be
useful, in order for security for time to come; and that which is useful may be
made use of now or hereafter, as Times mend: How long they have been bad, God
knows. But I remember, many Years past, it was said, Bad Men made Bad Times:
how it is now, must be left to the Learned to Judge. And it was said, Bad Times
caused Good Laws; God send the Seamen some Token of the Truth of that before
they are all ruined.

And now as to the first Consideration of the Seamen's Relief, it is to be
considered of the Admiralty and Navy-Board: if they be the most Excellent Men
in England for Loyalty to his present Majesty, and Care of his Men of War and
Merchant-Ships, and to preserve the Seamen's Lives and Pay, that will, it may
be, be half a Cure. But if ever there should be in England, for time to come,
an Admiralty and Navy-board that should be one part false and Treacherous, and
the other soft, and easy, and foolish, to be led into ignorance and madness, it
might perhaps lie in their power to put in several Cowardly, Sorry, Damming
Officers, that would Ruin and Drive away Thousands of Seamen, and never fight
One Enemy; and if there were abundance of good Commanders and Officers that
loved the Seamen, and would fight their Enemies, and protect their Friends,
they might be tied up as so many Cats, some in one Room, and some in another;
and the Mice might play up and down in all the rest of the Rooms, and also
devour half the Victuals and Clothes in some Rooms, and be never hurt hardly;
Or indeed, in plain English, there might be Ships of War have Orders to lie in
the Downs, and their Enemie's Ships might come within TwoLeagues of them, and
it may be snatch away a Merchant-man, and be gone: And if the others say, Their
Orders is to lie there, and they must not break their Orders; that may serve;
or if there should be a Spuadron ordered to lie before Dunkirk, to keep their
Ships from coming out, and the French did start out, and ours had no Orders to
follow them, then it may be they might take some more Russia Ships; I think
they took Four Russia Ships last time, the next day, as near as I can remember;
And I deal plainly, because I write not either for Profit, Praise, or
Preferment; and so would do as a Lawyer or Physician, that gives Law or
Physic to a Friend freely, gives the best Advice and Help they can possible,
to have done the sooner, and perfect the Cure effectually.

And now having said, it may be, too much to the first, I conclude, only
observing, by the way, how it is possible we Citizens of London may be served
when we put our Children to Nurse; We may pay the best prices in the World to
the Nurses, and if they be not honest, the Children may be starved at last, if
we do not go, or send to see how they are used; and if there be good Milk
provided for them, it may fall out, that the Nurse, or her Children, or
Servant, yea the very Mongril Dog of the House may devour it three quarters up,
with as much greediness as ever a Ticket-Buyer bought a Seaman's Pay, Seven
Pound Ten Shillings for Forty Shillings, and as much honesty as ever a poor
Seaman was made Run basely and shamefully out of his Pay at the Office, or at
Pay-day.

2. Therefore if the Seamen should, or would be ever encouraged, we should look
back to the Justice, Policy and Honesty of our Forefathers, who used to pay
their Seamen their Money on Shore; and the Commanders, and Seamen, and Ships,
used to be agreed together to fight and Ruin, and destroy their Enemies at Sea;
and God blessed their honest Courage, and their honest Pay; and every Seaman's
Life then lost at Sea, was as a Poisonous Arrow to their Enemies: They killed
their Enemies, and destroyed their Fleets and Seamen; and they that lived came
in and were paid; and those that died, had their money, paid their Friends, and
Bounty-money sometimes also; and this did business.

And there is these Two Things to be considered of, which of them showed most
Courage, most Policy, most Profit or most Loss, our English Fleet neglecting or
refusing to fall upon the French Fleet, when God from Heaven turned the Wind
fair for our Fleet to fall on the French, when they were in Fresh-Water-Bay, on
our own Coast; When, in all likelihood, God that gave us the Wind to fall on
them, would have given us the Victory, and then we might have Ruined their
Fleet on our own Coast, if we had fought as our English Ships used to do when I
was a Boy, and it may be not lost 4 Ships, neither Two Thousand Seamen in the
Fight, because God seemed to turn the Wind for our Fleet to fight, as he did
for our gracious King William to Land at first, and Crowned his Industry and
Courage: And whether if our most Gracious and Valiant King William had been
afraid to have fallen on his Enemies at the Boyn, because of danger to have
saved some hundred Men's Lives, then he might not have lost the Victory, and
had forty Thousand Men's Lives dwindled away by Sickness and Skambling Fights
in Ireland since, and it may be, the War continued there until this day, as it
does at Sea; but blessed be God, who gave him Courage and Victory, and to every
Man he lost there, he Ruined ten Enemies, and Ruined their whole Cause in the
Conclusion in that Nation; and had our Fleet done so, what Mercy had England
enjoyed, to have seen the French Fleet Ruined.

But now as to our Ships and Men, and the two Questions before, Whether it was
greater Profit to the Nation and Seamen to save their Ships and Men, as
aforesaid, and of loosing four Ships, than in Fighting our Enemies Yard-Arm,
and Yard-Arm, with all our Fleet, after the old English way of Fighting, as old
Blake, and old Dean, and old Albemarle used to do, if their Enemies were twice
their Number. But now instead of that, we saved our Ships and Men then, and
lost twenty times four Ships since, and twenty times two thousand Seamen since,
and great part of them destroyed not their Enemies by the Bargain; and which is
best or worst I leave to those who have more Skill than I to Judge. But in
short, if the Seamen of England be ever truly encouraged and preserved for time
to come, they must be paid on Shore, and it must be so contrived as near as
possible, that every Man may be paid off once in a Year, or tw^ at farthest,
and have then a little security against the Press, that they may Recruit their
Healths, and then they will be encouraged to come into the Service again, and
their Friends glad to send them; and without that, I am afraid other
encouragements will be but like a few Oats showed a Horse to tempt him to come
and take up a Pack, who remembers the last time he could never get it off
before he fell sick, and was thrown in the Hedge: And lastly, although he saw a
great part of his Companions Dyed under their Burdens, none would be so
merciful to them as to give them a Fortnight's Rest in several Years. This may
seem a foolish Comparison, but Children and Fools are said to tell truth. and
so much to that, if there be no certain time when Seamen shall be discharged, I
fear there will be no certainty of their coming in for time to come freely: And
so much to that.

3ly, If His Majesty, and the two most Honorable Houses would advance all able
Seamen's Pay four or five Shillings the Month, this might be the way to
encourage the Seamen of England to serve more cheerfully and freely.

4thly, All ordinary Seamen's Pay, but two Shillings the Month, that they might
all strive to be Able Seamen.

5thly, That all Apprentises might be encouraged when they are Honest, and
Punished when they are not; that is, their Masters to have twelve Shillings the
Month, and they themselves the remainder; that is, if they are such as deserve
but Eighteen Shillings the Month, to have Four Shillings themselves to buy them
Clothes; if Men, to be Paid Nine Shillings; and if an Able Seaman, to be Paid
the Remainder of the Pay, as Able Seamen are; and this I Propose. because I
have known several Apprentises shifting, and running to and fro from Ships,
have Beggered their Masters and Dames, and the King loses their Service at
last, it may be, as their Masters and Dames do their Pay. But if they had
Encouragement themselves, it may be they would stay in their Ships; and if they
did not, to be liable to serve their Time over again, or pay for it; and also
by this means it would be certain who should have their Pay; and that has not
been this War; Sometimes the Prentices shall have all, and the Masters none;
and sometimes their Masters all, and the Prentices may starve for Bread or
Clothes, their Masters, it may be, some of them, taking little care where they
shall be provided for when sick and almost naked.

6. See all Seamen to be encouraged to be able Seamen, and Midship-men and
Officers, as they are capable of; and not let any Captain's Boys receive
Midship-men's Pay for their Masters, and the Brave, Courageous, Loyal Seamen,
that served indeed for Midship-men to be paid but as Able, or to be split their
Pay, one Midship-man's Pay between Two Men; and this would encourage all Seamen
that have Brains and Art, to strive for Preferment, and not have Lieutenants
put over them, that never saw a Gun fired in anger, it may be, this War.

7. As few Seamen as possible to be turned from Ship to Ship; and if they are,
to have Tickets given them for their former Ships, and these to be as
Landmarks for their Pay, and not to be made Run afterward; but sent up to the
Office for their Wives, or Friends, or Parents to receive their money; and these
turned over Tickets to be Registered, and paid in course, and that within three
months at farthest, after the turning over; and none to buy any of them at
above 3 s at most, in the Pound Profit, on Pain of Forfeiture of thrice the
value to the party grieved or oppressed; and if those who have extorted before,
of the Seamen, out of their Tickets, above 4 s or at most, 5 s in the Pound
Profit, might Pay to the Party grieved and oppressed 2 s back for every
shilling more profit; and that would not be so great a punishment as some may
imagine; For if they extorted 10 s profit, and five being for time past winked
at, the other five paid back double, is but 10 s So that the poor extorted
ruined Seaman, would have but 20 s at last for 20 s And if any say, there was
no Law against these Extortioning Villains for time past: To that I answer, I
do suppose, unless the Extortioners are worse than Heathens, there is the Law
of Nature and of Christ, to do as they would be done unto.

And Secondly. unless those Extortioners are worse than Turks, I have been
often informed, that the Turks will severely correct a Jew if he takes more
than a moderate profit of a Christian; they will beat the Jew severely. And I
do suppose that such dreadful cursed wretched Extortioners, as have bought some
Seamens Pay at near a quarter of the value, were never heard of among Turks or
Indians, or the most Savage and Barbarous Nations in the World; And those very
Seamen who are so Ruined, to lose their Health and Lives in the defense of that
very Nation where these Extortioners must live, or be Slaves themselves, and
lose all at last.

And I consider, That if David would not drink of the Water of Bethlehem, when
the Three Mighty Men had ventured their Lives to fetch it, but said, God
forbid: is it not their Blood? Then how can these Nations expect to thrive,
that put by the poor miserable Seamens Widows from their Pay; that was earned
not only with the peril of their Husband's Lives, but even fell sick, and
actually die on shore by reason thereof; or whether it be not very like
injustice, or unmercifulness, and Cruelty, to cause so great multitudes to be
deprived of their Pay, who have not been one Day or Month hardly out of the
Service for several Years, as by the Ship's Books will appear, except by
sickness or death, that can be proved; and if those, who have helped to throw
more misery on them, be the only men that are in this Nation to Relieve them;
the Lord, for Chrift's sake, preserve all Landmen from falling into such
Distress; for if Christ should say to these Nations in Judgment, The same
measure you mete, shall be measured to you again, it would be sad; but what he
will do is known only to himself; and what his good will and pleasure is to
stir me up to write this, he only knows.

And 8thly, Therefore there ought to be care taken what Seamen must do for time
to come, if they are set sick on shore, and the Ships go away before they are
well to secure their Pay; for I would appeal to all mankind, that has Grace or
Reason, yea, or Common Sense, whether it can be thought, that when there is
several sick Men in Ships, and they set on Shore, some in one Port, and some in
another; Whether the Ships must wait until they are well, and how the same Men
can get to their own Ships again when they are gone? And if they continue sick
or die, or go on board of other Ships, or be sent to the Hospitals, and Run out
of their Pay; whether this be not Injustice, Cruelty, Opression, Discouragement
to the King's Service, and that whereby no Man in England can be safe to Serve
his King and Country for time to come; nor no Man safe to trust a Seaman, or
Seaman's Wife and Family, one Groat that is in the King's Service on those
terms, since the Stoutest Man and Honestest Man in England, by keeping long on
Board, may fall Sick and Die, or continue Sick, and that a Year or two, and if
not go on Board, or be Pressed on board another Ship, and so loose his Pay: I do
protest in the presence of the Lord, before whom I Write this, I fear if there
be none in these Nations to be found to consider these dreadful Cases, but
suffer Cruelty and injustice to be smugled up, that God will Chastise these
Nations, until they Learn what it is to Ruin Men and Families in their Lives or
Pay, thousands and ten thousands, as by the King's Pay-books and Muster-books
will appear; and they I appeal to; they are such a Register the Nation never
saw in the Sea Affairs, and the blame must lie somewhere; and I suppose some
hardened Hearts will say the Running them out of their Pay, is right enough;
but it may be they will not consider that their turning from Ship to Ship,
until Sickness or Death came, was the Cause of a great part, and I hope they
will not be so Case-hardened as to say they were served well enough to be Run
out of their Lives, so many ten thousands; also I remember the English Nation,
in some former times, was mighty industrious to find out, and Punish the
Instruments that Ruined the King's Liege-People in their Lives and Estates; and
had we had but the tenth part of Landmen's Poor Families Stripped of all they
had in the World, as there has been Seamen stripped of their Pay, it would
have made a dreadful outcry in England: And indeed if our Poor in England had
been forced to be turned from Master to Master, without a Penny of Money for
some Years, as many Seamen have from Ship to Ship, and their miserable Wives
and Children Live on Credit, or Starve; and if at last they should, under the
burden of all by discouragements, fall sick, and be Run out of their Money, they
had worked for several Years, as many have been out of their Pay in several
Ships; it would look dreadfully bad. And some well-meaning men would have
nothing said of it to acquaint the Government, for fear our Enemies should know
it; as if the French, who has taken so many hundred Ships from us, and near
twenty thousand Men Captive, this War, and has so many Spies, and Treacherous
Villains here, and does, to outward appearance, know a great deal better where
to meet our India Ships, and Berbado's Ships, in several places to take them
Home to France, than ours did to send Convoys to take them Home to England; and
yet some seeming Honest Men are afraid the French, that take our Ships and Men,
should know our Case, and in short, I fear he knows it a great deal more
exactly than some do, or will do in England, for I do think some in England
seem to do, like what is said of the Woodcocks, to hide their Heads in a Bush,
and think none can see them; and so if they let the King, Country and Seamen be
all Cheated, it will continue to be all smuggled up; but my Pen runs thirteen
to the Dozen, and yet the knavery of the Bakers is such, that if care be not
taken, I am afraid some of our Seamens Families will be ready to starve: but to
that, I should propose a Remedy, that Seamen may not be Cheated of their
Health, Lives and Pay altogether.

First, if as many as is possible, might be Paid off every year, and that, it
may be, would save most of their Lives, most of their Healths, and all their
Pay besides, and we might have Ships enough for a Winter Squadron besides; and
if any did fall Sick, then if the Ship goes away and leaves him set on shore,
then if he cannot come on Board to set him in the Ships Book dis-sick at such a
place and time, and the Man, if well to go on Board another Man of War, and to
have the Captain of the Man of War send up a Certificate to the Office, That
such a man that was in such a Ship, is now in his Ship, and this to be Entered
in the other Ships Book in the Office to save the Poor Seamens Pay; and if the
other Ships Book be not there, to have a Register Book to enter it in the mean
time; and if the Man continues Sick or Dies, the Surgeon of the place, he is
sent to, to be Bound to give a Certificate of his Case to save his Pay, since
it must needs seem to me to be a barbarous thing toward any, for time past, to
be turned from Ship to Ship, for several Years; until they fall sick and die,
and then be Run out of their Pay; and it may be their poor Ruined Wives, who
hardly have seen their Husbands this War, it may be they must come 100 or 200
Miles, to show cause why they must have any money, and why their Husbands went
not on Board their own Ships again; and it may be the Ships Journal, if looked
into at the Office, would show the Ship went away in 24 hours: And if God will
bring every work to Judgment, I doubt our Ships Books and Ships Journals will
be sad Witnesses against the Cruelty of some in those Offices, to Run poor
Wretches out of their Pay, that the men are, as the Sentence is against those
that are to be hanged, Dead, Dead, Dead. And therefore if I find not any Remedy
against Ruining the Fatherless and the Widow, I will not expect any great
Security of our Ships and Merchandise.

And so much to that: God is a Jealous God: If we Ruin the Poor of Thirty
Thousand Pounds the Year, by some sort of Tools, and God suffers the Nation to
lose so many Hundred Thousand Pounds in Riches, and the King his Custom, by the
Ignorance, Carelessness, and Treachery of others; if our own Folly be not too
hard for us, I fear the Judgments of God will: and therefore I advise some way
for these Nations to break off their sins by Repentance, and their Iniquities,
by showing mercy to the Poor: and Mercy and Justice both, will teach ways to
secure Ruined Seamens Pay, when wounded, or dead, or in the Hospitals.

9. It is a miserable thing, that when men are turned over, or dead, or sick,
that their poor Wives cannot be informed whether their poor Ruined Husbands are
Run out of their Pay, without Petitioning; Which, if there be Twenty Thousand
Turnings over in a Year, may make work for the Clerk of the Petitions, and his
Masters. If they all Petition at 12 d the Piece to him, it is a Thousand Pound
the Year, and 6 d to his Boy, is five hundred Pound the Year: And will not this
be brave Times for him? But I remember, in all Calamities, some dreadful
Wretches get money; in the time of the Plague of London, in the time of the
Fire, and in the time of War, many are Raised from the Dunghill on the Ruins
of others; but why poor Seamen themselves, or their poor Wives, should not have
Liberty to get a Clerk to search the Book, to see if they are cheated of their
Pay or no, before Pay-day, is sad. But I confess it is a good way to hide
Knavery: For if money be said to be paid the Party, and was not, and he appears
himself, it is a timely notice to get another book to show him, that it was
only ordered to be paid him. But if he be dead, or gone, and never come
himself, then it may stand paid the party until Doomsday; and if he comes, it
was a mistake: And besides this, having a sight of the Books, may be a great
help to Extortioners and Ticket-buyers, if they get the Books searched
privately, they may buy as they please; And whether this be not turning the
blind out of their way, seeing the Seamens Wives have most time nothing but the
Books to know what is due; and if they be Run at Pay-day, it may be are forced
to petition, and stay for their money another year; and this is misery to misery.

10. Therefore I think they ought, for time to come, to have no Seamen
discharged without a Ticket, and no Officer keep his Ticket on pain of Felony;
For in plain English, which is worst, a Pick-pocket stealing a Guinea or Two
from a Gentleman, or a Captain of a Man of War to take a Seaman's Ticket from
him of Ten Pound, and it may be the poor Seaman, nor his Wife and Family, has
not a Groat in the World to buy a bit of bread? Therefore if there be not
Relief to poor Ruined Seamen, I will never more wonder we fool away, knock on
the Head, betray and destroy so many Men of War and Merchant Ships. But,

11. And none to wait above One Payment for One Ticket also, for time to come;
and not wait 3 years for 30 s at Two Payments of a Ticket, as has been common
this War: And whether this was not Misery to Misery? And to prevent that,

12. As few as possible to be turned from Ship to Ship; but when Ships come in,
pay them off as they come in, some one time, and some another; and the Men have
a Month's Liberty to come on shore; and gather health and strength, and spend
their Money; and when their Money is gone, their Friends will quickly send them
to Sea again, without pressing; and that would be good for King and Country:
And if Men see they are not shifted from Ship to Ship, like Slaves, they will,
when paid off on shore, as in other Ages, have Encouragement to come into the
Service again, and bring their Children, Servants and Friends with them. But if
they find they are deprived of their Liberty all their Days, when once they
come, and of their Property, when sick and die, no marvel if they are glad to
get away: And I would ask all Mankind, and would appeal to the King and
Parliament what should be the Cause the King's Service now should be more a
Prison than in other Ages? and why so Gracious a King's Service should be made
such a Bugbear now; and such Loss of Liberty, Property and Lives to the Seamen
now more than in any Age of the World; and whether it be not an unmerciful,
unjust, and an unreasonable Argument to pretend the Seamen cannot be admitted
to come on shore to be paid now, as in other Ages, because they will Run away:
Whereas, in the mean time, they are kept turned and tossed from Ship to Ship,
until more die than would Man the Fleet; and in the mean time also, more Run
away from the Service than would Man it all and half over again: And if they
are Run out of their Pay wrongfully, it is shameful and cruel; and if Justly,
their New Management has frightened more Seamen out of the Service, to the
appearance of the Ship's Books, this Seven Years last, than has Run away in
this Nation, I do verily suppose, this fifty years, if all the Old Books and
New Books were searched. So that I say, Experience shows the Misery of that
Argument of paying them on board Ship, by the Loss of near Forty Thousand
Lives, and sixty or seventy Thousand Men's Pay: Whereas, had their Lives been
preserved, and their Pay encouraged on shore, in all likelihood Seamen would
have been so increased, and thereby their Pay in Merchant Ships near half Iess:
That considering the hazard of Lost Voyages in Merchant Ships, they would there
have Thousands of them proved my Words good, that I used to say to them at
first, That the King's Service was the best in England; No half Pay, no
Damage, no Lost Voyage; and if pinched of their Diet, the King pays the
Pinch-gut-mony also honestly.

And thus I would by the way consider, that we cannot expect to be in safety
for time to come, without we do by Humility, Justice and Mercy, engage God to
stand by us, and give us Wisdom, and his Blessing in the first place.

And 2dly, As to outward means, in a visible way, we cannot be safe and happy
in times of Peace or War, without an hundred and fifty Thousand Seamen in
England. My Reason is this, That tho now we have the Dutch united with us, and
it may be save 20 or 30 Ships, and 10000 Men, the time may fall out we may
stand alone; and 2dly, What has been, may be; and the French and another
Nation have Joined against us; and then we need double the Strength and Number
of Men we have now; and that to maintain a War and Merchant Trade both; and if
we do not that we are Ruined for want of Trade; therefore this I would say, Tho
our Losses have been dreadful this War, and God knows, many of them blindfold,
and scandalous and ignorant; yet it was a great mercy we traded; Our poor had
been Ruined, if we had not Traded; all our Manufactory-workers would have been
ready to perish, and commit, it may be, any mischief; for it has been with the
Nation as it may be, in some part, with my self; There are some that have by
the Providence of God a Subsistence from me; I trade, and trust, and lose much;
I pay them, blessed be God, they live by their Labor, and some might starve,
if they had not that, or the Parishes must keep them; others, it may be, get
Money, more than I, under me, because I stand to all hazards, and they to none,
but take my Money. So it is in a Nation; if we had not Traded this War, we had
been Ruined; and if we lose not more than we get clear Profit, we shall live at
last; tho, by the way, the World may admire at us, that have near twice the
Number of Men of War employed that the Dutch have, and yet that they should
have so many Millions of Riches come home from the Indies, and other parts,
this year, and other years, and hardly lose any almost to speak of, except what
they have lost in our Company; for where they take care of their own Concerns
themselves, for the most part they go and come well. But in conclusion, I do
suppose, besides their preservation of their Shipping, if I am not under a
misapprehension, they save a Million of Money a year more than we in their Ships
of War, and Men's Wages, and it may be half a Million more in the very Wages of
Seamen in their Merchants Service; and if they spend less by half, and lose
less by Eight Parts in Ten, they will outdo us in Trade; and it is not our
making a Noise, and keeping our Seamen on Board of Ship until they die, will
save our Trade alive; but first the blessing of God; 2. The increase and
Encouragement of our Seamen, and our preserving them alive; and having enough
to supply the Merchantmen with Seamen cheap, and then having Men to order our
Convoys, at least with as much common sense to preserve our Merchant Ships, and
meet them as soon, and take them home to England, for time to come, as the
French use to do; to meet them to take them home to France, that we may not be
a Grief to our Friends, and a Joy to our Enemies, and a byword to the World. I
bless God I love my Native Country well, and our gracious King William well;
and if I did not, I would not be so plain hearted. And as to what I said
before, we must, for time to come, employ at least half as many Seamen more in
times of Peace, than ever we did; and to do it in time of Peace, if we would,
when ever God in Mercy sends us peace; then mind the very Fishing Trade at our
own Doors, as others do. I find it computed by one Sir John Burrows, Keeper of
the Records in the Tower, and printed with Gerard Malines Lex Mercatoriae,
which I have by me, That the Dutch do employ in our British Sea, which he
says is a continual Harvest, and does employ 6400 Ships and Busses, and 120000
Men at Sea; whereby he says, That Holland it self being but 28 Miles in
length, and a few in breadth, imploys in all their Sea-Trade 10000 Sail of
Shipping; and he says, That Lubeck has 700 Sail of Ships, Hamborough 600,
Emden more, besides Freemen, and other Nations that Fish and Trade in our Seas:
And he says, That the very Customs of their Fishing Trade of Holland came to
500000 l the Year, including the Tenth Fish, and Cask paid for Waftage. And
this, if thought of by England, when ever God shall send Peace, would be the
way to employ and increase our Seamen, and to have a sufficient Number always
ready to serve the King and Country at 2 Months Warning; and not suffer our
Seamen, in Peace, to rove all over the world for employment to get bread, yea
to go some Thousands into the West Indies a Buckaneering, for want of bread at
home. This is by the way. It may be something of this may be minded some Years
hence. And this I would leave as a Memorandum, That since France is grown so
prodigious Great, if we double not our Diligence, they will endeavor to
out-wit us in Peace or War: and it may be they may be to England as the
Philistines were to Israel, when we fall deeply to sinning, they may be raised
up to scourge us; and the Lord prevent the Cause, and if it be his holy Will,
enable us to bring them under.

11. And I would say, That all possible care ought to be taken, that those, who
have the Command and Offices in the Ships of War, should be Men of true Courage
in fight, and true Kindness to the Seamen at other times: And I would appeal to
all our Brave Commanders, if the Seamen, with good usage, will not be led with
a twined Thread, up to the Muzzels of their Enemies Guns, at any time, by
Stout, good Natured Commanders: But hate to be abused like Dogs. And I am
consulting my Memory, and do not remember any one Commander that was an
Hectoring, and Swearing, Damning, Cruel Wretch to his Men, that ever had the
Heart to fight an Enemy: And therefore it were in this Age well, if there were
a Law made. Tha^ no extraordinary Correction should be given to Seamen in
Passion; but to have Three, or at least Two Officers advise in any Correction
more than ordinary.

12. That no Seaman be kept above 2 Years out, either in the Straits or West
Indies before they come home, and be paid off; it having been often found,
Ships staying long there, have had their Number of Men 6 times over, to the
Seamen's Ruin. And I never heard of a Penny Profit to King and Country, by
their Ruining of so many.

13. None be so turned over above once before his first money be paid, and that
to prevent the Ruin of their Pay and Families.

14. None to forfeit a Penny of the other Ship's Pay, after he is 3 Months in
the Ship.

15. No Officer to detain a Seaman's Ticket on any pretense whatever, except
his Covenant-Servant, on pain of Felony.

16. None to set a Q. or R. on any Seaman's Pay, but to show Cause, and set his
Name that did it, that Seamen may not be rumed in Life, and Death and Pay and
All, by they know not who, nor wherefore.

17. None to receive a Seaman's Pay without a true Power; and if Counterfeited,
to have the Middle Joint of each Little Finger cut off, and be sold to the
West Indies for perpetual Servitude all their Days.

18. No Officer to detain a Seaman's Certificate, or Sick-Ticket, on any
pretense whatever.

19. No Officer to keep Men open on the Books a Voyage after they are gone,
neither to make out Tickets for them, or to enter Men in the Ship's Books, that
never saw the Ship in their Lives. And to prevent this and the other, and the
Cheating the King; and Loss of Ships, and Ruin of Seamen for time to come,
there might be,

20. One man in 20 that can write and Cast Account, to be as Seamen extra, to
keep a Journal signed by them all, of the daily motion of the Ship, in what
place, what Wind, and what Friends or Enemies met with, or run away from; and
also to take an Exact Account of all the Ship's Victuals and Stores coming on
Beard, to see that it is the full Quantity, and that no Embellishment might be
in the Stores, nor no Victuals short, since the King allows enough of all these
things, if men shuffle it not away; and also to see the men mustered every week
all the Voyage on board, to prevent their being entered that never come on
board; neither they kept open that Run away: And that also the Seamen extra
might be Learning to carry a Ship to Sea in any part of the World, and
consulted with in case of Danger, that Ships might not be knocked on the head,
or fooled away, for time to come, so madly as in some times past; and these men
to have six shillings the Month more than Able Seamen; and to be preferred, if
deserving.

21. In regard that the Boatswains, Gunners and Carpenters are Places of great
Care and Trust, and some Expenses in the getting in, and taking care of, and
accounting for their Stores, and their Wages being, it may be, under-valued, in
respect of those who have double Pay, if his Majesty, and the Honorable
Houses, would advance their Pay half as much more as they have now, and this
would be the way to encourage them to be honest, faithful and cheery in the
Service; and they that are not honest, to be punished: if they are found to
steal the King's Store, then they and the Parties who are the Receivers, which
are as bad as the Thieves, to be every man that is found guilty, marked on the
Little Fingers, and transported for Servants to the West Indies, all their
Days, as those that would infect others if they staid here: And to find out all
Theft, if there were this Encouragement, That whatever Seamen 2 or 3 could
prove the same, to have their discharge from the Ship, on the Conviction of the
Offender, and Tickets for their own money, to be paid presently at the
Pay-Office, and a Protection for One Year from the Press, except they can be
preferred in the time to some place, into some other Ship. And this would be
the way to have almost all the Thieves in the Fleet, and in the Yards
discovered, and without Charge or Loss to the King. But if men who discover
Cheating be abused, brow-beaten and back-beaten, and confined to endure it all
their days, no marvel if there is seldom any Thievery found out, if never so
much committed.

22. No Pursers, or Captains Clerks, or any Officers, to give a List of Names
to others, to forge Powers, or to deliver out Tickets to any, but publicly;
and to those who have Powers, that are Lawful to take the same; and none to
sell or receive any Seaman's Pay or Ticket, except their own
Indenture-Servants, on Pain of Felony, as being worse than Highway-men.

23. There to be a Committee to hear the Complaints of those who have been
oppressed, cheated, or ruined in their Pay; and to hear all Complaints freely,
and to restore Justice to the oppressed, as those who would not have the hand
of God go out against our Navigation any more, to the suffering either our own
Folly or the Enemies Subtilty to ruin us.

24. That whenever Ships are put up for Re-calls at Broadstreet, for Pay, there
be a certain time appointed for each Ship, and public notice given at least 6
days beforehand, for all parties to appear, that have Money due, that they may
not lose their Pay, or come at such uncertainties for small sums, that the
trouble and charge, and loss of time, is worth more than the Money received.

25. That there may be also an appointment of some of the Commissioners, that
state the public Accounts, to hear and receive all Informations, wherein the
King and Nation have been cheated, and liberty to grant a safe Conduct to any
one to come and appear before them, to make a full and free discovery, and to
let them depart home without molestation again; and if their Information be
worthy of a Pardon, that it might be interceeded for; if not, that they might
be left open to the Law, as before: And that, if any one, that has been guilty
of Cheating, and forging of Powers, can discover two others as bad as
themselves, so as they may be convicted, then the first to be pardoned, and the
other two punished: And if the other two can either of them discover two more,
that is four as bad as themselves, the two to be excused, and the four
corrected, unless any of them could double their Information, as aforesaid; and
this would be one way, perhaps, to find out how the King, and the Nation, and
the Seamen may be modestly Judged to be cheated of 100 or 150000 l a year this
War.

And now I having proposed this, it may be I shall meet with some Enemies that
will envy me ten times worse than the Thieves envied him that wrote the Book
that is called, The English Rogue; and yet if they were so wise, as to keep
their own Counsel, none would know I meant them; for indeed, I bless God I aim
not against persons, but Villainy; and if I meet with any that is offended at me
for discovering the Method of the Navy-Cheats, I shall think it is some body
that is galled and scabbed; and that I touched them, tho I did not see them,
and therefore they kick and bite, as some Horses will do. And so much to that.
I would advise them to keep their own Counsel, that others may not laugh at
them; and if they laugh themselves, and are pleased, the World will be ready to
judge they are glad if I can hunt out the Scabby Sheep out of their Flock. But
I would propose concerning those many thousands that are taken captive into
France, if it were in English Ships.

26. That they that are taken may have their several miseries considered of,
how they are used in France; and if their sufferings be so great, that they are
ready to perish there for want, it would be well if some Relief were ordered
them, that they might not die, and perish there, or be forced to enter into the
French Service for Liberty, Bread and Clothes, and therefore to be sent for
away, also so soon as possible they can conveniently.

27. When come to Plymouth, or any Seaport Town in England, to have at least a
penny a mile allowed every Seaman for Traveling Charges to London, if in Men
of War, and to where their Friends live, if in Merchant Ships, that they may
not be forced to beg or starve for near 200 miles, and at last be forced away
into other Ships, without one penny of money to buy them Clothes for to shift
them: And it may be considered, if it be not a barbarous thing to meet men as
far as Kingston, coming home out of France, with nothing but their Lousie Old
Clothes the French give them, and when they have begged 150 miles, to carry
them away, lay them in the Hold in Press-Ketches, without Bedding, or any thing
to lie under or over them; and it may be the poor Wretches sickly and weak,
some of them: And this is now at this time one Fruit of our keeping Seamen on
board, and paying them there, that they should not Run away, until there is so
many dead and gone, that there is dreadful Tearing ann Halling in City and
Country, and the very Watermen out of the Tiltboats, that they are afraid to
work on their Trades, some of them now, while our great Ships are so many laid
up: And by the way, this pressing, when Men were paid lately, frighted away
some Hundreds or Thousands of Seamen: Whereas if they had but had liberty to
have spent their money freely in one month, they would have been glad to have
gone again. I have heard a Friend of mine declare solemnly, He had above 20
Lodgers that belonged to his House, went away to their own Countries, not
daring to come up to London to spend their money here, or return it home to
their Friends; and if so many be seared away in one house, how many in all the
houses that keep Lodgers in City and Suburbs? Therefore men must be taken care
of for time to come, to have their Lives preserved, and their persons
encouraged; or if not, I fear it will produce greater Loss and Damage than is
yet foreseen; And all mankind that knows the Sea-Affairs; knows that 2 or 3
Years keeping on board of Ship, commonly 3 fourths of the men die: whereas if
they had liberty, and fresh provisions, and Land-Air, one month often recruits
them again.

28. Therefore the Seamen to be encouraged, and preserved, and paid off at
London, as formerly, and the City would not be Ruined by the War. And if it be
objected, The Seamen would then go in Merchant-Ships, many of them. To that I
do answer, if their Lives were preserved, they would increase as fast or faster
in Men of War than in Merchant-Ships: and if there were plenty, Wages would
fall in Merchant-Ships. And had our Fleet increased Seamen, as it was expected,
the Wages would have been so low in Merchant-Ships, and what with Lost Voyages,
Seamen would have strived to have gone into the King's Ships, if they had been
paid off in every Ship, and had Liberty. But when they have no hopes of
Release, but Death, or the End of the War, and cannot have opportunity to fight
to end the War, this is a melancholy Case: many of them have complained they
wanted to fight it out for to end the War. And,

29. This paying the Seamen off on Shore yearly, that is, one half one Year,
and another half another Year, would many times save the King near as much
charge in small Ships Victuals and Wages, while as our Ship is in the Dock, as
the charge of mending the Ship comes to. And indeed this War has been, it may
be, such a Disappointment to Seamen, as the World never knew, some Commanders
having had so much Love and Reputation, and Care, as to have Men to Man a Ship;
and it may be in some months after, either the men turned great part into other
Ships, or the Commanders removed into other Ships; so that if a Thousand Seamen
would be freely willing to serve under such brave Commanders, as I know some,
they are not sure, but in a month they may exchange their Drivers. And by the
way, I would observe, That tho the Double-Pay Officers have had Pay suitable to
buy Two Canes to beat the poor Seamen, instead of one; whereas before, they
sometimes did tie a Ropeyarn at the end of their Cleft Sticks, but now may buy
new; but the poor Seamen had not 1 s the month more all this War, to buy one
course Coat or Wastcoat to keep off a blow. Which brings me to another
Paragraph, that is,

30. That the poor Seamen may have their 40 s a piece for Clothes, used to be
allowed them if the Ship was lost; and this they had before they beat the
French; and before that, they enjoyed some Comforts now and then. But to go on,

31. No Seamen to be forced to go out of a Man of War into a Merchant-Ship,
although the Captain should have several pounds for the same. But if Necessity
requires the Lending of a Seaman or Two to a Merchant, the Seaman may have all
the Pay in the Merchant-Ship, and the Captain and Purser to have the Benefit of
his Victuals only in the Man of War, that the King and the Seamen be not both
cheated at one time. And,

32. The Seaman to have a Certificate to come again in a certain time, and to
be kept from the Press until then.

33. No Seaman to be made wait above ten days at the Navy-Office, to petition
for to have a Q or R. taken off. But if whenever paid-off, as formerly, and
encouraged, there would be an end almost to that dreadful wretched Ruining and
Destruction to themselves and Families, of losing their money, for those Letters
being set on by any wrongfully; and therefore would serve the King cheerfully.

34. That those, who are discharged fair, by Reason of Sickness, and have
Tickets signed by all the Officers for their Pay, may not be cheated of it, for
the word of one hard hearted wretche's pleasure, the Seamen's Ruin being too
great already.

35. If Seamen are pressed away when on Shore, the Captain that commands the Ship
he is in, to be obliged to send a Certificate to the Ticket-Office, to be
Registered in the other Ship's book, or in a Register-Book, as in the Case
before of Sickness, to secure the Seaman's Pay from being ruined, because he
lost his Liberty.

36. That it may be considered there are 3 things Englishmen do value highly,
that is, Liberty, Property and Life, and all these have the Seamen lost some
share of this War, and the Histories of all these Nations cannot parallel; and
therefore double Care ought to be taken of them for time to come, seeing it is
to be feared there is some gone to enquire after the preserving of those things
in other Nations already, as by the King's Books of Ships come home this Year,
may be seen something.

37. Seamen pressed out of Merchant-Ships, to be under the penalty of half
their Pay, to go on board of such a Man of War, at such a time, and then to
have liberty to bring up the Merchant-Ship, and to take half their Pay, and
sell their Ventures, and recruit themselves a few days, to recover their
health, that they may not, after long Voyages, infect the men of War by
sickness; and when they are gone on board, that man of War to have a
Certificate sent up to the Office, That such a man is come on board such a Man
of War; and then his other half of his Pay to be paid to his Attorney: And if
he goes not on board the Man of War, or if she be ordered away sooner, than on
board another; then the other half of his Pay to be forfeit to the Hospital of
Greenwich, if he goes not in a Man of War. And by this means most of the
Seamen might be in the King's Service once in 2 Years, and the others that have
been there discharged, and paid off, would please the Seamen, increase them,
save their Lives and Pay. And if so, there might be a Law made, to cause all
Masters to register them that come home for the King's use, before they are
paid, and all other Registers will be too short, there being, it may be, 40000
Seamen Batchelors, or such as cannot be found to be registered, but lodge 40 or
50 in a house; and if registered there, can be gone 100 miles next week. But
good Pay, their Lives preserved, and good loving Commnaders, that will fight
with their Enemies, and be as kind to the Seamen as Lambs, would set almost all
to Rights again in a Year or Two, if they be not ruined at the new way of
management in the Offices afterward.

38. And therefore they that are sent to the Hospitals, or continue a Year or 2
sick, must not be cheated out of their pay, or have that barbarous word told to
a perishing Wife, That her Husband should not have been sick; when if he had
been sick two Years, and before quite well, crawled into a Man of War again,
and there continued, might deserve, more especially if the Wife and Children
have Relief of the Parishes, and the man still in the Service also.

And indeed I find our Poor's Book in the Suburbs, below the Tower, smell very
strong of the Ruin of the Seamen's Families; our Taxes for the Poor being
doubled: And it may be some that would grudg to give a poor ruined Seaman's
Family 2 d to buy them bread, if they were ready to starve, may yet blame me
for troubling my head with their Cases, and Ruins, and miseries: but however,
my Conscience bears me Witness, that I serve God and King William, and the
good Old English. Interest, in what I do: And so long as I have sweet peace
within, I cannot so much as fear any thing of trouble can hurt me; for, I bless
God, I have learned in part, as a Christian, to be content with what God
allotteth me; And I have also learned this Principle, That an honest man is not
subject to injury; a man may kill him, but cannot hurt him. And now I speak of
that, makes me think of some that threatened to sacrifice me last Year; and when
the News was brought my dear Wife, she was frighted: But I bless God I feared
it not: For as God carries me on, that I cannot let the Ruin, and Destruction,
and Cruelty, and Injustice, that is exercised on our English Seamen, more than
ever the World saw, to be hid from the King and Parliament; so by the Grace of
God, he carries me above fear of any sufferings, so long as I have Truth on my
side, and those Two Graces of my side, Justice and Mercy, that will bear me up.
But if all the Reason and Understanding I have left, do not fail me, I have all
the common Policy of my side that can be imagined. And now I speak to that, I
will be plain hearted and declare my Opinion, That I do verily think, if there
were no Policy on my side, that if the Seamen were oppressed and ruined, they
and their Families, as multitudes have been, the Justice of God would awake
against the Nation.

And 2. I do also verily judge if there were no provoking Evil in their Ruin,
they are ruined so madly, and dead, and run away so shamefully, that it would
be the way to spoil our selves at last, if it proceeds much farther; for their
Ruin does increase the pretense of keeping them turned from Ship to Ship, or
catching them next day, or the same they are paid: And if there be not liberty
of fresh Air and fresh Provisions, Experience shows the salt Seas and salt
Victuals, in staying long in Ships, kills ten times more than the Sword: And
God forbid, that the French should bave cause to rejoice, and say, as long as
this War lasts, he need not fight to kill our men; for they die faster without
his fighting. And in short, if this War had been a Game at Cards, I should have
feared some Gamesters played booty; if it had been a Suit of Law, I should have
verily Judged there were some took double Fees. But my wandering, roving Brains
do rather think our Sea-Affairs look more like that Rude Play, called, Blind
man's Buff; for we have had several scurvy hard blows, that we could not well
tell who it was that did hit us: But however it is, my Wisdom is too small to
unriddle the whole, although I have Abundance of secret Notions that at present
serve for my own instruction: And this that I write is something that bubbles
over; And if any should go farther, and say, Whatever the Game was, some that
were either to hold or decide some of the Stakes, have gotten great Estates,
let as many Gamesters as will, be ruined. Now that I would leave to those, who
have more skill to determine. I am almost ashamed of this rambling discourse,
and will now say what comes next to hand; and that is, That we had need to
secure our Walls; and if the Seamen are called our Walls, they had need to be
repaired all that is possible; And if any say, Great part of them are new ones,
and so should last well; To that I answer, it may fall out the newer they are,
the more apt to fall; whereas those which are old and seasoned, if preserved
any thing like, would do better: And to that I might say, Perhaps it is so
indeed; for in England we need never want men for the Sea; but Seamen are men
seasoned to the Sea. And by the way I would observe, That our brave Seamen that
have been 7 Years in the Service, they never had a penny Bounty-mony in the
Spring; it is they that come in afterward get Bounty-mony: And I have wondered,
those that managed the Seamen did not think of some encouragement for those who
stood all the time, as well as for those who come in the last week. It is an
old saying in England, The Eye of the Master makes the Horse fat; And indeed,
if our most gracious King William had been Rightly informed, to have seen the
Case of his Loyal Seamen, they would have been in better plight. And this
brings me to consider, That the Victualling of our English Navy, is the best in
the World; that is allowed them, if they have what the King allows: And
therefore,

39. It were well for the Seamen, if the Pursers were bound, and made to take
all the Sea-stores on board of Ship, and neither to receive any short at the
Office at first, neither to sell any away before they come as far as my House,
and that is not a mile from the Victualling-Office; and then Ships need not go
to shortallowance often in 14 days after they are at Sea; and if that were
prevented, it were well. But it may be they may plead, They can answer it,
because if they are found out, they must pay for it: Now to that I would say,
it is well for all the Nobility's, and Gentry's, and Yeomen's Horses in
England, that they have not Pursers to feed them; that if their Masters allow
them 10 or 20 Quarters of Oats for a Stable, the Grooms, that should feed them,
take a third of them, and sell them, and drink away the money between the
Drivers and the Grooms; and reckon so many Pecks a day; and if the Horses are
abroad at work, and come not in time, charge their Oats to the Master's
Account, tho they are sold away, and they eat none in 2 or 3 days, or a week:
And indeed, bad Drivers and bad Feeders is enough to spoil any Team of Horse in
the World. I have heard among Countrymen, in Kent, some say, There is half in
half difference in driving Cattle; some will beat them, and whip them, and
knock them over the Pate, and swear and damn like Devils at the Cattle, and
spoil them, that they will hardly drive at all, or it may be break their
Traces, and run away, and spoil the Team at last; whereas, if another, that
knows how to manage them with care, and cheereth them up, clappeth them on the
back with his hand, and chirups lovingly to them, they will draw like Lions.
And in short, I will appeal to all the Yeomen in Kent, many of whom are my
Relations, if ever they knew a Team of Horse get a Groat clear Gains for their
Masters, at 7 Years End, whose Drivers and Hostlers had ruined them half, and
near starved some of the rest, and cheated their Masters in the mean time of
more a great deal than their Provender came to. But I had need entreat pardon
for my rambling; but sometimes there may be Abundance of homely Truths spoken
in Jest; and it may be too true to make a Jest of.

But however, now to the Seamen of England; They are Really as true to the
Interest of King William, to the last, as any sort of men whatever; and many of
those, who have stood in the King's Books as Run-aways, are either dead in his
Service, and that is the last they can do for him; and others are still in his
Service to this hour, tho Run out of their Pay in other Ships; And in short, it
looks very miserable also, to be Run out of their Pay in other Ships, and
cannot obtain leave once in 3 or 4 Years to come to show Cause, or hear Reason
why they should have their money. I remember the Heathen Romans are said to take
care not to condemn men without being heard speak for themselves, and also
seeing their Accusers. Now if it be objected, that it cannot be expected all
that are made Run should see their Accusers, yet for the 2d, they might have
this privilege Heathens allowed of, speaking for themselves: And therefore I
think in the next place,

40. It is but Reason and Justice the Seamen that are made Run, should be
protected 14 days, to petition to get off their R. S. But I am much afraid that
it will be found Cruelty at last, to make men lose their Pay that are dead
ashore, or sick in the Hospitals, or not a month out of the King's Service
these several Years, or discharged fair by Tickets signed by all the Officers.
And this I would ask, Whether the King's Service be a perpetual bondage? That
tho a man be Really sick, and have a Ticket given him to discharge him sick,
signed by all the Officers, to clear him, and get his Pay, whether it be not
Oppression and Cruelty in those that should pay the money, to deprive these men
of their money, because they, that they left their Powers with, do not know
presently where the man is, or whether living or dead, or in what Ship; and it
may be, it is some Years past since he was discharged, and whether this way of
management be like to encourage the Seamen, or any that trust them, or the
like? In plain English, Such managers would fright away the Seamen, and fright
others from trusting them. And now I have said this, it may be some will think
I write this for interest, and am concerned with such a Case. To that I answer,
No; for I left off buying 3 Years past, and now write only to serve God, and my
King and Country; And if I were in another Country, and should hear these
things, it may be I might be ashamed of those kind of Actions, and Abundance
more, that I fear are against Law and Gospel; and Honesty and Policy, yea, and
I fear against good Heathen Morality; and seems to be all Arbitrary. But now I
hope our Gracious King and Loyal Parliament have espoused the Seamen's Cause,
they will, as an honest Gentleman of the House of Commons said, endeavor to do
them Right. And this short Prayer I will put up for the Seamen for time to
come, That the King and Parliament would not leave them and their Families to
the tender mercies of the wicked; for the Scripture that cannot lie, says,
That the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. And it may be some that have
been a year a getting a Petition for Justice Answered, may understand something
of the meaning of that, when they come to beg nothing but their own that was
due to them, by plain Justice, bare and threadbare, and stark naked Justice
and Honesty: Therefore if there be not some way to secure poor Seamen's Pay for
time to come, it is past my skill to warrant our Seaport Towns will send their
Men, Children or Servants into the Service so freely as before; and it may be
they that have been so served, as aforesaid, if they are not dead, yet will not
come without good words. And,

41. Therefore if I might humbly presume to give my thought, I would suppose it
requisite not only to take all care imaginable to secure the Seamen's Lives,
and Pay, and Health, but also to have the Act for their Encouragement read in
every Ship once a quarter, and an Abstract of the Encouragement set up in the
Seaport Towns of England; or at least the Heads of it put in the Gazette, that
the Nation may see, for time to come, that they do not pay their many, and the
Seamen ruined; but that the Seamen shall be encouraged, and also honestly paid.

42. That they might be paid in London, that the City of London, that is always
ready to assist his Majesty with money, may have some again from the Seamen;
and not let those who manage the Seamen, put the King to extraordinary charge
to pay the Seamen several miles off, to the depriving the City of their Trade,
and the spoiling of near half the Seamens Pay besides; For in short, in London
the Seamen can buy all things at best hand, can send home their money to their
Families, to any part of England or Scotland; And if they but spend their money
here, or send it home to their Families, and enjoy a months Liberty, and fresh
Air, and fresh Victuals, the Sea will be the next thing they will be for; And
Seamen will live and increase, as in other Ages of the World they used to do in
times of War, although Thousands were killed: And of the most fighting War the
Seamen ever saw in England this 100 Years, it can only be said, the Sword or
Guns killed Thousands. But this War, without fighting, has been the Death of
several Ten Thousands. And indeed this makes me think of their Complaints to
me, some years past, that they could not Fight it out, as in former Ages: And
indeed, in my mind, the Fighting like Men, and being Killed an Hundred in a
Ship, is nothing; such a loss to themselves, their Families, the King, and the
Nation, as being kept on Board of Ship, until three or four Hundred in a Ship
Die before the Voyage is done, and sometimes a quarter of their Men Sick
together; and how melancholy that must be, and at last be served as the Mary's
Men that brought home about forty of those Men they carried out, and Buried
about six or seven Hundred Men, and these forty men not suffered to have a
Penny of Money one Shore to Refresh themselves, and tell their Friends that
some escaped alive. I am afraid that some hard Hearted wretches makes as if our
Seamen's Miseries were a Comedy, but God knows whether the next Age will not
call it a Tragedy, seeing such dreadful Numbers of Lives have been lost; but
however it be, His Majesty and the Parliament may now inquire of the Actors;
how it is, and why it was so contrived, and the Charge of the whole seem so
great, and show no better; but my Wits run a Wool-gathering: instead of Writing
a few Heads I make so great Bodies, they will require an Hour's time to undress
by the Fireside at Night before Bedtime, and the Discourse may seem tedious:
But if so, how tedious must that misery be, when it may be a few Lives
Represent forty Thousand Miseries; and I would have put in a pretty deal of
Discourse of Knavery also, as how, it may be, the King and Country may be
Cheated shamefully: But if it be to be heard only at the Navy-Office or
Admiralty-Office, as one great Cheat was, that I went about last Year, and
Forger of Powers. And another that I went to the Commissioners that Stated the
Public Accounts this year, about; but they having not leisure, I suppose the
partie's peace was made up another way. But I would have had the method of
Cheating to be found out above, and prevented by Law for time to come, for the
advantage of the King and the Country; for I suppose there has been so many
Informations of the King's being cheated, and the Seamen cheated, that have
been brought before the Admiralty and Navy-board, that they know the method of
Knavery ten times more than I; and it may be as carrying Coals to Newcastle, to
tell them. But I wonder they have not made an outcry to the Parliament against
all the cheating and Knavery they have been informed of; for if their Skill be
only in the Running and Ruining of Seamen out of their Pay when they are sick
or dead, I am sorry; and especially seeing I cannot find it wears well, we
have lost so much this Year, our Accounts will not come even, besides the loss
of the Hope, the Brave Hope: O that England should lose their Hope at Sea to
the French this Year. And now I think of the Hope, there was five Ships of the
English, as I understand, and 2 went away, and 2 run away; and there was 5
Ships of the French, and they, like cunning Knaves, kept together, and so got
away the Hope, tho she fought well. And now our brave Sovereign is burned,
which is to be lamented, and for that she was so brave a Ship, and named the
Sovereign; And as for the Vulgar Name, some called her the Sufferance; As to
that Name, the Sufferance, if all the Seamen's Calamities be redressed, I
suppose they will never see such a Sufferance again in haste. But I wish we may
see a brave New Hope, and as good a Ship as the other, for our Gracious King to
go on board of, and name her, The New Sovereign. And so much to that. But,

43. It might be considered of, that seeing we have lost near 100 Ships of War
these last 7 Years, to a prodigious charge to the Nation; And many people
admire what is done with all the Money raised, never considering, that since we
saved our Ships from being lost by fighting at first, we have lost and fooled
away near as many since as will cost Two Millions of Money to build more,
besides the Millions of Money extraordinary to keep an heap of Ships always in
pay, tho a great many of them seldom send word home what good they do abroad.
And I have sometimes thought it is possible to act like boys in the street,
that meet before Processioning-Days, great heaps and numbers, as if they would
drive the Town before them; and, poor Wretches, it may be, not one in 6 has
the heart to strike a stroke, only run about and dirt their clothes, and put
their parents to charge. But this by the way.

As to our Ships lost; for time to come, it may be useful for the Commissioners
that state the public. Accounts, to have the case of our Ships lost, brought
before them, that if any body be in fault, they may not be all excused. And
indeed, so long as the Seamen are sent away in other Ships, and the Commanders
are their own Accusers, and their Friends the Judges, they will do well enough.
I have sometimes thought how mischievous a Fellow No Body is grown since I was
a Child; Then he used to be accused for stealing Apples, and eating up odd
things, or drinking up the Wine or Strong Drink in a house; but now, if there
be Ships murdered, or fooled away, or betrayed to the Enemies, or Fleets
miscarry, as bad as our Smirna Fleet, No Body is most times called to Account,
and punished for the same: And when as the Seamen of England are ruined and
destroyed, and dead, or frighted out of the Service of our Gracious King
William, multitudes of them, and then still No Body must be blamed and shamed
for the same. And indeed, had not our most Gracious King William spoken for
them, and the Loyal Parliament espoused their Cause, to relieve them, no body
would perhaps have regarded their Ruin and Destruction so long until they and
their Families might have been some of the most miserable ruined Creatures on
the Face of the Earth, and no body would have gotten by their Ruin in this
Nation; And yet it may be no body would have considered that they had been some
of them like the poor men that traveled from Jerusalem to Jerico, and fell
among Thieves, who did not only rob them, and wound them, but did actually
leave them half dead; And yet I suppose no body will be called to account at
last for all this Ruin and destruction of them and their Families, although it may
be the next Age will cry out shame of it, and say, the blame must lie
somewhere: And it may be they will inquire then, who were those at the
Admiralty, or Navy-board, or in any other places, that directed and managed our
Sea-Affairs in those days wherein the Seamen of England were more ruined than
ever the World saw, and more Men of War and Merchant Ships lost than ever the
Sea groaned under, in so few Years of English Concerns; and if they understand
the true History of this Age, they must know that our Gracious King William is
the Justest and Mercifullest King in the World; but is concerned in the
management of the whole Confederacy against that common plague of the Christian
World, the French King; And is forced to be be abroad, beyond Sea every Summer,
to manage the Army; And that it will be known that he left the management of
the Sea-Affairs unto Englishmen, and that to such as are qualified by Law; and
if there be any that wants any Qualifications of Grace, or Reason, or Common
Sense, or Common Honesty or Loyalty to him, it should be best known to
themselves; for I do not meddle with Names of Men; but the Ruins of the Seamen
stick in my stomach, and I cannot digest it; for I am sick of it; and had I
been a Merchant, it may be I should have been sick of our Ships and Merchandise
also. But however, it may be observed, That whatever miseries or ruins come in
the management of things, there is this to be considered of; The Managers of it
must be men truly qualified; and that is something. But I wish, for time to
come, there may be men qualified with Grace, and Wisdom, and Loyalty to the
present Government, and that may have an entire Love to his Majesty, and the
good old English Interest, that we may not be, any of the inhabitants of these
Nations, forced to roar like Bears, or to mourn sore, like Doves. But I had
forgot going on concerning particular encouragement for Seamen; as that they,

44. Might never have sour Beveridge Wine forced on them in the Straits, that
One Hogshead will mix with 12 Hogsheads of Water; as is sometimes done in the
Streights, for the advantage of the Pursers, tho to the hazard of Seamens
Health or Lives.

45. And that all Seamen might be encouraged to look out for their Enemies
Ships, and that they that did spy them first, might be rewarded; And they that
entered the Ships on board that are taken, might have encouragement, and not to
be forced to deliver every little thing they get to their Lieutenants, or
Officers; And also it were well if there were given an Account at the
Prize-Office, of the Value of Money that has been paid to Seamen this. War, to
see if they have had any thing to speak of, or whether the Officers got all to
themselves.

46. And that no Officer, on pressing, do take any Bribes in pressing, to
exense the Able Seamen, and in the mean time take Boys, and infirm persons, or
Landmen for the Service of his Majesty; And that all Press-Katche's Accounts be
examined for time to come, to see if they do not put the King to 30 or 40 l
charge to press 2 or 3 men; And that no Katches bring Coals for the Officers,
from Newcastle, instead of Seamen for the King.

47. That if Ships are in Harbor, the Purser to give the Seamen their
Allowance, as much as possible, in fresh provision, it being all on charge to
his Majesty; and the way for Seamen to recover of the Scurvy, or other
Sea-Distempers.

48. That when the Seamen have been fed in the Winter, and clothed in London,
and they that have Families been supported a Year or 2 on Credit, they may not
be extorted on at Chatham, or Deal, or Portsmouth, to run in debt 18 or 20 l a
piece, as many have been in a fortnight, or 3 weeks time, to the Ruin of the
Seamen; but that none should trust them above Half a Crown in a week, except
for Clothes, or where they lodge. And that in case at any of those Seaport
Towns they do trust them above that sum, except in sickness; or if they lodge
there 10 s the week, to prevent many thousands of Seamen running out of the
Land; and that many must do, or hide when the War is over; For where there is a
Seaman owes 30 l at one house, and 20 at another, and 10 at another, they must
run away, and do usually do so; And I have known in former time, above half
those who did madly trust them, to be broken also: Therefore that extravagant
expense is the Ruin of the Seamen, and those who encourage them in it, and has
caused many Seamen to leave the Land, and go a Buckaneering in the West Indies;
That is, to turn Pirates, or Sea-Robbers. And now in time of War, the Parishes
near London, are forced to relieve many Families of those who so basely spend
their money in the Seaport Towns; And his Majesty's Service is often ^eglected
thereby. Whereas those who are good Husbands, save money, and send it up to
their Friends or Families: And these honest Seamen are such as will he able to
show their Faces any where, if they live until time of Peace. And now I come to
speak of peace, I desire the Lord in mercy to send a good one, if we wait a
Year longer or two before it comes; and our Seamen will need help in
Merchant-Ships. And indeed some of our Merchant-Ships, the Masters are
shame^essly scandalously Villains, in going the way to cheat and oppress the
Seamen: And these may be reputed among the cursed Ticket-buyers, and barbarous
Villains that ruin the Seamen in Men of War; For many of the Masters in
Merchant Ships stop what they please out of their pay, or do make them go to
Law for their Wages, and keep them out oftentimes also 2 or 3 months, tho the
poor Seamen are pressed away; And one in particular lately did sell his Seaman's
Venture, and kept his pay, and the Seaman pressed away; and the Master did
promise me his money from day to day, until he cunningly, in the Night, carried
his Ship to Gravesend, and got her cleared. But I heard of it in the morning,
and sent away an Officer to the Ship, and got him arrested to make him honest;
and got the money from the scandalous Villain. But if Merchant Seamen were
encouraged as follows:

49. First, That there might be a Law made, That all Seamen might have as good
and large allowance of all Provisions and Beer, as in his Majesty's Ships; and
in case of falling short, on any occasion, to be paid short allowance money also.

50. That none might pay any damage, except for their own Neglect or Fault.
And this would be the way for Masters and Owners to take care to send better
Ships to Sea, and not oppress the Seamen for their Rotten Leaky Ships Fault.

51. No Seamen to have undue Correction, nor indeed no extraordinary
Correction, without the Approbation of the Master, and 2 of the Officers, that
so men might not be barbarously killed in the Ships, as some have been, and
others dreadfully abused.

52. That the Masters who stop 2 or 3 months pay a piece from the Seamen, when
they pay them, unjustly, may be punished as Villains, that do go the way to
discourage, and bring a Curse on our English Navigation, if it lay in their
power. Whereas those honest Masters, that Victual well, and pay well, are such
as go the way to encourage our English Navigation, and to procure a blessing on
the same; and these Masters I love; but I hate all sorts of Villainy and Knavery
wherever I meet with it in any: And do therefore expect to hear of some Knaves
find Fault with this, as some Thieves and Cheats did when they heard I did
discover to the Parliament how the King and Nation was cheated. But I wonder
they should be such Fools to complain, seeing I named no body; And if they had
laughed at it, no body had need to have known they had been guilty themselves:
And so I wish them to be wiser next time; And tho there are Abundance of Cheats
and Villains to Cheat the King and Country, I know their methods, and am
ashamed that so brave and excellent a King, and so famous and fine a Country,
and such Stout, Loyal, brave Seamen, the best in the Universal World, should be
all cheated and abused, and that many times by those who drink it away, or
whore it away, or game it away. Again, and if one Devil helps them to get it,
there is so many Devils to help to spend it, that some of them will not be
worth one Groat a Dozen, in a Years time after the War is over, and nothing
stirring but Honesty and Industry.

But 53. There ought to be some care taken that Masters of Ships might not
abuse, and cheat, and beat, and starve their Seamen beyond Sea; for that has
caused multitudes of Englishmen to run away in the Straits, and other Voyages,
to the great discouragement of our brave English Seamen, who will do anything,
if encouraged; but will be mad, and run away to serve any Nation, yea even the
Turks themselves, if they are Abused.

54. It is pity there is not more liberal encouragement for Seamen to carry
Ventures, and to be extraordinary well provided with provisions in their
Voyages to the East Indies, since many Ships have in that Voyage, of those they
carried out, buried 4 men to One of those which they did bring home: And that
is bad, to lose all to a fifth part. And many men have in that Voyage been
supposed to die for want. And the Company suffers by it in the danger of
their Goods, if Ships miscarry. Whereas those Brave Worthy Commanders, who
Victual extraordinary well, and take great care of their men, do come home
well, and their men love them, and I love them also for their Honesty and love
to the Seamen. But it is a shame that any Ship's Commanders should be so
unnatural as to want water almost so soon as they come out of the Harbor: And
if there were a Law made, That all Seamen in Merchant Ships should be paid the
full for their short Allowance and Water-mony, as the King does; And that would
be the Way to encourage the Seamen to keep their Ships, and not run away to
serve other Nations for want of better usage. And the Commanders of all Ships,
for time to come, ought at least to be made to provide Water for their Ship's
Company, and not neglect it, or fraught their Ships so full that they have no
room for Water, that so the poor Seamen may not be whipped at the Geers for
drinking the Water that is allowed for the Hogs. This seems to be worse than
the poor prodigal Son was served: And indeed I have observed, That the
Interlopers Ships to India, that their men had liberty to carry good Ventures,
have gone well, and their men come home as fat as Pigs almost; as if they had
not only had enough of Water, but had eaten half the Hogs also. And indeed it
is also,

55. Great pity that so many poor miserable people were forced to come and
wait, and wait and come 20 times for their money after it is due, for 4 months
pay, at the East India-House. The loss of time to many, and their labor, and
waiting sometimes 3 or 4 hours in a day, is worth to some, I fear, if they
reckon their Time, above half the money. But this Age seems to play with misery.
I meet with so many Objects of this Age's being hardened against the Groans of
the poor, in some places, and Cries of the Poor, that truly I must needs fear
that the most merciful God will arise to plead the Cause of the Poor, the
Oppressed, the Fatherless and the Widow, seeing many men seem to lose moral
pity. And indeed I am afraid it is gone to look after moral honesty, many men's
very Consciences seeming to be even as it is said of some Firelocks,
Case-hardened: And as it is said, That a good man is merciful to his beast; so
I will say, that even the tender mercies of many wicked men in this Age, are
cruel. But certainly God did not send men into this World to be like Devils, to
plague and afflict mankind. And therefore it were well and convenient;

56. That no Seamen in any Merchant Ship whatever, to be forced to wait above
four Weeks after the Ship is in Harbor, for their Money, it being a very great
oppression on the Seamen, after a long and tedious Voyage, to have no Money to
buy any thing for themselves or Families in three Months time, and thereby Live
on Credit, take up their Clothes and Provisions, at what Prices any will set on
them, to the great Loss of many Families.

57. But if there were a Law made for the Hearing of the Seamen's being abused
or cheated of their Pay; and either the Masters of the Trinity-House, or some
other men, to be as a Court of Conscience to hear the Seamen's Cause, without
Charge, it would save the poor Seamen's being forced to go to Law for their
Wages after any Voyage, or for money to be paid in the time of any Voyage, it
might save a multitude of Charges at Law, or loss to poor miserable Seamen, or
their Families being often forced to give one half to get the other Recovered,
after it is Earned.

58. Another method for the true management of our English Navigation, is to
labor to have both the Commanders and Officers and Seamen, to be brought to a
moral Reformation, and also to a Religious Worship, and fear of the God of
Heaven and Earth, and Sea, at whose Command are both Winds and Seas, and indeed
if God be not sought unto, but instead thereof, daily Blasphemed all other ways
and means will be too short to Expect a real Blessing, and comfortable
Encouragement, as we might wish; but that the Seamen will be so much oppresed,
and the Ships Ruined and Spoiled, more and more, until there be some outward
Reformation at least, if not a true and sound Reformation of Life and Manners.
And if the general instructions printed and given to the Captains and
Lieutenants of Ships by the Admiralty, were minded aright, it would mend many
things, and therefore deserves to be inquired into, in drawing up the method of
the Well-Government of our Ships and men; And the first Paragraph of it is,
That God be duly worshipped, and that twice a day, and all Profaneness,
Drunkenness, Swearing and Cursing be discountenanced and punished; and the
Commanders that allow it, turned out. And we should meet the Lord by Repentance
both by Sea and Land; and cry to the Lord, that he would meet us with his
mercy, that we may, by Righteousness, be an exalted Nation, and not for our
sins be a ruined people: And therefore,

59. It were well if every Ship in England that carries but ten men were bound
to carry that excellent Book of the Church of England's Doctrine, the Book of
Homilies, to read 2 Homilies every Sunday. And it has the 39 Articles bound up
with it, that all Seafaring men might see the excellent Doctrine of the Old
Church of England to be for sound Piety and Holiness: And that it may be said
of the Profaneness of this Age, That it is such a thing as the Fundamental
Doctrine of the Church of England abhors: And as it was said of Old, of some
that knew not Joseph, so it may be said of the great Wickedness of this Age,
That it is from such as know not God, neither do they truly know, and believe,
and practice that true fundamental Doctrine of the Church of England; And it
were well if the Reverend Bishops would consult the great need there is of such
Laws as may in some measure at least bring men to as near a Conformity to the
substantial, Fundamental Holiness, Sobriety, Charity, Justice, and all
Christian, Fundamental Duties of Grace and Holiness that are contained in so
holy a Doctrine.

60. And that every Ship that does carry 120 men, or more, do carry an able,
sober Minister, to instruct the Seamen in their Duty toward God, and to
reprove the Vices of any one in the Ship; And by their Doctrine and
Conversation, to show to them that the fundamental Doctrine of the Church of
England, is for the Real Service of God and Holiness, and against all sin; And
that they that profess the Doctrine, and live in Wickedness, are false
pretenders to so holy Doctrine.

61. And therefore that Excellent Act against Cursing and Swearing, if well
executed, will be a good beginning, and a good help toward a moral
Reformation. So if the great Debauchery of this Age could be suppressed, it
would be a good help toward men's coming to consider of a future state, and to
think, that whatever they are themselves at present, yet mankind was created to
live to the Glory of God, and to honor him; and not to live like beasts, and
worse than beasts. And the more excellent the fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity is in any Church or Nation, the greater the condemnation of those
must be that do sin against the Light of the same, and will not regard to walk
according unto it.

And now having said this, I will return again to another encouragement I think
there is great need of, although the Seamen in all Merchant Ships, that go well
and come well, in the Merchant's service, pay something toward the same; And
that is,

62. That all Fleets of Merchant Ships should, as much as possible, keep
company, and stand by one the other, except much overpowered; And for want of
this there was 6 or 7 Ships taken out of 12 in One Fleet, by 2 Privateers.
Therefore those Ships that would not fight, the Commanders ought to be made
public Examples.

63. And those that fight stoutly, as brave Englishmen, to be encouraged and
preferred.

64. And that those Seamen that lose their Lives or Limbs in Merchant ships,
should be encouraged, and have Bounty-mony, as in his Majesty's service they
that are Wounded or Killed there have.

But now I would not be mistaken, to think that his Majesty should pay it;
although if a Merchant Ship be lost, it may fall out that his Majesty may lose
4000 l Custom: And were it so they did fight and save the Ship and Goods, if
there were 20 killed, and 10 wounded, if his Majesty paid each of them, or
their Families, 20 l it were 200 l and his Majesty would save 3600 l by the
saving the Ship at last, and the Merchants, it may be, 30000 l by the bargain
also: And therefore it would be of great use to the King and to the Merchants,
and to the Nation in general, to save our Ships as much as possible, and ruin
our Enemies as much as possible, and encourage our Seamen and Masters to fight,
to save the Ships as much as possible. But I have often wondered that any
Merchants should be so barbarous, or Masters so uncharitable, as not to give
the Seamens Families one penny of Eucouragement, who laid down their Lives, and
saved their Ships. And sometimes I have heard of some that have been forced to
go to Law for their Wages after the Ship was saved* And as I remember, a
Customer of mine was forced to pay the Surgeon 3 or 4 l to cure him of his
Wounds. Now I did look on this as barbarous: And I do say, in this respect, the
service of his Majesty is much better than the Merchantmen; And would be in
many others also, if it were not for the Fault of Officers, and Officers of
diverse sorts. But this by the way; for I think we should be the most happy
people under the Face of Heaven, if it were not for the Sins, and Follies, and
Bribery, and Knavery and Villainy of the Age we live in; Whereby men are Ruined,
and plagued and Afflicted more than ever, in several Kinds, both in Men of War
and Merchant Ships, and the King and Country lose by the same at last, many
Seamen serving, as is to be feared, other Nations, by being so much discouraged
in their own: But I leave that, and would to God that all would indeed leave it
in good earnest, and set themselves to study to serve God and his Majesty, and
the common good of all these Nations; and in order to it, I think this is one,
to encourage all Seamen, as much as possible, to preserve our Shipping; and one
way was, that, as I said, Whoever lost their Limbs or Lives in defending a
Merchant Ship, should have Pensions, or Bounty-mony: And I suppose, that if
there were a Law made, That every one should be so rewarded, every Seaman would
be more willing to venture their Lives to save their Ships: and the very Seamen
in Merchant Ships, that went well and came well, would pay 12 d out of every
pound toward a Chest to be kept for that purpose at Greenwich Hospital, as
there is a Chest for the Cripples at Chatham: And there might be a
Commissioner, or 2 or 3, appointed to manage it in time of War and Peace: And
in time of War, they that are in Merchant Ships could afford to pay that
cheerfully, because their Wages is near double; and in time of Peace it might
be but 6 d in the pound toward the Pensions; and a Clerk or 2 appointed at the
said Hospital, to keep all accounts of every man's months pay in England, and to
receive the money, and to pay it out again to the Widow or Aged Parents of all
that are killed in the defense of Merchant Ships, 20 l and to all that lose a
Limb, or the total use of a Limb, in the defense of a Merchant Ship, 6 l the
year during their Lives; for their Relief; and this to be paid them constantly:
And not to have any Ticket-buyers suffered to extort half of it from them: And
if the said shilling in the pound paid by others, did amount to more, as it
might, if gathered faithfully all over the Nation, then the rest to go to the
Widows of poor Seamen, or to aged Seamen that were past their labor. And it is
as great pity, but all industrious Seamen should be encouraged in England,
seeing I do not remember that ever in all my Life I heard of one Ship, either
Merchant Man, or Man of War lost, because the Seamen would not fight; but so
many because the Commanders would not fight, that I have been ofter grieved and
ashamed to hear of it. And if there were a Law made to encourage the Seamen, I
wish there were also another, That if the Commander^ would not fight, they
should lose, as aforesaid, 2 of their singers, and be sold for saves all their
days; and if they did ever return, to be hanged, that so there may not be so
many to disgrace this brave Island with Cowardice, which has been, and in some
measure is, at this day the Terror of their Enemies, the French Fleet; which
were pretended to be such Monsters before; having run to their Harbors with
shame and disgrace, since they see we have an Admiral who with less than half
our Ships did beat them before; and for that we have cause to bless God, and
live to his Praise.

And now to say something to save his Majesty's money, and the poor Seamens
also, for time to come, I do suppose it will be needful for time to come, to
make it Felony to commit these Transgressions, viz.

1. To enter 40 men's Names in a Ship's book, that never were in the Ship, nor
in the World, and that is bigger; This to be Felony. And this is a Trick of the
Devil's Masterpiece.

2. That no Purser, or Captain's Clerk, or any other, do give a List of 40 or
50 men at a time, that are dead, or run away; that so, tho the King has been
cheated of their Victuals, he may not be cheated of their Pay; and tho the
Purser might afford their Pay cheap, yet I wondered when I heard One Purser gave
as many Names as there was 3 or 400 l worth received for in a Ship, and the
foolish Knave had but 8 or 10 l for all. Now this Purser, and they that did
find Powers, ought to be transpor^ed on of this Nation, that the Climate may
not be infected with their Villainy.

3. That no man in the Office be suffered to change the Christian Name of a
Seaman in any Ships books, to cheat the man's Friends of his money, if occasion
be: This Exploit looks like the Art of Juggling, if it should be practiced;
therefore should, if discovered, be punished.

4. That none be suffered to keep men open upon the book a whole Voyage after
they are run away, since this Trick, and those beforementioned, and some
Captains, as I here discovered to have many hundred pounds worth of Seamens
Tickets, and some other Tricks I know may be played, if not prevented, may cost
his Majesty it may be 80000 l the Year, and cheat the Seamen Twenty Thousand
Pounds to make it up an Hundred Thousand Pounds the Year; and it being hard
Times, as I find it is, a penny saved will be as good as a peuny got; And if
others do study to raise so much, it is their Ingenuity; and if I do study how
to save his Majesty and the Nation 100000 l the year, it may be a service for
the Nation, although it may be no great ingenuity in me for my self, because I am
not like to get any profit to my self by it in this world: but I bless God who
enableth me in some measure to be willing to serve his Majesty and these
Nations; as cheerfully, and heartily, and faithfully, for Love, as any man
alive can do for Money; And if the Representing these last, or any other
Knavery, should cause any to be offended at me, I should wonder at their folly
and madness to betray themselves, since I love and respect every honest loyal
Commander and Officer in his Majesty's service, and every honest good Commander
in Merchantmen; and they that are such will no doubt love me, and delight in
me, as one that is willing that every man of their Professions and Offices
should be an honor to the same, and to get praise to the whole Fraternity of
them. But I expect that those who are sore, and scabbed, and galled, will, as
we use to say, be ready, when their sore is touched, to winch and kick, although I
name no person; I wish their person well, and their Knavery and Villainy
punished, and they made better. And I only represent the Knavery, and if they
will be so foolish when they hear it, by their Anger to let others know they
are the men, that is their fault; and a guilty conscience needs no accuser. And
so I leave them to their serious considerations, to think if they have souls,
how they that are Cheats and Villains here, must answer it hereafter.

And I wish all mankind well, and know no man alive but I would do a kindness
to, if it lay in my way; and know not any man alive but would do the same by
me. And now being come to a conclusion of this, I give up this and my soul,
spirit, body, and all my Family, and all my affairs, all into the hands of the
Eternal Love and Mercy of our most gracious God and loving Father in Jesus
Christ our only Savior, for all time, and all Eternity. Amen.

The Art of Ticket-buying, or the way to help to Ruin the Seamen and their
Families in their Service and Pay. In a Discourse between Honesty, Poverty,
Cruelty and Villainy, as follows.
Hsnesty. THIS Trade of Ticket-buying does seem to have its Rise between Misery
and Cruelty, or between cheating the King and Country, and Ruining the Seamen
in their Pay; and as times grow worse, either in manners or misery, this Trade
grows and increases as Misleto does on a decaying Apple Tree; as the Tree
decays the Misle increases: at first Cruelty used to buy at 5 s profit in the
pound, from the Seamen; but that was near 30 years past, and they were cried
out upon as extortioning Villains then, that have passed as modest men since:
but since the times are grown more impudent in cheating the King, and ruining
the Seamen, there be many have bought the Seamens pay at half loss; and not
only content with that, but like inhumane Beasts, that were worse than all
other sort of Beasts, except Swine, in devouring their own Kind, there have
been some that have bought at near Two Thirds Loss, and others, worst of all,
have many of them swallowed up the poor Seamens Pay altogether, for nothing,
except the charge of an Oath, and false Power, if dead, or a false Power, if
out of the way, as has of late been often proved: And this Villainy and
Extortion, and cheating the Loyal Seamen out of their Pay, has been an unknown
loss to the King, and unknown Ruin to the Seamens Families, and unknown Loss to
those who did friendly and honestly trust the Seamen, who by reason of their
losing 7 or 8 l at a time, out of a Ticket bought by Cruelty, or being
shamelesly deprived of it all by ^^llany, have not been able to pay their
Debts, neither buy bread for themselves and Families as they ought to do. And
indeed what say you Poverty, is it not so?


Pov. Indeed we have found it so, for while we have been shuffled from Ship to
Ship, until our Friends knew not where to find us, it has been an Opportunity
for Villainy to get Powers to cheat us of all our Pay: or if we fell sick and
died, for others to Q or R us; living, out of our Pay, if dead, to deprive our
Wives and poor ruined Children. But, Honesty, it seems, knows not what Names to
call those by that Ruin the Living, and fright many of them away; and Run the
Dead, and let their Families cry for Justice or Vengeance; and he knows not
whether the next Age will call them barbarous Villains, or hard hearted
Wretches, or Fools, or Knaves, or Jacobites, and Friends to French, or a
mixture of all together, and Ruiners of their Country into the bargain.


Hon. Do not say what I think; for if so, you will say the last Age the Devil
and the Jesuits debauched many people out of Religion and Morality, and now
they would, if they could, cheat us out of our common Senses, and out of all
our money into the bargain, this next year or two; and there is too much cause
of fear of this. But you must say little of it for the fear of puzling. But as
to the Loss of senses, you may tell our Enemies of it; for it may be they know
not how they have lost them, neither where to find them again, they are so
dwindled away; or washed away. And as to the Loss of our Money, you may let your
Friends know of it; for your Enemies know it is worth more, our milled money, to
melt down, or carry to France or Sweedland, and some other parts, b^^ Ten in
the Hundred, some places, and near Twenty in other places; and they begin to
laugh and say, Where is your money? And that is too sad to make a Jest of.


Villainy. What a noise here is of money: If I can buy Tickets at Ten shillings
in the pound, I will buy; have you any?


Pov. I have a small Ticket to sell; I am in great distress. I was in such a
Ship, and fell sick, and was Run out of my money: but I crawled into the King's
service again, and now I have a Ticket of 6 or 8 l and we have not a penny to
buy a bit of Bread for my Family, neither a Rag of Clothes for my self, and yet
I have been in the service all this War; what will you give me for my Ticket,
Cruelty?


Cruelty. You say you were Run out of your Pay before, for being sick; and who
knows, tho you are discharged fair now, and have a Ticket, but you may go into
another Ship, and continue there until you fall sick, and be Run out of your
Pay there, and for this also? However I will give you 40 s for your Ticket,
Poverty, if you please: What say you, Poverty, will you take it?


Poverty's Wife. That is very hard, and our Case is miserable, however, money we
must have; my poor Husband has not a penny to buy him a Shirt, or a pair of
Shoes or Stockings to shift him, and I do not see what we can do; pray give me
3 l for it, and that is dreadful Loss.


Cruelty. No, I will give you 50 s I do not know whether my brother Cruelty, or
my sister Villainy would give so much; therefore do what pou will.


Pov. Wife, take the money: who shall make the Writings? Pray what Writings must
you have?


Cruelty. I must have a Bill of Sale, will cost you 18 d and a Letter of
Attorney, will cost you 1 s My brother Cruelty does use to have a Bond too,
which would cost 1 s or 18 d more; and my sister Cruelty does use to have a
small piece of meat, and some good drink also when she pays the money: but I
would have you see I am kind to you: and if any of your Ship's Company has any
more Tickets, I will buy them; for I have some money lies by me that I received
at the Office lately; and if they will sell them, I will help them to money for
them, if they be good; send them.


Pov. I have some money due in such a Ship; it stands open on the book, and they
are not to let me see the book without petitioning the Navy-board, and I have
not a penny of money in all the World to get the Petition written, and I know
not what to do: I spend my time in the waiting for the payment of the Ship;
will you buy it, Cruelty, what say you?


Cruelty. If I get the books searched, you must pay the charge, and if we
agree, and must give me Bond, if I buy it, to make it good to me, if it be made
Run in the Office, as many have been.


Pov. How should it be made Run in the Office, when I am discharged fair, and
have been in so many Ships since, and not had a penny of money for any of them,
and my Family not had a penny of the King's Pay to buy them one bit of bread,
neither my self a penny to buy a Rag of Clothes to cover my Nakedness this 2 or
3 Years: And I have been in 2 or 3 Ships more besides: Pray what will the books
cost searching privately? Pray be as kind as you can.


Cruelty. I will not Undertake to get them searched under half a Crown.


Pov. Pray get it done, and I will abate it out of the money, if we agree.


Cruelty. I have got the books searched, and I find there is 6 l 10 s due to
you, if it be paid at last.


Pov. I did reckon I had been 8 months in the Ship, and my money had come to 9 l
But I must take your word: What will you give me for the money?


Cruelty. I will give you 30 s for it; and I know not if it will be ever paid:
There is an Order, That if a man fall sick in the last Ship, and be run of his
Pay in that, they do make him run out of his Pay in other Ships: Therefore do
what you please with it, and I have been at charge to get the books searched,
and do expect you shall pay me that.


Pov. I have not one Groat, if it were to save my self and Family from Ruin and
starving: Therefore if you do not buy it, I cannot pay you: take it for 40 s
anp pay the charges besides.


Cruelty. No, I will allow you 34 s and abate you all charges for Writings, and
all will be about 6 s more, and that is 40 s in all together, tho you have but
34 s. you self.


Poverty. Take it: I cannot wait: and my poor Wife is forced to work hard for
bread for our Children, to keep them from starving, or being kept by the
Parishes: And we owe money to the Baker, and to the poor Chandler-woman, and
that for a little Bread, or Cheese, or now and then a quartern of Butter, to
help to keep my poor Family: And I owe for the Clothes and Bedding I had to sit
me out to Sea, or I might have perished for Cold, and not been able to serve
the King, and this poor little money cannot pay one Groat of those Debts to
either: And I being turned from Ship to Ship, if I am forced to sell the rest
so, none knows what I and my poor Family must do to live. This will not hardly
buy me Shirts and Drawers, and a Wastcoat and Coat, and Shoes, to fit me to
Sea again: and I shall hardly be able to let my Wife add Children have 5 s of
this money: And for the money I owe Honesty, he must stay, and that is pity,
because he is a man has been very ready to trust the Seamen to serve the King,
and that as cheap as for ready money, and has lost abundance by the same, and
is forced to hold his hand before it be too late, and he ruin himself to help
them.


Villainy. As to him you call Honesty, I hate the Name of him, and intend never
to have to do with him, he is so much a Fool^ He had for a Year or 2 half
spoiled this Trade of Ticket-buying; for he bought up almost all the Tickets
that came near him, at 2 s in the Pound Profit to himself, and we could get but
a few of those, who did not know where to find such a one of the Trade: And at
last he bought at Three Shillings in the Pound Profit: And finding himself then
to have now and then a Delay, he began to be weary of the Trade: and since, he
and many of his Friends left off buying Cruelty can come in, for some business
by Wholesale.


Pov. The more is the pity that so few of his Friends will now buy any poor
Seaman's Pay: And it is sad for the poor Ruined Seamen. But it seems he was
served worse at the Office than the Heathen Romans used to do in point of
Justice: for he bought One Ticket in a Ship called the Rose, from New England,
of Fifty Pound, and paid Forty Five Pound for it: and it was clear of all
encumbrances when he bought it: and signed by the Last Captain, and Purser
Swain, and all the signing Officers, clear of all Debt. But some of the
Commissioners laid a stop on it for the Use of the former Captain's Mother: and
w^^n petitioned about it, could neither tell wherefore, nor where (...) find
her, and yet continued the stop: made Poor Pil^arlick wait near Two Years, and
lose the interest of the money, aboot six Pound, be at the charge to go and send
into City and Country, to find out the Captain's Mother: and one of their
Officers gave them under his Hand, he had enquired, and she could not be found:
And after waiting so long, and the party that earned the money appearing, who
was preferred to a Lieutenant's Place, and demanding his money to be paid to
Honesty, his Attorney; and said, None other ever had power from him: And yet
they would not let it be paid, until a Lawyer appeared, and claimed some money
due to the Captain, but had nothing to show for it; and then the stop was taken
off lamely; that is to be paid to them that had the best Power, when there was
never any Power they could find or hear of, ever to appear for it, besides poor
filly Honesty: and he was Kept out of his money until the books were made up,
and then had it paid by a List: and then Purser Swain, that was Purser of the
Ship, had five Pound stopped out of it for Tobacco, although there was none due,
and does detain the money still, although he has heard of it so much: and poor
Nonesty knows not whether he did not lose twice as much by his money being
stopped so unjustly from him by the Commissioners, or by the 5 l stopped for
the Purser, neither which of them all will be the honestest men when they come
to die, or look blackest in the face Living or Dying.


Cruelty. You have told some part how Honesty was served in that Case, that he
never would speak of; but you have not told how many Tickets he has by him, or
his Friends, that the money is said to be paid the parties, and they know not
where to find the parties; and Honesty never told the Riddle of that Trick,
That if poor Seamens Wives have their Husbands Tickets detained by the
Captains, they may cry their Eyes out before they get a penny of Money without
Tickets: But when Tickets are in some hands, then money can be said to be paid
the parties, or to Jack-a-Noaks, or Joan-a-Styles; and the Tickets may serve
for the Ages to come, to wonder why there should not be a certain Rule, a
certain Payment, and a certain Law in the Seamens Payment; and not lay all the
blame on Cruelty, in buying; for he commonly gives something for what he buyeth
of the Seamen, although but little; but Villainy cheats them of all: And his
brother Villainy used to give something for what he buys of the Officers, tho
they all cheat the King, or the Seamen, shamefully.


Pov. Now I think of it, pray Honesty, I do hear, since you made such a Noise
this 2 Years, of some Officers cheating the King, and the Seamen of their
Tickets and Pay, there is an Order, they must receive no man's Pay but their
own; and I hear some of them are vexed sadly at You: What must they do now with
such Tickets, pray, to get a penny for them?


Honesty. I will not say what they must do, but I will say, if they be not
prevented; they that please to give their mind to it, and have Tickets at their
command, I fear can get Powers filled up, and witnessed by themselves, or other
Officers, and leave Blanks for such Names to receive them, as may serve to be
put in afterward: And therefore it was my Advice, That if the Parliament
pleased, they should make it Felony and Transportation to receive a Seaman's
Pay by a wrong power, for time to come: And if they had been Seamen, and
cheated of their Pay, ten times as often as men have Robbed on the Highway, or
had their Pockets picked at Land, they would have strived to make a Law against
cheating, for time tu come, and not left it to will and pleasure, to hinder
small Officers from receiving money by a Lawful Power, although they fed them
and clothed them several Years before, to assist them whsle they served the
King, and in the mean time leave so many ways open to cheat the King and the
Seamen by other Officers still in private ways, instead of those Hundreds of
Pounds in a Ship received for the Captains, of Seamens Pay publicly, in former
Years.


Poverty. It is a Wonder that you will meddle with such Diseases as are Noli me
tangeries; that though they are heard of publicly now and then, as the Noli me
tangere is in the Weekly Bill, yet hardly One in an Hundred knows what a
dreadful Distemper it is, although some die of the same: And therefore, pray if
you meet with any Offices that are infected with the Ruining and Plaguing of
the Seamen, as the Houses of some were of Old in Israel, with the Leprosy,
that they could never be cleansed until the very Walls were scraped; And
although the whole Priesthood should by the Law of God Judge them Unclean, pray
Honesty say no more of it. And when you hear I have been sick a Year or Two, or
in the Hospitals, and Run out of my Pay, to the Ruin of my Family; and I and my
Family cry and groan to Heaven for Relief or Vengeance; and others of my Poor
Poverty Brethren be crying to Heaven and Hell for Damnation against them that
Ruin them, and Run away to other Nations, to see if there be Mercy and Justice
there; pray hold your Peace for time to come; Let things sink or swim, you have
done your Duty; and you being sensible every Leaf you write, must be such as
must be true before God and man, as to the substance of it. And now you may
admire at the mercy of God in keeping you hitherro, as in mercy you have been
hitherto.


Honesty. That is true, and that I only trust to the infinite Free Grace, and
Free Love and Rich mercy of God to me and all mine, in Christ Jesus our Lord
and only Savior, for all Time and all Eternity, desiring the Eternal God to be
our Refuge and Portion for ever: And that underneath us may be his Everlasting
Arms of Love and mercy, for all Time and all Eternity, to us and all ours. Amen.


Poverty. You have chosen well: but do not you consider, That there was an Age
wherein it was said, Hold thy peace, for we may not mention the Name of our
God? But do not you think, that those sad and barbarous Villains, who do Cheat,
and Ruin, and Destroy the Seamens Pay and Families in this Age, do neither fear
God, nor Regard man, but are as Ungodly, Hard-hearted, Case-hardned Brutes,
that seem as the Boy said by his Learning the Primmer, some of them to be past
the Graces, and to be come almost as far as the Devil and all his Works: And as
it was said of the Gentleman by his Jackanapes, An Ill Life may Expect an Ill
End. Therefore pray be wary how you Discourse about those sort of men.


Honesty. I bless God I have no prejudice against the Persons of any men in
England; and know not any man in England but I would show him a civil kindness;
and it may be there is hardly a man but would do the like by me, if occasion
were; and I find Anger is often Folly, but malice is the Devil, and a dreadful
burden certainly for any man to carry: and I bless God who keeps me clear of
that hitherto, as I desire to be kept from flattery, and that makes me write
such plain honest homely English, to serve my King and Country, without much
minding who are pleased or displeased: and that makes me labor as heartily to
endeavor the preserving of our Lives and Liberties, and encouragement of our
English Seamen, with as much earnestness as ever I heard of any did to secure a
Wall or Bank that was to keep out the Sea from drowning the Country: And
therefore having said it may be too much, I may pass over a great part of the
Art of Ticket-buying in silence, for want of Time and Patience, and so say
little of the Buyers Skill in getting the poor Wretches in that are not in the
greatest of miseries, making them drunk, and getting their Pay as they please:
Or of any buying at Five Shillings, and paying them part of their money, and
then afterward will have them at Ten Shillings Profit, or demand their money
again, and extort money for. Extortioning Interest, besides Trouble, if they
cannot pay the money. Neither mind I to represent how there have been some
Hundreds of Pounds worth of Tickets offered without Powers at a time in One
Ship: Neither the making out of Twenty Hogs, alias, Seamens Tickets in One
Ship, allowed about Fifty men: Neither the very great multitudes of Tickets
Captains Clerks have made out privately for Seamens Pay: Neither need I trouble
my Head for time to come, much more than other men, if the King and the Nation
should ever be found to be cheated of a sixth part of their money: for if I pay
about Twelve Pound the Year this War: Taxes, as I have done, it is but Forty
shillings Charge Extraordinary the Year: And I suppose I have printed as many
Thousand sheets of Paper, freely to inform the most Honorable Houses of
Parliament, and these Nations this Last Three Years, as has cost me about Ten
Years Purchase, for my sixth part of the said Twelve Pound: And I bless God I
was never employed by any to do it, but as the good will and pleasure of God
stirred me up out of a true design to serve God, and my King and Country: and I
never had, to my knowledge, Ten shillings advantage from all others for the
same. And I am of no Club, nor of no Faction; neither am I any men's Instrument
or Tool: so that if I do any service, the glory will be to God, and the benefit
to these Nations: And if I mistake, and suffer for it, I must submit with
Humility, Love and Patience. And so entreating the pardon of his most gracious
Majesty, and the Two most Honorable Houses of Parliament, for what is amiss:
and begging of the Eternal Jehovah for his Grace and Blessing on his Majesty,
our most gracious King William, and on the Parliament and People of these
Nations: and on me and all my Family, I subscribe my self a faithful Subject to
his Majesty, and Servant to him and all good men, while I remain to be,


W. HODGES.
Hermitage-Bridge, Feb. 20th. 1695.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce I writ my first book of the Seamens miseries, and presented 500 of them
to the 2 most Honorable Houses of Parliament, who were graciously pleased to
pass by my infirmities, in representing the fame; for which I am in all humble
duty obliged to be thankful to them. And I have presumed to attempt the
foregoing rough Piece, being heartily willing any that can represent better
Rules for the safety and encouragement of the Seamen, to serve his gracious
Majesty King William, and the Nation, I shall rejoice. But if any say, some did
by my other book, they could have represented it in fewer as words, and yet
never had themselves neither wit, or sense, or heart for to represent it at
all, I shall look on their words as idle prate, and to try their skill, if they
are excellent at any thing, I will recommend the miserable Case of our Trading
People, and the poor in these Nations, in respect of our money, which I fear the
loss of will be fatal to both: And I wish it may not be miserable in respect of
the raising the Taxes for his Majesty: for I fear that as our Milled Money was
bought up to carry away, or melted down, above 20 years, when it was worth but
a Groat in the pound to make it away; then I fear it will be ten times more in
danger to be all melted down or carried away, or both, now it is worth ten
Groats in the pound to make it away either way. Neither do I see how Tradesmen
can escape Ruin for want of Trade, if there be not money to Trade, and Exchange,
and pay the poor. And the Loss of Trade already to some I fear has been, and
is like to be ten times worse than their Taxes; and unless there be a new
Coinage, that is about 3 Ounces to 20 s or the Milled money raised to 6 s and 8
d the Crown Piece, I fear whoever lives 9 months, will see hardly any of it
passing about; and for Guinea's, they are at present a perfect Plague and Trick
to mankind, and a means for men to prey upon one another; and if they fall,
will be carried away; but if settled at but 28 s the Guinea certain, would pay
in Taxes, and out again; and there might be One per Cent. allowed for profit of
those who carried Silver and Gold to Coin; and the rest to go toward the
Calling in the Fragments of our Old Money at last; And there would never want
Silver nor Coiners; and we should be in a few Years full of money, to the Joy of
the King and Country, and Landlord and Tenant: And this I would represent, that
our Seamen at Sea, and the common people at Land, tho called the Mobilly, have
been entirely in the Interest of our gracious King William, and this Nation.
And I fear our Enemies would rejoice it they could find the Ordinary people to
be Ruined at Land for want of money; and then they would say, as they begin
already, Where is your money? and I fear, if possible, will make the worst use
they could of the same. And, if I mistake not, our Case in the Suburbs of
London, is so bad already, that One may go to ten Tradesmen before One meet
with a man can change a Guinea: So that here is Work for the Wits to propose a
help that is past my skill to think or understand how ever the common people of
England shall keep Silver money any more, if there be none but what is worth a
great deal more to melt down, or carry away: They may kiss it at parting, as
Friends that do never expect to see One the Other more, I fear; and have not
sense to get over my fears, but rest in them this 27th of Feb. 169^.

W. H.

By reason of the Author's great distance from the Press, there is diverse
Errata 's, which the Courteois Reader is desired to correct.

ERRATA.

PAge 4. line 6. read formerly. p. 9. l. 14. r. he would. p. 9. 1. 16. r. I
might. p. 10. r. 14. January. p. 15. l. 28. r. Once a year or two. p. 21. l.
29. r. not having. p. 25. l. 6. r. Breamen. p. 26. l. 35. r. Imbezzlement.
Ibid. l. 11. r. in the last Ship. p. 45. l. 15. for 4 months r. a month. p. 50.
l. 24. r. Out of this Nation. Ibid. l. 15. r. Arts Master-peice. p. 53. l. 33.
r. and sad, if it do ruin us. p. 56. l. 23. r. A loss


