A LETTER FROM Mr. HUMPHRY HODY, TO A FRIEND Concerning a Collection of Canons
(...) said be Deceitfully omitted in his Edition of the Oxford Treatise against
SCHISM. In which is likewise Contained Offer of Certain Propositions to be
proved by the Advocates for the New Separation. WITH A Vindication of the
Authority of the Civil Power in Depriving such BISHOPS as refuse to submit to
it.

Nemo vos, Fratres, errare a Domini viis faciat. Nemo vos Christianos ab
Evangelio Christi rapiat. Nemo Filios Ecclesiae de Ecclesia tollat. Pereant
sibi soli qui perire voluerunt. Extra Ecclesiam soli remaneant, qui de Ecclesia
recesserunt.

S. Cypr. OXFORD, Printed by I. Lichfield, for Ant. Pisly Bookseller. 1692.

Imprimatur

Dec. 12 1691. JONATH. ED VICE-CAN.

A LETTER FROM Mr. HUMPHRY HODY, TO A FRIEND. Concerning a Collection of
Canons, said to be deceitfully Omitted by him, in his Edition of the Oxford
Treatise against SCHISM.
SIR,
A Day or Two ago, upon my Return out of the Country, I received your Letter,
which had lain some time expecting me: In which you are pleased to advise me,
concerning a Report industriously spread abroad, by the Abettors of our present
Schism, That the Treatise against it, which I lately Translated out of the
Baroccian MS. is Partially, and Deceitfully published; That there are some
Canons belonging to it omitted, which would, if published, have unravel'd the
Whole. I had heard of such a Report before I received your Letter, but I rather
admired at the Heat and Judgment of those that first raised it, then thought it
worthy to be taken notice off by me, and refuted. I could hardly believe, that
they, that were the Authors of it, were really in earnest, when first the Noise
was made; and, if they were in earnest, I knew that their Judgments were
determined by so strong a Biuss of Resentment and Zeal for a Cause, that all
men must easily perceive it. I could not persuade my self, that any Person of
common Ingenuity and Candor, could believe me guilty of so dull a Piece of
Knavery, a Knavery so easily discoverable, and that by my own Direction. It was
really very entertaining to observe, to what little Arts and Shiftings our
Adversaries were reduced. I plainly saw by their Passion, and their holding up
dirty Hands, that I had given 'em a Fall. And I could not wonder, that so small
a Person as your Friend should be so stigmatized, when even Cecilianus, the
great Archbishop of Carthage, was, by the Schismatical Donatists, called
downright Nebulo.
Knave, in a Letter to the Emperor Constantine; and that too, tho He himself
had Iudicially acquitted him, and declared him a worthy Archbishop. It Is this
is the Humor, and indeed the Unhappiness, of Mankind: If in your Opinions, or
Actions, you chance to run counter to a Party, there is no expecting of
Quarter: you are fallen in among Rapparees, and, if it lies in their power, God
have mercy upon you, you will certainly fall by one Weapon or other; you must
either be a Fool or a Knave. Where the Bluntness of the former will not pierce,
there the Sharpness of the latter must be tried. They will stab one at the
Heart, if they cannot knock one on the Head. This they will be sure to
endeavor to do: but the best of it is, it does often happen, that there is no
one (...) I was confident it would prove so with me: I knew it was impossible,
that the Dirt, wherewith I was so freely and bountifully bespattered, should
stick long upon me, that a little Time would of course dry it off; and if not
so, 'twould however come out by the least Rubbing. The Design of those, that
first blew abroad that strange and improbable Rumor, was so obvious to all,
that would give themselves leave to Think, that I could not imagine, any
Persons of sound Understanding could possibly give Ear to it: The Fort I had
happily raised was very strong and impregnable, well-man'd with stout and
unconquerable Veterans; and who could not see through so common and usual a
Stratagem, as that of a False Report? What else could be done to keep up the
sinking Spirits of the Adverse Party? It was necessary they should be
persuaded, that tho there was an Appearance of many Brave Men upon the Walls,
yet there lay in the Town concealed, a much stronger Party, Well-wishers to
Them, that would show Themselves shortly, discover the Weakness of the rest,
and deliver up the Place.

These Considerations, Sir, made me altogether secure, and regardless of that
idle and unlikely Tale: But you blame me, you say; I must not any longer
despise it; It is still, as you tell me, continued, and by many believed. And
the Author of a Pamphlet entitled, An Apology for the New Separation, etc. has
made a public Complaint of my Disingenuity in this matter? He says, he is
assured by his Friends in Oxford, that that Collection of Canons, which follows
our Tract in the MS. is a part of the Tract, and that it shows plainly, that
the Author (...) the Tract, when he contends, That A Bishop unjustly deposed
ought not to make a Division in the Church provided his Successor be Orthodox,
is to be understood of only a Synodical Deprivation; By which he means, that
the Author of the Treatise supposes, that, if a Bishop unjustly deprived, be
deprived by a Secular Power, and not by a Synod of Bishops, then he is not
obliged not to make a Separation. Upon this account, I see it is high time to
rowse up my self a little, since the Philistines are so much upon me. I shall
now, Sir, obey your Commands, in laying before you those Canons which our
Adversaries so much boast off, and the Reasons why I did not publish 'em
together with the Treatise; That you your self may judge what a Nothing that
is, that has made such a Bounce; that it is only mere Powder, that can hurt no
one else but the Person that Fires.

In the first place, Sir, I must assure you, That when I transcribed our
Treatise out of the Baroccian MS. I did it as an Historian, or a Philologer, or
whatsoever else you will call it, not imagining then, I should ever send it
abroad upon such an Occasion: If therefore the aforesaid Canons do truly belong
to the Treatise, it is to be imputed to the error and mistake of my Judgment,
and not to an ill Design, that they are omitted. I perused 'em, I remember, at
that time, and they seemed to me (as still they do) not at all to belong to the
Treatise. They are written, I grant, in the same hand, and immediately follow
the Treatise, but (for God-sake!) what then? Are they therefore a part of the
foregoing Treatise? What a wretched Judgment must that needs be, that can draw
so strange a Conclusion? Here I cannot but return you that Story, which once, I
remember, you told me, of that poor Country Person who would needs have the
Book-binder's Leaf to be a part of his Bible: He was told, it came after the
Index that was in that Bible, and was not at all to the Purpose; no matter for
that, it was Printed, he said, in the very same Letter, and must therefore
needs be a Part. If you pitied the Simpleness of that poor Man, what, Sir,
will you say, when you see even Learned and otherwise Worthy Men so much
prostitute their Judgments to Resentment and the serving of a Cause, that
rather then not be Revenged on the saucy Publisher of so pestilent a Treatise,
and supply their Adherents with an Antidote against it, they will let
themselves down to the lowest degree of Absurdness? We grant that our Treatise
and the Canons, that follow it, are written in a Hand somewhat different from
the rest of the Volume: But what can be thence concluded? Are our Adversaries
so extremely Strangers to MS. Volumes, as not to know, that, as they consist
very often of several Treatises, and of several Hands, so many times they have
two Tracts together, or more, of one Hand? This is true in particular of that
very Volume, out of which our Treatise was published. The other Parts of the
Volume, besides our Treatise and the Canons, are not all written in the same
Hand, but in several: In one Hand two or three Treatises, in another two or
three Others; it being made up of the Pieces of several Volumes bound together.

First, Sir, it is to be observed, That he that Transcribed that Volume, out of
which the Leaves of our Treatise and the Canons were taken, and put into that
in which they now ly; He, I say, that Transcribed our Treatise and the Canons,
seems himself to have took 'em for two distinct Pieces: For between the
Abstract, or Summary, of the Treatise and the Beginning of the Canons, there is
somewhat a wider Space, than between the Lines of the Treatise, or between the
Treatise and the Abstract of it. And what (I pray) if the Canons had been
written just close upon the Treatise? I can show you some Scores of Examples of
Collections or Treatises wholly distinct, so closely connected in the Writing,
without any Note of Distinction, that no one, but he that reads 'em, can
possibly take 'em to be distinct. Who so little acquainted with this sort of
Learning, as not to know, that Librarians, or Transcribers of Books, were
oftentimes ignorant Persons, that did not at all understand what they wrote,
but, like Horace's Painter, joined oftentimes the Head of a Man to the Neck of
a Horse?

In the Second place it is to be observed, That the Treatise as it is in the
MS. and as it is published, is thus concluded: TO CONCLUDE ALL IN A WORD; ONE
THING ONLY was required by the Church ((...) etc.) that the new Bishop should
profess the same (Orthodox) Faith with the other that was deposed, but as for
other Complaints and Accusations, except it were Heresy, she never made any
Examination into them. What Person of so little Sagacity and Judgment, as not
to see, that here the whole Treatise is ended?

In the Third place, I shall give you as clear and plain a Demonstration, as
can possibly be brought for the Confirmation of any thing of this Nature. It is
this: Between the Conclusion of the Treatise, and the foresaid Collection of
Canons, there comes in, in the MS. the Abstract or Summary of the Treatise,
which stands, as it were, for an Index, as it is published in borh the Editions.
I cannot but admire, how it possibly could enter into any Man's Head, that that
is a part of the Treatise, which follows the Abstract or Epitome of the
Treatise.

In the Fourth place, it is to be obsetv'd, and this is likewise as clear a
Demonstration as any one can possibly desire, That the Canons which follow our
Treatise are barely transcribed, not at all connected by any words of the
Transcriber; Not a word of his in either the beginning, or the end, or mixed
with 'em, as I know by comparing them with those that are Printed; When yet it
is certain, that the Author of our Treatise does every where use his own Style.
Neither does he make any mention, in any part of his Treatise, that he would
subjoin any Canons. If the Canons had belonged to the Treatise, it is absurd to
imagine that the Author would have said nothing of 'em, not expressed his Design
in transcribing 'em. And if he had produced 'em, as our Adversaries would have
it believed, to show that in the foregoing Treatise, he understood only a
Synodical Deprivation, why does he not somewhere say so? Why make no mention of
a Synodical Deprivation? Why leave us to judge of his meaning by his gaping?

This News, Sir, I know, will surprise you, which I tell you concerning the
bareness of the Canons, that they are nakedly transcribed without any one Word
added by the Transcriber; For you tell me, I remember, in your Letter, that
they that talk of this Matter, are wont to bring this for an Argument that the
Canons belong to the Treatise, That there are added some Words at the end of
the Canons, which plainly refer to the Treatise. And for this, as you say, the
Authority of a very great Man is wont to be quoted. Let me tell you, Sir, I can
now (...) about with a (...). It is true, The thing has been all along
confidently affirmed by a very great Man, as you very deservedly call him: But
take my Word for it, You will hear no more of that Matter. I inquired, Sir,
lately of that Learned and otherwise very Accurate Person, What Words those
were which he meant; and I found he had mistaken a Part of the last of the
Canons for the Words of the Transcriber. This is strange, you will say: I, for
my part, shall say nothing of it; but leave it for others to judge. But this I
must add, that the Words which were alleged by that Gentleman to be the
Transcriber's own, supposing they were the Transcriber's, (as we know very well
they are not) do contain nothing in 'em, that could prove the Transcriber to
have been the same Man with our Author. There is nothing from whence it might
be gathered that the Canons did belong to our Treatise; not a Tittle from
whence it might be proved that our Author therefore transcribed 'em, to show
that he meant a Synodical Deprivation. You will judge of this by and by, by
reading the Words your self. You will easily see, that Men, whose Eyes have
contracted a Yellowness (whatsoever otherwise their Temper or Constitution may
be,) read every thing agreeably to the Color in their Heads.

I come now lastly to the Canons themselves; Let them speak for themselves: We
need nothing else to refute the strange Fancy and Dream of our Adversaries. The
Argument, you know, of the Treatise, is to show by many Examples, That it is
contrary to the Practice of the Ancients, for a Bishop unjustly deposed to
recede from the Communion of an Orthodox Successor. Pray look with both Eyes,
and see if you can possibly find in the Canons any thing truly pertinent to
that particular Subject. The Argument and Design of them, is against private
Conventicles without a lawful Presbyter: against a Presbyter or a Deacon's
withdrawing from the Communion of his Bishop without a just Cause: that a
Bishop being condemned by the Bishops of the same Province, it shall not be in
the power of the Bishops of another Province to take the matter into their
Cognizance: against such Presbyters as shall separate from their Bishops on
pretense of some Crimes they can charge 'em with, before they be legally
convicted: against such Bishops as shall pretend to condemn their Metropolitan,
and to leave his Communion on pretense of his Vices, before he is legally
condemned: and lastly, against such Metropolitans as shall act in like manner
with relation to their Patriarch. I shall here translate you these Canons in
the same order as they ly in the MS. In Doctor Beveridge's Synodicon you may
read 'em all in the Original.

Can. Apost. XXXI. If a Presbyter shall in contempt of his Bishop, gather a
separate Congregation, and erect another Altar, his Bishop being not condemned
Not. That the seeming supposition of th^s Canon, that its lawful for a
Presbyter to recede from the Communion of his Bishop, and to set up an Altar
against him, if he be a Vicious Person, is unjust, as Balsamon affirms, and
contrary to the express declaration of other Canons of the Greek Church, and
particularly one of those that follow. But I scarce doubt, but as they that
composed the Canon, intended that the Bishop should be judicially and
Canonically condemned for the Crime alleged against him by the Presbyter, tho
the words, (...), do not plainly express it.
by him for any Impiety or Injustice, let him be deprived as Ambitious. For he
is a Tyrant. In like manner others of the Clergy that shall adhere to him. But
let the Laity (that shall make themselves of his Party) be excommunicated. And
let these things be done after three Admonitions given by the Bishop. What is
this (in God's Name!) to our Treatise? How does this prove our Author's Meaning
to be of a Synodical Deprivation? What is this to the adhering to a Bishop not
Synodically Deprived, in opposition to another put into his Place?

Can. Council. Gang. VI. If any one in contempt of the Church shall gather a
private Congregation, and do those things which belong to the Church, without a
Presbyter appointed by the Bishop, let him be Anathema. What relation could
this Canon have to the design of our Author? It was made, as Zonaras tells us,
against the Eustathians, who despised the Congregations of the Church, and set
up Conventicles in their private Oratories; and here they are forbid to
celebrate the Service of the Church, even in the private Chapels of their
Houses, without a Presbyter appointed 'em by the Bishop. This our new Recusants
would do well to observe.

Can. Council. Antioch. V. If a Presbyter, or Deacon, shall in contempt of his
Bishop separate himself from the Church, and set up a Conventicle, and erect an
Altar, and not submit to his Bishop after a second Admonition, let him be
deposed, and let him be incapable for ever of being restored to his Honor, and
the Cure of Souls. And if he goes on to raise Troubles and Seditions in the
Church, let him be punished by the Civil Power as a Rioter. How could this Canon
be produced by the Author of our Treatise as pertinent to the Subject of it?
What Is this to a Bishop deprived by a Lay Power, and the leaving his Communion
who is put in his place, which our Adversaries tell us is warranted by the
Author of our Treatise?

The XVth Canon of the same Council. If a Bishop being accused of any Crimes,
shall be condemned by all the Bishops of the Province, and all shall
unanimously agree in the Sentence against him, he may not be judged again by
others, but the Sentence past unanimously by the Bishops of the Province, shall
be valid. This Canon was made to prevent Appeals, which a Bishop deprived by
the Bishops of the same Province of which he was, might make to some other
Bishop, or Bishops, of another Province. Pray, tell me, how it makes to the
Business and Subject of our Treatise. What Lynceus so very strong sighted as to
see a Thing at that Distance?

Can. Council. Carthag. XI. If a Presbyter through Pride shall make a Schism
against his Bishop, let him be Anathema. This is only an Epitome of the XI.
Canon of the Council of Carthage. What a rare relation it has to the particular
Subject of our Treatise! What a plain Demonstration it affords, that the Author
understands a Synodical Deprivation!

The XIII. Canon of the Council called the First and Second. The Devil
scattering Heretical Seeds in the Church of Christ, and seeing them cut off at
the Root by the Sword of the Spirit, has pitched on another Method, and
endeavors to divide the Body of Christ, by the Madness of Schismatics* The
holy Council, in order to prevent this Snare as well as the other, has decreed,
That if any Presbyter or Deacon having condemned his Bishop for any Crimes,
shall dare to depart from his Communion, and refuse to recite his Name in the
Public Prayers of the Church, according to the usual Custom, before he be
Synodically tried and perfectly condemned, that Person shall be deposed and
deprived of all his Honor in the Priesthood. For any one placed in the order
of a Presbyter, if he takes upon him to prevent the Judgment of the
Metropolitan, and to condemn and pass Sentence on his Father and Bishop, he is
not worthy of the Honor or Name of a Presbyter. And they that adhere to such
as have done so, if they are of the Priesthood, let them likewise be deprived
of their Honor; if Monks, or of the Laity, let 'em be Excommunicated, till
they leave the Schismatical Party, and return to their respective Bishop. I
shall pass a Remark on this, and the other two which follow, together.

The XIV. Canon of the same Council. If a Bishop upon charging his Metropolitan
with a Crime, shall withdraw from his Communion, and refuse to recite his Name
in the public Service of the Church according to Custom, before he is
Synodically tried; the holy Council decrees he be deposed, upon Proof that he
made such a Schism. For all Men ought to observe their proper Duties, and the
Presbyter must not despise his Bishop, nor the Bishop his Metropolitan.

The XV. Canon of the same. What has been decreed concerning Presbyters,
Bishops, and Metropolitans, the same is yet more reasonable with relation to
Patriarchs. If therefore any Presbyter, or Bishop, or Metropolitan, shall dare
to recede from the Communion of his Patriarch, and does not, according to
Custom, recite his Name in the Publick-Service of the Church, but makes a
Schism before his Patriarch has been Synodically tried, and perfectly
condemned; the holy Synod ordains, That, upon Proof made of such a Schism, he
be deposed. Here begin the Words which the Learned Mr. D* -- to k to be the
Words not of the Canon, but the Transcriber.
And these things are ordained and ratified concerning those who upon pretense
of certain Crimes shall separate from their respective Bishops, and make a
Schism, and break the Communion of the Church. For they that separate
themselves from the Communion of their Bishop, for a Heresy condemned by the
holy Fathers and Councils, he publicly professing and preaching the Heresy,
shall be so far from being obnoxious to any Canonical Punishment, on the
account of such a Separation, that they shall be honored as becomes true
Believers. For in such a case they do not condemn true Bishops, but false Ones
and they do not break the Unity of the Church by a Schism, but endeavor to
deliver the Church from Schisms and Divisions. Here ends the Collection of
Canons. That which follows immediately in the MS. is altogether foreign both to
them and the Treatise, a Fragment of a Story concerning Artaxares and Chosroes
of Persia.

And now, Sir, you have read all the so much celebrated Canons, which have
raised so great Expectation, and been made the common Defense of those that
have been pressed with the Authority of the Oxford Antiquity. When you light on
any of the Adversaries of the Oxford Antiquity, pray show 'em freely to them,
and desire them to make their best of 'em: Much good may they do 'em. If you
meet with any of 'em so very Judicious, as to lay any Stress on the Mention
that is made, in these Three last Canons, of a Synodical Deprivation; pray
desire them to be so just to you, as to give you a Reason. Let 'em give you a
Proof that those Canons are a Part of the Treatise. Let 'em show how it makes
for their Cause, that in them there is mention made of a Synodical Deprivation;
how it proves that the Author of our Treatise is only to be understood of a
Synodical Deprivation. Desire 'em but to open their Eyes, and then they will
plainly see, that the whole Design of those Canons, is only against a
Separation from our Bishops, and the throwing off Canonical Obedience upon our
own private Judgments and Pretenses; that the Vices or Crimes of a Bishop ought
not to be made an Occasion of a Separation, unless he be legally and fully
condemned and deprived. This is still the Doctrine of our Church; and what we
in England call Legal, the Greeks, when they spoke with relation to Bishops,
called a Synodical Deprivation, 'cause the ordinary way of Depriving Bishops
amongst them, was by the Metropolitan, and the rest of the Bishops of the
Province; who, by the Consent of the Emperor, were constituted the ordinary
Judges of the Causes of Bishops.

I shall here add, that it is easy for any Man of Judgment to observe, That
therefore the Canons, which we have above produced, were by some Body tackt to
our Treatise in the MS. because of some kind of Relation which they seem to
have to the General or Material Subject of the Treatise, viz. Schism and
Bishops, tho they have not any Pertinency or Relation to the Formal or
Particular Subject of it, The adhering to an Orthodox Bishop in possession, tho
the former Bishop was unjustly turned out. We know, that most of those MS.
Volumes, which now our Libraries afford us, were nothing else but so many
Volumes as it were of Common Places, in which Men of Learning and Study heapt
together such Things as seemed to them something akin. And hence it is, that in
most Theological MSS. or at least in very many, you meet with Canons of
Councils dispersed up and down according to the Subject of the Treatise
foregoing. Hence likewise many Fragments of the Fathers subjoined to Discourses
of Divinity, and others out of the Historians subjoined to Historical
Treatises, and the like. A Thousand Instances of this may be easily produced,
if need were; but I shall not spend Pains and Paper in what will easily be
granted by all that are acquainted with MSS.

I must not here omit, that besides the Copy of our Treatise which we ow to the
Baroccian Volume, there is at this time extant another in France. It is
mentioned by the famous Cotelerius in his Notes upon the Third Volume of his
Monumenta Ecclesiae Graecae. He quotes it under the Title of a Treatise Offendi
pariter in opusculo nunc inedito, olim si Deus dederit ^dendo, De celebri
Schismate ob Josephum Presbyterum, haec verba. (...). p. 645.
Concerning the famous Schism which was raised upon the account of Josephus the
Presbyter, and he says he intended to publish it. That that which he mentions
is the same with our Treatise, appears by a certain Quotation of one of the
Epistles of Methodius out of the Second Book of Nico, which is produced by
Cotelerius out of it, and is in the very same words in our Treatise. Since I
published the Treatise, I received this Observation from the Famous and Learned
Mr. Dodwel. Now if any one is so very unwilling to be convinced, as not to be
satisfied with what we have hitherto said, and he thinks it worth his
Curiosity, he would do very well to desire an account of this Copy from some
Body at Paris. It is, I suppose, to be found in the King's Library there, tho
Cotelerius makes no mention where he had it. Five Hundred to One, but a Month
or Six Weeks hence we may have a Report spread abroad, that Advice has been
sent from Paris, that the aforesaid Canons are found in the MS. there in the
self same manner as at Oxford. A spurious Letter, as from some considerable
Man, the Librarian himself, or some other, will do very well for that purpose.
This would be but a very dull Imposture, since the Canons make nothing to the
Purpose of the Treatise: However I shall here let you know, that it often
happens, that Two distinct MS. Copies of a Treatise have the same things
subjoined at the end of the Treatise. And the Reason is plain, viz* Because
they were either transcribed from one another, or are both descended from the
same. I know, This is very Dry Food for a Person of so delicate and nice a
Digestion as you are; But however I shall give you one Instance. We have here
in Oxford amongst the Baroccian MSS. a Copy of Anastasius Sinaita (Nicaenus
some men miscall him) his Quaestiones Theologicae; at the End of which there
are added many Fragments of several Authors, which by the manner of Writing you
would take to be part of the Work: Another ancient Copy of the same Work is
extant in the aforesaid Library at Paris, in which the same Fragments are
exactly found, as I know by a particular account of that Volume which I have
met with; And yet it is certain that the Fragments, we speak off, are not part
of the Work of Anastasius, but annexed to it by some ancient Librarian.
Concerning the Schism which was raised upon the account of Josephus the
Presbyter, of which there is mention in the Paris Copy, as the occasion of our
Treatises being written, I shall tell you something by and by.

Before I utterly dismiss this Cause, I shall beg your leave to observe, that
the Council called First and Second, to which the Three last of the Canons
above translated, do belong, was a Council called under Photius the Patriarch
of Constantinople; in which the said Photius, tho made a Patriarch by the
Emperor when Ignatius the Patriarch was unjustly deposed by the Emperor's
bare Authority, was received and owned as rightful Patriarch, and that whilst
Ignatius was living. And it is further observable, That that same Council
consisted of so many Bishops as to be called by Balsamon, the learned Patriarch
of Antioch, (...) a General Council.

And thus much, Sir, for our Canons. The next thing I observe in your Letter,
is what you tell me concerning a very learned and elaborate Answer, which you
say is ready to be published, and very much talked on, against the Oxford
Antiquity. As for that, Sir, It is no News to Me, and no more than I ever
expected. You know, there must somewhat be said. That Is a Business of course.
And Schism is a Thing of so ugly and horrid an Aspect, that it is not a Wonder,
if They that have rashly espoused it, think fit to give it a Paint; tho all the
World knows, It is not its Natural Color, and it plainly appears to be
Dawbing. We have been now so Civil and Gentile to our Adversaries, as to clean
our selves of that Dirt, which they themselves cast upon us, before We are to
enter upon the Struggle: You may tell 'em, Sir, We are ready and prepared to
close-in, whenever they please to come on. We are not Concerned at what you
say, That They are Great Men, Men of War from their Youth. For what avail the
greatest Abilities, what avails the strongest Confederacy, when a Cause is not
capable of Defense? What avails a great deal of Strength, when, like Milo, they
are caught in an Oak? It is not, Sir, to be admired, that they that are engaged
in this Schism are so little moved and persuaded by the many Examples of those
Great and Excellent Bishops, which the Oxford Antiquity presents 'em. You
cannot but know, of whom it was that St. Ierom uses those Words: Mores meorum,
says he, in the Person of a Luciferian, apprime novi, facilius eos vinci posse
quam persuaderi.
I know very well their Temper, that it is easier to conquer 'em, than to
persuade 'em. 'Twas, you know, the Luciferian Schismatics, of whom he speaks
so. And St. Augustine, I remember, makes Totum sermonem meum tanquam mutus
audivit. Retract. l. 2. c. 51. Multa diximus etiam fatigati, and tamen Frater
noster, propter quem ista dicimus vobis, and cui pariter dicimus, and pro quo
tanta agimus, adhuc consistit. Lib. de Gestis cum Emerito.
Complaint of Emeritus, the Champion of the Schismatical Donatists, that, tho
in the Conference between 'em, he was so far Confounded, as not to have a Word
to say, yet he still continued in his Schism, as if He himself had been
Conqueror. As it is a particular Complexion, and a great and strong Temptation
of either Resentment or Ambition, or the tickling Satisfaction of being at the
Head of a Party, that must hurry a Man on to so great a Sin as a Schism, so it
must be a peculiar Grace that reduces one. It is not your carrying a Light,
that will make a Man follow you; not the showing him the Road, that will make
him go right, unless he has a Will to be directed. It is therefore, I say, no
matter at all of Wonder, if those many Examples and Authorities of the Oxford
Antiquity have not met with that agreeable success which a Man unconcerned
might very well have expected: And, when I tell ye, We are ready to assert and
defend that Doctrine, which our Treatise advances against all the Opposition
which our Adversaries threaten, We are far from engaging to open a way for it
to our Adversaries Hearts. That, I fear, is scarce to be expected; more
especially of those whose Pens are now engaged in the Defense of their Schism:
For they be Writing, still make make it more hard to be convinced, and suck,
like the Orator of old, a fatal Poison out of their own Pens. In short, Sir, I
must tell ye; The Place, before which we ly, has, to Me, no other Appearance
(you will pardon, Sir, the youthful Comparison) but that of a Castle Enchanted,
and I shall not pretend to be so Romantic a Champion as to force it to a
Surrender. Tho we know all the Arms it can possibly make use off, are very Weak
and Insignificant; tho the Walls, that look toward us, are extremely thin, and
without any manner of Foundation; Whatsoever our Weapons may be, or our
strength and dexterity in using 'em; There is still a SPIRIT within, that will
keep it from being taken. Yet this I shall dare to pretend to; I shall dare
engage to discover the Weakness of the Place, and to Throw up such Works round
about it, as may hinder, like a Circle, the Sallies of the Obstinate Spirit,
and secure all those, that are yet without, from the Charms it may lay upon 'em.

That We may not run on and mispend our Time, and Abuse the Patience of our
Readers by Discourses not properly pertinent and close to the Matter depending;
When you meet with any of our Learned Adversaries, the Emeriti of this Schism,
who, you say, are publishing an Answer to our Treatise, and writing a Defense
of their Revolt, Be pleased, Sir, to (...) desire 'em to demonstrate, if they
can, the Two general Propositions which follow.

1. That the Civil Government has not any Authority in it self to deprive a
Bishop of his Bishopric, who refuses to own it, and to submit to it. And here
they are desired to consider, that the Civil Power or the Temporal Governors
are no less of God's own Institution than Bishops or the Governors of the
Church, that both are equally Iure Divino with this only difference, that the
former are instituted by God for our Peace and Happiness here in this World,
the latter to conduct us to Happiness in that which is to come; That the
Secular Government is antecedent to the Spiritual; That when Christ came into
the world to establish a Church, he came not to abolish any Law that was
necessary for the support of the Secular Government, not to set up a Church
that was any ways opposite to it; But that he himself submitted to the Secular
Government which he found established, and commanded his Followers to do so;
That after his Death the Apostles likewise did so, and commanded likewise all
their Followers and Successors to do the same, to submit to the Temporal Power
as the Ordinance of God. It is plain that our Savior by establishing a Church,
intended the establishment of such things only as might well consist with the
Safety and the Essentials of Government. From hence it follows, that none has
received any Power or Commission from Christ to preach the Gospel, or to
preside over the Church in any Country, but with this Supposition, and on this
Condition, that he own and submit to the Temporal Government which God has
ordained in that Country. It is, I say, with this Supposition, That he gives
his Bishops, and his Ministers, a Commission to preside over the Church, and to
preach his Gospel in such or such a Country; It is upon the same Condition that
the Church appoints 'em to preside or preach in that Place; and it is upon the
same Condition that they are received, allowed off, and protected by the State.
If therefore they fail of the Performance of that necessary Condition, their
Commission then ceases as to that particular Government, which they cannot, or
will not submit to. They become Deprivable by the State, and the Church is to
constitute others who are willing to submit to the State, and whom the State
shall approve of as fit to be trusted by it in that Post. Thus for Matters of
Heresy; Christ has given no Authority to any to preach in his Name, or to
govern in his Church, but on this Condition, that they preach and maintain the
true Faith. If that Condition be not observed, the Church is then to deprive
'em. In the Case of Heresy it belongs to the Church to Deprive, that being the
proper Judge of that Question, What is the true Faith? In the Case of
Rebellion, or of Non-submission to the Government, it belongs to the
Government, as being the proper Judge of what is necessary for its own Support.

I lay down this as a Principle, on which both the Power of the Church, of
Depriving for Spiritual, and likewise the Power of the State, of Depriving for
Political Crimes, does depend.

Query, What Security the Civil Government, which is God's own Institution, and
antecedent to the Ecclesiastical, can have, if a Bishop, that refuses to own
it, and to submit to its Authority, may not be Deprived by it? What Security
can it have, Especially considering, that Men of that Character are generally
Persons of very great Power and Authority, and may easily go a great way in the
Subversion of a Government, by the Influence of their Eloquence, and their
great Reputation for Learning and Piety? In such a Case is the Bishop to be
Deprived by a Synod of Bishops? Here a Second Query will follow, What if all
the Bishops, that are under a Government should conspire against it? And what
if we suppose, that there is only one Bishop within the Bounds of that
Government, a thing that has often happened; What must be done in that Case?
Will our Adversaries grant, that, supposing a Bishop should conspire against
the Government or Rebel, the Government has Authority to imprison him, or to
banish him; but not to Deprive him of his Bishopric, so as that another may be
placed in his See? If this be the Plea of our Adversaries, I shall then desire
to be satisfied in one Query more. How does this consist with the Nature and
End of Church Government? How can He continue a Pastor that is utterly banished
from his Flock, and rendered utterly incapable of doing the Duty of his Charge?
Shall the Neighbor Bishops be his Delegates, and act by his Power and
Authority? But what if we recur to our former Supposition, that all the Bishops
of a Kingdom are Rebels? When they are all banished by the State, who then must
govern the Church? Who ordain, and do other Duties that are proper to a Bishop?
Or supposing that there is but one Bishop; when he is sent into perpetual
Banishment, how must his Office be supplied? When in the first Planting of the
Christian Religion in the several Parts of the World there was only one Bishop
in a Country, as at first in many Countries there was only one, if that one
had been banished for Rebellion, pray, what should the Christians there planted
have done? Should they have lived without any Bishop during all his Life that
was banished, or ought they not rather to have got a new one to govern 'em, to
supply the Church with inferior Clergy, and the like? Here, Sir, I shall put
you in mind of those words of the great St. Chrysostom, which are urged in the
Preface to the Oxford Antiquity; when he was unjustly banished he charged his
People, That as they hoped for Salvation, they should be obedient to that
Bishop who should succeed him as to himself, For the Church, says he, cannot be
without a Bishop. And yet it is certain, that that great Man did never resign
his Bishopric, but continued to act as a Bishop of the Catholic Church during
all the time of his Banishment, that is, as long as he lived. I shall only
add, that if the Banishment of a Bishop be not designed to be perpetual, as
that of St. Chrysostom was, but only for a Time, then there may not be any
Necessity that another should be placed in his See. And this was the Reason,
why, when St. Athanasius, the Patriarch of Alexandria, was banished by the
Emperor Constantine, there was no new Patriarch created. That He was banished
only for a Time, and that the Emperor Constantine intended to recall him, and
to restore him to his Bishopric, is expressly attested by the Younger Emperor
Constantine in his (...) etc. Iam cum inprimis vestrae in Deum pietati, s^aeque
Sedi hunc Episcopum Dominus Deus noster and Pater Constantinus restituere
vellet, and humana (...) hoc votum impleret, requieverit, ego mihi convenire
puto, ut susceptae volunta^e sacrae memori^e* Imperatoris, id ipsum adimpleam,
quod ille non potuit. Apud Athanasi^ ad Imp. Constable. Apolog. p. 806.
Letter to the Church of Alexandria, by which he restores him to his See. Who
adds, that he himself by restoring him, did only fulfill his Father's Will:
who, he says, would have done it himself if he had not been prevented by Death.
And Pope Julius in his Synodical (...). Ap. S. Athan. Apol. ad Imp. Constable. p.
784.
Epistle to the Synod of Antioch, concludes, That the Emperor Constantine did
not fully and perfectly condemn Athanasius, because there was no one put into
his Place, during the time of his Banishment. If, says he, He had fully
condemned him, his See would have been disposed of to another.

The Solution, Sir, of these Queries, which I have proposed, will prove, if I
am not mistaken, a Work of no great Ease. I should gladly see the Knot fairly
untied, without any Cutting and Violence. We will see on the contrary, if you
please, how easily those Knots may be loosed, which our Adversaries are wont to
present us, as the greatest effects of their Skill.

Ob. 1. How does it consist with the Safety of the Church and of Religion, if
the Secular Governor has Authority to turn out a Bishop? Then all Bishops may
depend on his Sentence, and the Church and Religion be precarious. An Orthodox
Bishop may be deposed, and a Heretic placed in his See.

Ans. It cannot be avoided but that the Church and Religion must be always, in
some measure, Precarious, and depend upon the Civil Magistrate. If the Governor
be an Enemy to Religion* there is no avoiding Oppression, wheresoever we lodge
the true Power of Depriving a Bishop. Now to answer directly the Objection: If
the Civil Governor should turn out our Orthodox Bishops, and put in Heretics
in their Places, or put in none at all in their places, then the Church is
obliged to adhere to the old Ones turned out, or, if there be a necessity, to
procure new Ones that are Orthodox. Thus if the Civil Magistrate should forbid
the Christian Religion to be preached in his Country, he is not to be obeyed,
because it is the Will of our Savior that his Gospel should be preached to all
Nations, as far as the Preaching of it does consist with those Rules that are
truly essential to Government. And when Decius the Emperor aimed to root out
the Christian Religion in the City of Rome by destroying the Bishop Fabianus,
and forbiding that any new Bishop should be Created in his Place; there was no
Obligation on the Christians of that Church to obey his Will or Decree, since
they did not pretend to choose such a Person as refused to submit to his
Government. And therefore, tho they deferred the Election of a new Bishop for
above Sixteen Months, for fear of the Emperor, who then resided ar Rome,
Propter rerum and temporum difficultates, as the Clergy tell St. Cyprian in a
Letter, yet as soon as the Emperor was engaged in a Civil War, and had
therefore removed from that City, they set about an Election, and placed
Cornelius in the Chair. This Principle will secure Religion from depending on
the Will of a Governor no less than that of our Adversaries, who would have
Bishops to be Deprivable only by Bishops. That likewise may have its ill
Consequences, for what if those Bishops, who are supposed to Deprive another,
should themselves be Heretical, or no true Friends to the Church?

This Rule is still to be observed, that neither the Civil nor the
Ecclesiastical Power may so far usurp upon one another as to lessen that
Authority which is necessary for the Subsistence of Each. Where on either side
their Pretensions exceed their due Bounds, there all there Authority ceases. We
must neither erect a Protestant Popedom, nor yet an Erastian Kingdom: Not so
interpret one Text as make it fall out with another. There is, as in other
Things, so likewise in this, a sort of an Analogy of Faith: As they both
proceed from God; so they cannot in their own Natures disagree in the least.
Neither must there such Maxims be advanced as may make 'em wage War with one
another. So to order the Temporal Government as not to have Regard to the
Spiritual, is Profaneness, Irreligion and Atheism; and to lay down such Rules in
Favor of the Spiritual as that it may Top upon the Temporal is no less a Crime
than it is a Vanity. In a Word: He cannot give to God all the Things that
areGods, that does not give to Caesar the Things that are Cesars.

Ob. 2. But it is not in the power of the Civil Government to take away that
which it could not give, the Orders and Character of a Bishop.

Answ. This Objection supposes that when a Bishop is deprived of his particular
Bishopric, his Orders are taken away, and he is not any longer a Bishop. If
the thing be so; look they to it, who refuse to submit to the Civil Government
which God has set over 'em. It appears from what has been said, that our
Savior has given no Commission to exercise the Office of a Bishop in such a
particular Place, but to such as submit to the Government of that Country in
which they reside: and if they are not Bishops but in that one Place where
first they were designed to preside, if they have not (I say) any larger
Commission, then whenever they refuse to acknowledge the Civil Government,
their whole Commission is void, and they are not any longer Bishops. They are
not deprived of their Orders by the Civil Power, but their Commission which
they received from Christ to exercise the Office of a Bishop in that particular
Place, is of it self void, as being given only on Condition, as soon as they
appear to be Enemies to the Government, and are so declared. Look they, I say,
to that. But it is not our opinion, that a Bishop is utterly Degraded
whenever he is justly Deprived. Neither is it agreeable to the Notions and
Practice of our Church. For if the Character of a Bishop does depend upon the
having a Bishopric, how can a Bishop remain a Bishop after Resignation? How
can he be restored after (lawful) Deprivation without a new Ordination? How can
he be translated without a new Ordination from one Bishopric to another, if,
when he was Ordained, he was only Ordained to this or that particular
Bishopric? How can he Ordain, or do the Offices of a Bishop, out of his own
Diocese? If the People of his City or Diocese should be all destroyed by Wars,
or be utterly dispersed and lost, how can he remain invested with the Character
of a Bishop? And as it is not agreeable to the Doctrine and Practice of our
Church, so neither to the general Notions and Practice of the Ancients, as
shall easily and plainly be made out, as soon as Occasion is given. At present
it will be enough, to remind you of what is above observed concerning St.
Chrysostom.

Tho it be not my Design at present to enter upon the Authority of the
Ancients, yet I cannot forbear to take notice of a very strange Weakness of
Judgment (for so I must call it) which Lucifer Calaritanus has discovered in
his Books to the Emp. Constantius in behalf of St. Athanasius. He affirms,
amongst other things, that another Bishop ought not to be put into St.
Athanasius's Place, as was done at that time, because Athanasius was living. By
which he seems to intimate that a Bishop could not be at all Deprived; but his
meaning is, that he could not be Deprived by the Emperor. So he says: But how
does he prove it? He does not pretend to Tradition, Persequeris eum per quem te
audire praeceperit Dominus, agente eo in rebus humanis, cohareticum tuum
Georgium mittis Successorem, cum tametsi fuisset liberatus jam Athanasius and
corpore (l. e Corp.) tibi non licuerit mittere, sed fuer^t ac sit in Dei manu,
quem fuisset dignatus populo suo antistitem instituere, per servos viz. suos,
hoc est Catholicos Episcopos. Neque enim possit impleri virtui Spiritus Sancti
ad Dei gubernandum populum, nisi is quem Deus allegisset, cuique manus per
Catholicos Episcopos fuisset imposita, (hic deest aliquid, e corpore liberetur,
aut quid simile) sicut defuncto Moyse, impletum Spiritu Sancto invenimus
Successorem ejus Iesum Naue. Loquitur Scriptura Sancta, dicens, and Jesus
filius Naue impletus est spiritu intelligentiae. Imposuerat enim Moses manum
super eum and audierunt eum Filii Israel, and fecerunt secundum quod mandavit
Dominus Moysi. Conspicis ordinationi Dei te obviam isse, contra Dei faciendo
voluntatem, temet mucrone gladii tui jugulatum, siquidem non licuerit ordinari
nisi fuisset defunctus Athanasius and defuncto Athanasio, Catholicus debuerit
per Catholicos ordinari Episcopos. lib. 1.
or to lay it down as the Doctrine of the Ancients; but so he thinks fit to
say, as being too angry to allow the Prince any Prerogative, and he proves it
from hence, that Ioshuah did not succeed Moses till Moses was dead. What a
strange Demonstration that is! Yet so bad as it is, it holds as well against a
Deprivation by Bishops, and likewise against a Deprivation by the People of the
Diocese, which Lucifer himself in another place owns to be lawful, as against a
Deprivation by the Prince: and so bad as it is, it is full as good, as a great
many other Arguments, which are urged from the Scripture by that over
Passionat, tho Orthodox, Bishop. It is true, that the Emperor did very ill in
turning out St. Athanasius unjustly, and in putting a Heretic into his Place.
This we know. It is likewise true, that our Author deserved very well for his
Zeal against the Arian Heretics: But this however I must say, that he manages
the Cause with much more Heat and Irreverence than Judgment. We may dare to
affirm he had no great stock of the latter: And it is not at all to be wondered
at, that He afterward proved a Schismatic. It Is further alleged by the same
Author against the said Persecuting Emperor, that instead of being a Judge in
the Cause of a Bishop, he ought by the Law of God to be Condemned to Death for
not submitting to the Doctrine of the Catholic Bishops. And this he proves from
that place in Deuteronomy where God commands, that they that did not obey the
Priests should be put to death; tho the Text be no other than this: ( Deuteronomy.
17.12.) And the Man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the
Priest (that stands to minister there before the Lord thy God) nor unto the
Judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel.
After all I must add, That the Cruelty of that Emperor Constantius to the
Catholic Bishops, may be pleaded to excuse both Lucifer, who himself suffered
Banishment, and also some other Bishops of that Age, who were so far provoked
as to deny that the Emperor had any Authority at all over Bishops, For, as
Solomon says, Oppression makes a Wise man mad.

Here, Sir, it comes into my mind, what you mention in your Letter concerning
St. Cyprian, That there is nothing more usual with the Advocates for the New
Separation, than to plead upon all Occasions the Authority of that excellent
Father. It Is, Sir, a merry Question, that which you are pleased to ask me,
Whether ever He wrote a Treatise by way of Prophecy for the Cause of our
Adversaries? One would think so, you say, by the Confidence and Triumph of
those that are wont to quote him. I shall answer you, Sir, in short, but with a
great deal of Seriousness, that there is not a Word in St. Cyprian that makes a
Whit for their Cause. I will give you, according to your Desire, a particular
account of the meaning of all those Passages, which you say are usually
alleged, and of the Occasion why they were written. You will then see, that
even the greatest and learnedest men (for such, you tell me, some of the
Quoters of St. Cyprian are) are in some respects no better than the Many; that
when they are drowning and sinking, they will catch at Straws no less than
other People.

The Words which you say, are commonly quoted by our Adversaries out of St.
Cyprian are

1. That a Bishop cannot be judged by another, but, that Christ alone, who set
him over the Church, has power to judge of his Actions.

These Words are in St. Cyprian's Preface to the Synod of Carthage. Superest ut
hac ipsa re singuli quid sentiamus, proferamus; neminem judicantes, aut a jure
Communionis aliquem, si diversa senserit, amoventes. Neque enim quisquam
nostrum Episcopum se Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad
obsequon^^ (...) Collegas suos adigit, quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro
licentia libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium; tamque judicari ab
alio non possit, quam nec ipse potest judicare. Sed expectemus universi
judicium Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui unus and solus habet potestatem and
praeponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae gubernatione, and de actu nostro judicandi.
The Occasion of them was this: There was a Controversy between St. Cyprian and
Pope Stephanus of Rome, concerning the Rebaptizing of such as had been Baptized
by Heretics or Schismatics. St. Cyprian and the Synod were for it. But they
would not, they say, take upon 'em to Anathematize those Bishops that did not
agree with 'em in that Matter; but would leave it to them to act according to
their Judgments, and would let the Matter alone to be fully determined by
Christ at the Day of Judgment, he being the proper Judge of the Actions of
Bishops in a Thing of that Nature.

2. That a Bishop ought not to be prescribed to in the ordering of the Affairs
of his Church, but that he is to govern according to his own Judgment, and to
give an account of his Actions to God.

These Words are spoken on the same occasion, and in the same sense, Haec ad
conscientiam tuam, Erater carissime, and pro honor communi, and pro simplici
dilectione pertulimus, credentos etiam tibi pro Religionis tuae and fidei
veritate placere, quae and religiosa pariter and vera. sunt. Caeterum scimus
quosdam quod semel imbiberint nolle deponere, nec pro positum suum facile
murare, sed salvo inter Collegas pacis and concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria,
quae apud se semel sint usurpata, retinere: Qua in re nec nos vim cuiquam
facimus aut legem damus, cum habeat in Ecclesiae administratione voluntatis
suae arbitrium liberum unusquisque Praepositus rationem act^s sui Domino
redditurus. Epist. 71.
in a Letter to Pope Stephanus, wherein he gives him an account of what had
been Decreed by the Synod of Carthage.

They are spoken likewise upon another, but a like, Occasion, in his Epistle to
Magnus, who had sent to know hisJudgment concerning such Persons, as, Qua in
part nemini verecundia and modestia nostra a praejudicat, quo minus
unusquisque quod putat, sentiat, and quod senserit, faciat. Nos quantu concipit
mediocritas nostra, aestimamus etc. Rescripsi, Fili carissime, ad literas tuas,
quantum parva nostra mediocritas valuit, and ostendi quid nos, quantum in nobis
est, sentiamus, nemini praescribentes, quo minus statuat, quod putat
unusquisque Praepositus; actus sui rationem Domino redditurus, secundum quod B.
Apostolus in Epistola sua ad Romans scribit, ac dicit: Vnusquisque nostrum pro se
rationem dabit; non ergo nos invicem judicemus. Epist. 69.
being converted to the Faith in the time of Sickness, were Baptized by
Sprinkling only, Whether they ought to be looked upon as perfect Christians? He
resolves him in the Affirmative, but with a great deal of Modesty: And he
leaves it to other Bishops to act according to their Judgments. He would not
judge another that should not agree with him in it.

And likewise in his Epistle to Antonianus, where he says, That some of the
Bishops of Africa before his Time, Et quidem apud Antecessores nostros quidam
de Episcopis istic in Provincia nostra dandam pacem moechis non putaverunt, and
in totum poenitentiae locum contra adulteria clauserunt; non tamen a
Co-episcoporum suorum Collegio recesserunt, aut Catholicae Ecclesi(...) ^uritia
vel censurae sua obstinatione ruperunt; ut quia apud alios adulteris pax
dab^tur, qui non dabat, de Ecclesia separaretur. Manente Concordiae vinculo,
and perseverante Catholicae Ecclesia individuo sacramento, actum suum disponit
and dirigit unusquisque Episcopus, rationem propositi sui Domino redditurus.
Epist. 55.
thought it unlawful to re-admit into the Church a Person excommunicated for
Adultery; but they did not however pretend, to condemn other Bishops that were
of a different Opinion, and who practiced accordingly.

As also in an Epistle to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, wherein he complains, that
some of his Factious Presbyters, who had been condemned by the Bishops of his
Province, were fled to Rome to have their Cause heard by Cornelius, when (as he
says) it was contrary to the Constitutions of the Church, Nam cum statistum sit
ab omnibus nobis, and aequum sit pariter ac justum, ut uniuscujusque causa
illic audiatur, ubi est crimen admissum, and singulis Pastoribus portio gregis
sit adscripta, quam regat unusquisque and gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino
redditurus; oportet utique eos, quibus praesumus, non circumcursare, nec
Episcoporum concordiam cohaerentem sua subdola and fallaci temeritate
collidere, sed agere illic causam suam, ubi and accusatores habere and testes
sui criminis possint; nisi si paucis desperatis and perditis minor videtur esse
auctoritas Episcoporum in Africa constitutorum, qui jam de illis judicaverunt,
and eorum conscientiam multis delictorum laqueis vinctam judicii sui nuper
gravitate damnarunt. Ep. 59.
and likewise to reason and equity, that a Cause should be tried in any other
Province but that where the Crime was committed; and that the Bishops of that
Province are to give an account of their Actions to God, and not to other
Bishops.

3. That a Bishop has Deum solum judicem, and Deo soli debet se judici.

These are not the Words of St. Cyprian, but of the Clergy of Rome, in their
Answer to him concerning the Receiving of the Lapsi into the Church: In which,
they applaud his Modesty in writing to them for their Judgments, Quanquam been
sibi conscius animus, and Evangelicae disciplinae vigore subnixus, and verus
sibi in Decretis caelestibus testis effectus, soleat solo Deo judice esse
contentus, nec alterius aut lauds petere, aut accusationes pertimescere: tamen
geminata sunt laud condigni, qui cum conscientiam sciant Deo soli debere se
judici, actus tamen suos desiderant, etiam ab ipsis suis Fratribus compro,
bari. Quod te, Frater Cypriane, facere non mirum est, qui pro tua verecundia
and ingenita industria, consiliorum tuorum non tam judices voluisti, quam
participes inveniri, etc. Ep. 30.
when he was not at all obliged, but had power as a Bishop to act in a thing of
that nature according to his own judgment, and was bound to give an account of
his Actions in that Affair to God alone, not to any other Church.

4. That all Acts of the Church ought to proceed from Bishops.

These Words are gathered out of the 33. Epistle to the Lapsi: Wherein he
complains of the boldness of some factious Presbyters of his, who had taken
upon 'em in the time of his Retirement to admit the Lapsi to Communion by their
own Authority without consulting him, and in writing to him had pretended to
write in the name of the Church. After he had said that the power of Binding
and Loosing was committed to the Apostles, he subjoins, Inde per temporum and
successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio, and Ecclesiae ratio decurrit, ut
Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur: and omnes actus Ecclesiae per eosdem
actus gubernetur. Cum h^c itaque Divina lege fundatum sit, miror quosdam nudaci
temeritate, etc.
He briskly asserts the Authority of Bishops; he tells 'em that the Church
consists in the Bishop, the Clergy and the People; and that in the Receiving of
the Lapsi into the Church, it was necessary there should be the concurrence of
the Bishop who had the power committed to him of Binding and Loosing.

5. That it is an extreme Insolence to pretend to pass judgment on a Bishop.

This he says with relation to private Persons, who pretend so to judge their
Bishop as to leave his Communion if they think him unworthy to govern in the
Church. Inde enim Schismata and Hareses obortae sunt and oriuntur, dum
Episcopus, qui ^nus est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione
con^emnitur, and homo dignatione Dei honoratus, indignus ab hominibus
judicatur. Quis enim hic ^st superbiae tumor, quae arrogantiae animi, quae
mentis inflatio ad cognitionem suam Praeposit^s ac Sacerdotes vocare; ac nisi
apud te purgati fuerimus, and sententia tua absoluti, ecce jan^ sex annis, nec
Fraternitas habuerit Episcopum, nec Plebs Praepositum, nec grex Pastorem, nec
Ecclesia Gubernatorem, nec Christus Antistitem, nec Deus Sacerdotem? etc. Ep.
66.
He writes it to Pupianus a Confessor, who upon the account of some very ill
things which St. Cyprian's Adversaries had maliciously accused him off, as
committed before he was a Bishop, had withdrawn himself from his Communion.

6. That to make ones self the Judge of a Bishop, is to pretend to judge God
himself.

What he has to this purpose, is in the foresaid Epistle to Pupianus, and upon
the foresaid occasion. He tells him that God, who, according to the Scripture,
extends his Providence even to Sparrows, does in a particular manner concern
himself in the Election of a Bishop, and therefore since himself was duly
Elected, Pupianus took upon him to oppose the Judgment of God, in pretending to
judge him unworthy.

Lastly, That a Bishop that invades another's See is no Bishop. Et cum post
primum secundus esse non possit, Ep. 55. Ad Anton.
quisquis post unum qui solus esse debeat, factus est; non jam secundus ille,
sed nullus est. What is this to our Case? He speaks those words concerning
Novatianus, who had violently invaded the Sea of Pope Cornelius, a good and
innocent Man, one that had never been Deprived for any Fault, and who never
refused to acknowledge the Emperor's Authority. Our new Bishops are not
secundi, but soli, since the old Ones are Legally Deprived.

I must here observe, that among all the Fathers there is no one speaks more
for the Concurrence and Consent of the Laity in Matters relating to the
ordering and governing of the Church, than our Author St. Cyprian. He declares
in many places, that he would not do any thing in this or that Matter relating
to the Church, till he had consulted both his Clergy and Laity, as particularly
in the Case of the Lapsi. And he thinks it not only convenient, but necessary
for a Bishop to do so. For He, together with his Synod, call See Epist. 64.
Therapius, a Bishop, to account, and severely reprimand him, for presuming to
admit into the Church a Presbyter, that had lapsed, without the Consent of the
Laity, From this Example it is further observable, that, tho St. Cyprian speaks
so much for the Equality of Bishops, and that they are not responsable to one
another for what they do as Bishops, as in the Case of the Lapsi; yet neither
his own, nor the general practice of his Age, did truly agree with what he
says. By what Authority did St. Cyprian, and his Synod, pretend to call
Therapius to account, a Bishop as well as themselves? How could they pretend to
have Power to turn that Presbyter again out of the Church, as they plainly
intimate they had? They derived, you will say, this Authority from the Consent
of the Church. So Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops are set over Bishops
by the Consent of the Church, though by Christ's Institution all Bishops are
equal. Query, Whether the Consent of the Church of England (were there nothing
else to be alleged) be not enough to justify a Lay-Deprivation? If a Patriarch
or Metropolitan can Deprive a Bishop by the Authority of the Church, why may
not a Lay-Iudge do the like?

I shall close this Discourse concerning the Authority of that Father, with
that Question or Expostulation which I find in St. Augustine his 48 Ep. to
Vin^entius, the Rogatist, (a Sect of the Schismatical Donatists) who had laid a
great deal of Stress on the Authority of that Father for the Doctrine of
Re-Baptism: If you are delighted, says he, (and so say I to our Adversaries)
with the Authority of the holy Bishop, and glorious Martyr Cyprianus, which we
do not hold to be equal to the Authority of Scripture, why do you not imitate
him in this, that he held Communion with the Catholic Church spread over all
the world, and defended the Unity of it by his Writings? In the same Epistle
having quoted that place of St. Cyprian where he praises those African Bishops
that refused to re-admit Adulterers into the Church, yet did not break the
Peace of the Church, and separate from those that were of a different Opinion,
he adds, what likewise we may well say to our Quoters of St. Cyprian: What say
you to this, Brother Vincentius? You see that this Man, this peaceful Bishop,
and most valiant Martyr, was not more concerned for any thing, than least the
bond of Unity should be broken.

As the Authority of the Civil Power, of which we have hitherto spoken, is
agreeable to Principles and Reason, so likewise is it to the Practice and
Sentiments of the ancient Church. To make this appear, and to put an End, if it
be possible, to this Controversy, I shall present you, when occasion is given,
with A History of that Authority, (viz. of the Civil Power over Ecclesiastical
Persons, as well in Depriving as in otherwise punishing) throughout all ages,
more especially that of the first Christian Emperor. I shall treat concerning
that Matter with all the Fairness and Impartiality that becomes a faithful
Historian, and a real Lover of Truth, concealing nothing that may seem to make
for the Cause of our Adversaries. Yet this I shall demonstrat, that tho in the
time of Constantius some persecuted Bishops were pleased to deny that the
Emperor had any Authority at all over Bishops, yet the Emperor Constantine
himself (so great a Lover and Honorer of Bishops as he was) and likewise the
succeeding Orthodox Emperors, did oftentimes Judge and Deprive Bishops by
their own bare Authority: That the Church in the time of that Emperor, as well
as in after Ages, submitted to and acknowleg'd that Authority: That those
Ecclesiastical Canons which ordain that Bishops (even for Political Crimes) are
to be deprived only by Bishops, did never oblige any Secular Government, but
as they were allowed off, and so made Laws, by that Government. I could
willingly give you a Forecast of a few illustrious Examples of Bishops deprived
by the Emperor's sole Authority, and the Church's owning and acknowledging
that Authority; but I find I have already exceeded what first I designed on
this Subject, and have done like a great many others, who, designing only a
Lodge, have been in danger of building 'em a Seat. I shall now proceed to the
second general Proposition which our Adversaries are desired to make out, which
is this,

2. That it is agreeable to the Practice of the Ancient Christians, for a
Bishop unjustly deposed (whether by the Emperor, or by Bishops) to withdraw
himself from the Communion of his Successor though his Successor were not a
Heretic. Let this be their Proposition: If they prove not that, they prove
nothing. And the contrary is plainly demonstrated in our Treatise. There are
Two things, you tell me, besides the Canons above spoken off, which our
Adversaries are wont to allege in Answer to that Treatise. They First endeavor
to weaken the Authority of it, and Secondly they pretend that the Examples
which it produces, are all of Bishops Synodically deprived, and therefore not
to our Purpose. In answer to this second Exception, I shall undertake to
demonstrat these Two things.

1. That the Ancients had no greater regard to an unjust Synodical Deprivation,
than they had to an unjust Imperial Deprivation.

2. That several of those Bishops that are mentioned in our Treatise, were not
Deprived Synodically, or by Bishops, but by the Emperor's sole Power and
Authority. Neither did they resign their Bishoprics, but were violently turned
out.

As for the Objections of our Adversaries against the Authority of our
Treatise, though I know not of any Treatise of that age and nature that deserves
to be more esteemed, yet to wave all impertinent Disputes, and to show that
what we assert is not grounded on that only Bottom, we will fairly make 'em
this Offer: We will lay aside, if they please, the Authority of that Treatise,
and enter the Lists with new Weapons. This is the Pr^position we shall take
upon us to demonstrat:

That its contrary to the general Practice of the ancient Bishops, to recede,
upon their being unjustly Deprived whether by the Emperor only or by a Synod,
from the Communion of an Orthodox Successor. I say, the general Practice:
That Is enough for us to demonstrat. For what if our Adversaries can produce us
one or two Exceptions? How will that excuse Bishops who have always professed a
great and due regard for the general Practice of the Ancients.

I must not conclude before I have told you, as I promised you, what Schism
th^^ was which was raised upon the account of Josephus (...) Presbyter, which,
as appears by Cotelerius's Copy, was the occasion of the writing our Treatise.
You must know, Sir, in short, that in the Year 1266. Arsenius the Patr. of CP.
was deposed by a Synod, whereof the Emp. Michael Palaeologus sat President,
partly for certain Crimes of which he was accused, but chiefly for Contumacy in
refusing to give his Appearance. He knew that the Emperor was his Enemy, and
therefore he pleaded that 'twas contrary to the Canons for Him to sit Judge in
the Cause of a Bishop. The Synod (a very great one) both acknowleg'd and
asserted the Emperor's Authority, and alleged, it was agreeable both to Reason
and the Practice of the Ancients. Germanus Bishop of Adrianople, who was put
into Arsenius's Place, resigning after a few Months, Josephus, the Emperor's
Confessor and an Abbot, was advanced to that Honor. Hence a rose a famous
Schism amongst the Monks and the Common People, some adhering to Arsenius, as
unjustly Deprived, others being averse to Josephus because they looked upon him
to have been formerly Excommunicated by (...), and others pretending other
Reasons. I said, Amongst the Monks and Common people; for Pachymeres assures
us, though a Friend and Well-wisher* to Arsenius* that in all the Church there
were but Three Bishops that engaged in the Schism, viz. those of Alexandria,
Thessalonica and S^ndi^. Of whom, the two last word the especial Friends and
Creatures of Arsenius. Neither did those Bishops make a Schism because another
Bishop was put into Arsenius's Place, whilst he was alive; for they presently
began it, as it plainly appears from Pachymeres, as soon as Arsenius was
deprived, before his Place was filled up; that is, they withdrew from the
Communion (not of the Church in general, but only) of those Bishops that
Deprived Him: so Pachymeres expressly says of the Bishop of Alexandria. -- Those
Persons that refused to Communicate with Josephus upon the Account of
Arsenius's Deprivation, the Author of our Treatise endeavors to convince, by
showing by many Examples of Bishops unjustly Deprived, part of them by Synods,
and part by the Emperor alone, how contrary it was to the Practice of the
Ancients to violate the Peace of the Church on the account of such unjust or
uncanonical Deprivations.

Being now assured what Schism that was, that occasioned the writing of our
Treatise, we cannot any longer be ignorant of the true Age of the Author. It
cannot reasonably be doubted, but that our Treatise was written about the
beginning of the Schism, and of Iosephus's Patriarchate, viz. in the Year 1267*
for Josephus was consecrated Patriarch the First of January 126^ as may castly
be shown, though Petrus Possinus would have it to be a Year later. This at least
is apparent, that (...) which happened on the last of Sept. 1273. for it
plainly appears from the Treatise, that the Patriarch, for whose sake the
Schism was raised, was alive when the Treatise was writ. It may further be
gathered out of the Sixth Book of Nicephorus Gregoras, that this Schism lasted
no longer* than the Year 1275* for he tells us the manner how it was ended,
just after he had spoken of Gregorius (Georgius) Cyprius's being promoted to
the Patriarchate, and before he speaks of the Patriarch Veccus's Banishment;
which happened both on the foresaid Year. Here, Sir, I must retract what I
formerly conjectured (tho very doubtingly) in my Preface to the Gr. and Lat.
Edition, concerning Nicephorus Callisti his being the Author of our Treatise.
For from what has been said it is manifest, that the Author of our Treatise was
older than Nicephorus Callisti. For Nicephorus was not full 36. Years old when
he published his Eccl. History, and yet when he published it, Andronicus the
Emperor (Son to the abovesaid Michael Pal.) who died in the Year 1327. near
70. Years of Age, was a very Old Man, as he plainly declares in his Itaque
longissimam etiam tibi vitam ((...)) qu^ bona omnia, pro eo atque decuit,
omnino in unum collegeris, obtigisse existimo: ut ex temporis diuturnitate ad
incrementum gloriae hoc tibi accederet, etc. p. 20. There is mention made
before p. 7. of the (...) of the Emperor, which the Interpreter renders,
aetatis flos and vigor. But that is a mistake: he ought to have rendered it
there, flos venustatis. The Author flatters the old Emp. and tells him of the
Symmetry of his Parts, and his florid Complexion.
Dedication. There needs no Argument to confirm so clear a Demonstration. Yet
others may be produced, as that which we our selves formerly urged in the
foresaid Preface, as an Objection against the Conjecture we had made; that the
Author of our Treatise ranks the Patriarchs of CP. that governed in the time of
the Emp. Isaacius Angelus, in this Order; Basilius, Nicetas, Leontius,
Dositheus, Xiphilinus: But Nicephorus, in a MS. Catalogue of the Patriarchs of
CP. thus: Basilius, Nicetas, Dositheus, Leontius, Dositheus again, Xiphilinus.
To which may be added, that the Predecessor of Macedonius, that was deposed by
the Emp. Anastasius, is by Nicephorus both in his Catalogue and in his Hist.
named Euphemius (as the more ancient Writers are wont to call him) but by the
Author of our Treatise, Euthymius. I once thought that this was only an Error
of the Librarian, tho he be so called in Three places; but since I have
observed, that by the more Modern Greeks he was usually so named. He is so
called likewise by Cedrenus, Metaphrastes, Theophanes, the Eighth General
Council Act* VI. and by others.

I was here, Sir, about to subscribe a Vale, and I thought on nothing but to
ease you of your poring on an ill Hand, and on sending away these Papers to the
Coach; But casting my Eyes a Second time on your Letter, I found that through
Have I had overlookt your Postscript, in which you mention an Empty and
Scurrilous Pamphlet, called, The Oxford Antiquity Examined, and are pleased to
ask me this Question, whether or no I design to Answer it? I do not wonder,
Sir, you should so far forget that Pamphlet, when you wrote your Letter, as to
throw it down to a Postscript, I rather wonder you should ever mind it at all,
but above all I wonder, how you came to be so far forgetful of the Humor of
your old Acquaintance, as to ask me that Question. How often have you heard me
say, That I hate to str^k^ on a Thing that is Hollow and Empty, which can only
return Noise! The Author of that Pamphlet is too much a Felo de se to need the
Hand of an Adversary. How excellently does he infer from one or two Mistakes,
which he endeavors to discover in our Treatise, that all the rest is nothing
but Error and Blunder! An incomparable Ergo! A rare Logician! How pleasant is
it to observe to what sorry Shifts our Second-hand-Writer is reduced where he
speaks of the Authority of St. Chrysostom! But I must not say, How pleasant: It
moves Pity in one, to see to what Pain he is put by that Weight that lies upon
his Head, what Turns and Twists he makes; how the poor Creature wrigles and
tosses his Tail up and down; And all to as little purpose as a Bird on a
Lime-twig, the more it flutters the more it is caught. No wonder he is so
hugely in Wrath, and falls so foul upon the Publisher and even the Licenser of
that Treatise. Here it comes into my Head what a Friend of ours said, when I
showed him some Libellous Letters, which have very freely been sent me; Bless
us! says he, What a Bawling here is, what a Squaling, and Calling of Names,
when a Person has been soundly Brusht!

From the scurrilous Writers let us pass, Sir, if you please, to the scurrilous
No-Writers, those Masters of Reflection and Censure, who, you say, are so free
upon this Occasion with the Name and Reputation o^ your Friend. I thank you,
Sir, for that good Advice which you give me* But here again I must blame you,
for ^o^getting me so far, as to fear I may be capable of ^eing disturbed by the
Insults of Adversaries. Can you think me so Pusillanimous, as to have Regard to
those (...)* Let me tell ye, my dearest Friend, I shall think my self very
unhappy, and but a very mean Profi^^^^ in Philosophy, when any Houses o^
Detractions, of either the Angry or the Envious, can so much move me as to turn
me any way from my Duty. It Is a brisk ^aying* you know, of Gaulminus, Scio and
mer^ri and far invi^iam* The Mereri, I have nothing to say to, I leave that
to Gaulminus, and the rest of his Fellow-Pretenders; but the Far, I my self
do pretend to. Be pleased to tell my Encomiasts, when you hear any of 'em
Harangue, that I never thought the World so much a Vtopia, as not to expect
their Elogiums. May they long and freely enjoy their own Humors, as I am
resolved to enjoy Mine. But withal let 'em know, that, by way of Return, I have
something for Them full as hot as those Coals of Fire, which our great and
common Master has commanded me to heap upon their Heads. To be short, Sir, give
'em my Service, and tell 'em they have the Prayers of

Your Humble Servant.

Page 19* (...) 3. read by writing. p. 26. l. 2 as to make.


