Advertisement of Books printed for W. Rogers.
SErmons preached upon several Occasions, by the Right Reverend Father in God
John Wilkins, D. D. and late Lord Bishop of Chester. Never before Published.

A Persuasive to Frequent Communion.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation.

THE NECESSITY Dignity and Duty OF Gospel Ministers. Discoursed of before the
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON, Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1685.

To the Worshipful PAUL WENTWORTH, Esquire;
Honored Sir,
THE many Charities and Benefactions of Sir Peter Wentworth your Brother in his
Lifetime, and the many considerable Legacies he left to Ministers at his
Death, and particularly that to my self, all paid by you with such speed and
integrity, together with your own love to Learning, manifested by the
Settlement you have made upon the School at Northampton, and by your Love and
Respects to good Ministers may be a sufficient Apology for my prefixing your
Name to this Paper, which contains the substance of a Sermon sometime preached
to the University of Cambridge, concerning The Necessity, Dignity and Duty of
Gospel Ministers.

Sir, may you long live a Pattern of good Works, and a Patron of good Men; and
when you die may you leave a Name behind you better than of Sons and Daughters.
May your Name and Memory be like the remembrance of good Josiah, Eccles. 49.
like the composition of the Perfume, made by the Art of the Apothecary, sweet
as Honey in the Mouth of all that speak of you, and as Music at a Banquet of
Wine in the Ears of all that hear of you.

Which is the hearty desire of Worthy SIR, Your very Humble Servant, Thomas
Hodges.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 33. dele thirdly. P. 8. l. 9. for ejecit read evomit. P. 12. after
Ezekiel's Temple add Christ was typified. L. 32. for sincerity read fire. P.
15. l. 7. for trn read turn. L. 24. for (...) read (...). P. 16. l. 29. for
are read or.

MATT. 5.13. Ye are the salt of the Earth: but if the salt have lost his
savor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is henceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.


THE Text is a part of Christ's most excellent Sermon on the Mount (after he
had spent a whole Night in Prayer) to his new elect Apostles; a kind of
Ordination-Sermon, or else a Concio ad Clerum. The 14, 15 and 16 verses contain
a peculiar admonition to his Apostles (as Interpreters generally conceive) both
concerning their Doctrine, and their Life and Conversation; and this under
three metaphors or similitudes, of Salt, of a City set on an Hill, and of
Light. They are Light, they must not be put under a Bushel, or in a dark
Lanthorn; they must shine, to whom? to all that are in the House; yea they must
be burning and shining Lights, like John the Baptist, both by their preaching
and living, that others hearing their good Doctrine, and seeing their good
Works, may glorify their Father which is in Heaven. Again, they are a City set
on an Hill, very conspicuous, in omnium oculis, the eyes of the World are upon
them; any erroneous Doctrine taught by them, or any miscarriage in practice in
them, cannot be hid, but will prove very notorious and scandalous. Thirdly,
they are Salt, and the Salt of the Earth; necessary, useful and beneficial to
the world as Salt is; but they must be savoury salt, not saltless salt; if so,
first, they become altogether unprofitable and contemptible; secondly, they are
good for nothing, must expect to lose their places and stations in the Church,
to be cast out, and to be exposed to scorn and contempt, to be made vile
amongst the people, to be trodden under foot of men. Some I know (as Grotius
and Dr. Hammond expound) extend this Scripture so far as to reach all
Christians, because the Beatitudes are of general concernment, and because they
think the twelve Apostles were not called and ordained till afterward, namely,
till Chapter the 10th, but to the last it is answered, that in the Writings of
the Evangelists, there be certain anticipations, that is, some things are set
down after, which were done before, and some things are set down before which
were done after; and so here the instruction of the Apostles for the office and
work of the Ministry seems to be the main scope of this Sermon, and therefore
they may be reasonably thought to be called or ordained before; as for the
election of the Apostles, it is set down indeed afterward in the tenth
Chapter, but it is by reason or upon occasion of the Evangelists recording then
their commission to preach. As to the other objection it may be answered, that
though he preached in the audience of the people, and that in this Sermon he
did teach his Followers many things in general, yet our blessed Savior herein
did chiefly intend to instruct his twelve Apostles, whom he had newly chosen to
be teachers of others. Thirdly, Ye, that is ye my Apostles and Ministers, ye
are the salt of the earth, that is, of men that dwell on the earth, it is your
part and duty to season them with the sound Doctrine ye have heard, and with a
conversation becoming the Gospel: that so they may be preserved from corruption
and putrefaction. Ye are salt, not properly but by resemblance; yet not in
regard of their Persons, but of their Ministry; hereby by this they were to
make the corrupt natures, hearts, communications and conversations of men to
become savoury, to season them for God. And the Apostles are called the salt of
the earth, that is, not of Judaea only, but of the whole World. So our Savior
enlarged their Commission, Matt. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all nations; now
our Savior amplifieth the former reason, whereby he moved his Apostles to
fidelity and diligence in their Office and Ministry, by letting them know, that
otherwise they would be but unsavory salt, incurable or hardly curable,
unprofitable and contemptible; good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot. A proverbial speech to show a thing of no worth or value,
but that is scorned and despised greatly. I shall endeavor by God's assistence
to show

1. That Ministers are the salt of the earth, and that it is their duty to be
savoury salt. 2. It Is possible some Ministers may prove unsavory salt. 3. By
what means this salt becomes unsavory. 4. That this unsavory salt is hardly
curable. 5. That in this condition it is useless and unprofitable. 6. That
unsavory salt or bad Ministers, unfaithful in their Office, are liable to
ejection and contempt, or to be deprived and scorned, and to be trodden under
foot of men.

1. They are so, see the Text, see also Mark 9.50. and Luke 14.34. Salt makes
that which is insipid and unsavory to relish, it gives it a good taste; so the
word of God which Ministers preach does season them, and render them acceptable
to God: he will not spew them out of his mouth that believe and obey their
word. Sal terrae dicuntur (says one) quia totus orbis doctrina Apostolorum
condiendus. A little salt seasons a great deal of Provision. So the Apostles
(though a few in number) did season many Nations, Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and
Romans, and others; yea they prevailed by their preaching Vniversum hominum
genus insipidum, Deoque ingratum quinimo abominabile, quippe quod ejecit ex ore
suo, jam olim insulsam agens vitam, and sapidum Deoque gratum ac jucundum
reddere. So Ludovicus Brugensis. 1. By the preaching of the Gospel to the world
and their receiving of it, men's persons were made grateful and acceptable and
well pleasing to God, which else he would have loathed and abominated. Hereby,
says one, Cibus Diaboli fit cibus Dei. 2. Men's Services and Sacrifices which
they performed, were seasoned to acceptance, by means of the Covenant of
grace, revealed in the Gospel, that covenant of Salt: else God would not have
had that respect to them he had, for the sacrifices of the wicked are an
abomination to the Lord, and the reason is, because they want this salt: for
the Law says, Every sacrifice must be seasoned or salted with salt, Levit.
2.12. 3. By the word of God men's actions are rendered more savoury to God and
Man. Omnis vitoe pars (says one) sine verbo, insulsa and insipida; sicut ergo
oblatio quoevis sale condienda, ita quoevis actio, verbo condienda.

Salt its heat and acrimony does resist putrefaction; and so the Apostles and
Ministers, by preaching the word, by being instant in season and out of season,
by reproving, rebuking, exhorting, do withstand the corruptions of men, their
corrupt natures, corrupt principles, corrupt hearts, rotten communications, and
corrupt and filthy conversations. The word of God preached (principally the
Gospel) is a means to dry up, and staunch our fountain of Blood, and natural
Corruption, which else would stream from us continually. Yea the Word
(especially the Gospel) is better than salt; for Sal ad diuturnitatem aliquam
servat; ministerii vero sal, ad aeternitatem: Again, salt preserves fresh meat,
which is already free from corruption, for a time: but, Sal ministerii,
homines, jam ante natura sua faetidos, and Deo abominabiles, a foetore and
putredine eximit. Further it is to be noted, that though the word resemble salt
in the good qualities of salt, yet not in the bad. As for example. 1. Sow a
Land with salt and it makes a fruitful Land barren and unfruitful, but let
the Church (God's field) be sowed with the word, and it becomes fruitful; some
part of it to bring forth thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold. 2. Salt
must be used in measure and moderation: too much salt makes meat neither
savoury nor wholesome, but the Gospel admits of no nimium: Preach the word says
the Apostle to Timothy, be instant in season and out of season; and diverse of
the Fathers of old, and so Bishop Hooker and Mr. Calvin of late, preached every
day. 3. Salt makes drink unsavory, Sal potum insuavem efficit: hence James
3.12. salt water is opposed to sweet: not so the word; Thy word is sweet unto
my taste, says David, yea sweeter than honey unto my lips. Ministers by reason
of the word they preach are the salt of the earth: Trahit ad personas, quod est
Doctrinae, says Calvin, non tam ad Personas, quam ad munus, says Gualter; to
the Apostolical or Ministerial Function, teaching us, that it is the part and
duty of the Ministers of the word, to season the Hearts of the Faithful. And
this brings us to the Duty of Ministers. Ye are the salt of the earth, ye ought
to be the salt of the earth. Estis, says one, id est, esse debetis, ad hoc
electi and ordinatia me estis Apostoli, ut sitis. Ministers must be savoury
salt, they must have salt in themselves, and thus must season others. Salt it
self is earth (says Spanhem.) but it is earth burnt and purged from its dregs.
Ipse sal terra est, sed terra expurgata a foecibus. So the Apostles and
Ministers they are Earth but purified by the Spirit of God, which is as Fire:
Ex se terra sunt, sed terra expurgata and excocta sacro igne and Domini
Spiritu. 1. There is requisite for a Minister sal gratiae; we come not into the
world salted with this salt. Yea, Grande opus est insaliri, says the Father,
qui sale conditur, gratia plenus est; in communi proverbio salsus dicitur
gratiosus, and a contrario, insulsus qui non habet gratiam. He that has Grace
in his Heart can speak experimentally; can say, That which I have heard and
seen declare I unto you, as it is 1 John 3.3. and with David, This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard him; and again, Come ye children hearken unto me, and
I will teach you what he has done for my soul. 2. There is requisite for a
Minister sal eruditionis; that he be seasoned with good Learning; some measure
of Natural parts, and some measure of acquired Learning is very requisite for a
Minister: some knowledge men ought to have in the Tongues, especially the
Original Tongues, wherein the Scriptures were written; else if they consult
Interpreters only, in some places (says one) the half has not been told
them. The milk of the word is then most sincere, when drawn immediately from
those full Breasts, the Hebrew and Greek Texts; whereas it becomes more dilute
(says one) by being filed through a Translation; wherein part of the Cream
sliding in the passage it loses somewhat of its delicious and genuine relish.
This water of life being carried from its fountain, by derivation into other
Tongues sometimes loses of its high gust and generous Spirit. And as the
Tongues so are also the Arts, Logic, natural Philosophy, History, Chronology,
Geography, Astronomy, etc. useful for a Minister, as is excellently showed in
a Treatise to that purpose by Mr. Reyner of Lincoln. 3. There Is requisite for a
Minister Sal Sapientiae, the Salt of Wisdom. Sicut insulsum a cibo transfertur
ad hominem; ita fatuum ab homine transfertur ad cibum: sic a Martiali, betae
insipidae, vocantur fatuae, an unwise or foolish man is insulsus or without
Salt. Apostoli sal terrae vocantur, quia homines and sua sapientia docere
debent, and suis moribus aedificare, so Maldonat. Ministers should be wise to
divide the word of God aright, to give every one their portion in due season,
as a Workman that needs not to be ashamed. Aaron's Bells (says one) must be
wisely rung; sometimes in one tune, and sometimes in another as occasion
serves. A Minister had need be wise to discern men's Tempers and Dispositions;
to choose the fittest seasons to deal with them, to treat of suitable Subjects,
for variety of occasions and occurrences; to be able (...) to speak upon the
wheels, that his words may be like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, Prove.
25.11. A wise Man will not send a Fool upon his Errand, and surely then a most
wise God would have his Ambassadors seasoned with Salt, to be thoroughly
furnished to every good word and work; and to be wise unto the Salvation, even
both of themselves and of them that hear them. And as Ministers must have Salt
in themselves, so they must season others, and this may be done two ways, by
their Doctrine and their Conversation, or by their Preaching and by their
Practice. 1. They must be sure to preach always sound, savoury, wholesome
Doctrine, they must always avoid all unsound, rotten or unsavory Doctrine:
especially they must preach Christ, he that is the Center, yea in a sense, the
a and o of the Scripture should be all in all in our Sermons. We should above
all as desire to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, so preach nothing
in comparison of Christ and him crucified. It Is thought by the Salt required
with every Sacrifice, both in the Tabernacle, in Solomon's Temple, and in
Ezekiel's Temple; and in Christ and by him it is, that God has entered into a
Covenant of Grace with Man, and this Covenant is an everlasting Covenant, and
so may be called a Covenant of Salt, with this Covenant let Ministers
endeavor, as to season themselves, so to season their Sermons, and their
Auditors. Again Ministers must not dawb and flatter, preach pleasing things,
sow Pillows under Peoples Elbows, or throw Sugar upon them, when Salt is
necessary. Their Sermons must have acrimony in them; what though it makes Men's
wounds smart? It will keep them from rankling. It Is a sign of a weak and giddy
Constitution of Soul, to desire to have our Soul-food powdered with Sugar,
rather than with Salt. God, of old, under the Law, required Salt in every
Sacrifice, but yet he forbad Honey to be used in Sacrifices; and it is thought
the reason was, because Honey does ferment. This may teach us not to preach
Doctrines that are likely to puff up our selves or others, but let our Sermons
rather (when occasion serves) rebuke Sinners sharply, and let our Sermons be
salted with sincerity. I find that the Apostle Paul his Spirit was stirred in
him at Athens, Acts 17. When he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry.
Ministers must be savoury Salt, they must season others, by a good Life and
Conversation; and this by their words and by their works. 1. Their Speech must
be savoury, seasoned with Salt, such as may minister Grace to their Hearers,
and this too out of the Pulpit, viz. in their Converse and Communication with
Men. No filthy Communication, or rotten or unsavory words must proceed out of
their Mouths, their Throats must not be like an open Sepulcher, sending out
Stench and Corruption. These Watchmen must especially set a watch at the Door
of their Lips, lest they offend with their Tongue. The Priest's Lips should
preserve knowledge, and there should always stand ready at the Door of their
Lips, some good or savoury Speech, either a word of Instruction, or of
admonition, or of reprehension. To this purpose, he had need to pray, that God
would touch his Tongue with a Coal from the Altar, and be with his Mouth (as
sometimes with Moses) that he may open his Lips, and show forth his praise. 2.
Ministers must season others by their good works, by works of Piety, Charity,
Mercy; as they must be lively in their preaching, so their Lives must be a
Sermon. They must walk exemplarily before their Family, and before their Flock;
labor they must, that they may say with the Apostle Paul to others, be ye
Followers of us, as we also are of Christ. 2. As good Ministers are like Salt
in its primitive and pure Estate, so are bad Ministers like Salt too, but it is
in its unsavory and degenerate Estate. Salt may lose its savor, and so
Ministers if they be, if they prove, unfaithful, they are but unsavory salt.
It was the Punishment of Lot's Wife, for looking back to Sodom, that she was
turned into a Pillar of Salt, and it is the Case and Condition of Ministers, who
are called Angels in Scripture, if they leave their station, if they
Apostatize; to be like unsavory Salt, to be cast out, and to be trodden under
foot of men. Yet as we read of fallen Angels, and of Stars falling from
Heaven, so there are Ministers, Angels of the Churches, and that are sometimes
compared to Stars, and in this our Savior's Sermon, called the Light of the
World; some Ministers there have been who have proved fallen Angels, and falling
Stars, who have neither the Vrim nor Thummim, neither purity of Doctrine, nor
integrity of Life, but become unsavory salt, altogether useless and
unprofitable. We read in Scripture of wicked Priests, Sons of Belial, Priests
who made the people abhor the Sacrifices of the Lord; we read of a Judas a
Devil amongst the twelve Apostles of our Savior, of false Teachers, and false
Apostles, and false Prophets. St. Cyprian in his time complained, Non in
Sacerdotibus Religio devota, non in Ministris fides integra, non in moribus
Disciplina: there was a great defection it seems as to their Religion, their
Faith, their Works, their Manners; their silver was become dross, and their
wine mixed with water. The truth is, the true Prophets had no greater enemies
than the false Prophets of old; Ahab's Prophets opposed Micaiah; Hananiah,
Jeremiah; Amaziah Priest of Bethel the Prophet Amos, Am. Chap. 7. the Scribes
and Pharisees and Priests our Blessed Savior; the false Apostles the Apostle
Paul; the Arians the Orthodox; and afterward, none more cruel or greater
Persecutors under the Papacy than their Bishops and Priests. Corruption optimi
est pessima, Men of the best Calling, if corrupted, prove the worst. But this
truth, that salt may prove unsavory, that there may be clouds without water,
and wandering and falling Stars, false Teachers and bad Ministers, this has
more need of a lamentation that it is so, than of any proof or confirmation
that it may be so. But if it be so, why is it thus? How is the Gold and Silver
become dross? How comes this salt to be unsavory? To this I answer, That salt
is sometimes made of water taken out of the Sea, and if you put it into the Sea
again it loses its virtue. Ministers are called and taken out of the World,
that troublesome Sea that always is casting out mire and dirt; and if they trn
thither again, if they desire and affect to live in trouble, in Lawsuits,
Quarrels and Brangles with their Neighbors, this renders them and their
Ministry useless and unprofitable.

Contentiousness marrs a Ministers good Savor. 2. Some Salt (or at least the
matter of which it is made) is taken out of the Earth; and if it be laid into
the Earth again, if buried in the Earth again, I suppose it will soon lose its
savor: So Ministers are in respect of their Calling, called out of the Earth,
to a spiritual, high and heavenly Calling, but if they fall back again to the
love of the present world, of earth and earthly things, a thousand to one but
they become unsavory and unprofitable. Covetousness marrs a Minister's savor.
It Is farther observable that the corruption of salt is called an infatuation;
Sal insipidus dicitur, (...), infatuari, to be infatuated or grown foolish. So
in the Text and in Luke 14.34. hence foolish men are called insulsi, insipidi,
as ye would say, men without salt, unseasonable, unsavory persons. And if once
Ministers that should be wise as the Angels of God, in some sense, become
Solomon's fools, given up to any habituated course of sin, especially to
uncleanness, to commit folly, to be as one of the fools, no marvel then if they
soon lose their savor, and are said to be infatuated; even are like to the
unsavory salt in the Text, and being so, are incurable or hardly curable, for
as Solomon says, Bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his folly depart from
him: and so I come to the fourth particular. Bad Ministers are hardly curable,
Inemendabil^s pene conditio mali ministri: salis sapor, and solis splendour, in
sese ita est, ut aliis communicetur, amissus non reparetur. The sight of the
eye, if once totally lost, is irrecoverable without a miracle. If the Fountain
be dried whence shall that be supplied? If the light that is in you be darkness
how great is that darkness? If the heart once lose its vital heat there is no
remedy: and so here, Non est salis sal, who shall teach the teachers? Non est
Doctor Doctorum, says one, and quis custodiet ipsos custodes? say we: which
made the Father cry out, Quis unquam vidit prolapsum Clericum agentem
Poenitentiam? And so I come to the fifth particular I propounded to you,
namely, That unsavory salt is useless and unprofitable, and so are bad
Ministers: if Money be broken the Goldsmiths can use it: corrupted and
putrified flesh, although it is not man's meat, yet the Dogs will eat it: old
threed-bare Clothes and Rags, though they are not fit to be worn, yet they are
good to make Paper, or they are good for the Dunghill, and to fat the Land, and
to make that fruitful. Wine that has lost its flavor, and generous Spirits,
yet will make Vinegar. But bad Ministers for the most part are good for
nothing; like the Vine the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of Chap. 15. If it bear not
Grapes it is good for nothing but to be burnt, it is not like other Trees.
Wicked Ministers are bad Ministers, are good for nothing. God will pluck out
their right eyes, and dry up their right arms; that is, he will bereave them of
their former abilities: see Zechariah 11.17. he will blast their parts, and
render them useless; yea God and Man join to punish wicked Ministers: God casts
them off, and Man casts them out: As wicked Ministers are like salt in its
corrupt estate, so is the portion of unsavory salt their punishment; unsavory
salt is to be cast out and trodden under foot; and so Inutilis minister loco
movendus. No Loyterers must stay in God's Vineyard, there must be none but
Laborers in his Harvest, the Lord of the Vineyard and of the Harvest will cast
out the unprofitable servant, such must be cast out of the Church, as we throw
out unsavory salt out of the Salt-cellar and out of the Salt-box. God himself
the Lawgiver, of his Church and of the World has laid this burden on
Ministers, in the case of Eli's Sons, 2 Samuel 2.30. Conform to this general rule
King Solomon put out Abiathar from being High Priest, and put Zadok in his
place: And the pious and learned Spanhemius in his Examination of Salmero his
Gloss upon this place says plainly that evil Pastors, Teachers and Bishops,
Non tantum mereri abjectionem and contemptum, sed revera abjiciendos esse, nisi
emendari possunt and corrigi. And we find in Cyprian the Deposition of
Basilides, and the putting Sabinus in his place, Ep. 68. Yea the same Cyprian
writes to Stephanus, that Martianus might be restrained from hurting the
Church; Et alius in locum ejus substituatur, and that another might be
substituted in his place, Ep. 67. and indeed, why should Wolves be suffered
among Christ's Flock, and in his Fold? So then cast out bad Ministers must be,
and that with scorn and contempt, the Prophet Malachi threatens, Mal. 2.3. that
wicked Priests shall be taken away as dung, or with it. They send out a
stinking savor in the nostrils of God and Man. And whenas good Ministers are
highly honored by Men, by good Men, and sometimes by wicked Men, (wicked Herod
honored John Baptist) wicked Ministers shall be cast out of the good opinions,
and out of the affections of Men; and they may expect to be cast out of their
places and employments, and at last to be cast out with the unprofitable
Servant into outer darkness. Hear a memorable saying of Cardinal Cajetan, who
commenting on this Text, when the French Army sacked Rome, viz. May 6th 1527.
writes thus, We the Prelates of Rome, do now find the truth of this by woeful
experience, being become a scorn and prey, not to Infidels but Christians, by
the most righteous judgment of God, because we, who by our places should have
been the salt of the earth had lost our savor, and were good for little else
but looking after the outward Rites and Ceremonies of the Church. Hence is it,
that together with us, this whole City comes to be trodden under foot,
Evanuimus, says he, ac ad nihilum utiles, nisi ad externas ceremonias,
externaque bona, etc. The truth is, as good Ministers are a good, a sweet
savor unto God in them that perish, and in them that are saved; so bad ones
are unsavory salt, and as vile as dung that sends forth a most noisome and
stinking savor continually.

Use.
1. This may inform us of the great necessity and usefulness of the Ministry
and of its continuance, and consequently the necessity and usefulness of
Universities, Colleges and Schools of Learning, the Nurseries of Preachers, and
of the Sons of the Prophets. They are the salt of the earth; as long as men are
subject and liable to corruption in Doctrine or Manners, so long will Gospel
Preachers be necessary. Monopolies of salt are injurious to the weal of the
Commonwealth, much more injurious are they, both to the Church and
Commonwealth, who would wholly deprive us of the office of Ministers and
Preachers of the word.

2. Hence we may learn the reason why good Ministers are so slighted in the
world, they are salt, their Sermons are full of acrimony, they make men's wounds
smart: those words in the Text, says Chemnitius, are brought as a reason of
what went before, viz. why the world should persecute the Apostles, because
they were the salt of the earth; their work was to reprove sinners sharply, and
sinners will usually hate and persecute him that reproves in the Gate or in
the Pulpit, those that dawb with untempered mortar, those that sew Pillows
under sinners Elbows, those that preach Placentia, pleasing things, those that
skin over wounds shall be accepted and well entertained, but sinners love not
those that will apply corrosives, that will apply salt to search their wounds
and make them smart, though this method and means most tend to the making a
perfect and thorough Cure.

3. Hence Ministers may learn their duty, they are salt, and they must have the
properties of salt in their preaching.

Now it is observed that the properties of salt applied to raw flesh or fresh
wounds are principally three. First, Salt will bite and fret, being of nature
hot and dry. Secondly, it makes it savoury unto our taste. Thirdly, it
preserves meats from putrefaction, by drawing out of them superfluous
moistness. So Ministers must apply the word of God to their Auditors, first,
preaching the Law, thereby making them sensible of their sins, giving them no
ease in them, but making them cry out as they, Acts 2.37. Men and brethren what
shall we do? secondly, Ministers must preach the Gospel to them, that men
being sensible of their corruption, like rottenness in their Souls, may by the
spirit of God be seasoned with Grace, may be reconciled unto God, and made
savoury in his Nostrils. Thirdly, both Law and Gospel must be dispensed by
Ministers, that thereby sin and corruption may be daily more and more mortified
and consumed in the hearts and lives of their hearers, even as superfluous
humors are dried up by salt. And Ministers must endeavor to be seasoned
themselves with the word that they may be the more able and fit to season
others. Fourthly, Hence the people may learn to suffer the word of reproof;
when we have a cut or wound in our flesh we put salt upon it, to hinder it from
rankling and corruption, and shall we not patiently and quietly suffer the word
of reproof from our Teachers, though it make our Consciences smart again,
because it tends to the health of our Souls? Fifthly, Hence we may learn all of
us what we are by nature, we are like flesh subject to corruption, unsavory
flesh; yea we are like stinking carrion in God's Nostrils; if there were no
danger of corruption God would not be at cost, for the salt of the Ministry of
his word, to prevent it, and to season us, that we may be a sweet savor unto
him. Here may be reproved unsavory Ministers, they have the name of salt, but
they want the property of salt; they want their acrimony, they are not seasoned
themselves, and how should they be likely to season others? There are four
sorts of this unsavory salt here to be reproved.

1. Blind Watchmen, Seers that see not, Teachers that teach not, Shepherds that
feed not their flock, Dogs that do not or cannot bark, Salt-cellars or
Salt-boxes without salt, or else salt without its saltness; such as have the
name indeed of salt, but want the virtue of it.

2. Heretical Teachers are unsavory Salt and here to be reproved: Haeretici,
says St. Austin, Cimicibus similes, vivi mordent, mortui foetent, they are
like Gnats, that bite whilst alive, and stink when they are dead. Infatuantur
Doctores, says Maldonat in loc. Cum male docent, aut male aedificant. These
especially are unsavory salt or worse, who do not only not season, but poison
their People, Qui pravo sapore inficiunt: it is a saying of Maldonat, Degeneres
Doctores, haeretici, imprimis, are good for nothing, Nisi ut conculcentur, nisi
ut crementur. Degenerate Doctors, Heretics chiefly, are good for nothing, but
to be trodden under foot, but to be burnt; but that they are in his sense to be
salted with fire, because they are unsavory, shall be no determination of
mine; If a Protestant Minister should fall away to Popery, and become a
Mass-Priest, and after return again to the Reformed Church, by true repentance,
he may be thereupon readmitted to be a Teacher and Pastor amongst us, but such
surely ought to be humbled for their Apostasy, and may do well to have before
their Eyes, the Example of Ecebolius, Ezekiel 44.10, 11, 12, 13.
who having often denied the Faith, and after returned to the truth, threw
himself down at the Church Door, and cried out. (...), kick me or tread upon me
insensible Salt. 3. A third sort of unsavory salt may be reckoned a Preacher
that preaches only general truths, but without application to his Hearers: the
use is the Salt and the Soul too of a Sermon; Generalia non pungunt. Such
Preachers are like Fencers, that make a great flourish, but never strike to
purpose; like those Trumpets that give an uncertain sound, and who then shall
prepare himself to the Battle? 4. Here are to be reproved those that have Salt
for others, but have no Salt in themselves; or are unseasoned themselves, such
as preach well, but live ill; whose unsavory Conversation, makes that the word
does not season others, as it should, but becomes unfruitful. Oh what will
become of you unsavory Salt! Expect you may, to be cast out, and to be trodden
under foot of Men. Oh absurd and unreasonable Men, you have a holy Calling and
lead an unholy Life: You call your selves spiritual Persons, and the
Spiritualty, and yet live after the flesh; the Ministers of God, and yet are
really the Servants of Sin. If there be not such a thing as Religion, why do
you preach it? if there be, why do you not live it? take heed, lest while you
preach to some others, your selves become not cast-aways; lest while you offer
Heaven to others, you fall short of it your selves; lest whilst you warn others
to take heed of Hell, you your selves fall into it. And so I come to the third
sort of uses, and they are of exhortation, and that both to the Ministers, and
to the People. And first to the Ministers, Are the Ministers salt? then labor
to be like salt.

1. Labor for the Whiteness and Purity of Salt, get pure Hearts, be of a pure
Lip: and since ye are compared to Salt consider what manner of Persons ye ought
to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness.

2. Labor for the acrimony of salt, be unto sinners a Reprover. Salt is more
necessary than Sugar; sharp words, than sweet and pleasing words, to prevent
the corruption of manners amongst your People.

3. When sinners are wounded for their sins, do ye stanch their bleeding wounds
and keep them from rankling, do ye preach the Gospel to wounded Consciences.

4. Be ye universal Antidotes and Preservatives against Corruption every way,
against corrupt Doctrine and corrupt Affections, against corrupt Speeches and
against all those Children that are corrupt. Yea labor to have salt in your
selves, that ye may be able to season others. Labor for the Salt of Grace,
that you may preach, out of your own hearts, from the Heart to the Heart, oh
that you may not want that Grace, which you exhort others to get and grow in.
You that persuade others to be gracious, be sure you be such your selves.
Labor to feel the power of that Religion you preach to others, and then preach
the power that you feel. Be able to say with the Apostles, that which we have
seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have Fellowship with us.
But if the Question be here, whether a Man cannot be a true Minister, and his
preaching profitable to others, except he have saving Grace himself? Our Answer
must be, that saving Grace, is not absolutely necessary, to the being of a
Minister: A Man may be a Minister, although he have not the real and saving
work of Grace in his Heart. Judas was an Apostle called and sent out by Christ,
and (for ought we know) succesfull too in his Ministry: and yet he was a
Castaway. The Ministry, says one, is Gratia gratis data, not Gratia gratum
faciens. It Is appointed for the good of the Church, of the Body of Christ, and
not mostly or chiefly for his own good, that is the Preacher of it. And you
that are private Christians ought to know, that the efficacy of the word and
Sacraments, does not depend upon the holiness or worthiness of the Minister,
but upon the Ordinance, and Institution and Blessing of Christ; the seed may
grow that is sowed by a foul hand: The Physic may work well and do good,
though perhaps the Physician lives contrary to his own Prescription and Rules
of Physic. And what though your Minister should have Jacob's Voice and Esau's
Hands? or should be like a sile, that smooths other things, and remains rough
it self? the Law is not to be condemned, because some Professors of it are the
Breakers of it, and are lawless themselves. The letter it not the worse,
because brought to you by the hands of a dishonest and wicked Carrier. Our
Savior has determined this case, Math. 23.23. The Scribes and Pharisees,
(says he) sit in Moses's Seat; all therefore, whatsoever they thus bid you
observe, observe and do; but do not ye after their works, for they say and do
not: as long as they preached the Doctrine of Moses, they were to be heard and
so far obeyed. It Is true, it cannot be denied but that it is a Minister's Duty,
to be good and gracious, righteous and really holy himself, as well as to
preach, and make others holy, and to turn others unto righteousness: If
Ministers be notoriously scandalous in their Conversation, it belongs to the
Governors of the Church, to cast out such as are unsavory Salt. Yet whilst
such as these, who preach well and live ill, are in the Church, the People may
hear them, and profit too, by their Ministry. We must not tie God to the
goodness of any Man's Person: He is of infinite Power and Wisdom; he can write
well with a bad Pen; and cut well with a blunt and bad Knife; and strike a
strait stroke with a crooked Rule or Line; he that awakened Peter's Conscience
to repentance with the crowing of a Cock, can by the Trumpet of the Gospel,
though blown or sounded by a bad Minister, awake them that sleep, yea that are
dead in their sins and trespasses, make them stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give them Life. Labor for the Salt of Learning, for a competent
knowledge, at least, in the Tongues, Arts and Sciences, in the Hebrew, Greek
and Latin Tongues; the Languages are the Cabinets, wherein the Jewels of all
Truths both divine and humane are laid up. Skill in the Languages, is a Key
that opens, and unlocks all these Cabinets, and lets a Man into the knowledge
of them all; And then as for Arts and Sciences, labor for some measure of
these, of Logic, moral and natural Philosophy, Rhetoric, History, etc. What
good is and may be had of these, a Reverend Author of our own Mr. Reyner, has
excellently shown, in a Treatise to this purpose, entitled, a Treatise of the
necessity of humane Learning, for a Gospel Preacher. These, these are good
Handmaids to Divinity, though not looked on as the Queen. 3. Labor for the Salt
of Wisdom, that you may know how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary; that you may be able to speak as a Gospel-Preacher ought to speak; as a
Workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth as a
good Steward, giving to every one of the Family his proper portion; as a wise
Master Builder laying the Foundation aright, and building upon the Rock Christ;
then rearing up an answerable Superstructure, viz. Gold, Silver, precious
Stones, not wood, hay and stubble, lest when the fiery Trial come, your works
be burnt up, though you should be saved, but so as by Fire, but so as to be
like a Brand plucked out of the Fire. Be wise as Serpents, be wiser than the old
Serpent, that ye may know and prevent or disappoint, his Wiles, Strategems,
Methods and cunning Craftiness, whereby he lies in wait to deceive and beguile
unwary Souls.

2. Labor to season others also by your teaching, and by your Living. Labor
to imitate our great Lord, Master, Doctor and Bishop of our Souls, the Apostle
and High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus, of whom Cyprian, the Father,
tells us, Dominus in verbis, Doctor and consummator in factis, docens quid
fieret, and faciens quodcunque docuisset. Preach and Practice, say and do both,
that those that hear your good Sermons, and see your good Works, may be
persuaded to go and do likewise; and so you and they may be blessed in the
deed. Be not like the Carpenters which builded Noah's Ark, who were not wrought
upon by Noah's Preaching, nor by their own working about the Ark, and so at
last were themselves drowned in the Flood. Never dream, that your Names and
Titles, or that your Places and Callings will save you, if you prove unsavory
salt, heretical, idle, profane, unfaithful Ministers. Consider how severely
God punished Nadab and Abihu, the Sons of Aaron, though thought to be good Men,
for doing the Work of the Lord negligently, so offering strange Fire before the
Lord, Lev. 10.1, 2. How remarkably he punished Hophni and Phinehaz the bad Sons
of a good Father, and the Posterity of Eli afterward for the wickedness of
those Priests, and because Eli their Father the High Priest restrained them
not! See, 1 Samuel 2.30. Wherefore I said indeed, thy House and the House of thy
Father should walk before me for ever, but now, the Lord says; be it far from
me, for them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed. Eli the Judge the High Priest was descended from Ithamar, the
second Son of Aaron the High Priest; see, 1 Chronicles. 24.3. and therefore some
think that the Highpriests of Eleazar's Family, had some way provoked God by
their wickedness, in former Judges times, and that therefore God had removed
the High-Priest-hood unto the House of Ithamar, of whom Eli was; and now again
because of the sins of Eli's Sons, Hophni and Phinehaz, God threatens to remove
the High-Priest-hood from Eli his house and family. And so we find that King
Solomon deposed Abiathar from being High Priest, who was of the Sons of Eli,
and put Zadok in his room; That the word of the Lord might be fulfilled, which
he spoke concerning the House of Eli in Shiloh, 1 King. 2.27. Hophni and
Phinehaz were slain with the sword of the Philistines in their Father's days;
Eli himself came also to a violent death: and afterward in King Readiness reign
were slain fourscore and five Priests at one time, it is thought of the house
and lineage of Eli. Oh consider this ye Priests that forget God, and by
unsavouriness make the people to abhor the sacrifices of the Lord, lest he tear
you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you. Ye Priests that are unsavory
may expect to be made a sacrifice, and to be salted with Fire. Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees and Hypocrites, how shall ye escape the damnation of
Hell? Remember and consider how King Josiah burnt the Idolatrous Priests bones
on the Altar, and how the King of Babylon roasted the adulterous Priests with
fire.

And now, oh that Heads and Fellows of Colleges in the Universities would
consider, that their Colleges are as so many Storehouses of Salt, and that to
them belong the seasoning of Youth; the fitting of them for Church and State;
the whole Land comes to you for salt, as the Egyptians did to Joseph's
Granaries for Corn. If the salt of Knowledge, of Grace, of Wisdom fail here,
it may cause a famine worse than a famine of Bread, even a famine of the word
of the Lord. If ye become unsavory, I cannot promise you, but that as the
Societies of the Knights Templers of old, and the Religious Houses of Monks and
Nuns, in King Henry the Eighth's days, were dissolved, ye may be one day cast
out also. Oh that the people of England may never have cause to come to the
King and Parliament to complain, as the men of Jericho did to Elisha, 2 King.
2.19. saying, Behold, we pray thee the situation of this City is pleasant, but
the water is naught, and the ground barren. These Colleges and Schools of
Learning are well built, well situated, well endowed, fine pleasant seats, but
the fountains of water which arise here, and should make glad the City of God
are naught, and the ground about barren and unfruitful, brings forth little to
the glory of God, or the benefit of the Church, or the Commonwealth. If ever
such complaint should be, and that justly, the least you can look for, Masters,
Fathers and Brethren, is, that our Sovereign, advised by his great Council,
should say, as Elijah, Bring me hither a new Cruse, and put salt therein; call
for new Heads and new Fellows, and such as have salt in them, of Learning,
Grace, Prudence, and put them into these springs, that so the waters may be
healed, and there may be here and from henceforth no more dearth, or barren
Land.

Lastly, here is an use of exhortation to the people. Are Ministers salt? then
let them look on such as very useful and necessary; they are as necessary as
Stars in the Firmament, as Shepherds to a Flock, as Laborers in Harvest, as
Salt at a Table. They are necessary to them that are called and uncalled. For
the first, the Scripture tells us Faith comes by hearing, and by hearing of the
word of God; but how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they
preach except they be sent? As for those that are called and justified, they
also have need of, have use of the salt of the Ministry, of the salt of the
Word, Ne denuo occupati putrefactione, recidant in corruptionem and
putrefactionem: so Chemnitius: lest they fall away again to the curruption that
is in the world through lust. 2. Be exhorted to prize them highly, and to
purchase them what-e'er they cost, buy them and sell them not. Pray God to make
good his promise, that though he should feed you with the bread of adversity,
and the water of affliction, yet he would not remove your Teachers any more
into corners, but that your eyes may see your Teachers, God would not allow
that the Priests of Israel should sell their Cities, and Joseph would not buy
for Pharaoh the Land of the Priests in Egypt, when he bought all the Land
besides; do not punish and starve your Ministers; if you would have salt, let
them not want bread. 3. Use them, sit at their feet, and receive words from
their lips, even the words of eternal life. Say, and that heartily, whatever
you speak unto us from the Lord that we will do: yea prize and use the holy
Scriptures; let your speeches and discourses be seasoned with this salt; and
whilst you feed your Bodies, feed your Souls with the word of God, or discourse
about it. Polydore Virgil, De communi vita Sacerdotum, observes, that the
Fathers brought in the reading of the Scriptures at Meals, Ne (says he) solae
vobis fauces sumant cibum, sed and aures esuriant verbum Dei, that their Ears
might hunger after the word of God, as well as their Palates to taste their
bodily food. 4. Do what you can in your places, according to your abilities, to
help others that want, to some of this salt, I mean to good Ministers, and to
the preaching of the word. How holy and happy might we be if there were of this
savoury salt in every Parish in England! and that every Minister might have a
comfortable and honorable maintenance, and none have cause to complain of his
poor Salary! if in every Candlestick there were burning and shining Lights! and
that there were sufficient maintenance, or Oil for every Lamp amongst us! Are
Ministers salt? then bear with them when they use acrimony in their preaching,
when they reprove us sharply, and make our wounds smart. As long as we are
flesh and blood and liable to corruption, the salt of reproof and admonition
will be necessary, useful and beneficial to us. Without the salt of the word,
the Devil (that Beelzebub) will fly-blow us, and breed in us such worms of
Conscience that without Repentance will never dye. Say and pray let a faithful
Minister salt me, or smite me with his reproof, it shall be a kindness, it
shall be as an excellent Oil, that shall not break my Head.

To conclude all, since these words are understood by some, of Christians in
general, and of others of Ministers, let us all, both Ministers and People,
pray and endeavor to be the salt of the earth, to have salt in our selves, and
to season others, these words (says Chemnitius) Recte accipiuntur partim ut
doctrina seu commonefactio, partim ut promissio: partly as an admonition or
doctrine, and partly as a promise: so, let us then put this promise in suit in
the Court of Heaven by our earnest and fervent Prayers, that God would make us
the salt of the earth, and savoury salt, that we may be good for something, and
never be cast out of his Church here, and kept out of his Kingdom, and cast
into outer darkness hereafter.

FINIS.

