MEMOIRS OF DENZIL Lord HOLLES.

The Right Honble. Denzel Baron Holles of Ifield. Aetat. 78. Anc. 1676. Ob.
1679.



MEMOIRS OF DENZIL Lord HOLLES, Baron of Ifield in Sussex, From the Year 1641,
to 1648.

LONDON, Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Queen's Head against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. M.DC.XC.IX.

To His Grace JOHN Duke of Newcastle, etc.
May it please your Grace;
WHEN the following Papers of the famous Lord Holles, Your Great Uncle,
happened to fall into my Hands, I could not long deliberat whether they
deserved a public View, and therefore intended to get them printed without any
further Ceremony; for the large share he had in the Transactions of those Times
will as much engage others to read these Memoirs, as the Defense he was obliged
to make for himself are a sufficient Reason for his writing them. But when I
understood that Your Grace (out of the Love You bear to virtuous Actions, and
Your Piety toward so near a Relation) did order a stately Monument to be
erected at Dorchester for this Illustrious Person, I was of opinion, that as
well for that Reason, as because in his Lifetime he entertained an
extraordinary Affection and Esteem for You, Your Name should in like manner be
inscribed on this Monument which he has left of Himself to Posterity. The
Justice of the thing, and the Sincerity of my Intentions, must be all my
Apology to Your Grace for this Presumtion: for the Public (of whom You deserved
so well, and particularly in appearing early, like Your Noble Ancestors, for
the Liberty of these Nations) will acknowledge it an Obligation; nor, if any
thing should chance to be amiss, can I doubt but an easy Pardon will be granted
to one who is, tho unknown, my Lord, with so profound a Respect, Your Grace's
most humble Servant.

March 28. 1699.
THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
SUch as really desire to know the naked Truth, and propose for their chiefest
aim the common good (which are certainly the best, tho not the greatest part of
Mankind) have ever expressed a desire in their Writings of seeing the Memoirs of
all parties made public, as the most effectual means of framing a true General
History: For in those places where nothing is licensed to appear but what
visibly tends to the advantage of one side, there can be no sincere
representation of Affairs, the basest Cowards must pass for the bravest Heroes,
the worst of Villains for the greatest Saints, the most Ignorant and Vicious
for Men of Learning and Virtue, and the Enemies of their Country for its
Preservers and Friends. Without consulting therefore the particular interest or
reputation of any Faction, but only the benefit of England in general, these
Memoirs of the Great Lord Holles are communicated to the World, that by
comparing them with those of Ludlow, and such as appeared before, or will be
published hereafter relating to the same times, they may afford mutual Light to
each other; and, after distinguishing the personal resentments or private
biasses of every one of 'em, the Truth wherein they are all found to agree (tho
dressed by them in different Garbs) may by some impartial and skilful hand be
related with more candor, clearness, and uniformity. What figure our Author
made in the Parliament and in the Wars, at home and abroad, in his private and
public Capacities, is generally known, and needs not therefore be mentioned in
this place. The account he gives of himself in the following Papers is
confirmed by many living Witnesses, as well as in the greatest part by other
VVriters of the same Transactions. But whether the vehemence of his Style, the
barbarous Usage he received, his concern for the Presbyterian Party, and his
Displeasure at the King's misfortunes (to whom he was then an adherent and a
friend) have not guided his Pencil to draw the lines of Cromwell's Face too
strong, and the shadows too many, I refer to the judgment of the disinterested
Reader, desiring him to allow all that is reasonably due to one in these or the
like Circumstances. This caution justice has obliged me to insert: For as to
that tyrannical Usurper of the Supreme Administration, who proved so ungrateful
to the Commonwealth, so treacherous to the King, and so fatal toboth, I think
him bad enough painted in his own true Colors, without standing in need of
exaggerating Rhetoric to make him look more odious or deformed. I should write
something here likewise with relation to General Fairfax, but that the
properest place for it seems to be in a Preface to his own MEMORIAL, which is
in good hands, and, it is hoped, may be shortly exposed to public view. How far
soever King Charles the First's Enemies in England may look on themselves
disobliged, or any of his Friends neglected by my Lord Holles, the Scots are
surely beholding to him; for in his long Panegyric on that Nation, he has said
more in their behalf than their own Historians have ever been able to offer.
But in this and other matters of the like nature we shall not anticipate the
Readers Curiosity or Judgment: I shall therefore only acquaint him, that tho
this Piece be entitled Memorials from the History it contains, yet in
substance it is an Apology for that Party who took up Arms, not to destroy the
King, or alter the Constitution, but to restore the last, and oblige the former
to rule according to Law.

To the Unparalled Couple, Mr. Oliver St. John his Majesty's Solicitor
General, and Mr. Oliver Cromwell the Parliament's Lieutenant General, the two
grand Designers of the Ruin of three Kingdoms.
GENTLEMEN,
AS You have been principal in ministering the matter of this Discourse, and
giving me the leisure of making it, by banishing me from my Country and
Business, so is it reason I should particularly address it to You. You will
find in it some representation of the grosser Lines of your Features, those
outward and notorious Enormities that make You remarkable, and Your Pictures
easy to be known; which cannot be expected here so fully to the Life as I
could wish. He only can do that, whose Eye and Hand have been with You in Your
secret Counsels, who has seen You at Your Meetings, Your Sabbaths, where You
have laid by Your assumed Shapes (with which You cozened the World) and resumed
Your own; imparting each to other, and both of You to Your fellow Witches, the
bottom of Your Designs, the policy of Your Actings, the turns of Your
Contrivances, all Your Falsehoods, Cozenings, Villainies, and Cruelties, with
Your full intentions to ruin the three Kingdoms. All I will say to You is no
more than what St. Peter said to Simon the Sorcerer, Repent therefore of this
Your wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of Your Hearts may be
forgiven You. And if you have not Grace to pray for Your selves (as it may be
You have not) I have the Charity to do it for You, but not Faith enough to
trust You. So I remain, I thank God, not in Your Power, and as little at Your
Service.

Denzil Holles.
At St. Mere Eglide in Normandy, this 14th of February, 1648. S. V.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 22. read Cromwell. P. 39. l. 22. r. written. P. 43. l. 27. r.
public. P. 89. l. 7. dele Comma. L. 4. r. Many in. P. 96. l. 15. f. the r.
their. P. 100, l. 18. l. as to say. P. 161. l. 8. dele not.

MEMOIRS OF DENZIL Lord HOLLIS.
1. THE wisest of Men saw it to be a great Evil, that Servants should ride on
Horses, and Princes walk as Servants on the Earth: An Evil now both seen and
felt in our unhappy Kingdom. The meanest of Men, the basest and vilest of the
Nation, the lowest of the People have got the Power into their Hands; trampled
upon the Crown; baffled and misused the Parliament; violated the Laws;
destroyed or suppressed the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom; oppressed the
Liberties of the People in general; broke in sunder all Bands and Ties of
Religion, Conscience, Duty, Loyalty, Faith, common Honesty, and good Manners;
cast off all fear of God and Man; and now lord it over the Persons and Estates
of all sorts and ranks of Men from the King on his Throne, to the Beggar in his
Cottage: making their Will their Law; their Power their Rule; their hairbrain'd
giddy phanatical humor, and the setting up of a Babel of Confusion, the end of
all their Actions. But how this misery is befallen us, the Kingdom brought so
low, and so unworthily, unhappily, inconsiderately delivered over into such
base and ignoble hands, the Parliament abused, betrayed, and now become in show
and in name the Instrument of their Tyranny, but in truth it self made nothing;
and (if the presence of the right Speaker be so essential to the being and
acting of a Parliament, and so necessary, that Sir Edward Cook says in his
Institutes the House cannot sit without him) then is there clearly at this
present no Parliament but an Assembly of Men, acted and moved by the Art and
Malice of some few sitting among them, by the means of an Army, which those
few, those Vipers of the Parliament, that have eaten out the Bowels of their
Parent and destroyed her, raised (that is, abused the Parliament, making them
raise it) under color of necessity for the preservation of the Parliament and
Kingdom; when in truth it was out of a design to make themselves Masters of
both, that neither of them might ever enjoy Peace and Liberty more, to blast
our Hopes, nip all the fair Blossoms of Reformation, dash in sunder all our
preparations and endeavors for the establishing of a happy Peace; and so a
glorious promising Morning became a Day of darkness, a Day of treading down and
perplexity: this, I say, will be worth the enquiry, and perhaps be no difficult
thing to discover, and make so plain, that he who runs may read.

2. Yet I would not be conceived to attribute so much of Wisdom and Foresight
to these Men, as to believe they had laid this whole Design, with the several
Circumstances and Steps of proceeding from the beginning; which not the Devil
himself was so politic and foreknowing as to have done. But I am persuaded
that they had it in their general Aim, and laid it as a foundation for all
their Superstructures, to do as much mischief as they could, make the Disorder
as great, the Change as universal as was possible, and still to improve all
opportunities, and occasions ex re nata, putting on for more as they prevailed
in any thing, till at last even beyond what either they could hope, or we could
fear, their Design was brought to this perfection, as will appear by the sequel
of this Discourse.

3. When in the beginning of this Parliament, in the Year 1642. after some
progress in a Parliamentary way to the relieving of many of our Grievances, and
reforming many Abuses both in Church and State (for which we were not
sufficiently thankful) it pleased God, in his just Judgment, for the punishment
of our Sins, to send a Spirit of Division between the King and the Parliament,
and things grew to that height, as both of them appealed to the Sword to plead
their Cause, and decide their Quarrel; the Members of Parliament, who then
engaged, declared themselves to desire nothing but the settlement of the
Kingdom, in the honor and greatness of the King, and in the happiness and
safety of the People: And whenever that could be obtained, to lay down the
Sword, and submit again to the King's Scepter of Peace more willingly than ever
they resisted his Force and Power. This I am sure was the ultimate end of many,
I may say, of the chiefest of those who at that time appeared: upon which
principle they first moved, and from which they never departed; which made them
at that time resolve to put their Lives into their hands, and offer them a
Sacrifice to the welfare and happiness of their Prince and Country. I say
Prince as well as Country, tho he perhaps looked on them as his greatest
Enemies; but they considered him as their Prince, whom Nature, Duty, the
Command of God, and the Laws of Men, obliged them to reverence, and to love as
the Head and Father of the People; whose greatness consisted in his People's,
and his People's in his; and therefore neither could be great, nor happy, one
without the other, which made those faithful ones put them both in the same
Balance, and rather adventure his displeasure by promoting the public Cause,
than (as they thought) his ruin by deserting it.

4. Whilst these Men acted in the simplicity of their Hearts, there was another
Generation of Men, which, like the frozen Snake that lay in their Bosoms,
seemed to desire but the same things with them, and that the same should have
contented them, when it was nothing so; but they had further Designs, to
destroy and cut off not a few, to make the Land an Aceldama, ruin the King, and
as many of the Nobility and Gentry as they could, alter the Government, have no
order in the Church, nor power in the State over them. This was the Venom they
harbored, which at first they were not warm enough to put forth: But it soon
appeared by some evident Symtoms, which discovered it to discerning Eyes,
though many were very long abused. For as the Devil can transform himself into
an Angel of Light; so they pretended Zeal in Religion, and to be public
Spirits, as if none were so holy and self-denying as they: and so insinuated
themselves into the good Opinion of Men; and, being bold and forward, got into
all Employments, engrossed the whole managing of the War (that is, the
directive part of it, not the fighting) whilst others, who meant plainly, and
honestly, went into their several Countries, desirous to see the business soon
at an end; and, either by showing the Sword, to have kept it in on both sides,
or else, if God had otherwise determined that some Blood must be drawn, to
adventure their own for speedy stopping the issue of it in the Kingdom.

5. This was the first step of those unworthy Men's getting into power. When
other Gentlemen of the House of Commons unluckily left it upon these occasions,
they then undertook the business, put themselves and their Creatures into all
Committees, persons most of them before only known by their Faces, and esteemed
for their Silence and Modesty. But they soon grew Bold and Impudent,
domineering not only over the rest of the House, but much more over others
abroad, and by their Pride and Insolency contracting Envy and Hatred to the
Parliament.

6. By this means they had power over all the Money of the Kingdom, pleasured
and recompensed whom they would, which were none, be sure, but their Creatures,
or such as would be theirs; and so made many Proselytes both within doors and
without, increasing their Party exceedingly, which made them carry the business
of the House as they would themselves: and made it easy to them, in all
Debates concerning applications for Peace, to drive us to extremities,
demanding unreasonable things, laying upon the King the Conditions of Naash, to
thrust out his right Eye for a reproach; or, as the Devil did to our Savior,
to have him fall down and worship them, lay his Honor at their Feet, his Life
at their Mercy; while they, upon all occasions, revile and reproach him, give
countenance and encouragement to all the bitter, scurrilous and unseemly
Expressions against him, impeach the Queen, give her the usage (both in words
and actions) one would not have done to the meanest Handmaid of the Kingdom,
tho the Wife, Daughter, and Sister of a King, the Mother of our Prince, who is
to sit upon the Throne, if these Men hinder him not* and all this, to make the
distance wide, the wound deep, that there might be no closing, no binding up.
Then was there nothing but expelling Members out of the House on the least
information. If any of those Whelps did but bark against any one, and could but
say he was busy in the Country, nothing but sequestring, impeaching of
Treason, turning Men and their Families, turning Wife and Children to starve:
so many Committees and Sub-Committees of Examinations, Sequestrations, fifth
and twentieth part, etc. made in City and Country, and some of the most
factious, busy, beggarly men put in, as fittest Tools for such Masters to work
by, to rake Men to the Bones, and take all advantages to ruin them.

7. This was a great breaking of heart to all honest Men, especially to those
in the House, who being present and Eyewitnesses of the management of Affairs,
easily discovered the drift of these persons, and opposed it all they could:
which made those Blood-suckers conceive a mortal hatred against them, and in
truth against all Gentlemen, as those who had too great an interest, and too
large a stake of their own in the Kingdom, to engage with them in their Design
of perpetuating the War to an absolute confusion.

8. This made them look with a jealous Eye upon my Lord of Essex, who was
General of the Army, finding him not fit for their turn, as too desirous of
Peace, and of maintaining Monarchy; and therefore they resolve to lay him
aside, beginning to draw Supplies from him, neither providing Recruits, nor
furnishing him with Money or Arms, (except sometimes for a pinch, when the
necessity of their own preservation required it) clogging him all they could,
countenancing and supporting who ever did oppose him: In the mean time carrying
on the business of the House in a wild madness, making Ordinances, like Draco's
Laws, written in Blood, that no Man could be safe whom they had a mind to
destroy, and their mind was to destroy all they could, by making so many
desperate, to render things more irreconcilable, and cut off all hopes of
Peace, which they were resolved to put by upon any terms, per fas aut nefas, if
not by art and cunning, rather to use force than fail, and where the Fox's Skin
would not reach, to take the Lion's; as to give one Instance for all.

9. The House of Lords in the Summer after the beginning of our Troubles in
1643, having resolved to deliver themselves and the Kingdom from this Egyptian
Slavery, had prepared a Message to the King, with Overtures for an
Accommodation, and sent it down to the House of Commons on a Saturday, where
the major part seemed to be of the same mind, and after a long dispute and much
opposition prevailed to take it into consideration, made an entrance into it,
agreed to some particulars, and it growing late, adjourned the further debate
till Monday morning; against which time these Firebrands had set the City in a
flame, as if there were a resolution to betray all to the King; and thereupon
brought down a Rabble of their party, some thousands to the House of Commons
door, who gave out threatening Speeches, and named among themselves (but so as
they might be heard) some Members of the House, whom they said they looked upon
as Enemies, and would pull out of the House; which did so terrify many honest
timorous Men, and gave that boldness to the others, as contrary to all order
they resumed the Question that was settled on Saturday for going on with the
business, and at last carried it by some Voices to have it laid aside: which
was the highest strain of Insolency, the greatest violation of the Authority
and Freedom (the two essential Ingredients) of a Parliament that before that
time was ever known. Since, I confess, the Army has far outstrip'd it.

10. This made some persons cast about how a stop might be given to such
violent proceedings, and to have other Counsels admitted, which probably would
give some allay to those sharp and implacable Spirits: It appearing to be
altogether impossible ever to obtain a Peace, whilst they were Rulers, who
Phaeton like, were able to set the whole World on fire. It was therefore
proposed that our Brethren of Scotland might be called in, who were known to be
a wise People, lovers of Order, firm to Monarchy: who had twice before gone
through the misfortune of taking up Arms, and wisely had laid them down; still
contenting themselves with that which was necessary for their security,
avoiding extremities. Their wisdom and moderation, as was presumed, might then
have delivered us from that precipice of misery and confusion, into which our
Charioteers were hurrying us amain.

11. But these Men would none of it at that time; they hoped to be able to
carry on the Work themselves, and meant to divide all the Spoil: which they had
done if it had not pleased God to give them that check in the West, when their
Army there was beaten through Sir Arthur Haslerig's default, one of their
invincible Champions. First, his ignorant foolhardiness, afterward his
baseness and cowardice, who then found himself to be mortal (for before he
thought himself invincible, and absolutely Stick-free and Shot-free, having had
the good Fortune to be in a gallant Regiment, under Sir William Balfore, at
Kenton-Field, and so not to run away) but, as himself did afterward relate it,
wink and strike, and bear down all before him. This made him so absolute a
Soldier, as he thought Christendom had not his fellow, and therefore would not
be governed by his Commander in chief, in that Western Brigade, a gallant and
discreet Gentleman; but would charge contrary to order, without sense or
reason: and, finding that resistance which he did not expect, ran away as
basely with all the Horse, leaving the Foot engaged. Presently afterward the
Town of Bristol was lost by the like Gallantry and good Soldiery of another of
their Champions, who for it was condemned to die by a Council of War, and
pardoned by my Lord of Essex, who was well requited for it afterward both by
this Gentleman and his Father.

12. Then our Masters, finding themselves to be mortal too, began to be afraid;
and now the Scots must be called in. So in all have they send to them to come
and help, with open Cry, Save us, or we perish. They promise any thing, offer
any thing, do any thing for the present that the Scots would have them do: The
Honor of England not thought of, Liberty of Conscience and the godly Party not
mentioned: But all that was heard was the Covenant, Uniformity in
Church Government, uniting the Nations, never to make Peace without them, and a
solemn Treaty for all this closed there, and presently ratified by the
Parliament here.

13. But they meant afterward to be even with them, to perform nothing of what
was de futuro to be done, to serve their turns by them, to make them
instrumental for their deliverance at that plunge, and then pick quarrels with
them and send them home again with scorn and discontent, which they have since
sufficiently labored to do, and went far toward it, and to the engaging of
the two Kingdoms in Blood; if some persons had not interposed with more
ingenuous and more moderate Counsels, to the happy success of whose Endeavors
the piety, honesty, and moderation of the Scots themselves did very much
contribute, concurring with them, and cooperating in all things which might
promote a Peace, as shall be afterward showed in its due place: for this is
but by the way.

14. Those Creatures of theirs whom they sent Commissioners into Scotland for
that business, represented the state of Affairs to that Parliament clear
otherwise than it was, endearing their own Party to them as the only sincere
public spirited Men, who desired such a Reformation as was agreeable to their
Government, and such a Peace as might be a joint safety and security to both
Kingdoms, giving Characters of all others as Malignants, ill affected, averse
to the Scottish Nation, opposers of a good understanding between the Kingdoms,
and of their mutual assistance of each other.

15. With which prejudice of us the Scots were strongly possessed, at their
coming in about January, 1643. and were in England some time before they were
disabused. They were first made believe nothing should be done without them, or
their advice and consent. To that purpose a Committee of the two Kingdoms must
be appointed for uniting the Councils, to order and direct the prosecution of
the War, and for communicating and transacting all Affairs between the
Kingdoms: In packing whereof, and keeping out some persons whom our Masters did
disaffect, they used such juggling, as never was heard of before in Parliament,
and none but such Hocus-pocus's could have the Face to have done.

16. Well, they carried it, and to work they go, bearing it very fair to the
Scots, till they were got aloft again, and that with their help they had
recovered and cleared the North, obtained that great Victory at Marston-Moor,
in July 1644, which without them they had never done. And however Lieutenant
General Cromwell had the impudence and boldness to assume much of the honor of
it to himself, or rather, Herod like, to suffer others to magnify him and
adore him for it (for I can scarce believe he should be so impudent to give it
out himself, so conscious as he must be of his own base cowardliness) those who
did the principal Service that day, were Major General Lesley, who commanded
the Scots Horse, Major General Crawford who was Major General to the Earl of
Manchester's Brigade, and Sir Thomas Fairfax, who, under his Father, commanded
the Northern Brigade. But my friend Comwel had neither part nor lot in the
business: For I have several times heard it from Crawford's own mouth (and I
think I shall not be mistaken if I say Cromwell himself has heard it from him;
for he once said it aloud in Westminster Hall, when Cromwell past by him, with a
design he might hear him) that when the whole Army at Marston-Moor was in a
fair possibility to be utterly routed, and a great part of it running, he saw
the Body of Horse of that Brigade standing still, and to his seeming doubtful
which way to charge, backward or forward, when he came up to them in a great
passion, reviling them with the name of Poltroons and Cowards, and asked them
if they would stand still and see the Day lost? Whereupon Cromwell showed
himself, and in a pitiful Voice said, Major General, what shall I do? he
(begging pardon for what he said, not knowing he was there, toward whom he
knew his distance as to his Superior Officer) told him, Sir, if you charge not
all is lost; Cromwell answered, he was wounded, and was not able to charge (his
great wound being a little burn in the Neck by the accidental going off behind
him of one of his Soldiers Pistols) then Crawford desired him to go off the
Field, and sending one away with him (who very readily followed wholesome
advice) led them on himself, which was not the duty of his Place, and as little
for Cromwell's Honor, as it proved to be much for the advancement of his and his
Parties pernicious Designs. This I have but by relation, yet I easily believe
it upon the Credit of the Reporter, who was a Man of Honor, that was not
ashamed nor afraid to publish it in all places. Besides, I have heard a
parallel Story of his Valor from another person (Colonel Dalbier) not
inferior, neither in quality nor reputation, to Major General Crawford, who
told me, That when Basing-House was stormed, Cromwell, instead of leading on his
Men, stood a good distance off, out of Gunshot behind a Hedge. And something I
can deliver of him upon my own knowledge, which makes passage for the easier
belief of both these Relations, and assures me that that Man is as errand a
Coward, as he is notoriously perfidious, ambitious, and hypocritical. This was
his base keeping out of the Field at Keinton Battle; where he with his Troop of
Horse came not in, impudently and ridiculously affirming, the day after, That
he had been all that day seeking the Army and place of Fight, tho his Quarters
were but at a Village near hand, whence he could not find his way, nor be
directed by his Ear, when the Ordnance was heard, as I have been credibly
informed, 20 or 30 Miles off* so that certainly he is far from the Man he is
taken for.

17. That day's work at Marston-Moor turned the Scales, and raised again the
fortune of the Parliament, which till that day had very much declined: And
these Men (who all this while stalked under the sides of the Parliament, and
did but pretend the business of Reformation, and the Peoples Liberties, thereby
to break the power of the King first, that afterward they might, either by
artifice or force, lay as low the Authority of Parliament, unless it would
betray its truth, and yield to be instrumental to them) did, after this, begin
to put out their Horns, appear in their Colors, and, as they warmed more and
more, to spit out their Venom against Monarchy, against Nobility and Gentry,
against that Reformation with which they had formerly held forth to the Scots,
against the very Covenant, their Vows and Declarations wherewith they had
abused God and the World.

18. Then did Cromwell declare himself to the Lord of Manchester, and indeed
revealed the whole Design. First, His rancor against the Scots, as that he
would as soon draw his Sword against them as against any of the King's Party.
Then his hatred of the Nobility and House of Peers, wishing there was never a
Lord in England, and saying, he loved such and such because they loved not
Lords, and that it would not be well till he was but Mr. Montague. Thirdly, His
intentions to hinder Peace, and that therefore he desired none to be of that
Army, but such as were of the Independent judgment, to interpose if a Peace
were like to be made which agreed not with their humors. All this remains upon
Record in both Houses, being the Earl of Manchester's Charge against him. And
let any one judge if this be not the very Plot which was then laid and since
practiced. Has not every particular been attempted by them? have they not fully
completed that which was chiefly aimed at? As that which will, and must
certainly (if not prevented) bring on all the rest the hindering of Peace, that
no ease nor quietness might be restored to the Kingdom. For when the Parliament
was ready to disband the only Army then left, and so to free the Subject from
all Payments and Taxes, that every one might return to his Vocation, and all
differences between King and Parliament might be ended and reconciled in a
parliamentary way; then did the Cadmean Brood turn their Swords against their
fellow Subjects, and their Masters the Parliament, which by open force they
assault, make void, and unvote what they had voted concerning their Disbanding,
put by all thoughts of Peace, and throw back the Kingdom, which was entering
into the desired Haven of Peace and Happiness, into the deep Seas of Storms and
Misery and Confusion, where I beseech God it perish not: But of all this anon.

19. Things were not yet ripe; tho the Serpent's Eggs were laid by him in the
Earl of Manchester's bosom, it was not time to hatch the Cockatrice. Therefore
when it was by the Earl made known to the Houses, their Party in the House of
Commons did ( more solito) with all the violence and injustice in the world
smother and suppress it, quarrelling that the Lords had infringed their
Privileges, in desiring that might be examined by a Committee in both Houses,
saying, The Lords ought not to meddle in it, because it concerned a Commoner;
whereas nothing was more ordinary throughout the whole proceeding of this
Parliament in all their inquisitions. Yet by that means this was then stifled,
the breach of Privilege referred to a Committee of the House of Commons, and
there the business died.

20. After this the Scots saw how they were cheated, and it came to be, though
not an open breach, yet a great coldness between them, a withdrawing of
confidence, of familiarity, of Counsels. And the Scots then found that the
other party had been misrepresented, being the Men who, in truth, did agree
with them in Principles and in Design: Which was only to reform, not to alter;
to regulate, and so to save, not to destroy. That they still carried about with
them the sense of their Allegiance and Duty to the person of the King, whom
they did desire to see reinvested into his Throne and Kingly Government, with
such a power, and in such a way, as might be good both for Him and the People,
that thereby confusion, misery, and that disorder which the Poet describes to
have been in the first Chaos, and which we now see (not in a Fiction, but
really feel and smart under) might be avoided.

21. By little and little the Scots and these latter came to a better
understanding; at last they discover the horrid Practices and the whole Design
of the others, who, in the mean time, drove it on, Iehu like, violently bearing
down, and destroying all that opposed them; for some opposition they found.
They saw there was a strong Party in the House against them, between whom and
the Soldiers who were under Command of my Lord of Essex, there was a good
Correspondency; and these two, together with the Scots, were as a threefold
Cord not to be broken by them: therefore they would untwist it, and so destroy
them one after another.

22. The Earl of Essex must be the first who they found would not bow, and
therefore must break; for many applications had been made to see if he would
stoop to their Lure. Great offers, large promises, all the glory of the Kingdom
should be his, if he would but worship them, be (as they termed it) true to the
Godly Party: but he was true to his Principles. Therefore they do what they can
to make him odious, not paying his Army, to make it a Burden to the Country,
and infamous; not giving him means of acting by Supplies and Provisions, so to
be looked upon as a Drone or worse, or putting him upon such Actions as should
break him, so to make him come off with dishonor.

23. As when he was about Oxford in the Summer 1644, he on one side of the
River, and Sir William Waller with his Brigade on the other; the King having
then but a small force within the Town, and either not provided for a Siege, or
not willing to be shut in with a light body of Horse, and I think some mounted
Men, held them play and distracted them, being sometimes on the one side,
sometimes on the other; which was easy for him to do, going through the Town,
as he saw occasion, by the convenience of the Gates: It being then known that
he waited but his opportunity and advantage to slip by, or break through, our
Grand Masters ordered my Lord of Essex, with a heavy body of an Army and a
great train of Artillery, to attend his Majesty's motion, and Sir William
Waller to go into the West, which they conceived would be an easy Task at that
time to reduce the King's Party brought low, and so not able to send any Forces
into those parts for their relief and encouragement.

24. This they knew would absolutely break my Lord of Essex, who must harass
his Army to follow a light and moving Body; and if the King, which was probable
enough, should chance to give him the slip, and get from him into the West,
then was he ruined in his Reputation, and liable to a Question, and perhaps a
further Prosecution. It proved that his Majesty did get by them, and passed by
Sir William Waller's Quarters on the other side, who, as soon as he knew it,
marched after him, and gave notice to my Lord of Essex thereof; so as before he
knew any thing, Sir William Waller was got a days march before after the King.
Then was it impossible for him to overtake them; and, being so much nearer the
West, Sir William Waller engaged in the other Service, he, upon the Advice of
his Council of War, resolved to bend that way, yet not to make such speed, but
that he should receive other Orders from our Governors above, that he might
comply with them. Accordingly he gave that Account to the Parliament and
Committee of the two Kingdoms, with his desire of their Directions.

They were so mad to see themselves defeated of their Plot, that they would not
for many days return him any answer at all; his disobedience was blown up, and
trumpeted about by them and their Agents: Some of whom did not stick to say, It
were better my Lord of Essex and his whole Army were lost and ruined, than the
Parliament not obeyed, and, that by their consents, he nor his Army should be
looked after or cared for more: A Maxim they have forgotten now in the case of
Sir Thomas Fairfax and his Army's, not Disobedience but open Rebellion; but
they were as good as their words then, and did most maliciously, wilfully, and
treacherously (as to the Parliaments Cause, which they seemed to be zealous in)
suffer General and Army to be lost, and the whole West left further out of the
Parliaments reach than before.

25. Sir Arthur Haslerig posted up to London, breathing out nothing but ruin
and destruction to the Earl of Essex, spoke it out in the hearing of several
persons, That he would ruin him, or be ruined himself. His malice and violence
was so great at the Committee of the two Kingdoms, where he and his Party were
prevalent, that a report was thence brought down to the House of Commons, by
which Sir William Waller was taken off from following the King, and by that
means the King was left at liberty to bend his whole force for the West after
my Lord of Essex, which he presently did. At last they left my Lord of Essex at
liberty to proceed in that Western Expedition, but with a resolution to let him
perish. He takes in Weymouth and some other Towns, goes on as far as Cornwall,
whither the King's Forces follow him at the heels, cut off all provision from
him, press upon him exceedingly, and put him to very great streights. He
engaged in a Country enclosed with deep Ditches and strong Fences, that he
could neither break through, nor march away; but sends Letter upon Letter,
Messenger upon Messenger to the Parliament, representing his Condition, and how
easy it was with a small force sent upon the back of the King's Army, if but
only a good Party of Horse, to stop their Provisions, and turn the Tables,
streighten them and free him, than which certainly nothing had been more easy,
and would have saved the Kingdom a Mass of Treasure, and thousands of good Men's
lives, which the continuance of the War after that time did cost.

26. But our Masters did not desire then to see the War at an end; they had not
the Sword in those hands they would have it for to break the King's forces,
well knowing they must then have had a Peace, and such a Peace as had carried
with it an establishment of the King's Government, a keeping up the Nobility
and Gentry; all things must have returned into their proper Channel, and (the
security of the Parliament and Kingdom being provided for) the Law of the Land
must have taken place, their Arbitrary Empire been at an end, and their Design
wholly defeated.

27. Therefore my Lord of Essex must not be relieved, but sacrificed to their
Ambition, the King's Army must be yet preserved, to give them a color to new
model theirs, and put the Power into the base hands of their Creatures which
should keep the Kingdom in a perpetual Bondage; and tho they ended the War with
the King, yet never made Peace, but continued to grind the Faces and break the
Backs of the People with Taxes and Free Quarter, to maintain an Army when no
Enemy was left; in a word, they govern by the Sword, the height of all Misery
and Slavery that any Land can undergo.

28. My Lord of Essex and his Army were by this means broken in Cornwall in the
latter end of that Summer, and the King seemed to gain a great Advantage,
recover a great deal of Strength; but to nip that, they soon provided Force
sufficient, it suiting with their Ends, that his Majesty should seem strong,
but not be so. Therefore the Soldiers of that Army which had lost their Arms in
Cornwall are presently armed again, and two other Armies joined to them, the
Earl of Manchester's and Sir W. W aller's, who gave the King's Forces a ruffle
at Dennington, gaining some of the Works: Yet, when the King came with the
remainder of his Strength, they did not think it convenient to put it to the
trial of a Day, but suffered him to march away, when it had been a most easy
thing to have prevented it: And even there, in all likelihood, have made an end
of the business, which was that they feared; and Sir Arthur Haslerig could come
up to London, and into the House of Commons, all in beaten Buff, cross girt
with Sword and Pistols as if he had been killing his thousands, when it is more
probable, if there was any danger, that he had been crying under a Hedge, as he
did at Cherrington Fight, bellowing out, Ah woe is me, all is lost! we are all
undone! insomuch that a great Officer, a Scotch-man, finding him in that tune,
wished him to go off the Field, and not stand gudding there (a Scotch term for
crying) to dishearten the Soldiers: but in the House of Commons he feared
nothing, none so fierce and valiant, without fear or wit; and there, like a
great Soldier in that habit, gave a Relation of what had passed, highly
extolling the gallantry and conduct of all the Commanders, the valor of the
Soldiers, that no mortal Men could do more, that the best Soldiers in the world
could not have hindered the King's marching off, and that it had been no wisdom
to have adventured to fight, for that the King would be King still, and would
soon have had another Army, tho they had gotten the better, but if he had
beaten them, they had been utterly lost. This served the turn for that time, to
cast a mist before the peoples eyes, and stop their mouths. Yet within very few
Weeks after, this worthy Knight forgot all he had said: for it is by Cromwell
laid as a Crime to the Earl of Manchester's Charge (whom they then meant to lay
aside) that he was the cause they sought not with the King, and Sir Arthur is a
principal Witness to make it good. But on the other side, the Earl of
Manchester returns the Bill, charging Cromwell, that it was his not obeying
Orders, who being commanded as Lieutenant General of the Horse, to be ready at
such a place by such an hour early in the Morning, came not till the Afternoon,
and by many particulars makes it clear to have been only his fault.

29. And to say the truth, they could not else have carried on their Design of
new modelling their Army, of which then there had been no need, and preventing
a Peace which they feared might else have followed. For if the King had been
too sore pressed at that time, it was in their apprehensions probably he might
have laid hold upon the Propositions for Peace, which were then ready, and sent
to him to Oxford immediately after.

30. Therefore now they set upon their great Work, projected long before, and
which Cromwell had broken to my Lord of Manchester in the time of his greatness
with him, when he thought him to be one of their own, that was to have an Army
composed of those of the Independent Judgment, to interpose if there were like
to be a Peace; only their Presumption and Impudence was swelled to be so much
higher, as now, they would have no other Army but of them. Because they saw the
danger was over; there being no Enemy to take the Field against them, but such
an one as they had willingly set up and given time and means to get together:
so as there would be no great need of fighting, that part having been acted by
others; for they were never good at it, but excellent to assume the praise and
reap the benefit, when others had done the work.

31. Therefore the whole force of the Kingdom must be theirs, in the hands of
their Creatures; all the Noblemen and Gentlemen who had engaged in the
beginning, and born the heat of the day, must be laid by, all these gallant
Officers who had done the Parliament the best Service, indeed all, must be
cashiered: The Earl of Essex, the Earl of Manchester, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir
William Waller, and the rest must be reduced, cast by as old Almanacks, in
truth not fitted to their Meridian.

32. For this Feat the Juggle of a Self-denying Ordinance is found out, whereby
it is ordained, that no Member of either House shall bear any Office Martial or
Civil; which strikes them all out of Employment and Cromwell too, but for him
they will soon find a Starting-hole.

33. Then there must be one body of an Army composed of so many thousand Horse
and Foot out of the several Armies, which were to be reduced (as I remember
some 20 or 21 thousand, which number they have since doubled or trebled for the
ease of the Kingdom) the Officers to be named by the House, and a Committee
appointed under the specious name of a Committee of Reformation for this Work,
by which they tear in sunder all their Forces, discontent all their best
Officers and Soldiers, utterly disjoynt the whole Frame of the Martial part of
their Affairs, and, I dare say, put the King's Party in greater hopes of being
able to make it good by the Sword, and less to apprehend the Consequence of not
making a Peace at that time, than the gaining of a Battle would have done: nor
in truth could it have any other Operation with rational Men.

24. So to work they go, and find difficulties enough. The Soldiers bore an
affection to their old Officers, which made them unwilling to be reduced: Money
there was not to give any reasonable satisfaction out of their Arrears to those
who were to be cashiered: But a fortnights pay was ordered, where many months
were owing. Yet such was the obedience of those Officers (gallant Men, old
Soldiers most of them) to the authority of Parliament (so unlike to the late
rebellious Carriage and Insolency of our new Model, as shall be hereafter
showed) that they submit to it, are content to sit down themselves, and (which
is more) use their interest to persuade the Soldiers to a Conformity. Some of
the Horse who had served under my Lord of Essex were a little stiff, and made
some show of standing out in Hertfordshire, which our violent bloody new
Modellers would have made advantage of presently to have fallen on them, and put
them to the Sword; but the Parliament followed more moderate Counsels,
endeavoring to gain them through fair means, by sending down some of their old
Officers to dispose them to a submission, which employment they declined not,
but went and prevailed: to which my Lord of Essex himself contributed very
much, an Example that this present young General Sir Thomas Fairfax would not
follow when his Army was to be disbanded.

35. Yet such was the wickedness and desperate madness of those Men, who
thirsted after nothing but blood, mischief and confusion, that at the very same
time when the Parliament was going a gentle way, Mr. St. John the King's
Solicitor (one who I think has as much of the Blood of this Kingdom to answer
for, and has dipped as deep in all cunning pernicious Counsels, as any one man
alive) wrote a Letter underhand to the Committee of Hertfordshire (which is
yet extant) that they should raise the Country and fall upon these men, to put
all into blood, contrary to the desire and endeavor of the Parliament. A
Villainy never to be forgotten nor forgiven in any man, much less a Man of Law,
who should better know what price the Law sets upon the life of every Subject,
much more of many together, and of a whole County, which, if he had been
obeyed, had run a great hazard.

36. But I wonder not at this or any other such passage from him, who could
have the face to say in his Argument against my Lord of Strafford, That some
persons were not to have Law given them, but be knocked on the head, no matter
how: tho he knows it, or should know it, to be against the Laws both of God and
Man, that any should be put to death before a legal Conviction, however he may
have practiced the contrary since the beginning of these unhappy troubles: his
composition being, it seems, like that Monster Emperor's Lutum Sanguine
maceratum. And to less than an Emperor I would not parallel him, whose vast
thoughts have carried him above King and Parliament, to frame, new mould,
alter, and destroy as he thinks good. This mixture in his nature makes his
actings so fierce and cruel. I appeal to all who have seen and observed him
this whole Parliament, if, on all occasions, his Opinion did not still conclude
in severiorem partem; if he ever stopped where there was any way to it before he
came to blood, or to the destruction of Estate and Fortune: But let him pass.

37. To return to our business: Those Soldiers were by these means persuaded,
and the new Army framed, Colonels and other new Officers appointed, and for a
Commander in chief Sir Thomas Fairfax is found out; one, as Sir Arthur Haslerig
said, as if he had been hewed out of the Block for them, sit for their turns to
do whatever they will have him, without considering or being able to judge
whether honorable or honest. In the passing his Commission they made the first
plain discovery of their Intentions concerning the Person of the King: for with
a great deal of violence and earnestness they pressed it, and carried it, that
the care of the preservation of his Person should be lest out, and that this
Army should go out in the name of the Parliament alone, and not of King and
Parliament, as it was before under my Lord of Essex, who otherwise would not
have meddled with it. But this General made no Bones, took it, and thanked them,
resolved (as it seems) to do whatsoever those his Masters should bid him: for
I Am sure he has, at their command, led his Army since against the Parliament,
which he seemed to adore above all things upon Earth.

38. The next work was how again to get in my friend Cromwell; for he was to
have the power, Sir Thomas Fairfax only the name of General; he to be the
Figure, the other the Cipher. This was so gross and diametrically against the
letter of the Self-denying Ordinance, that it put them to some trouble how to
bring it about. For this Cromwell's Soldiers, forsooth, must mutiny, and say
they will have their Cromwell or they will not stir. Hereupon he must be sent
down; no word then of cutting or hewing, or of forcing them to a submission, as
in the case of the Earl of Essex's Soldiers; but they must have their wills.
Yet for these very men had Cromwell undertaken before, when upon debate the
inconveniency was objected which might follow by discontenting the common
Soldiers, who would hardly be drawn to leave their old Officers and go under
new, he could say, that his Soldiers had learned to obey the Parliament, to go
or stay, fight or lay by the Sword upon their command; which I know prevailed
with a great many to give their Vote with that Ordinance.

39. By this trick a little beginning was made toward the breach of it, which
was soon made greater. For they caused a report to be spread, That the King was
bending with his Forces toward the Isle of Ely, but none could save but
Cromwell, who must be sent in all haste for that Service, and an Order of
dispensation is made for a very few Months, two or three (I remember not well
whither) but with such protestations of that Party, that this was only for that
Exigency, and that for the World they would not have the Ordinance impeached,
as Mr. Solicitor said; and that if no body would move for the calling him home
at the expiration of that time, he would. But all this was to gull the House.
Mr. Solicitor had forgot his Protestation, and before that was out there is
another Order for more Months, and so renewed from time to time, that at last
this great Commander is riveted in the Army, and so fast riveted, as after all
his Orders of continuance were at an end, he would keep his Command still,
which he has done for several Months, and dos yet, notwithstanding that
Ordinance, without any Order at all of the House for it.

40. There, now they have the Sword where they would have it, and resolve with
it to cut all Knots they cannot untie; yet they desire to keep that Resolution
behind the Curtain as long as they could, and would be thought very obedient to
the Parliament, hoping they should be always able to have it carried there
according to their mind; and partly by the awe of their Power, partly by hopes
of reward and advantage, still to have the major Vote. Which was easy for
them, having both Sword and Purse, and withal an impudence and boldness to
reward all those who would sell their Consciences. For all such Members of the
House, and others were sure to be preferred, have large Gifts given them out of
the Commonwealth's Money, Arrears paid, Offices conferred upon them,
countenanced and protected against all Complaints and Prosecutions, had they
done never so unworthy, unjust, horrid actions, to the oppression of the
Subject, and dishonor of the Parliament. All others discountenanced, opposed,
inquisitions set upon them, questioned, imprisoned upon the least occasion,
colors of Crimes many times for doing real good Service, and no favor nor
justice for them: Only that the World might see which was the way to rise, and
which to be sure to meet with contrary Winds and Storms, and so to make all men
at least to hold Candles to these visible Saints.

41. But a Party in the House still troubled them, which saw their Juglings,
their under hand dealings, suspected their Designs, found what they drove at,
and countermin'd them, opposed them, sometimes crossed and defeated their
Practices, always vexed them, and did, in a great measure, divert and keep off
Evil, tho the stream was so strong they could not attain and effect the Good
they desired.

42. This knot must be broken, and some of the persons removed, who are
represented to the Kingdom by these Men and their Agents, as those who were
rotten at heart, not faithful to the Parliament, holding correspondence and
intelligence with the King. This was upon Generals, only to prepare Men's minds
to make passage for an approbation of any attempts to their prejudice, and give
credit to such Lies and false Accusations as they should be able to set on
foot: and all means are used to procure Witnesses to testify any thing against
them, Prisoners examined and encouraged to say something, any scandalous
desperate Rogues received and hearkened to, Spies set to watch them, their
goings out and comings in, what places they went to, what persons they visited
or that visited them. Some of their Agents consest they have been two years
together watching about some of our Houses, yet it pleased God to protect the
Innocent, and, notwithstanding all these endeavors, it was never in their
power to do any great mischief in this base unworthy way.

43. They came nearest to their Mark, when they had gotten the Lord Savil, a
known infamous Impostor, to accuse me with keeping correspondence with my Lord
Digby (of which he said he had notice given him by a Letter in Cipher from the
Duchess of Buckingham) and for what I did and said at Oxford, when I was
amongst others sent thither to present Propositions to the King, where they had
a sit Instrument to act for them, and say and swear any thing they would have
him, who was at that very time employed by some of their principal ones, to
truck and drive a Treaty underhand with some great persons at Oxford. For the
chief among them had always Grace to try more ways then one to the Wood, and
commonly not to row the way they looked, willing enough to have made a good
bargain for themselves at Court, and then have left their Whelps, their
Zealots, to have mended themselves as they could, perhaps not despairing but to
have persuaded them it was for their good, and the advancement of their
Catholic Cause, so to have quieted them, and some little thing should have
been done for their satisfaction. I did with my own Eyes see Letters, and so
did several persons, Members of both Houses, some yet alive, some dead, witten
by Savil to diverse of great quality at Oxford, one to L. D. some to others,
with only one Letter for their Names, where intelligence was given of the
proceedings and intentions of the Parliament and their Army, many Propositions
made in the name of that Party and their Undertakings, and in the Close my Lord
Savil to be Lord Treasurer, Mr. Solicitor to be Lord Keeper, and others of
their Faction to have several Offices of Honourand Trust. These Letters were
seen likewise by my Lord Willoughby and Mr. Whitlock, who are yet alive, and
can testify it, and by the Earl of Essex, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Sir
Christopher Wray, who are dead. Some of them were written by Savil's own hand,
some copied out by a person of Honor, who was employed by him, and is yet
alive to make it good: And when they played this Game themselves, and
pretended, forsooth, a designupon Oxford, and to have the King's Army in the
West delivered to them (which was all but collusion and deceit, to abuse the
World, and color their Correspondencies) then did they make Savil play the
Villain and accuse me, whom they prosecuted with that height of malice and
violence, with so much injustice and partiality, especially that Man of Law Mr.
Solicitor, who tho Mr. Whitlock had not only consented to, but joined in, and
advised all that I had done at Oxford, and that Savil himself had laid it
equally upon us both in his Information (it seems either not so wicked as his
setters on, or not fully instructed by them) yet such was the Justice of that
Man, as he would needs sever our Cases, and was not a shamed not only so to
declare his Judgment, but pressed it and solicited it, that the proceedings
might be singly against me: whereby the eyes of many indifferent persons,
Members of the House, were opened, and their Spirits raised to an Indignation,
insomuch that in spite of the Solicitor and his Party, I was acquitted by the
House.

44. This made them bethink themselves, begin to mistrust the House, and doubt
if they should be able to carry things as formerly: And thereupon resolve on a
course, which some amongst them had formerly still opposed or declined, as Mr.
Solicitor by name, which was to have the vacant places of those they had
thrust out filled up by a new Election, issuing out Writs for it under their
new Great Seal. This they hoped would alter the Constitution of the House, and
give them infallibly a majority of Votes. Accordingly in the long Summer
Vacation of the year 1645, when very many of the Members were gone into their
several Countries, they fall upon that point of recruiting the House; and
notwithstanding the thinness thereof, and its being surprised with that Debate,
their Creatures most of them there (as they were always sure of some fifty
Voices, persons whose only Employment was there to drudg and carry on their
Masters work, having thereby a greatness far above the Sphere they had formerly
moved in; whereas the others were Gentlemen, who had Estates which required
their looking after and all of them some Vocations, either for their particular
business or pleasure, which made them less diligent, and many of them, as at
other times, so then away) yet they carried it but by three Voices.

45. Then to work they go to canvass for Elections in all places, for the
bringing in of such as should be wholly theirs. First, they did all they could
to stop Writs from going any whither but where they were sure to have fit Men
chosen for their turns, and many an unjust thing was done by them in that kind:
Sometimes denying Writs, sometimes delaying till they had prepared all things,
and made it, as they thought, cock-sure: Many times Committee Men in the
Country, such as were their Creatures, appearing grossly, and bandying to carry
Elections for them; sometimes they did it fairly by the power of the Army,
causing Soldiers to be sent and quartered in the Towns where Elections were to
be, awing and terrifying, sometimes abusing and offering violence to the
Electors. And when these undue Elections were complained of, and questioned at
the Committee of Privileges, there appeared such palpable partiality, so much
injustice, such delays and tricks to vex Parties grieved and their Witnesses,
such countenancing and defending those who had done the wrong, as it
disheartened every body, and made many even sit down and give over prosecution.

46. Notwithstanding all this, and that by this means some persons unduly
chosen were brought in, yet it proved, that far the greater part of those new
Members deceived the expectation of these Men. For tho they came into the House
with as much prejudice as was possible against the other moderate Party, who
had always been represented to them as persons ill affected, not faithful to
the Parliament, obstructing all businesses that were for the good of the
Kingdom, having Self Ends and ambitious designs of their own; when they came to
sit in the House themselves, to see with their own eyes the carriage of things,
understand the ways and drift both of the one and the other Party, discern the
tricks and violent proceedings of the one, and plainness and reality of the
other; that all these aimed at was but to get a good Peace, see the Government
settled both in Church and State, and make no advantages to themselves, have no
share, nor desired none of the Moneys, look after no Offices nor Preserments;
in a word, not seek themselves but the pulick; and those on the other side
hinder and oppose the settling of the Government, and keep things in a
distraction and confusion, not willing to put up the Sword, but continue the
burdens and pressures of the Country, countenance the insolences of Soldiers,
bear them out in their abusing of Ministers, and other honest Men, who were for
Church Government, keep up factions and drive on interests in the House, put
themselves, their Kindred and Friends into all places of power and profit,
share and divide among them the Commonwealth's Money, by Gifts and Rewards,
and paying pretended Arrears; in a word, seek the ruin of the Kingdom, and the
advancement of themselves and their Party; this made them change their Minds,
and many of them to confess and acknowledge they had been abused.

47. But this was not the work of one day: Some time passed before they could
make these clear discoveries and disabuse themselves; our grand Impostors kept
them a good while at gaze, with putting jealousies into their heads against the
Scots, as if the Scots had a design of making good their footing in this
Kingdom, and that we who were of the other Party from them did carry on the
Scotch Interest, and designed to betray the Rights and Liberties of England;
with which Engine they battered a long time, and made no small impression in
many men's Minds.

48. For the next step they meant to make, was to fall foul with the Scots, and
engage the Kingdoms one against another in Blood, which was the return they
would give the Scots, as a reward of the good Service they had done them,
coming to their help in time of need, when they were so low, so despairing of
carrying on their work, and effecting what they had projected to themselves, as
that the chief of them a little before were ready to run away, Ships prepared,
good store of Treasure which they had shark'd, packed up to carry with them, or
returned beyond Sea by Bills of Exchange, and all things in a readiness for
their remove, so well were they resolved to hazard, and (if need were)
sacrifice themselves for their Country, tho they would be thought to be the
only Patriots; but they had certainly left it in the lurch, if first my Lord of
Essex had not done that memorable piece of Service in relieving Gloucester
(which was so gallantly defended by Major General Massey) and fighting the
great Battle of Newbury. And a little before that the Kingdom of Scotland
engaging in the Cause, sent in their Army to their assistance. My Lord of
Essex, as has been showed already, had his reward; he was cashiered, and so was
Major General Massey, who since likewise is turned out of the House (being one
of the eleven Members) and voted to be impeached of High Treason. And next the
Scots must have theirs. The quarrelling with them, and endeavoring to destroy
their Army, is what I must now speak of, as the Subject of the next Act in this
Tragedy. The first endeavor is to break the Scottish Army, by not paying it,
which before, whilst they had need of it, or hopes that the Kingdom of Scotland
might cooperate to the working of their Designs, they could be careful to do
their utmost to satisfy, and to provide for it fitting Accommodations. But now
they can let many months pass without sending them any Money, or taking any
care for their supply, or so much as affording them good words. One of these
two effects they thought this would certainly produce, either the Soldiers to
run away, perhaps mutiny, so the Army disband and fall to pieces, or else live
upon Free-quarters, so by oppressing the Country to become odious, and the
people rise against them. Nor were they wanting to give all encouragement so to
do; Emissaries were sent out, and Agents employed in all places to stir up and
imbitter men's Spirits. Many Complaints were, by their procurements, sent up to
the Parliament, and all means used to get hands to those Complaints, and
strange things were suggested, vast Sums to be levied by them, so many thousand
Pounds a week to be levied upon a County, unheard of Insolences to be
committed, Robbing, Killing, Ravishing, Riots, all manner of Villainies. This
would come up with open cry, make a great noise, be received and heightened in
the House of Commons with railing Speeches, bitter Invectives, blown over the
City and Kingdom to the disadvantage and reproach not only of the Army, but the
Nation; in a word, all done that could be imagined to set Man, Woman and Child,
and even the very Stones against them. The Commissioners of Scotland that were
in London would many times send in their Papers to the Houses of Parliament, to
show the falsehoods of those Reports, and desire that Committees might be sent
down to join with theirs to examine these things; pressing that it ought to be
so done by the Treaty between the two Kingdoms, and that there should always be
a Committee of both Kingdoms with the Army to govern it, to provide what was
sit for the Soldiers, and prevent both disorders and misunderstandings: but it
was not that which our Masters desired, and therefore they would send none.

49. The Members of the House who disliked those Courses, and saw the
endeavors that were used to cause a breach between the two Nations, did yet
desire, that if those relations were true, it might so appear, and be
represented not only to the General of the Army, and to that part of the
Committee of Estates of Scotland which was in England (both those with the
Parliament and those with the Army) but even to the Kingdom of Scotland, that
there might be redress, the Offenders punished, and the Kingdom of England
righted and satisfied: If false, that the raisers and contrivers of those
Reports might be punished, and the Kingdom of Scotland repaired, which was the
way to keep Peace between the Nations. And so sometimes they prevailed, and got
it ordered for an Examination, but never any thing could be made of it. Only at
a Market Town in Yorkshire there had been a Riot, and some Men killed; for
which a Council of War had passed on the Offenders, and some (as I remember)
were executed, some cashiered. And for the raising those great Sums of Money,
it is true, Money they did raise, or else their Soldiers must have starved: But
for that exorbitancy of raising so many thousand Pounds a Week upon one County,
it was a Scandal and false Lie, grounded upon notable Cheat and Collusion. For
the Scots drawing their Quarters near together, which they did, as well for the
better governing of their Army, as for the safety of it, knowing they had many
backfriends, this made them lie heavy upon places, and exact the more Money and
Provisions from those several Townships. Then did these Men who were employed
to blow the Coals, and put all into a flame (if possible) between the Country
and the Scots, take the highest rate that was set upon any one of these Towns,
and make a computation what it would come to upon the whole County at that
proportion, which Sum they informed to be the charge upon that County for the
payment of the Scottish Army; and this must be made a great business and past
for a truth, as if the Scots had raised so much Money, when in truth there was
no such thing.

50. Yet let me not be thought to excuse and justify all that the Soldiers of
that Army have done upon the Country, and not to pity with a very tender Sense,
the deep Sufferings of those Northern parts, the Scottish Army lying so long
upon them on Freequarter. I must be very ignorant of the carriage of an unpaid
Army, if I did not believe that many disorders were committed, many a poor
Countryman exceedingly oppressed and abused by the unruly Soldiers, and more
by half taken and spoiled by them, than would have sufficed for their Pay and
Entertainment, if it had been orderly raised and provided by the authority and
care of the State which was to pay them. And so should I likewise have very
small bowels toward my Country, England in general, and particularly those
poor Counties, in one of which I received my being, if I did not grieve and
mourn from the bottom of my Soul for the sad condition which did then
overspread them, the poverty to which they are reduced, the ruin of so many
Houses and Families, the Land lying in many places an uninhabited Wilderness,
all over a face of misery and desolation. But then the more I am raised to an
indignation against them who were the cause of this, those who had rather
suffer not one County or two, but all the Counties in England, and two Kingdoms
besides to perish and ruin, than they to fail of their Ends. So must all the
North be made a Sacrifice to their malice and revenge upon the Scottish Nation,
and rather than not enforce the Scots to oppress those parts, hoping at last
they would fall one upon another, they will suffer the Country to endure any
Misery; and not only so, but impudently and perfidiously wrest and misinterpret
the Treaty themselves had made, and so put a great scorn thereon, to give
greater provocations to the Scots: and thus they make themselves ridiculous and
infamous to the World, and to all posterity, by a gross and palpable collusion.

51. For when the Commissioners of Scotland and the General of the Army did so
often and earnestly move for Pay for the Soldiers, representing that on the
monthly Pay which was conditioned for and promised, they have not of so many
Months received any thing, and that it was impossible to observe that
Discipline in the Army which was requisite for the ease of the County, because
the Soldiers were unpaid, they had the face to say, that by the Treaty the
Scots could not receive their Pay at present, because there was a Clause, that
if any part thereof were behind, they should be allowed Interest for
forbearance (which Interest was not to be presently paid neither, but
afterward when the Peace was settled and the Kingdom more able) upon which
these conscionable Logicians inferred, that allowing Interest nothing could be
demanded. So that which the Scots gave way to out of friendliness and
confidence, to show they would not exact upon our necessities, if at any time
through the great occasions of expense we were not able to give them their full
Pay, is now made use of, and ungratefully turned upon them, to defer the
payment of any part: And this only to affront them, and make them desperate.

52. And as they deal with the Army, so did they with the State and Kingdom of
Scotland, by putting neglects and indignities upon their Ministers, raising
jealousies of them and of the whole Nation. For this they had their Robert
Wright, and their unknown Knight to give intelligence of Correspondencies held
by them with the Queen, of undertaking to do great matters for the King,
Treaties with France, strange designs and practices against the Parliament, and
every foot Letters of Information from some well-wishers abroad to Mr.
Solicitor, or Sir Henry Mildmay, or some other of that Gang, upon this strain.
Then this is whispered about, and these Letters go from hand to hand, and told
as a secret in every bodies Ears, to make people afraid and mistrust even their
own Shadows, as if all were in danger. Sometimes the House must be acquainted
with some of these things, or some person or other brought to the Bar to make
some relation, as Sir Thomas Hanmore. Then the doors are shut, long winded
Speeches made to set out our dangers, and great expectations raised of strange
discoveries, and all but a parturiunt montes. Yet this serves to make a noise,
and they had Instruments abroad to improve it, and many hones well meaning men
were cozened and stood at gaze, knew not what to think of their Brethren of
Scotland, nor yet of the Members of either House, and desired to have things
more fairly carried toward them; and as they had had experience of their
faithfulness formerly so could they not be brought by such artifices to have an
ill opinion of them without better grounds for it, and therefore differed in
the entertainment they gave to those alarms, judging them false and causeless,
accordingly expressing themselves, diverting and breaking the desperate thrusts
which these men made, and were therefore decry'd as Scottish, malignant, and
prejudged in all they did or said.

53. The malice against the Scots rests not here, it carries them to discover
and manifest slighting and neglecting, and (that not sufficiently provoking) a
violent injuring and affronting of them. First, they vouchsafe not to answer
the Papers they put into the House, some not at all, none presently (as
formerly they were wont to do) nor in any convenient time: but make them wait
days, and weeks, and months, for a return to what the Commissioners present
from the Kingdom of Scotland, or from themselves in the name of that Kingdom.

54. The Committee of the two Kingdoms is now no more in esteem, than (as they
say) a Saint without a Holiday: That which before did manage all the great
business, which was looked upon with so much reverence, even as a sacred thing,
prayed for in the Churches like the Lords in the Council, had all the `trust,
all the power, not only in matters of War, which were wholly left to them by
the ordinance of their Constitution; but all other business of consequence, as
framing propositions for Peace, and all Addresses to his Majesty, all
Negotiations with foreign States, whatsoever did in any high degree concern the
Parliament or Kingdom, was still referred to them, and what they did, passed
for Law, was seldom or never altered in the House. But now the Tide was turned,
they had nothing to do. Sir Thomas Fairfax was discharged of his subordination
to them, and left to himself, to do as he saw cause with his Army. They of the
Committee, who were of that Faction, seldom or never came to it; so that the
Commissioners of Scotland, and the other Members of it, did come and attend
three or four days one after another, sometimes oftener, to no purpose, and no
Committee could sit for want of a number: nay, they prevailed so far, as now to
vilify and show their neglect or jealousy of the Scottish Commissioners. They
would sometimes get business referred to the Members of both Houses that were
of that Committee, with their Exclusion.

55. To provoke them yet more, they Break through the Law of Nations, which in
all places in the World give protection to public Ministers employed by any
Prince or State, so as neither their Servants or Goods, and especially not
their Letters, which are of greater consequence, and more immediately concern
the Honor and Interest both of their Masters and them, ought to be in any sort
touched or stopped; yet the Packets of the Commissioners of Scotland must be
intercepted, and their Letters broke open. This done several times in a secret
and private manner, the Letters suppressed and never heard of more, which was a
great wrong and injury to that Kingdom; yet cannot be said to be an affront,
because it was not avowed. But they have likewise done it openly and avowedly
in a most inselent way: Once they set a Captain, one Massey, at the Guards by
London, knowing the Commissioners were sending an Express into Scotland; and
this Captain (who deserves to be made an Example for it, and his Masters too
who set him to work) stops the Gentleman who was sent with the Packet, takes
the very Letters they had written to the Committee of Estates, reads them, and
keeps the Messenger Prisoner upon the Guard, which was the highest affront, the
greatest violation of the public Faith, the greatest scandal to all Princes,
States, and even Societies of Men, the basest unworthiest dealing with a
Nation, to whom we were engaged by Amity, League, Covenant, common Interest,
and all Bonds of Gratitude for the good we had received from them, that ever
was heard of, or read in any Story, or I think ever will be again. Yet was this
fellow, by the power and interest of these Men, protected in the House of
Commons: So far from being punished, when the Scottish Commissioners made their
Complaint, that when the Lords had committed him for it, they made the House
set him at liberty, and quarrel with the Lords for breaking their Privileges,
in committing one who was under examination of their Committee: for they had
referred the business to a Committee, in truth not to do the Kingdom of Scotland
any right in punishing the Offender, but affront it the more in protecting him.

56. One would think now these had bid fair for an absolute breach with
Scotland, but they are not satisfied yet; one thing more they will do which
they are confident will do the feat. It is this; At the coming in of the Scots,
they had born them in hand, they desired nothing but the uniting of the
Nations: That therefore they would never make Peace without their advice and
consent; and that as they desired a conjunction of Forces and Counsels for
prosecution of the War, so whenever a Peace was made, they desired a
conjunction of Counsels and Interests for the preservation thereof, that so the
Kingdoms, interwoven one with another, might be a mutual strength and security
one to another. Therefore in framing the propositions for Peace presented to
the King at Oxford, and treated on at Vxbridg, which was done at the Committee
of the two Kingdoms, they make it one proposition, That some Commissioners from
Scotland should be joined with ours in the power of the Militia of this
Kingdom, and converse some of ours with theirs in their Kingdom, and so bring
it to the House. Where my self, and many more, who truly desired the joining of
the Nations in love and good understanding to perpetuity, opposed it, fearing
that joining them in that power would prove a dividing of affection, which
should be best set, and so preserved by keeping several their several
Interests. But those carried it, and what we feared proved true: it being
afterward made an occasion of great endeavors to set the two Kingdoms farther
asunder, and certainly was first done by them out of that design.

57. For now when the propositions were to be sent again to the King to
Newcastle, that Party took their rise upon that proposition to have them all
reviewed, and changed almost all in them that looked toward the Scots, and
gave themselves liberty, as they had a large Field, to show the inconveniences
of admitting another Kingdom to share power in this. And much was done and said
reflecting upon Scotland, and against all such intermixtures. Then those who
showed their dislike of it before, and would not have had it done when it was
to do, being now done, did not desire at that time to have it undone, in truth,
unwilling there should be any altering of the propositions at all; not knowing
where these Men would stop, if once they began to change any part: And
therefore offered this consideration, that though before it had been no wrong
or unkindness to our Brethren not to have admitted them to such a
Copartnership, which they apprehended would prove rather a prejudice than
otherwise, but being now in, they thought it might be ill taken to thrust them
out, and argue a jealousy and change of Affection, according to the Rule,
Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur, etc. But for that very reason were these
Men the more earnest for it, that it might be ill taken, that it might argue a
jealousy, that the Scots might see by it, that the countenance, of the
Parliament was not to them as before, and that the Ligament being untied, by
which the two Kingdoms did seem to be bound up together, they might fall in
sunder, and the breach be the greater. O the wickedness of these Men, that
thirsted after nothing but to see the two Kingdoms weltering in that blood
which they must let out of one another's Veins! But that does the more commend
the goodness, piety, wisdom, and moderation of our Brethren of Scotland, which
prevented it; for notwithstanding all these provocations, all these injuries
and affronts, they were steadfast, they were unmovable in their resolutions to
promote the Peace of England. They said they came in to help it, they will not
be made Instruments to destroy it: They had bound themselves in a Covenant
before God, and in a Treaty with their Brethren of England, to endeavor by all
good ways and means a happy Settlement and Reformation both in Church and
State: The art and malice of their Enemies, and the Enemies of Peace, shall not
engage them to become in any sort an occasion of hindering it. Therefore they
deny themselves, they renounce their own interest, they quit all pretensions,
and agree with the Parliament in those alterations, aand thereby defeat the
expectation of those who hoped to see, not only the propositions of Peace laid
aside upon that occasion, but that Scotland should have born the blame, both of
not making Peace with the King, and also of all the Miseries which must have
followed upon both Kingdoms by a rupture and breach between 'em.

58. When they saw they could not by Art and underhand-dealing compass this
Breach, that neither the Scots would be provoked to declare against the
Parliament, and so the War begin on that side; nor could they engage the
Northern Counties to fall upon them: If either of which had taken, they had
still kept themselves behind the Curtain, and hid the Arm which had thrown the
Stone; they had seemed, alas, innocent well-meaning Men, and yet the mischief
befallen which they had contrived. But rather than fail they will throw of the
Vizard, and come downright with open face, to the executing their Design. They
set on their Teazers, as Haslerig, Mildmay, Martin, and many others, to move,
That Sir Thomas Fairfax might go down with his Army to protect those Northern
Counties, and relieve them from the oppression of the Scots, a pretty way of
protection and giving ease, to send an Army into a Country. We see how this
Army eases the Country now, to the breaking both of their backs and hearts.
But, could they have gotten a Vote for this, their work had been done, and we
should soon have heard of mischief and felt it: The animosity between those two
Armies had instantly put them and the Kingdoms into blood, for which, no
question, Sir Thomas Fairfax had his Instructions, but the House would never
give way to it, tho with earnestness pressed many times by that Party. And when
they saw they could not prevail, the presumptions are very strong, that they
would have had the Army to have marched thither without the Parliament's order:
for the Scots had an alarm of the Army's moving toward them, and their
Commissioners so informed the House, with a protestation against it, upon which
there was a stop, with a denial and disavowment of their having any such
intention. Yet certainly there was an attempt, and it is said, orders out for
part of the Army to move that way; but God be thanked it went no further, for
that would have been a sad business.

59. Before I go off this matter, I must do that right to Col. Pointz, who
commanded the Northern Forces, as to attribute to his care and vigilance, and
his discreet ordering of his business, a great part of our happiness, that all
that mischief was prevented which was so earnestly endeavored to be pulled on
us, by engaging the Country and Scottish Army in quarrel and bloodshed; and that
was his Crime with these Men to be for it, since so unjustly put out of his
Command, after they had stirred up the unruly Rabble of the Agitators, to take
him by violence out of his House at York, being as absolutely in his Command as
Fairfax was in his: Merely doing it by an act of power, force, and violence,
breaking through all Rules of Justice, Equity, and Honesty, bringing him a
Prisoner to the Army, not suffering him so much as to put on his Clothes, or
speak to his Wife, or any Friend, but use him as if he had been the greatest
Traitor in the world, when Sir Thomas Fairfax could not pretend to the least
jurisdiction over him, not any thing could be laid to his charge. Such is their
hatred of every honest Man, who stands in their way to their pernicious designs.

60. Their next hope was, that the Scottish Army would not go out of the Kingdom
at the desire of the Parliament; so bloody Noses would be upon that occasion:
and I must give them their due, there was no failure in them, to do all that
was possible to have kept them in still only to quarrel with them, but with a
seeming to desire nothing so much as their going. Very forward they were to get
the Vote of the Parliament that they should be gone; but to enable them to go
they would not help, rather hinder, and hang on all the weights they could. To
say the truth, they had some ground to believe, First, That they would not go,
Secondly, That they could not, if they would; for the Scots had a color, if
not just reason to have refused.

61. By the Covenant and Treaty, the two Kingdoms had bound themselves before
God and one to another, as one entire Body, to prosecute the Cause (these are
the very words of the Declaration of both Houses to the State of the united
Provinces, which Declaration Mr. Solicitor himself penned, therefore they must
hold it Canonical) and that neither Kingdom should lay down Arms till the Ends
mentioned in the Covenant and Treaty were obtained. If then in this Cause the
Forces of both Kingdoms made but one entire Body, the Scots had a good Plea,
Why will you send us away and disband us wholly? This proceeding is not equal,
the Body must suffer, and cannot act as an entire Body if one whole Member be
cut off; or if there be no more need of acting, if the Ends be obtained for
which the Body was constituted, and therefore you send us away, then why do you
keep up your own Army, the other part of this Body? This had certainly been
strong reason, which Mr. Solicitor would have been puzzled to answer.

62. Besides, the Scots had cause enough to have their jealousy prompt them,
that it was not safe for them to depart with their Army, lay by their Swords,
and leave standing in this Kingdom so great a Force, which they knew to be so
ill affected to them, and might act to their prejudice; and the King being in
their power, perhaps force both him and the Parliament to a Peace
disadvantageous to Scotland, and differing from those grounds upon which, by
the Kingdom of England, they were engaged in this Quarrel: or else make no
Peace at all, but interpose (as Cromwell to the Earl of Manchester) to hinder
it, and themselves govern by the Sword, not only to the prejudice of Scotland,
but also ruin of England. One may swear there was ground enough for such a
fear; for since it has proved so to purpose. But according to the old Rule,
they who mean well themselves, are not suspicious of others. The Scots had no
thoughts but of settling a Peace, laying down of Arms, calling the People, and
all things to revert into their old Channel; therefore they were willing to be
gone and return into their own Country, in confidence that after their
departure, the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax should likewise presently be
disbanded, since there was no more need of any Army at all, so they were
willing to go.

63. But then the question was if they would go or not, and how the Soldiers
would be disposed to march out, who had not been paid of so many Months,
insomuch as the Scottish Commissioners gave in an account of some 800000 l.
Arrears. Here our Gallants hoped they had them upon the Hip, and should surely
give them a fall. Then they thrust on some of their little Northern Beagles, as
Mr. Blaxton, and others, to inform what high Sums they had raised upon the
Country; upon which they conclude the Scottish Army was in their debt, and
therefore they would come to an account with them, which had been a sure way to
have kept them in the Kingdom five or six months longer. But to help that, our
just Pay-masters said the Army should march away, and some persons be left
behind to see all accounts adjusted: which had required very good Rhetoric to
have made it Justice, especially to have appeared so to the Scottish Soldiers:
for to have sent them away without Money, and then ask the Countryman what the
Soldiers had taken, when he might say what he thought ^ good, the Soldier not
there to answer for himself* and yet his Pay to be thereby determined, would
have been but hard measure. But the Rhetoric had been, Sir Thomas Fairfax to
have gone down with his Army, which should have made it just, and easy, and
every thing; for this was it they desired to bring it to, as it was often moved
and pressed by them.

64. At last the well-wishers to Peace with much ado prevailed in the House,
and it was carried to offer the Scots a gross Sum for all, so to part fair, and
avoid the delay and disputes of an account, to which they presently agreed.
Then the question was what Sum. Here again we had a strong debate: For our
Incendiaries hung by every twig, sticking fast to their Principles to
dissatisfie the Scots, and break with them (if possible) upon any point;
pretending the poverty of the Kingdom, and the great Sums the Scots had raised,
and therefore they would give but 100000 l. which they knew was all one with a
hundred Shillings, as to the satisfying of the Soldiers for marching away. In
the end, after many debates in the House, and passages to and again with the
Scotch Commissioners, the lowest Sum that could be agreed unto by the
Commissioners was 400000 l. two in hand, and the other two after some time,
with a protestation of theirs, that the Army would not be satisfied with less,
nor enabled to march, which was motive enough for these Men to deny it; for if
they could have wrought the dissatisfaction of the Army, so as to have refused
to go, it was where they would have it. Whereupon 'twas opposed by them with
all the power they had, but in the end the better part, that is the moderate
Party, who were the Peacemakers, those that labored to keep things even and
fair between the two Kingdoms, carried it: And the sum was voted, and all
things agreed upon, tho with difficulty (for they fought it out and lost it by
Inches) then the Scots declared they would march out by such a day.

65. Yet had our Boutefeus one hope left, which was to quarrel at last about
the person of the King* believing the Scots would certainly have taken his
Majesty with them into Scotland. This they knew had been ground sufficient, and
would have engaged all England against them, giving a confirmation to all the
jealousies formerly raised, and occasioned a thousand more: And had certainly
more advantaged the designs of those who thirsted after the destruction of the
King first, the Scots next, and then all such as desired Peace within this
Kingdom, and have made them a smoother way to their damnable Ends, the altering
of the Government, and bringing in a confusion both in Church and State, than
any thing that could have happened: And the two Kingdoms had been together in
blood, the author of the mischief undiscovered, masked over with the glorious
pretenses of zealously vindicating the honesty and interest of England, and
every breach of Covenant and Treaty in this Cause, which made them with so much
peremptoriness and incivility, and in truth injustice* demand that the Scots
would deliver up his Majesty, who had an equal interest in his Royal Person
with the Kindom of England, he being equally King of both, and an equal
interest in the closing and binding up the unhappy differences which were
between him and both his Kingdoms, they having been engaged in that Quarrel at
the entreaty of England, and made up together with an entire Body with England
(as is before showed) for the prosecution of it. Therefore they had no more
reason to trust us with the King than we had them; and as much were they
concerned in all that related to his Majesty's Person, so as they had ground
enough to have disputed it, and out of that hope was it pressed by the others.
But the wisdom of the Scottish Nation foresaw the inconveniences which must
have necessarily followed, had they been positive at that time, how they had
played their Enemies game to their own ruin, and even ruin to his Majesty.
Therefore they made for him the best conditions they could, that is for the
safety and honor of his Person, and to avoid greater mischiefs, were
necessitated to leave him in England, and so march away. Which they did in
February 1646.

66. Here then the very mouth of Iniquity was stopped, Malice it self had nothing
to say to give the least blemish to the faithfulness and reality of the Kingdom
of Scotland, the clearness of their Proceedings, their zeal for Peace, without
self-seeking and self ends, to make advantage of the miseries and misfortunes
of England. This gave such a reputation to them, and to those that appeared for
them (that is, so far for them, as to endeavor the doing of them right, and
prevent the practices of those who sought all means of doing them wrong) and
gave such a blow to the other violent Party, so broke their power, and lessened
their authority in the Parliament, as it made way for obtaining those
resolutions which were presently taken for disbanding Sir Thomas Fairfax's
Army. Till when, by the fomenting jealousies against the Scots, and against all
moderate and well affected persons, as if their designs were to betray the
Cause, deliver over the Honor, and Interest, and Strength of England, into the
hands of the Scots, they prevailed so far, generally upon the affection of the
people, and especially upon many well-meaning (but not so well discerning)
persons, Members of Parliament, as they were able to suppress all good motions
tending toward Peace, all endeavors of smoothing those rugged ways that their
violence had put all things in, and to swell up that Independent Army, like the
Spleen in the Body by the concourse of all ill humors, to the ruin and
consumption of the Body it self: And yet other Forces cashiered, as Major
General Massey's Brigade, which had done all the Service in the West, of which
those Drones robbed the sweet, getting the honor and advantage of it to
themselves. That tho that Army was composed for the most part of factious
Sectaries, except some few gallant Men that were scattered here and there
amongst them, as Colonel Greves, Colonel Thomas Sheffield, Sir Robert Pie,
Colonel Herbert, Colonel Butler, Quartermaster General Fincher, and other
Officers of Quality, and Gentlemen of the Lifeguard, who had formerly served
under my L^^d of Essex, and Sir William Waller, and in other parts of the
Kingdom, to whom they did the honor of letting them perform all the Action
which that Army had to do, and who every one of them afterward left it, when it
left its obedience to the Parliament and fidelity to the Kingdom, and that they
grew to be not only an unnecessary grievous burden in respect of charge, but
also a let and hinderance to the settling all Government both civil and
ecclesiastical, neither submitting themselves to order of Parliament, nor
permitting others where they could hinder it; but giving countenance to all
disorders, especially in the Church, as breaking open the Church doors, doing
most unseemly barbarous things, indeed not fit to be related either to modest
or Christian Ears, and in time of Divine Service interrupting Ministers as they
were preaching, miscalling, reviling them, sometimes pulling them down by
violence, beating and abusing them, getting into the Pulpits themselves, and
venting either ridiculous or scandalous things, false and pernicious Doctrins,
countenancing and publishing seditious Pamphlets (for which they had a Press
that followed the Army) decrying both King and Parliament and all Authority,
infusing a rebellious Spirit into the people, under the pretense of Liberty and
Freedom. All this notwithstanding while the Scottish Army was in the Kingdom.
Such things were whispered, such jealousies and fears raised, as these
inconveniences were not only dispensed with, but the Army supported and
cherished as if they had been tutelary Gods, those who must have protected and
delivered us from all danger, and all that the Parliament and Kingdom could do,
little enough to feed and maintain them, tho an excrescence that drew away the
whole nourishment of the Body, and starved it.

67. But afterward when the Kingdom saw how they had been abused, made to fear
where no fear was, and were come to themselves, they soon grew to feel the
weight of that which lay upon them, and seek for ease. Then City and Country
could petition the Parliament for disbanding the Army, complain of their
intolerable disorders and irregularities, and the Parliament was well disposed
for it, who now likewise discovered the art and malice of the Independent
Party, a Spirit they had raised which they would gladly lay, and considered,
that as such an Army was dangerous, so none at all was needful, that Ireland
wanted what we had too much of, Soldiers.

68. Besides, they well saw that whilst that Army stood, they should never be
able to relieve Ireland to any purpose, the stock of the Kingdom was swallowed
up in their maintenance; and tho for the space of a whole year there had not
been an Enemy in the Field, nor Town possessed by any to find them employment,
yet they recruited daily, all care being taken for sending them Pay, Arms,
Provision, Clothes, with all other necessaries, as if they were every day upon
hard and dangerous Service, when they did nothing but trouble and oppress the
Country ^ so as notwithstanding their glorious pretenses of fighting for
Conscience, not Pay, sacrificing themselves to God and the Kingdom's Cause,
none of them would stir to help the poor Protestants in that Kingdom, but even
hindered what they could all others from going.

69. Which appeared by Colonel Hammond's Capitulation, being designed for the
Service of Dublin, who tho he were but an Ensign to Sir Simon Harcourt in the
beginning of those Wars, now a Colonel of the new Model, stood upon his
pantoufles, That he would not be obliged for longer than two or three Months,
have all his Pay before hand, Victuals for six Months tho he would stay but
two, be absolute Commander of all the Forces there, have a proportion of Money
over and above for contingent occasions put into what hands he would appoint, a
Fleet of Ships to transport him, wait upon him, and be at his disposing, not to
stir without his leave, in truth he must be Admiral and General; such Terms as
no Prince or foreign State that had but given an assistance could have stood
upon higher. This was the obedient conscientious Army; but most Men were
satisfied if it was not disbanded Ireland must be lost, and England undone.

70. The Parliament therefore taking into their consideration the necessity of
relieving that dying Kingdom, after long debate, and much opposition from all
that Party, came at last to a resolution in May 1647, and vote, that a certain
proportion of Foot and Horse should forthwith be transported into Ireland (as I
remember seven Regiments of Foot, of which four I am certain were to be taken
out of the Army) they further vote, that no Foot should be continued in
England, but those that were to be for the necessary defense of the Garrisons,
and that about five thousand Horse and Dragoons should remain under Pay in this
Kingdom, for quieting and preventing any stir or trouble, either within or from
abroad, to interrupt proceedings till a settlement of Affairs: Peoples Minds
after such Commotions being, like the Sea after a Storm, unquiet for some time
tho the wind be abated. Those Men would have had a far greater number, and
pressed it earnestly, saying, We laid by our strength that all might be
delivered back into the King's hands; and tho even this proportion seemed very
great to discreet and moderate Men, yet they pitched upon it, partly to stop
the mouths of these Railers, and give satisfaction to all indifferent persons,
who looked not so far into business, and were apt enough to be misled into
jealousies and suspicions, and partly because they well hoped it would be but
for some short time that this charge should be continued upon the Kingdom.

71. Here then is the Ax first laid to the root of this broad spreading Tree,
the Army; a dismal Cypress, the shadow and dropping whereof were so pernicious
as to darken all the comfortable beams of our Sunshine of Peace, and suffer no
good thing to prosper near it; this vexed the Children of darkness, who now must
cast about, shake Heaven and Earth, raise all the black Spirits of Hell,
confound Sea and Land, and all the Elements, rather than permit this to take
place.

72. The Parliament goes on with this work, refers it to the Committee of Lords
and Commons at Derby-house, to see those Votes concerning Ireland put in
execution. The eleven Members were almost all of them of that Committee, who
may say Hinc illae Lacrimae. For doing their parts, together with the rest, in
discharge of the duty and trust which lay upon them to take care of that poor
Kingdom, and discovering the designs of the Army to frustrate all the good
designs of the Parliament, they incur the mortal hatred of the Party and Army
which have driven them from their Homes, and Country, and City of London,
without the privity or consent of the House of Parliament. The Earl of Warwick,
the Lord Dacres, Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, Major General Massey,
and Mr. Salloway, are the persons employed. These labor to dispose Officers
and Soldiers to a compliance with the necessities of Ireland; but at the very
first were received with a mutinous acclamation amongst the Officers whom they
had called together, some of them crying out, One and all, and the whole
Company disturbed and distempered. So as finding it not convenient to deal with
them together in a body, they desired, that such as had a sense of the
miserable condition of that Kingdom, and a will to engage for the relief of it,
would repair to them to their Lodgings, which very many did, Colonels and
Lieutenant Colonels, and other Officers, and undertook for themselves, and a
very considerable number of their Soldiers, about 1500, or 2000, casting
themselves wholly upon the Parliament for their conditions. The rest of the
Officers and Soldiers of the Army doing all that was possible to obstruct the
Service, decrying the Employment, railing upon, misusing, threatening, and
thereby discourage those who engaged, calling them deserters of the Army and of
their General, and by great offers and assurance of better conditions to stay
with them keeping of others.

73. And at that very time did some of the Officers meet and prepare a
Petition, together with a Representation, in the name of the whole Army, That
before disbanding there might be an Act of Indemnity with the King's royal
Assent to it; that Auditors might speedily repair to the Army to cas^ up their
Accounts for their Service from the beginning; that none who had served
voluntarily in that Army should be compelled to go out of the Kingdom; that till
disbanded, Money might be sent down for their supply. This was a fair beginning
of the godly Army's taking care for Ireland, and of those good Officers
proceedings, so obedient to the Parliament, as merely for that they had been
made choice of and put into the rooms of far better Men than themselves; now
forsooth, when the Parliament would have some of them go for Ireland, they will
put the whole Army into a Mutiny.

74. For an Army, or any part of it, to join in a Petition, tho but for Pay,
when their Superiors (that Authority which they are to obey) require any Duty
to be performed, or Service to be done by them, as the present relieving of
Ireland was, this, I think, by the Rules of War, has in all Armies been held a
Mutiny, and the Authors, at least, punished with death. Here to be sure it
shall mutiny to purpose, and not disband according to the resolutions of
Parliament; they put them not only to petition in this mutinous way, but to
desire impossibilities, as Tacitus says, Non ut assequerentur sed causam
seditioni, not to rest satisfied with former Ordinances, and the general care
taken for all who had served in these unhappy Wars, but to demand a particular
Act of Indemnity with his Majesty's approbation, not that they cared for him,
or meant ever to see him again in power to enact any thing, which their
proceedings since have made clear to all men's understandings (though some
discerned it very well to be their principle and their drift from the
beginning) but they knew this would take up time, could not possibly be so soon
done, and would elude all endeavors of disbanding. So for Auditors to go and
cast up their Accounts was the work of many Months, and a strange demand for
this godly obedient Army to make, who, by their own sayings, were not
Mercenary, but had taken up Arms in judgment and conscience, and out of love
and duty to the Parliament, not for their Pay. Their other demand is as good,
and is as much as to say, as that the Parliament should send none of them for
Ireland, they who were the Parliaments Army, who, as Mr. Cromwell made us
believe, would go with a word to any part of the World, whither the Parliament
would please to send them; and therefore the other Armies and Major General
Massey's Forces must be cashiered (those who certainly would have gone) to make
way for their entertainment. These now who had received the Pay of the Kingdom
so long, the sole Army, which, like Pharaoh's lean Kine, had eaten all the
rest, and had the Sword of the Parliament singly and wholly in their hands,
stand upon terms, and will not be compelled to go, that is, will not go; for
they know none is compelled for Ireland, nor was there any thought of it, since
many were willing to engage in that War who were not so in this; but this was
enough to possess the Army with a prejudice against the employment, and against
the intentions and proceedings of Parliament.

75. This Petition and other of their practices so interrupted the business,
that our Commissioners at their return informed both Houses of it, who yet were
so tender of conceiving or expressing any great dislike of the contrivers and
promoters of the Petition for obstructing the Service of Ireland, and
distempering the Army, and that those who had but been drawn in it should not
find themselves lessened in their good Opinion, who resolved to pass by all,
and punish none, except such as should mutinously persist in the promoting of
it. They sent likewise up for some of the Officers that had more notoriously
appeared therein, and in discouraging and abusing them who offered themselves
in the Irish Service: Whose miscarriage, though it was very gross, and the
answers of some of them at the House of Commons Bar mere collusion and
equivocation (as by name Lieutenant Colonel Pride's, who being charged with
causing the Petition to be read at the head of his Regiment, denied it stoutly,
because, it seems, it was but at the head of every Company, the Regiment not
being drawn up together) notwithstanding all this, the House willing to bury
what was past, and hoping it would have gained them to a better obedience for
the future, sent them down again, rather with respect than otherwise,
acquiescing with their denial. And this very act of Clemency was turned against
them; and afterward when the Army came to do their work barefaced, no longer
to excuse but justify that Petition, nay, make the Parliament criminous for
questioning it, they upbraided the House with sending up for the Officers from
their Charge, when they had nothing to say to them.

76. The necessity of disbanding more and more appearing, it hastens the
resolutions for it; whereupon it was ordered, that Officers and Soldiers should
have six weeks Pay of their Arrears, and so be disbanded, those that would be
taken in for Ireland to have six weeks more advance. The Parliament at first
pitched upon no greater Sum, it being the highest that had yet been given to
any. Major General Massey's Brigade, which had been much longer without Pay,
and had done better Service, had no more. The other Armies under my Lord of
Essex, and Sir William Waller, which had likewise done more work, the chief and
main of it all, as having had a stronger Force to grapple with, and yet had
received less Wages, were put off with a fortnights Pay. This made the
Parliament think this proportion sufficient; yet afterward they of themselves
increased it to two months, which was more than any had before. Supposing then
there would be no question of a compliance, they proceed to perfect what was
further necessary for the supply of Ireland, and safety of England.

77. For England they appointed what Regiments of Horse and Dragoons shall
stand, settle the Garrisons, name Sir Thomas Fairfax General of all the Forces
under Pay, which was sufficient Honor for him for the Service he had done; and
showed that they had no meaning to dismiss those with reproach who had served
them, as they were falsely scandalized.

78. For Ireland, they make Sergeant Major General Skippon Commander in Chief,
with the Title of Field Marshal, and Major General Massey Lieutenant General of
the Horse; recommended it to the care of the Committee at Derby house, to
prepare all things necessary for the forwarding of that Service, and draw off
such of the Army as were willing to go: for the distempers there continued,
those who had declared themselves being affronted, discouraged, and many of
them debaucht from that Service.

79. This was faithfully performed by the Committee (that is, by part of it)
for some of them, as the Solicitor, Cromwell, Sir Arthur Haslerig, and those of
that gang would not attend, but the others did. And if I may speak it without
vanity, it being one of the great Crimes with which the eleven Members stand
charged, by their care and industry, they put the whole business into such a
way, not only doing their best endeavors to have sent over the Forces that
should have gone out of the Army, but sending over others also, as Colonel
Jones, and those Regiments which went to Dublin, and supplying the best they
could my Lord Inchiqueen, and those Forces which were there before, with such
necessaries as they could provide, that by the blessing of God the foundation
was laid for all the good which has since befallen that Kingdom, and for the
great advantages which those gallant Men have gotten upon the Rebels,
notwithstanding the little assistance they have since received, having, in
truth, been rather hindered than helped; for every body knows the malice which
is born them by that Party which now bears sway, what discouragements my Lord
Inchiqueen has labored under, and the small regard had of Colonel Jones. Yet
they have subsisted, and not only preserved but advanced very much the English
Interest, with Honor to themselves, and shame to these unworthy Men who are so
little sensible of the conditions of the poor Protestants there, preferring
their particular revenge and prosecution of their damnable End before all that
is of Honor and Justice, and either of duty to God and their Country, or
compassion to their distressed Brethren.

80. The Officers in the mean time play their parts below in the Army, they had
already engaged the Soldiers to stand upon Pay, an Act of Indemnity, and some
other Immunities, plausible things to make them all of a piece, enter into a
kind of a league and combination one with another, and so become fit to receive
any other impression, and unite upon it. Therefore now they go a step further,
to incense them against the Parliament, misrepresenting all passages and
proceedings to them, as if the intention were to force them for Ireland, and
therefore starve them or dismiss them with shame, and expose them to question
and trouble for what they had done in the Wars; so engaging them to persist
upon their demands in that Petition, and ask reparation of the Parliament for
wrong done them by the Commissioners sent down for the business of Ireland, and
other Members of the House, whom they had uncharacterized to be Enemies to the
Army, whereby they put them into such a distemper, as all thoughts of duty and
obedience were cast off, nothing so odious as the Parliament, nothing would
satisfy but revenge.

81. When they had wrought the Feat, Sir Thomas Fairfax himself came to London
upon pretense of taking Physic; Cromwell, Ireton, Fleetwood, Rainsborough, who
were Members of the House of Commons as well as principal Officers of the Army,
keep the House, that the Soldiers might be left to themselves to fire the more,
run up to extremes, and put themselves into a posture to carry on their work of
Rebellion with a high and violent hand, which had been so handsomely done: for
either they must have appeared in it and joined with the Soldiers, which had
been too gross, or have stopped it in the beginning, crushed the Serpent in the
Egg, which had been most easy, but was contrary to their design. So now they
give the business time to foment, and the Rebellion to grow to some head, that
afterward when they should come amongst them (for they could not but expect
the Parliament would send them down) they might seem to be carried with the
violence, and to give some way for preventing greater inconveniences, and to
keep them from extremities till the Monster was formed, and got to that
strength as to protect it self and them, when they might without danger declare
for it, which they afterward did. In the mean time disclaiming it, blaming the
Soldiers at that distance (as Cromwell did openly in the House, protesting, for
his part, he would stick to the Parliament) whilst underhand they sent them
encouragements and directions; for nothing was done there, but by advice and
countenance from London, where the whole business was so laid, the Rebellion
resolved upon, and the Officers that were in town so deeply engaged, that when
the full time was come for putting things in execution, my friend Cromwell, who
had been sent down by the Parliament to do good Offices, was come up again
without doing any, and he who had made those solemn public Protestations with
some great Imprecations on himself if he failed in his performance, did,
notwithstanding, privily convey thence his Goods (which many of the
Independents likewise did, leaving City and Parliament as marked out for
destruction) and then without leave of the House (after some Members missing
him and fearing him gone, had moved to have him sent for; whereupon he being,
as it seems, not yet gone, and having notice of it, came and showed himself a
little in the House) did steal away that evening, I may say run away post down
to the Army, and presently join in the Subscription of a rebellious Letter,
whereof I shall speak anon. But let him take heed those Imprecations fall not
upon him, which many times God remembers, and takes Men at their word, meeting
with them in their dissembling wishes, when themselves least think of them,
perhaps have forgot that ever they made them. This by the way.

82. For the present the thing pitched upon was to set up a kind of Council
(like the supreme Council of the Irish Rebels, but that those were most of them
persons of birth and degree, these ex faece populi) under the name of
Agitators. Two (as I take it) were chosen out of every Regiment, at first, I
think, but common Soldiers (tho afterward some Officers were added) to
transact this business. These now, forsooth, seem to acknowledge no Officer, but
to rule and dispose of all things as they think good. They take into
consideration what is fit to be done, what not, and give their orders
accordingly, examine and censure the Orders and Votes of Parliament, receive
all Complaints, give the redress, send out their Warrants and Commands, write
their Letters, exercise a general power over all, set up a new form of
Government in the Army, and in the end are instrumental to their Masters to
possess themselves of his Majesty's Person, subdue Parliament, City, and
Kingdom, and be revenged upon all those who had formerly given any disturbance
to the carrying on of their design, till such time as the work was done which
they had set them to do. But then Mr. Cromwell and his Officers could give a
stop to their proceedings. And when the Agitators thought to do as formerly,
and finished what they were made to believ^^ should be the Catastrophe of their
Tragedy, which was the destruction of the King, and alteration of the
Government, Counsels not being at that time so disposed, nor the time ripe for
the execution, they soon found their Locks were cut, and (the influence of
their Superiors ceasing) their strength failed, so as they brought but
confusion to themselves; three of the chief were condemned to die for mutiny,
but Cromwell being a merciful Prince would take but one, who was shot to death,
the rest reduced to subjection and obedience, their Council Table dissolved,
and their Castles in the Air Vanished to smoke. But these things fell out long
after, for a time they triumph, act all, drive on the design; Cromwell and his
fellows standing behind the Curtain, laughed in their sleeves, and pleased
themselves to see the Game which they had packt, play so well.

83. The first Act of these new Rulers, was a Letter sent to their three
principal Officers, who were then in London, and innocent persons, God knows,
knew nothing of all this, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell, and
Sergeant Major General Skippon. For this last, to do him right, I think that at
that time he was innocent indeed; but afterward I must avow it, he, together
with the help of Mr. Marshal a Min^^^er, contributed more to the success of
their Villainies, betraying the Parliament and City into their hands, than all
that Cromwell, the Solicitor, Ireton, and the rest of the Crew did or could do,
and no question will be sufficiently rewarded for it by them; for they are good
at it to pay dear out of the public Store for any man's Conscience that will
be sold, and may be useful to them.

84. This Letter was an exclamation against the Parliament, false and untrue
Complaints of wrongs done to the Soldiers at Assizes in the Counties, a
protestation against the Irish Expedition, calling it a design to break the
Army, declaring if any of these three Commanders should engage, their
averseness to it (tho one of them, Skippon, was by the Parliament appointed,
and had accepted it) in plain English saying they would not disband, nor
receive any other propositions from the Parliament till their expectations were
satisfied. Three of the Agitators brought it, and Skippon acquainted the House
with it; they were sent for, and carried themselves at the Bar in a slighting
braving manner, refusing to answer such questions as the Speaker, by order of
the House, asked them; saying they were employed by the Army, and could not
without leave from thence discover any thing. Many the House resenting this
high affront, were earnest to have them severely punished; but that Party stood
as stiffly for them, insomuch that the worthy Burgess of Newcastle, Mr.
Warmworth, stood up and said he would have them committed indeed, but it should
be to the best Inn of the Town, and good Sack and Sugar provided them, which
was as ridiculous, as 'twas a bold and insolent scorn put upon the Parliament;
at last even Mr. Skippon himself excused them, said they were honest Men, and
wished they might not be too severely dealt with: whereupon the House flatted,
let them go without punishment, and by tameness increased their madness and
presumption. Where as had they served them as Mr. Cromwell after wards did their
fellows, hanged one of them (they all well deserving it) it might probably have
given a stop to their Career, and prevented a great deal of mischief, which has
since befallen the Kingdom by their means.

85. All that we did (whether it was Fate or Design I know not, but it proved
our Ruin) was to command down to the Army the Officers that were Members of the
House, such as were in town, and the General himself. I say, I know not if
there were a design in it; because afterward upon just such another occasion,
we sent Sir Henry Vane the younger, Mr. Scawen, and some others, which I am
sure was a thing laid; and this wrought the same effect as that did, even put
them together the better to contrive and lay their business, joining the
counsels of the Officers to the actings of the Agitators, so to hatch that
horrid Rebellion which soon after broke out, to the utter ruin (if God's hand
of mercy interpose not) of Parliament and Kingdom. They were sent to allay the
distempers, and to prevent inconveniences, but how they discharged that trust
will soon appear.

86. Instead of discountenancing, reproving, and suppressing that disposition
to mutiny, that standing upon terms with the Parliament, those Meetings and
Consultations by which the ill humor was nourished, and instead of persuading
them to a fitting obedience and submission, and laying the Regiments farther
asunder to lessen and abate the contagion, they gave them occasion to increase
their distempers and vent them, by asking them what they will have, calling the
Officers together, and sending them to their several Regiments to be informed
of their designs; and by drawing them together already so indisposed and
inflamed, inflame them the more. A strange way of quieting an Army that was in
a way to Rebellion, and had begun to set up a new Government amongst themselves
by their Agitators, which sped accordingly, and produced the effect that they
desired, a representation of Grievances, in which the whole Army now joined and
engaged, except some few gallant Men, both Officers and Soldiers, who detested
those proceedings.

87. This Representation is brought up to the House by Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and Colonel Fleetwood, who had the faces to say (just as the
Representation begins) That the Army was quiet and free from any visible
distemper, which was only to amuse us. But then it expostulates with the
Parliament the making of the forementioned Declaration, sending for up and
questioning those persons who had been complained of for obstructing the
Service of Ireland, justifies them, taxes the Commissioners of Parliament, and
other Members of the House, for doing ill offices to the Army, stands upon all
the particulars of the first Petition.

88. The House was very much dissatisfied with these proceedings, and if ever
it denied it self, did it then: for it was willing to give the Army
satisfaction in all things possible, to free the Kingdom of that burden, even
dispensing with their own Honors.

89. They pass several Ordinances for Indemnity, freeing from pressing the
relief of maimed Soldiers, Widows, and Orphans, with such alterations and
amendments as the Army desired. Concerning the proposition of Pay upon
disbanding, which was eight weeks, they conceived it could not be enlarged, in
regard of the great present expense to which they were necessitated for the
supply of Ireland; That the two hundred thousand Pounds, which for those two
occasions were then borrowed of the City of London, would scarce serve.

90. Therefore upon these terms both Houses concluded the disbanding, begin
with the Foot, and appoint to every Regiment, as they lay quartered, a
Rendevous at some Town near, where they were to lay down their Arms, receive
their Money, and have Passes to their several homes. Those that would engage
for Ireland to march to some other place near hand, there to receive
Advance-money and further Orders.

91. The several Ordinances and Orders were sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax, who
then had his head quarters at Bury; and two Lords and four Commoners were
appointed Commissioners to repair to the several places appointed for
disbanding, with Money, and directions to see the Service performed, and assist
Sir Thomas Fairfax in it, who was desired to issue out his Orders for the
Regiments drawing to those places.

92. Then it was referred to a Committee of the Army to put into a way, the
stating of the Accounts, both of Officers and Soldiers; and where more than two
Months appeared to be due, the Commission Officer was to receive his Debenter
from the Committee and Treasurer of the Army, it being appointed where he
should be paid. The inferior Officer and common Soldier was to have his
security upon the Excise. Let any Man now judge if the Army had any cause to
complain, if all was not done that with any color of reason and modesty could
be expected.

93. Our Commissioners, who were the Earl of Warwick, the Lord De la Ware, Sir
Gilbert Gerard, Mr. Grinston, and two others, went to Chelmsford the first of
June, the Rendevous appointed for the General's Regiment, whither the
Lieutenant Colonel came, Lieutenant Colonel Iackson, an honest and gallant Man,
with a resolution to conform to the Order of Parliament; but a Command comes
from the General to the Regiment to march another way for drawing the Quarter
near together.

94. For upon the 29 th of May, when the Votes were sending down for
disbanding, Sir Thomas Fairfax had called a Council of War of the factious
Officers (the honest Officers who were for submitting to the Parliament, and a
quiet disbanding, having before been most of them abused, and forced away by
the violence of the Soldiers and commands of the Agitators, he conniving at it)
where they resolve upon an humble Advice to his Excellency, That since their
Grievances were not at all satisfied, and Jealousies were very great, it would
not be safe to disband, but rather draw the Army into a close posture (there
being a great propensity in the Soldiers to a general Rendevous) and then
resume the consideration of their Grievances, and of the Votes for disbanding,
suspending, for the present any proceedings upon these Votes; which advice his
Excellency follows. So the Parliament commands to disband, Sir Thomas to march
away, and draw to a Rendevous: Fit he should be obeyed.

95. At the very same time Colonel Rainsborough dos the like with his Regiment
which was at Petersfield in Hampshire, designed for Iersey, and so far upon the
way, himself being attending the House of Commons, of which he was a Member,
and pretending to prepare for that Employment which had been entrusted to him;
but in truth to give his Soldiers opportunity to mutiny, as the rest of the
Army did; who, to give them more time for it, would not presently acquaint the
House with the Intelligence he had received of their disorder, but having it in
the morning kept it to himself till toward the evening, even denying his
knowledge of any such thing, when Sir William Lewis informed the House of it,
and about five or six a Clock in the Afternoon (the House then by accident
sitting, as these deportments of the Army gave them cause sufficient) spoke of
it, said they were in a great distemper, resolved not to march to the Sea side,
but return to Oxford; whereupon being sent down to quiet them, and reduce them
to obedience, he went immediately, but put himself at the head of them, and
instead of taking care for Iersey, marched to Oxford first, so to the Army; and
none more violent in the Rebellion than he: for which good Service, and joining
with the Agitators in their highest exorbitancies for the destruction of the
King and altering of Government, and particularly in a Petition for taking away
the House of Lords, the House of Commons since made him Vice Admiral. And the
Lords, to the eternizing the honor for their gentle tame dispositions,
consented.

96. But one thing was yet wanting (as they thought) for the carrying on their
design, and amusing the poor people of England with an expectation of their
settling a Peace, so to make them sit still and look on, whilst they trampled
upon Parliament, City and Kingdom, which was to be possessed of the King's
Person, and make the world believe they would bring him up to his Parliament,
and set him on his Throne. For this it seems a meeting was appointed at
Lieutenant General Cromwell's, upon the thirtieth of May, where it is resolved,
That Cornet Joyce should, with a Party of Horse, go to Holmby and seize upon
his Majesty, which is presently executed, and given out, that others had the
like design, which they had prevented. At first it must seem only to be the act
of Mr. Joyce, Cromwell protested he knew nothing of it (tho he was the Man
appointed it to be done, as appears by what has been recited, taken out of some
of their own Authors, one that calls himself Sirrah Niho, and others) Sir
Thomas Fairfax writes a Letter to the House, professes the same for himself as
in the presence of God, with a large undertaking for the rest of his Officers,
and the body of the Army. And perhaps he said true, I would fain be so
charitable as to believe it; nor indeed do I think the good Man is privy to all
their Plots, he must have no more than what they are pleased to carve and chew
for him, but must swallow all, and own them when they come abroad. Here then
they have the King, Joyce drives away the Guards, forced Colonel Greaves to
fly, whom else they threatened to kill, for no man's life must stand in their
way (Murder being no Sin in the visible Saints) carries away his Majesty and
the Commissioners that attend him Prisoners, and immediately sends up a Letter
to certify what he had done, with directions it should be delivered to
Cromwell, and he absent, to Sir Arthur Haslerig, or Colonel Fleetwood, which was
given to Colonel Fleetwood, as one Lieutenant Markham informed the House,
saying, the Messenger that brought it told him so: nor did Sir Arthur Haslerig
make a clear answer when he was asked concerning it in the House, Colonel
Fleetwood being at that time gone to the Army, so as he could not be examined.

97. By this trick they hope to catch the people, and so find no resistance to
their traitorous proceedings; yet they will not trust only to Juggling, they
will play a sure Game, and have power in their hands to go through the work,
and make their way if it will not be given. Therefore the Army must be put into
a posture for it, they have the Soldiers already, they must have Artillery and
Ammunition; so at the same meeting Cromwell likewise appoints Joyce (as the same
Authors relate) to repair to Oxford, secure that Garrison, the Magazine and
Train of Artillery which had there lain many Months, the Army having had
nothing to do, and so no use for it, which therefore the Parliament had then
ordered to be removed and brought back to the Tower, the place where all Stores
are kept. But those who were sent down by the Parliament for that purpose, were
by these Mutineers beaten and wounded, the Magazine and Train kept away by
force, and besides, some 3 or 4000 l. in Money taken from them, which they had
carried down for disbanding of the Regiment there in Garrison. And now they
think they have all in their own hands, the Fish is caught, they may throw away
the Net. They begin thereforre to appear in their own Colors; Cromwell, Ireton,
with the rest of the Cabal, and Sir Thomas Fairfax in the last place (who, tho
he be General, is not to lead, but will be sure to follow close) may not lay
aside their innocence and their ignorance (for all this while they knew
nothing) and put themselves in the head of the Agitators, own all they have
done, and at Triploe Heath, near Cambridg, appoint a general Rendevous, there
to declare themselves, and avowedly enter into the Confederacy.

96. At this Rendevous was framed that solemn Engagement, wherein, they say,
they look upon the resolutions of the Parliament for their disbanding, as
proceeding from malicious and mischievous Principles and Intentions, and not
without carnal and bloody purposes. That therefore they are resolved not to
appear at the places thereto appointed, and then declare, agree, and promise to
and with each other, That till they have such satisfaction in all their
Grievances, and such security for the future as shall be agreed on at a
Council, consisting of the general Officers, with two Commission Officers and
two Soldiers to be chosen for each Regiment, they will not disband or divide,
nor suffer themselves to be disbanded or divided. And this is one result of
that meeting of the godly obedient Army, this the fruit of the new Model, and
of all the great undertakings of that man of God (as his Disciples called him)
Lieutenant General Cromwell in their behalf.

99. They likewise frame there another submissive business, which they called
an humble. Representation of the dissatisfaction of the Army, in relation to
the late resolution for so sudden disbanding, where they are more large in
their humble cudgeling of the Parliament, and do it to that purpose, with a
scorn of all that had been offered to their satisfaction, say, The private
Soldiers will not regard what is behind of Pay after disbanding, implying all
must be had, require further security for the Officers Arrears, as Forest
Lands, and the revenues of Cathedrals, quarrel with the ordinances past for
Indemnity, exemption form Pressing, etc. expostulate about the Declaration
against their seditious Petition yet standing in force, demand reparation for
questioning their mutinous Officers, and will have it against those Members of
the House who had done but their duty, and discharged their Consciences in that
particular, declare plainly, That tho all their Grievances were duly
considered, it were nothing except those persons were censured, calling them
Men of desperate Principles, Incendiaries, that must not continue to be their
Judges, that is, must not sit in Parliament, and much more of this nature,
which in contempt they send up to the House. These are they that fight for
privilege of Parliament, who have made a Covenant with God and Man so to do,
and well they perform it; those they mislike must be thrust out by head and
shoulders, and such as remain, if they be not obedient to them, shall be served
with the same sauce: And this is to make a free Parliament. Was there ever a
more perfidious breach of Duty, did Rebellion it self ever outdo it, can any
Man think? Yet let us go a little further with them, and we shall see greater
abominations than these.

100. All this while they seemed to desire only things concerning themselves,
tho very unfittingly and wickedly, both for matter and manner; yet not to
meddle with any thing else concerning settling the business of the Kingdom,
which in many Messages and Declarations they still protested against, saying
(as Sir Thomas Fairfax wrote up from Cambridg) That whatever was suggested or
suspected, they would leave all such matters to the wisdom of the Parliament.
But now Tempora mutantur, they have power in their hands, and the Kingdom shall
feel it; the Parliament shall not only give them what they will have, but do
what they will have done, or smart for it. They make the world believe they
will set the King on his Throne and in his Rights, the People in their
Liberties, the Parliament in its Duty, and a Golden Age is like to follow.

101. To this end they march up in a hostile way toward London, bring his
Majesty along with them from Royston. Sir Thomas Fairfax, Cromwell, Ireton, and
the rest of the Officers, write a Letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council, telling them, That the sum of what they have desired of the
Parliament, is a satisfaction to their demands as Soldiers, a reparation upon
those that have improved advantages (as they falsely say) by false suggestions
and misrepresentations to the destruction of the Army, and endeavored to
engage the Kingdom in a new War. That the things they insist upon as English
Men, are a settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom, and of the Liberties of the
Subject, which they say they have as much right to demand as their Money, or
other common Interest of Soldiers, and that the honest People of England are
full of the sense of Ruin and Misery, should they disband before. That for the
obtaining of these things, they are drawing near the City, and declare, That if
the City appear not against them, nor provoke them, they will give no offense;
but if they do, they call God to witness they are free, and have washed off the
Ruin which will befall it: that they will lose all rather than not be righted of
the Men they aim at, therefore desire, that like fellow Subjects and Brethren,
the Citizens would follicite the Parliament in their behaf.

102. Here they first take upon them openly to intermeddle with the business of
the Kingdom, contrary to all the former Declarations and Protestations; but
their words nor yet their vows were ever any rule to know their meaning by: as
Hammond told the King concerning Cromwell, so is it with all those visible
Saints, have they promised, vowed, sworn never so much, called God and Man to
witness, if the condition of their Catholic Cause so alter, that what they
have so promised and sworn be no longer expedient for them, a pretended
Enthusiasm, a new Light shall give a dispensation, and they will do clean
contrary, yet all out of tenderness of Conscience; well, they are now in
strength and power, and will make use of it to turn all upside down.

103. The poor Parliament all this while is sitting upon addle Eggs, take a
great deal of pains, like Children, to build Castles of Cards, a puff from
their faithful Army blows it all down. It is true, that at first, upon return
of their Commissioners, who were sent down to disband, and had brought them an
account of the scorn put upon them, how instead of the Regiments coming to the
Rendevous appointed, a Command from Sir Thomas Fairfax fetched them clear
another away; how the train of Artillery was seized upon at Oxford, the Money
which should have disbanded a Regiment taken away by force, and the Servants
whom they had employed, beaten and wounded; this did with good reason startle
them; many of the Members expressed a sharp and severe Sense of it; the House
was taking vigorous and honorable Resolutions, tho opposed with might and main
by all the Independent Party, who prevailed but little, being now a known
engaged Faction, till Sergeant Major General Skippon stood up, a Presbyterian,
one who had seemed to dislike those factious ways before his last going down to
the Army, who was nominated Commander in chief for the Irish Expedition, had
received a gift of a thousand Pounds by way of encouragement to go, but now was
willing enough to stay at home with it; he, forsooth, in a grave way, with a
doleful Countenance, and lamentable Voice, makes a long Speech to exhort to
moderation, and to bear with the Infirmities of a zealous conscientious Army
which had done so much good Service. Therefore it was his opinion we should
humble our selves before God, appoint a day of Fasting, and do those things
which the Army desired, give them their full Pay, alter the Ordinance according
as they proposed, and he was persuaded in his Conscience they would then be
satisfied; however they were not to be provoked, for they were a formed Body
which would be upon us before we were aware. This knocked us on the head,
especially his last Argument, a demonstration (...); so it is, they are strong,
they will fall upon you; timorous Men, as he knew many of those were he had to
deal with, could make no reply to it.

104. But had he done his duty, given warning of those preparations and
intentions sooner, when he was below with the Army so long, and could not
choose but discern it, the House would not have been so surprised, would have
provided against it in time, but now fear took away the use of reason. They
looked upon the Army as even at their doors, Hannibal ad portas, and all of
them Children of Anak, armed Giants not to be resisted.

105. Whereas in truth there was no such cause of fear. As they in the Army had
more Cause carrying about them so much guilt, as I am confident they had as
great a share of apprehension. But they presumed upon their Agents among us,
they knew we had them with us both in Parliament and City who would betray us,
possessed with the like evil Spirit as Ahab's Prophets were; we should prevail,
otherwise we were not in so despicable a condition. The Parliament had not yet
utterly lost their reputation, the Image of Authority was not wholly defaced in
them, they had a stock entire and untoucht of 200000 l. provided for disbanding
the Army, and service of Ireland, multitude of Officers and gallant Soldiers
about the Town, who had always fought gallantly, and obeyed readily, had little
reason to be in love with the Army which had unhors'd them, so it is likely
would have engaged cheerfully and done good service. The City was high in the
opinion of the People for courage and resolution, firmness to the Parliament,
zeal in the Cause, hatred of Independency, dislike of the Army, and a Purse to
make all good, give Sinews and Strength to that side with which they should
close, and had particularly presented many Petitions to the House for those
very things which they were doing, and the Army only came to undo; which were
in order to a Peace, restoring the King, settling the Government both in Church
and State, and giving ease and quietness to the Kingdom, so as they were in
truth already engaged with us, and waited but a Summons to declare themselves,
when by this unfortunate Man's interposition at that time (to whom chiefly and
to his Chaplain Marshal, we must attribute all the Evil that has since befallen
King and Kingdom) all was dashed; instead of a generous resistance to the
insolences of perfidious Servants, vindicating the honor of the Parliament,
discharging the trust that lay upon them to preserve a poor People from being
ruined and enslaved to a rebellious Army, they deliver up themselves and
Kingdom to the will of their Enemies, prostitute all to the Lust of heady and
violent Men, suffer Mr. Cromwell to saddle, ride, switch, and spur them at his
pleasure.

106. For we instantly fell as low as dirt, vote the common Soldier his full
Pay, the Officers a Month more (that is in all three Months) upon disbanding or
engaging for Ireland, take all our Ordinances in pieces, change and alter them
according to their minds, and (which is worst of all) expunge our Declaration
against that mutinous Petition, cry Peccavimus to save a whipping, but all
would not do.

107. In so much that when our Commissioners were sent down to the Army at
Triplo Heath, to give an account of our dutiful compliance, they would not
vouchsafe to hear them, but when they offered to read the Votes, cry out,
Justice, Justice, a Note that Cromwell and Ireton had taught them to sing, being
done by their directions, as some of their own Disciples falling our with them,
have since discovered; which was by Mr. Scawen, who was one of those were sent,
reported back to the House, in such a ghastly fearful manner (only to terrify
us and make us more supple) he saying, the Army was so strong, so unanimous, so
resolved, as the poor Presbyterians hearts fell an Inch lower, and the
Independents made themselves merry with it. Then forsooth the Houses must send
down Members to abide with the Army as with a Power independent, or a third
Estate, improve all advantages and opportunities, to give good impressions of
the actions and intentions of the poor Parliament, and, like Benhadad's
Servants, catch at any thing of comfort which might fall; these were Sir Henry
Vane the younger, Sergeant Major General Skippon, Mr. Scawen, and Mr. Povey.

108. In the mean time the Army is marching, draws nearer and nearer to the
City, where, as well as in the Parliament, Men were between hopes and fears;
looking upon what was done sufficient to appease them, what then offered, what
they always intended for doing right to the Army; and in truth to all persons,
they could not but hope as well. But seeing the postures and proceedings of the
other side, there was more cause of fear, till at last that Letter came to the
City of which I spoke before, which satisfied our doubtings; and when the
Citizens who were sent from the Common Council brought it to the Parliament,
the horror and indignation of such an Impiety, so great a Presumption, so
manifest a Rebellion, awakened us to see our danger, and mastered those fears
which had been given us to awe us from resistance, so as both Houses and City
resolved to put themselves in a posture of defense, appointed a Committee of
Lords and Commons to go into the City, call the Committee of the Militia of
London to them, and jointly and severally do what was necessary for our common
safety.

109. The Committee went and did their parts, but they found Ioab's hand every
where; the Army had so played Absalom, pretending an intention to settle Peace
immediately, correct the exorbitances with which the people had been oppressed
and abused, restore the King, with such other plausible things; and their
Agents had so industriously improved their Interests, some false Brothers in
the City, as Alderman Foulks, and Alderman Gibbs, so cunningly wrought upon
men's Minds, sometimes upon their Fears, setting out the strength and power of
the Army, which threatened nothing but ruin; sometimes upon their hopes and
desires of Peace, gilding over their proceedings, as all done in order to it;
sometimes upon the dislike of the present condition, assuring them all Taxes
and Payments would by this means be taken off; sometimes upon their credulity,
making them believe, that those Persons whom the Army had in their eyes to
remove, were not so well affected to the public, but had particular Ends and
Designs of their own, to arm Reformadoes, and set up the power of another Sword
to rule and govern by, so to continue the Miseries and Burdens of the People:
by which Falsehoods and Juglings, those two chiefly, like Iannes and Iambres,
had generally bewitched the City, and lulled it into a security, withstanding
those who had no other thought than to deliver their Brethren and themselves
from that subjection and vassalage to which they were then designed, and are
since brought. As the Citizens resolved not to stir, but looked on to see what
this Army would do; some few did appear, rather to make objection and hinder
the business than help it; and tho many good orders were made for putting the
City into a posture to defend it self, none were obeyed: so on all hands the
poor Parliament, and Kingdom, and City it self were betrayed, and left to the
mercy of the Army, whose mercy we shall soon see was Cruelty it self,
Injustice, Oppression, Violence, and Rebellion in the highest degree.

110. They now thunder upon us with Remonstrances, Declarations, Letters, and
Messages every day, commanding one day one thing, next day another, making us
vote and unvote, do and undo; and when they had made us do some ugly thing,
jeer us, and say, our doing justifies their desiring it, as they served us
concerning all we had granted for Pay, expunging our Declaration, passing the
Ordinances for Indemnity against Pressing, and the like. They tell us in their
Representation of the 14 th of June, That our resuming the consideration of
these things, as to their further satisfaction, dos much justify their desires
and proceedings so far; and therefore they then proceed further, and say, They
desire full and equal satisfaction, not only for themselves, but for all the
Soldiery throughout the Kingdom, who have concurred or will concur with them;
so engage all against the Parliament, and contract such a debt as has broken
the back of the Commonwealth, and now say they are not a mercenary Army to
serve the arbitrary power of the State, but that they took up Arms in Judgment
and Conscience (notwithstanding they have received more Pay than all the Armies
in the Kingdom, and yet lived most of Spoil and free Quarter) therefore they
are resolved to assert and vindicate the power and rights of the Kingdom, and
say, That what they do is short of the proceedings of other Nations, to things
of a higher nature than as yet they had pretended to, instancing in the
Netherlands and Scotland. For the present they require, that the Houses be
purged, those who have appeared against them not to be theirs and the Kingdom's
Judges, whose names they say they will speedily give in; they tell the
Parliament what kind of Men they will have preferred to power and trust in the
Commonwealth; then (which was a Crime some six weeks before, to move in
Parliament and in a Parliamentary way, so as that sagacious Gentleman Mr
Gurden, stood up in a rage, and said it smelt of Oxford, and it was much
decryed by all the Crew, but is now of public merit, and very pious, coming
from their Masters the Army) they will have a determinate period of time set to
this Parliament, some provision to be made for the continuance of future
Parliaments. And when his Majesty shall have given his Concurrence to these and
all other things that shall be proposed for the liberties of the People, the
Militia, and peace of the Kingdom, then his Rights and of his Posterity to be
considered. They will have the Rights of the People cleared for freedom of
Petitioning, and such as are imprisoned for pretended Misdemeanors to be
speedily tried, and have reparations if they have suffered wrongfully; the
power given to Committees, and deputy Lieutenants to be taken into
consideration. The Kingdom to be publicly satisfied in point of Accounts, and
after public Justice done upon some of the excepted Persons, that there be an
Act of Oblivion. Then they conclude that these things done, tho there be many
other particulars, yet (which certainly was merely out of their great goodness
and grace, like that of the modest Spaniard with his no quiero mas) they will
ask no more, but leave the rest to the wisdom and justice of the Parliament;
and this they say they find to be the concurrent sense of the People, by their
Petitions presented to the General, wherein (as in all the rest) they play the
arrant Impostors and Mountebanks, being as impudent, false, cunning, bloody,
proud, and ambitious as the Devil himself, their grand Master. They will have
us believe the Sense of the People joined with them, and that they petitioned
for these things; when their own fellow Witches have since discovered how
Cromwell himself drew those Petitions, sent them about into the Countries, had
his Agents to promote them with mellifluous enamouring promises (as the
expression is) so got some Independents to subscribe them, and perhaps some few
more that they had cozened; which served the turn, and made their wise General
engage himself with them, saying, That what he wanted in expression of his
devotion to their Service, should be supplied in action, as Mr. John Lawmind
informs in his Putney Projects.

111. The Parliament is now brought to a fine pass, made a notable free
Parliament, but we must believe it to be so, because Cromwell's Army says it,
and speed as well as our first Parents believing the Serpent, that told them
eating the Apple would make them as Gods, wise, and happy. The Army on the
other side triumphs, drives on like Iehu, bears down all before it, carries
about the King as a Prisoner to show him, and make that use of him, which the
Philistines would have done with the Ark, prevail against all opposition; and
truly that and their power together did make them prevail.

112. Their next work is, charging eleven Persons, Members of the House of
Commons, particularly by name, but with general things; for particulars they
were not provided with, as their friend John Lawmind says, who uses these
words, the particular matter of their Charge was to seek after they had in
general charged them: And another of their Disciples, Sirrah Nico* says, That
Cromwell confessed at Colebrook, he had nothing against Sir John Maynard, yet he
must be put in amongst the rest, only because he was a busy Man against him
and his faction; so you see these Thieves falling out some truth comes to light.

113. With this general Charge there comes another Paper from his Excellency
and the Army under his Command, requiring the Members impeached may be
forthwith suspended sitting in the House, and a months Pay to be immediately
sent down to the Army for a present supply; and of these things to know the
resolution by the next Thursday at the furthest, which was within two days.
They require further* That the Officers who had deserted the Army (as they
called it, but in truth who had left them for their Rebellion, and engaged for
Ireland) should have no more of their Arrears paid them till the Army was first
satisfied: And to be sure the Parliament should have none to defend them, They
command them to raise no new Forces within the Kingdom, nor invite, nor admit
any from other parts; the reason, or at least the color for this was, because
the Committee of Safety, at such a time as in obedience to the Order of
Parliament they had endeavored to have put the City in a condition to defend
the Parliament and it self, had considered of raising some Force, but never any
thing was put in execution, nor one Man listed: And tho the Parliament and City
did assure them there was no proceeding in it, which they might then very
likely believe, and in good manners have acquiesc'd, yet such was either their
fear, by reason of guilt, or their scorn of the Parliament, and petulancy to
show how they slighted what they said or declared, as they would not believe
them, but threap them down that there was listing still, and quarrel with them
about it, to such a height were they then grown, and others to that tameness.

114. This passed about the 15 th of June. The Hou^e took these things into
consideration, obeyed in all but that concerning the Members; wherein they came
to a resolution, That upon such a general Charge they could not in Justice
proceed against them, nor suspend them, therefore desire to know what they
could charge them with in particular. They further considered how unhandsome it
was, the King should be so hurried up and down with the Army, and that if he
were at some of his own Houses near London, application might be made to him
jointly by them and the Scottish Commissioners, in order to Peace; whereupon,
tho it was mightily opposed by the Independent Party, yet they voted his
Majesty should be desired to come to his Manor House at Richmond.

115. Here the Scholars had broken out a little into rebellion against their
Schoolmasters the Army, and soon they were lashed for it. For on the 23 d of
June comes a rattling Lesson, a Remonstrance from his Excellency, full of sharp
and scoffing Expressions, and ends with a lusty Menace, tells them, The voting
of the King to Richmond is but in pursuance of the former design upon him at
Holmby, and to put his Majesty within the reach of those Men, who had already
listed considerable numbers of Horse and Foot about London; therefore wishes
them, as they tender the welfare of the Kingdom, and the avoiding of jealousies
and other inconveniences in the Army, to resume again the consideration of
that business, and not propose any place for him nearer London than they would
have the head Quarters of the Army: then to ingratiate themselves with the King
and his Party, and make him willing to stay with them (till their design was
ripe to dispose of him otherwise, as it was afterward) they take notice of
some scandalous information, by the procurement forsooth of eleven Members and
others of their Party, as if his Majesty were kept a Prisoner among them, which
they say is most false and contrary to their Principles (as has appeared since
by what Sir Thomas Fairfax commanded to be done to the King in the Isle of
Wight, upon his Majesty's answer to the four Bills, without order of
Parliament, like a great Prince, Ex mero motu and certa scientia, tho it was
afterward approved of and justified Ex part post) but as yet they are
harmless Saints and good Subjects, all for the King. Therefore they take
occasion to declare there, That they desire a just freedom for his Majesty and
those of his Party, and profess they do not see how there can be a firm Peace,
without a due consideration of and provision for the Rights of himself, his
Royal Family and late Partakers. O ye Hypocrites, then with Honey for him in
their Mouths, and War in their Hearts!

116. For the expunging of the Declaration, they say, they acknowledge the
Justice of the House in it, but should rather have been satisfied with the
Parliaments declaring how and by whom they had been misinformed and surpised,
and that it is an apparent dishonor to them to pass such a Declaration, and
soon after without alteration in the pretended ground and cause of it (for
shame of the world) to expunge it: I confess they say true in this, but the old
Proverb is, true Jests are bitter Jests.

117. Then for the Members, they insist to have them forthwith suspended upon
the general Charge, saying, they would willingly proceed to particulars, if
they might be encouraged by the Justice of the House for suspending them for
what it self knows, as having been done there, which they say they cannot prove
without breaking the privileges of Parliament: Therefore they advise a
necessary expedient for prevention of the like for the future, That in the
House of Commons dissenting Members may enter their Dissent, as they do in the
House of Peers, with a Protestation, and say, They offer these things from
their good wishes to the privileges of Parliament, to render them more lasting
by being more innocent.

118. Was ever Parliament so abused? First, they must, because the Army will
have it so, give a Judgment upon persons before they know any fault by them,
only to encougrage their accusers to tell the fault, for which that Judgment is
already given; first punish, then enquire; Hallifax Law, and Army Justice. And
this no less than of suspension, where not only the Parties themselves have a
mark of ignominy put upon'em, are dispossessed of the execution of that Trust
which their Country has reposed in them, but the places they serve for, Towns
and Counties are punished, deprived of their Representatives in Parliament, and
consequently of their suffrages there which they give by them. Then what must
this be for? even for what was done and said in the House (for so it is laid)
contrary to all proceedings and privileges of Parliament, which will have no
man questioned for that afterward; upon this ground, That if he had done
amiss, the House would at that time have checked it; and they not finding fault
then, for any other to do it, must needs reflect upon their Wisdom and
Integrity, as if they approved of what was ill, or could not discern it. And
lastly, for my young Masters to jeer them with their good wishes to have their
privileges less nocent, and then dare to propound so great an alteration in the
very fundamental constitution of the House of Commons, where the minor part is
involved in the major, and both make but one entire Agent in all they do, where
there is no particularizing of persons, not any one Member to be so much as
named, where all is acted as by one Man, that which must bind the whole Kingdom
to be established by the united consent of it, there to make such a rent and
division as to introduce dissenting Protestations, only to foment Faction and
Parties, and by troubling the Fountain, to corrupt all the Streams, is the most
transcending presumption that ever was heard of.

119. But that which in my opinion carried most of injustice in it self, and
dishonor to the Parliament, was the requiring them to discharge and disperse
those, who upon their orders of invitation and encouragement to engage for
Ireland, had left the Army, quitted the advantages they might have had in
joining in that Rebellion, and wholly cast themselves upon the Parliament, as
Sir Robert Pye's Men, Colonel Graves's, Colonel Butlers, Captain Farmers,
Lieutenat Colonel Iacksons, the Captain, and many of the Soldiers of the
Lifeguard, and others quartered in Kent and Surry, the greater part of the two
Regiments under Colonel Herbert and Colonel Kempson, quartered about Worcester
and Evesham; these honest, gallant, faithful, stout Men, both Officers and
Soldiers, for their obedience to the Parliament, zeal to Ireland, must be
abused and ruined, the Parliament it self made to eat its own words, break its
faith, deceive them who trusted it, deliver them up, make them Anathema's: for
what? because the Army says they are Deserters, and raisers of a new War, but
in truth, for complying with their Commands, refusing to join in a Rebellion
against them, being willing to adventure their lives against the Rebels of
Ireland.

120. Never was such a violence and scorn put upon a single person, or any
society of Men, much less a Parliament, to make it act its own shame and
confusion, except by that Italian, who to be revenged on his Enemy, got him at
advantage, bad him deny Jesus Christ, and acknowledge him his Savior, or he
should die presently, which the wretch doing to save his life, he then stabs
him to the heart, and says, Go thy ways, I am now revenged upon Body and Soul.
So the Army threatened the Parliament, if all these things forementioned were
not done (and likewise the poor Reformadoes put out of the City, who had
offered themselves, and were ready to run all dangers for theirs and the City's
preservation) and done by the next Thursday night, that then they should be
forced to take such a course extraordinary, as God should enable them and
direct them to.

121. And when the Parliament had done it (as they did all but suspending their
Members) had retracted that Vote concerning the King's coming to Richmond
(which the Lords did first at Mr. Marshal's earnest solicitation, as I have
heard, who at that time could not have prevailed so with the House of Commons)
prostituting their Honors, renouncing whatever would be of strength and safety
to them, casting themselves down naked, helpless and hopeless, at the proud
feet of their domineering Masters, it is all to no purpose, it dos but
encourage those merciless Men to trample the more upon them, like the
Taskmasters of Egypt, double the tale of their Bricks.

122. For this was a resolution taken, nothing should satisfy, nay not be
accepted with a good look, a smile, whilst the eleven Members sat in the House;
while Mordecai stood in the Gate and bowed not, proud Haman cannot be pleased,
therefore he must die: The eleven Members must out. The House of Commons will
not do it, Mr. Joyce and his Agitators shall. For this Sir Thomas Fairfax takes
up his Quarter at Vxbridg, some of his Forces advance within three or four
Miles of Westminster, he sends his Warrants for Provisions into the very
Suburbs, a Party of Horse is commanded to be ready at a Rendevouze, to march up
to the Parliament, then here is the Case of the eleven Members; stay, a
violence shall be offered upon the House, the Members pulled out by the Ears,
and then Actum est de Parliamento, I may say de Parliamentis, farewell this and
all Parliaments.

123. Those Gentlemen therefore think it best, rather than a breach should be
made upon their occasion, that through their sides the Parliament should be
stuck to the very heart, and die for ever, to make it their own act of
forbearing the House. And therefore they told the House, they saw they were in
that condition they could neither protect them nor themselves; that if they
would not do as Achish did to David, who bid him be gone because the Princes of
the Philistines loved him not, yet that they would at their humble suit and
desire be pleased to give them leave to withdraw, and to such as desired it,
Passes to go beyond Sea, which at last they did agree to, tho truly I must say,
unwillingly; but which all said, they looked upon it as a good Service done to
the House for preventing greater inconveniences.

124. Upon this they forbore, and staid, I think, a week or better, expecting
if the Army would send in a particular Charge against all or any of them; which
not doing, but instead of that writing up a Letter to commend their Modesty,
they then petitioned the House, that they would send to the Army to know what
particulars they laid to their charge, and prefix them some convenient time to
do it in: Which the House did, giving them about a week. And one would have
thought a short day might have served. That accusing Members in such a manner,
with such a noise, as if they had been so criminous, that as Mr. Solicitor
said by his Beasts of prey, which were not to have Law given them, but be
knocked in the head, so they were not worthy of Justice, nor of privilege of
Parliament, nor of common humanity, much less to be used with some respect,
like Gentlemen who had so long, and some of them served their Country so often
in Parliament, and more faithfully than ever any of the Army party did, or will
do there or any where else. But all Bonds of duty and civil society must be
broken through to come at their destruction; they must needs have known some
notorious things by them which might readily be produced. But it seems they
were not so provided, the particular matter of their Charge was yet to seek (as
their fellow Mr. John Lawmind says) they were then hunting out for Articles,
sending about for Witnesses to testify any thing, promise, bribe, threaten,
but all would not do: several persons came to me, informing how they had been
solicited to inform against me; one Lewis told me they had been tampering with
him; one Westcomb acquainted me how one Pain had been sent for by Rushworth his
Excellency's excellent Secretary, to the same purpose, who lodged him in his
Chamber, gave him an Angel the first time; that he went thesecond time, and
this Westcomb with him, and then had a Horse given him worth ten Pounds, and
the promise of some Place in the Army, for which it is presumed he did some
acceptable Service. It seems these Saints were put hard to it; well, the first
day passed and no Charge came in, they desired longer time, and promised it
should be ready by such a day, and I think the day after it did come: And if I
be not very partial to my self, as in this I believe I am not, after all this
traveling of the Mountains, out comes ridiculus Mus.

125. I will not repeat all the particulars here, they are in print and our
answer to them, which I hope satisfies all Men; besides another answer we put
into the House, more upon the formality of a legal Plea, which it seems
satisfied them, for they never proceeded further, nor did the Army prosecute,
but the House ordered the Speaker to give us Passes according to our desires.

126. I will but make this observation upon some of them, That they and their
Party acted those very things which they laid to our charge; and what was false
as to us, was really true in them.

127. One thing was holding a Correspondency with the King and his Party, which
of all Men they ought not to have objected, doing what they did even at that
very time; for suppose it never so great a Crime, it ill becomes the Devil to
find fault with the Collier for being black: they treat with his Majesty, have
some of his Servants present at their Councils of War to debate and prepare
things, frame proposals for settling the whole business of the Kingdom; and if
their own Writers, Prophets of their own, tell true, capitulate for Honors and
Preferments, Cromwell to have a blew Ribbon, be an Earl, his Son to be of the
Bedchamber to the Prince, Ireton some great Officer in Ireland. Now admit all
true they said of us, was it to be compared to this? is it not a Decimo sexto
to their Folio, a Molehill to their Mountain? And I desire it may be taken
notice of, that in all the Charge there is not a word of the Plot to fetch the
King from Holmby, bring him to London, or put him at the head of the Army,
which they made the groundwork of all their Villainies, pretending some of us
(in truth underhand, and in their Pamphlets naming me) to have had such an
intention; and that what they did was by way of prevention. Is it likely this
would have been omitted if there had been the least color of truth for it? but
Truth was what they ever least looked after in all their Speeches and Actions,
caring only to serve a turn, gain an advantage by cozening the world, and then
cast about how to make it good by power, or amuse Men with some new Cheat, that
the last might be forgotten.

128. They accuse us of infringing, and endeavoring to overthrow the Liberties
and Rights of the Subject in arbitrary and oppressive ways, and by indirect and
corrupt practices to delay and obstruct Justice. These are the words in their
general Charge. Now I appeal to all Men, and even to their own Consciences, who
say this, whether of the two, they or their Party, or we in the House of
Commons, upon all occasions, were for violence, oppression, and ruin, to
destroy all that came before them, sequester Estates, impose great Fines,
imprison, starve, sometimes take away life, make Men offenders for a word, take
all advantages, wrest and strain up to the height of all their penal
Ordinances; and who they were that had the hand in making all those penal
Ordinances, so severe for Sequestrations, so high for Compositions, so
insnaring and bloody for making new Treasons, and little things to be capital
Crimes; that no Man almost was safe, free from question, and few or none
questioned but sure to be destroyed. How many Ministers wre pulled out of their
Livings for very small faults? how many Persons made Delinquents, their Estates
torn in pieces, themselves, their Wives and Children turned to beggary, and
ready to starve for no great offenses, at least that for which they did not
deserve so severe a punishment? What Committees were set up? That of
Haberdashers Hall, to pill and poll Men, put them to an Oath as ill as that ex
officio to make them discover their Estates, and expose themselves to their
merciless carving out a fifth and twentieth part, which was the undoing of
many, even fetching in some of the Members of the House to whom they had a
displeasure, and generally all Men who had crossd or opposed them in any thing:
that of Goldsmiths Hall, to impose Fines to the ruin of many of the best
Families of England: that of Sequestrations, where the very intention of the
Houses was perverted, that Committee being first proposed and made only for
great and notorious Offenders, but afterward came to be worse than any Spanish
Inquisition, few escaping that were ever questioned; I dare say Sergeant Wild
the Chairman, and Mr. Nicklis the Lawyer, and some few more Bloodhounds, who
always attended there, never gave their Votes for the freeing of scarce any one
person; and then the delay there is worse than the condemnation, making suitors
wait one, two years, and commonly be sequestered at last. The Committee of
Examinations where Mr. Miles Corbet kept his Justice Seat, which was worth
something to his Clerk, if not to him, what a continual Horse Fair it was? even
like Doomsday it self, to judge persons of all sorts and sexes.

129. Did not that Faction put on all these things? did not we still oppose,
hinder it all we could? how earnestly and how often have we moved the putting
down those Committees? that of Sequestration, that of Haberdashers Hall. Those
in the Counties sometimes got orders of the House for that purpose, brought in
Ordinances, and still by some art or other of theirs put by when it was thought
in a manner settled, so as the Government might have returned to Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, Grand Juries, and other Ministers of Justice in that
subordination which the Law had established. Was any preserved and delivered
out of his trouble, that we or some of us had not a hand in it? Were we not
called the moderate Party? branded with that Title (for they held it a crime)
were we not said to favor Malignants? when in truth we had respect to the
Parliament, that it should not be made the Instrument of those men's Lusts, and
contract that Odium which only could ruin it, and upon which this very Party,
being themselves the cause of it, took the advantage to master and subdue it,
they in the beginning of their Rebellion exclaiming against the Parliament for
those things, and therewith possessing the Country, which themselves and their
Faction made it do. Who but they drew all business into the Parliament,
especially when themselves or their Friends were any thing concerned? And had
they not an Art of delaying men, and making them attend when they could not
mischief them by dispatching the business? were any more violent in an
arbitrary way of proceeding than they? nay, were any so but they? could a
Mayor, or Officer, or a Burgess for Parliament be chosen almost in any Town of
England, but with their leaves and according to their likings? And on the other
side, did not we press to have all things left to the Law of the land, and to
the ancient and ordinary course? yet they accuse us to be the troublers of
Israel, and themselves would be thought to be the restorers, just as the Wolf
in the Fable charged the Lamb with troubling the Waters.

130. They charge us beside with having a great power upon the Treasure of the
Kingdom, disposing of the public Moneys, enriching our selves, and say in many
of their Declarations, that we would embroil the Land in a new War, that we
might not be called to an account for them. O the impudence! They know that
themselves only and their Creatures had power over the Moneys, and meddled in
Money matters, well licking their Fingers; for they know they shared and
divided amongst themselves all the Fat of the Land, the Treasure, the Offices,
the King's Revenue, the Revenue of the Church, the Estates of so great a part
of the Nobility and Gentry, whom they had made Delinquents, and we, not one of
us had any thing to do in all this; Mr. Recorder I think only was of the
Committee of the King's Revenue, but very seldom came thither. And did not they
make use of the price in their hands? And did they not like charitable persons
begin at home, give Gifts and Offices to all their own Party, to some upon mere
Grace, as the thousands to Mr. Blaxton, a thousand Pound to Mr. Pury (besides a
good Office) as much to Mr. Hodges of Glocestershire, to Alderman Pennington,
who had concealed three thousand Pounds of Sir John Pennington's which he had
in his hands, for which, by their ordinance, he should have forfeited the
treble, and had he been a friend to the eleven Members should not have been
spared; they did not only forgive him that, but gave him that three thousand
Pounds, and three thousand Pounds more, which was upon the City's turning him
out of their Militia, and presently made him be put in again. The Speaker had
Money given him, I know not how much, 6000 l. at one time (as I remember) was
made Master of the Rolls, Chancellor of the Duchy, and a good while Keeper;
Mr. Solicitor was, besides his being Solicitor, the King's Attorney, and about
two years one of the Lord Keepers, got infinitely by the Pardons upon
Compositions, which was a device only to fill his Coffers, and had a thousand
Pounds given him at the expiration of his Commission for the Great Seal. So had
all his fellow Commissioners, Mr. Brown, Mr. Prideaux, and Sergeant Wild, each
their thousand Pound besides the profits of the Seal; Mr. Prideaux also made
himself Postmaster of England, being but the Chairman of a Sub-Committee to
the Grand-Committee of Grievances, where my Lord of Warwick and Burlamachi were
contesting about the place, which was there represented as a public Grievance,
tho my Lord of Warwick's Grant proved not to be so; but this worthy Gentleman
being one of the Committee, and in the Chair, who was to hear both, and report
their Cases to the Grand Committee, from whence it was to come to the House,
finding it a convenient Employment, worth some 24, or 2500 l. per Annum, eased
them of it, took it himself, and has kept it ever since. Mr. Sergeant Wild was
trusted with some Money by the Lady Thornborough's Father for the use of his
Daughter, and took occasion upon her going to Oxford, pretending she had got
possession of his Estate, to get a fair Ordinance of both Houses to have that
Money given to himself; but sure found some good Law for it, as he did for
hanging of Captain Burley; and being excellent at it, no question would find
Law to hang the eleven Members, were there a whole dozen of them, and me
highest for writing this, which he would prove to be a greater Treason than any
in the Statute of the 25 th of Edward the 3 d; and when I come within his
power, I will forgive it him, let him hang as many, and get as much of the
Commonwealths Money as he can in the mean time. But I will say this for him,
the Elders of Iezreel that found a Law to put Naboth to death, were but fools
to him. Then how many of their small Prophets were preferred, that Man of
Conscience Alderman Hoil, that worthy Lawyer Mr. Nicklis, Sir William Allison,
Mr. Love, Mr. Lenthal the Speaker's Son, these two made six Clerks; Mr. Lisle,
Master of St. Cross's, Mr. Miles Corbet, Colonel White, a Colonel that never
was in the Field with his Regiment, Mr. Allen the Goldsmith; all of them, and I
know not how many more, in places of great profit, some in the Courts of
Westminster, others made Treasurers of their Armies, as Allen and White; the
latter also made Clerk of the Assizes in the Northern Circuit, worth 5 or 600
l. per Annum. Cromwell has 2500 l. per Annum, Sir Peter Wentworth a Gentleman's
Estate for half the value, settled likewise by Ordinance, tho the Gentleman
(whose delinquency was perhaps aggravated, because he would not sell him that
Land which he had long desired, like Naboth's Vineyard) offered to pay the
Money to the State as the Fine for his Composition, which by the rules of their
own proceedings could not in Justice have been denied him. I remember we put by
the Ordinance two or three times, but I hear it is since past, which makes me
mention it here.

131. To some for reparation of Losses. So Mr. Cornelius Holland, who had some
inferior place in the Prince's Household (which certainly he was not born to,
the height of his ambition reaching no further in the beginning than to be Sir
Henry Vane's Man) was in recompense set over the King's Children, above my Lady
of Dorset, and had the managing of their Household some three or four years;
then they gave him the King's Pastures in Buckinghamshire for twenty one years,
worth to him de claro some 15 or 1600 l. per Annum. Sir William Strickland for
the burning of his House in Yorkshire, has a Gentleman's Estate in Kent of a
good value. Mr. Henry Herbert had 3000 l. given him out of my Lord of
Worcester's Woods, and Sir John Winter's. The Lord Say, in lieu of the
Mastership of the Wards, which by his power since the beginning of this
Parliament he had wrested from the Lord Cottington, had 10000 l. and for part
of the Money (I think 4000 l. of it) had Hanworth House, with the Lands about
it, which was worth, as they say, 14000 l. Colonel Fleetwood was by way of
Sequestration put into the Remembrancers place of the Court of Wards, which his
Brother held, and by going to Oxford lost it; upon the putting down of the
Court he had 3000 l. recompense: multitudes there are more of this kind.

132. To some for pretended Arrears; as to Sir Arthur Haslerig 7000 l. who had
earned it well at the Devizes and Cherrington. To the Lord Fairfax, Sir William
Constable, Sir William Brereton, great Sums. To Colonel Thompson 2000 l. for
his wooden Leg, which nothing but a Cannon could have helped him to, for he
would never come within Musket shot. To Colonel Purefoy and his Son Colonel
Boswel, some 1500 l. each; and so to many more.

133. To some to buy their Voices, make them Proselytes. To Mr. Weston, Son to
the Earl of Portland, the reviving an arrear of a Pension which was his Ladies,
and if I be not deceived, had been discontinu'd for many years: The Debenter,
as I remember, was 4000 l. To the Lord Gray of Groby (who had before been
zealous for my Lord of Essex, as he had good reason for the respects he had
received from him) a considerable Sum, which I well remember not, to be paid
him out of such discoveries of Delinquents Estates as he should make; whereupon
he and his Terriers were long attending the Committee of Examinations, in the
prosecution still of some Game or other, till his Sum was made up. To Mr.
Scawen, one who formerly had not very well liked of their ways, 2000 l. How
many of the Lords that could not be heard before, nor their Petitions scarce
vouchsafed to be read, when they tackt about and voted with them, were then
presently considered, and good proportions allowed them; nay, they were so
impudent as some of them would not stick to give it for a reason openly in the
House, why they would not grant their desires, that they took notice how they
gave their Votes: Mr. Gourden is the Man I have heard say so several times;
this was an excellent way to make a free Parliament, for the Members to be
honest and discharge their Consciences.

134. Then for Accounts; I would fain know what Accounts they have passed: Let
any Man peruse my Lord Fairfax's and Sir William Constable's, I hear they are
strange ones for the great Sums they have fingered: And I am sure the Committee
of Accounts did complain, that their Sub-Committees were beaten in
Staffordshire, where Mr. Purefoy and Mr. Boswel should have acted, and would
not.

135. Upon the whole matter, I would have our Accusers say so much by one of
us: I confess, I am sorry to discover this of them, it being much against my
nature, but I am forced to it for my vindication. I may say with the Apostle,
They have compelled me, and not only so to recriminate, but even to glory a
little in some thing. Have any of us ever refused to account, who were liable
to it? Sir William Lewis did account for the Monys he received, being Governor
of Portsmouth, so fairly and satisfactorily, as that the Committee of Accounts
made a special report of it to the House, to be (as they said) an Example to
others for his care and just dealing in managing the States Moneys which came
to his hands. Major General Massey I am sure was sollicitous to perfect his
accounts, which if or no he had done before they drove him away I know not. Sir
William Waller and Colonel Long finished theirs. Sir Philip Stapleton never
touched but his personal Pay, yet did account, and had but forty Shillings a
day, being Lieutenant General of the Horse under my Lord of Essex, who was
Generalissimo, when Sir Arthur Haslerig had five Pounds for commanding the
Horse under Sir William Waller, a Place inferior to his, and had been at no
charge, having lived still upon Sir William Waller, and gotten well all along
the Employment. Sir William Waller had his Arrears after his subordinate
Officer; Sir Arthur had led the way, who broke the Ice for his General and all
the rest. Sir Philip Stapleton had also his, a very small one for so eminent an
Officer, in regard his allowance was no greater; it came to about 1700 l.
having left the benefit of his whole Estate during all the Wars, which Haslerig
did not, if his Neighbors in Leicestershire say true, that his Grounds have
continued full stocked all this while, better than ever they were before, so
safe and well protected (as I have heard) that his Neighbors when there was
danger, would send their Cattle thither; I confess, I understand not the
mystery.

136. Here is all concerning matters of Accounts and Arrears of the eleven
Members, the rest meddled not with any of the States Moneys, some of them have
refused to receive what the House had given them upon much juster grounds than
all the pretenses of the others that had so much. I my self for my Sufferings
after the Parliament 3 d. Car. which continued many years, cost me some
thousands of Pounds, and prejudiced me more, had five thousand Pounds given me
by the House for my reparation. I refused it, and said, I would not receive a
Penny till the public debts were paid. Let any of them say so much. I desire
who ever shall chance to read this, to pardon me this folly, I do not mean for
not taking the Money, but seeming to boast of it. I must again repeat the
Apostle's words, I am become a Fool in glorying, but they have compelled me. It
is true, I had paid for a Fine imposed in the King's Bench, which I laid down
in ready Money out of my Purse, a thousand Marks: This in the time of these
troubles, when my whole Estate was kept from me in the West, that for three
years or thereabouts I received thence not one Farthing, was reimburs'd to me.

137. Now I appeal to the world, whether our accusers, or we the poor eleven
Members, so decry'd, so oppressed, were the more guilty, who they were, who had
gotten, cozened, oppressed, were indeed the Traitors. If he did not say as
truly as he did wittily, if they had not had more men than matter against us,
they had been the Traitors themselves, which many of their own Disciples have
upon the matter confessed and published, saying, they were to seek for matter;
only we were a Beam in their Eyes: And their great Apostle Lilburn himself
says, the great aim was but to pull down those who stood in the way of their
preferment.

138. Here is our Crime, I will ask pardon of God for my failings, even in the
performance of all these duties, where I served my Country best, but not of the
Parliament from whence I desire no favor. Let them put upon me the severest
disquisition, either concerning those things then charged, or the great.
Treason since committed, of endeavoring to defend my self, the Parliament, the
City, from a rebellious, unjust, oppressing Army, which against all Laws of God
and Man, came to force us, for which I stand voted to be impeached of Treason,
and am outed the House, of which I shall treat presently.

139. But first I shall show the Steps to it. The Army now did all, the
Parliament was but a Cipher, only cried Amen to what the Councils of War had
determined. They make themselves an absolute third Estate, have Commissioners
residing with them from the Parliament, Agents from his Majesty, and abuse both
sufficiently; as solemnly treated with as if no Subjects, but a Body
subordinate to neither, vested with an Independent Authority, claiming only
from God and their Sword. The whole business of the Kingdom is there now
agitated, and the engagement of the Army is the Standard by which all
propositions must be measured. If any thing be offered by the Parliament which
they like not, it is presently answered not to stand with their solemn
Engagement. Many meetings there were, great consultations and debates upon
certain proposals for settling of a Peace, and securing the Rights and
Liberties of the People.

140. Notwithstanding this, while these things are in agitation, after all
their affronting, baffling, forcing the Parliament, marching up against it and
the City, contrary to their orders, by which they were not to come nearer than
within forty Miles of London, they will have them own them for their Army,
undertake to provide for their maintenance, and immediately send down a months
Pay, yet will not be subject to them in any thing. All this is done, Mr.
Marshal the Minister being a principal Instrument for them, who was still going
and coming between Westminster and the head Quarters, or at the Parliament
doors soliciting the Members of both Houses, persuading them by all manner of
arguments, sometimes assurances, sometimes terrifyings, to agree to those
things which the Army desired; and this not in order to the setting up of
Presbytery, in which he had formerly been so zealous (for the Presbyters were
not then Trump, and he meant to whine therefore to put out them to take in
better Cards for his turn) Afterward they send to repeal the Ordinance for the
Militia of London, which had been settled upon many and long debates, to stand
for one whole year, and renew the former expired Ordinance for establishing the
old Committee, which was the year before.

141. It is but ask and have, that is presently done; and truly I think it was
a design of the Army, merely to provoke the City, engage them to do something,
express a dislike perhaps, fly out, and give them an occasion to offer some
violence should they persist; or if yield after a little ill favour'dly showing
their teeth, then to put such things upon them, so yoke them, break their
strength, trample upon their Liberties and Privileges, as they should not be
able afterward upon any occasion to raise them disturbance, and make
opposition to whatever they should set on foot, tho never so grievous and
displeasing to the whole Kingdom; for they thought not themselves secure whilst
the City stood unbroken.

142. Their Plot took, the City was very much moved at this sudden Act of the
Houses, in the altering their Militia, without so much as giving them notice to
hear what they could say in a point so nearly concerning them. They look upon
it as an Infringement of their Charter (granted and confirmed to them by so
many Kings successively, by which they were still to have the power of their
own Militia) as a shaking of the foundation of all their security for those
vast sums of Money they had lent, which depended only upon Ordinances: and the
easy and sudden repealing of this, gave them cause to fear they might be
served so in the rest.

143. Whereupon at their Common Council they agreed upon a Petition to the
Houses, informing them of the distempers in the City upon the change they had
made, and beseeching them to reestablish it as it was before; which was
presented by the Sheriffs, some of the Aldermen, and of the Members of the
Common Council in a fair and submissive way. But the Parliament durst do
nothing without the leave of their Masters, only give them good words, and so
hoped to slide over the business. Then some young Men, Apprentices and others,
appeared, pressing hard, who would not be satisfied till it was done; which the
Houses sticking at, the young Men insisting, drew a great concourse of people,
putting things into some heat, so as at last they prevailed, and the Militia
was again settled according to their desire: upon which they went away
returning to their homes, only some of the younger and more unruly sort
remained, among whom some idle people (and perhaps not well affected) Soldiers
and others, and I have heard some of the Independents even belonging to the
Army, thrust themselves, and put the multitude, disorderly enough before, into
great distempers, who then would make the Houses do this and the other thing,
vote the King's coming to London, the calling in of the eleven Members, and I
know not what else, would not suffer the Parliament Men either of the one House
or the other, to stir till all was voted and passed which they desired, keeping
them there till I think nine of the clock at night; when the Common Council
hearing of these disorders, sent down the Sheriffs of London and some of the
Aldermen to appease them, which they did. This was upon Monday the 26 th of
July. The Houses adjourned themselves, the House of Peers to Friday, the
Commons house to the next day. The City had against the next day, which was
Tuesday, taken order to prevent such further inconveniences by unruly people
assembling about Westminster, which before they could not well do, in regard
their Militia was unsettled by the alteration that the new Ordinance upon the
Armies command had made, and I heard sent down a Message to the House of
Commons to assure them of it; but Mr. Speaker was so hasty to adjourn till the
Friday, perhaps because the rather he would not receive that Message which had
half spoiled the Plot, that he would scarce stay till it was a House; and some
of the sactious crying to adjourn, he did so, tho many cried out against it,
who could not be heard.

144. By the Friday the two Speakers, the Earl of Manchester of the Peers, and
Mr. Lenthal of the Commons, instead of giving their attendance according to
their duty upon the Houses, with eight Lords and fifty eight Commoners, were
run down to the Army, there enter into an engagement, bearing date the 4 th of
August, to live and die with it, upon pretense of a force and violence to the
Parliament, but in truth by a Conspiracy with the Army, designed and laid
principally by Mr. Saint John the Solicitor, as appears by a Letter sent from
Rushworth, Sir Thomas Fairfax's Secretary, to the Speaker, with no name in it,
but the latter part of it written with his own hand, advising him not to appear
at the House on Friday morning, but to take counsel of Mr. Solicitor, who
would tell him what was fit to be done, assuring him the Army would all lie in
the dirt or protect them who were their friends. This, as I remember, was the
effect of the Letter, yet remaining in one of the Houses; which, no doubt, came
from Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Mr. Cromwell, and the rest of those Governors
undertaking so for the Army, and shows who was the man that must give the
Orders, and direct what was to be done by the House, and then may well be
supposed to be the Author of all. The ground of this Engagement is made to be a
Declaration of the Armies showing the reasons of their advance toward London,
as full of falsehood as it is of malice against the eleven poor Members, and in
truth intended only against them, who are by it said to be the cause of all
that had been done in the City; that therefore they were resolved to march up
to London, expecting the well affected people of the City would either put us
in safe custody, or deliver us up to them, stuffing up the whole Declaration
with falsehoods and lies, as well in the narrative part as in the comment upon
it; they pretend, That to carry on our former evil designs, and preserve our
selves from the hand of Justice, we had endeavored to cast the Kingdom into a
new War, and to that end had procured an under hand listing of Reformadoes, and
continued a wicked and treasonable Combination, which we caused several persons
to enter into, That this could not be done in the time of the old Commissioners
for the Militia, and therefore the new were made, who many of them were very
intimate with us, which was a just cause for the Army to have them changed
again: That thereupon the tumult was abetted and fomented by us to violate the
Parliament, and force it into our hands, which makes them require that we may
be in that manner delivered up; and declared all that was done in the Houses
that day or afterward, till those fugitive Members should return again, null
and void (so here the Army takes upon it to declare what Votes shall stand
good, what not; and this is for the honor and freedom of the Parliament, that
which those worthy Patriots would live and die upon) And besides, they say they
were laboring after the settlement of the Kingdom, and had even brought it to
perfection, the particular proposals ready to be sent to the Parliament for a
final conclusion of all our troubles; which conclusion of our troubles, in
truth, nothing in the sight of Man could have hindered, but this cursed
practice of violence upon the Parliament, which very thing in them was as
cursed a High Treason as could be committed, a mercenary Army raised by the
Parliament, all of them from the General (except what he may have in
expectation after his Father's death) to the meanest Centinal, not able to make
a thousand Pounds a year Lands, most of the Colonels and Officers mean
Tradesmen, Brewers, Tailors, Goldsmiths, Shoemakers, and the like; a notable
Dunghill, if one would rake into it, to find out their several Pedigrees: these
to rebel against their Masters, put conditions upon them, upon the King and
whole Kingdom, make their Will a Rule, that all the Interests of King,
Parliament, and Kingdom must be squared by, which they are not ashamed to
declare here to the world.

145. And this pious Declaration do these worthy Lords and Commons receive with
much approbation, and with much thankfulness to God in the first place, and
next under him to the ever faithful Army; and so became, like the Proselites
which the Scribes and Pharisees made, twofold more the Children of Hell than
themselves, more criminous, and guilty of a greater Treason, as having broken a
higher Trust, being themselves part of the Parliament which they deserted and
betrayed; a wound given in the more noble and vital parts, tearing the Bowels,
and piercing to the very Heart. Whereas the Army were but Servants, outward and
ministerial parts, so to be looked upon, and so punished; Slaves were
crucified, but Citizens that betrayed were exterminated, they and their
posterity, and the whole City turned into mourning, sensible of the loss as the
Body when deprived of a principal Member.

146. They should have remembered, that even at the time of the pretended force
which they would have men believe to have driven them away, the House lay under
a greater force, and themselves were greater Slaves to the lusts of the Army
which trampled upon their Necks, made them more contemptible than the smallest
Court of Guard that had but a Corporal to command it, to eat their words, their
Declarations, Orders, Ordinances, break their Faith, betray and destroy all
that served them faithfully, give thanks for being cudgel'd and abused, pray
and pay, and be glad it would be accepted; should not every Member have been
sensible of such violations and injuries done to the Body? But some will say it
was as these Men will have it, who were like the sinful lusts in the Soul,
quiet and well pleased, while the strong man the Devil keeps the house: So they
were satisfied with all that was done, because it was according to their Minds,
conducing to their Ends. If it be so, and that they will be Slaves, let them be
Slaves still, for they deserve no better. The Army was the fittest place for
them, as Brutus said of those he took Prisoners at the first Battle of
Philippi, Let them go, says he, they are greater Captives in their own Camp
under Caesar and Anthony than here.

147. They might likewise have considered, that the force upon the Parliament
from the Army, as it was greater, so to have been a more horrid crime, of more
dangerous consequence to the Kingdom, and more destructive to the being of
Parliaments than that from the Apprentices; which is, in my opinion, very
clear. This of the Apprentices being a sudden tumultuary thing of young idle
people without design, and without that obligation; indeed but an effect of the
other, both as following their example, and also as occasioned by the just
offense which they had given the City: whereas the Army was a formed deep laid
design of revenge upon them they called their Enemies, of domination over the
Parliament and Kingdom, carried on both with power and cunning, laying the
foundation of a perpetual Tyranny by a company of hired Servants, that had
received more wages ten times than their work deserved, and now betrayed the
trust reposed in them, rising against their Masters, whose own Swords they
turned upon their breasts, to force them to do most dishonorable, unjust,
infamous actions, deliver up themselves and the Kingdom to their wills. So as
take the act of the Apprentices at the worst, it is ex malis minimum, and that
of those fugitive Members at the best, which is, that they were really under a
force, and under a fear, they did vitare Charibdim incidere in Scyllam, and
leap (as the old Proverb is) out of the Fryingpan into the Fire, wherein they
were unfortunate; and well would it be for them in the day of their accounts if
it were but fortune, but it is too apparent to have been in some of them a
propens'd Malice and detestable Combination.

148. As for what they lay to the eleven Members, with all the aggravations in
that Declaration, I will not answer it as Mr. Nathaniel Fines did Mr. Walker's
Charge against him, to say only thou lie, and quote along the Margin, First,
Second, Third, and Fourth Lie. But this I will say to disprove it, affirming it
upon the word of a Gentleman, and faith of an honest Man (I think I may speak
as much for the whole number) I was not in the City all the time those
businesses were in agitation, knew nothing of the Petitions nor actings in the
Common Council, nothing of the City's engagement, never saw it till two or
three days after it was printed, had not the least thought of the Apprentices
coming down to Westminster, nor notice of it till the very day at eleven of the
Clock when they were already there. We had appointed four days before to meet
that day at dinner at the Bell in Kingstreet, there to even our Reckonings,
because we had made a common Purse for Lawyers Fees and other charges, in
preparing our answer for the House, then to take our leaves one of another,
resolving to go several ways, some beyond Sea, some into the Country. As I was
going into my Coach (there was with me Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William
Waller, Major General Massey, and Mr. Long) one brought us word of the hubbub
at the House, whereupon we resolved not to go, and parted companies upon it;
but presently Sir William Lewis's Footman came to tell us, his Master and Mr.
Nichols were staying for us at the Bell; upon which Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir
William Waller, and my self (who were yet together) went thither, but hearing
more of the disorder about Westminster Hall, we would not stay so much as to
make an end of our Dinners, but presently came away. I mention this particular
because I know they have made a great matter of that meeting, as if it was to
be near hand, to receive information, and send instructions according to
occasion, when we were as innocent of it as any of those who cry out most
against us; nay more, if it be true what is so confidently reported, as I said
before, that there were Independents most busy amongst that unruly multitude.

149. Here we have seen what those worthy Members did at the Army, and upon
what ground, and besides what little reason they had to go away upon the
pretended force, which was a sudden thing, then past, and care taken it should
be no more, and they lying before under a greater force, which they purposely
now ran again into, to continue it the longer upon themselves and the Kingdom.
Now let us see what in the mean time was doing at London.

150. The Houses met according to the adjournment upon Friday the 30 th of
July, some six or sevenscore in the House of Commons, and as great a number of
Lords in their House as of those who went to the Army, but all mute, neither
having their Speaker, for whom they sent about to seek, waiting till they had
certain information how they had disposed of themselves; then they fell into
consideration of what was to be done, and that offered it self, which in truth
was obvious to every man's reason, to choose other Speakers. For the Lords House
there could be no question, it was every day's practice, their Speaker being
but pro tempore, and changeable at pleasure; so they make choice of my Lord
Willoughby of Parham. For the House of Commons, it lay not so above ground,
their Speaker being a settled Officer, made with great Formalities, and not so
moveable at pleasure; but that he cannot be at all removed upon no occasion,
not for misdemeanour (as it is not esteemed for a Speaker to be honest, or to
be so powerful by his compliance with the major or the more active part of the
House, to be born out in his Knaveries, as some have the luck of it) or if he
desert the House as Mr. Lenthal lately did, or be disabled by sickness, or any
other accident, I think no Man will say. For then what Act of continuance will
be of avail to keep up the Parliament, since it would depend upon the will of
one Man, or the uncertainty of his health, to frustrate all such provisions,
and at any time to set a period to a Parliament?

151. Therefore they proceed to the choice of their Speaker, and pitch upon Mr.
Henry Pelham, who, according to the custom, is presented at the Lords House
Bar, brought in by my Lord of Pembrook in his Robes, and there received.

152. They then go on upon the business of the House, take into consideration
the Letter spoken of sent by Rushworth to Mr. Lenthal the late Speaker, which
discovered the intention of the Army to march up against the City; whereupon
they order a Letter to be written to the General, signifying in what quietness
they sat, and that therefore he should not advance his Quarters any nearer.

153. They afterward order the eleven Members to come and give their
attendance, who were presently sent for, and some others that had been forced
by the Army to forbear the House.

154. For amongst other enormous proceedings of the Army, one was, upon
pretense that some sat there who had born Arms against the Parliament, or
abetted the other side, they make the House enjoin some Gentlemen to present a
state of their Case upon certain Votes then passed, which put an incapacity
upon such as were comprehended in them under a heavy penalty if they forbore
not the House of themselves, so compelling them either to accuse themselves
against all rule of Justice, and the very law of Nature, undergoing the
greatest hazard that could be; for if they failed in a tittle, as very well one
might in a thing done three or four years before, or that any Knave would come
and swear something against him, they underwent the penalty, or else to deprive
themselves of their rights of sitting in the House, and so the Town or County
which had chosen him lose the service of their Burgess or Knight; indeed this
was a heinous villainy, but they are guilty of so many that one drowns another.

155. They pass a Vote, that the King may be humbly desired to come to his own
house at Richmond, that so the Houses of Parliament and Commissioners of
Scotland might have access to him, to propose what was necessary for settling
the Peace of the Kingdom, himself be in a place of safety out of the hands and
power of the Army, whose fair shows toward him they had cause to suspect to be
no other than the kisses of Judas, to betray and ruin both him and the Kingdom:
and accordingly Messengers were sent to attend him with it, but the Army
frustrated all those endeavors.

156. Some other things were passed that day, and lest the Parliament should be
wanting to it self in doing what was possible for its defense and the Citys, in
case the Army should not stop upon their Letter, the Committee of Safety is
revived, and ordered, as before, to join with the Militia, and provide for
their protection; and all but need, for Sir Thomas Fairfax and his two Councils
of War, the Members and the Officers, would not vouchsafe to read the Letter,
but march on Rabshekah like, threatening ruin and destruction; yet was there no
such thought toward them, our End being not vim infer, but repellere, get
such a strength about us as might only defend, not offend. To that end those
Forces which were quartered further off in Kent and Surrey, as Sir Robert Pye's
Company, Colonel Graves's, and some others, were commanded to draw near the
City, not offering or intending any act of hostility, when upon a sudden, the
Sunday morning the 2 d of August, a Party of Horse, about two Regiments,
commanded, as I take it, by one Desborough a Major, fell into Deptford, where
were some half a score of Sir Robert Pye's Soldiers who had staid behind the
rest to discharge the Quarters, and most inhumanly and basely butchered those
poor Men as many as they could light of, killing besides any that looked like a
Soldier whom they found upon the way, some within a stones cast of the works of
Southwark. This, as it was a most barbarous and bloody Murder (which will bring
down vengeance upon their heads soon or late, that tho they should escape the
hand of Justice here, the hand of God will certainly overtake them) so did it
something awaken the City to see their own danger, and a little quicken their
pace to draw the Ordnance upon their Works, and man them something better; but
in truth not much. For I may say they were a people prepared for ruin and
slavery, Gibbs and Fowks principally had bewitched them; and Agents for the
Army who were up and down, weakened Men's hearts and hands, so as nothing was
done to any purpose for putting them into a way of safety, or possibility of
deliverance. All were desirous equally of Peace, but not all equally afraid of
Danger; those who feared it most were the greatest cause of it: and some good
well meaning Men of the Assembly, Mr. Herbert Palmer and others, whom Mr.
Marshal had wrought upon and persuaded to come to the Houses first, as being
Ministers and Ambassadors of Peace, to persuade to Peace, and then to the
Common Council to do the like to them; which did but dishearten and discourage
those who were apt enough to fear, being not so fully ready to resist a power
that was coming upon them, and did hinder the preparations. To say the truth
all was done that could be to hinder and little to help. Insomuch as at that
very time when the Army was marching up for their destruction, about 49000 l.
which had formerly been ordered to be sent down for the Army's drawing off
further from the City, could not be privily conveyed out of Town by Sir John
Wollaston, and some others, in which Mr. Scawen and Mr. Allen Members of the
House, had a principal hand, which was as great a blow to Parliament and City
as could be given; for it served to keep the Soldiers together, and unite them
for marching up, whereas before there were high discontents amongst them, and
it weakened us, even taking away so much of our blood, that which at that time
we principally stood in need of.

157. The Parliament did all that could be desired, yet still with a resolution
to endeavor the ways of preventing extremities. Those Commissioners of theirs
who were at the Army had in a manner disavowed them, for never any thing came
from them to the Houses; and Mr. Skippon, when the City sent to him to come and
take the conduct and management of their business, a duty they might very well
have expected from him, he was so far from performing it as he absolutely
refused except he might have an assurance from the Parliament, and from them,
to return again to the Army if he liked not his conditions, which was a great
ingratitude to those who had deserved so well of him, and an unworthy
compliance with them who had formerly neglected him.

158. A Message was resolved upon to be sent to the Army, to see if they could
be stopped from coming in that manner to endanger putting all into blood; Mr.
Swifen and Mr. Ashurst as I remember were nominated, the rest I have forgot.
The like was also prepared in the City, and more quickly executed; upon Tuesday
Alderman Gibbs, Mr. Noel, and some other Aldermen and Common Councilmen were
appointed to go with it. And they soon returned, not with an Olive branch, but
with a heavy doom to the honor of the City, freedom of the Parliament, and
safety of the poor eleven Members in the first place, and next of all that had
engaged in the defense of the City. The Keys of the City (if I misremember not)
must be delivered to his Excellency, all the Works from the Thames side to
Islington Fort demolisht, the eleven Members secured or given up, and all the
Reformados and Officers likewise who were ready to have fought for them. This
was as worthily by the Common Council yielded to, their Ambassadors notably
promoting it. The eleven Members were not yet seized nor delivered, but as bad,
left to shift for themselves, no care at all taken for their preservation, tho
the City had now this last time wholly embarked in their trouble, and engaged
them in their business, petitioning the House of Commons to enjoin them to
attend the Service of the House, themselves not at all moving in, or desiring
it: Nay, they did not so much as provide for Major General Massey, whom they
had made their Commander in chief; but like Isachar bowed under the Burden,
betrayed themselves and all that had to do with them.

159. Here was an end of the Parliament, and in truth of the C^^y, all whose
Glory is laid in the ^ust; and as it was high before in reputation both at home
and abroad, so is it now become a hissing and reproach to all that see it or
hear of it. The next day Sir Thomas Fairfax sends to take possession, and the
day after that marches in state, bringing with him those deserting Lords and
Commons, and the Earl of Manchester and Mr. Lenthal, the two pretended
Speakers, not vouchsafing to look upon the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, who were
there with the Recorder, provided with a Speech for his entertainment, which he
did not so well deserve, as they did that scorn then put upon them.

160. He goes strait to the Houses, put those two Men in the Speakers places,
who had no more right to them than himself, and has ever since continued them
there by force, and keeping out the true Speakers; which the Lord Willoughby is
to the Peers (that House being under an adjournment, and not sitting when the
Intruder came in, so not in a capacity to admit him) and Mr. Pelham to the
Commons, who had been legally chosen when the House was free and under no
force; the other having deserted, which is of all Crimes the greatest.

161. So as without him it is no House, but an Assembly of Men acting under the
Army without lawful authority; some of them by a combination and agreement with
the Army, but far the greater part by a terror and an awe from it, and
therefore to be looked upon accordingly; and questionless many of them
continuing there out of a good intent, like so many Hushais, only to defeat the
pernicious Counsels of those Achitophels who had designed the destruction of
David, the ruin of honest Men, and even the trouble and confusion of the whole
Israel of God, Church and State. These are so far from deserving thereby either
to become the object of blame or pardon, as they merit exceedingly, are worthy
the praise both of present and future times; but to be considered rather as
faithful Patriots, that act out of necessity in an extraordinary way, stand in
the Gap to keep off mischief, than as Members of Parliament able or indeed
qualified to exercise any parliamentary Power for the good of the Kingdom; the
House having been disturbed, and for the time suppressed by a real Force, not
feigned and imaginary as the other was; and while this force continues, not
suffered to come together, but as soon as it ceases will return of it self to
be as it was before.

162. For there is a difference between these two Cases, one the Parliaments
acting under a force, remaining still to be a Parliament, which dos not annual
it, nor the Acts it dos; but makes them fit to be repealed, yet standing good
pro tempore.

163. Many of our best Laws have been so made (when Armies have been on foot)
and afterward declared good in a free Parliament; and what then done did
appear to be inconvenient and unjust, was by subsequent Parliaments repealed.
So is it fit that what was compelled to be done by the Apprentices and others in
that tumultuous way, the Monday that the force was, should be repealed, as not
fit to be continued. And so all that has been done a great while, under the
power and force of the Army, since it first rebel'd and gave Laws to the
Parliament, is as fit, if not more, to be hereafter repealed; and questionless
will, if ever the Parliament come to be free again. Nay, even these pretenders
do us that right, as finding the proceedings of the Parliament after their
desertion not suitable to their Ends, but against them, by an Ordinance to
repeal and declare them null; which otherwise had not been needful, seeing they
would fall of themselves, being Crimes in their own nature as proceeding from
an usurped Authority. This is one case; the other is, when a force proceeds so
far and so high as not to suffer a Parliament to be, gives it such a wound as
for the time it cannot act, but must cease, even as a wounded Body that lies in
a Trance without sense or motion: But when that force is over, and the Spirits
recollected, it returns to it self to do the functions of life, move and act as
formerly. It is but like a Parenthesis in a Sentence, and remains one and the
same as if the Parenthesis were not at all.

164. But to return where I left. This General, a setter up and puller down of
Parliaments, has a Chair set him in either House, where first in the Lords
House, then in the Commons, those pretended Speakers make Speeches to him,
giving him thanks for all, approving his Declaration of the Reasons of his
coming to London, desiring him to go on in taking care for the security of the
Kingdom, and to appoint a Guard for the Parliament. Than which there was never
any thing more base; but Mr. Lenthal exceeded, being both base and profane,
applying a Higgaior Selah to this last act of his Excellency, who as wisely
took it. Then that the profaneness might be complete, and God mocked as well as
Men abused, they appoint the Thursday after for a day of Thanksgiving, and
fitted it with Preachers, Mr. Marshal and Mr. Nigh, Simeon and Levi, where they
say Marshal outwent all that had gone before him, and his Brother Nigh was a
modest Presbyterian in comparison of him; but that Apostate went beyond Ela,
making this deliverance a greater one than the Gunpowder Treason, as I have
been credibly informed by those that heard him. And some few days after, Sir
Thomas Fairfax and the whole Army marched in triumph with Laurel in their Hats
as Conquerors, through the subdued City of London, to show it was at his mercy;
which was an airy vanity I confess above my understanding, and might have
raised a spirit of Indignation, not so easily to have been laid. But a higher
insolency of an Army composed of so mean people, and a more patient humble
submission and bearing of a great and populous City, but a little before so
full of honor and greatness, was, I think, never heard of.

165. And now the Houses fall to voting, the Lords leading the way, and
outdoing the Commons, as much as Mr. Lenthal outdid the Earl of Manchester in
the Thanksgiving, or Mr. Marshal did Mr. Nigh in the thanksgiving Sermon. They
make Sir Thomas Fairfax Generalissimo, Commander in chief of all the Forces in
the Kingdom, and Constable of the Tower, otherwise signifying Mr. Oliver
Cromwell, of whom Sir Thomas was the shadow; they thank his Excellency over
again for his care of the safety of the City and Parliament, Risum teneatis
amici; leave it wholly to him to appoint what Guards he thinks fit for their
security, Sed quis custodiet custodes? give a months Pay for a gratuity to the
Army for their many good Services, which is praemium nequitiae; then set up the
Star Chamber, the High Commission, the Spanish Inquisition, in one Committee of
ten Lords and twenty Commoners (read over but their names, and you will swear
it, except for four of the Commoners, who are very unequally yoked, sixteen
against them) to sit in the painted Chamber de die in diem, to examine the
business of the Mutiny, and of forcing the Houses.

166. So far the Lords lead and the Commons follow; but in another Vote they go
by themselves a good while, that all things done by the Members since as they
injuriously and falsely pretend) the Speakers and other Members were driven away
from the Parliament, be annulled, and of no effect, and declared to have been
so at the making thereof. The Commons cannot agree to this, but put off the
debare to another time. Some sense of honor there was amongst them, and of the
dangerous consequence of such a Vote, besides the unreasonableness and
injustice, taking away the Authority by which those Votes were made, and so
exposing to question and ruin all such as were at the passing of them, or had
acted by them. Many days debates were spent upon it, but it could not be
carried the House of Commons would be a House of Commons still; and as they
represent the people of England, so assert their Liberties, if they were left
to themselves, and not overaw'd by the power of the Army.

167. Therefore the Agitators must to work again with an humble Address to his
Excellency, and some Proposals on behalf of the Kingdom and the Army: First,
That all those that have fat at Westminster, usurping a parliamentary
Authority, since the forcible expulsion of the Parliament, may immediately be
excluded the House. Secondly, That those Members who have adhered to that
pretended Parliament, may be also excluded under a penalty if they presume to
sit. Thirdly, That all former Votes against disaffected Members may be put in
execution. And this is to make a free Parliament, for those Rogues to determine
who shall sit, who shall not, and how they shall be punished who disobey them.
These Lords and Commoners deserve well of Parliament and Kingdom, that ran away
from the Parliament, and went to the Army for this.

168. Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Council of War answer presently, for it is but
a Song of two parts, making one harmony, all set by the same hand. A
Remonstrance is forthwith produced and sent to both Houses the 18 th of August,
a sorrowful Ditty for the poor House of Commons, which tells them plainly,
after a long deduction of all passages, just lying over the same Lies again,
That those Members which sat during the absence of the Speakers, are guilty of
the prosecution and maintenance of the said treasonable engagement and
violence, and therefore must not be their Judges (but their adverse Party shall
be theirs, which is Army Justice) That they might have been made Prisoners of
War; wherefore they protest and declare, if they hereafter intrude themselves
to sit in Parliament, they can no longer suffer it, but will take some speedy
effectual course, that both they and others guilty of the same practices may be
brought to condign punishment.

169. And they back this Remonstrance (for which the Lords return a Letter of
approbation and great thanks to his Excellency for his continued care of the
honor and freedom of Parliament) with a Party of a thousand Horse drawn up to
Hide-Park; Cromwell and Ireton making menacing Speeches in the House, and Guards
out of the Army besetting the doors and avenues. By all which means, and the
terror of their surly impeaching looks (as some of the Pamphleteers observe it)
many of the Members were driven away, and the poor House forced the 20 th of
August, to pass the Ordinance for declaring all Votes, Orders, and Ordinances,
made in one or both Houses from July 26 till August 6, null and void. And now
they are a free Parliament, or as Haslerig told them the next day after the
eleven Members were withdrawn, a glorious Parliament, in truth no Parliament,
but they are what Mr. Cromwell will have them to be.

170. Then they lay about them, impeach seven Lords of High Treason, sparing
only my Lord of Pembrook. They proceed against some of their own Members,
suspend Mr. Bainton, put Commissary Copley and Mr. Recorder out of the House,
whom they commit to the Tower for high Misdemeanors, expel likewise Sir John
Maynard, and send him to the Tower. The rest of the eleven Members upon the
City's delivering up it self and the Parliament to the will of the Army, having
sent for their Passes which the House had ordered and upon them withdrawn
themselves into foreign parts, the Lord Mayor and some of the Aldermen were
likewise imprisoned in the Tower, and charged with Treason: And all honest Men
persecuted, threatened, and therefore fled and scattered, some one way and some
another; and these are the effects of a free Parliament.

171. The Lieutenant of the Tower, Colonel West, an honest and gallant Man,
after he had been at charge to treat and entertain Sir Thomas Fairfax, coming
to take possession of his Place as Constable, was by that worthy General, by
way of thankfulness for his good entertainment, turned out: And an Independent,
one Tichburn a Linen Draper, put in, which was done with so much insolency and
scorn of the City, as when his favorite Alderman Gibbs had prepared a long
winded Speech in the name of the City, who craved it as a Boon and Act of
Grace, that he would keep in the old Lieutenant, he cut him off short, and bid
him speak no more of it. Indeed it had been against his Instructions, and the
Maxim of his Master Cromwell and all that faction, which is to suffer none in
any power save such as are theirs Body and Soul, and put all others out.

172. So Colonel Pointz was seized upon, and by force fetched out of his
Command in the North; Major General Massey must not continue in his of the
West; Captain Patten turned out of his Vice Admiralship, and Rainsborough put
in; Colonel Carne out of the Government of the Isle of Wight, and Hammond in
his room. The Self-denying Ordinance was a trick for this purpose. In the
beginning of these troubles Sir William Lewis not agreeing with their Palate,
being Governor of Portsmouth, they make the Earl of Essex, who was then
General, send for him, upon a supposition that he was a favourer of Malignants,
and of many other things; which being examined by the Committee of Safety, he
gave so good an account of himself, as the Committee could not do less than
write a Letter in his justification to the General, leaving it to him to repair
him as he thought fit. Then some of these honest Men, who themselves had
subscribed to it, sent a Letter privately to my Lord of Essex, by which they
advised his not sending him back to Portsmouth; which juggling of theirs he
received with indignation, and wished Sir William Lewis to return to his
Command: but he seeing what Men he had to deal with, quitted the Employment;
and to say the truth, he only can be happy who has nothing to do with them,
except it be in punishing them according to their demerits.

173. They have now they think both Houses to their minds, ready to do
whatsoever they please. Accordingly the House of Commons orders those of the
eleven Members, who were beyond Sea upon their Passes, which gave them liberty
of traveling six Months, to appear the 16 th of October, taking no course to
have them summoned, only notice to be given at their Houses, or places of their
last abode, where few of us had any Servants, my self only an old Porter and a
Maid or two.

174. Then they go on to the public business, such work as the Army had cut
out for them. Which were certain Proposals that Sir Thomas Fairfax and the
Council of War had sent them the 1 st of August, signed by John Rushworth
Secretary, now far above John Brown and Henry Elsing. In these they (...) down
a new platform of Government, an Vtopia of their own, take upon them to alter
all, give Rules to all, cajole the King, claw with the people, cheat both,
never intending good to either. The reading of the Articles themselves which
are in print will satisfy every body; they need no Comment, and are so many,
and of so vast a comprehension, as to treat of them all, to show the
absurdities, contradictions, impossibilities, unreasonableness, which many of
them contain, would swell this to too big a Volume. I will only speak to some
few, and show how they dissolve the whole frame of this Monarchy, taking a
sunder every part, pulling out every pin and new making it. First, The
constitutions and proceedings of Parliaments, projecting new things for their
beginnings, continuances, and endings, for the elections of Members, privileges
and customs of the Houses, which they had violated before de facto, but now
must be altered de jure. The Militia of the Kingdom, where they will have a
General appointed to command it, Pay settled to maintain it, a Council of State
to superintend it, which signifies to establish by Act of Parliament this holy
Army, the Council of War, and General Cromwell. Then matters of the Church,
where they will have no power exercised to preserve Religion and Piety; they
would have Bishops so they may be just Ciphers, and all Acts to be repealed,
which hinder Men from being Atheists or Independents; for no body must be
enjoined to come to the Church, and there may be Meetings to practice any thing
of superstition and folly, the Covenant must be laid aside. In sum, it is to
take away all Government and set up Independency. They propose a new way for
making grand Jurymen, Justices of Peace, and Sheriffs. When these and many
other things which they mention are settled, which will take up time enough,
then the King, Queen, and Royal Issue to be restored, which is as much as just
nothing. Next they make the people believe they do as great matters for them,
will have a liberty of petitioning, which is but to make way for schismatical
seditious Petitions; for if any Petition stick at their Diana, none so fierce
to punish. Who more than they against all the Petitions from London and the
Counties for disbanding of the Army, and complaining of their factious ways?
how eager were they against the Petitions promoted in the City in the
beginning, for which Benion was fined, and many troubled; and some Petitions
out of Kent, for which some Gentlemen were committed? How barbarously did they
fall upon some poor women which came one time to Westminster petitioning for
Peace, commanding a Troop of Horse to run over them, the Trained Bands to shoot
at them, whereby many were wounded and some killed? Yet the world must think
they will have it free for all to petition. Then they will have the Excise
taken off from some Commodities whereon the poor people live, and a time
limited for taking off the whole; which was but to please and amuse them till
they had got the mastery of those who they thought stood in their way: but
being Masters themselves, they soon sent out a Command (more now than any
Proclamation or Ordinance) to forbid all Soldiers any way to interrupt the
levying of the Excise, orany other Tax charged by the Parliament, which they
had made merely instrumental to poll the people for the support of them and
their Faction. They will have no Tithes to be paid, and so Ministers to be
starved for in truth they would have no Ministers at all, or rather no
Ministry; like Julian the Apostate, take away presbyterium not presbyteros:
for Ministers that will be subservient to them, like Mr. Marshal, shall be much
made of. The rules and course of Law must be reduced; indeed they will need no
Law, for they will rule by the Sword, and the Councils of War shall supply all
Courts of Justice. Prisoners for debt, if they have not wherewith to pay, must
be freed; so we may be sure few debts shall be satisfied, for it is an easy
thing so to convey or conceal an Estate, as nothing visible will be left for
doing right to Creditors. None must be compelled to answer to questions tending
to the accusing themselves or their nearest Relations in criminal Causes,
witness their Orders to make men under great Penalties state their Case in no
less matter than Treason; therefore this is understood to extend only to the
privilege of their own Faction. We must alter all Statutes and Customs of
Corporations, and of imposing Oaths which may be construed to the molestation
of religious people, that is, Independents, for all others are Greeks and
Barbarians. Yet these men, in how many Letters and Declarations do they say and
protest, they have no thought of setting up Independency, nor to meddle with
any thing but what concerns the Soldiery, and leave all the rest to the wisdom
of the Parliament. Indeed they conclude their Proposals with what concerns the
Soldiery: That provision may be made for payment of Arrears to the Army, and
the rest of the Soldiers of the Kingdom who have concurred with them in their
late proceedings: and in the next place, of the public debts and damages of
the Kingdom, which they have taken a course that the Parliament shall never
satisfy, having caused such a debt to the Soldiers, and so insupportable a
charge for the maintenance of the Army, which is to be satisfied in the first
place before other debts to the rest of the Kingdom, that the Subject is not
able to bear it, but is utterly ruined.

175. To some of these Heads they say they will offer some speedy particulars
in the nature of Rules, of good use to the public: Rules indeed, from which,
and from the Rulers, good Lord deliver us. But here you see they compile a work
like the second part of Solomon's, treating from the Cedar in Lebanon to the
Hysop on the Wall; of all degrees and conditions, from the King that should be
on the Throne to the Beggar in Prison. And since they have brought both ends
together, so now we have a free Parliament and a free Kingdom.

176. Every day produces some effects of their tyranny and power, like another
Africa, some Monster, tho they were not without their difficulties to wrestle
with and overcome. For to bring so absolute a Bondage upon a people that was
free before, could not be without many heats and colds. They had the King to
deal with, whom they must in some measure satisfy and persuade that they had
good intentions for him, to restore and maintain him in a power and dignity
suitable to his Royal Person and Office, from which the truth and bottom of
their design did differ toto coelo: they had the King's Party, whom they must
entertain in hopes and expectation, and then cozen; they had the Parliament
which must be kept under, brought to obedience, and a total subservience to
their will and command. They had the generality of the people, who were for
Government and Monarchy founded upon Peace (as they had reason) desirous to be
eased of their Burdens and Taxes, with hopes whereof the Army had fed them, but
it stood not with their Interest to procure it them. They had lastly their own
faction which troubled them most of all, being violent, impatient, not to be
gained to go the pace of their Grandees, and wait the revolutions of time,
which they desired might have taken place, for the same things to be effected
which even those headstrong furious people coveted, but with more ease,
advantage, and greatness to themselves.

177. For they apprehended it very dangerous to fall presently upon his Majesty
and break with him, seeing the inclinations of the people toward him, and he
at liberty for all persons to have access unto him, whom he might confer with,
inform, and dispose according to occasion, perhaps take some resolutions which
they apprehended might turn to their prejudice. Besides, they knew not how the
Scottish Nation might then declare and engage, which with the help of those whom
they had already discontented by their injustice and oppression in the
execution of their particular malice and revenge, and those whom they should
discontent by frustrating their expectation, having born them in hand with
hopes of Peace and freedom from Taxes, must needs have given a great
interruption to their proceedings, and even shake the foundation of their whole
design; therefore they must work in another way, make his Majesty believe they
will do great things for him, so to receive rather an advantage than hinderance
from his influence upon the affections of the Kingdom. To this end were all
those applications to him by Cromwell, Ireton, and the rest of their Creatures
and Instruments, in framing of the proposals, appearing for his interest in the
House, seeming to desire his restitution, being now turned absolute Courtiers.
They knew it would at last come all to one with that which they have since done
to him. For, coming to a settlement with his concurrence, they had the power,
he but vanam imaginem; and what of luster and quietness had been contributed by
his Majesty's conjunction, would but have served to have confirmed and
heightened their authority, all had been but Stilts to raise them above the
rest of the Kingdom and himself likewise; so as it had been in their power (as
well as we are sure it had been in their will) to destroy him afterward, he
should have only been a little longer reprieved, as Ulysses was by Polyphemus
to be devoured at last.

178. But the Party would not give way to this; hatred to the King, envy and
jealousies against their aspiring Leaders, and a violent desire of having the
work done at once, lay all persons and things level on the sudden, bring forth
their monstrous conceptions all at one birth, made them break out, fly in
their faces, discover many of their villainies, and, as appears by that business
of Lilburn and Wildman, even resolve to take Cromwell out of the way, and murder
him for an Apostate.

179. When Cromwell, Ireton, and the rest saw this, and that this madness of the
inferior sort of their Disciples, which had formerly raised them, supported
them, and lately given them the advantage of their Enemies, victory over the
Parliament, and a superiority over all the Kingdom, would now be their ruin, if
either they closed thoroughly with the King (for then their Party would forsake
them, turn against them, and they knew they had so well merited of King and
Kingdom, as not to expect to be preserved in greatness, either for honesty or
abilities) or if the King continued at liberty at Hampton Court, or any other
place, where freedom of resort might be to him, and opportunities taken and
improved to meet with and prevent all their attempts, that then it would be
impossible to carry on their business in an open and declared way of violence
against him. They saw a necessity of removing him, and making sure his person;
that done, they thought they might be bold to do and say what they would, and
own a second time the actings and resolutions of the Agitators.

180. The difficulty was how to bring this about, to cozen the King so as to
make him act it himself, and fly into the Cage; carry him by force they durst
not, it would be unhandsom, it might be dangerous: They use this stratagem,
heighten and sharpen underhand the mad humor of their Party against him, to
have it break out all manner of ways, in threatening Speeches, Pamphlets; some
consultations that whilst his Majesty lived in England he could not be safe;
meetings to consider and come to some resolutions of taking him out of the way:
the Army is again disquiet, the Officers not obeyed, all things tending to
mutiny, and some violent eruption. Then dos Mr. Cromwell and his Cabinet Council
seem to be extremely solicitous of the safety of his Majesty's person, cause
some discoveries to be given him of his danger, express great indignation and
trouble in the House, in the Army, and other places against these proceedings,
act their parts so to the life, as the Life of a Man must go to make up the
disguise: an Agitator whom at a Council of War, with two more, they condemned,
was shot to death; so as the King could not but have a great confidence in
these Men to believe that they were really for his preservation. At last
Cromwell writes a Letter to Whalley (who commands the Guards about his Majesty's
Person) to be shown his Majesty; and other informations are likewise brought
him, to make him believe that if he escaped not presently he will be murdered;
and he is advised to go to the Isle of Wight, where they had beforehand
provided him a Jailer, Colonel Hammond, one for whom they said they could
answer, that there his Majesty would be in safety, and they able to serve him.

181. Here they have the King safe enough, and now the Army is presently quiet,
the Agitators as obedient as Lambs, and Councils of War are set up again to act
as formerly. And Sir Thomas Fairfax, with their advice, sets out a Remonstrance
to give satisfaction to the Army, which he concludes with a Protestation, to
adhere to, conduct, live and die with the Army in the prosecution of some
things there expressed; as namely, To obtain a present provision for constant
Pay, stating of Accounts, security for Arrears, with an effectual and speedy
course to raise Moneys, a period to be set to this Parliament, provision for
future Parliaments, the certainty of their meeting, sitting, and ending, the
freedom and equality of Elections, and other things which he had the impudence
and boldness to publish in print.

182. And now instead of the Proposals, they intend to send the four Bills to
his Majesty to sign, which done, they would treat with him. By these Bills the
Army was to be established, which was the English of that for the Militia; and
by another of them they would make sure, that the countenance of the Parliament
and the acting of the Army should never be separated; which was the intent of
that for power of adjourning. So as if at any time the just sense of
Indignation, of so many Indignities and Injuries offered by the Army to all
ranks of Men, Magistrates both supreme and subordinate, people of all
conditions and degrees should stir them up to some endeavors of casting off
this iron Yoke; their Party in Parliament, with their Speaker Mr. Lenthal's
help, should presently be ready to adjourn to the Army, then damn and destroy
all the world by color of Law and power of the Sword; so King and Kingdom must
be subject to a perpetual slavery by Act of Parliament.

183. The Scots were laid aside in this Address to his Majesty, contrary to the
Treaty, and contrary to the Covenant. By the Treaty there ought to have been no
application for Peace but with their advice and consent; here the Scots did not
only not advise nor consent, but protest against it. By the Covenant all were
bound to keep united, firm and close one to another, not to suffer themselves
to be divided; here these Men do divide from the whole Kingdom of Scotland,
make a rent and breach between the Kingdoms in settling of the Peace, the very
end both of Treaty and Covenant.

184. And for that subterfuge, that it is against the privilege of Parliament
that any out of the Houses should interpose, or have any thing to do with
Bills, it is a mere cavil, Fig Leaves which cover not their nakedness; for that
would have been no more against Privilege, than was the whole transaction of
business in carrying on of the War, and managing other great concernments of
Parliament and Kingdom, wherein the Scots all along were admitted to
participate in Counsel and Interest.

185. The King refusing to sign these Bills, Hammond, by Sir Thomas Fairfax's
single order, claps him up a Prisoner, removes all his Servants. It seems by
this time they had forgot their Remonstrance of the 23 d of June, where they
say it is against their principles to imprison the King, and that there can be
no Peace without due consideration of his Majesty's Rights: But then was then,
and now is now. It was then necessary for the good of their Affairs to seem
gracious, desirous of Peace, and of restoring the King. Now they appear in
their own colors, their nature having no restraint; nay, Sir Thomas Fairfax's
Command is so absolute and sacred, as Captain Burley was hanged for
endeavoring to oppose it, there being at that time no other pretense for his
Majesty's Imprisonment, but because Sir Thomas Fairfax had commanded it: it is
true, that upon his signification to the Houses of what he had done, it was
approved of and confirmed.

186. All this while a rigorous hand is continued against the impeached Lords
who were under the Black Rod, the Gentlemen of the House of Commons, the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen in the Tower, who had been kept Prisoners so many Months,
upon a general Impeachment, and no particular Charge against them. It was often
endeavored in the House to have passed the Articles which were brought in
against the Lord Willoughby, to be a leading Case to the rest. Where I cannot
pass by, that I find he is charged with Treason for levying War against the
King, and this done by the same persons that imprison the King, and had hanged
Burley for levying War for him: One may see they will find matter to hang on
all hands. Many debates were had on this business, and at last it was resolved
to lay the Articles aside.

187. The seven Lords still pressed for their Trial, the House of Peers as
often sent down to the House of Commons to give them notice of it; and no
Charge coming up, they set them at liberty. The Common Council likewise
petitioned for the liberty of their Members in the Tower; which the Army took
so heinously, as that and the laying aside of the Charge against the Lord
Willoughby, together with a Vote which had passed for disbanding the
supernumerary Forces, produce a thundering Remonstrance of December the 7 th,
casting in the Parliaments teeth their delays and neglects: That the Army had
with patience waited four Months upon them: That finding such obstructions in
matters of supply, and such unworthy requital, they apprehended God upbraids
their care to preserve a people given up to their own destruction: That they
could, to speak Amen, with the power and advantages God had put into their
hands (for so is their expression) have put the Army and other Forces engaged
with it into such a posture as to have assured themselves of Pay, and made
their opposers have followed them with offers of satisfaction: That now all
business seems to be wrapped up in one bare Vote, That all supernumery Forces
should be disbanded, which Vote they say they cannot imagine to be absolute and
sovereign: They offer as their final advice, that 40000 l. more per mensem be
added to the 60000 l. that is in all 100000 l. a Month. That for the more sure
and ready payment, the Force^ may be immediately assigned to several Counties,
out of whose Taxes they shall be paid, and the General have power to make those
distributions. And many things more they offer, or rather order for the payment
of the Soldiers so peremptorily, as if it be not granted and passed effectually
by the end of that present week, they say they can give no longer account of
the Army in a regular way; but if they find not satisfaction in their
judgments, must take some extraordinary ways of power. Then they come and vent
their malice against the City, of which they say they have been so tender;
witness their carriage in their late advance toward it, notwithstanding
provocations, their innocent march through it, their patient waiting for their
long due Arrears. But now Justice forces them to desire that (the adjacent
Counties being undone, and the whole Kingdom groaning under the oppressions of
free Quarter, whilst the City, which occasions all, is free of it) there be no
longer stop to the drawing thither of the Army: That besides levying the arrear
of the Tax, it make reparation to the parts adjacent of 100000 l. damage: That
if they be necessitated or called on by the County, they must on their behalf
demand of the City to the full: They earnestly desire that the proceedings
against the Citizens and others impeached may be hastened, and that out of
their Fines and Confiscations some part of reparation be made to the Country.
Then they say they see not how the Parliament can sit in safety in the Army
should never so little withdraw, when they find the Common Council, through the
Parliament and Army's lenity, take the boldness already, in the face of both,
to intercede for the release and acquittal, or rather justification of those
impeached Persons, who are but fellow Delinquents to most of that Council: That
the consideration of this, and the renewed confidence of Mr. Gwin, and other
Members, partakers in the same things, who presume to sit in the House, makes
them fear, that through lenity and moderation, so much of the same Leven is
left behind, as even the worst of the eleven Members (notwithstanding their
double Crimes) may be again called for in, unless the House by some exclusive
resolutions and proceedings do timely prevent the same.

188. Indeed these are gracious Princes, full of lenity and moderation, by
their own sayings; but they dwell by ill Neighbors, that they must commend
themselves, for no body else will do it. The Parliament is beholden to them,
they tell them their faults, bid them not trust so much to their Votes, which
are not absolute nor sovereign; let them know what is their duty to do, and
give a short day to perform it in, lest they should be idle, and a worse thing
fall upon them. The Country is beholden to them, who now know the worst of it;
100000 l. to be monthly raised to ease them of Taxes, and the Excise according
to promise: but then they have to help them, reparation from the City for
former damages, and the persons appointed out of whose Estates it must be paid
by way of Fine or Confiscation, whether they prove guilty or no; and they are
not wanting in their expressions to the City of their tenderness of it,
wherefore they give good instance, coming against it with Banners displayed,
Horse and Foot armed, Cannon laden, and only take possession of their Works
and of the Tower, change their Militia, take from them Westminster and
Southwark, commit their Mayor and principal Aldermen, yet doing the City no
hurt (like the Friar in Chaucer, who would have but of the Capon the Liver, and
of a Pig the head, yet nothing for him should be dead) then marching through it
so innocently, only putting that scorn upon them which none of their Kings ever
did when most provoked; that to have endured a plundering had been more
honorable: Then waited so patiently for their Arrears, when they had a great
part of the 200000 l. which the City had lent for their disbanding, had taken
that Money, yet would not disband, and destroyed Trade by their late Rebellion;
and now having so long lain upon free quarter all about, that they had made
Provisions excessive dear, and almost famished the City, to express a desire to
come and quarter in it, which sure was for their good, only Justice made them
move they should pay 100000 l. for reparation to the Country; that their best
Members, greatest Aldermen, and others, and their Lord Mayor, whom they had
caused to be unjustly committed, should be as unjustly fined and ruined; and
then charge so honorable a Court as the Common Council with Treason.

189. Then for the eleven Members, how much they are beholden to them is beyond
expression, all their Remonstrances, as well as this make it appear; here they
desired only they might have a Writ of ease from attending the Parliament any
more, out of their abounding care for the freedom of Parliaments, and the free
sitting and voting of the Members.

190. And they will be sure to have all put in execution, the refractory House
of Commons shall make them wait no longer. A Regiment or two of Foot march and
quarter in White Hall, as many Horse in the Mews (they having provided another
Lodging for the King, therefore making bold with his Majesty's House) and then
they think they can take a course both with the Parliament and City; which in
truth they do full handsomely.

191. For presently they make them resume the consideration of the Charge
against the Lord Willoughby, and pass it, and likewise against the rest of
those Lords, and Sir John Maynard; carry it up to the House of Lords, and
demand the recommitting of those Lords, and putting them to their answer. Sir
Arthur Haslerig, the now worthy Governor of Newcastle, staid in town from going
to take possession of his Command, only to do this feat; so to make good what
he before said, when they could not upon a long debate, and the laying out of
all their strength and power, carry the Impeachment, that it was no matter, the
Army should impeach them all.

192. A little after the Lord Gray of Groby sets on foot the motion concerning
those of the eleven Members who were beyond Sea, having had Passes to travel
for six Months, and most of them written or sent to the Speaker and other
Gentlemen of the House, to desire the favor of a longer continuance, in regard
it was winter, and ill crossing the Seas; but if it would not be granted, upon
signification of their pleasure, they would immediately return. They had
likewise (upon occasion of the Order of Summons) written of the uncertain
report they had heard of such a thing long after it was done, that if notice
had been given them of it, they had not failed to appear, and would if they
might be certify'd that the House continued in the same resolution; so
confident were they of their innocence, tho they knew the malice of their
Enemies, and their violence and force upon the Parliament: But proceedings
since have made it clear what Justice they should have found. For
notwithstanding all this, those Horse and Foot were so powerful an argument
against them, backing the Remonstrance for the exclusive resolution, that it
was carried to expel them the House, and Impeachments ordered to be brought in.
A parallel proceeding to this was never known in Parliament, where it has not
been refused to any, especially who were beyond Sea, or in truth any where
absent upon leave, to give a further day upon nonappearance the first; and in
our Case there was a great deal more reason, considering the season of the
year, the occasion of our departure (then looked upon as a merit) our readiness
to obey upon the first Summons. All this writes but their Injustice and our
Oppression in the more Capital Letters.

193. I am now coming to the Catastrophe of this Tragedy, the last and most
horrid Act. The Parliament forced to do that which is unnatural against the
being of Parliament, the end for which it is called, which has rationem formae
in all moral things; that is, to declare they will make no further address or
application to the King, receive none from him, nor suffer it in others; which
is, as if a Limb should cut it self off from the Body, and thereby deprive it
self of life and nourishment: For the communication between the King and
Parliament is that which gives it being and life. It is called by the King, ad
colloquium habendum and tractatum cum proceribus Regni, etc. They are the words
of the Writ which brings them together. Now there is Colloquium and Tractatus
cut off, which was the first unhappy breach between his Majesty and this
Parliament, and which the Parliament found themselves grieved at, that he had
withdrawn himself from them, so as they could not repair unto him for advice
and counsel. And in all our Declarations and Messages in the beginning, until
these people (who it seems had projected from the first what they have now
acted) got to the Helm, and steered us into this violent tempestuous Course,
that we neither see our Pole, nor use our Compass; we still desired, pressed,
endeavored his Majesty's return to his Parliament: But they say he shall not
return, the Regal Power they have assumed, they will keep it and exercise it.
They will no longer be fellow Subjects with the rest of the Kingdom, but Lords
and Masters. Those whom they represent, and whose substitutes they are, they
will put under their foot; as if an Ambassador should renounce the Prince that
sent him, and say he will make his own Dignity real and original, which is but
representative and derived, take away the substance and yet the shadow remain:
certainly this is exceedingly against nature, and will turn all upside down;
yet this disorder must be made perpetual, put out of all possibility of
recovery, like Death, from which there can be no returning. For admit the King
would grant all that they have desired or can desire, give them all imaginable
security for it, it is impossible it should be made known, and so cannot be
received, and by consequence our Peace never be settled; which is casting the
Kingdom into a mortal disease, putting it past cure, past hope.

194. To show by what Magic this Spirit is raised, you have his fellow Devil
immediately called up by a Council of War; a Declaration comes from his
Excellency and the general Council of the Army from Windsor, bearing date the 9
th of January, presented to the House the 11 th by Sir Hardress Waller, wherein
they give their approbation of the Votes, say the Parliament in that Address to
the King, with the four Bills, could go no lower without denying that which
God, in the issue of War, had born such testimony unto: That they account that
great business of a settlement to the Kingdom, and security to the public
interest thereof, by and with the King's concurrence, to be brought to so clear
a trial, as that upon the King's denial, they can see no further hopes of
settlement and security that way; therefore upon the consideration of that
denial, added to so many other such Votes as had been passed that no further
application should be made to him, etc. They do freely and unanimously declare
for themselves and the Army, that they are resolved firmly to adhere with and
stand by the Parliament in the things so voted, and in what shall be further
necessary for the prosecution thereof, and for the settling and securing the
Parliament and Kingdom without the King, and against the King, or any other
that shall hereafter partake with him.

195. And in this I believe them, being (I am confident) the only truth has
proceeded from them in all their Declarations or Proposals, with relation to
his Majesty. I would remember them, if 'twere to any purpose, of some of their
former professions, That it was against their principles to imprison the King,
that no Peace could be lasting without him, and the like. But they can blow hot
and cold, as the fellow in the Fable, to make all the Satyrs, and almost the
Devil himself abhor them, as afraid to be outdone by them in his own art of
lying and dissembling. Therefore I shall not trouble my self any more with
blazoning their Coat Armor, which is nothing but false colors and base
metals: Their Impostures, Contradictions, Falsehoods, Hypocrisies, and damnable
Delusions being beyond all Heraldry, not to be tricked within the compass of
any Scutcheon.

196. I will only add one Scene more of this last Act, represented in the House
of Commons. I do not hear that the House of Peers have had any part in it. But
the Commons, like the Consistory of Rome, have spent much time since in hunting
out the Premises, to infer the Conclusion formerly agreed upon, a Declaration,
or rather rhetorical Invective, to persuade men's Affections, not convince their
Judgments of those enormities in the King, which should justly merit, and so
justify the resolutions taken concerning him. The particulars are such, as
truly I cannot name withont horror, Auferat oblivio si potest, si non,
silentium tegat: I would forget that ever such a thing was done by the
Parliament. I will only say this of that Faction (for I look upon it merely as
their act and their Army's, who have forced the House to it, as they have to
all the rest since the breaking out of their Rebellion, the owning them, paying
them, voting their continuance, expelling, committing, impeaching their own
Members, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, doing what not for
the increasing their own shame, and setting up their Diana, that Idol of
confusion) That if they themselves believe that to be true which they there
relate, they are excellent good Patriots, and notable Justices, to see and not
see faults for their own advantage. For if the King would have agreed to such
Conditions as they proposed to him, and such a Settlement as had been in order
to their Ends, to have continued an Omnipotency in them and ruined the rest of
the Kingdom, these things had been all dispensed with, sacrificed to their
greatness, and the advancement of their Dagon; then nothing but Hosannah's in
their mouths, no Peace could be lasting without due consideration of his
Rights; far was it from them to have a thought of imprisoning him; he had been
their good King, and they his and our gracious Masters. But now that his
Majesty had discovered their aims, and would not contribute to them, he is an
Anathema, guilty of such and so many crimes, as not to be found scarce in any
one person; and now these Men of Belial can say he shall not reign over us. For
the things themselves, I doubt not but there are those who knowing the Arcana
Imperii, will give satisfaction to the world by a faithful and clear
manifestation of his Majesty's Actions and Counsels relating to them. I who
stand below and at distance, as I cannot have the knowledge of such high things,
so will not presume to meddle with them, only upon the general say, that
methinks in reason those things cannot be; for to destroy the Protestants in
France, whose preservation must needs be as a contentment to the Soul of a
Protestant King, so a strength and advantage to his Interest, were strange
State Policy. And as for the Rebellion of Ireland, to cut off so great a Limb
from himself, pluck off one of the three Flowers of his Crown, is, methinks, to
be Felo de se. To speak nothing of that concerning King James, an act so
monstrous as not to be suspected in a Heathen, not to be found in heathenish
Rome, much less in a Christian; truly I cannot, as a rational Man, bring my
judgment to admit of a belief of those things; and then certainly Charity
obliges to hope better, believe better of any Man, much more of a King, and of
our own King, whom Solomon tells us we are not to curse, no, not in thought,
much less, which Job blames, tell him, and tell the world he is wicked and
ungodly, least of all when there is not a clear an undeniable proof. And even
their expressions in their Declaration are not positive, as if the subject
matter were only allegatum, not at all probatum, and rather set forth ad
captandum populum, to gain, if possible, an approbation of the vulgar of what
they had done, than that they conceived it would find credit with rational and
judicious Men, or that themselves thought it to be a truth. For the other
things, as Knighthood, Ship Money, etc. any thing by which the Subject has been
oppressed and his Purse picked, they of all Men should not find fault, whose
little Finger has been heavier than the Loins of Monarchy. What was all that in
comparison of free Quarter, Excise, and even the 100000 l. a Month, which they
say they must have for the maintenance of the Army? those were but Flea-bitings
to these. At the worst one may say, we were then chastis'd with Whips, but now
with Scorpions.

197. And so I hope I have made good what I undertook in the beginning, having
made it appear, that England is become, by the actings of these Men, that
Monster whose shape is perverted, the head standing where the feet, and the
feet where the head should be, mean Men mounted aloft, and all that is or
should be great, Lacqueying it after them: The authority of the Magistrate
suppressed, and the will of particular persons made the Law of the Kingdom,
Justice obstructed, and Violence in the room of it; King and Parliament trodden
under foot, and an Army insulting over the Persons and Estates of the Subject;
so as we may take up the Psalmist's Complaint, That the very Foundations are
destroyed, and what then can the Righteous do?

198. I will conclude all with this short Epiphonema: If such a complicated
Treason as this, which they have designed and carried on all along, consisting
of so many several parts, by betraying all the Trusts Men can be capable of, as
Subjects to their King, Servants to their Masters, an Army to them that raised
and paid them, English Men to their Country, and which is more, Christians to
their God, bound up yet in a more particular obligation by Covenant, Vows, and
Protestations; all these Relations thrown aside, nothing of Duty, Conscience,
or Morality to stand in the way, that could either be removed or overcome,
eluded or broken through. If, I say, a Treason raised up to this height, by so
many several steps of Hypocrisy, Treachery, Perfidiousness, Injustice,
Violence, and Cruelty, can be made good, and the Actors prosper, blessing
themselves in their success, sacrificing to their Nets and Gins, by which they
have snared and destroyed all their opposers: And on the other side, if no
blessing must be on the good endeavors of those who only had proposed to
themselves Bonum publicum, had nothing in particular in their Eye, sought
nothing for themselves, but to find their safety comprised and contained in the
happiness and welfare of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom; like the honest
Passengers that seek their preservation in saving the Ship they sail in (as I
can speak it for a truth, take the God of Heaven for Witness, and defy all the
Men on Earth to disprove it) that I for my part (and I hope the same of those
other persons of Honor, Members of both Houses, with whom I have cooperated,
and now partake in their sufferings) never had other end: Let the Earl of
Manchester speak, who has been present at and privy to all our Consultations,
and is now joined and engaged with the Army, and those other Men who carry on
this pernicious design, where, besides the universal desolation of the whole
Kingdom, there is a particularity against me for my ruin and destruction, and
therefore I doubt not but he will say all he knows: Let Mr. Reynolds of the
House of Commons, who went a long time and a great way with us, but is since
fallen off and become thoroughly theirs; the same I say of Colonel Harvy, who
was long enough in our Ears, and in our Bosoms, to bottom all our thoughts,
know all our desires. If these or any other, even that malicious and
treacherous Lord Savil, can say, that at any time, upon any occasion, I
proposed any thing that looked toward a self End, the driving of any
particular Interest, setting up of any Party, but merely to prevent these
fearful Precipices into which the Kingdom is fallen, by the art and practices
of these Enemies of Peace, and to attain such a settlement, as all honest
moderate Men might have found in it both security and satisfaction: If they
can, let them speak; and if they prove one tittle, I will put my Mouth in the
dust, I will bear my punishment, and expect mercy neither from God nor Man;
nay, even in relation to the Army, and those persons who have a long time
sought my ruin, if all I desired and aimed at in disbanding that schismatical
factious Soldiery, in carrying on the business of the House in opposition to
that Party, and even in this last great Treason of levying War against King,
Parliament, and Kingdom (as they style it) which was only to do my best
endeavor to defend them and my self from a rebellious Army that was marching
up for all our destructions, contrary to the Orders of both Houses, against
whom it first rebelled instead of an obedient disbanding; then cudgel'd them to
own it for their Army, forced the City into a trouble, and show of opposition
to what it had made the Parliament do; then took that occasion to march both
against it and the Parliament. If notwithstanding all this, in what I did, I
had any thought of personal revenge, or to do the least hurt to any particular
person in case we had prevailed, but only to return into the way whence we were
put out, of a free quiet Parliamentary proceeding, to accomplish the great work
of settling the Peace both of Church and State, let me perish; and God, who is
the searcher of hearts, knows I now speak nothing but truth.

199. Well then, I say, if all our endeavors must, like an untimely birth,
come to nothing, our hope be cut off, our persons destroyed, our integrity,
innocence, fidelity, questioned and decry'd, our good names traduced, torn in
sunder, our memories made to stink to all posterity, by the false calumnies of
our malicious Enemies, and their power in suppressing truth, and which is worst
(for all this is but particular) the general, the public, the Common wealth,
once in so fair a way of recovery, at the eve of a happy day, to be rid of
Armies, enjoy a Peace, hear no more of the Instruments of War, but see a
blessed composure of all unhappy differences, reap the fruits of Justice and
Mercy; and upon a sudden to find all this but as the hungry man's Dream, who is
the more empty when he awakes, so instead of this solid happiness to embrace a
Cloud, have nothing but the empty promises of a false deceitful Army, and be
cast back into a greater gulf of misery and confusion than all the enemies in
the World could have brought it into, and the latter end to be far worse than
the beginning:

200. If this be our Portion, were I a Heathen, I should say with Brutus when
he meant to kill himself, seeing the assertors of public Liberty overcome and
ruined, and the Invaders prevail and conquer, O misera virtus! eras igitur
fabula, seu verba; ego te ut rem colebam and exercebam, tu autem fortunae
serviebas. But being a Christian, I am taught another Lesson, to know that
nothing comes by chance. God, who dos all things in number, weight, and
measure, orders and disposes all as may most make for his own Honor, and the
good of his Church and Children, to which even the wickedness of the wicked,
and these Disorders will conduce, tho the wit of Man cannot fathom it:
therefore I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth, and not once whisper, because the
Lord has done it, only take up St. Paul's admiration, and with it end, crying
out, O Altitudo! O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table.
A.
Accommodation with the King proposed by the Lords, and laid aside by the
malignant Party of the Commons. p. 9, 10. Agitators set up by the Army, their
Actions. 86, 87. Receive some check from Cromwell. 87, 88. Write a Letter
against the Parliament. 88, 89. The Insolence of those that brought it. 89.
Their extravagant Proposals to Sir Tho. Fairfax in relation to the Parliament,
etc. 171. Allen, Treasurer of the Army. 135. Concerned in conveying away a
great Sum of Money designed for the Army. 161. Army forsaken of diverse brave
Officers when it left its Obedience to the Parliament. 70. Countenanced great
Disorders in Churches, etc 71. Petitions from City and Country to have it
disbanded. 72. Recruits daily, tho it had no Enemy to oppose. 72. Hinders the
Relief of Ireland. 73, 76, 79, 83. Voted to be disbanded but what was necessary
for Garrisons, etc. 74. Some of its Officers mutiny. 76. Petition for an
Indemnity before disbanding, etc. 77, 78. Incensed by the Officers against the
Parliament. 83, 84. Are rather encouraged than discountenanced by the Officers
that were sent to appease them. 91. Their Representation to the Parliament. 91,
92. Address their General against disbanding. 94, 95. Enter into an Engagement
not to disband. 99. Their Representation, in which they censure the
Parliament's Actions with Contempt. 100, 101, 111. Intermeddle with the
Business of the Kingdom contrary to their Protestations. 103. Refuse to hear
the Parliament's Votes, tho in their own favor, and march toward the City.
108. Their high Pretenses for the good of the People, etc. 110, 112, 149. Make
the Parliament do what they please. 111. Require a Period to be put to it. 112.
Their insolent Demands of it. 113, 115, 116, 163. Their specious Pretenses for
the King. 118. Vpbraid the Parliament for doing what they forced 'em to. 119.
Their pretended Care for the Privileges of Parliament. ibid. Manage all Affairs
of the Kingdom. 142, etc. Are composed of mean Officers, etc. 149. Their
extravagant Proposals to the Parliament in relation to Church and State. 177 --
181. Their Remonstrance, December. 7. 1648. against the Parliament, 192 -- 195.
which is descanted on. 195 -- 197. Make the Parliament act against it self; set
up for Lords and Masters, etc. 200, 201. Army Party, their Actions and Aims. 1,
5. How they got into Power. 6. Their Usage of the King, Queen, etc. 7. Are for
the Covenant, etc. 13. Misrepresent Affairs to the Scots. 14. Begin to show
themselves after Marston-moor Fight. 18. Oppose the Lords for meddling with a
Commoner. 20, 56. Against putting an end to the War. 25, 29. Govern by the
Sword, etc. 26. Opposed by an honest Party in the House. ibid. Frustrated in
their Expectation of some they had got chosen. 43, 44. Endeavor to set the two
Kingdoms against each other, 45. and the Country against the Scots. 49. Amuse
the House with strange things against them. 52. Break the Law of Nations with
relation to the Scots Commissioners. 54, 55, 56. Ioin some Scots Commissioners
to the English in the Power of the Militia, but with an ill design, 57. which
they would afterward have altered. 58. Would have the Army march into the
North against the Scots without the Parliament's Order. 61. Hinder the Scots
going out of England, tho they pretended to be for it. 62. Quarrel with 'em
about the Person of the King. 67, 68. Their Designs frustrated by the Scots
Prudence. 69. Seize upon the King's Person. 96. Their Letter to the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen of London concerning their Demands of the Parliament. 102. Their
large share in the Treasure of the Kingdom. 132 -- 137. Their Accounts
extravagant. 138, 139. Their Remonstrance concerning the Members that sat
during the Speaker's Absence. 172. Draw up a Party of Horse to back it. ibid.
Turn out Officers that were against them, etc. 175. The Difficulties they had
to encounter. 182, 183. Cajole the King, etc. 184. The means they used to get
rid of him. 185, 186. Procure his going to the Isle of Wight. 187. Send him
four Bills to sign. 188. Their Declaration from Windsor concerning no further
Address to him, 200. descanted on. 201, etc. Ashurst Mr. sent with a Message
from the Parliament to the Army. 162.
B.
BLaxton employed by the Army Party to give account what Sums the Scots had
raised of the Country. 65. Bristol lost; its Governor condemned, but pardoned.
12. Burley Captain hanged by Fairfax's Order. 190.
C.
CHarles King of England, his Forces ruffled at Dennington. 27. His Safety not
regarded by the Army Party. 34. Is delivered up to the English by the Scots.
68. His Person seized by the Army. 96. Is made a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight
on refusing the four Bills. 190. Clotworthy Sir John, one of the Committee at
Derby-house. 75. Commissioners of Scotland endeavor to undeceive the English
Parliament in relation to their Army. 47. Move for Pay for their Soldiers. 50,
51. Slighted by the Army Party. 54. Their Packets and Letters intercepted and
broke open. 55. Give in an account of Arrears due to their Army. 64. Committee
at Derby-house to see the Parliaments Votes concerning Ireland executed. 75.
Labor to dispose the Army to go thither. 76. -- of Haberdashers-Hall,
Goldsmiths-Hall, etc. misused by the Army to the ruin of many. 129. -- of the
two Kingdoms. 14. Is out of esteem, tho all Affairs of Moment had been
transacted by them, etc. 53, 54. Committee of Reformation. 30. Corbet Mr.
M^^es, Justice at the Committee of Examinations. 130. Covenant between the two
Kingdoms, the ends of it not answered by sending away the Scots, without
disbanding the English Army. 63. Crawford Major General, his Service at
Marstonmoor. 15, 16. Cromwell, his Cowardice at Marstonmoor, Basinghouse, and
Keinton. 17. His Rancor against the Scots, and Hatred of the Nobility. 18. His
Soldiers mutiny, that he may escape the self-denying Ordinance. 35. Is
dispensed with for two or three Months, but after keeps in for good and all,
without an Order of the House. 36. Keeps from the Army to give 'em opportunity
of doing their Mischief. 84. His Policy and Hypocrisy in relation to the
Disorders of the Army. 85. Sent down to 'em, but to no purpose. ibid. Leaves
the Parliament, and joins with the Army. 86. Orders the King to be seized, but
denies it, 97. and the Magazine at Oxford to be secured. 98. Appoints a general
Rendevouz near Cambridg, and justifies what the Agitators had done. 99. Gets
Petitions of his own drawing signed by several Counties. 114. His Pension. 135.
Writes a Letter to Whalley to be shown the King. 187.
D.
DAcres, Lord, one of the Committee at Derby-house. 75. Delaware, Lord, one of
the Commissioners for disbanding the Army. 94. Desborough, Major, with two
Regiments, falls upon some of Sir Robert Pye's Men at Deptford, and barbarously
murders them. 159.
E.
ELections vacant, by an Artifice voted to be filled up. 41. Vnfairly made by
the malignant Party. 42. Eleven Members incur the Hatred of the Army for doing
their Duty. 75. Their Care and Industry with relation to Ireland, was the
Foundation of the good Successes in that Kingdom. 82. Have a general Charge
exhibited against them by the Army, who require they should be suspended
sitting in the House. 115, 119. Remarks on their Case. 120, 123. Withdraw from
the House to prevent Inconveniences. 124. No particular Charge against them;
the ill Practices of their Enemies to ruin them. 125, 126. Accused by the Army
of holding Correspondence with the King, etc. which is descanted on. 127, 128,
etc. Largely vindicated; 130, 131, etc. 140, 141. The Army's Declaration
against them, 148, 149. which is largely descanted on. 150, etc. Are vindicated
from the Disorders that happened at Westminster from the Rabble, etc. 153, 154.
Ordered by the House to make good their places. 157. Forsaken by the City, who
had espoused their Cause. 163. Their unparalled Case. 199. Essex, Earl,
suspected and laid aside by the Army Party. 8, 9, 21, 30. Is ordered to attend
his Majesty's Motions. 22, 23. His ill Success in the West. 24, 25. His Ruin
designed by Haslerig. 24. Relief refused to be sent him. 25. His Army willingly
disband. 31, 32.
F.
FAirfax, Sir Thomas, commands at Marstonmoor under his Father. 15. Is made
General. 34. His Commission ran only in the name of the Parliament. ibid. Is
discharged of Subordination to the Committee of both Kingdoms. 54. Designed to
be sent with his Army to protect the Northern Counties. 60. Receives Orders
about disbanding. 93. Causes his Regiment to march another way. 94. Innocent as
to seizing the King. 97. His Remonstrance concerning the King's being voted to
Richmond. 117. Takes up his Quarters at Uxbridg. 123. Marches to London in
State, and puts in the old Speakers, 164. by whom he is complemented and
addressed. 167. Marches through the City in Triumph. 168. Voted by both Houses
General of all the Forces, and Constable of the Tower. 169. His Remonstrance
for satisfaction of the Army. 188. His Order concerning the King, etc. at the
Isle of Wight. 190. Fleetwood, Colonel, concerned in seizing the King. 97. His
Place and Pension. 136. Foulks, Alderman of London, promotes the Interest of
the Army. 110, 160.
G.
GIbbs, Alderman of London, promotes the Interest of the Army, 110, 160. Sent
with a Message to the Army. 162. Interrupted by Fairfax in a Speech he was
making to him. 174. Gray of Grooby, Lord, is gratified by the Army. 137.
Against the eleven Members. 198. Gurden, Mr. against the Parliament's having a
Period put to it. 112.
H.
HAmmond, Colonel, his unreasonable Demands on being designed for Ireland. 73.
Haslerig, Sir Arthur, his ill Success in the West. 11. His Rashness, etc. 12.
His Excuse for the King's not being attacked at Dennington, Cowardice,
Vainglory, etc. 27, 28. Is concerned in seizing the King. 97, 98. His Pension.
136. His great Pay. 139. Stays in Town, tho Governor of Newcastle, to do a
feat for the Army. 198. Holland, Mr. Cornelius, his Gratuity from the Army
Party. 135. Holles, Mr. Denzil, accused by Savil of corresponding with the Lord
Digby. 38, 40. Is prosecuted with great Violence by the Solicitor St. John.
40. Acquitted by the House. 41. Concerned in the Uxbridg-Treaty. 57. His
Generosity as to the public Money. 140.
I.
JAckson, Lieutenant Colonel, submits to the Parliament in order to disband.
94. Independents; Army, etc. mostly composed of them. 29. Joyce, Cornet, seizes
the King at Holmby, with the Commissioners that attended him. 97. Ordered to
seize the Magazine at Oxford. 98. Ireland not to be relieved while the Army was
kept up here. 72. Relief voted them by the Parliament. 74. About 2000 willing
to go, the rest hinder it all they can. 76. Such as were willing to relieve it,
voted Deserters by the Army; 115. who require they should be discharged, tho
ordered thither by the Parliament. 121. Ireton keeps from the Army to give them
opportunity to do their Mischief. 84. Lenthal, Speaker of the Commons, his good
Places, etc. 133. Forsakes the House, and joins with the Army. 146, 147. Is put
into his Place again by Fairfax. 164. Lesley, his Service at Marstonmoor. 15.
Lewis, Sir William, Governor of Portsmouth, his fair Accounts, etc. 138, 139,
175. Lilburn against the eleven Members. 141. London for the Parliament, and
against the Army, etc. 106. Resent the Parliament's altering their Militia by
the Influence of the Army. 143, etc. Alarmed by the Army. 160. Lords, several
forsake the House, and join with the Army. 146, 147. The House choose a new
Speaker on the other's leaving 'em. 155. Outdo the Commons in Honor of Sir
Tho. Fairfax. 169. Their Vote concerning what was acted by the Houses when
forsaken by their Speakers, disagreed to by the Commons. 170. Seven of 'em
impeached of High Treason by the Army. 173, 191. Are set at liberty. 192.
M.
MAnchester, Earl, his Charge against Cromwell. 18, 19, 28. Laid aside by the
Army. 30. Is Speaker of the House of Lords, whom he forsakes, and joins the
Army. 146, 147. Is put into his Place again by Sir Tho. Fairfax. 164. Marshal,
Chaplain to Skippon, too instrumental in the Evils of this Kingdom. 107, 143.
Preaches before the Parliament, and extols Sir Tho. Fairfax's Expedition, etc.
168. Marstonmoor Fight had not been obtained but for the Scots. 15. Massey,
Captain, stops an Express sending to Scotland; committed by the Lords for it,
but set at liberty. 55, 56. Massey, Major General, his Brigade cashiered, tho
it had done the greatest Service in the West. 70. Is one of the Committee at
Derby-house. 75. Is made Lieutenant General of the Horse in Ireland. 82.
Forsaken by the City. 163. Maynard, Sir John, one of the eleven Members, tho
nothing against him. 115. Expelled the House, and sent to the Tower. 173.
Members of Parliament, what their Design in taking up Arms. 4. Are
misrepresented by the Army. 38. Some of 'em discover the Designs of the Army
against the Scots. 53. Mildmay, Sir Henry, has Letters sent him against the
Scots. 52. Model of the Army, etc. 30.
N.
NEwcastle; Propositions sent to the King there, gave occasion to the Army
Party to review 'em all, etc. 57. Nicklis, Mr. the Lawyer, concerned in the
Committee of Sequestrations. 129. Noel, Mr. sent with a Message from the
Parliament to the Army. 162. North of England suffers by the Scots Army, through
the Practice of the Army Party here. 49, 50. Nigh, Mr. preaches a
Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Commons on Sir Tho. Fairfax's coming to London.
168.
O.
OXford; Magazine there kept by the Army from the Parliament. 98.
P.
PAlmer, Mr. Herbert, influenced by Marshal. 160. Parliament vote the
disbanding of the Army. 74. Send for some Officers that had promoted the
Petition against it. 79. Their Clemency to 'em ill requited. 80. Settle the
Arrears of the Army. 81. Make Sir Tho. Fairfax General of all their Forces.
ibid. Order the Officers down to the Army, but to their own Ruin. 90. Too
favorable to the Army. 92. Appoint a Rendevouz for the Foot in order to
disband. 93. About to take a severe Course with the Army Party, but prevented
by Skippon. 104. Forced to comply with the Army. 107, 111, 116. Resolve to
defend themselves and the City against the Army. 109, 159. Vote the King to
Richmond. 117, 158. Made a mere Cipher by the Army. 142, etc. Endeavor to
prevent Extremities. 162. Their Case stated as to the Force put upon 'em, and
being deserted by their Speaker. 165 -- 167. Appoint a Committee to inquire
concerning that Force. 169. Disagree with the Lords about what the Houses had
done when forsaken by their Speakers. 170. Afterward forced to comply. 173.
Constrained to act against it self by refusing to make any further Address to
the King, etc. 200. Pelham, Mr. Henry, chose Speaker of the Commons in the room
of Lenthal. 156. Pennington, Alderman of London, favored and rewarded by the
Army Party. 132, 133. Petitions from an Army to their Superiors, when required
to do Service, always deemed a Mutiny. 77. Pointz, Colonel, his Care and
Vigilance to prevent the Mischiefs designed by the Army Party in the North, for
which he was put out of command. 61. Taken by Violence out of his House by the
Agitators. ibid. Inhumanly treated by 'em. 62. Pride, Colonel, his Equivocation
at the Bar of the House about petitioning against disbanding. 80. Prideaux, Mr.
of the Army Party, made himself Postmaster of England. 133.
R.
RAbble threaten the House of Commons, to cause 'em to pass several Votes 145.
Rainsborough Colonel, his Regiment refuses to march for Jersey, which he
connives at; yet afterward made Vice Admiral. 95, 96. Riot in Yorkshire. 48.
Rushworth, Secretary to Sir Tho. Fairfax, his acting against the eleven
Members. 126. His Letter to the Speaker against appearing at the House. 147.
Signs Proposals to the Parliament concerning a new Form of Government. 176.
S.
SAint John, Mr. Oliver, his Character; his underhand Letter to the Committee
of Hertfordshire, etc. 32. His violent and bloody Nature. 33. Breaks his
Protestation as to Cromwell's being dispensed with from the self-denying
Ordinance. 36. His Places of Profit, etc. 133. Salloway, Mr. one of the
Committee at Derby-house. 75. Savil, Lord, an Impostor. 38. Writes Letters to
several Great Men against the Parliament. 39. Say, Lord, rewarded by the Army
Party. 136. Scawen, Mr. brings a sad account of the temper of the Army. 108.
His Pension. 137. Concerned in conveying away a great Sum ordered for the Army.
161. Scots proposed to be called in, but obstructed by the Malignants; their
Character. 11, 13. After called in. 12. Made use of only for a pinch. 13.
Imposed on by the Malignants. 14. Discover the good Intentions of the honest
Party in England. 20, 21. Are represented as having a design to make good their
footing here. 44. Their Army ill requited. 46, 65. Are vindicated as to raising
of Money in the North on Free Quarter. 48. Their Pay kept back. 51. Their
Ministers of State suspected by the Army Party here, to hold Correspondences
with the Queen, etc. 51, 52. Their Papers in the House of Commons here, not
answered. 53. Their Piety, Moderation, etc. 59. Had no ground to disband their
Army, unless the English did. 63, 64. Have a great Sum voted 'em, tho with
great opposition. 66. Deliver up the King to the English. 68. Whereby they gain
Reputation. 69. Are laid aside in the Army's Address to the King at the Isle of
Wight. 189. Self-denying Ordinance. 30. Sequestrations, etc. 8. Skippon, Major
General, made Commander in chief in Ireland. 82. Instrumental in betraying the
Parliament, etc. 88. Excuses the Agitators. 90. Prevents the Parliament's
proceeding against the Army Party, and how. 104, 105. Refuses to obey the
Parliament's Order, but on certain Conditions. 161, 162. Stapleton, Sir Philip,
laid aside by the Army. 30. His moderate Pay, etc. 139. Swifen, Mr. employed by
the Parliament to the Army. 162.
T.
TIchburn, a Linen-draper, made Constable of the Tower by Sir Tho. Fairfax.
174.
V.
VANE, Sir Henry, one of the Parliament's Commissioners with the Army. 108.
Uxbridg, Treaty there. 57.
W.
WAller, Sir William, ordered from Oxford into the West. 22. Laid aside by the
Army. 30. Is one of the Committee at Derby-house. 75. Warmworth, Mr. his
insolent and ridiculous Speech concerning the Adjutators. 89. Warwick, Earl,
one of the Committee at Derby-house. 75. One of the Commissioners for
disbanding the Army. 94. Wentworth, Sir Peter, gets an Estate for half the
value. 135. West, Colonel, discharged by Fairfax from being Constable of the
Tower. 174. Weston, Earl of Portland's Son, his Reward from the Army. 137.
White, Colonel, his Places in the Army, etc. 135. Wild, Sergeant, Chairman in
the Committee of Sequestrations. 129. Gets an Ordinance for the Lady
Thornborough's Money; is a great Enemy to the eleven Members. 134. Willoughby
of Parham, Lord, chose Speaker by the Lords. 155. Charged with Treason by the
Army. 191. Wollaston, Sir John, conveys a great Sum away, which was ordered for
the Army. 161. Wright, Robert, made use of to give Intelligence of the Scots,
etc. 52.
FINIS.
LEX Parliamentaria; or, a Treatise of the Law and Custom of the Parliaments of
England, by G. P. Esquire with an Appendix of a Case in Parliament between Sir
Francis Goodwin and Sir John Fortescue, for the Knights Place for the County of
Bucks. 1 Iac. 1.

Reflections upon what the World commonly calls good Luck and ill Luck, with
regard to Lotteries, and of the good use which may be made of them. Written in
French by Monsieur Le Clerc, and done into English.

Printed for Tim. Goodwi^*


