A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. Magnus the Martyr, By
London Bridge, On Sunday February 11th, 1699-1700. AT THE BAPTIZING Of some
Persons of Riper Years, brought up by Quakers and Anabaptists, but now
Conformed to the Church of England.

Published at the Request of them and their Friends.

By RICHARD HOLLAND, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the DVKE of RICHMOND, Curate
of St. Magnus, and Lecturer of Allhallows the Great; who has since Baptized
several others.

The Second Edition.

LONDON. Printed by J. Richardson, for J. Back, at the Black-Boy on
London Bridge, 1700.

To all those who have newly Embraced the Church of England, especially whom I
have lately Baptized in this City; some brought up by Quakers, others amongst
Anabaptists.
It Is the Honor of our Established Church to carry the demonstration of the
best and happiest Constitution in the World; whose Articles are sound, Canons
and Discipline easy; whose Sacraments are of our Lords own appointing; whose
Ceremonies are but few, and those Decent; whose Orders are Apostolical, and
Guardians watchful; whose Prayers are truly Divine, and Preaching from the Word
of God, not from the Whims or Policies of Men; this Church, admired by the
Learned, even amongst its Enemies, desired and prayed for by all the truly
Pious abroad, despised and neglected at home only through the Prejudice and great
Unhappiness of Education in some, and Willful Ignorance in others; this Church,
you now are become Members of, at your Earnest desire, and (as I thank God, I
have very good Reason to hope) after a due preparation. As for this Discourse,
it is properly yours; it was prepared for you, and that with a Plainess answering
the Honesty and Importunity which you discovered in your Request, both to
understand and enjoy this holy Sacrament. And thus to do, I found convenient,
if not necessary, and to me very tempting; not only as a Curate conversant with
people, who (blessed be God) have had the good Effect of convincing and
informing some, who thought themselves Wise: But because also of those odd
Notions and strange Enthusiastic Fancies, which you formerly were, and others
still are teized and exercised with, from their unteaching Guides; which instead
of Comfort, have improved to the Ruin of their Proselytes. Among the many
proofs of this, that sad story of the dearest Relation of one of you, will not
yet be forgotten; who under great perplexity of thoughts from some strange
Doctrines amazing and disturbing him, when he applied himself to his Teacher to
instruct and assist him, that he might find Peace and Comfort, received from
him only this Answer, Go Home, and get Faith. Which was so far from easing his
Troubled Mind, that he immediately fell distracted, was obliged to be lied and
Bound in his Bed, and lived about a Week in that dreadful condition, and then
was relieved only by Death.

But our Church, as it has no such Unintelligible Distracting Notions, nor
Unmerciful Tyranizing Discipline; so you receive this, containing the true
Christian Doctrine of it; discovering the Bowels of the Mercy and Love of our
blessed Savior, the Head of it; and Published at the Request of you, and your
chosen Witnesses, I hope for your Benefit, and the Benefit of those who are yet
Ignorant of the Excellencies of now your Church, and misled by Crafty and
Designing Men.

And therefore, as when Instructing you, so in this Sermon, I attended to the
most easy, familiar, and aptest Expressions to inform you; using in Comments
and Expositions, the best Authors, and sometimes also (because I could not do
better) their own words; Endeavoring to keep true to the Orders, and excellent
Doctrine of our Church, as every Faithful and Honest Man ought to do.

That the Honor of God, and Interest of the Church, might be advanced, and
that you and others may be bettered by this, and at last all our Souls Saved,
is the Prayer of,

Your Faithful Friend and Servant, In the Cause of God and the Church, Richard
Holland.

A SERMON Preached at the BAPTIZING, etc.
Acts II. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be Baptized every one of
you, in the Name of Jesus Christ.
THE Occasion of these words was this: St. Peter, with great Earnestness, had
just Demonstrated to the Jews, the great Glory of Christ: Who. though He was
taken by wicked hands, Crucified and Slain; yet did He Rise again, thereby
making a perfect Conquest over the Grave, and all the Powers of Darkness; and
entering upon his Government, as He is appointed an everlasting King, whose
Dominion endures from Generation to Generation, to take Vengeance of all His
Enemies.

Of which these Men of Israel, having from the Apostles words clear Conviction,
they stop their Mouths; (for before they did but Scoff at the power of
Godliness;) their Minds are now perfectly changed, they are very sensible of
their evil condition, were pricked at their Hearts, and with great Importunity
and forward Earnestness apply themselves to the Apostles for Relief, for
Comfort, and Advice, in these extraordinary thoughtful words, Men and Brethren,
what shall we do?

It may not be amiss to take notice of that part of St. Peter's Sermon that
Introduces all this, and caused so sudden an alteration in those Jews.

He very plainly argues the Messiah, and proves his Resurrection; beginning
ver. 22. Ye Men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
of God among you, by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs, etc. And here he tells
them how barbarously they had dealt with the Son of God, and their own Messiah:
And then he brings to their remembrance some of the Prophecies of David, and
explains them, particularly of His Resurrection, That His Soul was not left in
Hell, neither did his Flesh see corruption. Again, The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit thou upon my right hand, until I make thy Foes thy Footstool. This he
proves David to speak of Christ, not of himself, v. 29. whose words may admit
of this Comment:

Some amongst you, perhaps, may conclude these Prophecies to belong to David,
and not to Jesus: I know you had a good value for that Royal Prophet, and he
deserved it, being the Man after Gods own heart, blessed of and beloved by Him:
But let me be so free and plain with you, as to advise, that you must not give
to him that is due to the Messiah. The thing does truly declare it self; and
this Prophecy neither agrees with David, nor any other Prophet or Patriarch. As
for David, you all know well enough that he Dyed* was Buried, and never came to
Life again; his Sepultchre is with us to this day; there is nothing in it
burdry Bones and Dust, and no sign at all that he eve, after Revived. And all
this David knew very well, that he should fare like other Men; Dye, be Buried,
and molder to dust in the Grave: Therefore he said none of these things of
himself: but being Inspired of God, he knew that Christ should be Born of his
Line and Family, be a most glorious King, and Reign for ever.

And since it is plain that this Jesus, this Son of David, did not sit upon his
Fathers Throne: he must therefore mean some other Kingdom and Throne, and he
does express it to be such an one too, as shall have no End.

Now he could not sit on this Eternal Throne, he could not Reign in this his
Everlasting Kingdom, if after having once submitted to Death, he had not come
to Life again.

He therefore is risen from Death to Life, on purpose to enter upon this his
Government, to sit upon this glorious Seat, the Seat of the Eternal Father, the
Lord both of Heaven and Earth.

And all this David himself spoke of, and what he said so long ago, is now come
to pass. This same Jesus Dyed, You Crucified him, and he lay some time in the
Grave, but did not Putrefie there, making good all the Prophecies of him: For
he rose again to take his Government, to enter upon his Kingdom. And we are
Witnesses of all this; we saw him, have Eat, Drank and Conversed with him,
since his Resurrection; and we are not, we cannot be Deceived in him; we knew
him well in Person and Voice; and besides, we saw and felt his wounded Hands
and Side; and many others also can testify the same, who saw and heard him as
well as we.

And this very same Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree, thus raised up by
the Power of God, we also saw ascend into Heaven: And he, having promised to
send to us the Holy Ghost from thence, has now performed that too, which you
cannot but own by this evidence which you now see and hear, those several
Languages we now speak, which before we knew nothing at all of, we never were
bred up in.

By all this it is very plain, That this same Jesus is advanced to His Kingdom;
is now Lord over all; is the very Messiah promised in the Prophets, whom ye
look for; and who will most certainly one day take Vengeance of all his Enemies.

This surprising Relation, carrying with it such Demonstration and Evidence,
touched them to the quick, who had consented to the thing, and who had acted in
the Crucifying of Him; being fearful therefore now, and apprehensive of their
great danger; and that they were soon to be brought under His Footstool, they
cry out for help, they entreat the Apostles to relieve them, they have no
Patience, but beg as for Life, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?

The Apostle is as quick, has a Remedy at hand for them, Repent, and be
Baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ.

There are some excellent Lessons in this Sacred History, which, before we
proceed, I shall but just mention.

The Apostle here charges the whole body of the Jews, and especially all the
City of Jerusalem, with that barbarous Murder of their King. Ye men of Israel
(says he) both High and Low, Great and Small, it is you that by wicked hands
have Crucified and Slain the Holy One.

He could not but know that the Soldiers mostly were the Executioners: But the
whole Nation being Guilty; he charges all in general with it; those who
Consented to it, as well as the Actors, and those who with mighty Clamours
cried out, Crucify Him, Crucify Him.

We have indeed a Record of one not to be forgotten, a Good Man and a Just. who
did not consent to the counsel and deed of them; St. Luke 23. 51. 'twas Joseph
of Arimathea, who took worthy care of the Corpse also, whose Humanity therefore
is Honorably noted. But for the body of the Jews, they were all Guilty, as
well as the poor Heathen Soldiers.

St. Peter then teaches us, That in Preaching the Gospel of Christ, the first
thing must be to Convince Men of their Sins, to charge them home with them, and
bring them to a general acknowledgment thereof, For, as no Physician knows well
what to do with that sick Patient, who conceals, or dissembles his Distemper:
so, nor can Christ profit any who will not be brought to a true sense of their
Sins.

For which reason Christ calls himself a Physician, and says, That He came to
Heal the Sick; and again, Not for the Just, but to call Sinners to Repentance.
And the Office of the Holy Ghost, He says, is to Convince, and to Accuse the
World of Sin. And in his last words to his Disciples, when he commands them to
Preach Repentance; to Encourage them, he immediately joins thereto Remission of
Sins, St. Luke 24. 47.

Nor does the Apostle seem to charge the Mobb only, the common Rout of
Crucifiers, but their Captains too: You, say he, who by wicked and unjust hands
have slain, etc. Judas in the first place, once the Disciple and Apostle of
Christ, but now their Leader, and who delivered him to them; so the High
Priest, and all the Colleges of Scribes and Pharisees, who corrupted Judas,
and gave him Money for his part in the Fact: Pilate too, who sat in the
Emperors Seat, and gave the unjust Sentence against Him, to gratify the
importunity of the People; Herod also, in whose power it was to let him go, who
instead thereof Mocked Him, and sent Him back to Pilate: All these, tho never
so Great, who were guilty as well as those common People who cried out, His
Blood be upon us, and on our Children, the Apostle boldly charges,
notwithstanding their Grandeur and Authority.

Though by some it might have been esteemed no less than Treason, to charge the
Government with Unrighteousness and Injustice in their Sentence: yet he plainly
does it, without that wretched Fear, and those fawning Hopes, which too often
Tempts Men, even in good things, to Prevaricate.

And this is the Duty of every one who comes from God: for, a Minister is a
public Person; an Ambassador, and that from the Almighty: and his Business is
to tell his Masters Mind, to deliver his Errands, discover his Truths and
Pleasure only: and not to sew Pillows under the Peoples Arms, not to bolster
them up in any of their Errors.

And though thus to do is somewhat Irksome, as the Prophet Jeremiah complains, Woe
is me that thou have made me a Contentious Man, and a Man that striveth with
the whole Earth, etc. Jer. 15. 10. Though it appears uneasy, and troublous to
thwart the Inclinations of Men, and discharge them of their own Humors, yet we
find it plainly intimated in their Commission, so the aforesaid prophet Jer. c.
1. v. 28. For behold, I have made thee a Defenced City, and an Iron Pillar, and
Walls of Brass against the whole Land, against the Kings, against the Princes,
against the Priests, and against all the People of the Land.

In the next place, this Honestly and plain Dealing in the Apostle, had very
good effect upon those Jews: they were Pricked at the Heart: they were sensible
how ill they had done: they owned their Evil Condition, and looked out for help.

This is the beginning of true Reformation, to be deeply impressed with their
Guilt and Danger, to be really apprehensive both of their Folly, and Desperate
Condition, both of their want of a Savior, and Misery without him; this will
soon make the Sinner cry out with David, I have Sinned, I acknowledge my
Faults, and my Sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51. 2. And this Sense of his
Condition will Encourage him to call for relief, to ask Counsel how to get out
of such a dreadful Condition, to cry out in good earnest, What shall we do to
be Saved?

Again, We see farther the good Nature and Faithfulness of the Apostle, who as
soon as they had discovered the extraordinariness of their Concern and Misery,
does not in the least delay or dispute their Cure: He does not put them upon
any Costly and Troublesome thing to Atone their Sin; neither does he Upbraid
them for their mighty Cruetly to the Blessed Jesus, nor reflect any more on
what is past, their long Neglect or Carelessness; but looks forward, helps them
in Earnest, tells them the only, and that an easy and reasonable Remedy;
comforts therefore their Hearts directly, keeps them no longer in Suspense,
hides not their Cure, but says, Repent, and be Baptized every one of you, etc.

You see how proper this Subject is for our present Discourse, having just now
received Persons into the Pale of the Church, who formerly were trained in
Errors, and by the Authority of Relations kept from this happy Call.

And since by their Earnest desire they have now Enjoyed this blessed
Sacrament, that as soon as conveniently can be, they may be admitted to the
other, let one word first be permised concerning the holy Sacraments, and their
Number.

Sacraments are the outward means whereby God does Represent, Exhibit, and Seal
to us our Redemption. And they are called Signs, and Seals, and Badges, and
Pledges: As Signs, they represent the great performances of Christ for us under
Visible Elements; Water represents his washing away our Sins; the Bread Broken,
and Wine poured out, represent his Body Crucified, and his Blood Shed for us.
Thus are they Tokens and Monuments of his Love, truly Signs of Heavenly things.

By them Grace is exhibited and conveyed to the faithful, Pardon ensured, and
Favor and Reconciliation obtained.

They are the Marks and Badges of our Profession: they are our Lords Livery, by
which all we his Servants are known and discovered to belong to him: they
proclaim us to be his Right and Property: so that all the World may see and
know what a Master we have, in whose Service we are Engaged, and whose Favor
and Protection we shall be sure always to Enjoy.

And they are Pledges also, or Pawns of his Care and Mercy, they are our
Security of Heaven, and the ground of our Hopes and Confidence in God. For,
there is an holy Contract betwixt God and us: Obedience is our part, Salvation
is his; and by the Holy Sacraments, as by Deeds and Indentures, is our
Happiness conveyed, made over, Sealed and Delivered to us.

If we would be Saved then, it must be by these means, and if we refuse these
means, the Pledges of his Love, the Badges of our Profession, the Securities of
our Happiness: we Rob our Souls of Heaven, we exclude our selves from Salvation.

Not that God cannot save without them, For his hand is not shortened, but they
are the ordinary Means, and appointed Instruments, by which he has promised to
convey the Merits of Christ to us, and commanded us this way to receive them.

Wilfully then to Neglect them, or to Want them, when they may be had, is
perfectly to despise God, and cast aside his Ordinances.

As for their Number, they are but two; though the Church of Rome has Established
more, yet the Ancients never acknowledged anymore. Nay, one of the greatest
amongst the Romanists, confesses it in these Words: It Is a common received
saying amongst us Catholics, That all the Sacraments did flow out of the Side
of the Lord, but thence only Issued out Water and Blood; Water, as the matter
of Baptism; and Blood, of the Eucharist; and thence concludes, that properly
there is no more. Thus Cardinal Richlieu.

True it is, that the Sacraments strictly and properly taken for Seals and
Badges of our Profession, they are, and the Church never acknowledged anymore
than two, and those of our Lords own Ordaining.

The first, Baptism, from (...), that signifies to Wash, Dip, Dive, or Sprinkle.

The second, The Supper of the Lord, because ordained at, or after his last
Supper.

And these two he only institutes; some have guessed that the Gospel Sacraments
might correspond with those two old ones of the Law, Circumcision and the
Passover: But rather, because these two are sufficient.

Nothing is required to make any one a true Master of any Profession than these
two things. 1. To be legally Entered, fairly admitted into it; and then, 2 To
be consummate in it, to be fully possessed of the Privileges and Immunities of
it.

To Illustrate this, by what you all know very well. In order to become a free
Denison and worthy Member of this Honorable City, or of any Society therein,
this is required, 1. That the Person be Lawfully Admitted, you call it Bound:
By which he is obliged to learn the Art or Mystery of his Profession, is
Engaged to the Rules thereof, and at the same time is become the Care and under
the Patronage of the Governors of the City. And having behaved himself well in
that Station, his appointed time, he is then, 2. Made Free; has Title to the
Privileges and Immunities both of the City and his own Society; to exercise
his Function without Control, and in his Course to perform the Noble Duties,
enjoy the Offices, and receive the worthy Honors of the same.

And as it is in these outward Worldly Societies; so is it in our best most
Holy and Religious one, as we are Christians, Members of Christ Sons of Heaven,
and Heirs of Salvation.

For, 1. By Baptism we are Bound; bound to the great Father and Master of all
the World; made Servants to the most high God; one of his so glorious a Family;
Members of Christ; and under the Guidance, Instruction, and Conduct of the Holy
Ghost. And our Employment under that our Master, and in his Household, is to
learn the Art of being and doing Good, the great Mystery of the Christian
Religion.

And in that High and Honorable Employment, in that Valuable Service, we are
under the Care, Government, and Protection, the Tuition and Instruction of God
the Son, from whom we receive all the Rules of our Office, the Laws and
Statutes of our Calling: And in order to our most Faithful Service and absolute
Obedience, we are Assisted, Comforted, Eased, Relieved, and Sanctified by God
the Holy Ghost. And then, 2. In this Station behaving our selves Faithfully and
Honestly, till we understand our Business, know well our Duty, and are fit to
set up for the Practice of Piety, willing to Devote our selves to that
Employment; we are admitted then to our Masters Table, to Eat and Drink of
those his Holy Viands, in the other Sacrament of the Eucharist; and there
Enjoy, in that Feast of Souls, the Lord of all Glory, by which we are Fed and
Nourished even to Eternal Life.

And thus you see how your Earthly, does exhibit and represent to you the Glory
of your Heavenly Employment; and that if you would be Masters, enjoy Liberty,
even the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, you must first be Bound, must be
admitted into the Family regularly and fairly, as he has Ordained; you must be
Baptized every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; and then
proceed from one Degree of Grace unto another; so you will obtain what St.
Peter's Congregation here aimed at, viz. To be Everlastingly Saved.

For this reason it is that the Font stands at the lower-end, but at our
Entrance into the Church; where having been received and admitted into the
Congregation, and afterward Instructed in our several Duties, till we are well
prepared for the Nobler Mysteries of our Profession, the higher Cordials of the
Gospel; we then come to be advanced to the Lords Table, that Holy Christian.
Altar, at the Upper-end of all, the most Honorable Place in Gods House, that
Royal Seat and Throne of the Blessed Jesus: Where Enjoying him in those his
appointed Elements in their Season, during the Course of our Lives, with
Honest, Faithful, and Repenting Hearts; we shall perceive the constant
refreshings of a good Conscience and Joyous Heart, and at last be Translated to
the Everlasting Arms of our Blessed Savior, and Enjoy Him in the highest
Heavens.

But the first of those Holy Sacraments is our Province now. In Discoursing
upon which, we shall a little more particularly consider, 1. The Nature, 2. The
Necessity of it, 3. The Qualifications for it, 4. The several Duties we are
Engaged in by it, 5. The extraordinary Benefits and Advantages of it.

1. For the Nature of Baptism. It was always a Custom amongst the Jews, that
when any Proselyte was Received, Entered, and Admitted into the Church, they
were wont to use several Washings, thereby denoting their Leaving off,
Forsaking, or Washing away all their former Pollutions, their old Profane and
Heathen Practices: Nay, the Jewish Authors say, that not only Proselytes, and
those newly Converted from Heathenism, but also the Natural Jews themselves,
were mitiated by these three things, Circumcision, Baptism, and Sacrifices.

As this was the custom amongst the Jews, so it pleased the Lord of Life, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, to appoint, That whosoever should at any time
be received into His Family, admitted into His House and Fellowship, shall be
received by this very same Ceremony and Element of Water; and the Holy Ghost
has ordered this Form of words, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Baptism then is the Door, by which we enter into the visible Church of Christ;
and it is administered to Beginners in Christianity, who are Initiated by Water.

This is done by Dipping, or Sprinkling, for the word signifies both, and our
Church makes the Action Indifferent; leaving it to Discretion, and to be
regulated by Charity.

Dipping was first in use in hot Countries, and when the greatest part were
well grown People: But when the Gospel was spread into colder Climates, as
ours, Sprinkling only was thought sufficient. And so does the wisdom of our
Church conclude, That if a Spoonful of Wine in the other Sacrament, be as
significative of the whole Mass of Christ's Blood, as a greater quantity; then
a few Drops of Water may be a representative of Washing, as well as a River.
And this Sprinkling, perhaps, the Apostles themselves used, even in those hot
Countries, since we Read of them calling sometimes for Water in Houses, to
Baptize new Converts, Acts 10. 47.

It Is to be done in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Intimating, That what the Minister does, is not of himself, or on his
own head; but in the Name and Power, by the Command and Commission of the whole
Trinity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost: And this Obliging
the Person Baptized to own, 1. The Glorious Trinity of Persons, and
consequently the whole Creed, in the words of the Church Catechism, to Believe
in God the Father, who made him and all the World. 2. In God the Son, who
Redeemed him and all Mankind; That is, who was pleased to undergo the Wrath of
His Heavenly Father, and all those Scourges due to our Sins, that we might be
free from Sin and Sorrow, the power and danger of Death and Satan. 3. In God
the Holy Ghost, who Sanctifies him, and all the Elect People of God; That is,
who Guides and Directs him, and who Comforts and Refreshes him in the ways of
Godliness.

As he thus owns and acknowledges the Holy Trinity, so 2dly. He yields himself
an absolute Proselyte to the Faith, of it, excluding all other Gods, or any
other Authors, and Patrons of Religion. The^*

3dly. He devotes himself to follow the Rules, and obey the Comands of this his
new Master, is always ready to be Governed, and Guided by him; and by all
cheerful dispatch of Religious Duties, demonstrates himself a very willing
Disciple of this Blessed Trinity.

Now this Water, and these Words, is called the Form, or the Outward part of
Baptism: And they have a great meaning in them, which is called the Inward;
being a Death to Sin, and a new Birth to Righteousness: By Dying to Sin, is
only meant leaving it off, washing away all Pollutions, getting clear of them,
out of the Power and Dominion of them. The Apostle also calls it, A Quickening
of us, who were dead in Trespasses and Sins. And St. John calls it, Overcoming
of the World.

For nothing makes a Man more a Slave than Sin; nothing betrays Men more to
Servitude, then living in Sin; nothing else but Sin can Domineer: He then that
overcomes it, is a brave Commander, is truly Master of himself, and Enjoys the
best Liberty.

And now very plain appears the meaning of a New Birth to Righteousness, and
being Born of God, mentioned so frequently in Scripture; which is only our
Lords Enabling of us to Live Religiously, and Act Honestly, To have our
Conversation here in Simplicity, and Godly Sincerity; and to keep our
Consciences void of Offense both toward God and Man: So we prove our selves
Members of Christ; and he will plentifully bestow upon us the Provisions of his
Grace and Favor, that is, Mercy, and Peace, and Pardon of Sins here, and
Eternal Life and Glory hereafter. I come now to the Second thing, To Consider
the Necessity of Baptism: The Word is here, Be Baptized every one of you; and
this is, if you have a mind to be Saved. Besides which, in St. John's Gospel,
c. 3. v. 5. Jesus himself says, Except a Man be Born of Water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot Enter into the Kingdom of God. That is, except a Man be Born
again by the effectual working of Gods Spirit, as by the Author of this New
Birth; and (in the ordinary course of Gods Proceedings in his Church) by the
Water of Baptism, as the Sign appointed by God in the Sacrament of our
Regeneration, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore he says
again, v. 7. Let not this seem so strange a thing, Marvel not that I said unto
you, You must thus be Born again. And I think, that Christ's own words, with
such a Condition, that without it, they shall not obtain Heaven, is enough to
urge the Necessity of this Holy Sacrament.

What then do they do? What have they to answer, who with hardened Confidence,
and willful Obstinacy, and scornful Ignorance, keep themselves and their
Children out of the Pale of the Church, refuse and slight this Great Grace, and
shut themselves out of Heavens Gate? They are indeed in a most dreadful
Condition, who though Light be come into the World, will Love Darkness rather
than Light; and bereave both themselves and offspring of that Happiness, and
those mighty favors of God.

What Value have these Men for Gods Command, to take the Sign and Seal of his
Covenant of Grace to his People, and their Seed, throughout all Generations?

What Value have they for Jesus Christ, confirming the same, when he sent forth
his Apostles and appointed them to make all the Nations Disciples, and to
Baptize them all in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? Which they did
through all the World, where they came. But more dreadful still is it, that the
Men of this Persuasion, are generally so Stubborn and Resolute, as to be in
Danger of never Repenting and Returning to the Church: Some indeed, by the
blessing of God, and a good Disposition, have led the way; may the rest of them
Speedily follow; and let not that Fate and Doom of a Reprobate, which is to be
of strong Delusion, and to Believe a Lie, (the worst of all Judgments) let not
that, or its Imputation, any longer rest upon them. I am thirdly to speak to
the qualification for this Holy Sacrament, which is Repentance: Repent and be
Baptized. Repentance is that that re-enstates us in Gods Favor, assures our
Happiness, and makes Joy in Heaven. We all know our selves, to be Fools and
Vile Sinners; and when ever we shall be brought to our Senses, to acknowledge
our Sin and Folly; we shall Act like Men, and make our selves of the Number of
those that God will accept, that Christ came to Save and Dyed for, and most
certainly will Receive into his Everlasting Arms, when he shall come again to
make up his Jewels.

But our Repentance must be made up of these Parts, 1. There must be a Sense of
Sin, 2. An Hearty Sorrow for it, 3. A free Acknowledgement and Confession of
it, 4. An utter Abhorrence and forsaking of it.

1. There must be a Sense of Sin, if we would Heartily Repent of it. That it is
Abominable, the Bratt of the Devil, that that God Hates, the thing that he
never can or will Endure to behold with the least Approbation.

That it really grieves the blessed Spirit, that it Crucifies the Lord of Life
afresh, and puts Him to an open Shame; and that it made Him, who is the same
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever, to alter his Decrees concerning Man, and
Cancel that Covenant of Uninterrupted Happiness.

Of so Mischievous Nature it is, that it turned Angels into Devils, Men into
Beasts; and Tumbled them down from Life to the Grave, from a Throne to a
Prison, from Heaven, and a Title to never-ceasing Joys, to Hell, and the
assurance of Eternal Torments. This is Sin, and thus we must acknowledge it to
be exceeding Sinful. And then,

2. We must proceed to Godly Sorrow for it. We must Heartily bewail it, express
sensibly our Dissatisfaction in, and Dislike of it; and that from a true
Apprehension of its own Vileness, and that most wretched Folly, that betrayed
us into it.

And this Sorrow must be not only because we have brought our selves into great
Danger, contracted Guilt, and wrought our own Ruin: But because also we have
dealt so Unkindly and Ungratefully, with so good a God: Because we have
provoked so Compassionate a Father, slighted so Gracious a Redeemer, and
quenched the Motions of, and grieved so Blessed a Sanctifier. Thus should we
abound in Holy Sorrow, with respect both to our God and our selves; for our
God, that we have thus Basely, Treacherously, and Ungratefully, done as much as
in us lay, to the very Dethroning of Him; as well as for our selves, whom this
filthy Sin has sunk into so wretched a Condition.

3. If we would perfect our Repentance, we must truly acknowledge and confess
our Sins, not Hide them, not Palliate and Excuse them, not Stifle and Endeavor
to put them out of our Minds, but to own them, and our selves for Sinners.

When ever we desire to enter the Temple, when ever we prepare to return to our
Fathers House, and there hope to be Received and Wellcom'd, we cannot do
better, then take to our selves the Words of the old repenting Prodigal, and
say, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called Thy Son, St. Luke 15. 21.

Thus freely should we expose our Vileness, acknowledge our Transgressions, and
that we have worthily deserved Gods Wrath; that we have added Sin to Sin,
Treasured our Vices, and Aggravated them with the most heightening
Circumstances.

And who knows then, but at our Meeting, as the tender Father in the Gospel
received his Rebellious Son, so our Heavenly Father will receive us also,
forgive us, and Enthrone us in his Kingdom.

And here that I be not Misunderstood, let me hint to you the Excellency of our
Church, in this particular. We are not obliged to an exact Discovery of every
Secret of our Hearts to Men of Cunning and Art, and yet of like Passions with
our selves; which is the Arbitrary management of other Churches and Sects; by
which the poor People are liable to be Ruined on Earth, their Secrets being
extorted, and they thereby exposed to the shock and prey of Cruel and
Unreasonable Men. But our Church requires General Confessions only, such as she
has provided; as We have Erred and Strayed from thy ways like lost Sheep, we
have followed two much the Devices and Desires of our own Hearts, we have
offended against thy Holy Laws, etc. Save in the matter of Scruples; and then
also it is ordered with that Ease and Security for the quieting of the
Conscience, and relieving the troubled Mind, as to Demonstrate the Divinity of
the Constitution, and that Holy Spirit which conferred the Directions.

All this I have said is of our Church and Public Confessions; but for our
Private ones, those in our Closets, we must be sure there to ransack every
corner of our Hearts, to Confess and Bewail every Particular of our Sins, to
our God; so he that sees, he that hears in Secret, will reward openly; we
shall not fail then of Pardon, and Forgiveness, if we add that that is next to
be Considered to make up our Repentance, and that is,

4. A Forsaking of all our Sins, and an utter abhorrence of them for the
future. He that Confesses and Forsakes, it is that shall find Mercy. Would we
then perfect our Repentance, and be truly Welcome to our Lord and Savior in
His House and Family? Thus we must do; Confess, and Forsake; own our former
Follies, and resolve upon a new and better Life; promise to our Lord more
Faithful Obedience, and then take Care to perform it; resign up our selves
entirely to the Will of God, and then endeavor to walk with him all the Days
of our Lives.

So shall we be truly Welcome to our Lord now in this Sacrament, and ever
afterward in his House; so shall we Enjoy the Comfortable Presence of the
blessed Spirit here, and even the Lord of Life in that Spiritual Banquet, the
other Sacrament. And when these Earthly Services and Mercies shall fail us, we
shall receive Eternal Comforts, be possessed of Blessings Unspeakable and full of
Glory; so shall none of our former sinful Actions ever rise against us, to
Accuse or Condemn us, or our Consciences to affright us; but in Peace and
Quietness, in a Sedate and Calm Composure of Spirit, we shall at last resign
our Souls into the hands of God, in sure and certain hope of a joyful
Resurrection. I am now in the

4. Place to consider the several Duties we are Engaged in by our Baptism; and
these are exactly set down in our Catechism; when we Vow and Promise, 1. To
Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, with all the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh. This Vow is of three parts: The
1. To Renounce the Devil and all his Works. By this the Church generally
understands Renouncing of all false Gods, and false Worship.

The World at the coming of our Savior, was full of Idolatry; and therefore it
was very proper that all those that were willing to engage in, and be happy by
the benefits of the true Religion, should be obliged to Renounce absolutely all
the false: And this not only in Tongue, but in Heart also; not only in
Profession, but in Action.

As we are not to believe in, and pay Devotion to an Idol; so, nor are we to
act any of those brutish Villainies which took up the Lives of those Idolatrous
Heathens. As we are not to consult Witches and Devils, so, nor must we have
such low and mean apprehensions of God and His wise Providence, as to sink our
Hearts, and suffer them to be betrayed to any base and unlawful Compliances:
And therefore more especially by the Works of the Devil here, was meant those
abominable Villainies (the Apostle says) not to be Named among Christians; which
was the usual practice of those Heathen Idolators; and for which the greatest
of Gods Judgments have formerly been brought upon the Earth; even fire and
Brimstone, upon particular Cities, famous for those Brutalities; Nay, even that
Deluge of Water upon the whole Earth.

But, besides those, there are others that may properly be called the Works of
the Devil; being such he delights in, and is very diligent in Tempting us to.
Amongst these is Pride, that Usurping and Ambitious Desire that made the first
Devil, and Dethroned him from an Empire in Heaven, to the infernal Abyss of
Hell; such also is Lying; for he is called a Liar, and the Father of it, St.
John 8. 44. Such also is Slandering, for he is famously also called the Accuser
of the Brethren; such also, is Malice and Envy, being hateful, and hating one
another. These are the proper Practices of him, whom the Scripture calls a
Murderer from the Beginning: And such also, is all Pleasure, Contentedness and
Delight in Sin, and Encouraging and Tempting others to commit it; all these are
truly and properly called the Works of the Devil.

The second part of the Vow is, To Renounce the Pomps and Vanities of this
wicked World. By these were meant formerly some Villainous and Unlawful Sports
of the Heathens, which we now (thanks be to God) know nothing of; and as it
respects us, may be understood by them mostly, all undue and sinful Compliances
with any of the things of the World; whether they be Riches, or Pleasures, or
Honors; whether it be Meat, or Drink, or Apparel; whether it be Rest, or
Sport, or Employment; or indeed any inordinate Enjoyment of any of these
Earthly things. Now many of all these things, as they are Blessings, when well
used; so when abused, they become Curses, Pomps and Vanities of this World, and
to be Renounced.

The third part of the Vow, is to Renounce all the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh;
that is, all Vile Affections, and Beastly Humors, and Greedy Cravings; the
Conquering of which is true Self Denial, and Mortification, the great Duty of
the approaching Season; which I have endeavored to inculcate to you, and which
you will have many opportunities of improving in the knowledge of, during Lent.
And so I come to the

Second part of the Vow and Promise, which is, To Believe all the Articles of
our Christian Faith: which consists not only in the being rightly informed in
the Articles of our Faith; in Learning, Endeavoring to Understand, and giving
full Consent unto them; but (which perfects and compleats our Faith) in Living
accordingly, in doing those things that will prove and well Demonstrate our
Faith. And particularly, to explain this in the Apostles Creed; When I say, I
Believe in God the Father Almighty; I must Honor and Reverence Him, as my God;
Love and Obey Him, as a tender Father; Fear and Own Him, as he is Almighty:
Maker off Heaven and Earth; Here I must attribute the Glory of all the Works of
the Creation to Him; admire his great Love in Communicating Being to us and all
his Creatures; give him only the Honor and Glory of Preserving and Blessing
us; and Love, Admire, and Praise his Universal Providence over the World. At
the same rate we must reduce to Practice, all the rest of the Articles of our
Faith; and so doing is truly Believing of them. The third part of our Vow and
Obligation in Baptism, is, That we Keep Gods Holy Will and Commands, and walk
in the same, all the Days of our Lives. By which is meant, that we will make it
our Business, as much as in us lies, to walk according to the Direction of Gods
ways; that we will use our best Endeavors to work his Righteousness, and apply
our selves with all Diligence and Care to the discharge of all the several
Duties of our Lives.

That we will not Practice Holiness by Fits and Starts only; allow time for
Devotions and Holy Duties, when we have nothing else to do; as is too much the
Practice of some. But that our whole Life shall be one continued Act of Honesty
and Piety; and we always will Endeavor to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge
and Love of our Savior, Jesus Christ; that we will keep true and undaunted to
the end, and Fight our good Fight, and Finish our Course, and keep the Faith;
knowing that all this Labor will not be in Vain, but that we shall receive an
Ample and most Glorious Reward in the Final and Complete Salvation of our
Immortal Souls. And this leads to the

Last particular, the Consideration of those glorious Benefits of Baptism. By
this it is that we assure our Salvation, we enter into Covenant with the Lord
of Life, who has engaged himself (we performing our parts) to make us easy and
happy here, and glorious hereafter; to afford us his Grace and Favor, his
Mercy and Love in this Life; then to receive us to himself, to partake of
Eternal Glory in the Life to come. By this we become Sons of God, Heirs of
Heaven, and Members of Christ. By this we have our Pardon Sealed, and it is at
our own Will and Pleasure afterward, whether we will be happy or not, whether
we will be Saved or Ruined. By this we have the Favor and Grace of God
Ascertained; and in this, we enter upon all those Glorious Fruits of our
Blessed Lords Death and Passion, of his Glorious Resurrection and Ascension.

And who can esteem these poor and mean things? Who, of any Sense and Thought,
can count them Indifferent? Who, but must highly Value, and with all his Powers
attempt to obtain them?

Happy most certainly are all they, who are thought worthy of them; Happy
indeed all we who are capable of them; who by the Care of our Parents, in our
Early Adoption and good Education, may be properly said to be Born Heirs to
them.

Happy our Nation that Enjoys the best of Churches, and happy all those People
who are brought up in the most Excellent Discipline of it.

Happy all we who had Christian and Conscientious Parents, and were early
Instructed in these Noble Principles; thrice happy we, who have so great, and
so many Encouragements to our Duty, and may perceive so much Ease and Pleasure,
so much Joy and Satisfaction, in the Discharge of it.

Happy are all they, who square their Lives according to these Rules, and makes
it their Business to follow the Captain of their Salvation.

Happy all they, who when denied and refused these Blessednesses by the
Misfortune of Education, or the Force and Violence of Commanding Relations, do
at last by the Grace of God, and the Power of his Righteousness in their
Hearts; or by the Conviction of their own Sins, and Misery in the want of a
Savior, as the Men of Israel in the Text, and these Persons here present, do
Heartily desire, and in this Sacrament, espouse Jesus Christ and Him Crucified.

Happy all those, who omit no opportunities of securing all this Happiness,
Improving all these Glorious Privileges: Happy indeed, the People that are in
such a Case; truly Blessed all they, who thus have the Lord for their God.

I have still the Application to press to us all on these two Accounts, both as
we have obtained, and as we have very Early and Long-ago obtained this
Happiness.

To you first, who now have obtained this Happiness, this Christian Fraternity;
as you are now admitted into the Church of God, and made Members of Christ,
suffer this Word of Advice.

You see how Glorious is your Employment, how great the Reward of it; how
Sacred the Profession is which you have now undertaken, how serious and earnest
are all the Rules and Laws of it. You see how good is your security of reward
from your Heavenly Father; how necessary therefore is it for you not to be
behind-hand, but to make good your part. You see that all the conditions are
absolutely in Favor of you, and that if you keep faithful to the end, you will
obtain such glory as does pass all understanding. You see that you have entered
upon an Holy Employment, a Serious and Sacred Conversation; you see what you
have now Promised and Engaged, even to put off and Renounce your former Natural
Habits, and Sinful Inclinations. Nay, you Solemnly have Vowed before God and
good Witnesses, a great Number of Christians in this Congregation, that you
would do your best so to do, following the Commands of God, and walking from
henceforth in Newness of Life. Lastly, you see what you lose, if you forfeit
this your Trust, and Break your Obligations; and what you will gain: You lose
then no less than God, and Heaven, Joys Unspeakable and full of Glory; and
you will gain only Disappointments, and Vexations, Torments and Trouble,
Uneasiness and the Gripes of Conscience, while you're on Earth; and afterward
anguish of Soul, Judgment with Despair, all the Treasures of Hell, even Eternal
Desolations.

Be assured then that this is no Jest, it is no less than your Interest, than
your best Interest, the Interest of your Souls: And you will find that your
Duty will require your utmost Care. Baptism indeed begins an Happy Life, but
yet a Life not free from Trouble and Temptation; the Devil is always very busy
with New-beginners; as soon as our Lord himself was Baptized, he had the
Impudence to Attack and Tempt Him: But he who overcame him, will also guard
you, if you keep true to him, and will take Care that you shall not be Tempted,
above what in will Enable you to bear; and God grant that you may so Consider
all these things, as to answer the great end of this your Noble and so Glorious
Call.

Lastly, To all us who have been so long Engaged in this mighty Covenant, let
one Word be added. We were early admitted into the Church, with all the Ease
and Satisfaction Imaginable; with the Comfort of Friends, the Joy of
Neighbors, the Assistance of Relations, and all manner of Encouragement: We
have frequently repeated this Holy Contract, Solemnly renewed it in the other
Sacrament, that of our Dear Lords Blessed Body and Blood.

Let us all remember, and most earnestly Consider the Sacredness of our
Obligation, the necessity of our Obedience, and the wonderful Indulgence of our
Lord and Master; who, though we have been so long Bound, and frequently have
forfeited our Condition of the Contract, and added many great, Voluntary,
Obstinate, and Ungrateful Violations of that most Holy Covenant, yet is pleased
not to take the Advantage of us, but rather Forgive us, and wait still for us,
is still open and ready to receive us, willing and desirous to be Fully
Reconciled to us.

And therefore we see the Reason for that Fatherly admonition we lately
received from our Right Reverend careful Diocesan, that that holy Sacrament be
administered here in Gods own House, at the place and times appointed by the
Church; not only to keep up the Honor of that Holy Sacrament of our Lord, of
late sunk to a most dreadful Disesteem by many; but also, that we our selves
might there be Reminded of our own Promises, our own former Vows and
Obligations, and brought thereby to a speedier Examination how we have answered
those our Vows.

Let us all then who by this opportunity are refreshed with the Remembrance of
our Duties, let us take Care speedily to Return to our Lord, Humble our selves
before him, truly Repent us of all our forfeitures and carelessness, and apply
our selves more diligently in our Masters Service for the future: So shall we
obtain Mercy and Ease, Relief and Comfort, Joy and Satisfaction, while we
continue amongst Men; and when we shall have done with this World, we shall
receive a Welcome into the other, even to God Almighty our Eternal Father; to
our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who was Baptized himself, who Died and Rose
again for us, and to the Blessed Comforter who preserves and directs us: To
which most Glorious Trinity, but one Only God, let there be ascribed, by all
Men and Angels, and created Brings, all Honor Power and Glory, Might, Majesty
and Dominion, both now and Evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

