AN ANSWER TO A Small Treatise Called JUST MEASURS; IN AN Epistle of Peace and
Love

By way of Address, to such as Esteem themselves Elders amongst the People
called Quakers; That they may remove what remains in the way of our Peace.

Printed in the Year. 1693.

Page 9 line 24 for here read where p. 15 l. 22 and r. or p. 16 l. 23 remains
r. remain p. 21 l. 29 of r. or p. 23 l. 16 and r for l. 17 for r and p. 24 l.
30 and r. that is p. 26 l. 22 Servants r Servant p 28 l. 7 And r or p 31 l. 15
way r may p. 33 l. 16 no r near l. 20 his r this p. 35 l. 22. there is r they
are p. 36 l. 13 know r knew l. 25 serviceable. r most serviceable p. 37 l. 18
to r that is p. 38 l. 30 them r then p. 40 l. 11 Distinction r Definition p. 48
l. 26 at an r about p. 49 l. 25 tho r the p. 52 l. 7 Sign r Figure p. 53 l. 24
forth r back p 63 l. 28 Jew r Jews p. 65 l. 17 singly r simply p. 66 l. 2. of r
in one l. 34 principal r Principle p. 71 l. 15 universally r and that
universally p. 72 l. 29 opinion r Profession p. 76 l. 12 according r. and
according p. 78 l. 3 souls r sakes l. 34 Liberty 80 l. 9 is r was p. 8 r l. 2
might r must p. 83 l. 9 opposition p 89 l. 22 alone r above.

AN ANSWER to a small Treatise, CALLED Just Measures, in an EPISTLE of Peace
and Love, etc.
WE have considered this Epistle, styled, Just Measures, etc. Subscribed G. P.
Directed to all Dissatisfied among Friends, as well to such asarenot separated,
as to such asare; Now though we are in no actual Separation, yet being truly
Dissatisfied, takes occasion to Write as follows. Who Is the Author, is not so
much as what is said, considering it seems approved by the Eldership, being
sent abroad amongst the Society, as such Books are, as are allowed for
Orthodox, therefore in speaking to it, we shall direct our selves to them, not
doubting, but as it was Wrote for them, their mind's included; and unto whom
can we so well apply our selves for Relief as unto such as have been the
Occasion of our Trouble, by bringing into the Society against the Minds of
their Brethren, things for which there appears no necessity, and then requiring
compliance under the Notion of Eldership; now if we apply our selves to them,
then chiefly to such as seems to be as the Head, and noting Causes by their
Effects, this seems settled at London, from hence came our Circular Letters that
have disturbed Us. And therefore as things are Modeled from hence must come our
Voice of Peace if ever Our Divisions be cemented, or our Disatsfaction removed;
but by the way pray let Us know how this headship, as to Government, came to be
fixed here, to Us in our Case there seems but two ways, that is either by the
choice of the People, or by the Choice of the Eldership, Now if the Society as
such have devolved the Government upon you that reside here: Pray when was this
Agreement made, for it is needful to know at least the Original of this
Constitution, if we are to be concluded by it? But if this Headship be fixed
here by the choice of the Eldership, Pray then give Us leave to Capitulate for
that Just Liberty we had in the Society, before those things was run to this
height of Disatisfaction, as formally being made terms of Communion, whilst We
have not gone from Ancient Principles, nor into any thing that is Immoral or
evil; if you deny Us this, We must complain it is not Government, but something
of Tyranny or Injustice at least that is introduced.

That the Headship as to Government is settled here appears further by the Power
being lodged here, for the conveneing of Our Yearly Meetings, as well as by
their Assembling here, it is here our Orders have their strength, by the
Approbation of this confluence. You know Christ Our Lord tells us that His
Kingdom is not of this World, and therefore we conceive His Government is not
set up by such ways and means as uphold Worldly Power, (address to Protestants
Page 232 to 244) if so, we cannot think this is Christ's Government, nor like
it, which is so like that of the World, both for Contrivance and Order, and if
not his, it ought at best to be Subservient to his; on which account You ought
to be Cautious that you entrench not upon his Prerogative, who is Lord of
Conscience; in short, the Government contended for by you, you must own to be
our Lords or yours; Our Lords it can not be, for it is certain he uses no other
force to uphold his Government, then to set it up, and if he always took it by
Patience and Suffering, he will never uphold it by force and Violence (address
to Protestants 203 Page to the end of that Head) and therefore when any thing
of Violence is used, we may be sure it is none of his, and if not his, then it
must be yours, and as yours, you ought not to impose new things, for that
destroys that freedom we ought to have and enjoy as we are a Free and Voluntary
Society; but you tell us this belongs to the outpart of the Church as we are a
Civil Society.

What Is this but to say we may have one sort of Power to Govern the out Part,
and another to guide the in; this makes way for Carnal and Unregenerate Men (if
they have but a good share of natural parts) to be our Rulers, but you know
Christ our Lord tells us, if the Inside be clean, the outside will be clean
also, and truly all Conformity that wants Conviction or Persuasion can have no
acceptance with God, so that all this is but to please Men; but if you will
insist that those things are Civil, however you may then take away as well as
add, and to take away those things so far as they have given occasion,
certainly seems needful; otherwise you may transmit your errors to Posterity,
for it is on those Foundations you lay for Government, that some others will
build, and considering that all Builders on a Religious score, since the
Apostasy, have failed at least in your judgment; or else how could you have
Justified our dissent; on this account you ought to have been the more
cautious; for error in the beginning, either in the matter or manner of
bringing in things, must be the Ruin of a Christian Superstructure; so that tho
the Foundation may have been good you may have professed, yet Hay and Stubble
may be Builded, for when you tell us those are the lesser things about which
the Difference is, (Page 16) they cannot be Fundamentals, and when you say they
concern not God. Faith, Conscience or Religion (Page 4 and 5.) they can be but
your Opinions and Judgments; those can have no higher Original then that of
Man's reason, which as it is subject to be short, vary, and miscarrie, such
things as those ought not to have been brought in as the Laws of the Medes and
Persians; but Cautiously and by way of Probation. Therefore having now the
proof of the evil consequence of being Possitive, where at most you ought but
to have recommended: You would do well to Repeal, or at least suspend next
Meeting what has been found so fatal to the Unity desired, otherwise you may
show more Power to Rule, then prudence to Govern.

What you have said to others in Address to Protestants (page 62 to 92) both
what should be made Terms of Communion, and what should not, deserves your most
serious Consideration; for certainly we want nothing of what (you say there) is
sufficient for Communion, and if so it is unreasonable to shut us out for want
of that which ought not to be made such, and that in your own sense, pray be
consistent for that passage in Page 93 deserves not only your Consideration but
Application, and that is if we consider the matter well, I fear (says our
Author) it will be found that the occasion of disturbance in the Church of
Christ, has in most Ages been found to lie on the side of those that had the
greatest sway in it, which in our Age is but too true. We observe this Epistle
differs much from other Books writ on this Subject, and allowed by the same
Authority, if we should Confront this with them they would be like Babel
Indeed, whilst the same thing is pretended, it is true we are willing to search
to the quick, but as we would not make the breach wider then needs must, we
shall not at this time compare them together, hoping how ever that the softness
of the Style of this bespeaks a dislike at least of former severities; what is
right we are willing to acknowledge, and shall as readily note; What is wrong,
concluding it is dangerous to endeavor to heal our hurt slightly; and how ever
our endeavor may succeed or be resented; we can in our Defense say, that not
only our Arms but our Hearts are open and free to receive you, and what you say
as we meet it in the truth and you in the Spirit and power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and can add sincerely, that our desire to seek and find that seemless
Garment of Our Lord you speak of and not only find it but that we might have it
put on as in our beginning, whilst Travelers together in Spirit for the true
Rest, which so many have set out to find but miscarryed; but as this Seamless
Garment stands not in Identity of an Opinion, nor in the Unity of those
Formallities of Form, which respect more the manner of doing of a thing then
the thing it self; therefore all the Builders that have sought it here have
erred and will still err, as they thus seek it. For as Truth is contrary to
Error, so is Gods way to Man's in this matter, as our own Appollogies for
Liberty do abundantly show; Now if the Unity to be sought for stand not in
Opinion nor in those Formallities of Form as above, it can only be found in the
Spirit, where there is a sincerity to God; this Our Lord owns when ever it is
according to the degree of Light afforded. And that is it which should be
seriously enquired after, and this you can hardly deny Us, upon your own
Concessions in this Epistle, if you are real, other if you deceive Us. You
confess ( Page the 2) that we are one with you in Judgment in the Worship and
Doctrine of Truth, etc. Now if by Worship you mean a true serving of God, and
if by Doctrine of Truth you intend, as you ought, what concerns Godliness, it
can hardly be but you must allow. Us found in the Faith, and Conscientious in
what we do; for it is impossible we should be faithful in the greater Things,
and false in the less, on this account you ought to allow our reason or indulge
us; and therefore considering this, and several other confessions in this Book,
may we not hope for the future, that Dissenters and such as are dissatisfied
may meet with a more favorable aspect from you, and not only their separate
Meetings Visited in Love by you, but your Meetings free and open in your minds
and behavior to such as come in Love and good will to Visit You, tho in some
things disatisfied with your proceedings; for what can keep up the Difference
more then your strangeness, and how can it tend to accommodation, the Thing you
pretend to desire and seek? Or how can it be Truth, or like it, to keep up this
Difference and distance to Severities? if not some time to rudeness; and that
with such as agree with you, in your own sense, in all the Essentials of
Religion, and truly serve God for any thing you know or can prove to the
contrary, Pray consider of it.

But to proceed; You speak of the Government to remain in the hands of the
Eldership, but if Our Lord makes this Eldership, does he not also make the
submission that is necessary, for we will say we are for good Order, and if the
Elders set us a good example of humility and selfe-denyal, by which we find it
is not themselves they Preach, but Christ and his Government they desire should
be set up, and not their own: We can readily give them double Honor, by
following them as they follow Christ; and we are sure none of you ought to
desire more.

Now if We are only to follow you, as you are the followers of Christ, we ought
to be sensible of it, and that must be either by an outward Rule, or by an
inward; if the first, set it forth; if the latter, stay till we are convinced
or persuaded, this is fair, here blind Obedience is excluded, and it ought not
to be denied; on this foot we inquire how we must know this Eldership on whose
Conduct we may safely rely; for where there must be a dependence, there ought
to be a certainty; pray mind that, to us then as a free and voluntary Society,
there seems but two ways to know Eldership, that is chiefly after the Spirit,
or after the flesh, that is, after an inward or an outward way; now if we must
know our Eldership after the Spirit, then indeed no matter of your setting them
forth, for as we are not to believe every Spirit, a liberty of Examination is
reserved, and where that ought to be, a choice must be allowed, on this Foot it
follows beyond contradiction, we are not Obliged to new things but as convinced
or persuaded; and as this is according to Gods dealing with us in our Spiritual
travel, so it agrees with our Imbodying as a free and voluntary Society; and
grant but this great Truth and Ancient Testimony, and as it may prevent further
disatisfaction, which to us seems greater then you either know or are willing
to grant, so it may also help to cure our Division; and how you should deny
this to such as was of the Community, till your Exclusion by Imposing your
Opinions, and do still agree with you in the Worship and Doctrine of Truth we
can not tell; but if you will say that we are to know our Elders chiefly after
the flesh, that is after an outward way; I Answer. Not now to insist on the
weakness and insufficiency of this way, we do say then as we are a free and
voluntary Society, it is needful, as well as our right, not only to be
satisfied in them, but have our choice of them; and then not only know who they
are but where they reside, that as on the one hand on occasion we may have
recourse unto them, so on the other, that thereby we may be secured from being
Imposed upon by pretenders.

But if you deny the first, and cannot secure Us in the latter; as we have
neither choice in the Eldership, nor power to refuse what is wrong, there is no
way left to prevent Ignorance and slavery; at this door, that thing you call
Priestcraft entered, and that distinction of Clargy and Laity, which must be
wrong and insupportable in you, what ever it is in others, we entreat you to
consider of it in a cool Mind.

But if you will say (as in this Epistle Page 14.) that the Government must
remain in the hands of such as God has made Eminent in the gathering of his
People, or to this effect; then we Answer, as the case stands, as specious as
this is, it is not like to cure our Divisions, but rather to increase them,
this being a way to make as many Parties as such Persons to head them, some for
Paul some for Apollo, etc. For it is sure under this Notion there is and have
been many Elders amongst such as are dissatisfied who may on this foot plead an
Equal right to Govern; what then remains this way except you will fly to that of
Antiquity or Number, but as those have been denied by you to others, we
conclude you should not use it; then what is to be done to cure our Divisions
and prevent further Disatisfaction? nothing can do but our Elders (...) to
throw down their Crowns at the feet of Jesus, that it may appear to be his
Government and not their's that is sought. Thus Christ our Lord advised in the
case of Difference and contest, the Elder is to be as the Younger, and him that
Rules, as be that serves, and he that will be the greatest, is to manifest it
by being Servant to the rest; for it is certain the Government of Christ our
Lord in this case is Uniform and does not vary (tho Man's may) using no other
way to preserve then he did to gather, for if force, strife, contention, or
violence were right at any time, he could as well use it at first as at last.
But as he always made his entrance by Patience and Suffering in his Servants,
as well as in himself, it is certain he rules in humility overcoming difference
by the same way; it is true in the breaking forth of his power, his Servants
are mostly Humble and Patiens of necessity, because they have nothing to depend
on but him; here many have been preserved that have failed when they have known
any thing of an overcoming, as tho the Lord was changed because the state of
things had changed them; No he is the same still, and therefore no other way
but to deny self, and to throw down your Crowns at the feet of Jesus; an hard
thing indeed to flesh and blood, but that is no matter, flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, and as this was never known truly done in any
Reformation, so it has certainly been the ground of Division, or at least a
cause of it, and of that enmity that has attended Separation; and it is now
become your Trial; O that you could consider of it that so the evil and enmity
at least in our different apprehension and dissatisfaction might be avoided;
pray consider, more light may spring up, as it has done before, and God may
make use of whom he pleases without your leave, and you ought rather to wait
for his judgment, then to conclude you are Judges of it, or of whom he sends or
makes use of; verily you cannot be too little in your own eyes, what ever you
are in others, pray direct all to Christ, that he may be known by way of
pre-eminence in all, the Elder of Elders, and be content to leave all with him,
as in the beginning, with out setting limits to his appearance, of your own
devising, knowing most certainly that none that come truly to him, can do any
thing against the Truth, and they that do not so come can do nothing for it;
and once for all, tho what is evil and Immoral may and ought to be rejected,
yet considering what gives acceptance with God can not be Imposed, let not a
misled Zeal, on this specious Pretense, to make the Church as large as the
Profession, or by adding of new Orders and Rules, under pretense to help such
as are not fatihful, be a cause to reject such as are; for as you deal with
such as are Conscientious, you will be dealt with; and to be plain with you, if
in this case you do not Judge your selves, you will be Judged by some that
succeed, as truly as you have judged some that did go before; for if you would
but honestly reflect upon your selves in that glass of equal Liberty, which you
have held to others, you might certainly see some thing of the same Image, that
you have reproved in others. And why should you take this ill or think it hard
or strange, for you must come through those Difficulties and Straits, where
others have failed or you must miscarry; but if you have not seen them it is
certain you have not escaped them; then must you be as truly tried, (as others
have been) by them whom the Lord may send; you know what our Lord said, There
are first that shall be last, and there are last that shall be first. You know
those hired into the Vineyard some came sooner then others, but those that came
last he paid first, this was not faulted whilst those that came first, did
still expect to receive according to their Estimate of their time and Service
(as they said) in the beat of the day, but when it proved otherwise, all was
wrong with them, what was written, was writ for our Learning; therefore set
Self but really aside; and the Scripture will be found as true in our day as
formerly. For to be plain, it is the overvaluing of your selves and the work,
that makes the mistake, but as I should speak to the intelligent, on this point
shall not much further proceed at this time, but take notice, what is here
said, is not to depress any beneath their true vallue or raise any above it in
the eyes of others, but only that confidence in the flesh, wherein so many have
stuck and miscarried, might be wasted and consumed, that so the Lord our God
might be exalted over all, for he that is come, is yet to come, and as His
goings forth has been from Everlasting, they still continue a Riddle to the
Rulers, and a Mystery to all that is but born after the flesh; and what is
flesh in a Religious sense, but Form, the external part of Religion; for all
that stick here, as they are great in the formality of it, so such never failed
to persecute them that's born after the Spirit, because such being dead with
Christ to the World, and the Rudiments of it, have not nor never had that value
for outward things, which those born after the flesh have; yet always brings
forth the righteousness of those things. It was thus betwixt Israel and the
Prophets, and betwixt the Jewish Rabbys and our Lord, and has been much after
the same manner in the Reformation, and is after the like sort now, if you
could but consider it; but for all this we can allow of Elders, and that in a
good sense, for some have been before others in testifying to Gods appearance
in our day, and have been made instrumental to turn some to righteousness in
the hand of the Lord; but what then, did such find out the Truth by their skill
or cunning, or the Lord fought them out, did such send themselves or the Lord
sent such into his Vineyard? If the Lord, is not all owing to him? and cannot
you be content with what honor he gives, without seeking honor by bearing
witness of your selves, for the noise you make bears witness you are not
satisfied with that honor he gives, he that has the Bride is the Bridegroom
and in the best sense you can be but Preparers for him, and as you have
directed all to him you ought to be willing to present all to him, for his
increasing must be the decreasing of the Instrument; for every true Preparer
for Christ does certainly know as he comes to take the Government they must
decrease, therefore do they constantly throw down their Crowns by affirming
that their Service must be fulfilled to every one that comes to know the
sufficiency of our Lords Government. And cannot you be glad and rejoice in
this? If not, all is not right yet; for all the true Preparers for him, as they
know this, ought to be so, they both seek and defire it, but such as are so
much in the formallitys of Form, they cannot, because they gather to themselves
that is to their own Opinions and Judgments; grant that you have Preached to us
Spiritual things; What then, do you desire we should know you after the flesh
for that? If so, all is not yet right; if God have made some of you
Instrumental to turn some to Righteousness, and in that sense may be termed as
Fathers, do you expect our Obedience as Children? But if so, consider you are
under as great or greater Oligation to us as Children, you should neither
provoke not require of us what we can not give for Conscience sake; for it
would be cruel to seek to destroy what you might be Instrumental to beget; it is
not a telling of us the cause of Difference is not matter of Conscience whilst
we know, and do most surely believe otherwise; beware what you do for if by
your distinctious of what is Civil and Religious, you destroy the tenderness of
Conscience or reject such as are Conscientious, your Work must suffer loss by
the fire, which must try your Works as well as others, and indeed it seems
already kindled, the occasion of all this noise is for the saving of what is
combustible; whereas had you builded nothing but Gold and Silver, had you
infisted upon nothing but what had been Essential to Society and good Order,
there would have been no occasion of this noise; because then there had been no
fear or hazard of loss; nay such things would have stood the trial and com'd
through rather purified then hurt.

But to proceed, is it not sufficient for you that we can acknowledge your
Seniority, as above expressed and can testify that it was Truth you directed
to in the beginning, but we must always be under your Tutorage? is it not honor
enough for you, that we can say that having come to him with our hard
Questions, whose Fame you spread, that we have found the truth of his
sujficiency even beyond your report; and now being come to him, and heard him
our selves, would you have us back again to depend on you? Nay verily, rather
give us leave frankly to say, we believe not now because of your word, but
because we have heard him our selves, whose word is Spirit and life, and by
what he has done for us, we are sure he only can complete what remains; and if
your distinction of greater or lesser things were necessary ( Page 15 and 16)
we find he does not only teach the great things, which you seem to grant as our
Duty toward God, but the lesser things also, as our Duty toward Men, which you
seem to reserve; and what is this for, but that we might always remains Pupils,
that thereby we might be at your Devotion? but to be plain, if that distinction
be needful, we find he teaches the lesser things first, and greater and
greater as we are fitted to receive them; for it is impossible we should know
the greater and not the less, or be faithful in the greater, and false in the
less; for he that performs his Duty to God cannot fail of paying what he owes
to his Neighbor; and indeed to know this Spiritual Birth, by which God can in
a peculier sense be truly called Father, is needful for every individual Soul;
otherwise our Title and Interest is surer to this World and the things of it,
then it is to that which is to come, when that and the things of it, as it is
more excellent so it can only be more sure, this being but the Figure, and that
the Substance; give us leave to say then, where the sufficiency of Christ the
Son of God is known, such cannot depend on you, nor any Man; and they that know
not your Service fulfilled by him, knows not yet his sufficiency, nor is
Christ yet truly formed in them as they ought to know him: And truly every one
that confesses that Christ is come in Spirit, and does not wait and hope to
have your Service fulfilled as Instruments, they have either taken up a false
Rest, or yet never came into the true travel. And whilst you seem to grant him
the greater things and not the less, it is because you do not know the greater,
or at least are not subject to the Government of Christ as you ought to be;
bear with us for the knowledge of his sufficiency, and the necessity for every
one ^w it, that professes his teaching that confesses to his inward and
Spiritual Appearance with love to him and those that so profess, makes us thus
to speak, and constrains us thus to Judge, that if one dyed for all then all
was dead, and he that you have directed to in the beginning, being that one
thas dyed for all, for this very end, that such as are quickied and live by
him, should not live to themselves, nor to you, nor any other by way of
Dependence, but only to him, that dyed for them and rose again, to Govern them
so, that tho there may have been a time that we might depend on Men as hoping
to receive from them, but this was in our Pupillage and Childish states, and as
that must be passed through, or Spiritual Manhood cannot be known, so where
Spiritual Manhood is truly known, such cannot know you nor any Men any more so,
or after that manner; Christ has been known after the flesh, but now as we are
chiefly to know him after the Spirit, on this account therefore we are to know
Men no otherwise; thus much by way of Preface.

And now we will come to the matter of Diffetence as you have stated it; ( Page
2 and 3) that there is a Difference (you say,) is but too plain, for it is come
(you say) to a Separation, as well to Places of Worship, as in matters of
Dis^pline, etc.

Answer, This is well done to grant that those that have Separated have Places
for Worship etc. For this fairly demonstrates, those did not Separate to be at
liberty in the flesh, as has been too commonly reported and objected; no, no,
that was not the matter; Places for Worship show such intend to serve God
still, and Discipline denotes such intend still to take care of what business
belongs to the Society; this we think might bring you nearer them then you are,
if well considered, what you confess, (...) that they are one in Judgment with
you in the Worship and Doctrines of Truth, and therefore if you be true, we
cannot see how they should be wrong, Consider of it.

But to Proceed: The ground say you of this great Dissatisfaction upon which so
great a distance has been raised (you say) meaning those that are Dissatisfied)
is requiring your compliance with some practices relating to Discipline,
particularly women's Meetings, and coming twice before Men, and Women's Meetings
about Marriages before admitted to be Solemnized among us, Some of you (that is
disatisfied) thinking that there is no Service for Women's Meetings at all,
others no Service in their being distinct from Men's Meetings, at least no
necessity for either, and therefore no necessary compliance to be required, and
insisted upon (by us) but every one left (in this matter should have been
added) to their Liberty in Christ, least Imposition and Formality should
prevail among us, as they have done in other Religious Societies in this (says
the Author) I think I have truly and fairly stated the case on your side (that
is dissatisfied) and given your Objection to our Practice and the reason why
you dissent from it, etc.

Answer, Other things beside this have given occasion of dissatisfaction: For
Instance that Possitive Limit of a Years time in the case of Marriage, which
certainly is of evil consequence, and against both truth and reason, as might
be demonstrated. But this above being as the Original or first beginning of the
present Dissatisfaction, that and the rest may be included; in the success of
this, we may grant the Objection is better made then answered a great deal, but
yet it is neither fairly nor truly stated at least in the first part; for you
man the Objection (...) alike against Men's and Women's Meetings, and against
coming twice to the Man's as well as against coming twice to the Women's;
whereas you do very well know that the Objection does lie chiefly against that
of the Women, and your imposing of it: and not against that of the Men, nor
against coming twice before them, if occasion be for satisfaction; for you know
speaking generally they did not refuse to come to the Men's Meetings in the case
of Marriage, till you peremptorily made that of the Women's as Essential or as
necessary as the other, and would not allow of the Former without the Latter,
tho our Ancient Practice and Order mutually agreed on and established among us:
From hence came Dissatisfaction by Imposing those things, and thereby invading
our Liberty as a free and Voluntary Society, and therefore if hence forward
some refused to come to the Men's Meetings in the case of Marriage, it was
because you had enjoined the Other with it, and this being wrong in their
Judgment, at least as Imposed, it made the whole wrong, for to enjoin what is
wrong with what is right, so that the one cannot be done without the other, make
the whole act wrong. Now for you to Argue (as in the 7 Page) that such refuse
to come to the Men's Meetings because they will not satisfy Parents, nor clear
former engagements, is disingenious and unfair; for you have both lost the
Objection, to wit, Women's Meetings, and also make it the same thing to deny
imposition, as it is to go from an Ancient Practice allowed of by us, wherein
you misrepresent the honest Dissenter as well as abuse the unthinking Reader.
etc.

As to the latter part of the Objection it is more fair; we may take it
beginning at those words, at least no necessity for either, that is, there is
no necessity for Women Constant Meeting either by themselves or with the Men
for Government in our Church or Society. Now the Term necessity on which the
weight of the Objection lies or depends, you have not spoken to it, nor so much
as taken notice of it in your Answer; therefore we may safely say the
objection, tho of your own Stating, is abundantly better made then answered;
but as the weight of the matter lies in this part, you ought to have taken it
in; for you must grant there is a necessity for Women's Meetings as above, or
there is not; if there is a necessity for Women's Meeting to be universally
imposed upon the Society, then you ought fairly to have set that out, for do
that and truly demonstrate or prove it, and then compliance will follow of
course; this had been a short and clear way to have done your business; but if
no necessity for Women's Meetings as above, then you ought to have granted that,
because it is needful to know on what foot you proceed with us; for if no
necessity for them, and yet you insist to require our Compliance, then the
Issue and decision of this great Controversy, must stand in the valliditie of
your Authority, to require things to be done by us, for which in truth there
is no necessity that they should be done.

Observe, Either of these Points truly proved determins the controversy, but
both cannot be insisted on and as both cannot be pleaded, if you can prove
neither; in plain terms you must be guilty of Imposing and seeking Lordship
over your Brethren, or something that relates to it, which cannot agree with
our Principle and that free bottom we seemed to Imbarke together in

Now we do most surely believe you can prove neither of the Points above, and
might here give some reasons for it, without taking any further notice of what
you write; but least you or any should say we evade your Arguments because we
cannot Answer them, we will consider them first; though truly they seem in our
Judgment so far from proving any thing to the matter, that they appear more
Artificial then Genuine, more like drawing a Curtain before the work of
Imagerie, then fairly setting out the truth; or like such as have bad Causes of
Titles to manage; nothing is more dangerous then coming to the Merit of the
Cause, or truth in the matter, for what a good Cause in this case endeavors in
plainness and simplicity, the other endeavors to avo^d by Artifice and cunning

But to Proceed, what you begin with is to clear your selves of Imposition and
Formallitie, but could you have proved either of the Points there had been no
Occasion of this, it follows ( Page the 4) I do not find (says our Author)
that you (meaning those disatisfied) have any just cause to sear in general an
infringement on our Christian Liberty. Since it has been and is most sincerely
declared by the Brethren chiefly concerned in the good Order and Service of the
Church, that they have no thought or design of imposing any thing upon the
Consciences of Friends or that friends, ought to have now any more then at the
beginning any other reason or measure of compliance or conformity in matters
relating to God then the conviction of the light and Spirit of God in every
Conscience but there is this distinction to be considered well of, that the
matters in difference are not such as require such an exercise and conviction
of Conscience as is pleaded because they relate not to Faith or Worship, did
they require Faith, or did they appertain to Worship, as if you were obliged to
Worship God only in such Place, time, Gesture, Raiment, with such words and
Forms of speech, etc. Your Plea and objection were good; but this about which
your Disatisfaction arises is merely Discipline in Government and not in
Worship, Formallitie in Order, not in Religion, it is about Methods of
regulating our selves as to the Civil or outpart of the Church, as we are a
Society, etc. For instance, to keep the Necessitous, and reconcile Differences,
in fine, to prevent rebuke, and restore disorderly Walkers.

Ans. You see we have quoted you fairly, and shall as freely examine it without
begging any excuse; for in matters of Truth and Justice all carnal
consideration is to be set aside; on this account then we are to know no Man
after the flesh, no not that of Fathers or Elders, and therefore first take
notice, all this has nothing in it to prove a necessity for Women's Meeting
constantly in the Society as above, nor that you under the Notion of Elders
have any Power from God or the Society to bring in, and enforce upon Us that
for which in truth there is no necessity; no, could you do that, you do but
trifle and lose time by this discourse; but the truth of it is, this bespeaks
you can prove neither of the Points; for you persuade us to follow you in those
things, not because there is a necessity for them, or because you have Power to
Impose them upon us; but because they are not matter of Conscience; whereas if
you had Power to bring them in or there was a necessity for them, then they
must be matter of Conscience, and it would be our Duty to obey you; for what is
Duty is matter of Conscience; you know we have been directed and exhorted to
walk in the light as God is in the light, and that is always, but this we
cannot do without Conscience and understanding; now if we must follow you
without understanding and Conscience, we are to follow you not in the Light but
without it, and then that must be in the dark, and you know it is writ they that
walk in the dark know not whither they go; to be sure if they get not into the
Ditch they must be in danger of it.

But to proceed, You tell us that you find no cause for us to fear in the
general an infringement of your Christian Liberty, etc. If this was true in the
general, yet just cause in a particular case was sufficient for our resentment,
for once admit of one error, and way is made for more; you know it is a Proverb,
Rome was not built on a day; nor did the most degenerate Church become so all
at once; nay there is a time ordinarily to grow worse as well as better, but
your reason as we take it, that we need not fear an Infringement on our
Christian Liberty is this, that the Brethren chiefly concerned in the good
Order, etc. have most sincerely declared they have no thoughts of imposing upon
Conscience. But pray who are those Brethren, what must we suppose at adventure
who they are, and then conclude they have not only most sincerely declared as
above, but also that they cannot err or be mistaken? But in the first Place, if
the matter be so purely Civil as you make it, why are not those persons you
speak of, as civilly set forth, for otherwise we are to depend on we know not
whom, and take for truth what we cannot understand, and what more blind and
Implicit? And what other Medium is afforded whilst neither the Brethren are
set out, nor we allowed Conscience to know what men say is true, for take
notice, there must be a certainty of those things, or a liberty of Choice. But
our Author is one of those chiefly concerned in the good Order, above or he is
not, if not pray how does he know those he speaks of have most sincerely
declared? what does he presume they have, and we must trust him; and what is
this but presumption upon presumption? But if he is one of them chiefly
concerned and so may pretend he speaks by experience; what demonstration does
he give beyond his say so? but if we know him and could take his word for
himself, what security can he give for the rest concerned, that they have most
sincerely declared as before; but suppose they are sincere and in earnest, what
satisfaction can either he or they give that they are not mistaken in the
matter? this is neither Impertinent nor Unnecessary; for if we must be led
without understanding and Conscience, to know the truth of things or be
satisfied for our selves, we had need to have some satisfaction of the
sufficiency of those on whom we are to depend, for what blind Man would be
willing to be led into a ditch? so that tho he cannot see himself, yet would
be as sure as possible those can, on whom he is to depend, and plainly whilst
you neither set forth our Leaders that we may query them for our satisfaction,
nor allow us Conscience to know what Men say is true; you put us as much as in
you lies into a worse condition then those that is blind, who yet have liberty
to choose for their satisfaction to the best of their understanding; how can you
think much that we desire to be satisfied when the Leaders and Elders in most
Ages in your own sense, at one time or other have been mistaken, and by their
mistake have caused the People to err, and yet might be sincere or in earnest;
for you know the Apostle Paul bare the Jews witness, they had a Zeal for God
but not according to knowledge, and therefore being Ignorant of the
Righteousness of God, went about to establish their own; and if we consider
there is nothing new what was then, has been in all the Reformation and is
still, and will continue, where outward things are over valued, or
Circumstantial things made terms of Communion. So that there is no more said or
done in all this, then what mistaken Men and degenerate Churches may have said
or done.

But to Proceed, you tell us that Friends ought not to have now any more then
at the beginning, any other reason or measure of compliance or conformity in
matters relating to God, then the conviction of the light, and Spirit of Christ
in every Conscience, etc. But (say you) there is this distinction to be
considered well of, that the matters in difference are not such as require such
an exercise and conviction as is pleaded, because they relate not to Faith or
Worship, etc.

Answer, We grant that a distinction may be made betwixt what relates to God,
and what relates to Man, but to make this distinction in our case, on purpose
to exclude Conscience in the latter, is so far from being a right measure, that
it is really wrong, and not only wrong but dangerous on a Religious score, and
not safe on a Civil. First on a Religious score, as this distinction makes
serving God not to stand in all we do, it makes it but to stand in some things,
and as this makes Gods Worship and Service not to be constant and continual, it
makes Worship only to relate to times and Places; in the best sense this can
but comport with a Legal Service and dispensation, for it cannot agree with
what is truly Gospel as rightly distinguished and understood from what is Legal,
for speaking generally there is nor never was but two Covenants or States in
which men are truly and sensibly tied to God, the first is that of fear, the
other is that of Love; the first is that of a Servant, and is a Glorious State
and has many advantages, but as it cannot perfect, it is not to continue, but
is to give Place to the latter, this is that which as it is perfect so it is
everlasting, the first state can speak much of his Masters greatness and
Majesty in the manifesting of his Royal Pleasure at sundry times and on
distinct Occasions; but as those appearances continue not, so this State is but
a Servants, and does not abide always in the house, therefore does not equally
serve God at all times, but the Son's state abides always in the House, and
does always what is pleasing in the sight of God, and does not serve him more
at one time then another, as it relates to his Obedience; for though the Errand,
he is sent about, may differ according to the Occasion; yet cannot be said to
serve God more at one time then another because his Love and Obedience is equal.

Now to apply it: For you under the Notion of Elders to conceive, believe and
teach as above, that Gods Worship, Honor and Service, stands but in some Acts,
and but at some Times and Places, as it must, if we do not serve God in things
that may be termed Civil; it is true this sets up an Eldership by begetting an
Implicit reverance to them; but it is dangerous and pernicious to the Souls of
Men, for if once Men believe that Gods Worship stands but in some things, and
but at some times, it prevents the looking and hoping for that Spiritual
Worship, Our Lord and Master taught, which is neither at Samaria^s Mountain nor
in Jerusalem below but in Spirit and truth, and that, we say is to be constant
as well as every where; again to believe this distinction that we are not to
serve God always and in all things, this prevents the looking and hoping for
the effect of that Prayer Our Lord taught his Disciples and us, as we become
his Disciples, and that is, thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth, as
it is in Heaven, and to be sure that is equal, constant, and continual.

Further, to teach that we are not to serve God always and in all things, as
it sets God at a distance, so it prevents the looking for as well as the
receiving of that blessed Union Our Lord and Savior speaks of, and that is
being made perfect in one through him, by which God becomes all in all, seen,
felt, tasted and praised in all we do, what ever it is; but believing Gods
Worship and Service stands but in some things, and but at some times, as it
certainly prevents the knowledge of what is above expressed, so it sets up a
false rest, then which nothing is more pernicious and dangerous to the Souls of
Men; we entreat you to consider of this Doctrine; for where the New Man is
truly put on, all is made anew, not only the Heavens but the Earth also, and
there all is done to the Praise of God to eating and drinking and every thing
else.

But on a Civil account we look upon this distinction unsafe, for we know no
Civil Government but that of Caesar's; therefore none amongst us, but what is
Religious, and founded on Religious Principles, in which Faith and Conscience
is to be truly concerned in all we do; For without Faith it is impossible to
please God (tho we may men,) and this seems too much insisted on;) we are to
walk by faith and not by sight, for it is the Just Man that lives by his faith,
and if he lives by it, he cannot be without Faith in any act and live to God;
Pray mind that; for Faith is as needful to our Souls in the living to God, as
the Air is to our Natural Bodies, for the living in this World. As for your
instances of those things that do not relate to God, Faith, Conscience, and
Religion, that is, keeping the Necessitous, rebuking and restoreing disorderly
Walkers, etc. We say those things are Acts of Religion and Conscience, or the
Apostle James was out, (1st. Ch: 27 verse) and cannot be done acceptably to God
without Faith and Con^cience, (tho they may without Women's distinct and
constant Meeting for Government) for if those Acts above could be done rightly
without Faith, what hindered the Pharisees acceptance? For who did them better
then they in the outward appearance? But as our Righteousness is to exceed
theirs, so if those outward acts be done better by us then them, they must be
done in the Faith, in the sense of Gods Presence and Power,,that works both
the will and deed that is done to his Praise; and this all Formalists as well as
the Pharisees wanted to do them in, and they must needs want that Faith, that
gives acceptance with God, who conclude those things are not acts of Religion
and Conscience.

But to distinguish things into Civil and Religious, for this purpose, that we
might perform, what you are pleased to call Civil, without taking notice of
Conscience, which being directly to please and humor you in your Opinions and
Judgments, what is clearer, then that the Form you are setting up and striving
for, to the loss of Charity, and good will, is really to be and is a Form
without Power? Seeing according to your distinction it may very easily be
performed without Faith and Conscience. On this account pray consider, if you
may not as justly be withstood or turned from, as those the Apostle speaks of;
We entreat you to be serious in this matter, while Balm in Gilead may be had to
heal our wounds and bruises, that is, to cure our Divisions and remove our
Dissatisfaction. But further, (You say did those things (of difference) require
Faith, or did they appertain to Worship as if you were obliged to Worship God
only in some Place, Time Gesture, Raiment, with such Words, or Forms of speech,
etc. your Plea and Objection was good (page 4)

Answer, True Worship cannot be imposed, for it is a serving God according to
his mind, in which Man's prescriptions have no place, because such the Father
only seeks out to serve him, and it appears that Gospel Worship ought to be
constant, for such as are Joined unto the Lord are one Spirit, and they that
deny a constant Serving and Worshipping of God, it is because they do not know
this Union of being Joined unto the Lord in one Spirit; how ever the worship
you mean and intend is constant or it is not, (for we would by no means mistake
you;) if not constant, it relates to our Public Assemblies only, and so to
Preaching and Praying and such other Public acts as is done and performed at
those certain times and Places, and because those things that is the present
occasion of difference in a strict sense, do not relate to those Public acts
for Worship in our Assemblies, therefore in your sense there can be no
Imposition upon Conscience, by Imposing those things; but then pray observe
what follows and that is, that there is no serving of God but in our Public
Assemblies, nor (if you please) use of Conscience, but when so met together; On
this account, Pray why do you refuse to put off your Hats, to use the word you
to a single Person, to pay Tithes and several sorts of Taxes for according to
this Notion of Worship and Service those things are Civil and not Religious; we
do not mention those things as indifferent; but to show, how by endeavoring to
avoid one error you run into another.

But if we are to Worship and Serve God constantly, as we say we are, we ought
to wait to know and be sensible of him every where, and upon all occasions; but
we say this cannot be done without Faith, for without Faith we cannot be
sensible of his Presence as the Governor of our actions, nor can our deeds be
done or wrought in him without it; well then if we are thus to serve God, and
this cannot be done without Faith, then we say, if the thing you contend for
was really good, we must, if we serve God, first know them to be good; thus on
this foot in your own sense our Plea and Objection is good, because the Thing
in Difference relates to the Service of God.

You explede in other Societies the impossing Time, Gesture and Raiment, in the
Worship of God, but pray consider if you are not doing something of the same
Nature; for you must grant that the Worship and Service of God ought to be
constant or it ought not; if it ought not to be constant, you ty it to some
certain times and Places, and herein agree with those you reprehend; but if you
allow it constant, the impossition of new things under this Notion of Civil is
out of doors; But further this Form that you are Imposing with all the reason and
force you have, is that to a Society, that a Garment is to particular Persons;
it is true and as truly granted without any reserve, that what is simple is
needful in both cases; for we can not be well without a Garment whilst
clothed with those Houses of Clay, neither as we are particular Persons, nor
as a Religious Society; but superfluity is dangerous on both hands; for if ever
the mind get out to think and conclude that it deserves honor and respect, for
the Garment, for the Form's sake in comes those additions of superfluity; from
hence on a Religious score comes in Opinion and Ceremony, and this to make it
more Glorious and Beautiful; that it may have more respect and acceptance both
with God and Man; and thus both on a Religious score as well as on a Civil Men
grow proud of that which shows their Poverty, and rich in conceit by trusting
in that which at the same time demonstrates their want; did they understand or
rightly consider of things; for as clothing to our bodies shows our want and
not our perfection, even so do Forms in Religion show our fall and want; and
therefore the more we seem to need and are burdened with Ceremony, the more
our want and misery appears, if we could but see it. For this cause where this
is truly seen and considered, such content themselves with what is simply
needful, knowing by how much as they stand in need of little by so much they
come nearer their first being; and then such in stead of adding of Opinion and
Ceremony to perfect them, do wait to have such things fulfilled as much as may
be for Righteousness sake; on this account we way safely say the less Ceremony
the more truth, and the less noise about the Formallity of Form, the more hopes
such wait for the knowledge of God in Christ, which is life Eternal; but to
apply the matter, the difference you make with us is not about what is simply
needful to Society, for you grant we are one in judgment with you in the
Worship and Doctrines of truth, and owns both the end and means of good Order,
(Page 11) then pray consider, If it be not hard for you to differ with Us about
that which neither relates to the Worship nor Doctrines of Truth.

In short, generally speaking, you have allowed us formerly as true Worshipers
of God without this new Mode or Fashion and you do so still, or you do not; if
you do, by what rule can you in the least exclude us your Communion in thought
word or deed? But if you do not allow us to be true Worshipers of God and
Members of the Society, without we put on this new Mode and Fashion, that you
are contending for what is more apparent and clear, then that it it is the
Raiment or (which is worse) the Fashion of it that is brought in as Terms of
Communion and thereby Imposed for us to Worship God in, if we will be of your
Society? Look to it, for while you are thus buthened about Ceremony or about
the Formallity of Form, the interpretation of what is writing upon this wall of
Separation that you make, will be, that you are weighed in the Balance and
found wanting.

Page 6. You say to expect compliance of Members of a Society to such Methods
of Order as the Elders thereof have exhorted to and the generallity of the
People have embraced, and which the Major part of those that Dissent, declare
they Dissent from, more for fear of suffering an infringement of their
Christian Liberty then on dislike of the matter it self, this (you say) cannot
be called Imposition upon Conscience because expedients of Order, etc.

Answer, That those things concern Conscience we have showed before; it is true
you are specious here, but i^ will not do; for if it were true that the
generallity embraced the Order you have exhorted to, which yet is a question,
if we consider it as doing it freely, but if they have that is little; for the
greatest Number in most Ages, and that in your own sense have through interest
or an Implicit dependence upon their Leaders and Elders, been led and
persuaded to their own hurt; again if it were true that the Major part dissent
more for fear of an infringment of their Christian-Liberty then on dislike of
the matter it self, (which we truly question as worded,) yet still their plea
is good by what name so ever they call their liberty, for if your distinction
of Civil and Religious would hold, which we cannot allow in our case, for our
reasons above, yet if it would hold, here is all the difference; we have now a
right as Men as well as Christians; and ought no more to be imposed upon by you
on a Civil then on a Religious score, you know those that command a Lawful
thing to be done that have no legal right to Command it; as it is wrong in
those that Command, it is wrong in those that obey, the first invade true
Liberty the other betray it, so that if the thing was good you ought to have a
right Power to Command, but in our coming forth we invested no Man with Power
to dispose of us either in Civil or Religious; if we did, Set forth your
Authority, for till that is done we conclude you do wrong, and tho from
Religious you turn it to Civil; you are still no better for English Government
best suits English Spirits, and the Laws of England by which the Free Men
thereof are governed are not made without their consent, which is enough if but
truly applied to spoil this specious pretense.

Page the 7. But you that are Dissatisfyed Object why must we go before Women,
and why Women apart from Men? This still Friends, can be no Imposition, as is
before expressed, because it is no matter of Faith nor Practice of Worship; but
a referring still to our External Order of Life,

Answer. This being as new as any thing to the Objection you have made, for
those that are dissatisfied in Page 3. we may reasonably expect that the
strength of your reason will be laid out upon it. We desire you to consider it,
to is our Author says still this can be no Imposition upon Con^cience as
before expressed, but why we pray? Because says he, it is not matter of Faith,
nor practice of Worship, but a referring still to our External Order, that is,
such an Order and Form as may be set up without Faith, and practiced without
Conscience; for observe here is still nothing brought to prove a necessity for
the thing, nor that you as Elders have any power to bring any thing in against
the mind of your Brethren, for which there is no necessity; as to that of
Faith, we have spoken to it before and therefore in short if we must receive
those things you exhort to without Faith, it must be to please Men and not God;
what is new in this Argument is your Instance, that the common Banns of
Marriage exclude not Women making their exceptions. Very well, nor do we
exclude them where they are concerned; but what is this to prove a necessity
for Women's distinct Meeting for Government in the Society? Nothing surely;
Women are concerned in their own Marriages, and sometimes publicly in
particular cases; and what then, therefore they must be so far concerned in the
Public Administration of our Church or State Government, as if we could
neither have Discipline nor Society without their constant and distinct Meeting
to uphold us; what is this, but by a particular Case or Act, to prove in general
a necessity for them to be Church or State Rulers? We will not say the Argument
is fallacious but we may safely say it is frivolous.

But again, Why Women apart say you (that are dissatisfied? To which our Author
answers (and indeed it is well worth observing considering the weight that lies
upon it, much of the difference depending upon this modification, and he is so
far from leaving out any thing that may contribute to fortify this Point, that
he tells us his thoughts and all) We think says the Author (and you think with
him by the approbation of his thoughts) for a very good reason (well pray mind
this good reason, nay this very good one if you can believe it on second
thoughts) Well (says the Author) the Church increases and what then? This
(says he) increases the business, and is this all that we might so justly
expect to acquit you of Formallity and Imposition? Indeed this is a poor sorry
business to convince us, that there is a necessity for Women's distinct and
constant Meeting for Government, in our Society, whether you will enforce it under
the Notion of Civil or Religious, whilst the whole body of Christians never
yet increast so much as to find that Method Serviceable, much less a necessity
for it.

But to make the most we can of this very good reason, by following it as far
as it is good for any thing; suppose then there might be such an increase of
Friends in some Places, as might possibly constitute a necessity for Women's
Meetings, yet where no such increase is, there is nothing to do for this very
good reason; therefore to set up Women's Meetings universally is wrong, because
it is set up not with respect to the increase for Service, but the formallity
of the thing; for in this (Page 6) You tell us, it is the end that always
constitutes the means, and here you tell us, that the increase makes the
business, and as business is that end, therefore on those terms, where there is
no increase; there is no business, and where no business no end, and where no
end there need no means; and it is certain in many Places there is no increase
since the thing came in question, therefore as it is against the truth, so it is
against your very good reason to impose them universally upon our Society; thus
to impose them is a wrong, that you ought to avoid, both according to reason
and truth.

But further, according to this reason that the increase makes the Service, a
decrease takes it away; therefore where there is a decrease in stead of an
increase, as the Service is at an end, we hope you will give leave to lay them
by, and we think you can hardly deny this; for as (in your sense) there is not
matter of Conscience; Conscience you know cannot be pleaded to uphold them; and
if the pretense of Service be a wanting, to what purpose are they endeavored
to be kept up; except for mere Formallity? The endeavoring of Unity there
being the Rock, on which all others have split; But in short, either your
Elders, that have exhorted to this of Women's Meeting and have used your
Authority with the People for the keeping them up till you have made these
Rents Divisions and Dissatisfaction, did believe and judge that Friends was
faithful to God without Women's Meeting, that is before they had them, or that
they was not; if they was not faithful to God, did you think the setting up
Women's Meetings for Government in the Society would do the business? What do
you say. Did you think they would keep out the Devil or baffle the Serpent?
Indeed if that was true, things is much altered since the beginning. But if you
did believe that Friends was faithful, how could you imagine they would not
receive what was needful without force? Pray consider is not our Principle
universal? And is not the Spirit of truth sufficient to lead into all truth?
Then must not every Man, at least every Meeting know best what was Serviceable
for them, or what they ought to do? If so, what need we pray of more then
recommendation? Except you were afraid the Spirit of Truth would not lead into
this Practice, and why? Except you know it was not a truth, and if not a truth,
will you differ with us for things that ought not be observed as a truth? Pray
Consider of it.

Page the 8. and 9) You are pleased to tell us of the great benefits of Women
distinct Meeting for Government, For (say you to confirm it) two businesses is
doing at the same time, which (say you) in Country Places and Winter Seasons
where Friends come 10 or 15 Miles to a Meeting must needs be very convenient
and comfortable, etc.

Answer, Indeed You are hard beset to keep up the credit of your Opinion, while
such Lame Notions are given for reason; for this makes Women's Meetings
Serviceable, where either they cannot be Practiced, or to be sure, are least
used; for here you give short days and Winter Season, to make them the more
Servicable, so that long days and Summer Seasons have the less occasion for
them; and yet every body knows they are then most frequent. And again, as you
make their greatest Service to be in Country Places, where Friends come ten or
15 Miles to a Meeting, they seem clearly to be of least use in the City, if at
all Serviceable there; because Friends live near together, so may take time to
do that business they cannot in the Country; when truly had not the good Women
in the City found either more Service for their Meeting or less business of
their own we believe we should never have been pressed with Women's Meeting in
the Country to our dissatisfaction; but by how much Friends live farther off
one another by this rule Women's Meetings still are the more Serviceable, for
the farther off one another, the less time to meet together, and so stand the
more need of quicker dispatch; but all this proves Women's Meeting a very
ordinary business, for where Friends live near together, they may very well
excuse the Women, because they may take time to dispatch their business
themse^ves; and then where they live remote they may as well excuse them, by
reason of the inconvenience of getting to go; so that you see all this noise,
according to this reason, is about little or nothing. But pray is not this
reason at a little ods with your Very good reason before? For there you made the
increase of Friends to great Numbers to make the Service, and here the fewness;
for the remoteness does demonstrate there is but few; but pray before you go
further then 15 Miles for a Woman's Meeting, is the thing practicable you have
already set on foot? What! 15 Miles to a Meeting for Women and home again in
Winter season and short days! to which we may add, bad Ways, long Miles and
bad Weather, for you have made no provision nor exception that we know of; what
think you of it on second thoughts? You know you have told the good Women the
matter does not relate to God, nor is matter of Conscience, so we hope you will
allow them the use of their reason, for if they find all the business they can
do and go 15 Miles to a Meeting in short days as above, is not worth while,
or that they can do all that business, if any better in their respective
Meetings, and perhaps with less Charge, then this 15 Miles Journey would put
them to; and besides save themselves at home, where they may be sure they have
an incumbent Duty, will not you be content? What do you say? If not, pray may
not we justly and honestly inquire if such as injoyne this 15 Miles Journey do
themselves put it in practice? If answered, that perhaps such as enjoin it do
not live so remote, and therefore have not occasion to make the trial; then may
we not still inquire who are best Judges of fact, those that do not put in
practice or them that have? But what think you of it, was not this Order made
in some warmer Climate or at least for some that dwelt where Days are more
equal, Ways better, and Miles not so long, as in many parts of England? But
indeed too much of this, if it had not been to show the frivolousness of your
reason) and therein the meanness of the cause that you have caused contention
about.

Page the 9 you tell us those are your reasons and Motives to the present
Practice of Women's Meeting in the Church of Christ without compelling
Conscience or infringing Christian Liberty, etc.

Answer, We have considered the weightyest of your reasons that we could find
as above, and do not see any thing that is offered that can clear you of
either; for here is not one word brought that proves a necessity for the thing
you have introduced, and insisted upon to Dissatisfaction; or that you have
power as Elders rightly to bring into the Society against your Brethrens mind,
that which in truth there is no necessity for. Could you prove either of those
Points (as before) then it must be our Duty to obey and follow you; but not
being so brought in; as it cannot be our Duty to obey, it can be no less in you
them Imposition and Formallity by which you endeavor, (whether you consider it
or not) both to compel Conscience and infringe Christian Liberty.

Page the 9. our Author proceeds to tell us his own sense, by this it appears
he told us the sense of others before, at least the sense of others as well as
his own; which makes our application to such no less forceible; it follows
says my Author, my own sense upon the whole matter, (of difference, for that
must be intended) is a misaprehending of the Brethrens intentions and an
undistinguishing Zeal against Imposition on the one hand, (that is on the side
of those dissatisfied) and a fear on the other side (that is on the side of the
Elders) that those who so mistook and misrendred the design of the Brethren,
were either high minded and unruly, or prone to indue liberty or that they not
being the first promoters of this Discipline, (to wit Women's Meeting for
Government) detracted from those that were, and so would lessen the credit of
their endeavors, etc. I say (says the Author) my sense is that this on each
side gave life to the Division, etc.

Answer, We must confess this is pretty modest of a Party concerned and desire
you may weigh it, for we will consider it a little; first as to undistinguishing
Zeal against Imposition, by this and some other passages in this Book it
appears you allow of some kind of Imposition; therefore as you are the
Imposers, it had been your part to have distinguished the matter before you had
Imposed upon your Brethren; that so if possible all this trouble might have
been avoided; but notwithstanding that you seem to attempt something about it,
now when a great deal too late, yet we do not find it well done still; it is
true you tell us, we are not to be imposed upon on a Religious score, nor in
things that relate to God; therefore if as Brethren, we had been consulted that
we might have agreed, if possible, about sixing the bounds of what is Religious
and what relates to God; the difference now had been in a less compass; but you
have been far from this Brotherly way, whilst as Elders you have not consulted
Us as Brethren, nor as Members of that Society, that confesses but one Lord and
one head; nay rather have not you treated us either not as Brethren or at best
but as Minors, that know not our right hand from our left, having no skill in
the things that relate to God, nor what is Religious, as neither knowing
Conscience nor who is Lord thereof? And does not all this appear by the
determining the matter without our knowledge approbation or consent? And have
not you here directly trod the steps of a wrong imposing Church according to
your distinction in address to Protestants Page 144, where you say, an Imposing
Church bears witness of her self she will be both Party and Judge, etc. And is
not this directly your State? For as Parties, have not you introduced your
Opinions? And as Judges have not you determined the matter against us? We
entreat you to weigh the matter seriously, for if this was wrong and evil in
others, it cannot be good or right in you; for by how much as our coming
together, as a Society, is more voluntary and free then any other People, that
we know of on a Religious score, by so much is the point more tender, and
therefore any thing of unjust Imposition more evil.

2dly. As to our misapprehending the Brethrens intention in that case: We
believe we have not misapprehended them at all; however shall be as Charitable
as we can in the explaining of our selves; therefore we say the Brethren might
intend well, to wit, the credit of the Society and that others might be
gathered over to our Form. Yet all this does not prove but they was mistaken in
the means used to do it; for it is without doubt that the builders of Babel (a
Figure of all the mistaken Builders on a Religious score) intended no less then
the credit and preservation of their Societies, and to make their Mountain the
gate to Heaven, that others might be obliged to come by them away; the Pharisees
was as solicitous in the like case and we believe there has been the same care
and pretenses in all the Reformations. And conclude that you as well as we,
judge that all those was wrong, and mistaken, and that their mistake was
chiefly Ignorance of Gods power and righteousness, as well as of his nearness,
and therefore in stead of waiting for Gods power to preserve and his
righteousness to adorn them, they endeavored it by their own that could never
answer the end designed, and truly we believe you are under the like mistake,
how strange soever things may appear to you, it is certainly the acting of your
own Spirit in the likeness of truth, that has deceived you; we would not have
you angry, for there is no occasion to be surprised, since you know beforehand
we are Dissatisfyed, and therein do oppose you; now we must oppose you either
as believing you right or wrong, in this of Imposition; if you should conclude
that we oppose you as believing you are right you make us really Judges, and as
this will offer violence to our understanding we must of necessity (we can not
avoid it but) know you are mistaken and do really want Charity, this must cast
off all accommodation; for on this account the difference would be made on your
part, as great as betwixt Christ and Belial or light and darkness; therefore to
prevent your falling into this gulf all we can, and yet without any flattering
we must say, We do oppose you as really believing you are wrong; Now that wrong
must be managed by design, or through some mistake, if we should conclude it
really by design you might perhaps, (and that truly) conclude us uncharitable
on the other hand, (and two extremes can never meet) therefore we do place the
wrong you do on a mistake (as above) for we can believe you might intend well,
to wit, the credit of the Society; but we see those additions you use, as
means, cannot do it, nor lies it in your power by any additions, that you can
make use of, to preserve the Name. The Name Quaker will lose its Luster and
Beauty as well as other Names, for the glory of all flesh is but as the Flower
of the Field, that the gathering may be still more Spiritual as well as more
universal, for it is only they that do Righteously that is Righteous, and it is
only those that fear God and works righteousness that are accepted of him, and
such he accepts every where; and he accepts none else amongst us, nor have we
this righteousness as we are of this Form, Society or Name, but as we fear and
love God, so that if you cannot raise up this fear and love by which that
Righteousness is wrought, that gives acceptance, you can do little except weary
and burden your selves in the inventing of New Order; that way indeed you may
become a Sect as a Nation that warreth against other Nations, but hereby you will
miss the true unity, that stands in the Spirit of Righteousness; by seeking it
and placing it in the formallity of Form.

3dly, But our Author makes the cause of difference on the other side (that on
the side of the Elders) to be their fear, that such as did oppose, did it
because they are highminded, or unruly or for undue liberty or because not
Parties concerned etc. (as before.

Answer, It seems there was no Fence for your fear, you were afraid but you did
not know of what, we grant those that are afraid in the dark may have strange
apprehensions and if in that fear they proceed to judgment and go about to
provide for their security, they may well err in the one and misaply the other,
why? Because they are in the dark, that is in doubt and want Patiene to stay till
the light come, that makes things manifest as they are, and truly this appears
to be your condition with your Brethren; which have been occasion of so much
trouble and strife, and why should this be taken ill, or thought hard? You know
those that are in fear as you were must needs be in doubt, and those in doubt
are really in the dark, and it in that doubt or darkness they proceed to
Judgment they must needs err, all this is clear to us on your part, for you did
not know the true cause of your Brethren's Dissatisfaction and opposing you,
and therefore tho you Imagined many causes (as above) you still missed it; now
had you been certain, you could not have been in fear, for that is doubtful;
it is true the case might have been such as you might have been troubled, but
you was in fear and in that fear did go about to preserve your selves, and here
was the mischief of the mistake, those that took this great fright had power to
Intrest the Major part (the body as its called) in their security under the
most specious pretense that particulars or others must be accountable to the
Society. Which tho true in many cases, yet is false in some, and that is, when
it truly concerns the Lord, and here all or most Societies have erred, and your
Plea is now no more then an old Artifice of the Enemy, by which just and
Conscientious Men have been made sufferers, in most Ages, as well as in Ours,
here was the beginning of our mischief and misery, and the cause of it
continues; for those of whom you were afraid must need be clothed according to
your fear, and what follows whether your Judgment was right or wrong it is all
one, they must suffer as evil doers by being killed and destroyed in the minds
and desires of the unthinking; few Synods and Councils of Men on this account
but they have erred; but as easily as they have been mistaken, it has been as
hard to retrieve the wrong, nay on this score have they not rather been tempted
to seek out shifts and evasions to cover a fault, then confess a failing? If it
be inquired who is thus concerned in our case? The Answer is ready, but in
stead of exposing Names, we could desire such might compare their mistake on
this foot, with what has happened even through most Ages, and so consider what
they have done and do so no more, but in stead thereof make use of their power
to make those things indifferent, that have given occasion by being Positive;
and then we could easily pass all by and love freely; for truly as much has
been forgiven, we can forgive much, and what hazard in all this? when you say
those things relate not to God? And truly you are far from becoming all unto all
while you cannot dispense with your own Opinions.

Page the 10th Our Author tells us our difference now is more in Spirit then in
fact, in mind more then matter, etc.

Answer, Seeing Our Author makes this difference so little as to matter of fact,
as not to amount to matter of Conscience, we hope in time you will see it your
Place to take it away by making your Opinion indifferent; that so in stead of
falling out by the way, we might quietly travel together for the true rest.

But to proceed, It is (our Author says), come to this, whether Conversation
should belong to Women as well as Men and over this he thinks we are gotten for
the most part, it seems then we are gotten a little nearer together then we
were in his Judgment, and if any mistake is removed it is very well; but pray
who ever denied Women's Concern in conversation as well as Men? They was always
concerned in their own and such as was under their charge, we were always of
this mind, and to this the Apostle agrees where he wills the Younger Widows
to Marry and govern the House, etc.

And if he took this care for the Un-married, surely he did nor forget those
that were; but what then? Tho the care of Conversation belongs to them, must
they every way be as publicly concerned as Men? What will nothing do but noise
and Popularitie? Must not Men meet but Women must meet and at the same time,
but yet must be distinct and separate from the Men, though but divided by a
Curtain in the same Room? And is not the Mode of Division most of the matter?
Must they indeed be as far concerned as the Men? Must nothing be done without
their consent and approbation? Nay sure, for we find the Apostle checking this
Popularity and affected Government, when he forbids Women speaking in the
Church, but this he did not unto Men which makes some difference; and if he
forbids Women speaking in the Church, certainly he never thought of either
making a Church or Church rulers of them; you will say this prohibition did not
exclude Women in all cases; we say so too; but then it must in a general sense,
or you make the Apostle in a matter he seemed so earnest about to speak to no
purpose.

2ly. Our Author asks, whether Women may not meet separate from Men? And for
answer to this he says, be pleased to take notice of your unavoidable
concession you (that are dissatisfyed) allow meeting of care in general, and do
not absolutely deny Women their share amongst the Men, etc.

Ans. All this is right in the sense we take it, but pray who ever denied
honest Women to meet apart and distinct from Men on occasion? What need of all
this, except to make it better appear how far we agree, that so a juster
estimate may be taken of our difference? If so, all is well still, therefore
consider the difference, we say they may meett on occasion separate from Men,
but you say they must meet and that constantly for Government, whether there be
occasion for it, or no, tho they go 15 Miles to a Meeting in Winter seasons;
what is this but to make business rather then want it? And indeed to make a great
noise about those very things that the more we are concerned for the more our
want and nakedness appear? For what does all this noise, but declare that we do
not possess what we profess, and are not faithful to our own convictions.

But to proceed, our Author says to those that are disatisfied, You own the
end; what is that? you (that are disatisfied) own that the Poor and other things
that are essential to Society should be taken care for, that is right, but
again says our Author you allow of the means too; What Is that? Well that must
be such fitting Methods as may answer that end the business above expressed or
intended; well thus far we do agree, and it must be granted there is a fitting
Method to answer the public business or necessities of our Society, without
Imposing constant distinct Women's Meetings for Government, or there is not; if
not, let our Author affirm and prove it; for do that honestly and take the
cause; but if there is a fitting Method to answer the Public business of our
Society without this unity in Formallity contended for, why do you differ with
Us, except it be for mastership? And if that be it, be plain with us, and so
end the Dispute.

But again our Author says, You referr the choice of your means to the
Society, and you as well as we expect a compliance with those Rules, etc.

Ans. Hold a little; for it is too much to grant this by whole sail as little as
it is, therefore we will first enquire what is intended, for it is necessary to
understand what we are to comply with, pray therefore observe who our Author
speaks to, for he speaks in the Plural, You (says he) referr the choice of
your means to the Society, Pray who speaks he to? Why, in this case he must
needs speak to those Friends that are separated for they having only distinct
Meetings and Discipline, it is referrable to them or none; now if he speaks to
those Friends, that is through disatisfaction Separated, then he must speak to
the whole Community, or but to a part; if he speak but to a part of them, pray
what part of those that is separated? This is necessary, for we ought to
understand his meaning; but if he speaks to the whole Community; then what is
this Society, that those that is separated referr the choice of the means or
Rules to for Discipline? For here is a Society in a Society, and this seems a
mystery; pray let this be unfoulded; for this Society in a Society seems some
active business, it is set forth as the Soul to the body, pray how comes this
Society? What, is it (...) (...)? Why; let it be what it will, God makes it, or
Man, or otherwise it must make it self? It self it cannot make according to
reason and truth, therefore if this Society makes it self, as its beginning
must be Usurpation, its end will be Tyrany and Oppresion, now if those you
write to submit to any such Usurpation amongst themselves, whilst they deny it
to you, pray prove it upon them; for do that and they will appear guilty of
what they accuse you for; but if this Society be of Man's making, that is, that
those that are separated, have selected some from among themselves to govern
them, in whom they have deposited a Power to make Rules and Laws for them to
which the whole is to be subject without examination, tho it is true in this it
can not be said that others have inslaved them because it is their own choice,
but if they have done thus pray prove it upon them? For still they will in some
part be guilty of that they accuse you of, there is only this difference, that
those thus chosen may act rationally according to the Power lodged in them
whilst you act without any such choice or assignation that we know of, the
first indeed may be said to be rational, but is it really Ignorance of the
sufficiency of Christ to make any such choice and a dishonor to our Lord, as
it takes away examination, but to have any to Impose themselves upon us is
slavery to boot.

Lastly, But if this Soceiety is of our Lords making, then they must act
according to the description of Government our Lord has given and advised to in
his Disciples, where he tells us, he that rules should be as him that serves,
and he that would be greatest in his Government must be Servant to all the
rest, then not as Lords and Masters to Impose upon the rest, for as his Kingdom
is not of this World, no more is his Government like the government of this
World, for that stands in force and mostly in subtilty and contrivance, but he
takes his Kingdom and Government in the hearts of Men by convictions and
persuasions only, which is diametrically contrary to wrath subtilty, force and
violence.

But to Apply what is said to our case; as we are a public Society, there is
business belongs to Us, this must be done by some body, and for that end it is
needful to have time and place appointed that such as are willing to serve
their Brethren and Friends may meet; and because all cannot meet, such as do,
are allowed to act according to those Rules the Society have embraced, and if
any thing farther seems needful to them, such have liberty, as the rest of
their Brethren have, and not otherwise, to recommend it, but cannot Command;
for as we are a free and voluntary Society confessing but one head and Lord,
the liberty of examination, must be preserved, as well that we may continue a
free People, as also and chiefly that we may conserve that honor due unto the
Lord, and where according to the truth and our constitution examination ought
to be preserved, a choice must be allowed, so that on this foot recommendation
is the highest any Man or any Assembly among us can go in the adding of new
things nor will or can such as have the mind of Christ desire more; therefore
if what such recommend meet with acceptance, all is well; but if not, all is
well still to such as meet to serve their Friends and Brethren, and not to be
their Lords and Masters now those that have separated from you on the account
of Imposition writes after this Copy, which our Lord and Master has set, they
will never differ at an Eldership nor mastership, and truly had you given this
good example of self denial, we could have given you double Honor, for we are
for good Order, tho against Mastership, and for good Government but against
Arbitrary proceedings; nor let any think we cannot have good Order and
Government so far as its necessary without a despotick Power be lodged in some
to rule over us; nay the Civil Constitution of our own Nation demonstrates the
contrary, for it allows of Order and Government but denis Arbitrary Power, and
if in Civil there has been this sense of Freedom to provide against Lordship
and Dominion how much more ought we to avoid it in Religion? where Christ our
Lord is to be our Example, that overcame by suffering, and through Death
destroyed him that had the Power of Death.

But again Page 11 Our Author says The Question is whether in fact Women's
Meetings be part of that Discipline the Church admits of, and to this the
Author says, it is evident the Church of God generally speaking receives and
Practices it.

Ans. This is little to conclude us, when it is considered that the greatest part
of all Churches through all Ages, and that in your own sense, at last have been
wrong and mistaken. But to the matter, if we take the Church of God in a
general sense (according to Address to Protestants Page 154) we may safely say
she neither receives nor practices Women's Meeting for Discipline, but we take
it he means Friends; and if not too much to apply the term only to them; then
we say, the contrary saying must be as true as this and of as much force to
determine the matter against you, the Church of God generally speaking (says
our Author) receives and Practices Women's Meetings; what then? But not speaking
generally does neither receive nor practice them; in our Authors sense both
parts make the Church, tho not receiving this of Women's meetings by the lesser
part hinders not them from being of the Church, and we are sure the practicing
of them by the greater part can make them no more; then who is this that dare
for their mere Opinion sake divide by force and voilence what God has Joined
together? You know what Christ our Lord said that there should be no Mastership
among his; pray then deliver us from this yoke of Bondage, which neither we nor
our Fathers were able to bear, to wit, Mastership in Religion, and we hope we
shall be willing to wait till you are better informed.

Page the 13 our Author proceeds as follows, As in no Age the resisters and
gainsayers of care and Order in any of the Lords Servants have passed without
the marks of Gods rebuke, so they that have contested and opposed the wisdom
of God in his faithful Servants have ever failed of their purpose and have been
finally manifested to have been led by a wrong Spirit, and as observable it is
that those by whom the Lord has eminently appeared and who were the first
Instruments of his several dispensations to the Sons of Men have always
exercised that Authority amongst the People they have gathered and have
constantly been preserved from falling away though some or other have risen up
against them with that clamor as if they had set up themselves and were gone
from what they taught or were or took too much upon them but what have they all
come to, read and Judge, etc.

Answer, It Is clear that the genuine and direct sense of all this is to get us
into a dependence upon Man under the Notion of Eldership, and to persuade or
affright into that Implicit Reverence as that we should not examine what is
said or done by them, but the receiving things presumptively on the vallue of
others, has filled the Professors of Christianity with Ignorance as well as
error, as is excellently set forth in address to Protestants ( Page 136 and so
to the end of that Head) there wants nothing but application and that is
needful because Example prevails more then Precept. Now that we may avoid that
fault in our selves, which you have so warmly and truly taxed in others, we
will as freely examine this Part as we have done the rest; and for that end
pray who are these Servants you intend and how must we certainly know them? For
truly as before if there must be a dependence they ought to be set forth, and
what is all this care you speak of? Is it that of Maryes or that of Martha's?
That was so Cumbred about many things that thought Mary took little care, and
what was the reason, but that her self was cumbred too much? It seems the
latter by this Noise and Clamor that is made about it; it is a part that may be
taken away which makes those concerned so sensible of it, that they cannot let
others be quiet that like Mary have chosen the better part.

But do you conclude or think that such as are dissatisfyed with Women's
Meetings do therein oppose the mind of the Lord in any of his Servants, yet
how should that be? Whilst you grant those things are not matter of Conscience
and that they are one in judgment with you in the Worship and Doctrines of
truth, what is it not a Doctrine of truth and matter of Conscience to believe
true Prophets? Again what do you mean by those words contesting the Wisdom of
God? Do you intend that Women's Meetings (the matter in question) was set up by
the Wisdom of God to be practiced? But pray how can this be when you tell us
that the things in difference relate not to God nor is matter of Conscience?
What set up by the Wisdom of God to be observed and yet neither relates to
God, nor is matter of Conscience? What think you of it? Is not this very
strange and inconsistant? If not pray explain your selves better.

But further you tell us, those made eminent have been constantly preserved
from falling away tho opposed; but what came such to as did oppose read and
Judge.

Answer, Here you bear witness to your selves, and what is this but to affright
Us into submission to your pretenses? But pray how must we know those things,
for excluding the Apostles times and those before, where must we read all this
you tell of? What do you bid us read and Judge, and can not tell where, or at
least does not? To be sure this is noise, to say no more, for it can not be to
Edification,

Again, what do you mean by those Dispensations he speaks of? He might at least
have given an Instance of what he intended, which being omitted, it is like the
rest, more to amuse then inform us; but will you allow those dealings of God
with Israel in Egypt and so into Canaan, to be included in the Dispensations he
speaks of? If you will it is well, if not, yet it is clear to us they are a sign
of Gods dealing with Men now, in Order to bring them into peace and rest with
himself, nay what if we say a Figure of Gods dealing with Man from the
beginning to the end; for first here is Israel in Canaan which may stand as a
Figure of Man's State in Paradise, Isreal's going down into Egypt by reason of
Famine, a Figure of Man's driving out of Paradise, Israel's relief comfort and
satisfaction in Egypt, a Figure of Man's Fall whilst alive in the World, being
dead to God; the Law or Power of Death having dominion over him; and Isreal in
bondage in Egypt a Figure of Man's fall, and misery when sensible of it, being
truly quickened and thereby made to know the Power or Law of sin in his Members;
but observe this bondage in Egypt preceded their deliverance, and made way or
prepared them for their going out into the Wilderness, now as the Wilnerness
was a different State to that of Egypt, so the travel there fitted them for the
possessios Canaan; so far as its said of that generation, who had seen Gods
wonders in Egypt, and had experience of his various dealings or dispensations,
that they did walk sweetly with the Lord, but when another Generation arose
that did not know those things but by hearsay, though they was in the same
Land, they soon forsook the Lord and served Idols; from hence there appears a
necessity for every individual soul to have experience of those various
dealings of God in a spiritual sense in Order to their walking humbly with him.
Observe there was perfect different States and dispensations in the same age,
that is, to the same People contrary to what you assert; here was Canaan
Liberty and Freedom, opposed to Egypt bondage and Oppression, and at last
Canaan rest to the Wilderness Travels; and as there was those real different
States and perfect change of dispensations in the same age, to the same People,
so was their Leader, (observe that) as truly changed: For Moses how eminent
soever in the bringing them out of Egypt, and through the Sea, yet could he not
bring them through Jordan into Canaan, a Type of the true rest; no, that was
Joshua's work, Moses's Minister, the Figure of the true Jesus, which deserves
your serious consideration, for in this change of dispensation lies your great
mistake. We might say more, but shall add only this that what was then in the
Figure is now to be done in the Substance, what was then done in the Letter, is
now to be done in Spirit; for Gods Israel now is after the Spirit and not after
the flesh, and are to be gathered from Man to God; so that if you do not throw
down your Crowns, there by making way for his Government, by freely delivering
up all unto him, but in stead thereof by reflecting upon your abillities to
Rule, shall seek to perpetuate your Government under the Notion of Eldership,
neither you that seek this dependence, nor those that depend upon you can enter
the good Land, of which Canaan was a Figure; and what then? If you go not forth
again into Egypt you must die in the wilderness.

But we have more to this purpose, in this Page it follows, nor was it ever
heard of (says our Author) in the dealings of God with the Sons of men that he
varyed or changed his dispensations in the life time of the Instruments,
(observe) of any of them as some have been ready to imagine nor yet in that age
in which he has brought them forth, etc.

Answer, What ado here is to get your Government established. If it were
Christ's our Lords, there would be none of this Noise; but as sure as you seem
you are mistaken that God has varyed his dispensations in the same age is clear
above; for those very People of whom it was testified that they did walk
sweetly with the Lord were of such as had seen Gods wonders in Egypt, in the
Sea, and at Mount Sinai, had known a travel in the Wilderness; and their Leader
changed, and that before they entered Canaan, did know the dividing of the
Land, and a sitting under their own Vine, none being left to make them afraid;
and this under Joshua and not Moses, according to the Figure, is sufficient to
show the wrongness of your assertion; but again, that God never varied or
changed his dispensation in the life time of the Instrument of them nor in that
Age, this is still as wrong as the former, nay false in fact, for Instance John
the Baptist. For that dispensation wherein he was so Eminent was truly varyed
if not changed in his life time, that it was varyed and to be changed is clear
from the Baptists own testimony, and that it was changed in the same Age, is
past scruple or contradiction, and not to John Baptist only but to Christ also,
first in flesh and then in Spirit.

Now as those assertions are wrong and contrary to the truth, so are they of
dangerous consequence to the Souls of men; by perpetuating Man's Government in
stead of Christ's; there is something like that saying Where is the Promise of
his coming? For since the Fathers dyed all things continue alike, for like to
that is this that God never varied or changed his dispensation in the same Age,
nor in the life time of the Instruments of any of them, in this all things
continue alike as they ever did; and then on this foot must not you under this
profession all degenerate as others have done before in your sense? But pray
how contrary is this to our Saviors advice to his Disciples and to all Man.
For says he, What I say unto you I say unto all, Watch; and why must we watch?
Why, because you know not at what hour your Master will come, and pray who is
this Master, but the Lord our God; that changes and varies his dispensations
when it pleases him, but rarely or never perceived by the Carnal mind nor by
the greatest Formalist in Religion, no, no they are the greatest enemies of it;
it is true you do not deny but the Dispensation may be changed but though you
can not tell certainly when it shall be, yet you presume to tell and that
certainly when it shall not be; and that is not in this Age; so that whiles this
Age lasts, we need not Watch in your sense; it is true your words imply God may
alter this Dispensation when this Age is over, and when all those eminent
Instruments are dead, but not till then however, and thus by Preaching us into
a sleepy Ignorance you hope to secure your Government as long as you and we
live, and indeed that is long enough. But if you could watch for us that we need
not but may rest secure as long as this Age lasts or you live, yet seeing the
Dispensation in your sense may be changed when this Age is over, and when all
those Eminent Instruments are dead; and then seeing there may be occasion to
Watch for the Masters coming, it would be needful at least for the good of
others if not for us, to set forth fairly, what you mean by this Age, and who
certainly are those Eminent Instruments, and what this Dispensation is that you
intend, that so when this Age is over and those Instruments are all dead, then
People may prepare to watch for the Masters coming to change this Dispensation;
all this and more is the Genuin Consequence of those Positions and assertions,
which we must say, is as carnal as they are presumptious, and is a plain
deferring of the Masters coming; and what follows but what ever did? A beating
of your fellow Servants; that this is truly the condition and danger of all
those that assert as above, own or stand by it, is to us an undoubted truth,
and therefore in order to awaken some and forwarn others we can do no less then
assert, that he that is come, is yet to come, that so by a true watching and
waiting for his coming some may avoid that great danger those are in, that
deferr it.

And indeed this presumption that the Dispensation is not to be changed in this
Age, is both your danger and mistake; for this makes the Dispensations of God
to lie chiefly in outward Modes of Worship, in outward Forms of Discipline, and
in the Government of Men, and this in stead of leading the mind to God, leads
from him, because in stead of waiting for the Kingdom and Government of Christ,
and the increase of it which is Spiritual, this sets up what is outward and
Carnal, which may be altered and changed from one thing to another, and yet the
mind unregenerated; and therefore those dispensations of God, that convert the
soul to God are Spiritual, and are the same now they have been through all
Ages, of which that unto Israel and the completing of that Dispensation by our
Savior is a true and perfect Figure to us and all men; but seeing you say
there is to be no change of Dispensation in this Age, Pray when is it that you
intend to Present those that depend on you, as chaste Virgins to Christ? That
they may be married unto him; for as this ought to be; so certainly you will
allow in that State such may simply depend on him; it does not appear you
intend it as long as you live because you say there is to be no variation or
changing of Dispensation in this Age and when may it be expected then? For
those that succeed you in the Government may as justly deny a change of
Dispensation in their Age as you do in this and to be sure they will be as
unwilling to allow of it as you; for why? They must bear the Image that you
beget, and as they will make you their Authority they will build on you, as it
has been through all the Reformations, and then as they are not like to know so
much as some have done in this Age they will be but bigoted the more; for indeed
where there is not a constant waiting for the Lords Coming to do what he
pleases with us, a false rest is set up, and such become as much as in them
lies the limiters of God and good Men, and the preventers of the further
discoveries of the mind of God, but if we come to be a Figure of the Universal
Church, of which Christ our Lord is truly head, we must know a change and
alteration of the Dispensation by which this striving for Mastership and
Ceremony may cease and that in our Age, for it is certain that Gods appearance
is twofold to Man in the work of restoring Man unto himself, and if we be of
Spiritual Israel we must know a coming through the work of a first Covenant,
before we can know the Second, whereupon it follows as there must be a
Preparation before there can be a Choice, there is a Legal Dispensation to be
known or passed through before that of the Gospel can be fully understood.

It Is true if we could consider rightly that the end of all Gods dealing with
men is to bring them to himself and secure them for the future against the
attempts of the Enemy, we might call or esteem all Gospel, according to Address
to Protestants ( Page 82) where it is said the Law is the Gospel begun, the
Gospel the Law fulfilled or finished, they cannot be parted, by the word parted
we conceive he means the Gospel cannot come or be witnessed, except it begin in
the Law; for when we consider that all men in their first State are concluded
under sin, and that in the work of regeneration there is trouble before peace,
and condemnation before Justification, and that no suffering for the present
seems Joyom, then may we say those dispensations of Law and Gospel, first and
second Covenant are now in being and as distinguishable to the Spiritual
Traveller as ever.

It Is true Christ our Lord is Heir of all things, but our first knowledge of
him is in his descending, where he devests himself of his glory, in this he
condescends to lay hold of us, or otherwise it were impossible for us to
apprehend or lay hold of him, you know it is written the holy Spirit was not yet
given because that Jesus was not yet glorified, and yet he both had Disciples
and they was taught of him, nay when raised from the dead and they were still
taught of him, they had not yet received the Holy Spirit, for he was not yet
ascended, but when the Power from on high came upon them, the true witness that
Jesus was glorified, then they received the Holy Spirit that was to abide with
them.

But to apply it, if our first knowledge of Christ be in his descending then
must we know him ascend where he was before, or the work cannot be completed,
but this cannot be without a change of dispensation; thus instead of denyit we
ought to wait for it. Again when we consider that since transgression at least
Man is made under a Law wrote or to be wrote in the hearts or minds of all Men
(of which that wrote in stone to Israel was but as a Figure) and that by this
Law came the true knowledge of (...), and (...) this Ministration cannot pass
away unfulfilled therefore does our Lord descend to assist us to fulfill this
dispensation as a Servant, and differs not from a Servant, tho he is Lord of
all; you know he was made under the Law to Israel that he might redeem them
truly prepared by it, from under the Law, and he is now as well as then a
Minister of the Sanctuary and then must we not know him first under a Legal
dispensation as well as then? For that dispensation given to Israel that he
then fulfilled in the flesh was never given to us, and as that was not to
continue, it is the Substance of that which remains, that we are to inquire
out; God appeared by his servants, and by his Son to the house of Israel after
the flesh; the first was to prepare, the latter to perfect; and those that are
not faithful in the first part now, can not know the latter no more then Israel
in the figure did, thus there may be a coming a great way in the first part of
the work and yet miss in the latter.

Well then as there is a Servant state and Sons-state, the first is
preparation, and answers to a Legal dispensation, or the ministration of
Condemnation, but the latter being truly election or choice answers to that of
the Gospel or Ministration of life, the first condemns the sinner, the latter
the sin, now as there must be preparation before there can be choice or
Election the first State is absolutely needful, but yet as there is a better
state there is a necessity to wait for a change of the first to all that comes
truly to know the reconcilliation to God through the death of Christ; for as we
cannot live unto the righteousness of Legal dispensation except we dye unto
sin, so we cannot know true Sonship, except we know a dying to all our
righteousness attained in the State of Preparation for we must have it before
we can part with it.

In the first State we receive a Talent, and except we serve God with all our
Strength, it cannot rightly be improved, therefore must we put to our strength
and thus we cooperate with the grace given to make all according to the pattern
showed in the Holy Mount, and here we follow Christ in the Regeneration, that
is in the begitting and quickening to fulfill the work given us to do, for we
have a work to do; and as we do cooperate with the Talent to do that work
something of the Man, something of the flesh remains, therefore must we come in
to the Death of Christ, which we can never truly know, except we first be
quickened by him, so then quickening is preparation, but to come in to the death
of Christ in the flesh is the perfecting the Covenant of works; you know,
whilst our Lord was in the Flesh he told his Disciples, he had overcome the
World, but through death the Apostle tells us he destroyed him that had the
power of death, and as there was two different dispensations then, in the
restoration of man, they still continue, and the latter is as contrary to the
former as that of our Lord was unto Moses, in the first we are Servants and if
faithful we are so far from denying a change of dispensation that we daily wait
for it, that we may give an account of the Improvement of the Tallent; for in
that stands a change of the dispensation, the first State has life and death
set before it, with a Promise of a reward or Punishment according as the
creature is faithful or otherwise, and as faithful receive the good from time
to time but as we do cooperate with the Tallent, this reaches no further then
the Covenant of works, and as it can not make perfect as to the new and
Heavenly Man, it is needful to know what can; and that is the true knowledge of
the mystery of Christ's death in the flesh, for that perfectly reconciles unto
God, by which the one Offering is known that perfects for ever them that are
sanctified, for there only can the Worker be freely offered up unto God wholly
for a burnt Offering, as a free Sacrifice, and then to die with Christ to the
flesh is gain, thus is the Death of the Saints pleasant in the eyes of the
Lord, it being the Sweetest Sacrifice because the more they die the more they
live to God, this was the State the Apostle so much vallued as he esteemed to
know nothing amongst them but Christ and him Crucified, and to be made
conformable to his Death was his chief desire, that if possible he might attain
to the resurrection of the dead, you see he was so far from limitting the
dispensations of God to what he did know as he did not limit or seem to bound
them short of attaining to the Resurrection of the dead.

And of this change of dispensation, we have a Figure in Abrams offering up of
Isaac, God promised him a Son, he cooperated with the Promise to bring forth
Isaac; that being done, that there might be a distinction betwixt Work and
Grace, tho its true if we speak generally all Gods dealing with Man to bring
him unto himself is Grace, and thus the least measure given to profit with is
truly Grace, but when we distinguish with respects to the work of God in Man by
which the restoration is brought about and reconciliation wrought the latter is
termed grace as opposed to that of Works, and that this distinction might be
clear Abraham must offer up Isaac in whom the Promise stood, it was his all,
and therefore in the offering of him up, the Ram the begetter or worker was
discovered behind the Bush, who was there before but not seen till now, but as
soon as seen how gladly did Abram offer up the Ram to God wholly for a burnt
Offering, O how gladly did Abraham part with the Ram, with the Worker and how
easily when he saw that was all that was intended in this great trial, and now
Isaac is received in the grace in the Second Covenant, and now and not before
can it only be truly said, it is no more of work least any man should boast, no
this act excludes the boasting and the boaster for ever, and as this thoroughly
reconciles unto God so it perfectly destroys the enmity, that arises about
Opinion, and Ceremony, or about the Formallies of Form on a Religious score,
the first part of the work shuts out Ishmael the Enemy as an evil doer, but the
latter act shuts out or destroys him as a Serpent, wherein he keeps up the
enmities amongst the several professors of Religion; under the show or likeness
of Good, and so make Religion which should be the very cause of good will and
Peace, to be cause of enmity and strife; and this deceives poor Man, and if we
were but Spiritually minded the Scripture would be found to be writ for our
Learning and comfort, and is as applicable in Spiritual sense now as then in
the Letter, wherein the Harmony as well as the excellency appears. But the
chief difference that we find in the dispensations (save that those were more
outward, and these now are more inward) is, that what was then done in Israel,
as a people or a Society, every particular or individual Men ought to wait to
know done in and for himself, for Israel in the flesh came through those
various states as Figures to Us; for Instance they were all in Egypt, passed
through the Sea, received the Law, traveled the Wilderness, passed Jordan, and
entered Canaan together; but it is not so now with any Society; and seeing no
Society on the account of Religion can be in one and the same State together,
that Society that is the truest Figure of the universal Church of God must take
in all those various States that fear God and work Righteousness, therefore a
right Gospel Church, with respect to outward Society, is a comprehensive
Church, and cannot shut out for Opinion; which deserves your most serious
consideration, in relation to your Brethren at least.

But to apply what has been said to our case; as it is sure that every Man,
that comes truly to be reconciled unto God, must know the dispensation changed
in his Age; so it is as certain that what is to be done in one Man, ought to be
done in all Men, and must be done in all, that comes truly to know the new and
heavenly Man put on; but seeing this cannot be done in all at one time, as we
are a Society, it must at least be done in our Elders or Leaders, or it is not
possible that we should be as a Society, a true Figure of the Universal Church
of God. For as are the Elders or Leaders, so is the People in a great measure
that depend on them; and therefore if our Leaders have narrow Spirits and wrong
Notions of things; the People must be so too, whereupon in follows if our
Leaders deny a change of Dispensation and cease to travel, the People must
needs do so too, and therefore whilst our Elders and Leaders know not a Change
of Dispensation in this Age, which is, a coming through the mystery of Christ's
Death, and a dying with Christ to the flesh, by which the beauty of External
things passes away in the true Ministration of Life, as such cannot be dead
with Christ to the Rudiments of the World, they will be burdened with their
Opinions and Ordinances, and therein burden others. We entreat you to Consider
of this; for it was and is on this very foot, that the greatest part of all
Religious Societies have failed; wherein their Leaders and Elders were always
most in fault. For they could allow of no variation or change of Dispensation
but what they made themselves; and is not this matter of fact? and therefore
always missed of the mind of God, both as he appeared by his Son and by his
Servants; it has been thus through all the Reformation, and was thus in that
great example of Israel; for tho they received the Law to prepare, as a
Schoolmaster to bring unto Christ, and did pretend to look for him, yet could
not allow of the change of Dispensation that he brought, so sticking in their
own Opinions and Judgments of things, in stead of receiving him, that should
have perfected the work they had known begun, they rejected him, for they said,
had any of the Rulers (that is Elders and Leaders,) believed? But the People
that knew not the Law were accursed. And those were such as seemed to have a
great esteem for the Law, the first part of the work, yet taught for Doctrines
the Commandments of men; by which the People were also misled that depended on
them; and whilst you deny a change of Dispensation in this, Age, it is clear
you stick in your own Opinions and Judgments, and are as truly in danger to
miss the mind of God and mislead others, as any that have been before you.

But observe, for you know, or at least may, that whilst our Lord was in the
flesh he was tied unto the Jews, or however did appear so, and here he seemed
straightened or limited with respect to the rest of Mankind; but when he had
fulfilled the work given him to do, as he dyed to the flesh of the Jew he
became universal, giving Gentiles as well as Jews an entrance unto the Father
by one Spirit, and of twain made one New Man, and cast off the seed of Abraham
after the flesh, and chused his seed after the Spirit, from hence he took off
all confidence in the flesh; for if the Jews had not herein to trust, surely no
Society now can have wherein to trust on that account.

But the Apostle tells us, if the casting off the Jews was the riches of the
World, what should be their receiving, but as life from the dead? And which way
could this great benefit come unto Mankind in their receiving (...) more then
in this; that as then they should have known true reconciliation unto God, they
would have been acquainted with the various States that are to be passed
through before that can be known; and then as they would have been truly fitted
to have informed Mankind of the different effects of each, so their credit with
all that had received Christ would have given them that advantage to have been
believed; then should we have been truly informed, that generally speaking the
work of God in restoring Man unto himself was really twofold? and that the
first part, tho a glorious work, yet it was but to prepare and not to perfect;
and as it was but to prepare, there was a necessity to wait to know the
Dispensation changed. For had the Jews, as a Society received the Messiah, they
would then have known him, to enlarge them in the Spirit, by taking away the
confidence in the flesh; then with one voice they would have informed us, that
whilst they continued in the first part of the work, tho it was glorious, yet
their Spirits was narrow and shut up to the rest of Mankind, and their thoughts
was childish and partial toward God; for they did conclude, that because God
had done so much for them, he had either forgotten or rejected all others, but
receiving the Messiah as they would have known the Dispensation changed so they
would have been enlarged in Spirit; then would they have informed us, that God
was God of the Gentile as well as of the Jew, and that as he was Lord over all,
so he was rich unto all that in truth called upon his Name; this would have
mortified and slain all our strife about Forms, carnal Ordinances, Opinion and
Ceremony; but alas in stead of coming as a Body or Society from the Form to the
Power, coming out of or through the first Covenant Works and from under a Legal
Dispensation, wherein the confidence in the flesh stood, as well as the wars
and strife, into the Second Covenant, in to the ministration of Life, where the
good will and Peace is; that so they might have been a perfect Figure of the
work of God with Man and therein been the great example to the World, as well
of Gods Love and good will, as of that Righteousness and Justice which he
required; they stuck in the first part of the work; and so that Elect and
Precious Stone, that laid in Sion, became to them a stumbling Stone and Rock of
Offense, for tho they seemed to own and magnify Moses and the Prophets
dispensation, which God owned and appointed, yet not owning the Change of
Dispensation in the Messiah, they became as a Sect, too narrow in their Minds
and Spirits, to make known the good unto Mankind intended in their choosing; for
the casting them off singly was not the riches of the World; but because they
stuck in the flesh, and could not follow the Lord fully, as their Father Abram
did, to manifest the good, they must be casten off or else it could not have
been known, thus it is clear they was rejected and casten off because they
denied the Change of Dispensation, which should have enlarged them in Spirit,
to have been the blessing of Nations.

Pray consider if something of this has not attended all the Reformations
according to their respective Interest; they could never as a body receive
those further appearances of God testified unto by such as the Lord sent and
and made use of; and therefore stuck in a fleshly knowledge of what they first
knew or received, like the Jews, which tho good in it self so far as it reached,
but not considering that as God has done great things for them, he could still
do greater, they durst never trust him in the delivering up of the Tallent
therefore in stead of becoming more Spiritual, they stuck in the flesh; so that
we may see in some sort what is of Man comes to be manifested in a Society
which is one body on a religious score, and that is flesh and Spirit, which can
never be reconciled, and therefore the one must prevail, and accordingly as
they prevail that body may be denominated, but in particular Persons we have
seen the flesh overcom'd and that universallity of Spirit brought forth
testified too in the birth of Christ, yet truly there wants the Example in a
body or Society of Men, so needful so necessary for the honor of God, and the
Peace of Mankind; and from hence have come those seperations and Divisions that
have been and must continue till Shilo come. And now you are upon the Stage,
and more may be expected from you then others, by how much you conclude God to
have done more for you then others; and as you pretend more unto the Spirit
then others. If then you do resemble Spiritual Israel more then others, you
must wait to place your Unity not upon the Professor of the Truth, for he may
be but as the fleshly child of Abraham, but upon the Possessor, and upon all
traveling for Sion, tho so ignorant of the way, that they weep because they
know it no better. For it is those and not the former that follow the Lord where
ever he leads, and those he will own for ever, whether they be known unto the
World or worldly Professors, or not, he knows them, and is gathering them
together in one, by destroying the enmity as it stands in carnal Ordinances;
and does declare now, as he did by his Apostle that of every Nation those that
fear God and work righteousness are accepted of him; and what is accepted of
God ought to be accepted of Man; and therefore if you conceive you are Leaders
(not of Israel in the flesh, but of Israel in the Spirit, you must know your
Spirits enlarged, that you may own what God owns; for as our Principal is
universal, our good will ought to be as large to the Children of Men, for
consider, an Universal principle and a narrow limited Spirit are inconsistant.
But this can never be without a change of the Dispensation come, you know
Israel after the flesh was to allow the Gentile to worship God in the outward
Court. Pray mind then if their outward Court was not larger then ours? It Is
true they had an inward Court, that such could not come to, till Circumcised;
was there then an outward Court, and an inward; and have not we what answers to
them now? What is sit for the Society of good Men, may not that very well be
allowed to come into our Society or outward Court? For they who do not come
thus far, cannot come into the inward Court, yet seeing they must come to the
outward before the inward, shall not we allow them here? Testifying at the same
time to the Inward Court, which none can come to but by the true Circumcision
in Spirit. Thus it is clear, if our Outward Court were but a little more large,
our Inward Court would certainly be the more prized vallued and sought after.
Again you know the Leader in Israel, in their Travel from Egypt to Canaan, was
to Travel according to the least of Israel, and did always own such as were
Circumcised, tho at eight days old to be of the Church of God in the Figure;
and pray will not this hold as true to Spiritual Israel? What is Circumcision
in the flesh now but a holy Conversation performed in the fear of God? For as
this is so far accepted of God it really fits for the Society of good men, and
therefore its impossible it should be rejected of that People or Society or
Church that is a true Figure of the Church of God; now least you should run
this into an extreme, we will at present bound it with respect to your Brethen,
who have come out and suffered with you for the Testimony of a good Conscience,
and do yet in your own sense agree with you in the worship and Doctrines of
truth; and yet for all this are shut out and excluded by you, for not complying
with you in your Opinions, yea mere Opinions; for that they are such, is put
out of doubt, when you tell us, those things of Difference do not relate to
Faith, Conscience or Religion. We beseech you to be serious, for this evidently
makes manifest the narrowness of your Spirits, and that narrowness of Spirit
demonstrates a necessity for you to know a change of the Dispensation. For it is
impossible whiles you thus remain that you should be that Figure of the true
Church, to which the gathering can be, by bringing forth that peace on Earth
that good will to Men, and glory to God on high; where only the Swords are
beaten into Plowshares, and Spears into Pruning Hooks; it is this and the glory
of this, to which the gathering of the People must be; we saw something of this
in our coming forth, as our testimony against all force, wrath and sighting
with carnal weapons do testify.

But alas! Not truly traveling in Spirit to know the work completed, we have
not yet come to know the substance of what was seen in the Vision, without
which the other will prove but as a dead and Formal business. Nor can you know
this without a change of the dispensation, and therefore whiles you conclude
against it in your mind, it is clear to us, you stick in the works of a first
Covenant, and abide but under a Legal Dispensation, and tho you appear to be
against the Enemy as as an evil doer, that is no more then others have done
before you; but not knowing the Dispensation changed; tho the Enemy does not
attach you with what is evil and Immoral, yet he deceives you as a Serpent, as
is apparent in this noise you make about your Opinions, and further clear in
this Narrowness of Spirit that appears amongst you, as is amongst the various
professors of Religion, that except you wait to know the Dispensation changed,
the Serpent will beguile you as he has done others; forin that appearance he
cannot be destroyed; but as we come in to the Death of Christ to the flesh and
know the Mystery of it. We entreat you to consider of those things seriously
and in the fear of God, that the good will and love that is known in the
writing those things may be felt; and then tho much might be said about this
matter, yet may this suffice, but if in stead of considering them, you will
contest them by your cunning; then if the Lord see it meet, more may be said;
but in the intrim this may serve.

As little as this Book is, many more things might be objected against; we
shall chiefly take notice of one passage more in the 11. Page and with it
conclude; it follows (says our Author) I would therefore beseech you Friends
to ponder it in your own minds upon what a narrow point your distance stands,
and that the main and tender point is allowed you, viz. Conscience is free and
unconcerned in the question and the visible ground of Difference being so small
weigh with your selves by what has been, what may be the consequence of this
lamentable breach, etc.

Answer, As little as this distance is made by you, we do not find it fairly
set out; we will endeavor to set it forth as it is without any reserve, that
we may come to a clear Issue with you in the matter; and first we will take
notice how far we agree in your sense according to your confesions in this
Epistle, that so a better and clearer Judgment may be made of the difference (
Page the 2) you grant we are one in Judgment with you in the Worship and
Doctrines of truth; therefore in those Essential Points we cannot differ in
your sense, which we desire may be noted for the future. Further you say, We
own the end, that is, of good Order in the Society, for that must be intended
or nothing; and not only so but you say, We allow of the means, which can be no
less then such fitting Method; as may answer that end, Page 11.) Thus in your
own sense, if you are ingenious, in your confessions, we cannot want what is
essential to demonstrate our Duty to God or Men: We own Women are concerned in
Conversation, having Souls to save as well as Men; we allow they may Meet apart
from Men on some distinct occasions; we Impose no new Oppinion nor obtrude any
new Method in Discipline; You neither do nor have any thing to charge us with
that is Immoral or evil; Pray then let not the Bear skin be put on us for the
future let things appear as they are.

For on your part it is clear that you make the difference to stand and arise
from those things, which under the Notion of Elders you have brought in and
exhorted to; we Join Issue with you here, and say it is true, the difference
stand here as to matter of fact, or what does externally appear; but we say our
Dissatisfaction is deeper; it is with that Spirit and Power, that without
reserve requires complience with what under the notion of Elders you exhort
too; it is here we place the ground of our Difference and Dissatisfaction: We
entreat you to be serious: for we most surely believe, that the allowing in our
case such a power to Man under the Notion of Eldership begets and leads into an
Implicit reverence and blind obedience, and so directly leads into Ignorance
and slavery: And as the first is inconsistent with the true knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; so is the latter with that freedom we ought to
Enjoy, as we are a free and voluntary Society. Now we say, had you practiced
Women's Meetings, as believing a Service in them, and only recommended them to
be used as a Service was found, we believe we should not have openly opposed;
hoping as the liberty of examination (the undoubted right of every true
Christian) had been truly and conscientiously preserved by you; things that had
been wrong would have dyed of themselves, but when instead of recommending, you
enjoin, and when in stead of leaving things to be freely examined, you add all
the force and skill you have to uphold them, no way is left for us to stand
clear in our Consciences to God; but in standing fast in that freedom and
liberty our Lord has purchased for us; nor any other way have we left to
endeavor to undeceive you and others, but by showing our dissatisfaction. For
to be silent here, is to give consent; and what strengthens wrong, can never
take it away. Meeting therefore with this Power that is wrong exerted in this
of Women's Meetings, its here then the difference must stand as to matter of
fact; and as the allowing of this Power does in our Judgment and understanding
(as above) bring in Ignorance and slavery, therefore we say if the things might
be of some service in some places, yet to Impose them universally upon the
Society is wrong, and we are in Conscience bound to refuse them, as against the
truth, and distructive to our Christian Freedom, as it stands in the Liberty of
Examination and choice. Therefore though the thing cannot be said to be simply
evil in it self, yet the consequence is evil, and we are bound to shun and
avoid the appearance of evil as well as the evil it self. Thus the Issue of
this great business must stand as stated Page 20. and 21. that is, there must
be a necessity for those things that you bring in against your Brethrens
consent, or you must set forth that you have a right under the Notion of Elders
to Impose upon the Society that for which in truth there is no necessity. For
now we say in plain words there is no Necessity for Women's constant distinct
Meeting for Government in our Societies, and deny that you have any Power
lodged in you under the Notion of Eldership, by Virtue of our constitution, to
bring or Impose upon Us that which in truth there is no Necessity for.

First, that there is no necessity for Women's Meetings as above, is clear from
the Practice of Friends, whiles we had them not, as well as from the Practice
of such now as have them not, and yet owns the same Principle: Again, the
Practice of all Christians from the beginning demonstrate there can be no
necessity for them in a general way, as insisted on by you. For if there had
been a necessity for them to Order or Government, they could not have been
without them; seeing what there is a necessity for, is as Essential to the
being of that thing. But it is matter of fact, that they have all done, the
business of their respective Societies without this Mode contended for by you,
therefore we may safely conclude there can be no necessity for Women's constant
and distinct Meetings for Government in our Society; and indeed if things are
brought in to the Society against the minds of your Brethren, by which
difference arises, nothing can justify the proceeding on your part but a
necessity for the thing. For if this of Necessity be not considered in our case
as abounder, a door is opened to fill us with Opinions and Ceremony, seeing
there wants nothing to introduce them but a specious Pretense, which never
failed to wait on such as affect Government, or reflect on their own abillities
for it. Now as there can be no necessity for Women's constant Meeting for
Government, for you to claim Power, under the Notion of Elders to bring in to
the Society against the minds of your Brethren such things as in truth there is
no Necessity for, this we say is a violence done to our Constitution, as we
imbodied a free and voluntary Society and is also against the truth of our
Principle and Opinion.

First, that it is a violence to our Constitution is clear for you know in our
coming forth we did not choose any Elders to depend on, nor indeed could we
according to our Profession; for as we asserted that Christ our Lord was come
in Spirit to teach and govern us, a teacher that as he could not be removed
into a corner, so he was only sufficient. And therefore the pre-eminence was to
be given to him in all things. Thus it would have been a against his Honor, and
the truth of what we professed, to have chosen any Man to have depended upon;
when Christ was come in Spirit to teach and govern, to depend on Man to do it,
was to neglect the Fountain and choose the Cistern; therefore as we neither did
nor could, according to the truth of our Principle, choose any Men to depend on,
under any Name or Notion whatsoever, for any to choose or Impose themselves upon
Us, is wrong to Us, and a violence offered to our Constitution. For in short,
observe; it is really Ignorance of the sufficiency of Christ to choose any Man
so much as Mentally to depend on. But it is Slavery to have others to choose for
or Impose themselves or their choice upon Us. You know as Christ our Lord was
owned to be come in Spirit to teach and Govern us, we were to bring all our
thoughts words and deeds to him, that we might know the truth in what we
thought said or did; for we were not to be our own but his; and as we were to
bring our own words and deeds to him, certainly we were to bring the words and
deeds of all others to him in which we were to be concernd. For as we could not
know the truth of what we did our selves, but by the testimony or approbation
of his Spirit, so it is beyond contradiction we can not know the words and deeds
of others to be from the truth any other way; thus conviction or persuasion
brought us together, and that must be preserved still inviolably, or we can not
continue a free People, examination of what we were to receive from others was
truly asserted, as our undoubted right in our coming forth, and as the truth is
but one, the reason is the same now as well as then, therefore to Impose an
Eldership upon Us under any pretense whatsoever, as it destroys or takes away
the Liberty of Examination, it is a violence done to our Constitution. Indeed
what is brought in by violence must needs be upheld by force, or otherwise it
will dye and come to nothing of it self; thus the force and strife you have
used to uphold what you have brought in by violence demonstrate you more wrong
then any argument we can use; when it is but seriously considered, that it is
not Truth but Error that loses by trial; nay the truth only gains the most when
freely examined and tried, and error loses most that way; what can discover
your wrongness more then the denying a free Examination? For where that is
taken away the prevailing of those things cannot be owing to the truth, but the
force and conquest of Men; which as it is directly contrary to a free
examination and choice, so it is beyond contradiction a violence done to our
Constitution as we are a free and volluntary Society confessing but one Lord
and head.

And as the bringing into our Society things for which there appear no
necessity, and requiring compliance under the notion of Eldership, is a
Violence done to our Constitution; so it is against the truth of our Principle
and Profession. For you know, the Lord from Heaven the second Adam, the
quickening Spirit, the true Light that lights all Men coming into the World is
Professed to be our foundation and asserted by us to be sufficient to lead into
all truth all that truly adhere to him. Now it must follow, whilst we thus
confess him, that we truly adhere to him, or we do not, if we truly adhere to
him, we must according to the truth of what we profess know his sufficiency,
and where the sufficiency of Christ our Lord is truly known such can not depend
on Man, no it is Impossible, as in the Natural Figure, the Moon and Stars do
show us light, but it is in the dark, it is in the night; therefore when the Sun
comes, tho it does not take away that light, which the Moon and Stares have as
to themselves, yet to us it takes it away, so that it is impossible, tho we had
a mind to depend on that Light or have any benefit from it; and we are sure the
Sun of righteousness, as he arises in the Soul, does as much fulfill the
Service and transcend the light of the Instrument; therefore on this foot we
are to call no Man Doctor, Master, Father or Elder on Earth by way of
Pre-eminence for our dependence; because one is our Doctor, Master, Father, and
Elder in Heaven; and all such as are thus taught of him are Brethren; Christ
and his Disciples in the days of his flesh are a true Figure of this; for he
chose his Disciples they did not choose him; and as he chose them out of the
World they was simply to depend upon him, not one upon another; therefore when
they thought of depending one upon another by consulting who should be the
greatest amongst them, our Lord corrected their mistake and in them yours, if
you lay claim to the like choice, by telling them the Elder should be as the
Younger, and he that ruled as he that served, nay, he that would be the
greatest among them, must be Servant to all the rest; then not Lord or Master
to Impose upon the rest; and as he told them they should call no Man Master,
Doctor or Father, so he forbad them to be called so; and we are sure it was
the thing, as well as the Name, that was intended; whereupon it follows, that
to seek this Pre-eminence by desiring this dependence under the Notion of
Eldership, as it is contrary to the truth of our Principle and Profession, so
it is against the very Sense and meaning of the Command of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. For this is to come in your own Name and not in his.

But on the other hand, whilst we confess the Lord is come to teach and govern,
if we do not truly adhere to him, as such can not know the truth of what they
do profess, so it is certain such do not truly believe in him; and if such think
that want shall be supplied by depending upon you; or that this is Christ's
Government, to be subject unto yours, they are Miserably mistaken. And truly
whilst you seek this dependence under the Notion of Eldership, you contribute
to their mistake and are guilty of the Ignorance and Error such are in; for as
(in the Figure above) the Disciples were not to gather unto themselves, but
unto their Lord, knowing none could be truly taught except they came to him, so
they knew that if they did come to him, he was sufficient, and therefore having
brought 'em to him they did not interpose, We have found the Messiah said one,
Jesus of Nazareth, can any good come out of Nazareth? Come and see, try thy
self, and then thou'l have the same ground to trust that we have, or to this
effect; and it is true according to our Profession, that Christ our Lord is now
as able to teach, and may be now as easily come to as then; who is it then that
dare strive for their Opinions, whilst such acknowledge the Lord is present?
Thus if you were the Servants of Christ you must gather to him, and not to your
selves; for we can not be the Disciples of Christ till we hear him our selves,
nor followers of him till we know him go before us, and this we can not truly
know whilst we depend on you or any Man. True Religion is founded on those two
Commands, to love God with all our heart and our Neighbor as our selves;
here is both our Duty to God and Men included; and Christ our Lord teaches the
latter as well as the former; and those that know not something of the truth of
those things in their own minds, under our Profession are not yet come in to
the School of Christ. Pray therefore let the People know that as Christ is head
to the true Churh in all things, he must be head to every Man in all things,
that is a Member of this Church: So that to be of this Church is quite another
thing then to be of any (...) Society whatever, ( Address to Protestants Page
177) this building is reared without noise strife and contention; it is like its
Figure the Temple built at Jerusalem in Solomon's Peaceful Reign no Axe or
Hammer heard there; all that at best is but in the Preparation, which so many
have mistaken for the choice: And so in stead of traveling for the true rest
have set up a false one, growing great in stead of being humble, dispising
others in overvalluing themselves. For all this noise and strife in the best
sense is amongst the Servants and Workmen, amongst the drawers of Water, and
hewers of Wood, and not among the Children and Sons of God. Now your Service if
you have any is to bring to Christ, the true knowledge of him ends the strife
and the noise. For those that sit at his feet truly to hear him are quiet, and
as they have chosen the better part, so are they not cumbred about many
things. And as your Service is to bring to him, you ought to endeavor honestly
to take out of the way whatever hinders coming to him, and indeed in this case,
that is your own self hood, your affected and desired Elderships for this is to
bear witness to your selves, by seeking a relyance and dependence upon you, and
this begets into Sects and Divisions; for it is sure while the People depend on
you ot any Man, they neither do nor can know the sufficiency of Christ our
Lord. Pray therefore consider, that to seek this dependence upon you under the
Notion of Eldership is really against the truth of our Principle and
Profession. For if you prevail it will fix the People in that which can never
perfect, for all that depend on you, as they must always be learning of you,
such can never be able to know the truth as it is in Jesus; as it always
falls out where Persons on a Religious score seek to bear Rule by their own
means, and the People love to have it so; and as on this foot you will still
grow more narrow in your minds and Spirits, as true and just a separation may
be from you as any other People heretofore. We entreat you to weigh the matter,
that so you may throw down your Crowns at the feet of Jesus, who alone is
worthy to reign, according to our Testimony in our beginning.

Objection, But perhaps you will say, It is true Christ our Lord is sufficient
for all that truly adhere to him; but all that Profess him do not adhere to
him, and it is for their Souls that an Eldership is necessary, and that we are
thus concerned that a check may be upon all Practice, as an expediency against
Irregularity in Conversation, whether toward them that are without, or them
that are within the same Communion, to which the strong will submit for the
sake of the Weak, etc. Page the 9.

Answer, It seems your care is about those that do not truly adhere to Christ,
and for the securing of them; you ought to be cautious that you do not burden
the Conscience of those that are faithful, for if what is good and evil could
not be known and Judged of without Women's Meetings for Government, it were
something to the purpose; but since it is clear it may, this seems but an
Artifice to seek to inslave such as are conscientious and sincere to God, under
pretense of taking care for those that are not; and is but a subtle argument
to make way for the setting up Man's Government in stead of Christ's; for what is
this but to say we are not to examine what you bring in whiles yon pretend to
apply it to some good end? But if we do examine things and truly find they tend
to Formallity and leads into Ignorance and Slavery, yet we must dissemble our
conviction and dishonor our head to please you, what is this but to endeavor to
make us owe more to you for Government then we do to the Civil Magistrate? It Is
true We are to Obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, but yet we do
not this blindfold; for as we are the Servants of Christ, and own him for our
Lord and Head, we must examine what Man Injoyns, and if in our understanding it
agrees with the truth we are bound in Conscience to obey: But if it do not,
then Conscience rather obliges to suffer then dishonor our Head. And will you
not allow us that berty without making us suffer, which you take and insist
upon as a right. You know Christ our Lord is one in all, and cannot deny but
that he ought to be the Head of every Man, and where he is truly head, we
affirm, such can do no less with respect to his Honor, then examine what they
are to receive, and to be singular here, or of the lesser numbers is so far
from being wrong or a hazard, that it is only just and safe. But perhaps you
will Object, shall not the evil doer be dealt with?

We Answer Yes; for as we have granted this before we here confirm it; but
then, who is this evil doer, ought to be considered. For you know, you ought
(according to Address to Protestants ( Page 99) to make no other distinction of
good and evil then God has made; it follows then you shall know them by their
fruits (says Christ) So (say you) shall Men know them that sincerely believe,
and confess Christ by their sanctified Manners, and blameless Conversation, and
(mark) Woe unto them that make other distinctions (pray mind it,) for God has
made no other. (again) there will be but Goats and Sheep at the last, Holy and
unholy, Just and unjust; therefore (say you) let that be our distinction
(observe it) which ever was and will be Gods distinction; for all other
measures (pray mind) are the effects of the Passions and Presumptions of Men.
Pray apply it; and, if you can but give what you have asserted to be right to
receive, Contention will be laid asleep among us, for had you made no other
distinctions then God has made, we'd had no difference.

But again, perhaps you will say, this is to make void the Service of
Instruments and to deny an Eldership in the Church of Christ.

Answer, No we truly own both in a right sense, but we say the Service of those
Instruments that the Lord sends are to be fulfilled on a Spiritual account, and
therefore such as come in the Name of Christ; gather to him and not unto
themselves; for like their Master they bear witness to the truth and make
themselves of no Reputation, throwing their Crowns down constantly at the feet
of their Lord, affirming freely as well as truly that their Service must be
fulfilled for Righteousness sake by every one that comes to know the Lord
present and sufficient. For where Christ takes the Government the Service of
the Instrument is swallowed up; and therefore must as really decrease, as in
the Baptist's time; and they that do not Preach it as well as he know not that
self denial he taught; and yet the least in the Kingdom is greater then he.

And as to Elders, they are such as are more grown up in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ then others are, and it is true their Service is
to go Armed before their Brethren, in Order to lead them into rest, which their
Souls have tasted of; and by bringing them into that State, that their Service
might be discharged, such seek not then to set it up as perpetual, but to have
it finished; of this we have a Figure in those of Israel that received the Lot
of their Inheritance, before they passed over Jordan, yet were they strong Men
to go Armed before their Brethren, but it was as their Servants not as their
Masters. For they was not to be followed but as they were the followers of
Joshua the Figure of the true Jesus; and here both them that did follow, and
them that went before did know that their Service of going before was to be
fulfilled and discharged, so that as the one part did truly desire rest, that
they should have no occasion for their Brethren's Service, so did the other
both desire and expect it, that they might be discharged of it; and this is a
true Figure of the Eldership in Christ. For indeed as such are more grown up
into the Nature and Spirit of our Lord, by so much they do the more resemble
him in his selfdenyal humility and Service. So that tho they go Armed before
their Brethren, yet they freely affirm their Brethren are not to follow them,
but as they are the followers of Christ; and all true followers of such Elders
might have a measure of the same Spirit; therefore all such Elders direct to
the Spirit of Truth. For without that they can neither be truly known or
followed. But such Elders like their Master makes little Figure in the World,
and therefore cannot be known aright but in a Spiritual way, and are as little
known as followed. But that the Practices of such may be the better known, we
will remind you of what you have recommended to other, which if but truly
observed might help us much in our case. You give it in your 5th Cause of
Persecution, Address to Protestants Pages 241) it follows another reason (of
Persecution) and that no small one, is self-love and Impatiency of Men under
contradiction, be it out of Ignorance, that they are angry with what they
cannot refute, or out of private Interest it matters not, their Opinion must
Reign alone they are tenacious of their own sense, and cannot endure to have it
questioned, be there never so much reason for it, Men of these Passions are yet
to learn, they are Ignorant of Religion by the want they have of Mortification,
such Persons can easily let go their hold on Charity to lay violent hands upon
their opposers if they have Power they rarely fail to use it so, not
remembering, that when they absolved themselves from the tie of Love, Meekness
and Patience they have abandoned true Religion, and contend not for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints which stood therein, but for mere words;

It is here that proud flesh and a capricious head disputes for Religion, and
not an humble heart, and Divine frame of Spirit. Men that are angry for God,
Passionate for Christ, and that call Names for Religion and slings Stones and
Persecute for Faith, may tell us they are Christians if they will, but no body
would know them to be such by their fruits; to be sure they are no Christians
of Christ's making, I would to God the disputants of our time did but calmly
weigh the Irreligiousness of their own heats for Religion, and see if what they
contend for will quit the Cost, will countervail the Charge of departing from
Charity and making a Sacrifice for Peace to gain their Points; upon so
seasonable a reflection I am confident they would find that they rather show
their love to Opinion then truth, and seek Victory more then Concord.

Could men (Pray mind it) be contented, as he whom they call their Lord was, to
declare their Message and not strive for Proselites, nor vex for Conquest, they
would recommend all to the Conscience, and, if it must be so, patiently endure
contradiction too, and so lay their Religion, as he did his, not in violence
but in suffering. But I must freely profess, and in duty and Conscience I do
it, that I cannot call that Religion which is introduced against the Laws of
Love, Meekness and Friendship: Superstition, interest or Faction I may. There
is a Zeal without knowledge, that is Superstition, there is a Zeal against
Knowledge, that is Interest or Faction, the true Heresy; there is a Zeal with
Knowledge that is Religion. Therefore blind Obedience may be Superstition, it
cannot be Religion, and if you will view the Countries of Cruelty, you shall find
them Superstitious rather then Religious. Religion is gentle, it makes Men
better, more friendly, loving, and Patient, then before, and the success which
followed Christianity, while the Ancient Professors of it betook themselves to
no other defense, plainly proves the force of those passive Arguments above all
corporal punishments, and that we must never hope for the same Prosperity till
we fall into the same Methods. Are Men Impatient of having their conceits
owned? They are then most to be suspected (pray mind it) Error and
Superstition, like cracked Titles, only fear to be searched and run and cry for
Authority and number. Truth is plain and steadfast without Arts or tricks; will
you receive her, well; if not, there is no compulsion. But pray tell me, what
is that desired Uniformity that has not Unity, and that Unity which has not
Love Meekness and Patience in it? I beseech you hear me, for those Men depart
from the Spirit of Christianity, that seek with Anger and Frowardness to
promote it. Let us not put so miserable a Cheat upon our selves, nor such an
affront upon Christianity, as to think that a most gentle and Patient Religion
can be advanced by most ingentle and impatient ways. I should sooner submit to
an humble Opposion, then to the greatest Zealot in the World, and sooner
deliver my self up to him that would modestly drop a Controverted truth, then
to such as seek tempestiously to carry it, etc. I have quoted this largely, it
is both so Christian and pertinent to our purpose; for certainly you ought to
practice what you have advised others to, for the little foxes are to be taken
as well as the great one, and not only persecution removed, as it stands in
Corporal Punishments. but the ground of it: And certainly such as are true
Elders in Christ's Church will write after this Copy; and therefore it is
impossible they should strive for their Opinion, no that is not the way into
the Kingdom and patience of the Son of God. So that like their Lord and Master,
if they have any Government, they take it by Patience and suffering; which as
it is contrary to the Kingdom and Government of this World, so it is contrary to
the nature, end and aim of all the carnal Professions of Religion, but how
Conform you are to the one and contrary to the other, is clear, by the Imposing
of your Opinions. For it is matter of fact, that the Imposing of your Opinions
contrary to what is above has been the occasion both of our dissatisfaction
and division; and pray what are these Opinions, but a Circumstance and
Ceremony: Now for you to endeavor to destroy the liberty of Examination on
purpose that you may bring in your opinions, that are but as Circumstance and
Ceremony, this makes way for Lordship and Dominion, and that can not come in,
but Ignorance and Slavery must follow. For not to Examine what we are to
receive is to be Ignorant, but to be deprived of Choice is the Original of
Slavery. Indeed if we must be enslaved after our Confession to so much Freedom
and understanding, Ignorance seems the best Medium to make us Patient to bear
it; whiles to know and to be Imposed upon must needs be grievous. In short,
there is nothing that can emonstrate you more to be the Servants of Christ and
that you truly honor him, then when like him, you can freely leave what you
Propose to be Examined if true. But how much more ought you to avoid the
Imposing of your Opinions: For if we must receive things because you say it,
and not because we know them to be true; Our Building then like others will be
on humane Authority, and not on the truth; and as nothing can more manifest you
to be dead unto self, and to the Rudiments and ways of the World in this
matter, and so alive unto God, then when you can freely leave what you bring to
be examined; so nothing can more conduce to conserve that honor we owe unto
the Lord our Head, preserve us a knowing and understanding People, and secure
us from being Imposed upon, then for us conscienciously to reserve and keep the
Liberty of Examination. For once let that go through any confidence in Man and
as the Reverance is Implicit, the Obedience is blind; it is no matter what Name
of distinction those Men go under, to whom we pay an Implicit Veneration;
Ignorance and Slavery must follow: and where the effect is the same, the cause
cannot differ in or about the (...) of Men. When we consider what you have
wrote against Imposition at diverse times, and particularly in Address to
Protestants; the second part being wholly to that purpose; what can thinking
Men say, but that you showed your parts well against Imposition, as many had
done before; but when you should have given the Example unto the World, (which
indeed they want in a Body of Men on a Religious score,) and so have proved the
truth of your Precepts or good Advice by your own Practice, here you failed and
have been as difficient as others. So blind is self, so partial is Interest,
that Men cannot make the case of others their own; and therefore do not give
what themselves did but just now Insist to receive, not as a favor but as a
right, and this has blasted all the Reformation to this day. It was not for
nothing that Israel was commanded not to oppress Strangers; no certainly it
ought to teach you to have been kind upon the account of Conscience to
Dissenters, who had suffered your selves so much for the one, and pleaded so
little for the other.

Indeed had you but cordially made the case of other your own; and applied unto
your selves what you wrote to others, but in Address to Protestants; it would
have been needless to have inserted any part of it here, because you could not
but have freely given unto your Brethren what you insisted to receive from
others; and then we should have had no difference, and that it is more blessed
to give then to receive, as its greater to show mercy then to receive it, is
certainly true. But not doing this, but in stead of it to recriminate Persons
for seperateing, and for being dissatisfyed is the occasion that we have quoted
Address to Protestants several times, and do yet further add some passages; the
first is Pages 79 and 80. where you say, to conclude, if ye desire Peace, Love,
Truth, seek Piety, and hate Hypocrisy, discard all those things called
Articles of Faith and Cannons of the Church, that are not to be found in
express terms of Scripture, or so plainly Authorized by Scripture, as may with
ease be discerned by every honest and Conscientious Person; and in room of
numerous and disputed Opinions made the bonds of external communion, lest some
plain general and necessary truths be laid down, and let them be few.

Was it right in those you wrote too, to take away those things? And is it not
wrong in you to impose such things as give Occasion? And if it was just and
right in them to take theirs away, is it not right in you to take yours away?
There is nothing but self-love that can hinder, For it will hold as true in our
case, being nothing but the Old Cause new Varnisht. But to go on (in Address to
Protestants 85 Page) you tell us, that the belief of Jesus of Nazereth to be
the Messiah, the Son and Christ of God, sent to restore and save Mankind, is
the first, and was then the only requisite Article of Faith, without any large
confessions, or a heap of Principles and Opinions, etc. And you proceed to
prove this confession truly made to be sufficient for Communion, and to that
end also answer all the usual Objections Page 91 and 92; the last Objection is
this, say you, if it be alleged that this will take in all Parties, ye that
Schismatics and Heretics will creep in under this Confession, since few of
them will refuse to make it; to this you answer, I do say (says the Author)
'twould be an happy day, what Man loves God and Christ, seeks Peace and
concord, that would not rejoice if all our Animosities and vexations about
matters of Religion were buried in this one Confession of Jesus the great
Author and Lord of the Christian Religion, so often lost in pretending to
contest for it? O Friends! Have not you been greatly wanting to the World here
in an example to your Brethren? whom you acknowledge to be one with you in the
Worship and Doctrine of Truth, and therefore can never want those requesit
Articles for Communion. O that you could see in this your day of trial the
things that belong to your Peace! Now that you may not think much that we
should thus remind you, because we are to examine what we are to receive, we
will take notice of a little part that you have quoted out of Jacobus Auntius
to strengthen what you there write, and therefore ought to be of more force to
conclude you. You beg^n with him in the 157 Page and continue to the 172 to the
same purpose; but the Place we note is in 162 and follows thus and because a
thing will be so much the better preserved, by how much the greater is the
Number of those that keep it, the People oughe often to be put in mind that
both the Reading of the Scriptures and the care of Religion belong, nor to the
Pastors of the Church only. (that is in our case not to the Preachers and
Elders only) but that every one that would be saved (Pray mark it) ought to
make dilli, gent search whether corruption be all ready or (mind it) is for the
future like to be introduced, and (mark) this to do no less carefully than if
he was persuaded that all besides himself was asleep, (no fear then or hazard
of being singular) and (mind) whatsoever is wont to take off the Common People
(that is such as are neither Elders nor Pastors) from such studdy, care must be
taken that that shing (observe) be wholly taken away. And pray who must take
this away in our case but the Preachers and Elders? And how must they take it
away but by letting every one know that is neither Preachers nor Elders, that
if they expect to be saved, the care of Religion belongs to them as well as it
does to the Preachers and Elders, and therefore they ought to examine things
and not to believe them true only because such as esteem themselves Pastors and
Elders say it; but because they themselves know they are true. And we are sure
if this will hold any where it will hold in our case; where we confess but one
Lord and Head. But allas! Instead of this good Method to take away what hurts
Examination, you are endeavoring all you can to establish and confirm what you
ought to take away, telling us, those things do not belong to Faith Conscience
and Religion, and so not to us to Examine that are to be governed and ruled,
but to you that are our Elders and Teachers; for that is the Natural
Consequence of this great strife for your Opinions. But as what is above proves
we ought to Examine things and that strictly, so what follows confirms that we
ought to have a choice as well as Examination. For in Page 149 it follows, to
check this exhorbitancy the Apostle Paul demands, Who art thou that Judge
another Servant? To his own Lord he stands or falls; which shows with great
evidence (say you) that Christians of all sorts great and small, are but
Brethren (to be sure) and consequently (Pray mark) all Superiority, Lordship,
and Imposition are excluded (to be sure.) But if there be a difference (among
Christians) it is in this, that as Christ taught, he that is greatest is to be
Servant to the rest; (but say you) what is more opposice to a Servant then a
Lord? And to Service then Injunction, and that on Penalties too? Here it is
that Christ is only Lord and Lawgiver, who is only King of this inward Kingdom
of the Soul; and it is to be noted (observe) that the Apostle did not write this
to a private Brother, or in some special case, but to the Church (observe) as a
general standing truth and therefore (say you) now as authentic and proper as
then; and if this be true, I cannot see (says our Author) how any or even the
most part of the Church (observe for it is patt to our case,) that are still
but Brethren to the rest, of one Voluntary Communion and Profession, can with
any show of reason Impose upon them (of the same Community) and escape the
reproof of this Scripture. (and pray mind, to confirm all this what follows)
for (says our Author) all Societies are to govern themselves according to
their Institution and first Principles of union; where there is violence on
this part, Tyrany and not Order is introduced; Now since Persuasion and
Conviction began all true Christian Societies, (and therefore ours to be sure
in your sense) all Christian Societies must uphold themselves upon the same
free bottom (to be sure) or they turn Antichristian, I beseech you (says the
Author) here let us Examine our selves faithfully, indeed that is it we would
be at, and the want of that is the cause of our Misery,) and I am of belief
(says the Author) that something will appear amongst us, that shows great
Reverence to that free Name. What do you say will not all this hold you? Can
any thing be more to the purpose against Imposition, or more pertinant to our
case? Seeing it is Imposition that excluded Us the same Society (...); and ought
any thing to be more considered and vallued as Obligeing then what you have
said your selves? And yet that you have Imposed your Opinions upon your
Brethren is matter of Fact, truly not to be as good as your word in so Sollemn
an Occasion lessens your Credit, as well as it is a dishonor to God, being
unrighteous in it self. What you can say to come off, we do not know; except
you will endeavor to Improve this new distinction, that you have made; that
is, that those are Civil things and not Religious. But we have showed that
distinction to be dangerous in our Case alone; and here will a little Examine
the difference betwixt your Plea for Imposition, and those you reprehend. You
say such have made Opinions Articles of Faith, and those Articles of Faith
terms of Communion; now to avoid this rock on which they split, you will not
make your Opinions Articles of Faith: No, for they do not concern Faith, You
say; but still you will make them terms of External Communion, and pray where is
the difference? Sure it is only in Name; for the Consequence and effect is the
same, to wit, Dissatisfaction and Division. Indeed if there is any difference,
your way of making the difference is the worse of the two, as not having so
much to plead for it, as those may have that you reprehend. As thus, they might
believe what they did was right, and so might plead Conscience for making
Opinions Articles of Faith, and then them Articles Terms of Communion, though
mistaken. But you can not plead Conscience for Imposing your Opinions, while
you do again and again say, they do not concern Conscience. But take Notice, no
Imposition can be Just, where Conscience cannot be pleaded, and Conscience in
this Case (generally speaking) can never be truly pleaded, but where Persons
goes into a known evil or neglect a known Duty; which can never be made out in
your case against your Brethren; but further in this passage you tell us that
Conscience is allowed us.

Your words is Suspicious, as well as dangerous; For who can dispense with
Conscience but he that is Lord of Conscience? But if you intend that Conscience
is unconcerned, as the following words may Import; then does this prove what is
above, that you cannot plead Conscience for Imposing upon your Brethren in
those things. And pray then what can you plead for Imposing but your Will and
Power? But lastly you bid us, (the Visible ground of Distance being so small,)
weigh with our selves by what has been, what may the consequence of this
lamentable breach. Must this affect us and not you, whiles we tell you that
Conscience is concerned; and you tell us it is not? Does this bespeak you
Conscientious? No verily, this rather bespeaks that you have lost the
tenderness of Conscience, that thus seek to baffle Conscience to please you.
For once sacrifice that, and farewell true Religion. But go too, is the Point
little for us to comply with, and great for you to omit? What say you, is not
that a kind of contradiction? And where shall we find this unreasonable
Language most in use but amongst the Imposers of Opinions and Ceremonies? Which
certainly you ought to Note; if it were but to avoid their company. But is the
matter little indeed, and did you introduce this to fit us for greater things,
or did you by this intend to Number the People that you might know the
greatness of your strength and largeness of your Dominion by the Subjection of
the People? If that was it we cannot hope for a redress: For that would be to
lose the design and end. But if it was for the good of the People, as we
suppose you will pretend, then seeing a contrary effect is brought forth, that
is, in stead of Love and good will, (the effect of true Religion,) Strife,
Debate, and Division arises; can you do any less for the cure of this evil,
which has attended the imposing of your Opinions, then make your Opinions
indifferent? And what harm can there be in this? For your Brethren to do their
business without Women's Meeting for Government, whiles you acknowledge they own
the end, and are one in Judgment with you in the Worship and Doctrine of truth.

We do sincerely beseech you seriously to consider of these things, for your
own good, for our Peace, and for the glory of God, and true Religion, that
brings forth Peace on Earth, good will to Men and glory to God on high. For we
can say in truth what we have writ is not for Contention, but for Peace, not
for destruction, but for Information, and therein for Edification. We are not
Ignorant, but what we have Writ may be controverted by such as are not willing
to make the best of things, and take things in the best sense. For what Writing
can escape a Cavilling Mind? Since it is clear that the Scripture (if it were
Men's Intrest) might be set at odds. Nay we see that one and the same word has
different meanings given to it, by different apprehensions of Men; then how
much more so large a discourse as this considering the things spoken of in it?
However that we may avoid that danger all we can, we will endeavor to bring
our present difference into as little compass as we can; and therefore as we
have several times upon occasion stated the matter in this Book, so we do it
now that you may take the better Notice of it at parting. Therefore we do say
again, There must be a necessity for that thing, that is brought in against
your Brethrens consent, or otherwise you must set forth that you have a right
under the Notion of Eldership to bring in and Impose upon us, that which in
truth there is no necessity for. You see we deny both, and have given our
reasons for it: And therefore if you can (...) prove neither of those Points,
and yet will not make your Opinions indifferent; then we must say, that our
Dissatisfaction is right, and Separation on this account for quietness is
really Just; and that all this noise that is made against Dissatisfaction and
Division, is but to cover an ill Cause, and therefore is as the smoke of the
bottomless Pit: Which darkens the Sun and Air, that things cannot be yet seen
as they are; but this will off; for the Sun will break through all those Clouds
and Disipate those Misty Foggs. Which that it may do quickly for the sake of
the simple hearted, is the sincere desire of your wellwishing Friend.

J. H.


