THE Case stated OF THE JURISDICTION OF THE House of LORDS In the point of
IMPOSITIONS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1676.

The Case stated of the Jurisdiction of the House of Lords in the point of
Impositions.
As the Lords are of nothing more desirous, than of keeping a good
correspondence with the House of Commons, so are they, and have ever been most
careful to take nothing from the House of Commons, which belongs unto them, nor
to assume any thing to themselves, but what has ever been their undoubted
right, and never so much as questioned to their Ancestors in any preceding
Parliament.

And to have the free use of their reason, to disapprove and disallow all or
any part of any thing propounded unto them for the Public Service, which they
in their Judgments believe not to be conducing to it, or so to alter and amend
it as to make it such, is so proper, so essential, so necessary to the
constitution of the House of Lords, as they do not think they are a House of
Parliament, or can act as a House of Parliament if this be denied them.

Now they conceive the point in question between them and the House of
Commons, to be of this very nature. The House of Commons sent up a Bill to them
to lay Rates and Impositions upon several sorts of Merchandise. The Merchants
Petition the Lords against many particulars in that Bill, show the inequality
and disproportion of the Rates imposed upon certain Commodities to be such, as
if not altered, and some which were to high, brought down to hold a true
proportion with others, which the House of Commons had set low, it would have
utterly ruined the whole Trade of those Commodities, and have brought an
irreparable prejudice upon all our Plantations, and consequently upon the whole
Kingdom; that of those Commodities being the principal Trade of the
Plantations, and that of the Plantations of most considerable part of the Trade
of the Kingdom.

The Lords were so fully convinced with the arguments and demonstrations of the
Merchants, and thereupon judged it of such absolute necessity to make some
alterations in the Bill, and to lower some of those rates, that they did so:
and the Bill so altered and amended they returned to the House of Commons,
giving withal their reasons for those Amendments and Alterations, which was
done at a Conference.

The House of Commons took this ill, and presently passed a Vote, Declaring it
to be a fundamental right lodged in their House alone, to impose Rates upon
Merchandise, as to Matter, Measure, and Time, and to pass Bills for that
purpose, and this in exclusion of the House of Lords. Which Resolution of
theirs was by them delivered back at a Conference, and withal some particular
reasons given to justify their Rates Imposed in opposition to the alterations
made by the Lords: But the maine Objection, which they still urged, and with
which they closed every Period of their Discourse was, That the Lords had
nothing to do with the altering of any Rate imposed by them upon Merchandise.

The Lords easily apprehended the ill consequence of such a Maxim, how it did
shake the very foundation of Parliament, and utterly overthrow the Being of
their House, rendering it altogether useless to the general good of the Nation:
Because it could then contribute nothing to what is of so great consequence to
it, as is the carrying on of Trade, and the just ballancing of it, if so be any
slip or mistake, or error should happen to have been in what had passed to that
purpose in the House of Commons, (as no Society of men but may err) And
therein consists the excellency of the constitution of our Government, that
every Law has first in each House of Parliament three Examens, like so many
passings through the fire, to refine and purify it. And that done in one
House, then the other House takes it, and examines it over again in like manner
three several times: And if any dross remain, or any thing be yet wanting to
make it better and fitter to pass, care is there taken to do all that is
further needful; so one House is both a Check and a help to the other, which is
the great security of the Kingdom. This the Lords saw must inevitably cease.
And therefore they judged it, to be of absolute present necessity, in the first
place to make that sure, and assert a Privilege so undoubtedly theirs, and
indispensably necessary for the good of the Public, of King, People and
Parliament; which they did by a Vote. That the power exercised by the House of
Peers in making the Amendments and Abatements in that Bill, was a Fundamental,
inherent and undoubted right of the House of Peers, from which they could not
depart.

This Vote backed with many Reasons, and confirmed by Presidents, they
communicate to the House of Commons likewise at a Conference, which yet did not
satisfy, as appeared by what was delivered by them at an other Conference,
which presently followed; For they begin with telling the Lords, That three
things did surprise the Commons at the former Conference: 1st. That expecting a
discourse upon the Amendments of the Bill, they met with nothing but a debate
for the Liberties of their House, and a demand of the delivering up of those
Liberties by a Public acknowledgment, before any further discourse upon the
Bill. 2dly. That their Lordships should declare so fixed a resolution before
hearing what could be replied by the Commons. 3dly. That their Lordships should
be so easily induced to take up that Resolution, if they have no other motive,
than the Reasons and Presidents which they had produced.

But why they should be so surprised with these three things, is not easy to
be imagined: For certainly no man ought to be surprised with what he might
rationally expect. And first, that the Lords should trouble themselves to
answer particular Objections to particular points, before they had removed one
main one, which alone took off all possibility of Agreement, and was by the
Commons generally applied and pressed by them upon every point, as it had been
a very fruitless labor of their Lordships, so it could not be with any reason
expected from them.

And as little reason had they to be surprised with the second thing, for
nothing is more ordinary in the proceedings of both Houses, than to be most
jealous of their Privileges, not to suffer them so much as to be disputed, but
upon the least attempt against them, presently to assert them with vehemence.
The House of Commons themselves gave an example of it, in this very business
but at the foregoing Conference, when upon the Lords making an abatement in
these Rates, they presently come and tell them, That the question being
concerning Rates and Impositions upon Merchandise, there is in this a
Fundamental right in the House of Commons, both as to the Matter, and the
Measure, and the Time unalterable, and which they not part with. Here was a
Resolution fixed, and settled sufficiently, and without hearing what the Lords
could say against it: And why then should it seem so strange that the Lords
should be as resolute in the asserting of their Right?

Their third surprise, (one may say) is a piece of Sophistry; for since they
cannot answer the Reasons alleged by the Lords in the maintenance of their
Assertion, nor disprove their Presidents, they would seem to slight them, and
wonder their Lordships should be so easily persuaded by them, having no other
Motives.

In the next place they would persuade the Lords, that in their Presidents
there is a departure from the question, which is only concerning power of
Abatement of Impositions upon Merchandise; whereas these Presidents go to a
joint power of imposing and beginning of Taxes, which (say they)the Lords do
not pretend to.

Nor indeed do they pretend to it, neither did they cite those Presidents for
that purpose. And the House of Commons should not put upon them any other or
further construction, than they were produced for. This may pre-possess
standers by with a prejudice, as if the Lords would assume to themselves a
power of laying a charge upon the Nation at their pleasure; but is not the way
to discover, who is in the right for his present pretensions. This is clear;
They do prove that in those times, the Lords and the Commons did join in the
gift, that the one could not give without the other, except they had otherwise
agreed it among themselves, and that they would give separately, as they have
sometimes done, and but rarely. Four times in Edward the thirds Reign, 13 E. 3.
n. 7, 8. and 18 E. 3. n: 10. and 20 E. 3. n. 11. and 27 E. 3. n. 8. once in E.
4ths time. 12 E 4. n. 8, 9. and in the 29th Eliz. the Commons having made
humble suit to the Lords to join with them in a Contribution or Benevolence to
the Queen: The Lords gave answer, that they would leave the Commons to
themselves, and they would rate themselves, which they did at 2 s. in the
pound, after the rate of the valuation of the Subsidy.

But the ordinary way of Parliament, has ever been for the two Houses to join
in the gift. And this not to be understood by a figure of Reddendo singula
singulis (as was said at the Conference by him that managed it for the House of
Commons), as if the Lords gave one part, and the Commons another part, and the
Lords to have nothing to do with what the Commons give, and the Commons nothing
to do with what the Lords give: And though they say, We Lords and Commons grant
to your Majesty this and this, and here we both of us jointly make to your
Majesty one Present, and give you one gift, we tell you so, yet it is not so,
but your Majestly must Reddere singula singulis, and take one part of it as
coming from your Lords, and the other part as coming from your Commons: And
though your Majesty does graciously return one thanks to us both, yet we shall
likewise Reddere singula singulis, and divide the thanks between us, and take
each of us his part. Is this a Parliament style? are Laws penned in such
Ambiguous and sense-confounding terms? does an Act of Parliament say, that the
Lords and Commons grant a whole Subsidy to the King, when neither of them does
so, and each of them has nothing to do with some part of the grant? No
certainly: Acts of Parliaments, and Laws, speak distinctly, and their
expressions are always literally true: And where they say the Lords and
Commons grant, both have an interest, and both exercise a power in granting.

Besides, in a Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, in which only Merchants and
Tradesmen are concerned, what singularity can be pretended of any thing
belonging peculiarly to the Lords, that they should be said to give there but
for themselves, and not to be at all concerned in what is done, as to the
generality of the Kingdom? Therefore, if they join there in granting, it must
be in reference to others, and not to themselves, and peruse all the Records,
from the 17th of R. 2. n. 12. upwards to the very first Subsidies of that
nature given by Parliament, it will be found, that the style was constantly, We
the Lords and Commons do grant, etc. And though since it has sometimes varied
in form, the sense has still been one and the same. For if it was true then,
that the Lords had a part in the giving, as the words all along are plain they
had, they must have a part still, having never quitted it by their own Act, nor
lost it by the Act of any other. The Figure then of Redddendo fingula singulis
mends not the matter; yet some alteration has been, as hereafter will be
showed, though not in the giving part, and that by which it comes to be a gift
to the King.

But then, says the Manager of that Conference for the House of Commons: If it
be not so to be understood, then to Grant signifies only to Assent, and to say
the Lords grant, is as much as to say, the Lords Assent to what the Commons
grant. But will this Exposition hold? Can it be said, that to give, is to be
content another shall give? If this be giving, one may find givers enough, and
a man may be charitable upon easy terms: Would any man (think we) be content,
if another and he were bound to give such a man a hundred pounds, if he who
were to give part of the Money with him, as being together bound, should say, I
am bound only to consent that you should give it all, not to give any my self:
I believe if the Manager of the Conference were the man to whom it should be so
said, he would then expound it otherwise, and say to his fellow-Obligee, that
to give and grant is one thing, and to give consent another shall give and
grant, is another thing, and you are bound Sir to give as well as I, and not to
be willing only that I should give all: And by the same Grammar he might
conclude, that where it is said, That the Lords and Commons do give and grant
so and so to the King, the meaning is, That it is a Grant of the Lords, as well
as of the Commons, and the Lords do give as well as the Commons; and certainly
in good English it can have no other construction.

But then he will tell you, that therefore the style was altered afterward,
and to declare the gift to come only from the Commons, it ran thus: We the
Commons by advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, do give and
grant, etc. Well, admit that to be now the settled constant form and not to be
altered, which yet we know is not so; for sometimes the ancient form has been
observed in explicit terms, We the Lords and Commons, etc. Sometimes
implicitly, We your Loyal Subjects do give and grant, etc. But be it, The
Commons with the Assent of the Lords, do give, etc. It does not at all follow,
but that the Lords have still power to alter and qualify the gift, before they
will assent to it.

Nay, if it be so, that they must assent to it before the House of Commons can
give it, (as that will not be denied) it does then necessarily follow, that if
it be not such, as they can approve of in their Judgments, when it comes from
the House of Commons to them, they must have power to alter it, and make it
such, as that they may assent to it, except they must be denied the use of
their reason; which would be a severe imposing upon a House of Parliament, and
an absurd one: A Council not to be suffered to debate and consider of what is
proposed to it, and what advice it shall give to him, who has called it for
that purpose to receive its advice; and so to frame it and mould it, as that it
may be fit to be advised, This is to make a Council to be no Council, it is
what the Logicians call Contradictio in adjecto, a quality inconsisting with
the Subject; as an Orator to be dumb, an Auditor to be deaf, a Watchman to be
blind; so a Council to be without power to consider, debate and satisfy it
self of the Counsel that it must give. And it is directly contrary to the Writ
which convenes and constitutes the Parliament. The Lords are summoned by it, Ad
tractandum and consilium impendendum de rebus arduis; but they must sit there
as so many Parish Clerks, only to say Amen to what the House of Commons has
resolved, and neither tractare nor consilium impendere. And what a Pageantry
were this? to read a Bill of Subsidy solemnly, once, twice, thrice, commit it,
perhaps to a Committee of the whole House, make a great business, and when all
is done, after all this stir, they must assent to it, and pass it just as it
came at first from the House of Commons, be the mistakes in it never so great,
and the ill consequences of it never so ruinous.

Can a rational man believe that a House of Parliament should be so
constituted, to act against the nature of a Parliament? Yes, will they say, for
both Houses do the same in some cases; They can alter nothing in the Subsidy of
the Clergy, nor in an Act for a General Pardon, and yet they give their Assents
to pass them for Laws: Which is very true, but makes nothing to this Case; for
those are things Eccentrick to Parliament, they have their motion in an other
Sphere: The Convocation gives the one, The King of his free Grace bestows the
other; the Parliament only gives them the force of a Law, and may choose whether
or no it will do that, when they are prepared to their hands; but it cannot
meddle with the things themselves, to make them this way or that way: But now
what is said here, is to be understood of things properly within the cognizance
of the Parliament, and that receive their rise and progress there, that is to
say, in one of the two Houses, (for the two Houses make up but one Parliament.)
And of such things, where either House is to give an assent to them, that House
may debate them, and alter and change them as it thinks good: And it mends not
the matter to say, That House may reject all, as the King may any Bill
presented to him, which has passed both Houses; For by the constitution of the
Government, the King has only a Negative voice, but by the same constitution
of Government the Parliament (that is, either House in its Legislative
capacity) has not only a Negative, but also a Deliberative voice in all things
of which it is cognizable: And of nothing is it more cognizable, than of what
concerns Trade, which is the wealth and strength and support of the Kingdom,
for which concernments they are principally called, and summoned by the King's
Writ.

But how this particular of Trade, and Impositions upon Merchandise for the
guarding of the Seas, and securing Merchants Ships in their passage out and
home, for carrying on of Trade, came to be lodged in the care and power of the
Parliament, and in what manner that power and care was first executed by them,
(which was then equally in both Houses to begin and propose whatever either
House thought fit) and how afterward it came to be appropriated to the House
of Commons to be the first movers in those Impositions, and the House of Lords
to reserve to themselves only a power to qualify and moderate the Sums
imposed, and bring them to that due measure and proportion, which would be most
convenient and advantageous to the Trade of the Kingdom, and if any error had
slipped in at the first framing and composing of a Bill passed for that purpose
in the House of Commons, the Lords to reform and amend it; This, we say, is
well worth the inquiry.

It appears by the Records, that it was at first a mere act of State, the King
with the advice of his great Council the Spiritual and Temporal Lords
contracting with Merchants, that they paying a certain rate for their
Commodities whether exported or imported, he would undertake to waft over their
Ships, and secure them from danger in their passage: Such was that agreement
recited in the Patent Roll of 3 E. 1. m. 1. n. 1. which by him that managed the
Conference for the House of Commons, was much mistaken; first upon point of
Grammar, the words of it he acknowledges to be as we say, that Magnates and
Communitas concesserunt; But Concesserunt he will have to relate only to
Communitas, which is certainly false Grammar, and then Communitas he expounds
to be the Commons, which is a mistake in the matter and true sense of the
Record: As for his Grammatical mistake in the Syntaxis, and his so construing
the Record, he must give us leave to say, that he goes contrary to an universal
known Rule in the Syntaxis of all Languages, that ever were yet spoken, which
is this, That where there are several Nominative Cases joined together with a
Conjunction copulative, they all do equally relate to the Verb; so Magnates
here must have the same influence upon the Verb Concesserunt as Communitas,
and they do alike Concedere.

But then what will be said, if Communitas in that Record be not the Commons,
as is surmised, but Communitas Mercatorum the Community of Merchants, which any
body would have seen, who had consulted the Record, and not relied wholly upon
Sir Edward Cooke's misreciting it in Print, in those two mentioned places, the
2d. part of the Institutes, p. 531. and the 4th part, p. 29. But to give a true
account of the marter: There are two Records of this, one in the Patent Roll, 3
E. 1. m. 1. n. 1. in Latin, which is something defaced, yet so much of it
legible, as to serve for the disproving of Sir Edward Cooke's allegation, and
the Comment now made upon it; for it runs thus, Rex omnibus, etc. cum Praelati,
and Magnates ac tota Communitas Mercatorum Regni nostri nobis concesserint
quandam -- torn out, -- coriis tam in Anglia, etc. in forma subscripta,
videlicet de quolibet -- torn out, -- pellibus quae faciunt unum saccum dimid'
Marc' de qualibet lesta coriorum unam Marc', etc. Then persons are appointed to
collect this duty; which is the sum of that Record: And this is again
Registered in Rotulo Finium, 3 E. 1. m. 24. tit, de nova Custuma in French, viz.
A la nouuelle Custume ke est grant par tout les Grant del Reaume, e par la
priere des Communes des Merchaunt de tut' Engleterre, etc. And so goes on to
tell what it is they grant de chescum sac de leyne demi mark et de chescum
treiscent de peaus ke funt un sac demi mark de chescun last de kevir un mark,
and then takes course for the collecting, etc. This Record is perfect, from the
beginning to the end, which any man may resort to when he pleases, to satisfy
himself, and the House of Commons, that here was no gift of the Commons in
Parliament, but a pure contract of the Commonalty of Merchants with the King
and Lords; which way of imposing this duty at last came to be grievous, and the
Parliament made great complaints of it several times.

In the 21. of E. 3. at a great Council held in the King's absence by Lionel of
Antmerp, (as the Record styles him) the King's Son, where there was no House of
Commons) there had been granted 2 s. upon every Sack of Wool, 2 s. upon every
Tun of Wine, and 6 d. in the pound upon all Merchandise for the payments of
Ships to guard the Seas, and to Convoy Merchants, and this duty to continue
till the Michaelmas following: The January after that, a Parliament was called,
at which the Commons complained, that the payment upon the Wool (which should
have ended at Michaelmas) was still demanded; and they desire the King to
forbid his Officers the demanding of it any longer. The answer is, That that
payment was prolonged until Easter, because the King had been at great charge
in setting out Ships, and was not yet reimbursed his money, which being for so
short a time should not seem to be grievous, 21 E. 3. n. 11. And they complain
again in the 25th E. 3. n. 11. of such Impositions, which had been laid on
anew by an Agreement with the Merchants, and pray they may cease, the Answer
is, Le Roy S'auisera et surceo les respondra en conuenable manner. Then in the
51th E. 3. n. 25. They come with a general desire, that for the time to come
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, Commons, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Kingdom
may not be charged, molested nor grieved. De Commune aid fair or Charge
sustenir, by granting a common Aid, or bearing any charge, except by the common
assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, etc. and this in full Parliament. They
desire also that no Impositions be laid upon Wool, and Wool fells, save the
ancient one, of half a mark upon a Sack, etc. To the first is answered, Le Roy
nest mie en volontee de le fair sans grande necesceite, et pur la defens du
Roialme, et la ou il le purra fair par reason; and for the other point of the
Wools, The answer is, That there is a Statute in the case which the King wills
to be in force: So here is a disavowing of the thing, yet with a reserve upon
urgent necessity: though in the 14th. of his Reign, he had consented to a Law,
upon occasion of a Grant made to him of the ninth Sheaf and Fleece, and Lamb;
wherein he declares, that willing to provide for the Indemnity of the
Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commons, the same Grant shall not be had in
Example another time, nor turn to their prejudice in time to come, etc. Further
enacts, That they shall not from henceforth be charged, nor grieved to make any
aid, or to sustain charge, if it be not by the Common Assent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and other great men, and Commons of the Realm of England, and
that in the Parliament, which are the words of the Statute, C. 1. of the second
Statutes made that year: The same in effect that he had bound himself to by a
former Act, made in the preceding Parliament of the same year, C. 21. when a
Subsidy had been granted to him of Wool, Leather, and other Merchandises that
passed the Sea between Easter and Pentecost, That he nor his Heirs would for
the future take more than the old Custom. And in the 13th of his Reign part 1.
n. 13. when he had by his own authority laid a charge upon Wool and Lead, the
Commons come and pray it may be taken off, and that the Male-tot upon those
Commodities may be taken as anciently it was accustomed, and not as then
enhansed without their assent, or of the Lords, Desicome ele est enhancee saunz
assent de la Commune ou des Grands, says the Record: Where is to be noted by
the way, that the House of Commons then did not think, that the Lords were to
be wholly excluded their Votes in those Impositions, when they made it a ground
of their exception, that they had not agreed to them.

Certain it is, that though this King struggled all his time with his
Parliaments about the exercise of this power, and sometimes did seem to yield,
and would promise fair, at other times would deny any condescension to their
desires of being eased of those Impositions, even when they complained, that
notwithstanding those allowances and payments for guarding the Seas, and
securing Merchants, yet Merchants were robbed, and the Seas unguarded, as is
set forth 21 E. 3. n. 58. yet still the Parliament got some ground, and less
and less was it practiced in that Prerogative way: And after his time it was
wholly remitted: and left to the Parliament, and there was not the least
attempt of reassuming it any more.

But ever after it was taken by the King as a pure gift of the Parliament, of
which the style was, We the Lords and Commons do give and grant, etc. And the
first variation of it was in the 21th of R. 2d. when it was, We the Commons
with the assent of the Bishops and Lords, do give, etc. which continued so for
three or four Kings Reigns, and since has been various, sometimes as
anciently, We the Lords and Commons, sometimes without specifying either, We
your Loyal Subjects, and all signifying the same thing: That both joined in the
gift, as has been already shown. And so jealous were they of having it thought
other than a pure gift of theirs, that they would sometimes grant this Subsidy
with a short intermission of time, in which the King should not receive it, as
5 R. 2. n. 40. there was to be an interruption to the Kings taking of it for a
week, between the Nativity and the Circumcision: And the like 9 K. 2. n. 11.
for above a month, from Midsummer to the first of August; and then 13 H. 4. n.
10. they speak out and say they give it the King for a year, so always as the
same should be confessed to proceed of their own good will, and not duty.

27 E. 3. n. 9. Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, the Kings Chamberlain, made a long
Speech to both Houses, the King present, declaring the wrong which the King
received from his Enemy of France (as the Record styles him) keeping from him
that Crown which was his right, that the King was resolved to recover it by
force, and therefore desired the Prelates, Lords and Commons to grant unto him
the Subsidy of Wools, Wool-fells, and Leather, (which was then expired) for a
longer time, Sur queu priere (says the Record) eve deliberation enter les ditz
Prelatz Grauntz et Co^es sassenterent vnement et granterent au Roi le Subside
des Leyns Quirs et Peaux lanuz pur trois anz, etc. Et que les deniers sourdans
de mesme le Subside soient sauuement gardez pur la dite guerre, sans ceo qils
soient mis en autre oeps, Dequent Grante nostre S le Roi enmerciales Seigneurs
et Communes. The King here makes it his desire to the Lords as well as to the
Commons to grant it, They confer about it with the Commons, and together with
them do grant it, then appoint how it shall be employed, only to the War and to
no other use, and afterward receive the Kings thanks for their granting it, as
well as the Commons: How then can it be said, that the Lords must have nothing
to do with these Grants?

But then will it not be inferred, that if it be as much in the gift of the
Lords as of the Commons, the Lords may not only moderate and abate, but also
augment the gift, and propose it first in their House, and give away the
Peoples money at their pleasure? It was certainly so in the beginning, but now
not at all so, as the saying is, Modus and Conventio vincunt legem, Agreement
alters right. And though the certain time when this Agreement was first made,
and when this was first altered, and all the circumstances of that first
Alteration, and of that Agreement cannot be made out by the Records yet it may
be made out, that it was before the 9th of H. 4. n. 21, 22. when the Indemnity
of the Lords and Commons (and of the Lords as well as of the Commons) was
declared and settled by a Law made that Parliament for that purpose, and the Law
has that title Indempnitee des Seigneurs et Communes, and is abundantly
sufficient to settle and establish the manner of granting Subsidies in
Parliament, and the power of proceeding of either House in passing Acts of that
nature, were there nothing else. The Record sets forth, That the King coming to
the Lords House in the Abbey at Gloucester, and communication there had of the
state of the Kingdom then environed with Enemies, and how behooveful it was to
give a notable aid to the King, to enable him to resist those Enemies, the
Lords being demanded what aid, did severally give their opinions, That less
would not serve then a tenth and half of the Cities and Buroughs, and a
fifteenth and half of the rest of the Laity, and to continue for two years the
Subsidy of Wools, Wool fells and Leather, and the 3 d. Tunnage, and poundage
for other Commodities, which the King commanded should be signified to the
House of Commons. And a message was thereupon sent to them, that they should
send up some of their number to hear what from the King would be said unto
them: Who sent up a dozen of their Members, and to them was declared what had
been moved to the Lords, and what their Lordships had answered, which they were
willed to report to their House, that so they might come to a conformity with
the sense of the Lords. The report being made to the Commons, Ils ent furent
(says the Record) grandement destourbez en disant et affermant ce estre en
grant prejudice, et derogation de lour libertees, they were greatly disturbed,
saying and affirming, that this was a great prejudice and derogation to their
liberties; which represented to the King, and he not willing that any thing
should be done, that might at present, or in after times turn to the prejudice
of their Liberties, N'encontre les libertees de les seigneurs susdits, nor
against the liberty and freedom of the foresaid Lords, Wills, Grants, and
Declares with the advice and consent of the Lords themselves, That in this and
all future Parliaments it shall be lawful for the Lords to debate and commune
among themselves of the State of the Kingdom, and the necessary remedies: And
likewise the Commons to do the same by themselves: And that neither the Lords
nor the Commons shall acquaint the King with any Grant made by the Commons, and
by the Lords assented unto, nor with any of the Communications concerning that
Grant, till the Lords and Commons themselves come to an Agreement and accord in
that behalf, and then to be in the manner and form as has been accustomed,
that is to say, by the mouth of the Speaker of the House of Commons for the
time being, To the end that they the Lords and Commons may receive their thanks
from our Lord the King. It being moreover the will of the King by the assent of
the said Lords, that the foresaid Communication of this present Parliament,
shall not be drawn into Example for the time to come, nor be made use of,
neither in this nor in any future Parliament, to the prejudice or derogation of
the liberty of the State: Then, n. 23. is added, How the last day of the
Parliament, the Speaker of the House of Commons made it his prayer to the King,
that he would grant unto that House leave to depart in as much freedom, as
others had formerly done, The King answers, That it pleased him well; and that
he had always been of that mind.

Upon this memorable Record we may make many Observations, and from them draw
several Conclusions. As, 1. That it was even before that time held to be
against the Privilege of the House of Commons, and a derogation to them, for
the Lords to be Beginners in moving them to lay any charge upon the People: And
that it is the Privilege of the House of Commons, to have it arise from
themselves. 2. That it is so acknowledged by the King and Lords. 3. That upon
the Complaint of the Commons, that it is a breach of their Privilege for the
Lords to begin and propound the granting of a Subsidy, and the King and Lords
joining, and so declaring it likewise, It becomes here a Law, that is, a
Declaratory Law of a thing which was before, not a Creating Law of a new thing.
4. For it appears to have been a thing formerly so settled, in regard it is here
declared to be the manner and form accustomed, for the Speaker of the House of
Commons to be the Person from whom the King must receive the notice of such a
Grant, and to be he that must present it; which shows that the House of Commons
has something proper and peculiar unto them in this Grant, since it must be
received from their hand, (for it is their act the presenting of it, and their
Speaker is but the Conduit-pipe to convey it from them.)
And this can only be, that they are to have the beginning of it, to be the
first Movers and Proposers of all such Grants: But all things else concerning
those Grants, as the preparing and modelling and fitting them in all
circumstances, and reducing the sums to a just and due measure (if there be
cause for it) and then the giving them to the King, that is, making a Law
whereby they are given to him: and that which was before part of the Estate of
the Subject to be now transferred to the King, and made to be his Right, and
his proper goods, and he empowered to levy it; this (we say) to be still the
joynt-work of both Houses, and equally in the one, as in the other. For in the
fifth place it is manifest hence likewise, that the Lords have their share in
the Grant, and that they have power to make such alteration in it, as may fit
it for their assent; for that Act of Parliament says, 1. That they shall
debate it, and confer of it among themselves. 2. They may then so alter it and
frame it, as that they may assent to it; which is the end of their debating it.
3. They must assent to it, before the Speaker of the House of Commons can
present it. 4. The King is to give thanks for it to them, as well as to the
Commons: And it cannot be thought that he will thank them for nothing, that is,
for a thing in which they have power to do nothing. 5. And lastly, The King by
this Act provides for the preservation of the Privilege and Liberty of the
House of Lords in those Grants unto him, as well as of the House of Commons,
which had been infringed: And what was this Liberty, but freedom of debate, not
to be locked up any more with a previous Vote, as they were then, upon the
King's propounding the matter to them, and they coming to a present resolution
in the Kings presence: and accordingly is the Act entitled, Indemnitee des
Seignours et Communes.


But may it not still be objected, that by what has been hitherto said, the
Lords may add to, as well as abate and take from the charge? Not at all: For
it has been said they cannot be the first movers and beginners of any charge
upon the People; And then they cannot add any thing: For so much as they add
to any Sum proposed by the Commons, they do for so much begin a new charge:
therefore in all their communings and debatings, the result can be only to
moderate, and abate the charge, if there be cause for it, not to augment it.

As in 4 R. 2. n. 11, 12. A great Sum having been demanded by the King, and the
great Officers and Council having delivered in a Schedule containing diverse
particular charges, amounting to 150000 l. The Commons come before the Lords,
and desire of them a moderation of that Sum, and that it would please them to
consider how it might be levied; So certainly it was then the opinion of the
House of Commons, that the Lords had power to consider of and lessen the charge
of the People, and to moderate demands; for they desire them to exercise that
power: But it will be said, This was demanded only by the King; but the House
of Commons had not imposed that Sum, for then their Lordships could not have
meddled with lessening it: This does not at all alter the Case, being it was in
order to a Bill to be passed for laying such a Tax upon the People. But to
prove that they have abated of a Sum imposed by the House of Commons, We
will go no further then this very Parliament in the 14th year of the King, in
the Bill for enlarging and repairing of common Highways, for which purpose
the House of Commons had agreed upon a Rate of 12 d. in the Pound, to be levied
upon the Inhabitants of Parishes contributory to those Repairs, the Lords
brought it down to 6 d. And the House of Commons agreed to it.

But perhaps they will say, That this is not to the purpose, for that the Point
in controversy, is not concerning the Abatement of any charge that should be
laid in general upon the Subject; but only for that, which is imposed upon
Merchandise: As if the one did not necessarily follow the other: For if the
Lords can abate Taxes at large laid upon the People, with much stronger reason
may they abate an Imposition upon Merchandise exported or Imported; And if they
have not power to abate in this which concerns only Merchants, much less can it
be thought they should do it in the other, which concerns the whole Kingdom.
Which the House of Commons did well foresee, and therefore it is that they are
so Positive in their Assertion, that It is their fundamental right to impose
all charge upon Merchandise, for Matter, Measure and Time, unalterably as to
the Lords; which how they do make good and maintain, by their Presidents and
Arguments, we will now in few words examine, though by what has been already
said, the contrary seems to have been sufficiently proved.

It is true, that at the former Conference the Lords were told, That the House
of Commons had narrowed the ground, and reduced the Question to this single
point of laying rates and impositions upon Merehandize only, and not upon the
Subject in general. Wherein the Lords conceive themselves very kindly dealt
with, That the House of Commons has been pleased to make choice of that to be
disputed by them, whereto their Lordships have the clearest right, to be at
least Joynt-tennants with them; and they the least pretensions to challenge it
wholly to themselves: For in charging the People, the House of Commons will
perhaps say, they ought to be the sole Arbiters, in regard they take upon them
to be their sole Representatives, and to be Trustees for them, and trusted by
them with all their concerns: (which yet will not be granted, that they
represent all the People; for how many thousands are there in every County whom
they do not Represent, and who have no voice in their Elections, and so confer
no trust upon them?) but they cannot have any the least pretensions to be sole
in laying burdens upon Trade, and Rates upon Merchandise, which even for our
Home-Commodities, and where the natural borne Subject is concerned, is much
depending upon, and regulated by Treaties, and Agreements, and Negotiations
with other Princes and States, over which the House of Commons will not pretend
to have any authority, either for governance or inspection, so cannot easily
judge, what is fit or not fit to be imposed: But then for Merchants Strangers,
and their Goods, what color, what shadow of reason, can the House of Commons
have to pretend any power to lay a charge upon them, and dispose of their
Estates? The whole Parliament indeed has power over them, as it has upon
whatsoever comes within the Kings Dominions, whether Persons or Goods, though
never so foreign: All which (while here) owe a local Subjection to the
Government and Laws of this Kingdom, but to either House singly, none at all;
being only subject and bound to submit to what is imposed upon them by the
whole State making it a Law; but cannot be supposed to be within the
disposition and gift of the House of Commons alone.

Yet they say, They have been possessed of this power in all Ages, and sind not
one grant of Tunnage and Poundage, that is not barely the gift of the Commons.
And well is it proved by the Statute of 3 E. 1. as has been showed already, by
reading Communitas concesserunt and leaving out the principal word Mercatorum,
which shows it to have been a Grant of the Merchants, not of the House of
Commons, as they would understand it. And the several Presidents cited by the
Lords, When the two Houses did confer and advise together about granting of
Aides to the King; by which the Lords did prove the power exercised by their
Ancestors, of delivering their advice and opinions, and giving their Votes in
point of Subsidies and Taxes, they would evade by drawing a contrary inference,
That is, All Aids (said they) must begin with the Commons, for else the Lords
needed not to have conferred, but have sent down a Bill: So being begun by the
Commons, the Lords can neither alter nor diminish, else why adjust matters by
private Conference beforehand, if they might have reformed it afterward? The
first part of this is acknowledged, and the groundwork is good, That the
Grants must begin with the Commons, but the superstructure upon it is very
false and deceitful: For clean contrary, It is therefore good to adjust the
matter beforehand, and then make but one work of it, because else the Lords,
if they be unsatisfied, will alter what the House of Commons had taken a great
deal of pains to complete and finish, which will be a new business, take up
more time, and cause more trouble: Whereas if the Lords had not power to change
any thing, it were to no purpose to confer and satisfy them beforehand, for
satisfied or not satisfied, they could alter nothing, but must sit down and
pass whatever the House of Commons had sent up to them. This was the true
reason of those previous Conferences, which sometimes were propounded by the
King, sometimes desired by the Commons, but still to expedite, and facilitate
the business, and only for that end. Which makes good all those Presidents,
viz. 14th. 22th. 29th. 47th. and 51th. E. 3. the 4th. and 6th. R. 2. and the
7th. of King James, which were cited by the Lords concerning those Conferences
between the two Houses about matters of Money, whether for raising or for
disposing of them: and leaves them strong evidences and unshaken proofs of that
Right, and Power, and Interest, which the House of Lords has in all such
matters, whether of Aides given to the King, or Moneys raised upon the People
for the present defense of the Kingdom, and immediately ordered to be applied
to that purpose: And this acknowledged even by the House of Commons themselves,
as appears by their often Addresses to the Lords desiring their help and
assistance in it.

As for the Case of 14 E. 3. it was made use of by the Lords only to prove,
that there had been Grand trete et parlance enter les Grantz et les Co^es,
great treating and conferring between them. As for what was said after of the
Nones being then granted, or having been granted before to be then appointed to
be sold for the present raising of Money, which was mentioned at the
Conference, as if the Lords had committed some mistake in their citing of this
President, alters not the Case. The Conference about the present raising of
Money in that way, and the Commons of themselves not able to do it without the
Conjunction of the Lords, is a President undeniable of the Lords Power and
Interest in matters of that nature: Yet who reads the Record thorough will
find, that there was 40 s. upon the Sack of Wool granted for Custom, and 20000
Sacks of Wool to be taken up for the King, in whose hands soever found, and the
price set, one mark upon a Sack less than was agreed at Nottingham, the Owners
to be reimbursed out of the Nones of the second year. And this was a
proposition made by the Lords, and assented to by the Commons.

Then their observation upon the 22 E. 3. n. 3. must not be passed by: They
will have it to prove expressly that the Commons granted 3 Fifteens, as if they
had done it alone without the Lords; (which how impossible it is, need not be
said, it speaks it self; for it cannot be imagined that one House alone could
make an Act of Parliament). But this was merely a proposition of the House of
Commons, in Answer to what they had received in command from the King, as
appears by the Record it self. The words are, Sur ce fut command as Chinalers
des Contees et autres des Communes qils se deueroient treter ensemble, et
prendre bon anys, etc. Et de se qils ent sentirent le deveroient monstrer a
nostre Seigneur le Roy et a les Grants, etc. Then after some days debating it
among themselves, they came up to the House of Lords, and sirst make great
complaints of their many pressures, then make several requests, and declare
certain conditions, which conditions observed, and their requests granted, they
then say, they give three fifteens. Let any man now judge, if this was any more
than a bare proposition of the House of Commons, which they made to the King
and the House of Lords; And if this could be the Granting of a Subsidy: But
indeed the King and Lords consenting and joining in it; It was then a perfect
grant, settled by a Law. To say the truth of this Parliament, no great formality
was observed in it; It was very short by reason of the Plague, as was declared
at the opening of the next Parliament, which was 25. n. 5. in these words, Cest
assaver l'an de son Regne vintisme second il sist sommondre son Parliament a
Westminster, lequel sembla puis a luy et a son Conseil, que ne se poeit
bonement tenir adonques, pur cause de la pestilence q'estoit bien aspre a mesme
temps, et par tant il sist relesser le dit sommons adonques, etc. So as no good
measure can well be taken from any thing done this Parliament.

Much need not be said neither to their endeavor of proving the Communitas 3.
E. 1. to be understood to be the Communalty of England by the recital of that
Statute, in a Statute made after in 25 E. 1. c. 7. called Consirmationes
Chartarum, since it has already been made out by the Record, That that Grant
in 3 tio. was by the Communitas Mercatorum. But however, a short mention made
in a Recital, can be no Restrictive proof; that is to say, not a proof to limit
and restrain the sense, when more is expressed, or may be understood in the Act
it self at large.

And therefore their argumentation concerning those Statutes of E. 6. can no
ways be allowed. In the 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 36. A Subsidy is given, and the style
is, We the Kings Majesty's faithful, loving and obedient Subjects the Lords
and Commons do grant, etc. This Statute (he says) is recited in 3 and 4 E. 6.
c. 23. And there it is acknowledged to be only a Grant of the Commons: The
words are these, That where in the last Session of this present Parliament,
your humble and faithful Subjects the Commons in the said Parliament assembled
with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Granted, etc. Now first,
This is not said to be only the Grant of the Commons, for the Lords join and
give their assent to it. Secondly, If the Commons only had been mentioned
restrictively in this Recital, the Act it self saying expressly, That the Lords
and Commons Granted, should the Recital be of more validity to declare what was
enacted, than the Act it self? In the third place it may be observed, That the
Act saying, The Lords and Commons do Grant, And the Recital of that Act
saying, It was the Commons with the assent of the Lords, It must follow that in
the Judgment of the Parliament then, these two forms of expressing the Grant
of a Subsidy did signify one and the same thing, and they may be promiscuously
used without any variation of the sense; so that in all Acts of Subsidies where
we find it said, We the Commons do with the assent of the Lords grant so and
so, it is as much as if it had been said, We the Lords and Commons do grant,
etc. which overthrows all that the House of Commons has alleged or can
allege to make it to be their gift alone, and the Lords to have no part in it;
And to prove it (say they) the style has been altered, and the Acts do now
run for the most part, We the Commons with the assent of the Lords, etc. But
it is answered, though the style be changed, the sense continues the same.

And 2 R. 2. n. 37. The House of Commons themselves are said but to Give their
assent to an Imposition, which had his rise in the House of Lords. The Case was
thus, Upon a Reference from the House of Lords to the Earl of Northumberland,
and the Mayor of London, with some Merchants joined to them, six Vessels were
appointed for the guarding of the Northern Seas infested by Pirates, who had
landed and plundered the Town of Scarborough: and for defraying the charge of
those Vessels, an Imposition was laid upon Ships that passed through those Seas
of 6 d. per Tun, excepting Flemish Ships bound for London, and such as carried
Wools and Woolfells to Calais, and 6 d. per Tun a week upon Ships that fished
for Herring; and upon all other Fisher-boats 6 d. per Tun every three weeks.
This had passed in the House of Lords, unknown (it seems) to the House of
Commons: for the Record says, they petitioned the King, that care might be had
of those Seas, and of the Town of Scarborough. The Answer is, Remede ent est
ordeinez, per maniere comme le Conte de Northumberland et le Mair de Londres qi
furent assignez en Parliament de treter sur cette bisoigne le sachent plus au
plein declarer, That already there is a remedy ordained in it, as the Earl of
Northumberland and Mayor of London, who were appointed by the Parliament to
treat, of that business, could more fully inform them; which they did, and the
Commons gave their Assent to it, as is expressed in a Schedule annexed, which
contains the particulars of that transaction. So then the style of Giving an
Assent can not be said to be wholly and solely appropriated to the House of
Lords, and made a mark of their having no part nor portion in the giving of
those Subsidies, since the same is likewise said of the House of Commons.

As for the Indemnity of the Lords and Commons 9 H. 4. It has been already
spoken to, and clearly proved out of it, that the Lords are very far from being
by it secluded to be noe parties to the Grant, but that they should not be the
Beginners of it, is confessed: And that was it, which was then the Grievance to
the Commons, that the Lords had already concluded the Aid to the King, and
declared it so to the Commons, not for demanding a Committee to confer with
about it, as was alleged at the Conference.

As for the Book-Case of 33 H. 6. which they say is the weakest of all, is a
thing easily said, but not so easily made good; for others conceive it a very
strong proof of the Lords assertion of their Interest in granting of Subsidies:
it is brought there as an instance of the Proceedings of Parliament, of which
the Judges desired to be informed, upon occasion of a business depending before
them, in which there had passed an Act of Parliament, and therefore they sent
for Kirkeby of the Rolls (as the Book styles him) and for Faux the Clerk of the
Parliament, to receive information from them: They come, and Kirkeby speaks and
lays down this for a Rule, That if the Lords make an alteration to a Bill,
which may well stand with that which the Commons have done, they need not send
this Bill back to the House of Commons. And of this they give an instance,
which is this, If (say they) the Commons have sent up a Bill of Tunnage and
Poundage to continue for four years, and the Lords they alter it to two years,
it need not be sent down again to the House of Commons: And the reason is,
because it may stand with the grant of the Commons, for both Lords and Commons
have granted it for two years. This was the Case to which were taken several
exceptions, 1. That it was only the opinion of the Clerk of the Parliament,
not of the Judges; To which is answered, That if it was so, none could better
know the course of Parliaments, than the Clerk of the Parliament, who was
therefore sent for by the Judges to inform them; nor durst he have delivered
that in Court for an instance, of the course and usage of Parliament, if it had
been a thing not practiced in Parliament. Nor is it to be believed, that those
Judges could be so ignorant of the proceedings of Parliament, particularly of
the manner of granting Subsidies, in which every man is concerned, as not they
to have known, if or no the Clerk did give a true instance of a matter in fact:
And their allowing of it, was a kind of declaring their opinions in the Case.
But it was not the Clerk of the Parliament, that gave that account to the
Judges, though it be true that Faux the Clerk of the Parliament agreed to it,
but Kirkeby (who was in truth Master of the Rolls) said it in the name of both:
whose authority should be of weight, being one in that great place, which is
ranked in the Statute 12 R. 2. c. 2. before the two Chief Justices, by the name
of Clerk of the Rolls, by which name that Officer was anciently called, and was
first in any Statute styled Master of the Rolls, 11 H. 7. c. 18. Kirkeby held
this Office, which was granted to him in reversion after John Stopindon, by a
Patent confirmed by Parliament, bearing date 20 Martii 25 H. 6. p. 1. m. 7. And
so Brook styles him, Clerk of the Rolls of Parliament, not Clerk of the
Parliament (as he was termed at the Conference slightly enough) which title
Brook gives to Faux, as the Year-booke does. Nor is the authority of the
Year-booke it self to be set so light by, having been compiled by the ablest
Students at Law appointed for that work, allowed and approved by the Judges
then, and by all the Judges and Lawyers ever since. Their second exception is,
That it was a Case put by the By, and not pertinent to the matter there in
hand: Which may be urged rather an Argument for it than against it, there being
the less reason to apprehend, that there was any bias of affection or
prejudice to lead them to such a declaration, as too often there is, when men
come to speak their opinions concerning things in contest between party and
party. Thirdly, That it is against the constant usage of Parliament, for that
then the Lords may choose whether they will send down the Bill, after they have
made an Abatement. It is acknowledged, that the Lords do now use to send back
a Bill, if any the least alteration be made in it; but why formerly it might
not have been sometimes otherwise practiced, no convincing reason can be given:
We know many things have been changed in Parliaments, and every where else:
Some things have been used heretofore, which are not now; and some things are
now, which may not be hereafter. One that should move now in Parliament, to
have a Bill read again, which has already been read three times, would not
speed with his motion, but be laughed at for his labor: Yet heretofore Bills,
especially Bills of Subsidy were commonly read four times, and sometimes
oftener. So Conferences between the Houses were commonly demanded to be by a
certain number, which is now never done; nay, would it not be thought a breach
of Privilege, and an imposing upon the other House, if it should be demanded?
Heretofore the House of Commons could not punish any of their own Members, nor
any body else, that had broken their Privileges; but they made their
complaints to the House of Lords, and they did them justice; but they will tell
you, it is not so used now: and yet because it is not so now, they will not
make it an Argument that it was not so then, nor deny the truth of an instance
brought of what was done then: No more can they with reason say, the Clerk of
the Parliament, or the Master of the Rolls, who by that Book Case appears to
have declared such a thing to have been in those times the usage of Parliament,
said false, because it is not so in these times. The fourth objection is, that
the Clerk says, The Lords may increase Impositions also, which part of the
Case (they said) their Lordships thought not fit to cite. It is true they did
not cite it, because that part of the Book-Case was out of the present Case,
the Lords not pretending to a power of increasing Impositions. Nor is it
strange, if it was not then so clear, but that the Lords might add, when once
the Commons had begun a Tax, though not begin one themselves, which now is out
of question upon better consideration by a necessary inference, that as much as
the Lords do add to any Imposition, they do for so much begin an Imposition,
though the Bill which charges the Subject, begin not in their House.

And certainly they misplace the Querie in Brook, if they apply it to that
part of this Case, which concerns the Lords abating two years, when the Commons
had given four, as any body may see, that will peruse the passage. It is Part
2. fol. 116. Tit. Parliament and Statutes, 4. The Quaerie there is put only to
what is said of sending the Bill back again to the Commons, the words are,
Comme si les Commons grant poundage pur quatuor ans, et les Seigneurs grant
nisi pur deuxans, ceo ne sera rebaile as Commons (Quaere inde) It appears what
it is that he makes his Quaere by that which follows, where he delivers his
opinion of the form used in the transmitting Bills from one House to an other.
He says, That if a Bill begin in the House of Lords, and there pass, they do
not use to indorse it, but send it down to the Commons, and if thyy pass it,
it is then indorsed Les Commons sont assentans; and this shows it had already
passed the Lords, and their assent is to what the Lords had passed; upon which
he infers, Et ideo cest act supra nest bon pur ceoque il ne fuit rebaile as
Commons. Therefore the Act abovementioned is not good, because it was not sent
back to the Commons: And this he makes to be his reason, why it was not good,
because it was not sent back. But he makes not any scruple at all of the Lords
cutting off the two years. This seems very plain to have been his meaning: Yet
a Quaere may be put upon what Brook himself says, that the Lords do not use
to endorse it, if it begins with them, for they do write upon it now, and
certainly did then, Soit baille aux Communs.

Then for Dyer Mic. 30 H. 8. 22. It is true the words are as they were quoted
at the Conference, and no body can deny what they import, That the Commons do
grant; but Dyer says not, that they do it singly and alone without the Lords.
To give a true judgment of his meaning, one must consider his end and scope in
saying this, it was to show the difference betwixt the old Customs, and a
Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage; The Customs he says are the Kings
inheritance, and due to him by the Common Law, and therefore the first Statute
that mentions Customs, 14 E. 3. he says, does not grant any thing, but
abridges the Kings power, that he shall not take more than half a mark for a
Sack of Wool, and half a mark for a last of Leather: But the Subsidy is a Tax
assessed by Parliament, and Granted to the King by the Commons for his life
only, for defense of the Seas; The one is Inheritance, the other is a Grant;
but to define and describe what kind of Grant, and in what manner granted,
whether by one or both Houses, with all the circumstances of it, was certainly
not at all in that Reverend Judges thought. This then is no such Judicial
determination of the Question, as they would make it.

From thence they come to the Provisoes in the Bill of 1 H. 8. in which, as in
the Bill it self, and their conclusion upon it, viz. That they are of no force,
unless it be against the Lords, there is certainly a great mistake; They say,
that by the Lords Journal the Case is this, That the Bill did not pass till the
3 of H. 8. That the Lords assented to it the 43d day of the Parliament, That
the 45th day two provisoes came in; one touching the Merchants of the Hans
Towns, the other touching the Merchants of the Staple at Calais, both signed by
the King; And that the Chancellor and Bishop of Winton did declare that the
signing of those Provisoes by the Kings own hand, was enough without the
consent of either House: Then they give reasons why they prove nothing. 1. For
that they were signed by the King. 2. For that they were brought in against all
course of Parliaments, after the Bill passed. 3. That the Provisoes were
nothing but a saving of former rights. 4. That the Journal declares, that the
King without those Provisoes might have done the same thing by his Prerogative.
This is the Narrative which they gave us.

The truth is this, In the first place, the Lords did not cite, nor insist upon
two Provisoes, but only upon one, that which concerned the Merchants of the
Staple, which Proviso was added then by the House of Lords, who meddled not
with that which concerned the Hans Towns, which was a Proviso sent up with the
Bill from the House of Commons. The progress of this Bill was thus, all of it
in the Parliament of 1 H. 8. for that which was said at the Conference, that
the Bill it self passed not till the 3 H. 8. is a gross mistake: That was
another Bill of Subsidy, which was given that Parliament 3 H. 8. and it is
true; we find in the Journal that the 45th day of that Parliament of 3 tio.
the Chancellor and Bishop of Winchester did declare such a thing concerning the
Merchants of the Hans Towns, in these words, Et dictum and decretum est per
Dominum Cancellarium and Episcopum Winton. quoad Provis. pro Mercatoribus de
Hansa quod Provis. pro ipsis per ipsum Regem signatum sufficient eis absque
assensu Dominorum and Domus Communis; These were strangers with whom the
Parliament had nothing to do, so such a Declaration might be concerning them:
But the Provisoe insisted upon by the Lords was concerning the Merchants of the
Staple natural borne Subjects: And besides, that which the House of Commons
went upon at the Conference, was clean another thing, a Provisoe relating to an
other Bill, and passed in an other Parliament: For 1 H. 8. 23d day of the
Parliament, and 16th of Febr. upon a Saturday this Bill which is now in
question came up to the Lords from the House of Commons, cum Proviso pro
Mercatoribus de la Hansa Theutonicorum; at the head of this Proviso, are these
words, Soit baille aux Seigneurs, and at the foot, these, Les Seigneurs ont
assentus. Then the 27th day of the Parliament, which was Thursday the 21 of
Febr. the Lords passed the Provisoe for the Merchants of the Staple which had
begun in their House, the words are, Item Proviso pro Mercatoribus Stapule de
Calais, lecta est secundo and tertio, and missa in Domum inferiorem per
Clericum Coronae, and these words at the top of it; Soit baille aux Communs,
and at the foot these, A Cette provision les Coes sont assentus. Then the 29th
day, which was the last day of the Parliament, the Bill with the two Provisoes
annexed were delivered to Sir Thomas Lovel at the Bar, Actus Subsidii cum
duabus Provis annex. liberati Thomae Lovel militi cum Sociis ad Barram, says
the Journal.

This bare relation justifies enough the Lords citing of that Proviso, by which
the Merchants of Calais are excepted from their being liable to any of the
payments imposed by that Bill of Subsidy of 1mo. H 8. To say it was but a
Saving of former rights signifies nothing: for no question, the Lords would not
have done it without good cause for it, (nor will they at any time make any
abatement, but for good cause:) but still they saved to the Merchants of
England, their right, which the Commons had taken away. And then here was
nothing against the course of Parliaments, the Proviso regularly added by the
Lords, and sent down to the House of Commons in due manner, and afterward
passed by the King with the Bill.

Then for the Kings signing it, which the Manager of the Conference made to be
so great a matter: if he would have perused the Records of H. 8. he would have
seen, that in those times the King still signed all the Bills he passed, and
all the Provisoes annexed he signed likewise with his own hand, only Bills of
Subsidy he signed not: But the Provisoes annexed to Bills of Subsidy, which
were to ease and discharge any persons, those he also signed; and therefore the
other Provisoe concerning the Hans-Towns, which was annexed to the Bill, when
it came up from the House of Commons, was likewise signed by the King. So as
the Kings signing this Provisoe concerning the Merchants of Calais, cited by
the Lords alters not the Case, and makes nothing against its proving an
inherent Power and Authority to be in the House of Peers of adding such
Provisoes, or making abatements in Bills of Subsidy, whenever they see cause
for it. As they did 1 Eliz. when they gave respite to the Counties of Wales,
and the County Palatine of Chester, for paying the Subsidy (given that
Parliament) a year after all the rest of the Kingdom, which was an easing of
them for that time.

And for what is said of the Grant 1 H. 8. that it was of the Commons alone, it
was, as many other Grants then were, The Commons by the assent of the Lords,
etc. which expression is sometimes used, as signifying the same thing with the
other, We the Lords and Commons do grant, etc. as 37 H. 8. the only printed Act
of Subsidy in all his reign, which begins thus, We the Kings Majesty's most
humble, faithful, and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, etc. have consulted together,
and determined to beseech His Majesty most humbly to accept, and graciously to
receive, at our hands the simple token or gift which we do herewith present to
His Majesty, freely with one consent granting the same; most humbly beseeching
His Majesty to accept the same, as it pleased the great King Alexander to
receive thankfully a Cup of water of a poor man by the high-wayside, etc. And a
little after they say, Wherefore we the said Lords and Commons do by our mutual
Assents and Agreements with one whole voice and hearty good will, by the
authority of this present Parliament give and grant to the Kings Highness, etc.
Here then is but one consent, one whole voice, one hearty good will to give and
grant, and one Act of giving and granting of the Lords and Commons, and yet the
Lords must have no hand in this giving, as was told them at this Conference.
And they are told further, That the thanks was given to the Commons alone, and
that is true; it was it seems the Kings pleasure so to do: But this course was
not always observed, sometimes both were thanked, and the Law is they should be
so in the Indemnity of Lords and Commons, 9 H. 4. Nor can the Act of a King,
using his pleasure, sometimes to vary from the exactness of a Law, make an
alteration in the nature and force of that Law, but that still it remains the
same, to show what then should have been done, however the King was pleased to
do otherwise, and what will be done, or at least ought to be done at an other
time.

And now we will go with them to Walsingham, and see if History makes more for
them than Records; though neither is History a sufficient proof for things of
this nature, neither is Walsinghams, or any of those Moncks Writings, the most
authentic History in the world: But let us see what Walsingham says, p. 475.
he says, His diebus Clerus and populus primo quintam decimam, and postmodum
tricesimam bonorum suorum Regi Angliae in Subsidium concesserunt. And p. 488.
he says, Pro confirmatione harum rerum omnium dedit Populus Anglicanus Regi
denarium nonum bonorum suorum, and Clerus Cantuariensis decimum, and Clerus
Eboracensis quintum, quia proprior damno fuit. What does this signify? but
that the Laity gave so much, and the Clergy so much; and certainly the Lords
will be acknowledged to be part of the Laity, therefore the Laity giving they
are comprehended. An other quotation was urged from p. 566. The words are, Eo
tempore incohatum est Parliamentum, quod protelabatur inutiliter fere per
annum, quia postquam Parliamentales milites distulissent diu concedere Regi
Subsidium, in fine tamen fracti concessere taxam petitam grandi Communitatis
damno. But how they will prove hence, that the Commons gave this Subsidy alone
is difficult to tell. All that can be gathered from it, seems to be but this,
the Knights in Parliament (which may be taken for the whole House of Commons)
held off a long time, but at last yielded, and gave the Tax demanded to the
great prejudice of the Commonalty? does it follow therefore, that when the
House of Commons had passed it at last, the Lords did not assent and join in
the Grant? Certainly no man will say it. And for their last quotation, out of
p. 564, in H. 4ths time, that Subsidium denegatum fuit Proceribus renitentibus,
the words are these, In quadragesima sequente Rex convenire fecit apud Sanctum
Albanum Clerum Regnique Barons, sed proceribus renitentibus nil actum fuit:
And no wonder that the Lords dissenting nothing was done; yet whether this was
a Parliament, or only a Great Council non constat, more like to have been only
a Great Council, and that the King had propounded matter of money to them, as
he did afterward in the Parliament of the 9th of his Reign to the House of
Lords, and as this very Writer says, that he had done a little before to these
same Barons at London, viz. Post Festum Purificationis Rex accerssitis
Londiniis regni Baronibus, tract abat cum eisdem de Regni regimine, deque
pecuniali subventione sibi ferenda, sed proceres Regiis votis tum minime
paruere. All this was but a great Council, and no Parliament, if so be
Walsingham gave a true account of what passed; for he does not mention the
Commons to have been summoned at all, or that they were there: However, were
they, or were they not there, it makes nothing for the Managers purpose, to
prove the Commons sole givers: And then for what he observes, that the Lords
not Agreeing an Act does not pass, is what no man yet did ever doubt of.

The Statute of 1 E. 3. c. 6. where the Commons complain, that when they have
granted an Aid, and the Taxers had taxed them, and they had paid the money,
there was Inquisitions afterward, and the Taxers put to fine and ransom,
signifies nothing to prove they were the sole Granters of that Aid.

And the 18th of E. 3. n. 14. It was by Agreement, that the Lords should
accompany the King, and pass the Seas with him; And the Commons they grant for
the Commonalty at large, in the Counties two Fifteens, and for the Cities and
Buroughs two Tenths; the Record says, Et pur ceste cause les ditz Grants
granterent de passer and lour auenturer ovesque lui, and la dite Commune luy
granta pur meisme la cause sur certain form deux Quinzismes de la
Communaltee, and deux Dismes des Citees and Eurghs, etc. This was sometimes
practiced, as has been already showed both in this Kings time, and in E. 4ths
and once in Queen Eliz. that the two Houses did agree to act severally, as here
the Lords to serve in person, when the Commons gave money: So some times the
Lords would charge themselves and their Tenants apart (which in those times was
a great part of the Kingdom, and taking in the Clergy, that is, Bishops, and
Abbots, and Priors, who held per Baroniam, more than half the Kingdom) and the
Commons did charge themselves apart, this in an extraordinary way, which
altered not the Case of their joint Gift, when they would grant Aides in the
ordinary Parliamentary manner.

As for what is said of the 36 E. 3. c. 11. was but taken out of Poultons
Collection of Statutes in Print; there indeed it is said, That the three years
Subsidy granted by the Commons to the King shall be no example for the time to
come. But if the Record it self had been consulted with, it would have showed
that the Lords and Commons granted this Subsidy, it is n. 35. where is said,
Les dits Grants et Communes granterent d'un assent a nostre dit Seignieur le
Roy un Subside de Leines Cuirs and Pealx lanutz, etc. pur term de trois ans
pleinement accompliz. It is true, that in the end of the Record it is said,
Purquelegrant nostre Seigneur le Roy a la request de sa Commune lour ad fait
Pardon de plusour Articles d' Air. For which Grant the King at the prayer of
the Commons, remits unto them many things for which they were or might be
questioned in his Courts. And so among the Petitions of the Commons in that
Parliament, n. 26. they pray, That after the three years expired only the old
Custom may be levied; And they pray, Que null Subside n'autre charge soit mis,
ne grante sur les Leines par les Marchaunts ne par null autre de sorenaunt sins
assent du Parliament, That no Subsidy nor other Charge be laid, neither by the
Merchants, nor any body else granted upon Wools henceforward without consent of
Parliament. And the answer is, Il plest au Roy; the King approves it. Is there
one word in this Record which makes for the Managers pretenses? Does it not
expressly say, That this Subsidy was granted by the Lords and Commons? What the
Commons make to be their desire afterward upon it, is nothing to the Grant.
But this appears by it, that the Merchants sometimes granted such things
without the Parliament, as has been said before; for the Commons complain of
it, and petition against it here.

So the Subsidy granted 21 R. 2. n. 15. was not by the Commons alone, for it
was by the assent of the Bishops and Lords granted to the King during life;
those are the words of the Record, and they signify the same thing, as if it
had been said, That the Lords and Commons had granted it. This has been
already made out to the full, and those Statutes of E. 6. formerly cited by the
Manager himself are a proof of it irrefragable. For that of ^ and 3 E. 6. says,
The Lords and Commons granted a Subsidy; and the Statute of 3 and 4 E. 6.
reciting that says, The Commons granted it with the assent of the Lords. Which
shows the meaning of the Parliament in those two differing expressions to be
one and the same: But the Manager tells us not what followed upon the grant of
this Subsidy, which was that the King gave a general Pardon, and withal the
Record says, Fist overt Declaration per son bouche de mesme, que siles
Seigneurs ou Co^es du Roialme qui viendront as Parlments en temps advenir
mettent ou facent impediment ou distourbance a contraire del Grante du dite
subside des Leins Quirs and Peaux lanutz ensi grauntez a luy a term de sa vie,
que adonques la dite Grace and Pardon soit tout void, and tout outrement
adnulle; Declared with his own mouth, that if either the Lords or Commons
should afterward in any Parliament give impediment or disturbance to this
Subsidy of Wool, Leather, and Woollfells so granted to him for his life, that
then the said Free Grace and Pardon should be wholly void and totally annulled.
So it seems the King thought that the Lords might make some alteration in the
Subsidy, as well as the Commons and feared it: And the Commons themselves did
not gainsay it, which they would certainly have done, if it had then been a
general received Position, that which has now been so confidently asserted,
nay, if it had then been but a question, that the Lords might not meddle in any
of these Subsidies, nor hinder nor alter any thing, which the Commons would do
concerning them. This was not for his turn, and therefore he would take no
notice of it. But in truth the very Grant it self shows it to be the joint act
of both Houses, and that the Lords had an interest in it, as well as the
Commons: For whoever must assent to a thing, and that it cannot be disposed of
without his assent, must questionless have an interest in it.

The same is to be said of 2 H. 6. n. 14. 31 H. 6. n. 7, 8, 9, 10. and 8 E. 4.
n. 30. all run, The Commons by assent of the Lords. In the two first of H. 6.
The Manager has it seems been misled by the Exact Abridgement, and not
consulting the Rolls; But that of 8 E. 4. is so in terminis in the Abridgement
it self, therefore it is some wonder how he came to mistake this, and rank it
amongst those, which he makes to run in the style of being Granted by the
Commons alone without any mention of the Lords.

As he does also mistake that of the 3 E. 4. relying merely upon the Print of
12 E. 4. c. 3. where it is indeed recited to be by the Commons alone: But if he
had resorted to the Record (which only is an Authentic President) he had seen,
that there it is in the same style as all the rest. It is n. 24. both in the
Memorandum which is in Latin in these words, Communes in praesenti Parlamento,
etc. de assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium concesserunt, etc. And
in the Indenture it self, which is English We your poor Commons by the assent
of all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this Parliament assembled grant, etc.
And in the same Parliament two other Subsidies are granted in the same form,
one for a Fifteenth and a Tenth, the other for 37000 l. And it may be boldly
affirmed, that ever since there has been a House of Commons, not one Subsidy
has ever been granted by them alone without the Lords.

But what he means by his President of Ireland, 15 H. 7. we understand not. For
how can it signify any thing as to the Parliament of England, to be any rule
to it, or evidence of it, or to hold any proportion with it, be it never so
much such as they would have it? But then what will be said, if it be found to
be nothing so? For there is awide difference betwixt saying, The Commons give a
Subsidy, and saying, That at the prayer of the Commons it is granted and
enacted by authority of Parliament, that a Subsidy be given. And by that form
of Expression they can no more be said to be the sole givers of a Subsidy, than
to be the sole makers of all the other Acts of Parliament in Ireland, that were
then made, for they all run in the same style, c. 16. Prayen the Commons that
it be enacted this present Parliament that every Lord shall appear in his
Parliament Robes. And c 17. Prayen the Commons that it be enacted, That there
be no Peace nor War made in the Land without the Lieutenants or the Deputies
license. So c. 20. Prayen the Commons that it be enacted, that no persons use
these words, Cremabo, Butlerabo (words it seems which were used when they
Robbed and Plundered). And all the other Acts of Parliament run so, yet sure no
body can think, it was only their House of Commons that made those Laws, but
such was then the form and style in the making of all their Laws.

All the rest of the Presidents cited by him, in the times of H. 8. E. 6. Qu.
M. Qu. Eliz. Car. 1. and Car. 2. are by his own confession still with the
assent of the Lords, and how little that makes for his purpose, needs not that
any more be said to it.

As for that of 1 Qu. Eliz. when the Lords did respite the payment of the
Subsidy for some time as to Cheshire and Wales, (which is an undeniable
President of their easing the Subject upon occasion) it does not at all alter
the Case, what was said of their address to the Queen, and of the Entry in the
Journall Book of her pleasure signified for it: For that was but a civil
respect to her, that they would not diminish her profit in any thing without
acquainting her with it, and the having her leave: But still it was done by
their authority, and it was an Act of that House: And the power to do it was
then well known, as appears by the Petition of all the Inhabitants of Wales
and Cheshire, presented to the Lords for that purpose by the hands of the
Knights and Burgesses serving for them in the House of Commons that Parliament,
nor would they else have Petitioned the Lords, nor durst the Members of the
House of Gommons that represented them in that House have delivered it.

But admit there were no Presidents of the Lords giving ease to the People, and
making, abatements of a Change laid by the House of Commons, whether upon
Merchandise or any thing else, and that noe complaint had ever been, and so no
alteration or amendment ever made: It does not follow, that therefore they have
not power to do it, when there is cause for it, and that there are complaints
of Excess or Inequality in a Tax, as now there were complaints sufficient by
all sorts of People, who dealt in those Commodities upon which the Impositions
had been laid, Planters, Merchants and Tradesmen. Therefore the Lords say,
they insist and rely more upon the Rationality, and intruth Necessity of the
thing for the good of the King and Kingdom, then upon any President that can
be for it: And yet Presidents we see there are several ones; However, they say
it were enough for their justification, if there be none against it, and there
could be but of one of these two kinds, either that the Lords have of
themselves disclaimed such a power, or that it has been denied them when they
have claimed it, and whoever shows one of either, Erit mihi magnus Apollo.

By what has been said, appears, how little reason the Manager had to brag of
a 300 years uninterrupted possession of this Privilege claimed by the House of
Commons to be the sole absolute and uncontrouled Taxers of the People, not only
in their Commerce and Trading; but in all Money matters: For to that large
extent has he now stretched the question, which he narrowed in the beginning:
And so the Lords must not in any case interpose, to give relief and ease to the
People, if there be never so much cause: But either they must not join to give
any Aid to the King, and so the King be unsupplied, or they must be made
Instruments against their Judgments, and against their certain knowledge, to
oppress the People, which all unequal Taxes do; So if they deny passage to the
Bill, the King suffers; If they give it passage, and make it a Law, it wrings
the People. Yet this must be, or else says the Manager, The Lords do what in
them lies to put an end to all further Transactions between the Houses in
matter of Money, he might as well have said in all matters of Parliament, for
that must be the consequence: And he is desired to consider where the fault
will lie, and who demands unreasonable things, such as Nahash did of the men of
Jabesh Gilead to thrust out their right eyes: So would this even thrust out one
of the eyes of the Parliament, make the House of Lords to be nothing, an
insignificant thing, of no use, no advantage to the Kingdom: Therefore it is
hoped the consideration will be taken on the other side, though an Item be
given to the Lords to consider of it; implying, that since, It may put an end
to all transactions between the Houses in matter of Money, the Lords should
apprehend, that the House of Commons might perhaps admit of no more Conferences
in any business of this nature, but would do it of themselves, without
communicating it to them, who then could not so much as take notice, that such
a thing was in agitation. But there are Presidents, that the Lords have of
themselves uncalled, taken notice of, and interposed in debates of that nature,
which have been in the House of Commons; And when contests and differences
have risen there, and that the House of Commons could not come to any
resolution among themselves, they have composed and settled the business, and
have directed and appointed what should be done. As 3 H. 6. The Commons with
the Lords assent had granted a Subsidy of 33 s. 4 d. upon every Sack of Wool,
as much upon every 240 Woolfells, 3 s. upon a Tun of Wine, and upon all other
Merchandise 12 d. in the pound, under the condition (says the Record) That
every Merchant stranger coming into the Kingdom should within 15 days be
under Host, and within 40 days after his being so under Host, should sell
off all his Merchandise, and what after that remained unsold, should be
forfeited to the King; and likewise should pay forty three shillings four pence
(that was 10 s. more than the English) upon every Sack of Wool, and every 240
Woolfells: And if these conditions were not observed, the whole grant of
Tunnage and Poundage of the English Merchant to be void and of no value: These
Conditions it seems were not observed; and great stir there was about it in the
House of Commons the next Parliament, which was 4 H. 6. as appears by the
Record, which says thus, Item pro eo quoth. inter Co^es Parlamenti praedicti
diversae opiniones de and super concessione and levatione Subsidii Tonagii and
Pondagii Domino Regi in Parlamento suo ultimo tento concessi motae fuerunt ut
dicebatur and subortae, visa tandem and diligenter examinata forma concessionis
Subsidii praedicti in praesenti Parlamento, habita quoque inde Justiciar. and
aliorum Legis peritorum deliberatione matura, consideratum fuit and before
declaratum per magnificum Principem Ducem Bedeord Commissarium Domini Regis ac
faeteros Dominos Spirituales and Temporales in eodem praesenti Parlamento
existentes, quoth. Subsidium praedictum ad opus praefati Domini Regis omnino esset
solvendum and levandum, aliquibus conditionibus in concessione ejusdem Subsidii
contentis in aliquo non obstantibus. The Lords eased the Merchants strangers,
and yet the House of Commons was not angry at it, nor did they threaten them,
that they would have no more to do with them, and that there should be no
further transactions between the Houses in matter of Money; but Tempora
mutantur, etc.

And so we have gone through the Presidents for the matter of Subsidies, which
were cited at the Conference by him that managed it for the House of Commons.
Let us now see what will be offered by him in point of Reason, in answer unto
their Lordships reasons, He begins with a terrifying general Position, which he
puts in the front, as a Caveat to their Lordships, That it is a very unsafe
thing in any settled Government to argue the Reasons of the Fundamental
Constitutions: for that (says he) can tend to nothing that is profitable to
the whole. As if their Lordships were now unravelling a settled Government,
whereas their Lordships are now argueing against the unsetling of an ancient
Government, and the setting up of a new one, altogether unknown to our
Ancestors, which is, To have the Trade and the Treasure, and the strength of
the Kingdom to be wholly in the hands, and in the absolute dispose of one of
the Houses of Parliament, be it either of them. This certainly would be the
unsafety of the Kingdom, and the arguing against it, and opposing it, is for
the safety of the Kingdom.

Then he brings in (if one may say so) a little improperly the Question of
Judicature, a point formerly controverted by the House of Commons, in which he
will have no better luck, than in all the rest: mistaking or misciting his
Presidents. He first brings in the Book Case of 22 E. 3. to show, that
sometimes it was not in the whole House of Lords, but such as the King would
please to appoint, to exercise that Power. The Case is this, A Judgment had
been given in the Kings Bench for the King against Edmond Hadelow and his
Wife, they bring a Writ of Error in Parliament; Sur que le Roy assign certain
Countz et Barons et auesque eux les Justices, etc. de terminer le dit
besoignes: The King appointed certain Earls and Barons with the Judges to end
the matter: But this might be a Committee appointed by the House and Judges to
attend it, (which were regular enough) and yet might be said to be done by the
King, as in all their Judicial proceedings, things were said still to be done
by the King, if the King were present, as sometimes he was, when such matters
were in agitation, and that the House acted as a Court of Justice, and not in
its Legislative capacity. And the rather it seems to have then been so, by way
of Committee, because the Parliament ending, the Book says, they could
proceed no further, and the business fell to the ground, whereas if they had
been Referrees appointed by the King their authority had been the same after
the Parliament as during the Parliament.

As to the next quotation of the Parliament Roll 25 E. 3. n. 4. it must be some
mistake, for nothing is to be found there relating in any sort to the matter in
hand: but n. 10. there is something to this purpose, which perhaps the Manager
meant, though if duly considered it makes against him. The Case is, That the
King caused to be brought into Parliament the Record of the proceeding against
Sir William Thorp Chief Justice, Et le sit lire ouuertement deuaunt les Grauntz
du Parliament, and caused it to be read openly before the Lords, to have their
advice upon it, who Judged it to be rightly and duly made, and approved of the
Judgment given against him, because he had bound himself by Oath to undergo
such punishment, if he did contrary to what he had sworn, which was not to
take any bribes: Et sur ceo y fut accord par les Grauntz de mesme le
Parliament; que si null tiel cas aui gne dejorenauant que nostre Seigneur le Roy
preigne luy des Grauntz que lui plerra et per lour bon auis fait outre ceoque
pleise a sa Royale Seigneurie. The Lords do agree, that if any such case
happen afterward, the King may take such of his Lords as he please, and by
their advice further do what seems good unto him. Is there any thing here that
does derogate from the Lords power of Judicature? or rather can any thing be
more in affirmance of it. One who out of Parliament had been tried and
condemned by a Special Commission, the King the next Parliament brings the
whole business before the Lords before any Execution be of that Judgment, to
have their Judgment upon that Judgment: they confirm it, and further (as it
seems by the Record) give the King power in the like Case to call what Lords he
thinks good, and by their advice to determine it. (which is to be supposed
meant by them, if the Case happen out of Parliament.) And certainly there
cannot be a stronger argument for the Judicature of the House of Peers in
Parliament.

Then he brings Presidents to show, that by the Kings good pleasure, the
Commons have been let into a share of the Judicature, His first is the 42 E.
3. n. 20, 21. The business was this, The King the last day of the Parliament,
invited all the Lords and Plusours des Comunes, many of the Commons to dinner,
Et aprez manger vindrent les Prelates Counts Barons et ascuns des Communes en la
dite Chamber blanch, And after they had eaten, the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and some of the Commons (probably not all they that had dined there, for the
Record is Ascuns) went into the foresaid Chamber blanch, (which is now the
Court of Requests, where the House of Lords then sat, as the Commons En la
petite sale, (the Record says) in the little Hall) and thither was brought
Monsieur John de la Lee, and tried for several Crimes laid to his charge, the
Articles read by the Chief Justice Robert de Thorp Del commandment des
Seigneurs illoeques assemblez, by the Commandment of the Lords who were there
assembled; so likewise the Record says that his answer, Fust auis aux
Seigneurs non reasonable, seemed to the Lords not to be reasonable. And then n.
22. the Record says further, that he was, Mis a reason deuant les Seigneurs,
tried by the Lords upon an other point. The Conclusion was, That he was sent to
the Tower, and made Fine and Ransom to the King; But all was done by the
Lords, who sat there as a House in their Judicature, the few Commoners who
were present, being but so many private persons, and lookers on, and not the
least color of their bearing any part in the Judicature.

As to his next quotation of 31 H. 6. n. 10. nothing can be said: it must be
mistaken. For in that Parliament, we find nothing of this nature. The
Complaint of the Commons to the House of Lords for their Speaker being
imprisoned, and their desire to have him released, which would not be granted,
was indeed that Parliament.

But to Hugh Brice's Case, 8 E. 4. a clear answer may be given, That what was
therein done, was by Act of Parliament, in a Legislative way. The Commons
Petitioning in these words, Please it therefore your Highness by the Advice and
Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, to assign, name and appoint the full reverend Fader in
God Thomas Cardinal Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. Then names several Lords
both Spiritual and Temporal, the three Chief Judges of the three Courts, and
some of the House of Commons to be the persons to examine that business, and
hear those complaints against Brice the Master of the Mint, The King's Answer
is, Le Roy le voet with a saving to his Prerogative Royal: conceiving it (it
seems) to be some derogation to it, that the Commons should be admitted to any
part of Judicature, though by a special Law for it. For this was a perfect Act
of Parliament, in which the three Estates concurred in their Legislative
capacity, which had no affinity with the Judicial Power exercised by the Lords
in their House, as the highest Court of Judicature.

As for his President of 2 H. 5. where he says, It was assigned for error in
the House of Peers, that the Lords gave Judgment without the assent or a
Petition of the Commons, It was the Earl of Salisbury's Case, to reverse the
Judgment given upon his Father, and it is true indeed, it was assigned for an
Error, but it is as true, it was not allowed to be one, for his Writ of Error
was rejected, and that Judgment was affirmed. And strange it is that he should
produce this for a President to prove a Partnership of Judicature in the
Commons, being a strong one against it: And as well might at any time a
Plaintiffs Bill in Chancery be produced for Evidence against a Defendant in
some other suite, even when the Bill has been dismissed.

And his next President is just such an other, to show that the King and
Commons alone without the Lords have made Acts of Parliament, for which he
quotes 1 E. 6. c. 5. It is a Statute against conveying Horses out of England,
and it is true that in Pulton's Collections it is so Printed, as enacted by the
King and Commons, without mention of the Lords. But if the Journal of the Lords
House had been consulted, it would have showed, that the Bill began in their
House, was read the first time the 1st. of December upon a Thursday. The second
time upon a Wednesday the 7th. The third time upon Saturday the 10th. and sent
down to the House of Commons by the Kings Attorney and Solicitor the 22 d. of
December upon a Thursday: the House of Commons sent it up again with a Proviso
to be added, which Proviso was allowed of by the Lords, and the Bill dispatched
the Saturday after. It was therefore a foul mistake to say this Bill passed
without the Lords. And it may be modestly said of all his Presidents, both
concerning the Legislative and the Judicature, that upon better consideration
he will not find cause of great encouragement from them to argue the
foundations of either Power in order to that Super-structure which he would
rear, whither in diminution of that Power which is challenged by the House of
Peers in the Legislative for Impositions, or maintenance of that which he
pretends to for the House of Commons in point of Judicature.

And now we come to his particular Answers to the Reasons given by the Lords.
And to so much and so many of those Answers, as seem to contain any thing of
weight, and material to be replied unto, we shall give that Reply that is
necessary: but as for that which is jocular, and has something of reflection
in it, as too much of it has, only this shall be said, Auferat oblivio si
potest, si non, silentium teget:

To the 1st. Reason then given by the Lords, which was, That the happiness of
the Constitution, is to have one House to be a Cheek to the other; his Answer
being, That the Lords having a Negative voice to the whole, is a sufficient
Check to the House of Commons. It is replied, That to have a Negative voice is
not to be a Check: A Negative voice is one thing, a Check is an other. The King
has a Negative voice to what both Houses do, yet he cannot be said to be a
Check to the Houses, The two Houses have each of them a Negative voice to the
Convocation granting Subsidies, yet they cannot be said to be Checks to the
Convocation: But each to other in their Legislative capacity have both a Check
and a Negative voice, which are different operations of that Legislative Power.
For properly to be a Check is to have a trust reposed in one to examine the Act
of an other; And both are trusted by, and accountable to a third person, by
whose authority, and for whose Service both are employed. And he that is the
Check, cannot wholly reject what the other has done, be it an account or any
thing else, he can only examine it if it be right; And if any error be, he can
correct it and reform it, and make it such, as that he who employes them both,
may receive no damage nor prejudice by it. And this is the proper work of the
House of Peers, as they are a Check to the House of Commons (for they have a
Negative voice besides, which is not now the Question, but only as they are a
Check, and so) they are trusted both by the King and People, as well as is the
House of Commons: not only in Money-matters, but in all things else,
cognisable by the Parliament. If the House of Commons give Money so to the
King, as the Subject cannot bear it, if out of Trade, so as Trade cannot bear
it (which is the proper question now) (...) out of the Estates of the People,
so as they are not able to pay it, the King himself suffers in all this, as
well as the People, it will be his damage, his loss at the last; nay the
greatest damage and loss will be his at the long run, perhaps immediately; for
as the saying is, He that graspes too much, holds nothing; so if more be given
than can be paid, nothing may be received. A thing which King James of blessed
memory did well understand; and therefore in the Session of Parliament 7mo. the
21. of March, he called both Houses to him to Whitehall upon occasion of an
Aid then demanded, and there among other things, said this to them, If you
give more than is fit, you abuse the King and hurt the People; and such a Gift
I will never accept, for in such a case you might deceive a King in giving your
flattering consent to that, which you know might move the People generally to
grudge and murmr at it: And so should the King sind himself deceived in his
Calcul, and the People likewise be grieved in their hearts. And a little after
he added these words, I do not desire you should yield to that extreme in
giving more than is sit, for that were to give me a Purse with a Knife. That
wise King knew the inconvenience of straining that string too much, winding it
so high as to endanger the cracking. Therefore if any mistake have been (as
among the wisest of men there may be) the Lords are there to discharge their
trust, and so rectify, so moderate, so proportion the payments to the ability
of them that are to make those payments, as that they may not be ruined, but be
able to discharge these now, and the like hereafter, when there will be need
again. Which answers the second part of what is objected, That it would be a
double Check upon His Majesty's affairs, if he may not rely upon the Quantum,
when once his People have given it: So far from it that it will be an advantage
to His Majesty's affairs, when the Quantum is made such, as he shall be sure to
receive it, and that he may thereby have both the Purse and the hearts of the
People. And as to this particular now in question, the Quantum upon the whole
matter would not have been less to the King, but much greater at the years
end: For if Trade be over-burthened once, it sinks, and yields nothing, and nowhere is the Proverb more truly verified, That light gain makes the heavy
Purse, than in the return upon Trade, to make it quick and easy, which cannot
be, if it be overcharged.

2dly, As to the Writ of Summons, which the Manager acknowledges to be de
quibusdam arduis, but that it must be understood of such things as by course of
Parliament are proper to Parliament, (which matter of Money (as he will
understand it) is not to the House of Lords, else, says he, the Commons may
as well entitle themselves to Judicature, for they are also called to treat de
quibusdam arduis. To this is replied, that Quaedam ardud comprizeth all that
the Parliament takes cognizance of, which are the great and arduous affairs of
the Kingdom, as it is described, 9 H. 4. n. 21, 22. L'estat du Royalme et la
remedy a ce besoignable, whatever concerns the state of the Kingdom, and the
necessary remedies to it: In all these things both Houses are equally
concerned, and equally called by the King, to consider and debate them, and to
give him their advise upon them: And there can be nothing of more importance to
the state of the Kingdom, and consequently more proper for the care and
inspection of both Houses, than the supply of the King with Moneys necessary to
support the Government, make Provision of Ships, Arms, Stores, and all things
needful for the defense of the Kingdom, and to defray all other charges
incident to the Crown. But the exercising of a Judicature is clean of another
nature, and the proper work of a Court of Justice, which the House of Peers
is naturally by the Fundamental Constitution of it: not that the Parliament is
called for that purpose, but the Parliament being called, and met according to
the Call, the House of Peers then becomes a Court of Justice, for the exercise
of a Judicial power in those extraordinary Cases, which by the Custom and
usage of Parliament are within their cognizance and Jurisdiction, and have
been so from the beginning, long before there ever was a House of Commons: And
therefore the Power of Judicature cannot be within the Quibusdam arduis, of
which the House of Commons is to treat.

Then for the third Reason, to which was given a Rhetorical answer (for there
was the Rhetoric.) The Lords had by way of Question proposed to know, when
they had appropriated this Right of Imposing upon Merchandises to the Commons
in exclusion of themselves; which well they might, having proved it to have
been originally in them, and then it was but reason to put the Commons to show
when they lost it, according to that known Maxim, Quod nostrum est, sine
facto seu defectu nostro amitti, sen in alienum transferri non potest. This was
no Rhetorical Question, but the Answer was Rhetorical, to give the Lords a Quid
pro Quo, with an other Question, and ask, Where was the Record by which the
Commons sub^itted, that Judicature should be appropriated to the Lords in
exclusion of themselves: And that upon the back of that Record their Lordships
would find the other endorsed. This is a fine insinuation, that all is but a
fiction of their Lordships Title to the sole Judicature, but it will be made
out, that they can show a good title to it, not only of Custom and
Prescription, from the very beginning of Parliaments, before there was a House
of Commons, but a good Law made in the Case, and the strongest kind of Law,
that is to say, to declare a right, (not to constitute it) for that Right had
been acknowledged and practiced time out of mind, beyond all Record; And this
was 1 H. 4. The Commons then come up, and represent to the King and Lords, Que
comme les Jugemens appartiennent seulement an Roi et as Seigneurs et nient as
Coes, etc. That as Judgments belong only to the King and Lords, and not to
the Commons, so they pray that noe Entry may be made in Parliament to make them
parties now or ^ter to any Judgment given or to (...) given: To which was
answered, That the Commons were but Petitioners, and that the King and Lords
have at all times had, and are to have the right of Judicature in Parliament,
which Order the King will have to be observed in all future times. This was a
perfect Law, and the same formality used to it, as went to the making of all
the Laws of those times: And the Record of this is upon the Roll in the Tower,
and yet noe endorsing upon it of the other Record, to make the Commons the sole
unlimitted and uncontrollable disposers of the Peoples Money: For that indeed
is only to be found upon the back side of the Salique Law, as the Gentleman
said of a thing that was nowhere to be found, from whom this whole conceit is
borrowed.

To the 4th of the Lords saying, That by the same reason of denying them Power
to abate, they may deny them Power to reject the whole, and at last take away
their Negative voice; and the Managers answering this with instances of the
King's Negative voice to Bills, and that of the two Houses to the King's
Pardon, and the Clergies Subsidy, who can each of them reject the whole, yet
cannot alter any part, and their Negative voices not be in danger for all that;
To all which noe more need be replied, than what has been already said, That
in all things of which the Houses can take cognizance, they have a Deliberative
voice, as well as a Negative, and by the same reason that the one is taken
away, the other may be taken away likewise. But of these things they have noe
cognizance, not of the Pardon, because it is the King's free gift; and as for
the Subsidy of the Clergy, the Clergy could tell them, 4 R. 2. n. 13, 14. when
the House of Commons had offered to grant an Aid, if the Clergy would pay a
third part of it, who held a third part of the Realm; The Clergy answered,
they were not to grant Aides by Parliament, and therefore willed the Commons to
do their duties, and they would do theirs.

As to the 5th. where the Lords said, That the Commons might allow them the
same Privilege of altering and amending of Bills of Money, that they do the
Commoas in Bills of Judicature, The Manager will take it for an offer; as if
the Lords would compound upon terms. But he is mistaken. The Lords very well
know, that it is not Parliamentary to make bargains. They neither desire to
have more Power in either the one or the other, Moneys or Judicature, than does
of right belong unto them, nor will they depart with that which does. And to
that which was said of Forbearing the instances, hoping they will reform: All
they will say is this, They know not wherein they have done amiss.

To the 6th. of the Ignoble Choice, which the Lords say they are put to, of
either not supplying the King, or consenting to ways, which their own
Judgment and the Good of the Government, and of the People will not admit; to
which are made two Objections. 1. That thereby the Lords make their Judgments
the measure of the welfare of the People. 2. That by that rule they may as
well increase as abate the Taxes.
And then he endeavors to retort this upon the Lords, saying, That the ignoble
choice is left by it to the King and the People, That so small an Aid must be
demanded by him, and given by them, as not to be capable of diminution, or
otherwise it must be subject to the Lords re-examination, whose proportions in
the Taxes in comparison to what the Commonalty pay is inconsiderable. To this
will be replied in the same order; 1. That it is most agreeable to reason, that
their Lordships being to act in the concerns of the People, to make Laws by
which a proportion of their Estates is to be disposed of for public use, for
the necessities of the King and Government, and consequently for the
preservation of the whole, they should apply the best of their Judgments to do
it so, as it may best consist with the welfare of the People, which welfare
they must so measure, and so guide, and regulate their determinations by it,
that what they do may not be hurtful to it, Therefore they may without vanity
grant what is said, That they do in that sense make their Judgments the
measure of the welfare of the Commons of England. To his second objection
their Lordships say (as before) that it is out of the Case, they pretend not to
a Power of increasing Taxes. And then for matter of payment, the House of Lords
indeed will not compare with the whole Commonalty (nor do they in their
Parliamentary capacity, look upon the Commonalty of England in a distinct
notion from themselves, conceiving themselves trusted for them and interested
in their concernments, as much as any House of Commons,) but they say they pay
their proportion as well as the House of Commons. And which of the Houses pays
most is not material, both certainly paying what is their due to pay.

As to the 7th concerning positive Assertions; It is true, they have on both
sides been positive enough, but which has better maintained their Assertions,
and made them good, and which has better proved three hundred years usage, let
neither party be Judge, but the indifferent looker on, who many times sees more
than the Gamesters.

As to what was said in Answer to the 8th and 9th of the Lords Reasons, it not
signifying any thing as to the decision of the matter in question, but rather
something savouring of harshness and of unkindness, as, That this House of
Commons stands in no need of their Lordships recommendation, of it self
deserving so well both of King and People, and then concluding with an Item to
the Lords, To follow the wisdom of their Ancestors, as implying they did not
so: Expressions fitter to be forgotten, than to be replied unto: All this
therefore shall be past over with Silence, in pursuance of Solomon's counsel,
To leave off Contention before it be meddled with.

The sum of all is, That the Lords are not at all convinced with either the
Arguments or Presidents brought by the House of Commons, to believe, that ever
they had, or that it is agreeable to Reason, or consisting with the Nature of
Parliaments, and the general good of the Kingdom, that they should have such a
Fundamental Right, as they pretend to, in Bills of Rates and Impositions upon
Merchandise, as to the Matter, Measure and Time (for those are their words)
They to be the sole Arbiters for the laying on of what Rates and Impositions
they think good in those three respects; And the House of Peers not to
intermeddle, nor have Power to make any alteration and abatement in them, when
once resolved by the House of Commons, be there never so much reason, nay a
necessity so to do. This can no ways be agreed to. And the Lords do say, as
to what concerns their Rights and Privileges, first in General, That they
pretend not to be the beginners of any Charge to be laid upon the Estates of
the Subject; nor to increase and augment any, that is already laid by the
House of Commons. This they conceive to be against the intendment of the Law 9
H. 4. and the practice of Parliament ever since. But they say in the second
place as to this Particular now in Question of Tunnage and Poundage, That they
do challenge a Right and Liberty to have the use of their Reason, when such
Bills come to them from the House of Commons, to judge of the equality of the
Rates imposed, to moderate and reduce them to a due proportion, if they find
any too high, and to receive the complaints and information of Merchants and
Persons concerned, or of any other, who is experienced in Trade, thereby to
regulate their Proceedings in the consideration of those Bills, that they may
so frame and model them, before they give their Assent unto them, as to be sure
they may be such, as Trade shall not suffer, and yet the King be supplied, and
those great Ends complied with for the general Good and Benefit of the
Kingdom, for which those Subsidies are given. This the Lords do affirm to be
the undoubted Right and Privilege of the House of Peers, and an Essential
part of that Power and Authority, which the Constitution of this Government,
and the Custom and usage of Parliament has lodged there for the Good of the
Nation, and which has so continued, and been enjoyed and exercised by them
for that End, from the very beginning both of Parliaments and Government.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 87. li. 1. for Bedcord read Bedfordiae, and li. 3. for saeteros, read
caeleros.


