DE Successionibus APUD ANGLOS: Or, A TREATISE OF Hereditary Descents, Showing
The Rise, Progress and Successive Alterations thereof. AND Also the Laws of
Descent as they are now in use.

LONDON Printed and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1699.

TO Sir S. E. Knight. THIS TREATISE IS Most Humbly Dedicated BY HIS Most
Obliged and most Obedient Servant, B. S.

TO THE READER.
THis little Treatise of Hereditary Descents being recommended to my perusal, I
willingly embraced the opportunity of showing my esteem of the great Learning
of the Author, and my Love for the Public in sending it abroad. And I was the

I am unwilling to detain you any longer than only to tell you, that though in
this Treatise there is nothing but what most Practicers do know already; yet
the Method I believe will render it useful in some sort to those of the
greatest Learning.

B. S.

DE Successionibus APUD ANGLOS.
MY design in the following Discourse is to Treat of the Hereditary
Transmission of Lands from Ancestor to Heir, and the certainty thereof, and
what growth this Doctrine has had in Succession of time, till it arrived to the
State and Prefection which now it has.

And touching Hereditary Transmission, or Succession commonly with us called
Descents, I shall hold this Order in my Discourse, ( viz.)

1 st, To give some account touching the Ancient Laws, both Jewish, Greek and
Roman, concerning this matter.

2ly, To observe some things, wherein it may appear, how the particular
Customs, or Municipal Laws of other Countries, varied from those other Laws.

3ly, To give some account of the Rules and Laws of Descents, or Hereditary
Transmissions as they stood, and at this day stand in England, with the
successive alterations, that process of time, and the wisdom of our Ancestors,
and Customs grown up, tacitly, gradually and successively, have made therein.

And first touching the Succession or Descent of Inheritance, as also of Goods,
among the Jews, Mr. Seldom in his Book De Successionibus apud Hebraeos, has
given us an excellent account, as well out of the holy Text, as out of the
Comments of Rabbis, or Jewish Lawyers, which I briefly comprise, in the 5, 6,
7, 12 and 13 Chapters of that Book, the sum whereof, for so much as concerns my
purpose, is this.

1. That in the descending Line, the Descent or Succession, was unto all the
Sons, only the eldest had a double Portion, ( viz.) If there were three Sons,
the eldest had two fourths, and each other Son one fourth part.

2. The Nephew, or Son of the Son, dying in the Fathers Life, and so in
infinitum, succeeded in the partition of his Father, as if his Father had been
in Possession of it.

3. The Daughter did not succeed in the Inheritance of the Father, as long as
there was Sons, or Descendants from the. But if one Son had died in the life of
his Father, having Daughters and without Sons, his Daughters succeeded in his
part, as if he had been Possessed.

4. In case there were no Sons but Daughters, the Daughters equally succeeded
their Father without any prelation of the eldest, to two parts, or a double
Portion.

5. But if the Son had an Inheritance, and died without Issue, having a Father,
and Brothers, the Inheritance of the Son descended, not to his Brothers unless
in case of the next Brother taking to Wife the deceased's Wife, to raise
Children for the Brother deceased, but in such case the Father inherited his
Son entirely.

6. But if the Father were dead, it came to the Brothers, as it were as Heirs
to the Father, in the same manner, as if the Inheritance had been actually
possessed by him; and therefore, the Fathers other Sons, and their Descendants
in infinitum succeeded, but yet equally, and without any double Portion to the
eldest, because (though in truth the Brothers succeeded as it were in Right of
Representation from the Father; yet) the Father dying before his Son, the
Descent was de facto, immediately from the Brother to the Brother, where the
Law gave not a double Portion; and in case the Father had no Sons, or
Descendants from them, then it descended to all the Sisters.

7. If the Son died without Issue, and his Father or any Descendants from him
were extant, it went not to the Grandfather, or his other Descendants. But if
the Father were dead without Issue, it descended to the Grandfather, and if he
were dead, then to his Sons and their Descendants, and for want of them, then
to his Daughters or their Descendants, as if the Grandfather himself had been
actually possessed, and had died. And so, mutatis mutandis, to the Proavus,
Abavus, Atavus, etc. But the Inheritance of the Son, never retorted to the
Mother, or to any of her Ancestors, but she and they were totally excluded.

8. The double Portion that was therefore jus primogenituroe never took place,
but in that person that was the Primogenitus of him, from whom the Inheritance
immediately descended, or in him that represented him. If A. had two Sons, B.
and C. and B. the eldest, had two Sons, D. and E. and died, B. should have had
a double Portion, ( viz.) two thirds and C. only one third. And if B. had died
in the life time of A. and then A. died, D. and E. should have had the two
thirds, or double Portion, which had belonged to B. if he had survived his
Father, and this double Portion should have been divided between D. and E.
thus, viz. D. should have had two thirds of the two thirds that came to them,
and E. the other third part thereof.

Among the Graecians, the Laws of Descents, in some sort, resembled those of
the Jews. In some things they differed Vide Petyts Leges Atticae, Tit. 6. De
Testamentis and Haereditario Jure, where the Text of their Law runs thus, Omnes
Legitimi Filii Haereditatem Paternam ex aequo inter se Haeriscunto. Siquis
intestatus moritur, relictis filiabus, qui eas in Vxores ducent Haeredes sunto.
Si nullae supersint, hi ab intestato haereditatem cernunto. Et primo quidem
Fratres defuncti Germani and Legitimi Fratrum Filii hoereditatem simul adeunto.
Si nulli Fratres aut Fratrum Filii supersint, iis geniti eadem Lege
haereditatem cernunto: Masculi autem iis geniti, etiamsi remotiori cognationis
sint gradu, proeferuntor. Si nulli supersint Paterni proximi ad sobrinorum
usque Filios, materni defuncti propinqui simili Lege Haereditatem adeunto. Si e
neutra cognatione supersint intra definitum gradum, proprior cognatus paternus
adito Notho Nothaeve. Superstite legitima Filia, Nothus hoereditatem Patris ne
adito. This Law is very obscure, but the Sense seems to be briefly this, That
all the Sons equally inherit the Father; but if he have no Sons, then the
Husbands of the Daughters; if he have no Children, then his Brothers, and his
Brothers Children; and if none, then his next Kindred of the part of his
Father, preferring the Males before the Females; and if none of the Fathers
Line, ad sobrinorum usque Filios, then to descend to the Mothers Line. Vide
Petyt's Gloss. in hanc Legem.

Among the Romans it appears, that the Laws of Succession did successively
vary, for the Laws of the Twelve Tables excluded the Females from Inheriting,
and had many other straitnesses which were successively remedied by Claudius,
and after him by Hadrianus, in Senatus-consulto Tertulliano, and after him by
Justinian, in the third Book of his Institutes, De Haereditatibus quoe ab
intestato deferuntur, and the two ensuing Titles. And again, all this further
explained, and settled by the Novel Constitutions of the same Justinian, styled
Authenticoe Novelloe, de Haereditatibus ab Intestato venientibus, and agnatorum
jure sublato; Therefore omitting the large Inquiry into the successive changes
of the Roman Law in this particular, I shall only set down how, according to
the Constitution, the Roman Law stands settled therein.

The Descents, or Successions from any Person, are of three Kinds, viz. 1.
Descending. 2. Ascending. 3. Collateral, viz. In Agnatos a Part Patris, in
Cognatos a Part Matris.


1 st, In the descending Line, these Rules are directed.

1. The descending Line, whether Male or Female, whether immediately or remote,
takes place, and prevents the Descent or Succession Ascending, or Collateral,
in infinitum.

2. The remote Descendants of the Descending Line, succeed in Stirpem, That is,
to succeed into that right, which his Parents should have had.

3. That this Descent or Succession is equal in all the Descendants, without
preference of the Male before the Female. So that, if the Common Ancestor had
three Sons and three Daughters, each had a sixth part, and if one died in the
life of the Father, having three Sons and three Daughters, that sixth part,
that had belonged to the Person dead, should have been equally divided, between
his or her six Children, and so in infinitum, in the Descending Line.

2ly, In the Ascending Line, there are these Rules.

1. If the Son die without Issue, or any Descending from him, leaving a Father
and Mother, both of them shall equally succeed to the Son, and prevent all
others of the Collateral Line, Except Brothers and Sisters, as shall be said,
or if only a Father, or only a Mother, he or she alone shall succeed.

2ly, But if the deceased had a Father, Mother, Brother and Sister, ex
utriusque parentibus conjuncti; they shall all equally succeed the Son, by
equal parts, without preference of the Male.

3. In the Collateral Line.

1. If the Descendant die without Father, Mother, Son or Daughter, or any
Descending from them in the right Descending Line, the Brothers and Sisters ex
utriusque Parentibus conjuncti, and the immediate Children of them, shall
succeed equally, withoutpreference of either Sex, and the Children from them,
shall succeed in Stirpes. As if there be a Brother and Sister, and the Sister
dies in the Life of the Descendant, leaving one or more Children. All such
Children shall succeed in the moiety, that should have come to their deceased
Mother, had she survived.

2. But if there be no Brothers or Sisters, ex utriusque Parentibus conjuncti;
nor any of their immediate Children, then the Brothers and Sisters of the
Halfblood, and their immediate Children, succeed in Stirpes, to the deceased,
without any Prerogative to the Male.

3. But if there be no Brothers or Sisters of the whole, or half-blood, nor any
of their immediate Children, (for their Grandchildren are not provided for by
Law) then the next Kindred are called to the Inheritance.

4. But if the next be in equal degree, whether on the part of the Father, as
Agnati; or on the part of the Mother, as Cognati, then they are equally called
to the Inheritance, and equally succeed in Capita, and not in Stirpes.

Thus far of these settled Laws of the Jews, Greeks and Romans. But the
particular, or Municipal Laws, and Customs of almost every Country, derogate
from these Laws, and direct Successions in a much different way.

For instance, By the Customs of Lombardy (according to which, the Rule of the
Feuds, both in their Descents, and other things, are much directed) their
Descents are in a much different manner. Lib. 1. Feud. Tit. 1. If a Feud be
granted to one Brother, who dies without Issue, it Descends not to his
Brother', unless especially so provided in the first Infeudation. -- If the
Donee dies, having Issue Sons and Daughters, it descends only to the Sons.
Whereas, by the Roman Law, it descends both to the Sons and Daughters. The
Brother also succeeds not, to the Brother, unless specially so provided, ibid.
Tit. 50. The Ascendants succeed not, but only the Descendants, neither does a
Daughter succeed, nisi ex part, vel nisi sit Feudum foemininum.

If we come nearer home, to the Normandy Laws, there are two kind of Lands
partable, or not partable; the Lands that are partable, are all Vavasories,
Burgages, and such like, which are much of the nature of our Soccage Lands.
These descend to all the Sons, or to all the Brothers. Lands not partable are
Fiefs and Dignities; these descend to the eldest Son, and not to all the Sons,
and if there be no Sons, then to all the Daughters partable. For want of Sons
and Nephews, it descends to the Daughters, if no Sons or Daughters; or
Descendants from them, it descends to the Brothers; and for want of Brothers,
to the Sisters, observing, as before, the difference between Lands partable and
not partable, and accordingly the Descent runs to the posterity of the
Brothers, unto the seventh Degree. And if there be no Brothers or Sisters, or
any Descendants from them, within the seventh Degree, it descends to the
Father; and if the Father be dead, to the Uncles and Aunts, ut supra, to
Brothers and Sisters; and if there be none, then to the Grandfather. So that,
according to their Law, the Father is postpon'd to the Brother and Sister, and
their Issues, but is preferred before the Uncle; though by the Jewish Law, the
Father be preferred before the Brother; by the Roman Law succeeds together with
the Brother; and by the English Law, takes not immediately by descent, but the
Fathers Brother.

If Lands descend from the part of the Father, they never Resort by Descent, to
the Line of the Mother; but in cases of Purchases by the Son, who dies without
Issue; for want of Heirs of the part of the Father, it descends to the Heir of
the part of the Mother, according to the Law of England.

The Son of the eldest Son, dying in the life of the Father, is preferred,
before the younger Son surviving the Father, as the Law stands here now, but it
has some interruption.

4. In an equality of degree, in Collateral Descents, the Male Line is
preferred, before the Female.

5. Although by the Civil Law, Fratres utriusque Parentis conjuncti,
praeseruntur fratribus consanguineis tantum, vel uterinis; yet it should seem,
by the Custom of Normandy, That Fratres consanguinei, viz. ex eodem patre, sed
diversa matre, shall take by Descent, together with the Brothers, ex utroque
conjuncti, upon the death of any of such Brothers. But this seems to be a
mistake, for it seems the Half-blood, hinders the Descent between Brothers or
Sisters.

6. Leprosy was among them, an Impediment of Succession, but then it seems, it
must be solemnly adjudged to be a Leprosy, by the Sentence of the Church. Upon
this and much more that might be observed, upon the Customs of several
Countries, the Rules of Succession, or Hereditary Transmission, have been
various in several Countries, according to various Laws, Customs and Usuages.

And now, after this brief Survey of the Laws and Customs of other Countries, I
come to the Laws and Usuages of England in relation to Descents, and the growth
that those Customs have successively had, and whereunto they are now arrived.

1. Touching the Hereditary Succession, it seems, that according to the Ancient
British Laws; their eldest Sons inherited their Earldoms, and Baronies, for
they had great Dignities, and Jurisdictions annexed to them, and were in nature
of Principalities. But their ordinary Freeholds descended to all the Sons; and
this Custom they carried with them into Wales, whither they were driven. This
appears by the Statute Walliae 12 Ed. 1. Aliter usitatum est in Wallia quam in
Anglia quoad Successionem Haereditatis, eo quod Haereditas partibilis est inter
Haeredes Masculos, and a tempore cujus non extiterit Memoria partibilis
extitit. Dominus Rex non vult quod Consuetudo illa abrogetur, sed quod
Haereditates remaneant partibiles inter Consimiles Haeredes, sicut esse
consueverunt, and fiat Partitio illius sicut fieri consuevit; hoc excepto, quod
Bastardi non habeant de caetero Haereditates, and etiam quod non habeant
Purpartes cum Legitimis, nec sine legitimis. Upon which three things are
observable.

First, That at this time, the Hereditary Succession of the eldest Son, was
then known to be the Common, and usual Law in England.

2ly, That the Succession of all the Sons, was the Ancient Customary Law among
the British in Wales, which is here continued.

3ly, That before this time, Bastards were admitted to Inherit in Wales, as
well as the Legitimate, which Usuage is here abrogated. And although we have
but few Evidences, touching the British Laws, before their Expulsion into
Wales, yet this usage seems sufficiently to Evidence, That this was the ancient
British Law.

2ly, As to the times of the Saxons and Danes, their Laws collected by
Brampton, and by Mr. Lambard, speak not much concerning the Course of Descents.
Yet it seems, that commonly the Descents of their ordinary Lands, (at least
except Barronies and Royal Inheritances) descended also to all the Sons. Among
the Laws of Canutus, there is this Law, Lambard fol. 122, Tit. de Intestato
Mortuis. Sive quis incuria, sive morte repentina fuerit intestato Mortuus,
Dominus tamen nullam rerum suarum partem (praeter eam quae jure debetur Hereoti
nomine) sibi assumito. Verum eas Judicio suo Vxori, Liberis, and cognatione
proximis, just (pro suo cuique jure) distribuito. Upon which we may observe
these things.

1 st, That the Wise had a share, as well of Lands for her Dower, as Goods.

2ly, That in reference to Hereditary Succession, there then seemed to be
little difference, between Lands and Feuds, for here is no distinction.

3ly, That there was a kind of settled right of Succession, with reference to
proximity and remoteness, pro suo cuique jure.

4ly, That in reference to Children, they seemed all to succeed alike, without
any distinction between the Males and Females.

5ly, That yet the Ancestor might dispose by his Will, as well of Lands as
Goods, which usage seems to have obtained, unto the time of H. 2. as appears
hereafter by Glanvil.

3. It seems, That until the Conquest, the Descent of Lands was, at least to
all the Sons alike, and, for ought appears also, to all the Daughters, and that
there was no difference in the Hereditary Transmission of Lands and Goods at
least, in reference to the Children. This appears, by those Laws of King
Edward, confirmed by the Conqueror and recited in Lambard fol. 167. and also by
Mr. Seldom upon Eadmerus, Lege 36. Tit. De Intestatorum bonis 184. Siquis
intestatus obierit, Liberi ejus Haereditatem equaliter dividant.

But this equal division of Inheritances among the Children, was found to be
very inconvenient.

For First, It weakened the Strength of the Kingdom, for by frequent parcelling,
and subdividing of Inheritances in process of time, Inheritances were so
crumbled, that there were few persons of able Estates, left to undergo public
Charges or Offices.

2ly, It did by degrees, bring the Inhabitants to a low kind of Country Living,
and Families were broken, and the younger Sons, which had they not had these
little parcells of Land to apply themselves to, would have betaken themselves
either to Trades, or Military, or Civil, or Ecclesiastical Employments,
neglected those opportunities, and applied themselves to their small dividends
of Land, whereby they neglected opportunities of greater advantage, to enrich
themselves and the Kingdom.

And therefore, William the Conqueror (having by his accession to the Crown,
gotten the Possessions and Demeans of the Crown; and also, very many and great
possessions of them that opposed him, or adhered to Harold); disposes of these
Lands, or great part of them to his Countrymen, and others that adhered to him,
and retained certain Honorary Tenures, either by Baronage, or in Knights
Service, or by Grand Serjeantry, for the Defense of the Kingdom. And possibly
also, as the desire of many Owners, changed their Tenures into Knights Service.
Which Introduction of new Tenures, was not nevertheless without consent of
Parliament, as appears by the additional Laws before mentioned, That King
William by the advice of Parliament made mention of by Mr. Seldom, upon
Eadmerus page 191, among which this was one, (viz.) Statuimus etiam and
firmiter praecipimus ut omnes. Comites, Barons, Milites. and Servientes, and
universi Liberi homines totius Regni nostri, habeant, and teneant se semper in
armis, and in equis, ut decet and oportet. Et quod sint semper prompti, and
been parati ad servicium suum integrum nobis explendendum, and peragendum, cum
semper opus affuerit, secundum quod nobis de Feodis debent, and Tenementis suis
de jure facere. Et sicut illis statuimus, per commune consilium totius Regni
nostri and illis dedimus and concessimus in Feodo jure Haereditario. Whereby it
appears, that there were two kinds of Military Provisions, one that was set
upon all Freeholders, by common consent of Parliament, which was usually called
Assiza Armorum, and another that was Conventional, and by Tenure upon the
Infeudation of the Tenant, which was called Knights Service, and sometimes
Royal, and sometimes Foreign Service, and sometimes Servicium Loricae.

And hence it came to pass, that (not only according to the Custom of Normandy,
but also according to the Custom of other Countries.) These Honorary Fees, or
Infeudations became descendable to the eldest, and not to all the Males. And
hence it is, That in Kent, where the Custom of Descent to all the Males,
generally prevails; They pretend, a concession of all their Customs by the
Conqueror, to obtain their Submission to his Government, according to the
Romantic Story of their moving Wood. Yet, even in Kent it self, these ancient
Tenures or Fees, that are anciently held by Knights Service, are descendable to
the eldest Son, as Mr. Lambard has observed to my hand, in page 553. out of
the 9th of H.3. Fitz Tit. Prescription 63, 26 H. 8.5. and the Statute of 31 H.
8. cap. 3. But yet, even in Kent it self, If Gavelkind Land, Escheat, or come
to the Crown by Attainder, or Dissolution of Monasteries, and be granted to be
held in Knights Service, or per Baroniam, the Customary Descent is not changed,
neither can be, but by Act of Parliament, for it is a Custom fixed to the Land.

But those Honorary Fees, made in ancient times, so shortly after the Conquest,
did silently, and suddenly assume the Rule of Descent to the eldest, and
accordingly held it; and so, (although possibly there were no Act of Parliament
of those elder times, that altered the ancient course of Descents, from all the
Sons to the eldest, or at least none that we know of; yet,) the use of the
Neighbor Country, might introduce the same Usage here, as to these Honorary
Possessions.

And because these Honorary Inseudations were many, and scattered almost
through all the Kingdom in a little time, they introduced a a parity in the
Succession of Lands of other Tenures, as Soccage or Vavasories. So that without
question, by little and little almost generally in all Counties of England
(except Kent, who were most Tenacious of their own Customs, in which they
gloried, and some particular Fees, and Places where a contrary Usage prevailed)
the generality of Descents or Successions by little and little, as well of
Soccage Lands, as of Knights Service, went to the eldest Son, according to the
Declaration of King Edward the first, in the Statute of Wales abovementioned,
as will more fully appear by what follows.

In the time of H. 1. Lambard fol. 203. we find in his 70th Law, that it should
seem, that the whole Land did not yet descend to the eldest Son, but began a
little to look that way. Primum patris Feudum primogenitus filius habeat. As to
Collateral Descents, the Law determined thus, Lambard ut supra. Siquis sine
liberis decesserit, Pater out matter ejus in Haereditatem succedat; vel frater
vel soror si pater and matter desint; si nec hos habeat, soror Patris vel
Matris, and deinceps in quintum geniculum; qui cum propinquiores in parentela,
fiunt, Haereditario jure succedant; and dum virilis Sexus extiterit, and
Haereditas abinde fit, foeminina non Haereditetur. By this it seems.

1. The eldest Son (though he had Jus Primogeniturae, the principal Fee of his
Father, yet) he carried not all the Land.

2. That for want of Children the Father or Mother, inherited, before the
Brother or Sister.

3. That for want of Children, Father, Mother, Brothers and Sisters, the Lands
decended to the Uncles and Aunts, to the Fifth Degree.

4. That in Succession Collateral Proximity of Kindred was preferred.

5. That the Male was preferred before the Female; That is, the Father's Line
was preferred before the Mothers, unless the Land descended from the Mother,
and then the Mothers Line was to be preferred.

How this Law was observed in the Intervals, between Henry the first, and Henry
the second, we can give no account. But the next period that we come to, is
Henry the 2d. Glanvil in his seventh Book, gives us some account how the Law
stood in his time, wherein, notwithstanding it will appear, there was some
incertainty in the business of Descents, or Hereditary Successions, though it
was much better polited than formerly.

The Rules then of Succession were either in reference to Goods or Lands. As to
Goods, one third part went to the Wife, another third part to the Children, the
other third part to the Testator's disposal; But if he had no Wife, a Moiety
went to the Children, the other Moiety to his disposal, Glan. lib. 7. c. 5. But
as to the Succession of Lands, the Rules were these: 1 st, If the Lands were
Knights Service, they generally went to the eldest Son; and in case of no Son,
to all the Daughters; and in case of no Children, to the eldest Brother.

2ly, If the Lands were Socage, it descended to all the Sons, Si fuerit
Socagium and id antiquitus divisum, only the chief House was to be allotted to
the Pourparty of the eldest, and a Compensation made to the rest in lieu
thereof. Si vero non fuerit antiquitus Divisum, tunc Primogenitus, secundum
quorundam consuetudinem totam Haereditatem obtinebit, secundum autem quorundam
consuetudinem postnatus silius Haeres est, Glanvil lib. 7. cap. 3. So that
although Custom directed variously the Descent, either to the eldest, youngest,
or all the Sons; Yet, it seems at this time Jus commune, or Common right spoke
for the eldest Son to be Heir, no Custom intervening.

3ly, As the Son, or Daughter, so their Children in infinitum are preferred in
the Descent before the Collateral Line, or Uncles.

4ly, But if a Man have two Sons, and the eldest dies in the life time of the
Father, having a Son or Daughter, and then the Father dies; it was then
controverted, whether the Son, or the Nephew should succeed the Father, though
the better Opinion seemed to be for the Nephew, Ibid. cap. 3.

5ly, A Bastard could not Inherit, ibid. cap. 13 And although by the Common and
Civil Law, If A. has a Son born of B. before Marriage, and after A. Marries B.
this Son be Legitimate and Hereditable: Yet according to the Law of England
then used, as well as after, he was not Hereditable, Glan. lib. 7. cap. 15.

6ly, In case the Purchaser die without Issue, the Lands descended to the
Brother, and for want of Brothers to the Sisters, and for want of them to the
Children of the Brothers or Sisters, and for want of them to the Uncles, and so
onwards according to the Rules of Descents at this day; and the Father and
Mother were not immediately to Inherit the Son, but the Brothers or Uncles, and
their Children, Glan. lib. 7. cap. 4.

And it seems, that in all things else the Rule of Descent, in reference to the
Collateral Line, held much the same as now: As namely, If Land descended of the
part of the Father, it should not resort to the part of the Mother, and e
converso; But in case of Purchase, for want of Heirs of the part of the Father,
it resorted to the Line of the Mother, and the nearer and worthier Blood was
preferred, so that if there were any of the part of the Father, though never so
far distant, it hindered the descent to the Line of the Mother, though much
nearer.

There were in those times as it seems two Impediments of Descent, or
Hereditary Succession which now do not at all obtain.

1. Leprosy, if so adjudged by the Sentence of the Church, this indeed I find
not in Glanvil, but I find it pleaded, and allowed in the time of King Jolin,
and the Land adjudged to the Sister, P. 4. Johannis.

2. There was another curiosity, and it is wonderful to see how much, and how
long it prevailed, for we find it in use in Glanvil, that wrote in King Hen.
2d's time; in Bracton, that wrote in Hen. 3d's time; in Fleta, that wrote in
the time of Ed. 1. and in the broken year Ed. 1. Fitz. Avowry 235. Nemo potest
esse Tenens and Dominus and Homagium repellit perquisitum. And therefore, if
the eldest Brother had enfeoffed the second reserving Homage, and had received
Homage, and then the second had died without Issue, it should have descended to
the youngest, and not to the eldest Brother; quia Homagium epellit perquisitum,
tee for this that I may mention it once for all, Glan. lib. 7. cap. 1. Bra.
lib. 2. cap. 30. Fleta lib. 6. cap. 1. And so it has been for ought I can find
ever since 3 Ed. 1. and indeed it is antiquated rather than altered, and the
Fancy upon which it is grounded has appeared trivial; for if the eldest
Brother enfeoff the second reserving Homage, the second dying without Issue, it
will Descend to the eldest as Heir, and the Seignioury is extinct. Indeed it
might have been some Reason to have examined, whether he might not have waved
the Descent, in case his Services had been more beneficial than the Land; but
there could be little Reason for this to exclude him from Succession. I shall
mention no more of this nor the former Impediment, ( viz.) Leprosy, for they
are both vanished, and antiquated long since, and neither the one nor the other
is at this day any impediment of Descent.

And now passing over the time of King John, and Richard the first, because I
find nothing of moment in that time relating to the Title in question, unless
the usurpation of King John upon his eldest Brothers Son, which he would fain
have justified, by introducing a Law of preferring the younger Son before the
Nephew, descended from the eldest Brother: But this pretention could no ways
justify his Usurpation, as has been shown in the time of Henry the Second.

We have the Tractate of Bracton lib. 2. cap. 30, 31. and lib. 5. The truth is,
there is so little variance as to the Points of Descents, between the Law as it
was taken when Bracton wrote, and the Law as it was afterward taken in Edward
the first's time, when Britton and Fleta wrote, that there is very little
difference between them as may easily appear, especially by comparing of
Bract.ubi supra and Fleta Lib. 5. Chapter the 9th, Liber the 6th, Chapters the
1 st and 2d, that the latter seems to be in effect an Abstract of the former,
therefore I shall set down what in substance both say, and thereby it will
appear, that the Rules of Descents in the times of Henry the 3d, and Edward the
1 st, were very much one.

1 st, The Law seems settled now unquestionably, that the eldest Son was in
Common right Heir, not only in cases of Knights Service Land, but also of
Soccage Lands, unless there was a Special Custom to the contrary, as in Kent
and some other places, and so that Point of the Common Law is fully settled.

2ly, That all the Descendants in infinitum, from any Person that had been Heir
(if he had been living) were Inheritable: As the Descendants of the Son, of the
Brother, of the Uncle, and c.

3ly, That the eldest Son dying in the life time of the Father, his Son or
Issue was to have the preference as Heir to the Father before the younger
Brother, and so the doubt in Glanvil's time was settled, Glan. lib. 7. cap. 3.
Cum quis autem moriatur habens filium postnatum and ex Primogenito filio
praemorturo Nepotem, magna quidem Juris dubitatio solet esse, uter illorum
praeferendus sit alij in illa Successione; scilicet utrum Filius an nepos.

4ly, The Father, or Grandfather could not by Law Inherit immediately his Son.

5ly, Leprosy, though it were an exception to the Plaintiff, because he ought
not to converse in the Courts of Law, yet we no where find, that it was an
Impediment of Descent.

So that upon the whole matter for any thing I can observe in them, the Rules
of Descent then stood settled in all Points as they are at this day, except
those few matters which yet in process of time soon settled as they now stand,
( viz.)

1. That Impediments of the hinderance of Descent, from him that did Homage, to
him that received it, seems to have yet been in use, at least till the 3 Ed. 1.
and in Fleta's time, for he puts the case and admits it.

Whereas they both agree that Half-blood to him who is the Purchaser, is an
Impediment of the Descent; yet in case of a Descent from a Common Ancestor,
Half-blood is no Impediment. For instance; A. has Issue B. a Son, and C. a
Daughter by one venture, and D. a Son by another venture, if B. Purchase in Fee,
and die without Issue, it shall descend to the Sister, and not to the Brother
of the Half-blood: But if the Land had descended from A. to B. and he had
entered and died without issue; it was a doubt in the time of Bracton and
Britton, whether it should go to the younger Son, or the Daughter, but though
it were then a doubt, yet the Law has since that time been settled, that in
both cases it descends to the Daughter, Seseina sacit Stirpem and primum
gradum, and possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit sororem esse haeredem.

Upon the whole matter it seems, that abating these small inconsiderable
variances, the States and Rules of Descents as they stood, in the time of Henry
the third, or at least of Edward the first, were reduced to their full
Complement and Perfection, and vary nothing considerably, from what they are at
this day, and have continued ever since that time.

I shall therefore set down the State, and Rules of Descents in Fee-simple as
they stand at this day, without meddling with particular Limitations and
Entails, which vary the course of Descents in some cases from the Common Rules
of Descents in Hereditary Succession, and herein we shall see what the Law has
been, and continued touching the same ever since Bracton, who wrote in Henry
the third's time, now above Four hundred years since, and by that we shall see
what alterations succession of time has made therein.

And now to give a short Scheme of the Rules of Descents, or Hereditary
Successions of the Lands of Subjects, as the Law stands at this day, and has
stood settled here for above Four hundred years.

All possible Hereditary Succession may be distinguished into these three
kinds: 1 st, Descending, as from Father to Son, or Daughter, to Nephew, or
Niece.

2ly, Collateral, as from Brother to Brother, or Sister and Brothers Children.

3ly, Ascending, either direct, as from Son to Father, or Grandfather which is
not admitted by the Laws of England; or in the Transversal Line, as to the
Uncle or Aunt, Great Uncle, or Great Aunt, and because this Line again divides
it self into the Line of the Father and Mother, this Transversal ascending
Succession is either in the Line of the Father, Grandfather, and c. or in the
Line of the Mother, GrandMother, and c. the former are called Agnati, the
latter Cognati, I shall therefore set down a Scheme of Pedigrees, to explain
the nature of Descents, or Hereditary Successions.

Pedigree.

THis Pedigree with its Application will give a plain account of all Hereditary
Succession, under their several Cases and Limitations, as will appear by these
ensuing Rules, take our Mark or Epoch from the Father.

1 Rule, In Descents the Law preferrs the Worthiest Blood; and upon this
Account.

1 st, In all Descents immediately the Male is preferred before the Female,
whether in Successions, Descending, Ascending or Collateral; therefore the Son
Inherits and Excludes the Daughter, the Brother is preferred before the Sister,
the Uncle before the Aunt.

2ly, In all Descents immediate, the Descendants from Males are preferred
before the Descendants from Females; and hence it is, that the Daughter of the
eldest Son, is preferred in Descent from the Father, before the Son of the
youngest Son, the Daughter of the eldest Brother or Uncle is preferred before
the Son of the younger; the Uncle, nay the Great Uncle, or Great Grandfathers
Brother shall Inherit before the Uncle of the Mothers side.

2 Rule, That in Descents, the next of Blood is preferred before the Remote,
though equally worthy; and upon this account.

1 st, The Sister of the whole Blood, is preferred in Descents before the
Brother of the half Blood, because more strictly joined to the Brother of the
whole Blood, ( viz. by the Father and Mother) than the Brother, though
otherwise more worthy of the half Blood.

2ly, Because the Son, or Daughter is nearer than the Brother, the Brother or
Sister than the Uncle, the Son or Daughter shall Inherit before the Brother or
Sister, and they before the Uncle.

3ly, That yet the Father or Grandfather, or Mother or Grandmother in a
direct ascending Line, shall never succeed immediately, the Son or Grandchild:
But the Fathers Brother shall be preferred before the Father, and the
Grandfathers Brother, shall be preferred before the Grandfather, and yet upon
a strict account, the Father is nearer of Blood to the Son than the Uncle, yea
than the Brother; for the Brother is therefore of the Blood of the Brother,
because both derive from the same Parent, the Common Fountain of both their
Blood. And upon this account, the Father is at this day preferred in the
Administration of his Sons Goods, before his Sons Brother of the whole Blood,
and a Remainder limited Proximo de Sanguine shall vest in the Uncle.

3 Rule, That all the Descendants from such a Person, as by the Law of England,
might have been Heir to another, hold the same right by Representation, as that
Common Root, from whom they are Descended. And therefore,

1 st, They are in Law in the same Right of Proximity and Worthiness of Blood,
as their Root that might have been Heir, was in case he had been living: And
hence it is, That the Son or Grandchild, whether Son or Daughter of the eldest
Son, succeeds before the youngest Son. The Son or Grandchild of the eldest
Brother, succeeds before the youngest Brother, and so in all Degrees of
Succession by the right of Representation, the right of Proximity, is
transferred from the Root to the Branches, and gives them the same preference
as next, or Worthiest of Blood.

2ly, This Right transferred by Representation, is infinite and unlimited in
the Degrees of those that descend from the Representer; the Filius, the Nepos,
Pronepos, Abnepos, and so in infinitum, enjoy the same Privilege of
Representation, as those from whom they derive their Pedigree, as well in
Descents Lineal as Transversal; and therefore the Abnepos, or Abneptis of the
eldest Brother, whether it be Son or Daughter, shall be preferred before the
youngest Brother, because, though the Female be less worthy than the Male; yet
she stands in right of Representation of the eldest Brother, who was more
worthy than the youngest.

3ly, And upon this account it is, That if a Man has two Daughters, and the
eldest die in the Life of the Father, leaving six Daughters, and then the
Father dies, the youngest Daughter shall have an equal share to all the rest,
because they stand in Representation of their Mother, who should have had but a
Moiety.

4th Rule, That by the Laws of England, without a Special Custom to the
contrary, the eldest Son or Brother, or Uncle excludes the younger, and the
Males in an equal Degree do not all Inherit: But the Daughters whether by the
same, or diverse venters do Inherit together, the Father and all the Sisters do
Inherit, the Brother by the same venture.

5th Rule, That the last actual Seizin in any Ancestor, makes him as it were
the Root of the Descent equal to many Intents, as if he had been a Purchaser;
and therefore, he that cannot according to the Rules of Descent derive his
Succession to him, who was last actually seized, though he might have derived
his Succession to some precedent Ancestor shall not Inherit. And hence it is,
That where Lands descend to the eldest Son from the Father, and the Son enters
and dies without Issue, his Sister of the whole Blood shall Inherit as Heir to
the Brother, and not the younger Son of the half Blood, because he cannot be
Heir to the Brother of the half Blood. But if the eldest Son had survived the
Father, and died before Entry, the youngest Son should Inherit as Heir to the
Father and not the Sister, because he is Heir to Father, that was last actually
seized. And hence it is, that though the Uncle is preferred before the Father
in Descent to the Son; yet if the Uncle enter after the Death of the Son, and
die without Issue, the Father shall Inherit the Uncle, Quia Seisina sacit
Stirpem.

6th Rule, That whosoever derives a Title to any Land, must be of the Blood of
him that first purchased it. And this is the Reason why, if the Son purchase
Lands and dies without Issue, it shall descend to the Heirs of the part of his
Father, and if he has none, then to the Heirs of the part of his Mother,
because though the Son has both the Blood of the Father and of the Mother in
him, yet he is of the Blood of the Mother, and the Consanguinei of the Mother
are Consanguinei cognati of the Son. And of the other side, if the Father had
purchased the Land, and it had descended to the Son, and the Son had died
without Issue, without any Heir of the part of his Father, it should never have
descended in the Line of his Mother, but escheated, for though the Consanguinei
of the Mother were Consanguinei to the Son, yet they were not of Consanguinity
to the Father, who was the purchaser. But if there had been none of the Blood
of the Grandfather, yet it might have resorted to the Line of the Grandmother,
because her Consanguinei were as well of the Blood of the Father as the Mothers
Consanguinity is of the Blood of the Son. And consequently also, if the
Grandfather had purchased Lands, and it had descended from him to the Father,
and from him to the Son, if the Son had entered and died without Issue, his
Fathers Brothers or Sisters, or their Descendants, or for want of them, his
Grandfathers Brothers or Sisters, or their Descendants, or for want of them,
his great Grandfathers Brothers or Sisters, or their Descendants, or for want
of them his great Grandmothers, Brothers or Sisters, or their Descendants might
have inherited; for the Consanguinity of the great Grandmother, was of the
Consanguinity of the Grandfather, but none of the Line of the Mother or
Grandmother, ( viz.) the Grandfathers Wife should have inherited, for that they
were not of the Blood of the first Purchaser. And the same Rule e converso
holds in Purchases in the Line of the Mother or Grandmother, they shall always
keep in the same Line, wherein the first Purchaser settled them. But it is not
necessary, that he that inherits be always Heir to the Purchaser, but it
suffices if he be of his Blood, and Heir to him who was last seized. The
Father purchases Lands, and it Descends to his Son who dies without Issue, it
shall never descend to the Heir of the part of the Sons Mother; But if the Sons
Grandmother has a Brother, and the Sons great Grandmother has a Brother, and
there is no other Kindred, it shall descend to the Grandmothers Brother; and
yet, if the Father had died without Issue, his Grandmothers Brother should have
been preferred before his Mothers Brother, because the former was Heir of the
part of his Father, though by a Female, and the latter was Heir of the part of
his Mother. But where the Son is once seized, and dies without Issue, his
Grandmothers Brother is to him Heir of the part of his Father, and being nearer
than his great Grandmothers Brother, is preferred in Descent. But this is
always intended, so long as the Line of the Descent is not broken, for if the
Son alien those Lands, and then repurchase them again in Fee; Now the Rules of
Descent hold as if he had been the original Purchaser, and that it had never
been in the Line of the Father or Mother.

7th Rule, In Succession, as well in the Line Descending, Transversal or
Ascending, the Line that is first derived from a Male Root, has always the
preference. A. has Issue two Sons, B. and C. B. has Issue a Son and a
Daughter, D. and E. D. the Son has Issue a Daughter, F. and E. the Daughter
has Issue a Son, G. ^. nor any of his Descendants shall not inherit so long as
there are any Descendants from D. and E. and E. the Daughter, nor none of her
Descendants shall inherit, so long as there are Descendants from D. the Son,
whether they be Male or Female.

In Descents, Collateral as Brothers and Sisters, the same Instance applied
evideceth the conclusion. But in Successions in the Line Ascending, there must
be a fuller explanation, because it is darker and more obscure; I shall
therefore set forth the whole Method of Transversal, Ascending, Descents in
these ensuing Rules.

1 st Rule, If the Son purchases Lands in Fee-simple, and dies without Issue,
those of the Male Line Ascending usque in infinitum shall be preferred in the
Descent according to their Proximity of Degree to the Son. Therefore the
Fathers Brothers or Sisters, or their Descendants shall be preferred before the
Brothers of the Grandfather and their Descendants. And again, if the Father had
no Brothers nor Sisters, the Grandfathers Brothers and their Descendants, and
for want of Brothers, the Grandfathers Sisters, and their Descendants should be
preferred before the Brothers of the great Grandfather. For although by the Law
of England the Father nor Grandfather cannot immediately inherit the Son, yet
the direction of the Descent to the Collateral Line ascending, is as much as if
the Father or Grandfather had been by Law inheritable, and therefore as in case
the Father had been inheritable, he should have inherited the Son before the
Grandfather, and the Grandfather before the great Grandfather, and consequently
if the Father had inherited and died without Issue, his eldest Brother and his
Descendants should have inherited before the younger Brother, and his
Descendants, and if he had no Brothers but Sisters, his Sisters and their
Descendants should inherit before his Uncles, or the Grandfathers Brothers, and
their Descendants, so though the Law of England exclude the Father from
inheriting, it substitutes, and directs the Descent as it should have been, if
the Father had inherited, viz. Lets in those first that are in the next Degree
to him.

2d Rule is this, That the Line of the part of the Mother shall never inherit,
as long as there are any though never so remote of the Line of the part of the
Father; and therefore, though the Mother has a Brother, yet if the Atavus or
Atavia of the Father has a Brother or Sister, He and She shall be preferred
and exclude the Mothers Brother though he is much nearer.

3d Rule, But yet farther. The Male Line of the part of the Father descending,
shall in oeternum exclude the Female Line of the part of the Father ascending,
and therefore in the case proposed, the Son purchasing Lands and dying without
Issue, the Sister of the Father, Grandfather or great Grandfather, and so in
infinitum shall be preferred before the Fathers Mothers Brother, though the
Fathers Mothers Brother be a Male, and the Fathers Grandfathers Sister be a
Female, and more remote, because it is in the Male Line, which is more worthy
than the Female Line, though even the Female Line be of the Blood of the Father.

4th Rule, But as in the Male Line ascending, the more near is preferred in the
Descent, before the remote; so in the Female Line descending, so it be of the
Blood of the Father, the more near is preferred before the remote. The Son
therefore purchases Lands and dies without Issue, the Father, Grandfather, and
great Grandfather, and so upward, all the Male Line are dead without Brother or
Sister, or any descending from them, but the Fathers Mother has a Sister or
Brother, and also the Father's Grandmother has a Brother, and likewise the
Fathers great Grandmother has a Brother; it is true, all these are of the
Blood of the Father, and the very remotest of these shall exclude the Sons
Mothers Brother; and it is likewise true, that the great Grand-mothers Blood
has passed through more Males of the Fathers Blood, than the Blood of the
Grandmother, or Mother of the Father, but in this case the Fathers Mothers
Sister shall be preferred before the Fathers Grand-mothers Brother, or great
Grand-mothers Brother, because they are all in the Female Line, viz. Cognati,
and the Fathers Mothers Sister is the nearest, and therefore shall have the
preference, as well as in the Male Line ascending the Fathers Brother or
Sister, shall be preferred before the Grandfathers Brother.

5th Rule, And yet in the last case, where the Son purchases Lands and dies
without Issue, and without Heir of the part of his Grandfather, the Land
should bescend to his Grand-mothers Brother or Sister, as Heir of the part of
the Father; yet, if the Father had purchased this Land and died, and it
descended to his Son who died without Issue, the Lands should not have
descended to his Fathers Mothers Brother or Sister, for the Reason given in the
eighth Rule, but for want of Brothers or Sisters of the Grandfather, great
Grandfather, and so upward in the Male ascending Line, it should descend to
the Fathers Grand-mothers Brother or Sister, which is Heir of the part of the
Father, who should be preferred before the Fathers Mothers Brother, which was
in truth the Heir of the part of the Mother of the purchaser, though the next
Heir of the part of the Father of him that last died seized. And therefore, as
if the Father who was the 02 purchaser had died without Issue, the Heirs of the
part of his Father, whether of the Male or Female Line, should have been
preferred before the Heir of the part of the Mother; so the Son that stands now
in the place of his Father, and inherits to him primarily in his Fathers Line
dying without Issue, the same Devolution and Hereditary Succession, should have
been as if his Father had immediately died without Issue, which should have
been to his Grandmothers Brother as Heir of the part of the Father, though by
the Female Line, and not to his Mothers Brother, which was only Heir of the
part of his Mother, and not to take till his Fathers Fine, as well Female as
Male was spent.

6th Rule, If the Son purchase Lands and dies without Issue, and it descends to
any Heir of the part of the Father, and then the Line of the Father (after
Entry and Possession) fail, it shall never resort to the Line of the Mother,
though in the first Instance, or first Descent from the Son, it might have
descended to the Heir of the part of the Mother: For now by this Descent and
Seisin, it is lodged in the Fathers Line, to whom the Heir of the part of the
Mother can never derive a Title as Heir, but it shall rather Escheat. But if
the Heir of the part of the Father had not entered, but then that Line had
failed, it might have descended to the Heir of the part of the Mother, as Heir
to the Son, to whom immediately for want of Heirs of the part of the Father it
might have descended.

7th Rule, And upon the same Reason, if it had once descended to the Heir of
the part of the Father of the Grandfathers Line, and that Heir had entered, it
should never descend to the Heir of the part of the Father of the Grand-mothers
Line, because the Line of the Grandmother was not of Blood or Consanguinity to
the Line of the Grandfathers side.

8th Rule, If for default of Heirs of the purchaser of the part of the Father,
the Lands Descend to the Line of the Mother, the Heirs of the Mother on the
part of her Fathers Side, shall be preferred in Succession before her Heirs of
the part of her Mothers side, because they are the more worthy. A great part of
these differences are easily to be collected out of the Resolutions in the case
of Clare versus Brook, alias Cobham. And thus the Law stands in point of
Descents, or Hereditary Succession in England at this Day, and for above Four
hundred years past.

FINIS.
A Scheme of Pedigrees: And also, The Degrees of Parentage and Consanguinity.
Adgnati, quasi (...) Patre congeniti.
Adgnati ex parts Patris. Cousins on the part of the Father, the more worthy in
Descents, though farther remote. RECTA LINEA: Cognati ex part Matris. Cousins on
the part of the Mother, the less worthy in Descents, though nearer of Kin.
Cognati (...) part (...)
Linea transversalis seu collateralis The Side Line. Linea transver salis, seu
collateralis The Side Line. Abpatruus magnus. The great Uncles Grandfather on
the Fathers side. Tritavus. The great Grandfathers great Grandfather. 6
Tritavia. The great Grandfathers great Grandmother. Abavunculus. The great
Uncles Grandfather on the Mothers side. Abamita magna. The great Uncles
Grandmother on the Fathers side. Attavus. The great Grandfathers
Grandfather. 5 Attavia. The great Grandfathers Grandmother. Abmatertera
magna. The great Uncles Grandmother on the Mothers side. Propatruus magnus.
The great Uncles Father on the Fathers side. Abavus. The great Grandfathers
Father. 4 Abavia. The great Grandfathers Mother. Proavunculus magnus. The
great Uncles Father on the Mothers side. Proamita magna. The great Uncles
Mother on the Fathers side. Proavus. The great Grandfather. 3 Proavia. The
great Grandmother. Promatertera magna. The great Uncles Mother on the Mothers
side. Patruus magnus. The great Uncle on the Fathers side. Avus. The
Grandfather. 2 Avia. The Grandmother. Avunculus magnus. The great Uncle on
the Mothers side. (...) Patre an. (...)
Amita magna. The great Aunt on the Fathers side. Pater. Father. 1 Matter.
Mother. Matertera magna. The great Aunt on the Mothers side. (...), quasi (...).
Patruus. The Uncle or Fathers Brothers. Linea recta ascendens. Avunculus. The
Uncle or Mothers Brother.
Avunculus quasi (...) minor.
Amita, quasi a (...) tertia.
Amita. The Aunt or Fathers Sister. The Right Line ascending. Matertera. The
Aunt or Mothers Sister. Matertera quasi M^^ltera.
Frater, quasi (...) alter. Semi Germani fratres, quasi ex (...) Patre and
separalibus Ma^^ribus nati. (...), quasi (...) orta ^liversa.
Frater. A Brother. Propositus. Linea recta descendent. Frater, A Brother.
Uterini (...) utero. Fra^tes (...) separalibus Patribus
Semi Germanus Frater, Brother of one Father and several Mothers. Uterinus
Frater, Brother of one Mother and several Fathers. Soror, Sister. Soror.
Sister. Soror, Sister. ^^lius, Filia. (...)i.e. ab amore ^arantum.
Patrueles a Patruo. Sons or Daughters, Cousin Germans on the Fathers side.
Filius. Son. 1 Filia. Daughter. Avunculini ab Avunculo. Sons or Daughters,
Cousin Germans on the Mothers side. Amitini ab Amita. Sons or Daughters, Cousin
Germans on the Fathers side. Nepos linealis, The lineal Nephew. 2 Neptis
linealis. The lineal Niece. Materterini a matertera. Sons or Daughters, Cousin
Germans on the Mothers side. Pronepos linealis. The lineal Nephew or Neeces
Son. 3 Proneptis linealis. The lineal Nephew or Neeces Daughter. Horum. Of
these. Filius. The Son. Filia. The Daughter right Cousin Germans. Abnepos
linealis. The Grandson of the lineal Nephew or Niece. 4 Abneptis linealis. The
Granddaughter of the lineal Nephew or Niece. Horum. Of these. Filius. The Son.
Filia. The Daughter, right Cousin Germans. Nepos, quasi (...) post.
Eorum. Of these. Nepos collateralis. The collateral Nephew. Neptis
collateralis. The collaral Niece. Atnepos linealis. The great Grandson of the
lineal Nephew or Niece. 5 Atneptis linealis. The great Granddaughter of the
lineal Nephew or Niece. Eorum. Of these. Nepos collateralis. The collateral
Nephew. Neptis collateralis. The collateral Niece. Eorundem. Of these. Pronepos
collateralis. The collateral Nephews Son. Proneptis collateralis. The
collateral Nephews Daughter. Trinepos linealis. The great Great Grandson of
the lineal Nephew or Niece. 6 Trineptis linealis. The great Great
Granddaughter of the lineal Nephew or Niece. Eorundem. Of these. Pronepos
collateralis. The collateral Nephews Son. Proneptis collateralis. The
collateral Nephews Daughter. Et sic in infinitum. Et sic infinitum. Et sic in
infinitum. Et sic in infinitum.


