A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT LEICESTER, MARCH 19. 1685.

Being the County Court, also when the Nobility and Gentry met to choose their
Knights for the ensuing Parliament.

By Richard Holland, A. M. and Rector of St. George's Church in Stamford.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THEOPHILUS Earl of HVNTINGDON, Lord Hastings,
Hungerford, Botreaux, Moels, Newmarch and Molins, Captain of the Guard of
Pensioners, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Lordship,
THis Discourse preached at the Assizes at Leicester, and now Printed at the
Request of the High Sheriff, Grand Jury, and other principal Gentry of the
Country, I presume to lay at your Lordship's Feet, and humbly beg for it and
the Author your Lordship's Friendship and Patronage, which my Relations never
wanted from your noble Ancestors. Nothing but its Plainness, Honesty and
Loyalty could recommend it to the Auditory, consisting most of your Lordship's
Tenants and Neighbors; and those Recommendations, I am sure, will welcome it to
your Honor; which therefore I most humbly entreat your Lordship to accept as a
Testimony of a grateful Mind, for those manifold Favors which my Relations for
many Generations have received from your honorable Ancestors; and for those I
have so often, and so lately experienced myself from your Lordship; and as an
Earnest and Pledge that I shall always behave my self as becomes

Your Lordship's Most obliged, Faithful, and obedient Servant. Richard Holland.

EXODUS 14. Part of the 13 th. Verse. Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord.
THE Words are part of a Speech, made by Moses, that Royal Captain, of a
peevish and murmuring People, the Israelites, to quell their Jealousies, to
stifle and remove their Doubts, when they labored under some dreadful
Apprehensions of most dismal Ruin. They were now indeed in Obedience to their
God's Command, and under the Conduct of their wise and great Prince, upon their
Journey out of Egypt; but the Egyptians plot against them, and pursue. Pharaoh
storms, and resolves their Overthrow; and they thought themselves in no great
Likelihood of making an Escape. They had just encamped near the Sea, weary and
dissatisfied. Pharaoh and his mighty Host come thundering after them; the Waves
of the Sea roaring before them; their Hearts fail, and they look for
Destruction.

In this desperate Case the common People begin to repine; they repent now of
their promised, hopeful Freedom, wish again their own slavish Condition, with
Garlic and Onions, to be commanded by, and serve the Egyptians. There was
nothing nearer, they thought, than Destruction; and though they had often seen the
Salvation of God; though they had been often rescued from the Fury of their
Enemies, by unexpected Means; though they had so often gloryed in Wonders and
Miracles for their Preservation* yet now their Hearts sink; now they almost
refuse to be comforted, and begin to quarrel with their Governors. Moses is
blamed, and thought hard of, as accessory to this their Misery: Yet in this
great Stress he encourages them to keep up their Spirits; informs them of their
Duty* endeavors to remove their Jealousies, and allay their so furious
despairing Passions, and administers comfort to them in these words: And Moses
said unto the People, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the
Lord.

This Subject then, I presume, as proper for our present Thoughts, since there
are amongst us those that will have low Hearts, and jealous Minds; though they
have as little reason, nay, much less than these Israelites in the Text had.
Men that are apt and greedy to suspect, that lie in wait to fear, and doubt,
and surmise, notwithstanding the late Royal Words of our most Gracious
Sovereign, so much of kin to these of Moses. Words not only of the wise, but
resolute also, and unalterably brave; and such words (though nothing can add
encouragement to the truly loyal and obedient to be so, but their Duty) yet
they are such words, as must needs refresh all honest thoughtful Souls for the
Loss of our late King; a King of eternal and unvaluable Memory; though neverhere
enough honored and obeyed whilst amongst us.

We have indeed lately had dreadful Insinuations and Amazes, Stories of
insulting proud Egyptians, and their Curses, more dreadful than Israel ever
heard of all their 400 years of Bondage. Nay, even amongst our selves, we have
had perfect and true Discoveries of whole Bands of Conspirators; Gebal and
Ammon, Amaleck and the Philistines, Herod and Pontius Pilate, Turk and Jew,
Atheist and True Protestant, all associated, and threatening us with their
Tyranny. It Is true, Israel was often delivered, and at the Expense of Wonders
too; so have we been: And those Old Egyptians grew but more desperate when they
saw those Deliverances, and received such confounding Defeats: So have we had
Cause enough to suspect of our Egyptians, that their Hearts were hardened also,
when we saw them go on so proudly, so impudently, notwithstanding so clear
Discoveries and Confessions, and continue so confident in their Methods of
Cruelty, of Flattery, of Injustice, of rebellious Obstinacy; and that that
balked at nothing that is sacred, that is sinful, that is great, rich, or
plausible, to work out their hellish Designs.

And then, when these Men had spread abroad their false and scandalous Rumors,
we were as apt to have desponding Thoughts, as the old Israelites had. We, like
them, would believe idle Tales, and embrace, and listen to disloyal Whispers,
and were apt to conclude Truth in their lying fanatical Insinuations, even to
the discouraging of the most mild, merciful, and gracious Prince, the
over-turning, and indeed excluding of our sound Faith, loyal Hope, and
christian Charity. We were as ready as those timorous Sons of Jacob were, to
affront and scandalize our Profession by too low and mean Apprehensions of our
Condition, by fearing and despairing of God's Favor, by distrusting his
Protection; and began to hammer out new Projects of Security and Defense, which
were not only unlawful, and in themselves cruel; but abominably ungrateful and
rebellious: Projects which God no where commanded, good men never thought on,
the World was never better for, and Reason blushed at.

For when we forsake our God, the God of Mercy, and leave the Covert of his
Wings;when we begin to distrust his Governance, and waylay his ordering of
Affairs, when we pretend by unwarrantable Designs of our own, to lay unlawful
Scenes for Peace and future Safety. Thus when we despair of, and fly from God's
Protection, we make haste to Ruin; we run briskly to our own Destruction, and
shall hardly stop till we come in that bottomless Pit.

And one of the first Steps in that Journey; the first Lash is generally at the
Government. We no sooner grow afraid of Security under God, we no sooner have
such low Apprehensions of him, but we become uneasy at his Vicegerents: Our
Governors presently trouble us, we make them to be most in the Fault; and then
for Bills of Exclusion, and We will not have this Man to rule over us; the
Consequence of which, is, that instead of every: we think much to submit our
selves to any Ordinance of Man, though we know our selves obliged to it even for
the Lord's sake.

Just thus these Israelites, when they looked back, and saw the Egyptians first
grew sore afraid, v. 10. and in the next ver. they fly in the Face of Moses,
accuse him for helping forward their Destruction, and opprobriously upbraid
him, though their rightful and honest Leader, ver. 12. To which he meekly answers
in the two next Verses, and endeavors to appease their unruly domineering
Passions, to assure them again of the Care and Assistance of the Almighty, and
recommend to them the Duty of that Juncture which is most emphatically
contained in the words to be discoursed of, Fear ye not stand still, and see
the Salvation of the Lord.

The word in the Septuagint, which is here translated Fear ye not ((...) from
(...)) is derived from a word, which signifies Presence of mind, and Hope, as
well as Boldness. This sense then is implyld, Be ye not so dismayed at these
Threatenings, and pursuit of your Enemies, confide you in your God, who has put
you upon this Journey. He has delivered you often, and now your are doing his
Commands, be assured he will assist and secure you. Put your Trust in him then,
and go on; mind your own Business. And now that you are thus awakened by their
Approach, do not suffer any sneaking, and low unworthy passions to prevail over
you; don't run into any Exorbitance to secure your selves, as if God was not
able to do it: Be but patient a while, and you shall see the Salvation of God.

From the words, with Allusion to our present Circumstances, and this whole
Story, I take leave to discourse of these Propositions:

1. That while we are doing what God requires of us (though we have noise of many
Enemies; though their Designs be deep and cruel against us, and though we seem to
be in great danger) we ought not to subject our selves to vile Passions, to
Fears and Jealousies, but be courageous, and stout, and lively: Fear ye not.

2. That in the midst of these imminent dangers, and great Appearances of Evil,
we must by no means embrace any unjust unlawful methods, though for our own
Security and Preservation; but rather, Stand still.

3. That We, the Israel of God, thus doing our Duty, and retaining our
Integrity, have the greatest security imaginable, that our Enemies shall not
prevail over us; but We shall see the Salvation of God.

1. They that do their Duty, have no reason to be afraid of any thing, when
Moses says, Fear ye not, to the Children of Israel, he does more than imply
thus much, Why should you, of all men in the World, why should you be dismayed,
and fear an Overthrow, when the Honor of your God is so much concerned? Why
should you be afraid, when those that pretend against you, declare against God?
Has not God been wonderfully kind, and faithful to you bitherto; and have you
any reason to doubt but he will be so still? Has he not dreadfully resented all
those Egyptian Affronts, and esteemed their ill usage of you, as fighting
against himself? Has he not returned their Flouts with Plagues that amazed the
World, that daunted their Pride, that confounded their Devices? And has he not
declared, that all that was done, that they might know that he was the Lord;
and because he would get him Honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his Hosts, upon
his Chariots, and upon his Horsemen? v. 17, 18. Does God take pleasure, think
you, that bloody men, and deceitful, that dishonor God, and blaspheme him,
that would root out those that are honest and obedient, and that worship him in
Spirit and Truth, should prosper in their Designs against him and his own
People? Has God forgotten to be gracious? or is he willing his name should be
had no more in remembrance? Will he suffer his chosen to perish, for whom he
has declared so signally, to whom he has assured deliverance so honorably?
It Is true, our Enemies, these Egyptians that pursue, are many, are bitter and
inveterate too, and hate our Worship, and our God, because we flourish, and
they fall before us: We know their Kindness, if we were in their Power, and
what Mercy we were like to receive at their hands; but though they be thus
malicious and cunning, though they exalt themselves, and are mighty, our God is
mightier: He that fights for us is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; a
revenger of his Adversaries, a rewarder of his Friends, and willing Subjects,
and will never leave them, nor forsake them. Be not you tormented then, you
that are the Care of so tender, and so mighty a God: You that have assurance of
protection from one that is able to deliver you, that has delivered you often,
and still will deliver you, if yon rely upon him: Fear ye not.

Holy David needed no such encouragement as this; and'twas shameful that these
his Ancestors did. He, when he was plotted against by many and mighty Foes,
hunted into Rocks and Dens, and threatened with the severest fortune, ever
received Comfort from, and delighted himself in his God, and rebuked, and
cheerfully quickened a thoughtful desponding heart. Why art thou cast down, O
my Soul? Why art thou so disquieted within me? Trust in God; for I will yet
praise him, who is the help of my Countenance, and my God, Ps. 42. And again, I
will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against
me round about. Salvation belongs unto the Lord: Thy Blessing is upon thy
people, Ps. 3.

This ought to have been old Israel's Sense: For by unmanly fears and
doubtings, we scandalize our Religion, and dishonor our God; when we make our
selves Cowards instead of Conquerors, and dwindle our Christian Courage into
Fears and senceless Amazements, we fly from our Colors, we run away from our
God; we disbelieve his goodness, and distrust his assistance; we accuse either
his Power or his Will, and call in question his Mercy, and seek help from our
selves by our unworthy Doubts and Suspicions of Evils; and consequently we
forfeit his Protection and Assistance. Nay, and besides, by this timorous
Disposition, we court all our unhappinesses, and complement even what we are
afraid of: We anticipate Miseries, those that perhaps, but may be, and make
them our own, before they have any Being at all; and are overtaken by them,
even while they are afar off; and it is vast odds would never approach any
nearer. These melancholy Apprehensions, low dejected Thoughts, do always debase
the Man, belly his Condition, awaken his Dissatisfaction, create and increase
his Sorrows, sometimes even to utter Ruin, as some we have heard of that have
died for fear of Death.

But a Christian generous Courage, a brave undaunted Valor, besides that, it
baffles all base Attempters, and beats of both real and imaginary Evils,
besides that, it is thus profitable for Man, so in a sense it honors God, and
proves a holy Veneration of him: For, when we trust our selves in danger upon
his score, when we are courageous at the approach of Evils that are called
desperate, and yet keep on doing our Duty, we prove that we believe God's
goodness, that we confide in his Mercy, that we reckon him as he is true and
faithful.

He was pleased to list us under his Banner against Sin, the World, and the
Devil. He commanded us to fight his Battles, not sneakingly to fear, plot to
save a whole Skin, or run away; but to continue stout and undaunted to the end:
And he has promised his Assistance to maintain us in his ways: He has assured
us to be Conquerors; has made our Rock so strong, that the Gate of Hell shall
not prevail against us.

Shall a little Thunder, or blackening of the Clouds, shall the roaring of that
infernal Enemy, that goes about to devour: Nay, shall the rude Gatherings of
the People, or idle Whispers of the uneasy ever be able to force us from our
Posts, our Security, from relying upon God? No sure: That Lion is chained, the
Thunder shall go over our Heads, and those Clouds will quickly be dispersed;
and though they break, and drop upon us, it should be for Refreshment in our Holy
Warfare: Tho we feed on Tears for a while, and eat the Bread of Affliction (and
His Sacred Majesty, I hope, will pardon us, that we are yet forced to continue
that affectionate Sense of our late most dear and incomparable King) yet we
have better Hopes than to distrust our God, to subject our selves to any
slavish mistrusts and doubtings: For those Tears will be turned into Joy; those
Afflictions will work for us an exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory.

And we are assured, that if we keep our Ranks, if we mind our own Concerns, if
we observe the Commands of the Captain of our Salvation, if we keep true to the
Duties of our Religion, the Defense of which we have fresh Assurances of from
our Gracious Sovereign, we shall be ushered to Eternal Comforts: For these few
short, and but seeming Evils, we shall triumph in Glories, in real Happinesses,
in heavenly Crowns, when this Life shall be swallowed up of Immortality.

In a word, we should remember, That the Author and Finisher of our Faith, the
ever blessed Christ Jesus, has taken away the sting of all Afflictions, and of
Death it self; and consequently removed all Fears and Doubtings out of their
way that follow him. He knew well enough all his Enemies Plots, and had
sufficient proofs of their inveterate Malice, and needed none of them to tell
him what they intended against him, or what he was like to suffer from them. He
freely underwent it; feared them not: He submitted to his Father's Will and
Pleasure, and dreaded not to humble himself to Death, even the Death of the
Cross. So those Holy Men and Women that followed him, those early Conquerors
over Passions, and unruly Affections, who sacrificed their Lives to Truth and
Reason, were so far from a sneaking cowardly Temper, that they rejoiced in
their Tribulations, and gloried that they were counted worthy to suffer for
Christ's Sake. Instead of fearing, they loved and complemented their
Tormentors, and forgave them, and with cheerful Countenances and joyous Hearts,
caressed themselves in those dreadful Flames that put an end to their Beings
here. They performed their Duties, they minded the one thing necessary, they
studied God's Honor, and the Salvation of their Souls, and continued true to
their Religion; they awaited the Divine Pleasure, and gladly submitted, whether
in doing, or suffering, for God's Sake, which if we do, we act like Christians,
and shall die like such, and after that celebrate God's Honor with eternal
Anthems, in the Society of that Noble Army of Martyrs. Which leads to the
second Observable from the Text, and that is,

2 dly. That in the midst of any great Dangers, and appearances of Evil, we
must by no means embrace any unlawful methods, though in order to our own Safety
and Preservation.

St. James says in chap. 2. of his Epistle, v. 10. Whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one point is guilty of all. He disobeys God, and
by that Disobedience forfeits his Mercies, and makes himself liable to the
Wages of Sin. By any sinful Act we disclaim God and his Protection: We court
the Devil and his Assistance: We abandon true Light, and must expect the End
thereof to be the Reward of the works of Darkness: For there is no congruity
betwixt Christ and Belial: We cannot serve two Masters: while we cleave to one,
we must forsake the other.

God is our hope, and our strength; and he is a present help in time of
Trouble: He is able to save, and while we keep true to him, he will be on our
Side: But then he expects that we be always true to him, that we hate every
evil Way; that we depend upon his Assistance, and do the duty of his most
faithful Servants; draw comfort from him only our chief Fountain, and not hew
out unto our selves broken Cisterns that can hold no Water.

No pretensions whatsoever can hallow an unholy Act: Shall we do evil that good
may come on it? Shall we sin that grace may abound? God forbid: (said the
Apostle) And indeed none say otherwise, but those present grand Enemies of our
Order, and our Lives, the Jesuits, and those bejesuited Dissenters from our
Church, though of many Sects. The former sort do but weigh, whether the good that
ensues, overbalances the Evil of the Undertaking, and then all is well; and
themselves will always be Judges in the case; which is no sooner determined,
but those terrible Bulls begin to thunder: Princes and Nations are
anathematized, Kings dethroned, and People absolved from Allegiance, and
Heretics must be pickled in their own Blood. All this, and much more, they
pretend, is lawful for God's sake: They may do it, they say, to promote the
Honor of Holy Mother Church: And by the other sort the very same things have
been done, and resolutely designed to have been done a second time in this last
Age. They say, That Dominion is founded in Grace; and where the Prince does not
in all points humor them, they think they do well to take him off, and then
want nothing but their Arms and Leaders to encourage them to Rebellion; and
this they pretend for Conscience sake, and to advance the Kingdom of Jesus.

Job's Friends thus triumphed over him in a sanctified way; they made use of
the Name of the Lord, and told him God was his Enemy: They called his Truths
Lies, and blamed him for multitudes of Words: they esteemed his honest Advice
Mocking; and with Fanatical Cant and Zeal pretended to expostulate with God, as
in chap. 11. of his Book, to whom in chap. 13. v. 7. he thus replies, What,
Will you speak wickedly for God? Will you talk deceitfully for him? Certainly
God expects it not: He never intended his Temple should be built by throwing
down the chief Corner Stone: He never designed his glorious Kingdom should be
at all advanced by any of the works of darkness.

Without doubt, we have a very strange Notion of God, if in any Danger we fly
to the Devil to secure us: For all that is good God can bestow on his Servants,
and free them from all that is evil: Whatsoever is worth the having, the
Sovereign of all has in Store for his Subjects: The goodness both of Himself
and Creatures, the Forces of Heaven Earth and Hell too, he rules as he pleases,
to his own good purposes; and at ease can frustrate the most malicious Resolves
of the worst of Men, and Correct all their noisome Qualities: He can turn Fury
into Peace, Malice into Quietness, Revenge into Love, mischievous Designs into
Order, and extract out of all, Glory to himself, Benefit to his Church, and
true Satisfaction to his Servants: And all this he has promised. When we sin
then, to secure our selves, we become either Atheists or Infidels; we either
disclaim God, or disbelieve him.

But those that truly serve him, are so far from being disheartened at
Persecutions, that they glory in them for Christ's sake: And they know, that if
evil Men be admitted to be Executioners of God's Royal Will and Pleasure (as in
the late Rebellion they were) it is no less suitable to his infinite Wisdom, and
their Advantage; and it may be for this good end (amongst others) that the
world may know, that God is not paid with Eye-service; but those that attend
his Courts, that give themselves to his Commands, love him so well, as to be
content to suffer for him; So that others seeing their good works may glorify
their Heavenly Father. And it is not sordid Wealth, or flattering Peace; it is
not fond Pleasures, or the world's Repute; it is not a few Sufferings, nor
especially the Noise and Suspicion of them, that can make them sin against God,
and turn them from the Love of their Master and his Commands. Briars and
Thorns, Lions and Bears may lie in their way, but shall never cause them to
stumble; the poison of Asps may be designed them, and prepared, i. e. Scandals,
and Reproaches, and Affronts; and the Cup of Gall and Vinegar may be given them
to drink, but not prove Bitterness to their Souls: They can still be patient,
and cry out with their Savior, Not my will, but thine be done. They are above
the World, its Baggs, Titles, Possessions and Ease, and therefore not moved
with the Loss of them: They sin not, though they receive Poverty and Disgrace,
Hunger, and Nakedness, and Perils, knowing, that nothing, nor no one shall be
able to hurt*them, while they are followers of that that is good.

In short, they will be very true to, and serve their Master through the whole
world of Miseries, if in Egypt, if in the Wilderness, in Babylon, or under an
Inquisition, or the most solemn Covenant, since they know that there is a
Canaan, a Land of promise, whereto they are going; where they shall be free and
undisturbed above, all Fears and Jealousies, and know these Sorrows no more.
Which leads to the last Considerable in the Text; and that is,

3. We the Israel of God, if we thus do our Duty, have the greatest Security
imaginable, that no Enemies shall prevail over us; but We shall see the
Salvation of God. In endeavoring to evince which, I shall now only mention
these two among the many Arguments usually offered: The 1 st. is taken from
that Resolution of Almighty God, To secure his Church and People in general: The

Second, From those many Instances of his care, in the Preservation of this our
Worship, this Religion reformed and practiced in the Church of England. For the

1 st. God has resolved to secure his Friends and Servants in all Ages of the
world. The Dragon and his Angels were quickly busy to afflict and assault the
righteous; but no sooner began that Rebellion, but Michael, and his Angels,
were raised, commissioned, and sent against them; and they cast out that great
Dragon, overcame that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives
the whole world, and his Angels were cast out with him, Rev. 12 8.

Wonderfully remarkable has been the Security of God's People from the
Creation; and that Instance of the Israelites none are unacquainted with, when
those many, and so wonderful Plagues were inflicted upon the Egyptians, and
still they were free, brisk and lively, not one feeble person among them* And
Christ has told his Disciples, He will be with them to the end of the World: He
walks in the midst of the Candlesticks, and he that has placed them, never
ceases to watch them: He has his Stars, his faithful Servants in his Right
Hand, where they are safe, and is resolved of all those God has given him, he
will lose none: But lastly,

2 dly. We have great Hopes and Encouragements to expect the Salvation of God,
if we be true to our Religion, since we have so often experienced his great care
in the Preservation of this our Reformed Church. It has hitherto triumphed over
all those so damnable Assaults, those deep hellish Contrivances, and desperate
Attempts of its most subtle and malicious Enemies: That neither Invasions, nor
undermining Plots, nor bloody Massacres, nor private Assassinations, nor (as
was last designed us) all these associated together, that not any thing, nor
all that is devilish, though invented with the greatest security, carried on with
most wonderful Secrecy, enforced by those important motives of Religion, of
Merit, of Envy of Pomp, Grandeur and Conscience; that these should all be
quashed when there appeared the greatest moral probability of succeeding, the
Church remaining secure, not jealous, but otherwise charitably disposed to
most, if not all those Abettors; that notwithstanding all these, this Church
should be maintained, its Honor defended, the Plots discovered, the Enemies
ashamed, and the Villainy it self hated and disowned: All this cannot be seen
without a Wonder; this cannot be solved, but by the Power and Goodness of him,
who only is able to deliver us. It evidently proves, that God is not so weary
of our more hearty fervent worship and sounder Faith, as instead thereof to be
willingly served with false, formal, or slovenly careless Addresses. As he
scattered that brave Armado with the Breath of his Mouth; as he sat in Heaven,
and laughed at P owder and Faggots, and undermining, and brought to light those
deeds of Darkness: As by his great Providence he has since discovered these
late cruel and dreadful Designs of men amongst us: As he has dissolved
Covenants and Associations, and brought to naught Bills of Exclusion; so we
have great hopes he will go on conquering and to conquer: For he that keeps
Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps: He sees the Designs are against him, his
Honor, his Worship and Government. He is challenged to the Field. I will up
then, says God, and avenge me of my Adversaries; those that will not I should
reign over them shall be slain before me.

To Conclude, While there are Arms of Mercy, and Bowels of Compassion; while
there is a God that judges in the Earth, he will be the Safety and
Preservation of his Church and People: And it is only required of us to be
godly, if we would be happy; to be true to our Religion, if we would have that
secured to us: Then it would defend both it self and us: Then we should be for
ever blessed: Then all our Enemies, the Enemies of our King, and of our Church,
as by Law established, the Enemies of our Peace and Order, who under the
specious Pretexts of Religion, and tenderness of Conscience, thirst after our
Confusion, our Ruin, and our Blood, would howl in envy, and despair in
Solitariness; though they roar as Lions, and raven it as Wolves, and rest not Day
nor Night, like the Devil and his Angels, shall in the end prove their own
Tormentors, and vent their Curses on themselves. And our Church, that has
Christ for her Head; that has Reason, not Money, or worldly Interest for her
Rule; Charity and Peace, not Revenge and Murder, Patience and Meekness, not
Mischief and Cruelty, Obedience and Love, not Rebellion and Hatred for her
Doctrines: This Church shall not keep Silence, but repeat her Songs of
Deliverance: This Church shall triumph with that true Divine, Rev. 12. 10. Now
is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of
his Christ; for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down.

There remains now only a Recommendation of those honest just Endeavors, to
save our selves, and discover the Ginns of our Adversaries, which we have
express Warrant for from Almighty God. There are evil, factious, discontented,
and quarrelsom Spirits amongst us, that are the Troublers of our Israel, that
would tear us in pieces, dissolve the Government, and shipwreck our Peace and
Safety. They would do with our whole Nation as the evil Spirit did to that poor
Man's Son, mentioned St. Mark 9. 9. And that our Land may be dispossessed of
them, let us observe our Savior's words, when he was about to cast out that
unclean pernicious Spirit, This sort (says he) comes not out but by prayer and
fasting. Other things, it is true, are required of our Governors, the Prudence,
Courage and Vigilance of whom at this time so honorably and eminently
appearing, makes it impudent in any to pretend to directthem. But for us of the
same Level with these discontented murmuring People, this is not only the most
justifiable Method; but for this season more especially worthy of our Thoughts.

Let us then continually beg of God, That his Protection, his Deliverance may
be continued to us: Let us all heartily pray, That he, who is the God of Peace,
would maintain Peace, and Love, and Charity amongst us now and ever: That he
would root up all those Seeds of Sedition, of Rebellion, of Schism, that are
sowed and grow up amongst us: That he would dispossess our Land of all those
evil Spirits that are entered into it, those Legions that lurk in Dens, and
Holes, and Corners of the Earth, on purpose to amuse and affright us from our
Duty, and then devour us* so that Men amongst us may sit clothed, and in their
right Minds, glorify God, and sin no more: That Righteousness and Peace may
kiss each other amongst us; that Truth and Order, Love and Loyalty, Justice and
Mercy might dwell with us to the last: And that he would grant to our Gracious
Sovereign a long, glorious, and peaceable Reign here, with the Hearts,
Affections, and constant Prayers of all his People, and hereafter eternal Rest,
with a Crown of immortal Glory.

And then for Fasting, would we be free from all Evils, the Evils of Fears and
Jealousies, and still live in Peace and Safety; would we enjoy our most
excellent Religion, and un-interrupted Quiet, we must subdue all Lusts and
Passions, all inordinate Desires, vain Love, and silly doting upon earthly
things; that our Souls may not be darkened or clouded with them, but in purity
declare the Honor of God; that our minds may enjoy the Fullness of Pleasure,
the everlasting Good, being kept pure and clean, swept and garnished, and God
himself may delight to descend and enter into us: Then would he* for ever
defend us: Then should our King rule in Joy and Safety, and we obey in Peace
and Plenty: Then should all our Enemies sneak and be ashamed; but we fear not,
be bold as Lions, and our Prince should live to see all his enemies scattered,
the Government for ever secured, and such a Peace commenced as shall be above
the Power of Rome, Geneva, or Hell, to quash or null it. Which God of his, etc.

FINIS.

