A SHORT DISCOURSE ON THE Present Temper OF THE NATION With Respect to the
INDIAN and AFRICAN Company; And of the BANK of SCOTLAND ALSO, Of Mr. Paterson's
pretended Fund of Credit,

BY J. H.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, and Sold by Mrs. Beiglie, in the Parliament
Closs, in the Year MDCXCVI.

To My LORD High CHANCELLOR, And the Remanent LORDS of His MAJESTY'S Most
Honorable Privy Council of the KINGDOM of SCOTLAND.
My LORDS,
WERE the Occasion of my writting this small Treatise, but Common and
Indifferent, I would not have presumed to Address Your Lordships, especially
being a Private Man, and of another Nation, but since the Greatest Interests of
the Kingdim are concerned in the Matter now in Dispute, I hope your Lordships
will not reckon me guilty of a Fault.

It is well known to your Lordships, of what Importance the Indian and African
Trade is thought to be to this Nation, the number of the Subscribers, and the
quickness of the Subscriptions, supposes Men have Great Expectations of its
Success, and it is become a Sign of Disrespect to the Common Good of the
Kingdom, not to be concerned in it; Or at least, not to Approve of it, and to
pay a more than Ordinary Respect to the Projectors of it.

It is the Opinion of most Men, that this Indian and African Company, will do
the Nation very much Good, or very much Hurt, some express it, That Scotland
must either be Happy or very Unhappy, by the Success thereof. It is indeed hard
to tell the Event of Things in most Cases, but in this, a Man but of Common
Understanding, may give a Shrewd Guess, when the Beginnings of this Great
Afair, is to the Prejudice, and upon the Plain Right of another Company,
Constituted by the same King and Parliament, and is a Business which cannot
hinder, but help all Trade.

When Men have evil Designs, it is not hard to find out Plausible Pretenses to
carry them on, tho for this of a Bank or Fund of Credit, to be joined to the
Indian and African Company, there never was less show of Reason, for the
Parliament have made the Act for the Bank, and the Act for the Indian and
African Company so distinct from one another, that there is all the Reason in
the World, to Hope the Bank will be Encouraged and Protected.

And since the Business of the Indian and African Company, is for a Trade that
your Lordships and the greatest part of the Nation are not well Acquainted
with; And also, because the Setters up of this pretended Fund of Credit do
misrepresent Things, I thought it proper to direct this Discourse to Your
Lordships, that you may take more particular notice of the Matter in Dispute,
and discountenance what your Lordships shall think may tend to the Dishonor
and Prejudice of the Nation

I will (with Your Lordships Favor) mention one Instance, which was offered to
the Directors, and General Council of the Indian and African Company at their
last General Metting; To wit, That the English East Indian Companys, Cashiers
or Secrataris Notes, pass currently in Payment for the Companys Use. My Lords,
that this is not so, will appear upon due Enquiry, for I never saw or knew of
any such Notes, Although I was about eight Years almost every day conversant in
that Business, and for several Years since, have had Opportunity to know the
Affairs and Methods of that Company. And they are in the like Error in the
Instances they give of other Companies for Trade, on purpose to carry on their
Design of a Bank, But since that the Stock of the Indian and African Company,
is so great a part of the whole Stock of the Nation, and that so much depends
upon the Success thereof, it is worthy Your Lordships Consideration (and that
also of all others who Love their Country) whither these Men's Assertions are
to be depended upon.

The bare giving out that the Indian and African Trade cannot be carried on
without a Bank, or Fund of Credit, has already prevailed so far, That its
thought by many the Exclusive Clause in the Act for the Bank, nor any thing
else can stand in their way; But although it could be proved, (which never can, or
that their Project would any way help the Indian and African Trade) I will
never believe, but that this Nation will have a due Regard to the Public
Faith, And Apprehend the sad Consequences, not only to the Bank, but to the
other Interests of the Kingdom, by the Breach thereof.

However, For Vindicating the Justice of the Nation, and asserting that the
Parliament, Your Lordships, and the Ordinary Court of Justice, will determine
this Matter, according to the Plain Meaning of the Parliament in their Act for
the Bank of Scotland, I am unkindly dealt by, yet I will not be discouraged to
continue my Wishes and Endeavors for the Prosperity of this Kingdom, and at
all times to approve my self

My LORDS, Your Lordships, most Faithful, Humble Servant, JOHN HOLLAND.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the INDIAN and AFRICAN COMPANY, And the BANK of
SCOTLAND.
THAT Trade and Comerce is an advantage to a Kingdom, or Comonwealth is so
obvious to every understanding Man, that there needs no Arguments to prove it,
the Riches or Poverty of all places being usually measured by the Increase or
Decrease thereof.

I shall consider it, and but very Briefly under these two General Heads.
First, The Trade that each Kingdom or Country has within it self, this we may
call Inland or Home-Trade. The Other is the Trade that one Kingdom or Country
has with other Kingdoms or Countries; This is Foreign Trade.

The First of these is more or less in every Nation, nay, in every City and
Town, and in those Countries which produce what is necessary for the support
and Convenience of its Inhabitants, a people even with this Home-Trade, may be
Happy.

The Foreign Trade is of two sorts, One is the Trade that we have with other
Countries, for what we consume immediately our selves, without Transporting
what we bring from those places to other different Countries. This Trade is
Profitable or prejudicial, according to the Value of what is sent out and
brought home; For it is Advantageous if the effects exported will sell (where
we carry them) for more than will pay for the Goods Imported, whereby the
Remainder must be returned in Money. And it is unprofitable and a lossing
Trade, if what we Import costs more than what we sent out, whereby we must
supply the Balance with Money; So that this Foreign Trade in the one case is
Advantageous, but in the other, will impoverish, and if this be considered as
it ought to be, it is not only to drive a Foreign Trade and a great Trad. But
to drive a Foreign Trade profitably, that deserves encouragement, otherwise
we may be great lossers thereby.

The other sort of Foreign Trade is, when what we Import from other Countries,
either in whole or part, is sent out again to other different places; This is
as it were a double rrade, and may yield a double profit, if under an Honest
and skilful mannagement.

To drive either one or both of these Foreign Trades, There ought to be great
regard had to the Product of the Country from whence it is driven, whether it
affoords matter sufficient fit for other Countries; There ought to be Regard
had to the hazard, and also that the Trade be not overdriven, but
proportionable to what the Nation is able to do, and many more particulars
ought to be considered in carrying on a Foreign Trade.

Foreign Trade is carried on by particular Merchants, each for his own account
as he is able, either in Purse or Understanding, this is best in many cases,
and to some Nations the only safe way, the private Merchants being not under a
necessity to drive a Trade otherwise than as they find it profitable.

Foreign Trade by Companies in Joint Stocks, is also in many Cases very
necessary, but here there must be sit Instruments, Men of Understanding (I Mean
of Trade) Men of Honesty and Application, these will prescribe fair and
wholesome methods, and will as fairly act thereby.

There is an inconveniencie that attends a Company, That the Money being
raised, it puts them upon a kind of necessity of employing the Stock, without a
due Consideration of all circomstances; And here I must go back and say, that
there ought to be great Consideration had in making a Company for Trade, to the
Ability of the Nation, and quantity of the Stock, and many other things.

The Inferences from the foregoing Assertions, I will not venture to make at
this Time, tho I am satisfied they might be useful, and would be justified even
in Scotland, by many Honest and Wise Men at present, and by all the rest that
are Such, when the Hurry of the Great Affair now in Hand is over, or at least,
when the Success of Things, shall discover the Truth or Falsehood of some Men's
Pretentions; However, thus far I will say, that Honesty and Experience are
essentially necessary for the carrying on a Company in a joint Stock.

It has been the Practice of all Wise Governments to Encourage the Subjects to
Trade, and all things that might be for the Publict Benefit, by giving
particular Privileges either to single Persons or Companies, and that these
Grants or Declarations have been depended upon by those whom they were made to,
is very well known by most Men: This plainly appears by the Pattents, Charters,
and Acts, that are from time to time given particular Persons and Companies,
which would never be desired, if there were no certain Dependence on the Faith
and Justice of the Givers, and even in this Kingdom of Scotland, there are many
such publict Grants for the Encouragement of Trade, which I believe none will
venture to say, that the Persons concerned therein, have not had just Reason to
believe, they should enjoy the Privileges mentioned in the said Grants.

A Breach of Faith, is not only base and unworthy, but it is also unprofitable
and loossing to the Breakers of it, and this is so even to private Persons, but
with this Difference, That in a private Case there may be Concealment, so the
Scandal is not so great, and the Knavery dies with the Man. But all Men's Eyes
are upon a Government, which survives particular Persons, and so the Scandal
and Loss is the more publict and certain.

There are few Men how wicked so ever they are, That would be willing to be
publictly know to break their Promise, and when such things are, it is
generally denied, and there are two Reasons for it; The one is Reproach, which
all the World over, is cast upon such People; And the other Reason is, That all
People are Shie of them, and are afraid to have to do with them in any Matter
whatsoever.

If some will say there are Degrees in this Matter, and accordingly is the Sin
or Folly, more or less; That is, Where Faith is not plainly and directly broke,
but Obliquely or in part; But this is all one, for the persons wronged, are the
Interpreters of it, and so are all the Standers by. And in a publict Case, the
Nation wherein such a thing is done, and also Neighbor Nations are Judges
thereof.

And in this matter I am confident, I shall not only have the Divine and the
Christian, but even the honest Heathen to justify what I say, and it will hold
good in the most depraved Ages of the World, so that I will now come plainly to
the Matter and Business in Question. And in what I shall write, I will not
knowingly do wrong to any Person, but endeavor to discourage and prevent the
mischiefs that some persons by Ignorance or Interest, may do to this Kingdom,
and a Body of Men, part of this Nation, and part in England, who entirely
depending upon the Faith in an Act of the Parliament of Scotland, have engaged
in a Society for their own and for the Publict Benefit, and is a Business of
such a nature as interferrs with none, but helps all publict Undertakings, and
under plain Open and Honest Rules and Methods.

The Government of this Kingdom did think fit the last Session of Parliament,
To constitute two Companies. The one for an Indian and African Trade, and that
none other should for the space of 31 years practice the same. This Act passed
the 26th. June 1695. And the other for a Publict Bank, with an Exclusive Clause
for the space of 21 years. After the date thereof; In these words; And for the
better Encouragement of the said Company and Adventurers, It is hereby statute,
That the Joint Stock continuing in Money, shall be free from all Publict
Burden, to be imposed upon Money, for the space of 21 years, after the date
hereof, And that during that space it shall not be leasome to any other
Persons, To enter into and set up a distinct Company of Bank within this
Kingdom, besides these persons allennarly into whose favors this Act is
granted: Which Act passed the 17th July, following the other Act.

After the Subscriptions were made in both Nations, The Adventurers were
pleased to choose me out of many much more worthy persons, to be Governor of
the Bank, and inveated me down to this Kingdom upon my own Charge and Expense,
my Reward to be one tenth part of what profits should be over and above 12 per
Cent: Interest first to the Subscrivers upon the Money paid into the seid
Stock.

Upon my Arrival, I immediately began by all ways that I could, to make the
People understand the Nature of the Bank, and by what Rules and methods I
should offer to their consideration further to proceed by; And in the whole, I
was plain and Candid without secret Equivacation or Noise.

The Principal Rules that I laid down, One was, That we must reduce the
Interest at least two per Cent: And that in all other respects we must make it
as easy for the Borrowers, as that they have liberty to pay in their Money at
any time they could after one Month, and also in parts. This was the Foundation
of all, and whatever the Baseness or Ignorance of some Men may insinuate, in
way of Reflection upon me, the Credit and Good of this alone will be Reputation
to me, in the Opinion of Good and Wise Men, above the Vain Aplause that other
Men have sought; And as this was the great thing I aimed at in setting up the
Bank, so I must also say, that it has been the greatest occasion and rise of
all those Designs and Attempts to hurt and ruin the Bank, for those whose
Advantages are by Interest of Money, even at my very first mentioning my
design of Louring Interest, insinuated among our own Friends by some plausible
Reasons: So that every one of the Directors here for some time, was of a
contrary Opinion to me in this particular. And since, several Sums of Money
have been paid into their hands, by Persons who have Borrowed of the Bank at
four per Cent. They take all ways whatsomever to defeat this Good and Great
Undertaking.

All the other Rules by which the Bank do Act are wholesome and plain, and not
only in the Notion, But in the practice of them; so that on all hands they are
approved of.

So soon as the Rules and Methods for carrying on the Bank, were agreed to by
the General Meeting of the Adventurers, The Directors proceeded to business,
and with such success that the Credit of the Bills, as fast as they were issued
out, obtained to a degree beyond expectation, and the Bank had Universal
Applause, except now and then an angry word from a few Persons, moneyed men,
for the reasons aforesaid.

The African and Indian Company at the same time, had Subscriptions to near
four hundred thousand pound Sterling. By (if I mistake not) about 1500 persons
some of the payments of the One Quarter part so soon as the Bank was open, were
made by Direction of the Mannagers of that Subscription in the Bank, Each
Society thanking the other, the One for the trouble it saved them, and the
Other for the confidence reposed in them.

And as for Personal Civilities between Mr. Paterson and my self, they were
such, as there was to my knowledge no thought or Prospect of any difference,
for I neither wrote nor spoke to any Body of what I observed, only took the
freedom of thinking. Till about the middle of May, There was a Rumor of a
design for setting up a Fund of Credit, by the African Company; I was indeed
surprised thereat, and when I had informed my self in the Matter, I could not
but exclaim against the folly and dishonesty of the design, and charge the same
upon the persons that should be the Contrivers thereof.

I gave my Friends in England two Posts after this discovery, an account of
what I had understood of this matter tho the Post before several Persons had
done the same, and they and all others who heard of it, were as much surprised
as my self, and some who had Subscribed to the Africa Company, forbid their
Agents paying any Money into the Stock, as unsatisfied and scandelized at this
design.

Most people here also, tho nowayes concerned in the Bank, but only in the
Africa Company, exclaimed against this new project as a matter unjust, unsafe,
and on all sides prejudicial, and as what was nothing like either what the Act
Imported, (being solely for a Foreign Trade and Comerce,) or what any of the
said Subscribers to the Indian and African Company had ever a thought of.

This resentment from all persons, made such an impression on the persons that
contrived and carried on this design of a Fund of Credit, that it was denied
and evaded by all manner of Art, and I was blamed for believing of it, because
the Directors of that Company, except four or five immediately concerned, knew
nothing of it, however they went on, and every day it became more and more
publict, and it is now the great and only subject of every ones thoughts and
discourse throughout the whole Nation.

It is urged, That Mr. Paterson designed a Bank even at first in the Indian and
African Act, and because the Act in the whole Scope thereof is wholly for
Trade, he would prove his Design by a Letter, which it will be necessary to
give some Account of.

Mr. Thomas Deans having given the Draught of the Act for the Bank, which he
had from me, unto some Lawyer, to put into the Scots Style, some One of the
Gentlemen, who came from London to Solitite the African Act, accidentally saw
the said Draught for the Bank on the Lawyers Dask, and being surprised that
such a thing should be without their knowing any thing of it, or from whom it
came, they immediately wrote to Mr. Paterson at London, thinking it must be
from him, he being so famous for setting up of Banks, and therein compleaning
of unkindness, that he did not acquaint them thereof. On the other side, Mr.
Paterson was as much surprised at their Letter, and returned Answer, that it
was all strange to him, but desired them by all means to make what interest in
Parliament they could against it, for that he designed a Bank as a part of the
Indian and African Business.

When I heard of this Letter, and what Mr. Pathrson had Answered to it, I
accosted him with a little sort of Briskness, and asked him how he could pretend
to know any thing of the nature of a Bank, if he thought it could be joined
with the other Business, and his Answer was, That he was only afraid that it
would prejudice the Indian Company; For otherwise he had nothing to say
against the Bank. And before I came for Scotland, some of his Friends desired
me that I would carry my self Civilly to him, and upon my Arival he came to me,
and Begged me Pardon for ever pretending against the Bank, and that what ever
had been, was only for fear it might interrupt and hinder the Subscriptions to
the Africa Company, but he saw it did not, and therefore wished all manner of
Success to it,

And now to paliate this unworthy Design of Setting up against the Bank, he and
his Friends, would pretend a Kind of Right, because he said in his Letter, as
is before narrated, but where the Sense of this Assertion made by himself, and
several Others is, I do not think any Body can see.

For if he had Originally a Design to make the Bank a part of his, I: and A:
Company, Wherefore did he not couch his Act something suteably? And why did he
not tell the Design to those, unto whom alone he discovered the African and
Indian Affair? And if he will say he did, tell them? Even his very Friends must
not believe him, For Mr. Chiselies Letters, and his Return speaks them
absolutely ignorant of it, and his own Confession to me in England and
Scotland, before Several, That he was only afraid the Bank might hinder the
Subscription to the African Company, declares the same.

It is further insinuated, as a Reason for this Design, that they have not
present use for their Money in their Trade, and therefore it ought not to ly
idle; And in this particular there will appear neither Sense nor good
Husbandry, if we consider that they allowed Twelve per Cent for prompt Payment,
to get the Money in.

But with this we must consider that at the same time they urge very
strenuously an other Argument, and which they pretend ought and shall prevail,
and in Truth is the greatest that they can offer, and is very popular, it is
this, that without a Bank or Fund of Credit, an Indian and African Trade cannot
be carried on, and that Companies of Trade in other places, have such Banks or
Funds of Credit; But this is both ridiculous and untrue; For do they not urge
it as an Argument for this design? That they have so much Money more than they
can use for some time, That it will be a great loss not to lend it out;
Besides, how can this Indian and African Trade so want a Bank joined to it for
the carrying it on, while but a small part of the Subscription is too much to
be employed for some considerable time; Are there not 1500 Adventurers to call
money from? And in such proportions and times, better than can be from persons
who they lend their Money to. Besides, their assertion is untrue: For Companies
set up for Trade and Comerce in other Countries, have not Banks and Funds of
Credit belonging to them; But the matter lies plainly here, that tho they have
nothing of Truth, Reason, or Honesty to help them on in this Bank project; Yet
they have this great advantage, that the African and Indian Trade is of such
Value and Esteem, in the Opinion even of all Men in General in this Kingdom;
That whateven is offered by Mr. Paterson to further it, is received with
applause, without any inquity into the Truth of what he says.

And upon this account, As a Fund of Credit is believed to foreward the Indian
and African Trade, it is a hard matter with many at this time to judge whether
all the Right of the Bank of Scotland, (so plainly founded by a most express
and Comprehensive exclusive clause for twenty one years) shall not be Invaded
and trampled upon, tho to the Eternal Scandle of the Nation. And all this I
say, because it is pretended (but not Proved nor can be) That a Bank or Fund of
Credit is necessary, and will encourage the Indian and African Trade.

When I came down to Scotland, which was the 18th of March I found Mr. Paterson
very popular, and in some proportion Mr. Smith and Mr. Lodge, and I found the
whole Nation so Universally in favor of this Indian and African Trade, that
although I observed several things in my Opinion very odd and strange, and heard
frequently things urged that I could no believe to be true, as that Business
and Trade is so and so carried on in other Nations; Yet I thought it both
Prudence and good Manners not to contradict the Common Opinion of the Nation;
And I had gone away as quietly, if Mr. Paterson had followed his own proper
business (tho by Ways and Methods right or wrong) by which he had so highly
raised the Expectation of the People; And from which business, without so much
as a thought of a Fund of Credit, the Subscrivers had their Hopes of Profit.

But since that, instead of going about their Foreign Trade, they first intend
to trip up the heels of another Company, so distinct from theirs, so fairly
established upon such good Methods and Rules, and upon a plain Right even in
the Opinion of all the World, I may very well be excused, Nay, it may be
thought my Duty, to expose the Evil of a Design so unjust, and every way
tending to Mischief and Confusion.

I am under a great Disadvantage, in what I can say, against the proceedings of
these Men, by the Base and False Reports that are raised of me. That I am a
Spy from the England East-Indian Company, and came down here to ruin the
Indian and African Company of Scotland, That I have a Pension or Fee from the
English East-Indian Company, to do what I can against the Scots Compay. The
bare Assertion prevails with many, but to give the Report Authority, It is
said, A Person of Quality had a Letter a little time after I came from England,
that I came down here to oppose the Scots Indian and African Company. They also
Report, That I should say, I would prevail upon the Parliament of England to
Ruin this Company.

Indeed I am ashamed that there should be any occasion to mention those very
ridiculous Stories; But such is the Zeal of the Nation to the Indian and
African Trade, that many are thereby prejudiced against me; And because they
cannot Answer what I have argued against their Design, they tell one another,
We must not believe what Mr. Holland says, for he is an English Man, and
engaged in a direct contrary Interest.

They report me in other Respects very falsely, and all to take away the Credit
of any thing I may say; And it is become dangerous for a Man to express his
Thoughts freely of this Matter, People being under more Awe and Fear, of giving
their Opinion of the African and Indian Company, both as to the Projectors, and
the Method they are fallen into. Then ever I remember the Dissentors in a
Former Reign, and the Jacobites in this, were of speaking against the
Government; Not that the Laws of the Kingdom do any way restrain People, but
the Danger is from an universal Prejudice, that is immediately contracted
against any that Speak or Do, what has but the least show of Discouragement to
this Foreign Trade, and this without ever Examining whither what is said, is
in Reality or not, the Truth of this, all the Nation are Witnesses of.

I never thought to have appeared in Print, I have not a capacity for it as
other men, nor do I affect noise or being taken notice of, and at this time, I
am under a further disadvantage, because the Business I came about, to wit, the
Bank, takes up my time; But since providence has engaged me in this public
Undertaking of the Bank; And that this other design has by the folly and
wickedness of some few persons, fallen so unhappily to interferr with the Bank,
and in such a nature, as that the Kingdom may be concerned thereby in its
greatest enterests, I reckon it my duty to do what I can to prevent the
mischiefs that this Nation will fall into, if this humor be not timely taken
off, and I heartily Pray GOD, to open the Eyes of these people, and incline
them to consider of what dangerous. Consequence it is to Invade a plain Right,
and bear down by noise and force, Truth, Reason, Order, and all that is Sacred.

I have many Witnesses of Honest and Worthy Men, That I have alwise thought it
the Interest of England to have this Nation Happy and Flourishing. And for what
is so basely insinuated and spread Abroad, of my being a Spy, and coming down
to dscourage this Company, is both false and ridiculous, and the fame are all
the other Aspersions.

For from my first being here, in all Companies I came into, I declared that I
was sworn to the English East Indian Company; That so no man might talk any
thing before me, that he thought I would or could take an advantage of against
their Indian and African Company, and I abhore the thoughts of so mean and base
an Undertaking, tho I have and ever will pay all manner of respect to that
Society of the English East Indian Company I have been concerned in.

And for what they untruely say, I spoke of making an Interest with the
Parliament, I am ashamed to think any such thing, both because I would not have
any Body believe, I am so vain to value my self at such a Rate; And also,
because I would have this People know, The Parliament of England is infinitely
too great to be influenced by any particular Person whatsover, and much less by
such a private Man as I am; And I am sure that I have shown these People that
make such a Bluster in the Nation, by my own Carriage, an Example of Humility,
and of the Duty and Respect due to the Government.

Nor do I value any thing of this kind with Respect to my self, since some of
these Men have had the Boldness, to cast as untrue a Reflection upon a Noble
Lord, the Earl Rochester, viz: That he should publictly Tare and Trample upon
the African and Indian Company's Act of Parliament; which was current among all
People, till my Lord Tarbat came from England, and did my Lord Rochester
Justice, by declaring how much of a contrary Temper his Lordship was of, with
Respect to this Kingdom.

I do indeed value the good Opinion of Men, but it is of Wise and Honest Men,
and not upon a mere Show and Noise, but from Fact from what I do that may
really deserve Esteem. The Business I only came here about, was to set up the
Bank, which is upon an Honest Foot, and carried on by plain and rational
Methods; Not by little Tricks, but in such a way, that all who know the Bank
and its Methods, do at first sight see the Reasonableness and Fairness of them,
and these exposed to all People from the very first, All having been prepared
with due Consideration by the Court of Directors, and then fairly Offered to
the Consideration of the General Metting for their Sanction.

It may be thought by some, that I say all this only to save the Bank, for that
I am so much concerned in the interest thereof, but I do not. I have other as
great reasons that I Write this for, and more Just and Hanourable than these
men will ever act upon, let them pretend what they will, Viz. The Honor and
wellsare of the Kingdom, which these Men wound, and if not stopped in their
proceedings, will lay in the dust.

I have all along said, The Parliament of this Kingdom will keep their Faith,
they know it is just, and they know it their intrrest so to do.

Specious pretenses will not prevail upon so Wise an Assembly, Order and Truth
must be mantained, else all will go to confusion, and the dearest interests of
the Kingdom will suffer to such a degree as will make the Nation despised, and
hated all the World over.

We have no reason to be afraid of the multitude of the Persons Concerned in
the Indian and African Company; For even if they were Judges, if they will but
consider things, they will abhore this attempt, invented and carried on by a
few, for a little pretendeds (tho not really one Farthing) profit, to the
hazard of the Honor of the Happiness of the Nation.

Those little tricks and evasions, calling it a Fond of Credit. and not a Bank,
the Clause in the Indian and African Act of improving their Stock to the best
advantage, and the nonsensical and untrue assertion, that a Foreign trade in a
joint Stock can not be carried on to Advantage, without a Bank or Fund of Credit
(which is not so in other Kingdoms; For Companis of Foreign Trade, borrow, not
lend Money) and all the rest of that Stuff will never prevail, and I am
thoroughly persuaded not only of this, but that a sad fate will attend these
men, who begin their Business with so many false and unheard of insinuations
and practices.

It is Untrue and Ridiculous, what they make this Nation to believe, of the
Ways and Methods of other Kingdoms, in carrying on a Foreign Trade, if
Enquiry be made. Where are the Companys for Foreign Trade that lend their
money? I Am sure there are none in England, but that is not to be valued, the
prejudice is so great to England, that their Example is not to be followed even
in Trade: But the Truth is, because it is nearest this Kingdom, and if they go
not further, they will be soon discovered. I dare not say, (tho its true) That
in Holland and other places, Companies for Trade are carried on without lending
money; And having Funds and Banks of Credit belonging to the said Companies, I
say it is giving them an Advantage, if I talk of what is done in these
Kingdoms, because, if Mr. Patenson will assert the contrary, it must be
believed. Never was such an implicit Faith before, in a Protestant Kingdom.

As for the Methods and Constitutions of Companies in my own Country; This
Kingdom, as I before hinted, is too much prejudiced by what the Parliament did
with respect to this design, to take any Example by them for carrying on the
African and Indian Trade, tho no Rational Man can see a Reason for it; I also
will be silent as to other things in this great Constitution, But so far I will
say, That let some Men but give themselves Names, they are thought to have
suitable Qualifications, as Mr. Lodge and Mr. Camphel esteemed among many the
Top Merchants in this great Affair. But why do I question these Men's Abilities?
Is it not possible that they should by inspiration, since they came from
England, have some Extraordinary Gifts for Trade, more than ever they had
before?

I cannot Argue upon this matter as I would, not only for want of time, but
also because I must not instance any thing how true so ever, of what is done in
other places, For then I am laid upon my back, because these Men will deny that
any such things are; And therefore I must discourse so, and instance things
that may here in this place be known to be true, from these Men's own
Confession, and from the Nature of the things themselves.

It is then known and confessed, That Mr. Paterson was to have a smmm of Money
for his Service to the Bank of England, He says, It was for being the Founder
and Setter up of the said Bank; It is also confessed, he had not the Reward.
The same in every particular of the Orphans Fund, Only in the last, he has
some Assurance to have 5 per Cent of the Profits: And further, It is known,
That there was an Agreement to have 2 per Cent out of the Stock of the African
and Indian Company, even without running any hazard, or staying for the Success
of the thing: And that he afterward relinquished this Bargain of the 2 per
Cent, this is all known and confessed.

Now let us Fairly, (tho not Fully) examine this matter, And First, What may be
thought the Reason that the Bank of England did not give Mr. Paterson the
Reward? It is said on one side, Because he basely betrayed them: But by him,
That they were unjust, etc. But which is to be believed, Whither the 26
Directors, Men of Estate, and Men of Esteem, or Mr. Paterson? Let every Body
judge as they please. I will only say in it so much, That he is believed in
Scotland, and they in England. And I will observe this, That what ever we
thought of Mr. Paterson in England, (and I speak it without Detracting from the
Merit of those Worthy Gentlemen of the Bank of England,) he is in this Kingdom
looked upon to be a Wiser Man, and is abundantly more Popular here, than all
that Court of Directors, or the Governor Deputy, and 24 Committee Men of the
English East-Indian Company are in England; Else why such a busle all the
Kingdom over, and so many New ways for the setting up a Company for a Foreign
Trade, and by an implicit Faith in Mr. Patersons Judgment and Honesty.

In the next place, we may enquire and tell what Opinion both Nations have of
his setting up the Orphans Fund, in this Kingdom it is all well, and an Act of
Merit and great ingenuity, But in England it is looked upon the Direct
contrary; And as one great occasion of the present miseries in the Kingdom; As
for my Particular Opinion in this Matter. I confess what some have charged me
with, that I should say, If I had a Brother that should set up one Bank against
another; and if I were Judge, I would hang him for his pains; Not that I would
charge the many Honest and ingenuous Gentlemen in that Fund, as Adventurers or
Directors of a Crime; For there was in England no Restriction by Law nor
Custom, but most of them were Ignorant of what the Consequences might be; But
if the Bank of England had been so happy to have had an Exclusive Clause, none
would have dared to Offer that Affront to the Parliament, so much as to talk of
setting up another Bank.

In the Third place, We may consider what Love and Zeal there was in this
Gentleman, and some of his Friends, for the good of his Country, in setting up
this Indian and African Company in Scotland; it is indeed thought a great Deal;
But even Scotland it self, who so Adore him, must confess that till he came
down here, the Great Certain and Present Reward (the Twelve Thousand pounds
Sterling out of the Subscription) was equal to the Zeal for his Country Men's
Good; And by others it will be believed, The Money was much more the Cause of
that Generous Passion: I cannot but smile, while I am writting this Paragraph,
how very well this is taken by many in this Kingdom, whom if they consider and
compare, Times and Things, its as plain as a Mathematical Demostration, that
there was self enough in the Case, And that he had carved for himself and his
Abettors, without any Hazard, a Bountiful Portion of the Six Hundred Thousand
Pound African Stock; But he has Relinquished, and stands now to the Justice
and Generosity of the Company, Or at least of the Counsel and Directions of the
Company; Of which I will say a Word or two, And it is,

That I observe, not a Voluntary Act as to the Will, that Mr. Paterson gave up
the 2 per Cent, but by a downright necessity, or else all must stop; And if I
mistake not in this particular, the Scots People were chiefly the Occasion of
his Relinguishing this certain Reward.

But now he thinks he has contrived matters for his advantage, better, He has
turned things into a never before seen method; And so many engagements are laid
upon particular persons, that those and he together hope to manage the Council
and Directors, so as the thing may some way make good the former disapointment,
but they are most of them Worthy Gentlemen, and will not long be carried away
by words without Correspondent actions.

Men will in time consider the Justice and Equity of things, and their interest
in Reality, The public and plausible name of a Foreign Trade, opposed so much
by the Parliament of England, and (tho untruely and foolishly said) by me on
purpose from the English East Indian Company, will not keep the Nation long in
a belief that this matter must be as great and profitable as is talked; For as
I said before, it is not only to drive a Foreign Trade and a great Trade, but
to drive a profitable Trade, that will be the advantage of this Kingdom, and
all the World will Confess, that such an undertaking should be begun and
carried on by Rules of Justice and Prudence.

But what is the very first scene of this project, Truly another Bank or Fund
of Credit, without any pretense to any such thing, and without the least
expectation of it from any of the Adventurers in the Indian and African
Company, there being not six Men among the whole Subscribers, that can say they
had a thought of any such design when they Subscribed, and upon the first
notice of it, there was an Universal surprise, These are bad beginnings of a
Foreign Trade, orany other Undertaking. I dare not write so freely, as if
people were not by false and base insinuations prejudiced against me; However I
will say, that there is in these men a great deal of folly and injustice, and
I have no reason to fear that it will be believed to be picque, what I have
said of these men, as some (by not knowing how things are carried on,) have
thought, I Thank GOD, as I did formerly to Mr. Paterson, forgive several
injuries, so I can and will do again, upon those terms that any Honest Man in
the World will judge I ought to do it.

I Appeal to those Gentlemen of the Subscribers only to the Indian and African
Company, whether Mr. Paterson and some others have not sometimes denied. and
sometimes evaded all these matters, and even the same days and Hours in
Company of those they thought would, like their project of a Fund of Credit
have confessed they would carry it on, and several persons of Honor as not
Countenancing it were made to think, that all would go over, and that nothing
should be done to interfer with the Bank of Scotland; Will any man then of
Sense and Honesty say, this proceeding is plain, Candid and fair. And will any
Wise and good Men think here is Honesty enough to carry on a business for the
Credit and good of the Kingdom.

Is there no Regard to Honor in this Nation, Nor to the other interests of it,
that all shall be thrown down by the popular Argument or assertion, that an
Indian and African Trade will be a good thing to the Kingdom.

I am told frequently that I lose ground in the opinion of many, and that
speaking against these proceedings endangers the safety of the Bank, I thank my
Friends for the Kindness intended thereby, but the Bank stands not upon such a
Foundation, as any thing of this nature can hurt it, it is a good thing to the
Nation for the Encouraging of Trade, for the Lands, and for the ease of people
in distress, and under heavy burdens of debt by Moneyed Men, to some of whom
we owe in a great measure the occasion of all this, and who are continually
laboring to destroy the Bank by this interferring these hallow on both sides,
and hope (and notwithout good grounds) That these unjust proceedings of Mr.
Patersons project for a Fund of Credit, shall bring matters to such a pass,
that no Trade shall be so great as Usury.

Are there no instances in this Nation of mischief by very much lesser
disorders in business than this is, and shall they be totally forgotten, nor
will there be no reflections made upon the distresses of England on this
Account, Goldsmiths and Banks, fighting one against another, its impossible but
men will see it their interest and duty to prevent the mischiefs in plain view.

I will not believe that the Crafty insinuations of these men will prevail in
the Parliament, in the Council, or in any Court of Justice, nothing of that
which they urge, and which they deceive so many Honest Gentlemen by, Viz: Have
they not power to lend their Money, may not people take their Notes, will top
the reason and Justice of those wife Assemblies, where is the Sense of giving
their Notes? And where is the profit, if it be not in the way of a Bank? And
would it not then be an affront to the Parliament, Council or Court of Justice
to think that these little tricks shall prevail?

Does not Religion prescribe Rules of Equity, and must all Principles which
even Natural Reason teaches, give way and be trampled under foot, upon
pretense that his Fund of Credit helps the Indian and African Trade? Or must it
be, because the Gentleman, upon having an account from Scotland of my draught
of the Act for the Bank, was pleased to write to Mr. Chiesly that he should
hinder its passing, for that he intended a Bank in his Africa Act? Or is it
because of the Clause in the Indian and African Act, that they may employ their
Stock to the best advantage.

If the Nation think the Indian and African Trade Valuable, and that Mr.
Paterson and his two or three friends are so necessary for the carrying it on,
let them proceed as they shall see cause, the Adventurers will be contented
very well, without their encroachment on others, and they will not desire to
gain by indirect practices, they never thought of this Fund of Credit that is
now trumpt up. Good GOD! where are these men's Honesty in this design? I will
say, let them pretend and Cant as they please, there will be no profit, but
loss and confusion in it; as may easily be proved, and shall be, if they
acknowledge in Print the true reason of their proceeding.

I hope my Friends and Partners in the Bank, will not fear any Danger, my loss
will be abundantly greater than any of theirs, And if these People should
prevail, which I cannot any ways be persuaded to think; Yet I will in such
case, show an Example of Patience, and Lament chiefly the sad Consequences it
will have upon the whole Nation.

The Breach of a Promise, Reflects a Scandal upon a private Person, so as to
make him Odious to all that believe it of him; What then will be the Shame and
Scandal to a Nation, If the Public Faith be broken? For as I hinted before in
this case, it is not the Persons injured, and the Persons that do the
injustice, that do only take Notice of, and will be the Judges of the Matter;
But all the People of the same Kingdom, and of the Neighbor Nations likewise,
let it then be far from us to think that the Parliament, Council or Court of
Justice will not protect us against all these Men's Arts and power.

Indeed I must confess that a blind Zeal for Religion, as among the Papists,
and many times Interest of State, has occasioned the breach of the Public
Faith, this Latter frequently among the Turks and Infidels. But it is hardly to
be found, that ever the Public Faith which has been given for (what we are
discoursing of) Trade, was ever broke even by the worst of Men. And if there
can be any Examples given in this kind, it is so far from being justified,
that (with one Voice) all People would cry out upon it as base and unjust, and
as what would infallibly be an absolute Bar and Discouragement to People for
ever after to Address the Public.

FINIS.

