The Judgment of the late LORD CHIEF JUSTICE Sir Matthew Hale, Of the Nature of
TRUE RELIGION, THE CAUSES of its CORRUPTION, And the Churches Calamity, by Men's
ADDITIONS and VIOLENCES: With the desired Cure.

In three Discourses, written by himself at several times.

Humbly Dedicated to the Honorable Judges and Learned Lawyers, who knew and
honored the Author, because in their true Sentiments of Religion, and its
Depravations, and the Cure, the welfare of England, under his Majesty, as well
as their own, is eminently concerned.

By the faithful Publisher, RICHARD BAXTER.

To which is annexed the Judgment of Sir Francis Bacon Lord Verulam St. Albans,
and Chancellor of England: And somewhat of Dr. Isaac Barrows on the same
subject.

Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be called the Children
of God.

Romans 14. 17, 18. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink but righteousness
and peace, and joy in the holy ghost. For he that in these things serves
Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men.

LONDON, Printed for B. Simmons at the three Cocks near the West End of S.
Paul's Church. 1684.

A PREFACE, With some Notes on these Discourses by the Publisher.
THe Publishing of these Discourses shows the great mutability of such weak
understandings as my own: Till very lately no Price could have hired me to
Publish them, lest it were a Violation of his Testament, which says that he
[would have no Writings of his Published, but what in his Life Time he gave to
be Published]; And he delivered not these in his Life Time to me. In my
ignorance this satisfied me. But lately opening the Case to some Lawyers of
known Eminence, Honor, and Integrity, they have convinced me that I cross his
Will, and the Common good, by my Suppressing them.

The Case is this: When he was gone from us in great Weakness to the Place of
his Death, in my last Letter to him, I told him how much good the Lord Bacon's
Book called Considerations of Matters Ecclesiastical had done, with many that
too justly suspect Clergy Contenders of Partiality; and that the Honor and
Just Esteem that God had given him with all sorts of Men he owed to the Service
of him that gave it: And therefore knowing the doleful Case of this Land, as
div vided and striving about Religion, I entreated him that he would Write his
Judgment briefly and freely of the Cause and Cure: The rather because his
Contemplations were so acceptable to many.

In his last Letter answering this, He professes that those Contemplations
were Printed without his Purpose, Knowledge, or Consent, but thanks God if they
did good, though beyond his intent. But though the rest be full of kindness, I
will not Publish it, lest really it should violate his Will. But when he was
dead, he who Published his Contemplations, showed me a Bag of his Mannuscripts,
small occasional Tractates, and gave me out these three, saying, that They were
directed [For Mr. Baxter] By which I knew they were by him given me in answer
to my foresaid Letter, which Craved the Publication of his Judgment of our
Divisions. But I conjecture they had been long before written by him at several
Times, and much to the same purpose; and so I suppose that he gave them me, and
left the use of them to my Discretion. Now say these Learned Lawyers, A man may
have several Wills in Writing in reference to several Things, not repugnant but
consistent, and all shall stand and be taken as his last Will, and may make
several Executors, and give them several distinct Powers. And clausula
generalis non porrigitur ad ea quae Specialiter nominantur, And this Direction
to you on that Occasion, makes it a Legacy bequeathed to you: And the
answering your Letter by it shows to what use: And his after likeing of the
publishing his Contemplations, shows that he was not utterly against
appearing in Print.

By this and much more they Satisfy me, that it was my Ignorance that made me
resolve to Conceal them.

I confess the Deliverer thought it best for me to make one Treatise out of
them all, Because being not intended for Publication at the Writing of them,
the same thing is repeated, especially in two of them. And that Repetition and
the Brevity made me long undervalue them.

But I take it as an intolerable piaculum to put any altering hand of mine to
the Writings of such a Man; which I profess I have not done in adding,
expunging, or changing one Word (save some false spelling of the Scribe: for
only the Latin Verses, and an enterlining or two, are his own hand; which I
know by many a Sheet that I have had from him.)

And as long as the Occasion of the Writing them is known, I think it no
dishonor to them to have these Repetitions: At least not so much as my
alterations would be: Yea it is useful; first, as sully showing the Readers,
that these are no hasty crude conceptions, but matters that long and deeply
dwelt in his heart. 2. And Great matters, specially to dull or unwilling, or
negligent Readers or hearers, must be often repeated; for a Transient touch
passes away from such without any Effect. O that the matter of these three
Papers were Written and spoken an hundred times, if it would make Rulers, and
Teachers, and People once truly to consider and receive them as they deserve.

Yet upon often perusal I find that the Repetition is joined with variety of
inference and Application: And he has too Queasy a Stomach that will Nauseate
them in so short discourses on so great a Subject, so necessary to a People
dissolving by wilful Divisions, by the delusion of Abaddon that is commonly
Painted with a Cloven Foot.

I shall add the Contents for the Readers help. But I shall not presume to
animadvert on the matter, save in these few Notes.

1. Tract. 1. page 3. I suppose by [Common assistances] he means not that
which All men have: But which is not Miraculous, and all that rightly seek may
hope for.

P. 7. Some of the Controversies which he Judged undeterminable, I have Cause
to think he at least came nearer to satisfaction in, after the Writing of these
Papers, as he signified to me on some Discourse, specially after the reading my
Catholic Theology.

Ib. Among the Points not distinctly knowable without more Revelation than we
yet have of it, one is [what is the Real Consequence of the Baptism of Infants
or its Omission]. But the Act of Uniformity Ejected all the Ministers of
England, that would not publicly, declare that they Assent and Consent, that
[It is CERTAIN BY THE WORD of God, that Infants baptized, dying before actual
Sin, are VNDOVBTEDLY saved] (none excepted). Had the Convocation but cited that
Word of God that says this, this Good man might have been kept from taking
that as unknowable, which every Conforming Minister in the Church is Certain
of, as an undoubted Article of Faith. And it would have been a great kindness
to the silenced Ministers.

Page 11. His preference of Episcopacy before all other Governments, was his
real Judgment. But it was its Essentials and not all the Additionals that he
meant. For to my knowledge he would have been glad of the Primitive Model of
Bishop Usher, (Who was his much valued friend).

In the 3d. Tract. Page 17. the Scribe left an A -- for a word omitted, and I
durst not supply it by Conjecture.

Who the Authors are that he so much blames, specially the Dialogist, few will
doubt, but I will not name, because by the Report of his good Preaching and
Life, I cannot but hope that he Repents of it.

There is one S T. that in an Invective against the Protestant Reconciler (a
Book like this) and against Dr. Stillingsleet, insinuates that I am not to be
believed in my Report elsewhere given of Judge Hales words, that [ A new Act of
Uniformity must heal England, etc. In these three Treatises this incredulous
man may see much more than that, which may expugne his Unbelief: And lest any
accuse me of Forgery, I hope to preserve the Manuscripts, and doubt not but the
Lady Hale or Mr. Stevens has a Copy of them. And because this Reverend Enemy
to the Reconciler, (pleading for their Excommunication) was a Son of a Reverend
Nonconformist (deceased) and lived sometime with me, at Kiderminster, and
frequently walked with me, and therefore may be thought to have known my
incredibility; I ask him, why in all that time, [if he knew me to be a Lyar]
would he never once tell me of it.

I take [Cursed be the Trimmers] and [Blessed are the Peace-makers] for direct
contraries: And Christ to be Wiser and more credible than all the Enemies of
Peace.

R. B.

THE CONTENTS Of the first Discourse.
THE use of Religion: By what means God made it so common. p. 1. How perfected
by Christ. p. 2. And why. 1. To recover his honor to God. 2. To bring man to
Happiness. 3. For the right Government of man. p. 16. The few plain, easy parts
of Religion. Comfortable Consectaries. p. 4, 5. How Religion is corrupted and
changed in the World. 1. By the subtilties of Scholastic Learned men. p 5. 1.
By their disputes about unnecessary and unknowable things: Instances. p. 6. 2.
And of Lower, yet uncertain points. p. 7. How safe the Religious are without
them. p. 8. 3. Casuists corrupting Morals. p. 9. 2. By turning Religion into
Politic Contrivances for wealth and power. Instance in Princes. 2. Specially
in the Roman Church. p. 9. 3. Instance, in Forms of Church Government and
Ceremonies. 1. Overvalued. 2. Over opposed p. 12. 13. 14. 4. Disputes between
Calvinists and Arminians: of old, about Easter, etc. p. 15. 5. Contention about
trivial matters: Diverse Instances, p. 16. 17. Men's overdoing for these
lamented. p. 16. 17. How different Religion is from all these men's Additions.
The Causes of these Errors. 1. The weaknesses of some Conscientious Persons,
deserving Compassion, tenderness, and Love, rather than severity or Contempt.
p. 22. 2. Some to get preferment and favor with great men. 3. Some for Gain.
4. Most from over-fondness of their own inventions. 5. An affectation of
Discrimination and singularity by outward Badges. p. 24. etc.
The Contents of the Second Discourse.
THE principle of Religion small, yet pregnant and productive. p. 1. Religion
is best in its SIMPLICITY and PURITY: But hard to be kept from corruption by
Additions. p. 2. What these corrupting Additions are. 1. Reducing it to gratify
sense: A common corruption. p. 3. 2. Additions from men's accidental
inclinations. Instances. 1. Philosophers mix their Natural Philosophy with it.
2. Behmen makes it Chimical. 3. Socinians subject it to their Reason. 4. Some
Physicians mix corporal Constitution. 5. Metaphisical men make it
unintelligible by Subtilties. p. 4. 6. Politicians, and Statesmen, and Papists
Hierarchy make it but an Engine of Policy. p. 5. 7. Politic Discontented men
manage it to get a Party against the State. p. 6. The violent Zeal of such
Corrupters, Papists, Reformed Episcopal Clergy, Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, etc. p. 7. Instances doctrinal. p. 8 3. Lawful Additions sinfully
managed. Reasons to prove them convenient. p. 9. Cautions to be used in them.
1. That they be not numerous. 2. Nor superstitious. 3. Decent, not Powpous. 4.
Not continued for their antiquity, when they become unseasonable or hurtful. 5.
Not urged with rigor and too much severity against Conscentious refusers. An
objection of the urgers answered. 6. Still remember that Religion is quite
another thing. p. 12. What is true Religion, and who are religious, and who
not, p. 13.
The Contents of the third Discourse.
WHat the Christian Religion is, and what men true Christians are, p. 1. But
many Additions in all ages have been made to it, by diverse sorts, for diverse
designs and ends. Some by the authority of great Names, some by insensible
gradations, some by supposed Congruity, some as for Order and Decency, some for
discrimination of Parties, some for Political Ends, emergent occasions, Civil
or Ecclesiastical Sanctions, etc. And the greatest Fervor and Animosity of men
commonly laid out on these additions, by some for them, by others against them.
The unhappy Consequents. p. 4. 1. Diversion from the true nature and use of
Religion, by Zeal for entire Conformity to these additions or against them. 2.
And so the Fervor of men's Spirits let out the wrong way. p. 5. 3. Hence come
Schisms and Factions, and Personal Animosities, discriminations,
Censoriousness, estrangedness by ill advancing these opinions and little
things. 4. The Bond of Charity broken, Severity, Persecution, Implacableness,
endeavoring to supplant and disgrace Dissenters, worse scorns, reproach and
vilifying than between Christians and Turks. p. 6 5. Increase of Atheism and
Contempt of all Religion; while preachers go so much against their Doctrine; As
if Religion wereof no more Moment, and of no better Effect than these
Additions, p. 8. The causes of this sad distemper, 1. Self-love and fondness
for that which is our own. 2. Pride, and Reputation. 3. Plain and Pure Religion
unsuitable to men's Curiosity and appetite. 4. They must have somewhat that is
pleasing p. 9. 5 Contrariety and Jealousy of men herein concerned; Specially
between Power and Conscience: Both plead Gods name, and neither will yield. p.
10. 6. Specially not dealing meekly and in Love with one another. But by
Passion, Violence, and Bitterness, rendering each other odious, scoffing,
catching Arts, misinterpreting each other; Disingenuous quotations, etc. p. 11.
These are contrary to Christianity. p. 12. The sad proof: 1. From such as
Martin Mar-prelate, etc. on one side, and Epithets of Antichristian,
Babylonish, Idolatrous, given to Bishops and Liturgy. 2. On the other side,
Ministers should cashiere these black Auxiliaries, or else profess that it is
not Christ's Cause that they plead, but their own. p. 13. A sharp reproof of
some late Writers against Dissenters, specially the Dialogist, as heinously
abusing Scripture and Religion: far worse than Ben. Johnsons profane Play. The
ill Effects. 1. It makes differences unreconcileable 2. It disadventages their
Cause and Persons that use them with sober men. 3. It exposes Religion it self
to the derisiof Atheists, and increases such. More of this evil with a
Concluding Counsel, to use more Temperance, Prudence, and Moderation in
Contests about the Circumstantials of Religion, p 20. 21.
The Contents of the Additional Testimonies.
1 THe Lord Bacons words in his Advertisement of the Controversies of the
Church of England. 2. His words in his Considerations for better Pacification
and Edification of the Church of England (Lest the Reader accuse me of omitting
any part, I had rather he would read all those two Treatises himself, than
those Scraps) 3 Animadversions of the Transcriber. 4. Some passages of Doctor
Isaac Barrow.
PART. I. OF RELIGION. The Ends and Uses of it, and the Errors of Men touching
it.
TRUE Religion is the greatest Improvement, Advantage, and Privilege of Humane
Nature; and that which gives it the noblest and highest Pre-eminence above
other visible Creatures.

We may observe in many Bruit Beasts and Birds admirable Instincts,
Dexterities, and Sagacities; and in some of them some dark resemblances of
Reason, or Ratiocination: But Religion is so appropriate to the Humane Nature,
that there are scarce any sort of Men, but have some Religion: Nor do the most
subtle or sagacious Bruits afford any signs thereof, as communicated to their
Natures.

It is one of the chiefest Mercies and Blessings that Almighty God has
afforded to the Children of Men, and that which signally manifests his
Providential Care toward and over them, that in all Ages and among all Nations
he has given to them some Means and Helps to discover unto them, though in
different Degrees, some principal Sentiments of true Religion: 1. By the secret
Characters, and Impressions, and Structures thereof in their Minds and
Consciences. 2. By his Glorious and admirable Works, commonly called the Works
of Nature. 3. By signal Providence, and Providential Regiment of the World. 4.
By raising up Men in all Ages of great Wisdom, Observation, and Learning, which
did instruct the more ignorant in this great Concernment, the Rudiments of
Natural Religion. 5. By Traditionary Transmission of many important Truths and
Directions of Life, from Ancestors to their Posterity, and others: Though in
process of time evil Customs and evil Men did in a great measure impair and
corrupt the Sentiments and Practices of Men, notwithstanding these helps.
Therefore the same Mercy and Goodness of God, for the preservation and
propagation of the true Religion, was pleased to substitute a more fixed and
permanent means; namely, the Holy Scriptures, or Divine Revelations, committed
to Writing in the Books of the Old and New Testament. Though the Religion
delivered in both Testaments, be in substance the same; yet the true Religion
was more fully, and plainly, and distinctly delivered by Christ and his
Apostles in the New Testament, together also with some additional Instructions,
for the better preservation and propagation thereof to Mankind, and diverse
additional Evidences to prove and manifest the truth of this Religion, to
procure its belief and acceptance: As the Birth, Miracles, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ Jesus, the great Reformer of the Jewish,
and great Institutor of the Christian Religion, so called from Christ that
taught and asserted it. The Christian Religion is the most perfect Rule of our
Duty to God, our selves, and others; and was designed principally for these
Great Ends.

1. To restore to the Glorious God, the Honor, Duty, and Obedience of his
Creature, Man; teaching him to Know, to Glorify and Serve his Creator, to be
Thankful to him, to submit to his Will, to obey his Law and Command, to be
thankful for his Mercies, to acknowledge him in all his ways, to call upon him,
to Worship him, to depend upon him, to walk sincerely in his sight, to admire
and adore his Greatness and Goodness in all his works, especially in the great
work of the Redemption of Mankind by his Son Christ Jesus.

2. To enable Man to attain everlasting Happiness, the perpetual Vision of the
Glorious God, and to fit and prepare him to be a partaker of the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light and Glory.

3. To compose and settle Mankind in such a decent and becomingrectitude,
order, and deportment in this World, as may be suitable to the Existence of a
Reasonable Nature, and the Good of Mankind: Which consistsprincipally in a
double relation: 1. To a Man's self, Sobriety. 2. To others, which consists in
those two great Habits or Disposition beneficent to Mankind, viz.
Righteousness, or Justice and Charity, or Love and Beneficence.

These three Great Ends are succinctly delivered, Tit. 2. 11, 12. For the Grace
of God, that brings Salvation has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and
Godly in this present World. Here we have these three Ends of Christian
Religion. 1. Godliness, or our Duty to God. 2. Salvation, or our own
everlasting Happiness. 3. Sobriety, Righteousness, which also includes
Charity, a part of Evangelical Righteousness.

And because Christian Religion was intended and instituted for the good of
Mankind, whether Poor or Rich, Learned or Unlearned, Simple or Prudent, Wise
or Weak, it was fitted with such plain, easy, and evident Directions, both for
things to be known, and things to be done, in order to the attainment of the
End for which it was designed, that might be understood by any Capacity, that
had the ordinary and common use of Reason or Humane Understanding, and by the
common assistance of the Divine Grace might be practiced by them.

The Credenda, or things to be known or believed, as simply necessary to those
Ends, are but few, and intelligible, briefly delivered in that Summary of
Christian Religion, usually called the Apostles Creed.

The Agenda, or things to be done or forborne, are those few and excellent
Precepts, delivered by Christ and his Apostles, in that little Book of the New
Testament; and yet even the tenth part of that little Book will contain all the
Precepts of Christian Duty and Obedience contained in that Book: And in brief
the Baptismal Covenant, as it is contained in the Liturgy, and Explanation
thereof in the Church Catechism used among us, together with the Precepts of
the Decalogue, contain in effect a Summary or brief Epitome of our Christian
Duty.

And certainly it was necessary and becoming the Wisdom of the most Wise God,
that that Religion and Doctrine, which equally concerned Men of all Kinds and
Capacities, should be accordingly accommodated, as might be useful for all. If
the Doctrine or Precepts of Christian Religion should have been delivered in
over sublime or seraphical expressions, in high Rhetorical Raptures, in
intricate and subtle Phrases or Style, or if it should have been surcharged
with multitude of particulars, it would have been like a Sealed Book, to the
far greatest part of Mankind, who yet were equally concerned in the Business
and End of Religion, with the greatest Philosophers and Clerks in the World.

Upon what has been said, we may therefore Conclude,

1. That there is not, nor indeed may not be any great difficulty in the
attaining of a true saving Knowledge of Christian Religion.

2. That the Duties of Christian Religion are not of so vast an Extent, but the
Knowledge of them may be also attained by an Ordinary Capacity willing to Learn.

3. That Considering that God Almighty is never wanting with his Grace to
Assist those that sincerely endeavor and Desire to Obey him and Serve him, it
is not so Difficult a Business to perform an Evangelical Obedience to the
Precepts of the Gospel, I say an Evangelical Obedience, though not a Perfect
Obedience; an Obedience that is Sincere, though many times Weak, and failings,
which nevertheless are forgiven, and their Sincere though Imperfect Obedience
accepted by Almighty God through the Merits and Intercession of Christ, and our
own Humiliation and sincere Repentance for our failings.

And, 4. That when all is done, in this Belief and this Obedience Consists our
Christian Religion. This is the One thing Necessary, the Magnum Oportet, which
is of highest Concernment and greatest Importance to Mankind.

But now if we do but look about us in the World, and observe and consider the
Matters, wherein Men for the most part do place, Religion we shall find quite
another kind of Rate and Nature of Religion than what Christ Instituted or
intended, and yet all veiled and shrouded under the Name of Christian Religion;
and greater weight and stress laid upon them than upon the True, Real, grand
Imports of Christian Religion.

1. I shall begin with the Subtilties of great Scholars, Schoolmen, and
Scholastic Divines. These have turned Christian Religion into a most Curious
and difficult Speculation, and that which was designed by Christ Jesus as a
plain Direction to every Capacity, to be a Guide to a Righteous, Holy, and
Sober Life here, and to attain Everlasting Life hereafter, they have [made] a
mere exercise of Wit, and a Piece of greater subtilty than the abstrusest
Philosophy or Metaphysics. And this they have done principally these ways:

1. By Disputes about Questions, that, as they are not in themselves Necessary
to be known, so they are in their own Nature Impossible for Humane
Understandings to determine: As for instance; many, if not all, the Points
controverted between the Arminians and Calvinists, as touching the manner of
the Decrees of God, what kind of Influence he has upon the Wills of men. The
manner of the Divine Knowledge of things Future, Contingent, or Possible. The
Resistability or Irrisistability of Divine Grace. The Nature of Eternity, and
Infinitude, and Indivisibility. The manner of the Existence of the Three
Persons in the Unity of Essence. The Nature of Angels and Spirits; the Manner
and Degrees, and Method of their knowledge of things; their several Ranks and
Orders; and infinite more Speculations and Disputes of things that do not in
their own Nature fall under the discovery of a Humane Understanding, by the
ordinary Course of Ratiocination, and are impossible to be known further than
they are distinctly revealed by Almighty God, and as it were industriously kept
Secret by Almighty God, because they are not of use to Mankind to be known. It
is far more possible for a Child of three years old to have a true Conception
of the most abstruse Points in Philosophy, or in the Mystical Reasons of State
or Politic Government of a Kingdom, than for the Wisest man that ever was,
without Revelation from God, to have any tolerable Conception or Notion of
things of this Nature with any tolerable Certainty or Evidence.

2. Again there are other Points disputed which are of a lower allay, and yet
not to be distinctly known without more clear Revelation than we yet have of
it, nor yet of any Necessity for us distinctly to know: As for instance,
Concerning the Nature and Manner of Transmission of Original Sin; How far the
sins of immediate or remote Parents affect their Posterity with Guilt or
Punishment; The Origination of the Humane Soul; How far the Efficacy of the
Sacrifice of Christ was intentionally for all Men; Concerning, the Means of
Communication thereof to Infants, Idiots, and the invinsible Ignorant; What is
the real Consequence of Baptism of Infants, or its Omission; How far the Will
of man is Operative to his Conversion, or Perseverance; Wherein the formal
Nature of Justification Consists; How far forth Faith singly is sufficient for
it, without Sanctification and Habitual Holiness at last, and how far forth the
Sincere Love of God by a person invinsibly ignorant of many or most Points of
Christian Religion is sufficient thereunto; Concerning the Estate of the
separate Soul before the last Judgment, and how far it enjoys the Beatifical
Vision before the Resurrection.

Disputes touching these and the like difficult Questions, have blown up men's
Fancies with Speculations, instead, of filling their Hearts with the true and
genuine Effects of Christian Religion.

It is true, that Physicians and Naturalists do and may make Inquiries into the
Method and Progress of Generation, and Digestion, and Sanguification, and the
motions of the Chile, the Blood, the Humors: For, 1. They have means of access
to the discovery thereof by Dissection and Observation. And, 2. It is of some
use to them in their Science, and the Exercise thereof. But when all is done, a
man of a sound Constitution digests his Meat, and his Blood Circulates, and his
several Vessels and Intrails perform their offices, though he know not
distinctly the Methods of their Motions and Operations. But these Speculations
abovementioned, in Points of Divinity, as they are not possible to be
distinctly determined with any certainty, so they are of little use to be known.

If the heart be seasoned with the true knowledge of the things that are
revealed, and with the Life of the Christian Religion, and the love of God, it
will be effectual enough to order his Life, and bring him to Everlasting
Happiness, though he be not, like an exquisite Anatomist, acquainted with a
distinct Comprehension or Knowledge of the several difficult Inquiries of this
Nature. Believe what is required by the Word of God to be believed, and do your
Duty, as by that Word is directed; so that the Life of Religion, and the love
of God be once set on foot in the Soul, and there nourished, and commit your
self to the Faithfulness and Goodness of God, and this will be effectual to the
great End of Religion, though all these Disputes be laid aside.

3. Again, A Third mischief of Scholasticks, is in relation to Practicks: 1.
Some Casuistical Divines have so distinguished concerning Religious External
Duties, that they have left little Practical Religion or Morality in the World,
and by their subtle curious Distinctions, have made almost every thing Lawful,
and with the Pharisees, in the time of our Savior, have made void the Laws of
God, (and of Man also) by their Traditions and Distinctions: So that Religion
toward God, and all Righteousness and Sobriety, is so thin and narrow, and
subtle, that by their Doctrine of Probability, and Casuistical Distinctions,
all the Bones thereof are loosned. It would be too long to give Instances in
particular: The late Velitations in France between some of the Popish Priests
and Jesuits furnish the World with instances enough of this kind.

2. The Second Instance is this, The turning of the greatest part of Religion
into Politic Contrivances, for attaining or upholding Power, Wealth, or
Interest.

There have been Instances many in this kind among Secular Princes and States.
This was the act of Jeroboam to set up Idolatrous Religion in Samaria, for
preventing a return of the Ten Tribes to the House of David. And we may observe
it in most of the Religion established by Heathenish Princes, which was so
ordered to accomodate their Interest, though to the extreme corrupting of
Natural Religion.

But there is not so eminent an Instance thereof in the whole World, as that of
the Ecelesiastical State of the Church of Rome, who have corrupted, as much as
in them lies, the most pure and innocent Religion that ever the world knew,
namely, the Christian Religion, by distorting it to Ends of Wealth and Power,
and appendicating to it certain new Doctrines and Practices merely to those
Ends. And not only so, but have laid the greatest weight of Religion in the
Observation of these Politic Appendicatims; so that a man, that either
questions or not observes these Politic Additaments, runs as severe a Censure
and Danger among them, as he that denies the most unquestionablePrinciples of
Christian Religion. Such are their Doctrines of the Popes Supremacy, the Popes
Infallibility; the necessity to Salvation to be of the Romish Church, the
Adoration of Images, Saints de parted, and Angels; the Veneration of Relics;
the Doctrine of Purgatory, Indulgences, and the Church Treasury of redundant
Merits; the Doctrine and Practice of Dispensations and Indulgences; their
Canonization of Saints; their Pilgrimages, numerous Ceremonies, Theatrical
Spectacles; their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and diverse other
Superadditions and Appendications to Christian Religion, which any person, not
captivated by them, may with half an eye perceive to be invented and continued
merely for the support of the Grandeur of an Universal Monarchy, which they
miscall The Church, and for the amassing of Wealth and Power for the support of
it, as might most easily be evinced by the particular Examination of all those
Politic Appendixes.

And yet let any man observe it, he shall find as great a fervor for the
upholding of these Doctrines and Practices, and as great a jealousy of the
least breach made upon them, as if the whole Concern of Christian Religion, and
the Salvation of Souls lay in their Belief and Observance.

3. The third Instance is in relation to the Forms of Church Government and
Ceremonies. That Ecclesiastical Government is necessary for the preservation of
Religion, is evident to any reasonable and considerate man: and that the
Episcopal Government constituted in England, is a most excellent Form of
Ecclesiastical Government, and exceeds all other Forms of Ecclesiastical
Government, may be easily evinced; and that it is the best adapted to the Civil
Government in this Kingdom, is visible to any intelligent person: And yet I do
not think that the Essence of Christian Religion Consists in this or any other
particular Form of Government. It is a great help to the preservation of it in
its Purity and Unity, and may be well called Sepimentum Religionis Christianoe,
as the Jews call their Oral Traditions Sepimentum Legis, the Fence of the Law.
But a man may be a good and excellent Christian under this or any other Form of
Ecclesiastical Government, nay in such places where possibly there is no
settled Form of Ecclesiastical Government established.

But if we observe many persons in the world, we shall find some so highly
devoted to this or that particular Form of Government, as if all the weight of
Christian Religion lay in it: Though the wise and sober sort of Conformists
know and profess this, yet there be some rash people that will presently
Un-church all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas which are not under
Episcopal Government. That if they see a man, otherwise of Orthodox Principles,
of a Pious and Religious life, yet if scrupling some Points of Ecclesiastical
Government, though peaceable, they will esteem him little better than a Heathen
or Publican, a Schismatic, Heretic, and what not: On the other side, if they
see a man of great fervor in asserting the Ecclesiastical Government,
observant of External Ceremonies, though otherwise of a loose and dissolute
life, yet they will be ready to applaud him with the Style of a Son of the
Church, and upon that account overlook the Miscarriages of his life, as if the
Essence and Life of Christian Religion lay in the bare asserting of the best
Form of Ecclesiastical Government.

On the other side, there is as great an Extremity of the other hand: there are
many indiscreet persons, as well Divines as others, that having either by their
Education, or by Conversation with Dissenters, or possibly to gain a Party,
taken upon them the Patronage or Asserting of some other Form of
Church Government, either Presbyterian or Independent, or some thing framed by
their own invention, presently cry down the Established Government of the
Church, as Antichristian or Popish, and cry up that which they have thus
espoused as the only true Christian Regiment instituted by Christ; and
presently among them, and their Followers, this is made the discriminative Mark
of a True Christian. If they see a man Conformable to the Established
Government, though he be pious, sober, and truly Religious, yet they despise and
neglect him, censure him as a Formalist, and without the Power of Godliness:
But if a man will but revile the Established Government, and be bold against
it, cry it down, and cry up the New Institution into which they are listed,
though the man be Covetous, Uncharitable, Hard-hearted, Proud, Impetuous, and
possibly otherwise Loose in his Conversation, yet such a man shall be
cherished, applauded, and cried up for a Saint, a Precious Man, and Zealous for
the Truth.

And although Decent Ceremonies, that are for the Preservation of the Dignity
of Religion, and to keep due Order and Regularity, are not Essential Parts of
Christianity, nor were ever so esteemed by wise and sober men, and yet are of
use and convenience in the Church, nevertheless, we may easily observe among
men the same Extremes as are before noted: some placing the whole weight of
Religion in their strict Observance, and making them the principal, if not the
only Badge of a Son of the Church, hateing and despising those that scruple any
thing in them, or that do not come up in every punctilio to their Observance,
though they be otherwise sound in the Principles of Faith, pious and strict in
their lives, just and honest to all men, and sober, temperate and blameless.

On the other side, there be a sort of men that place the greatest stress and
discriminating Point of Christian Religion in opposing and decrying all
Instituted Ceremonies, though Innocent, Decent, and without any the least touch
of Superstition in them, yet these must be decried as Popish, Antichristian,
destructive of Christian Liberty, and the Party that with most boldness and
vehemence declaims against them, is valued by them as a most precious man, a
man of zeal and courage, and needs little else to justify and magnify him
with his Party.

On the other side, though a man be of an holy and conscientious life, sound in
Principles, sober, blameless, peaceable; yet if he observe these blameless
Ceremonies, though with great moderation and Charity to Dissenters, he shall be
slighted and undervalued, esteemed a Formalist, a Time-server, or at best, a
man wanting Courage, Zeal, Lukewarm, Timorous, and wanting the Power of
Godliness. Such wild and wrong Measures do men of Extremes on all hands take of
the true Essence and Ends of Christianity.

4. Again, even among Professors of the Protestant Religion, there are diverse
disputed and Controverted Points; as between the Calvinists and Arminians,
especially touching the Universality of the Redemption by Christ, Perseverance
and Falling from Grace; and almost every day there arise certain new Opinions,
some of greater importance, but very commonly of small and incnosiderable
moment; and these are taken up by the several Parties possibly agreeing in the
same Fundamentals of Christian Religion. And some times they are entertained by
a Party of men, because their Pastors are of that Opinion, or seem to be so;
though often they are taken up, or instilled into a Party, to make a
discriminative Mark betweeen Persons of several Congregations. And then it is
wonderful to see with what servour each Party maintains his Tenent, and as
great weight is laid upon it, as if the whole stress of Christian Religion, and
the Salvation of the Souls of men lay upon it; when God knows they are not of
any moment in it.

Such was the old Controversy between the Eastern and Western Churches about
Easter Day, and ancienter than that, in the Apostles times, about Eating of
meats offered to Idols, and among us at this day touching the five Arminian
Questions. And yet we shall see men as fervent and zealous about them, as
censorious of Dissenters from them, as fond of those of the same Opinion with
them, as if all the Articles of the Christian Faith were immediately concerned
in them; when all the while they are not of any moment to the Salvation of men,
nor of any concernment to the Christian Religion, or the Ends thereof, but are
only Artifices imposed upon men to hold up Parties, or to keep up some Man or
Parties Reputation; imaginations which men are fond of, because they are their
own, at least theirs whom they have in great Veneration or Esteem.

5. Again, the fond Mistakes of men in this kind, are observable in very slight
and trivial matters, which yet are entertained with a kind of Religious
Veneration, when they serve to hold up Parties, or as disciminations of their
Professions. Among the professed Monks and Friars they have certain Habits
assigned to several Orders, and as well anciently as now have several kinds of
Tonsures of their Heads, which they observe with great severity; and place much
Religion in them.

And even among the various Sects, or Persuasions among those that at least
abhor Popery, yet we shall find some such fond things upon which they lay a
great weight of their Religion: sometimes in very Looks and composing of their
Countenance; sometimes in the manner or Tone of Expressions; sometimes in
affected Phrases; sometimes in Gestures, sometimes in Habits and Dresses,
sometimes in use of Meats and Drinks of one kind or another. I shall give some
few Instances:

You shall have some that place a great point of Religion in forbearing the
eating of Flesh upon Frydays, or in the time of Lent, but yet indulge
themselves oftentimes in the eating of the choicest Fish, and the most costly
Diet of other Meats: Others again think they must needs go as far on the other
Extreme, Choosing those Seasons for Feasting upon Flesh, and think it acceptable
to God, because it runs counter to the other Exteme.

Again, a time there was when it was thought that long Hair was unbecoming
Professors of Christianity, and upon that account some did wear their Hair
short, even to extremity. But about the beginning of the late Wars, many took
up, as they thought, a more elevated way of Christianity, and as a Badg thereof
wore their Hair extreme Long.

The Conformists usually wear Gowns or Canonical Coats; Many of the
Nonconformists by way of Discrimination use other Habits.

The former officiate, as the Canons require them, in Surplices, and sometimes
with Hoods, and some are so taken with it, that they think the Offices want an
Essential Part when performed without it; some of the latter think the solemn
Ordinances are profaned by it, and rendered Superstitious.

But among all the differing Persuasions among us, there are none that give a
man more ample Evidence of Mistakes of this Nature, than those called Quakers,
who place a great part of their Religion in keeping on their Hats, in using the
words Thee and Thou, in stiling the Months and Days of the Week not according
to the usual Appellation, but the first, or second month, or day, in certain
Habits and Postures unlike other men; in Silent Devotions at their Publck
Meettings, in revileing and crying down the Established Ministry, Churches,
Sacraments, Lord's Day, and all manner of Forms, whether commanded or used by
others; in refusing to take an Oath when lawfully called thereunto; and some
such other singularities. Take away but these, and the like affected
Superadditions, the men are as other men, some indeed very sober, honest, just
and plain-hearted men, and sound in most, if not all the important Doctrines
and Practices of Christianity; others (as it happens in all Professions)
Subtle, Covetous, Uncharitable Tumultuous, Ignorant, proud Despisers of others,
Slanderers, and yet as long as they conform to their Sect in these impertinent
or unwarrantable singularities, they please themselves with the Style of the
People of God, and are for the most part esteemed such by those of that Sect.

By this little Survey, we may easily take an Estimate of the Mistakes of
Mankind, and even among Christians, touching the Mistakes in point of
Christianity and Christian Religion, and how common it is to misplace the Name
of Christian Religion and the Nature of it, and attribute it to such things as
in truth have nothing to do with it, but many times are directly contrary to it.

And yet even in these Impertinencies many men place the greatest moment of
their Religion, and have as great and many times a greater zeal and fervor for
them, than for the weighty Points and Duties of Christianity, and most of the
business of many men Consists in Velitations and Defenses and Invectives about
them; The Pulpits and the Press is engaged about them. Love, and Charity, and
even common Humanity, and mutual Conversation between Man and Man, Church and
Church, Party, and Party, is broken by the Mutual collisions and animosities
concerning them. So that (the Lord be merciful to us and forgive us) there is
as little love, and as great distance and animosity between many of the
Dissenting Parties among Protestants, touching these Matters, as there is
between Papists and Protestants, or between Christians and Infidels. And by
this means the true Life of Christian Religion, and that which was the great
End of its Institution, and the true genuine and natural Effect of it upon the
heart and soul, and course of life, is lost or neglected by them that profess
it, or disparaged among those that either have not entertained it, or at least
entertained it as they do the Customs of the Country wherein they are educated.
These men, when they see so much Religion placed by Professors of Christianity
in these things, which every intelligent man values but as Forms, or
Inventions, or Modes, or Artifices, and yet as great weight laid upon them, as
great fervor and animosity used for or against them, as almost for any Points
of Christian Religion, they are presently apt to censure and throw off all
Religion, and reckon all of the same make.

But when all is done, true Christian Religion is a thing of another kind of
Make, and is of another kind of Efficacy, and directed unto, and effective of a
nobler End, than those things about which, as above is said, men so much
contend, and that makes so great a bustle and noise in the world. As the
Credenda are but few and plain, so the Facienda, or things to be done, are such
as do truly ennoble and advance the Humane Nature, and brings it to its due
habitude, both to God and Man.

It teaches and tutors the soul to a high reverence and veneration of Almighty
God, a sincere and upright walking as in the presence of the Invisible,
All-seeing God: It makes a man truly to love, to honor, to obey him, and
therefore careful to know what his will is; it renders the heart highly
thankful to him, both as his Creator, Redeemer, and Benefactor: It makes a man
entirely to depend upon, to seek to him for guidance, and direction, and
protection; to submit to his Will with all Patience, and Resignation of Soul:
It gives the law not only to his Word and Actions, but to his very Thoughts and
Purposes, that he dares not entertain a very thought unbecoming the sight and
presence of that God to whom all our thoughts are legible: It teaches and
brings a man to such a deportment both of external and internal sobriety, as
may be decent in the presence of God and all his holy Angels: It crusheth and
Casts down all Pride and Haughtiness both in a man's heart and carriage, and
gives him an humble frame of soul and life, both in the sight of God and men:
It regulates and governs the Passions of the Mind, and brings them into due
moderation and frame: It gives a man a right estimate of this present world,
and sets the heart and hopes above it, so that he never loves it more than it
deserves: It makes the Wealth and Glory of this World, high Places, and great
Preferments, but of a low and little value to him; so that he is neither
covetous nor ambitious, nor over sollicitous concerning the advantages of it:
It brings a man to that frame that Righteousness, Justice, Honesty, and
Fidelity is as it were part of his Nature; he can sooner dye than commit or
purpose that which is unjust, dishonest, or unworthy a good man: It makes him
value the love of God and peace of Conscience above all the Wealth and Honors
in the World, and be very vigilant to keep it inviolably: Though he be under a
due apprehension of the love of God to him, yet it keeps him humble and
watchful, and free from all presumption, so that he dares not under a vain
confidence of the Indulgence, and Mercy, and Favor of God, turn aside to
commit or purpose even the least injury to man, he performs all his Duties to
God in sincerity, and integrity, and Constancy; and while he lives on Earth,
yet his Conversation, his Hopes, his Treasure, and the flower of his
Expectation is in Heaven, and he entirely endeavors to Walk sutably to such a
Hope: Insum, it restores the Image of God unto the Soul in Righteousness and
true Holiness.

Compositum jus, fasque animi sanctosque recessus mentis, and incoctum generofo
pectus honesto.

These, and the like to these, are the Ends, Design and Effect of True
Christian Religion, truly received and digested in the Soul. And certainly any
man that duly confidereth, will find that they are of another kind of Nature
and Value, than those sublime Speculations, Politic Constitutions, Forms or
not Forms, affected Singularities, upon which many lay the weight of Religion,
and for and touching which there is so much Contention and Animosity in the
World. So that methinks men in this regard are like to a Company of foolish
Boys, who when the Nut is broken, run scrambling after the pieces of the Shell,
and in the mean while the Kernel is neglected and lost.

Now touching the Reasons or Causes of these Misapprehensions touching
Religion, they are various: some deserve compassion, and others are more or
less excusable, according to their several kinds: 1. Some persons truly
Conscientious and zealous of any thing that they judge to be displeasing to
God, as not agreeable to his Will, and observing the many Corruptions, that the
Romish Church have brought into the Worship of God, are very suspicious of any
thing that may look, as they think, that way; and therefore, though they are
otherwise men of sound and Orthodox Principles, and of a truly righteous,
sober, and pious Life, yet perchance are transported somewhat too far in
scrupling or opposing some Ceremonies or Forms; And possibly their Education
and Conversation with men of such Persuasions have confirmed them in it, so
that they do not oppose out of a frowardness or peevishness of Mind, or out of
Pride, or a Spirit of Opposition, but in the sincerity and simplicity of their
hearts, and out of a tenderness for the Honor of God. These, though they are
or may be mistaken in their Persuasions, yet certainly deserve Compassion,
Tenderness, yea and Love also, much rather than Severity or Contempt.

2. Others again, observing that certain Modes and Forms, and the rigorous
Observations of them, are the common road for attaining Preferments or Favors
of great Persons, upon that account exercise a mavelous fervor of mind for
them, and a vigorous opposition of all that come not up to them in every
punctilio, that they may thereby be taken notice of, and employed as useful and
fit and vigorous Assertors and Instruments for this purpose.

3. Many times Gain and Profit is the End and Design of many Practices and
Positions appendicated to Christian Religion, as is before observed in the
Romish Church; and it is easily observable that Interest, Profit, and Temporal
Advantage have a strong bias upon Men's Affections, and are dearer to them than
the Truth of Religion, and carry men more vigorously in their upholding and
maintenance, than Religion it self does: And because the presence of zeal for
Religion carries a fair Plausibility with all men, therefore those very things
that are but Engines of Gain and Profit are Christened with the specious Name of
Religion.

It was the making of Silver Shrines for Diana, the Art whereby the Artificers
got their living, that made the Outcry, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

4. Again, it is very certain that mankind has a huge kindness and partiality
for matters of their own Invention, and set a greater rate upon them, than upon
other matters handed over to them by others: And hence it comes to pass that a
new Fancy or Opinion, a new Form of Worship, Discipline, or Government that,
any man has invented or studied out, is to such a man ordinarily of greater
value and moment than it deserves, and shall be maintained with greater zeal,
Fervor and Animosity, than Points of greater truth and moment, as if the great
moment and weight of Religion and Christianity lay in it, which is in truth
nothing else but the Effect of Self-love and Self-conceit.

5. Again, though by Nature Man be a sociable Creature, yet there is in most
Men a certain Itch of Pride, which makes them affect a Discrimination from
others, and to become a kind of separated Party more refined than the rest of
the same Common Profession.

I do remember in the beginning of our late Troubles, the only Party that
visibly appeared, were some that desired some Reformation in Church Matters:
And when that Party had obtained, under the Name of the Presbyterian Party, in
a very little while there arose a more sublime Party of men, called the
Independent or Congregational men, which much despised the former, as not
arrived to a Just Measure of Reformation. Shortly after that there arose a kind
of Lay Party, which as much undervalued the Independent, and indeed the
Ministry in general.

After that there arose a Party discriminating it self from all the former,
viz. the Quakers. These various Parties were as so many Subdivisions and
Rectifications of what went before.

Now the Means of holding up this Discrimination of Parties are certain select
Opinions, Practices, or Modes, which are like the Badges or Colors that give
each Party his Denomination, Distinction, and Discrimination: And consequently
these Discriminative Badges have as great a rate set upon them as each Sect
sets upon it self; and therefore must be upheld under the very Notion of the
life of Religion, and must be maintained with the greatest fervor imaginable;
for otherwise the Distinction of the Sects themselves would fall to the ground,
and become contemptible both among themselves and others, because otherwise
there would appear very little and inconsiderable reason, upon trifling or
small reasons, to Separate and Divide from others, and to Un-Church and
Un-Christen them that are not Their Company or Society.

PART II. CONCERNING RELIGION. The life of it, and Super additions to it.
THe Truth and Spirit of Religion comes in a a narrow compass, though the
Effect and Operation thereof are large and diffusive. Solomon comprehended it
in a few words, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole Duty
of man: The soul and life of Religion is the Fear of God, which is the
Principle of Obedience; but Obedience to his Commands, which is an act or
exercise of that life, is various, according to the variety of the Commands of
God: If I take a Kernel of an Acorn, the Principle of life lies in it: the
thing it self is but small, but the Vegetable Principle that lies in it takes
up a less room than the Kernel it self, little more than the quantity of a
small Pins head, as is easy to be observed by Experiment, but the exercise of
that Spark of life is large and comprehensive in its Operation; it produces a
great Tree, and in that Tree the Sap, the Body, the Bark, the Limbs, the
Leaves, the Fruit; and so it is with the Principle of True Religion, the
Principle it self lies in a narrow compass, but the activity and energy of it
is diffusive and various.

This Principle has not only Productions that naturally flow from it, but
where it is it ferments and assimulates, and gives a kind of Tincture even to
other Actions that do not in their own Nature follow from it, as the Nature and
Civil Actions of our lives. Under the former was our Lords Parable of a Grain
of Mustard, under the latter of his Comparison of Leven, just as we see in
other things of Nature: Take a little Red Wine, and drop it into a Vessel of
Water, it gives a new Tincture to the Water; or take a grain of Salt and put it
into Fresh Liquor, it does communicate it self to the next adjacent part of the
Liquor, and that again to the next, until the whole be fermented: So that small
and little vital Principle of the Fear of God does gradually and yet suddenly
assimilate the actions of our life flowing from another Principle. It rectifies
and moderates our Affections, and Passions, and Appetites, it gives Truth to
our Speech, Sobriety to our Senses, Humility to our Parts, and the like.

Religion is best in its Simplicity and Purity, but difficult to be retained
so, without Superstructions and Accessions; And those do commonly in time
Stifle and Choke the Simplicity of Religion, unless much Care and
Circumspection be used: the Contemperations are so many and so Cumbersom, that
Religion loses its Nature, or is strangled by them: Just as a man that has
some Excellent Simple Cordial or Spirit, and puts in Musk in it to make it
smell sweet, and Honey to make it taste pleasant, and it may be Cantharides to
make it look glorious. Indeed by the Infusions he has given it a very fine
Smell, and Taste, and Color, but yet he has so clogged it, and sophisticated
it with Superadditions, that it may be he has altered the Nature, and
destroyed the Virtue of it.

The Superadditions and Superstructions in Point of Religion are very many, and
from very many and various tempers in men that add them. As for Instance,

1. There is one common Superaddition that naturally all men are apt to bring
into it, viz. that it may Gratify the Sense; for in as much as the most
powerful and immediate influence upon us comes from and through our Senses, and
that spiritual and internal apprehensions have not so strong or constant an
Impression upon us, they seem things at a distance, flat, and the Soul is weary
of bearing it self upon them; men are apt to dress up Religion so as it may be
grateful to the Sense: Make us Gods that may go before us: And this is the
chief original of Idolatry, and also of Superstition.

2. There are other Superadditions that come even from the accidental
Inclinations of men to some special matter which they value and love; and that
they carry over into Religion; and many times mingle with it. As for the
purpose, take a man greatly admiring natural Philosophy, he will be apt to
mingle and qualify Religion with Philosophical Notions. Many of those things
of Aristotle that are harshly and dishonourably asserted concerning the Diety
are from his tenacious adhering to certain Philosophical Positions that he had
fixed upon.

Behmen, who was a great Chemist, resolves almost all Religion in Chemistry,
and frames his Conceptions of Religion suitable and conformable to Chemical
Notions.

Socinus and his Followers, being great Masters of Reason, and deeply learned
in matters of Morality, mingle almost all Religion with it, and form Religion
purely to the Model and Platform of it.

Many great Phisicians that have much observed the Constitutions of Man's Body,
have figured to themselves Notions of the Soul conformable to the Results of
their Observations in the Body.

And as thus in these sorts of men, so again men of Metaphysical and Notional
Brains and Education, as the Schoolmen, they have conformed Religion and their
Notions concerning it to Metaphysics: and indeed have made that which is and
ought to be the common Principle for the actuating of all men, yea even of the
meanest Capacities, to be a mere Collection of Subtilties, far more abstruse
than the most intricate and sublimated Humane Learning whatsoever.

Again, take a Politician, or Statesman, and he shall most easily conform
Religion to State Policy, and make it indeed a most excellent and incomparable
Engine for it, and nothing else.

And if we narrowly look upon the Method and System of Religion as it is formed
by the Romish Hierarchy, it is a most exquisite piece of Humane Policy, and
every thing therein suited with most exquisite Art and Prudence for the support
of the Grandeur and Interest of that State: This has mingled with the
Christian Religion the Popes Infalliability and Supremacy, his Power of
Pardoning and Dispensing, his Keys of Heaven and Hell, his Purgatory and
Indulgences, and Images, and Adorations of them, his Relics, and Pilgrimages,
and canonizing of Saints, and a thousand such kind of stuff most incomparably
fitted to men's Passions and Affections; and so to support that most artificial
and methodical Fabric of the Popish State: for indeed it is no other.

And if we look into other Kingdoms and Places, we shall easily find that
Religion is so stated and ordered as may best conduce to the peace, order,
wealth, and amplitude of every Kingdom; for wise Politicians, finding that
Religion has a great impression on men's minds, and therefore if it be not
managed by the Policy of state, may prove an unruly Business, if it be
contemperated with Mixture prejudicial to the State, and that it may be a most
excellent Engine if it can be managed and actuated for the Benefit of the
state, do add to it much of their own, that it may be managed upon occasion,
and they dress up Religion with State Policy, whereby in truth it becomes
nothing else but a mere piece of Humane Policy, under the Name of Religion.

And on the other side, those either politic or discontented Spirits, that
would put a Kingdom into Blood and Confusion, do mingle Discontents, and
Fancies, and Imaginations, Suspicions and Frowardness with Religion, and call
this confused mixture of Phancies and Passions, Religion: and manage and
brandish this Weapon with mighty disadvantage to that State which they oppose.

For it is most apparent, that as nothing has so great an impulsion upon men,
as that which comes under the apprehension of Religion, in as much as it
concerns the greatest good, even their Everlasting Souls and Happiness; so
nothing is of so universal Concernment as this, and therefore like to attract
the most Followers; for every man has not an Estate to care for; but every man
has a Soul to care for; and hence it is that scarce any great Contest between
Princes has happened in these latter years, nor scarce any Commotion in a
State, but Religion is owned on all sides; and God, and his Cause, and his
Church, owned on on all hands, and therefore still the scramble is for
Religion, and who shall keep the Opinion of Religion most firm to them, and
therefore they on all hands infuse into the thing they call Religion those
things that may most probably and politickly hold to their Party.

Again, in Contest among Clergymen, every one Trims and Orders Religion in that
Dress that may most make it their own, and secure it to themselves.

Take the Popish Clergiemen: hold what you will, if you hold not the Supremacy
and Vicariot of the Pope, all the rest of your Religion is not worth a rush.

Come to the Reformed Episcopal Clergy: as to the Popes Supremacy they disclaim
it: but if you acknowledge not Episcopal Government; if you swear not Canonical
Obedience to your Ordinary, if you submit not to the Liturgy, and Ceremcnies,
and Vestments, and Music used in the Church, you are at best a Schismatic.

Again, come to the Presbyterian Clergy, they will tell you Episcopal
Government is Romish and Superstitious, and their Ceremonies and Usages
Antichristian Usurpations; but if you mean to be of a warrantable Religion, you
must submit to the Presbyterian Government as truly Apostolical.

Come to the Independent, he declaims against both the former, and tells you
that the true Conformity to Apostolical Order is in the Congregational way.

Take the Anabaptist, and he tells you all the former are vain and irreligious,
unless you will be rebaptized and listed in their Church.

Again, in Points of Doctrine, as well as Discipline, it is most plain that
Tenants are professed or decryed for distinction of Parties: witness the
Contest between the Arminian Party and the Calvinistical Party, which are only
used as Methods on either side, to attract Proselytes, and distinguish Parties:
And in these and the like distinctions of Parties and Professions the
Superstructions and Additions are in a manner incorporated and grafted into
Religion, and in effect give the only Denomination to it, according to the
various Interests and Affections of Parties; when in truth, the main business
of these and the like Additions and Superstructions, are but Policies to
distinguish, and fortify, and increase Parties.

3. The re are some Superadditions to Religion, that though I do not think they
are to be condemned, yet are carefully to be distinguished from the true and
natural Life of Religion; and so long as they are kept under that apprehension,
they may, if prudently applied and managed, do good. But if either they are
imprudently instituted, imprudently applied, or inconfiderately over-valued, as
if they were Religion, they may and many times do harm; and such are decent and
inoffensive Forms in the External Worship of God appointed by the Civil
Magistrate, by the advice of those that are deservedly eminent in the Church
for their Piety, Learning, and Prudence. And there seems to be very good Reason
for it.

1. Because if every man should be left to himself, there would Confusion
ensue; because no man knew another Mind, or Rule of his external Deportment.

2. All men have not that equal Prudence to Judge what were fit to be used: the
Magistrate is like to make choice of those persons that are fittest to advise,
and their Recommendations would be of greatest authority with others.

3. It is most certain, that Man being composed of Soul and Body, cannot so
regularly and well fix himself to his Duty, without some justifiable help to
his Devotion; such are vocal Prayers, Kneeling, and other Gestures proper for
the Matter of Worship which he intends.

And this may be one Reason, why the Lord, though he strictly forbad all
Idolatry and Superstition, and Heathenish Practice to the Jews, yet did appoint
Sacrifices, Priests, a glorious Tabernacle, and the Ark, which was not only a
diversion from the Egyptian Idolatry which they had seen, but also a help to
their natural infirmity for the excitation of their Devotion.

And although our Lord Jesus came to abrogate even that Indulgence, and
foretold that those that worshipped the Father, should worship him in Spirit
and in Truth, under the Gospel, yet it is certain that the immediate Apostles
of Christ did set certain orderly Observances in the Church for decencies sake:
and it was justly allowable: As concerning the order of the exercise of their
Supernatural Gifts, Concerning Women's speaking in the Church, concerning men's
being covered in the Church, and Women veiled, concerning the manner and order
of receiving the Sacrament, and the like.

But as there be Reasons for it, so there be Cautions to be used in it.

1. That they be not too numerous; for their Multitude will rather oppress than
secure Religion.

2. That in their Natures they be not Superstitious, but keep as much distance
from it as well may be; otherwise they will be in Religion, as the dead Fly in
the Apothecaries Ointment.

3. That they be clean and decent, not too full of Pomp or Ostentation:
Ceremonies should be used as we use a Glass, rather to preserve the Oil, than
to adorn it. Too much Pomp causes Jealousies even in good men, of a
degeneration either to Jewish Ceremonies or Popish Vanities.

4. That though such are not to be rejected because they are Ancient, so if
they become Unseasonable, they are not to be held merely because they are
Ancient. It is with Ceremonies as with some other things that are fit to be
changed when they become unuseful or offensive, as the Love Feasts, Extreme
Unction, and some other things, possibly practiced, and fit enough, in the
Primitive times: Many Ceremonies were at first invented and practiced, to win
over unconverted Heathens; to encourage weak Christians, especially the Jews,
who were not easily to be drawn from their Legal Ceremonies: But when People
become a Knowing People, that see beyond those Ceremonies, and understand when,
and why, and how they came in, then it were Prudence to dispense with, or
change them.

5. That they be not urged with too much rigor or severity upon such as
conscientiously refuse them. Charity to a weak Brother in things indifferent in
their own Nature, is then to be exercised, when my Brother is offended
therewith, or never: And if it be said it is his duty to submit to the Church,
and not the Church to him; I do think that answer will not serve in this case;
for surely though a Child owes a Duty to a Father, yet his neglect thereof,
especially if it be upon a conscientious account, will not excuse the neglect
of a Fathers Duty to his Child: The Apostle professed he would abstain from
things lawful rather than offend his weak Brother.

6. And especially that we be careful to remember that Religion is another
thing from these Ceremonies. These are of use, i. e. for Ornament; They are the
Dressings and the Trimmings of Religion at the best, but the Fear of God is of
a higher extraction.

It is a pitiful thing to see men run upon this mistake, especially in these
latter times; one placing all his Religion in holding the Pope to be Christ's
Vicar, another placing Religion in this, to hold no Papist can be saved: One
holding all Religion to consist, in holding Episcopacy to be jure divino;
another by holding Presbytery to be jure divino; another in crying up
Congregational Government; another in Anabaptise; one in placing all Religion
in the strict observation of all Ceremonies; another in a strict refusal of
all: One holding a great part of Religion in putting off the Hat, and bowing at
the Name of Jesus; another judging a man an Idolater for it: and a third
placing his Religion in putting off his Hat to none; and so like a company of
Boys that blow Bubbles out of a Wall-nut-shell, every one runs after his
bubble, and calls it Religion; and every one measures the Religion or
irreligion of another, by their agreeing or dissenting with them in these or
the like matters; and at best, while we scramble and wrangle about the pieces
of the Shell, the Kernel is either lost, or gotten by some that does not prize
any of their Contests.

Believe it, Religion is quite another thing from all these Matters: He that
fears the Lord of Heaven and Earth, walks humbly before him, thankfully lays
hold of the Message of Redemption by Christ Jesus, strives to express his
thankfulness by the Sincerity of his Obedienue, is sorry with all his soul when
he comes short of his Duty, walks watchfully in the denial of himself, and
holds no confederacy with any Lust or known Sin, if he falls in the least
measure is restless till he has made his Peace by true Repentance, is true in
his Promise, just in his Actions; Charitable to the Poor, sincere in his
Devotions, that will not deliberately dishonor God, though with the greatest
security of impunity; that has his hope in Heaven, and his Conversation in
Heaven, that dare not do an Unjust Act though never so much to his advantage,
and all this because he sees him that is invisible, and fears him because he
loves him, fears him as well for his Goodness as his Greatness; such a man,
whether he be an Episcopal, or a Presbyterian, or an Independent, or an
Anabaptist; whether he wears a Surplice, or wears none, whether he hears
Organs, or hears none, whether he Kneels at the Communion, or for Conscience
sake stands or sits; he has the Life of Religion in him, and that life acts in
him, and will conform his soul to the Image of his Savior, and walk along with
him to Eternity, notwithstanding his Practice or Non-practise of these
Indifferents.

On the other side, if a man fears not the Eternal God, dares commit any sin
with presumption, can drink excessively, swear vainly or falsely, commit
Adultery, Lie, Cozen, Cheat, break his Promises, live loosely, though he
practice every Ceremony never so curiously, or as stubbornly oppose them;
though he cry down Bishops, or cry down Presbytery; though he be rebaptized
every day, or though he disclaim against it as Heresy; though he Fast all the
Lent, or Feasts out of pretense of avoiding Superstition, yet notwithstanding
these, and a thousand more external Conformities, or zealous Oppositions of
them, he wants the Life of Religion.

PART III. OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. The Superstructions upon it, and
Animosities about them.
THe Christian Religion and Doctrine was by the Goodness and Wisdom of God
designed to be the common Means and Method to bring Mankind to their Chief End,
namely, to know, and to serve, and obey, and glorify, and everlastingly to
enjoy Almighty God the Chiefest Good.

And to that end it was given out with all the Plainness and Perspicuity, with
all Evidence and certainty; a Doctrine and Religion containing Precepts of all
Holiness and Purity, of all Righteousness and Honesty, of all Longanimity,
Benignity, and Gentleness, Sweetness, Meekness, and Charity; of all Moderation
and Patience, of all Sobriety and Temperance; in brief, it is a Religion that
is admirably and sufficiently constituted to make a man, what indeed he should
be, Pious toward God, Just and Beneficent toward Men, and temperate in
himself, fitted for a life of Piety, Honesty, Justice, and Goodness, and
Happiness heareafter. Such is the Christian Religion, and such the men must be
that are truly conformable to it; and if any man professing Christianity, be
not such a man, it is because he comes so much short of his due Conformity to
Christian Religion, and the most excellent Doctrine and Precepts thereof.

The Profession of this Religion is that which is, and for many Ages has been,
commonly made by a very considerable part of the known World, as the only true
Religion given to the world by Almighty God, through his Son Jesus Christ,
wherein and whereby they may expect everlasting Salvation.

But yet together with this Christian Religion, the Prosessors thereof have in
several Ages and Places chosen to themselves various adventitious accidental
Superstructions, Adtions, Opinions, Modes, and Practices, which they have as it
were incorporated into the Christian Religion by them professed, or
appendicated unto it

And these Superstructions or Appendixes of Christian Religion have been
introduced and entertained by various Means, and by various Designs, and to
various Ends: Some by the Authority of great Names; Some by insenfible
graditions or long customs, some by a supposed congruity or incongruity; some
for Order or Decency: Some for Discrimination of Rarties; Some for Political
Ends, appearing in themselves, or secretly carried on; some upon emergent
occasions; either continuing or now ceasing; Some by Civil, some by
Ecclesiastical Sanctions; Some by traditional Observations, either continued,
or interrupted and revived; Some for Ornament; Some for Use; Some as supposed
necessary consequents upon the Christian Doctrine, Some to be, quasi septa and
munimenta doctrinoe and religionis Evangelicoe, as the Jewish Traditions were
supposed to be the Sepimenta Legis; Some for one end, and some for another: And
although these are not truly and essentially parts of the Christian Religion,
yet as the humors in the body are some good, some noxious, some innocent,
though they are no part of the true vital blood, yet they mingle with it, and
run along in it; so these Superstructions, and Occasions, and Additions have in
various Ages, Successions, and Places mingled with the true radical vital
Doctrine and Religion of Christ, in men's Opinions, and Practices, and
Professions.

And yet it is visible to any man that will but attentively observe the Courses
of men professing Christian Religion, that the greatest fervor and animosity
of the Professors of Christian Religion is not so much with respect to the
subftantials of Christian Religion, either in things to be believed or
practiced, as touching these Additions and Superstructions; some as fervently
contending for them, as if the life of Christianity consisted in them, some as
bitterly and severely contesting against them, as if the life and soul of
Christian Religion were not possibly consisting with them.

And by these means these unhappy Consequences follow.

1. That whereas the main of Christian Religion consists in the true belief of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and the Practice of those Christian Virtues that he
lest unto his Disciples and Followers, both by his Example and Precept, namely
love of God, Holiness and Purity of life, Humility and Lowliness of mind,
Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, Charity, a low and easy Value of the World,
Contentation of Mind, submission to the Will of God, Dependence upon him,
Resignation unto him, and other excellent Evangelical Virtues, that perfect and
rectify the Soul, and fit it for an humble Communion with Almighty God in this
life, and a blessed fruition of his Presence in the life to come; the Christian
Religion is not so much placed in these, as in an entire Conformity to Modes
and Circumstances, or an extreme Aversion from them. And according to the
various Interests or Inclinations of Parties those are made the Magnalia of
Christian Religion, and such as give the only Character or Discriminative
Indication of the Christian Religion.

2. And consequently all the greatest part of that stress and fervor of mind,
which should be employed in those great weighty Substantials of Christianity,
runs out and spends it self in those little Collaterals, and Superstructions,
and Additaments, some placing the greatest earnestness and intention,
contension of mind to have them, and some placing the intension and fervor of
their mind to be without them, not unlike those old Contentions between the
Eastern and Western Churches touching the time of the Paschal Observation, one
Party excommunicating the other for their dissent, as if the whole weight and
stress of the Christian Religion lay in those little Additaments.

3. And hereupon there arise Schisms, Factions, and personal Animosities,
Discrimination of Parties, Censoriousness, and studied estrangings of
Professors of Christianity, oftentimes one Party declining those Practices
which are good and commendable in the other, to keep their distances the more
irreconcilable, and each Party espousing some odd Discriminating Habits, Modes;
and sometimes also by Opinions in matters of Religion, that may estrange and
discriminate them each from the other; and these Opinions though of little
moment or consequence (it may be whether true or false) are advanced up into
little less than Articles of Faith, for the sake of this Discrimination, when
possibly they are of little moment whether they be assented unto or not, of
less certainty, and have little or no influence or concern in the Substance of
Christian Doctrine.

4. And hereupon it oftentimes comes to pass that not only the common Bond of
Charity and Christian Love is broken between the Professors of the same
substantials in Christianity, but there is most ordinarily much more Severity,
and Persecution, and Implacableness, and Irreconcileableness, more endeavors
to undermine, and supplant, and disgrace Dissenters, more scorns, and
vilifying, and reproach, and insolence one toward another in their
vicissitudes of advantage, than there is between Professors of Christianity,
and men of the most loose and profane lives, between Orthodox and Heretics,
nay between Christians and Turks, or Infidels many times.

5. And from this there arises a most fruitful and a most inevitable increase
of Atheism and contempt of Religion, in many of the Spectators of this Game
among Professors of the Christian Religion, and that upon these two Accounts:
Principally, because when they hear each Party declare (as they must if they
declare truth) in their Sermons and Writings, that the Doctrine of Christianity
injoynes Mutual Love, Condescension, Charity, Gentleness, Meekness, and yet so
little practiced by Dissenting Parties, men are apt to conclude, that either
these persons do not believe what they pretend to preach and publish, or that
the Doctrine of Christianity was a Notion and Speculation, and never intended
as a necessary Rule of Practice, since the greatest Pretenders to the Religion
of Christ practice so little of it.

2. Because when men see that those little Superstructions and Additions are by
the one side prosecuted, and on the other side decryed, with as much animosity,
fervor and severities, as the most weighty and important Truths and Precepts
of Evangelical Faith and Obedience, Spectators and Bystanders think that they
are all of the same value; and when they see that these things which every
sober considerate man must needs conclude little, and of no momont, are rated
at so great a value by the contesting Parties of each side, Truths then are
doubted of in relation to these: It makes men call in question great matters,
when they see such small things pursued or declined with no less Fervor and
Anunosity than if they were of the greatest.

And considering these unhappy Consequences of these fervours of minds touching
these small Appendixes and Superstructions, even more than about, or concerning
the very weighty things of the Gospel, I have endeavored to search out the
Reason how this strong Distemper comes to pass; and there seems to be these
Causes thereof.

1. Ordinarily a man is more fond of, and concerned for something that is his
own, than for that which is of God; as we are transported with a Love to our
selves, so we are transported with a love and admiration of what is our own:
and hence it is that the weightier and more important Duties injoined by
Christ, partake less of our zeal, or courage, or intension of mind, than our
own little Fantasies and Inventions.

2. Pride, Credit, and Reputation are commonly engaged in either Party in the
things contested, when they are once contested; and these are violent and
pressing Interests and Motions.

3. The Plainest Truth and Purity of Religion is a thing that seldom pleases
and suteth to the Curiosity and Appetite of Men; they are always fond of
something Annexed or Appendicated to Religion to make it pleasing to their
Appetite. A certain Sauce that may entertain their Fancy, after which it may
run, and wherein it may please it self. And these Sawcesto Religion are
various, and variously pleasing, according to the Various Inclinations of Men:
Most ordinarily the Fancies of men affect some things Splendid and Sensible to
be Superadded to Religion; the Israelites would needs have gods that might go
before them; and in compliance with this Humor, most of the Strange Modes and
Gesticulations among the Heathens, and most of the Superstitions, Ceremonies
and Rites among the Papists were invented.

Again, sometimes the Humor of the People runs in the other Extreme, either
they will have nothing of Form or Order, or all such Forms or Orders as are
extremely opposite to what others use, and place their delight and complacency
therein: And by this means oftentimes it comes to pass, that men are carried
with greater earnestness and vehemence after those Placentia, the
entertainments of their fancies, than to the true Substance of Religion it self.

4. Oftentimes it comes to pass that there are two very jealous Concerns, and
impatient of any Corrival, that are engaged each against other in these
different and dissenting. Practices, relating to Collaterals in Religion: On
the one side, Power and Authority is very tender of its own Interest, and
jealous of a Competitor or Rival: On the other side, Conscience and Persuasion
either of the Necessity or Unlawfulness of any thing, is very jealous, or
fearful, and suspicious of any thing that might injure it: And whether the
Conscience be mistaken or not, yet so long as its Persuasion, that is
entertained sub ratione conscientioe, prevails, this jealousy will still
prevail in the mind; and it many times falls out that Authority on the one hand
is impatient, or at least jealous of Opposition, and Conscience on the other
hand restless and unquiet.

5. And the difficulty is so much the greater, because each seems to derive
their obliging Authority from God; the Magistrate recognizing God Almighty as
the Fountain, Root, and Foundation of his Power; and the Conscience supposed to
be the Vicegerent of God in the Soul.

6. But that which admirably keeps up these differences, is that men on each
side, deal not one with another calmly, mildly, or upon the Reasons of the
things, or upon a true way of Reasoning, Debating, and Arguing of things, or
prudent Considerations that might invite yielding on the one side, or
accommodations of the other, but each Party takes in all those Contributions,
Assistances, and Advantages, that commonly accompany the worst of Contentions.

For instance, 1. Extremity of Passion and Indignation, 2. Violence and
Bitterness of Writings and Speeches, 3. Each Party rendering the other as odious
and ridiculous as is possible: 4. Scoffing, jearing, and personal reflections:
5. Artifices and Designs each to catch and undermine the other: 6. An
industrious and willing mis-interpretation of each others Words, Writings, and
Actions, and raising them to odious Inferences and Consequences, beyond what
they were meant, or really and truly bear. 7. Disingenuous Quotations out of
each other, without those ordinary Remedies that might be allowed by comparing
of other parts of their Writings.

These and the like Auxiliaries are on each part taken into these Velitations
between Christians, and in relation to things contended for or against in these
Differences, whereas the whole tenor of the Doctrine of Christianity, as it
was delivered by Christ and his Apostles, decries nothing more than Anger,
Wrath, Malice, Railing, Evil-speaking, Back biting Slanders, Reproaches, Names
and Epithets of Scorns, Craft, and Subtilty; yet all these black Legions are
called, used, and employed in the management of that Cause, which each Party
pretends to be the Cause of Christ; as if Fiends, and Furies, and Legions of
Devils were thought fit Auxiliaries on each Party, wherein both pretend the
interest of Christ Jesus.

And that this is so, let any man but read those Books whith have slown abroad
from either Party, he will find it evident in all the Contentions of this
nature: Witness on the one part Martin Marprelate, the Odious Centuries put out
by Mr. White in the beginning of the Long Parliament, the frequent Invectives
and odious Epithets given to Liturgy, to the Bishops, Conforming Ministers, and
to the Church of England it self, as Antichristian, Idolatrous, Babylonish, and
a thousand such Names and Styles.

And on the other side there have been many that have not been behind hand with
bitter Invectives, Scornful and mocking Expressions and Appellations, odious
Reflections, unnecessary to be repeated. By all which these two things are
evident,

1. That these Transports of either side come not from that Spirit which Christ
brought with him into the world, and which he commended and left to his
Disciples and Followers; namely, a Spirit of Love, of Charity, of Gentleness,
Patience, Kindness, and Sweetness of disposition.

2. That if men go about to justify this, because first provoked by the
adverse Party, and so justify it by the Law of Taliation, these men do not
remember that as on the one hand the Duty of Christians is Self-denial,
Moderation, and Peaceableness; on the other side, that a Spirit of Revenge, an
Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for a Tooth, is as much against the Doctrine of Christ,
as any thing in the world.

Therefore certainly it becomes those of either Party either to casheer these
black Auxiliaries of their Wars, and Contentions of this kind, or otherwise for
the sake and honor of Christ and the Christian Religion, plainly declare that
he is not concerned in the Contest, but that the Contest is a Contest of
Interest and Vainglory, of Pride and Ambition, and Reputation, and desire of
Victory; Or if they will not declare so much to the World, yet they must give
leave to the Spectators to judge of it so.

Now these bitternesses and virulentnesses of either side, have been commonly
of two kinds: first such as reflect, if not all together, yet most of all, upon
the Persons of their Adversaries. 2. Or such as reflect only upon the Matters
in difference between them; both were bad enough, and such as serve to make the
Differences and Breaches wider.

But of late times, I know not by what unhappy Star, there has prevailed more
than formerly, certain Invectives that have gone much farther, even to the
rendering of Religion it self, and Scripture Expressions ridiculous, and pieces
of raillery; and I could have wished that some late Books, put out under the
fashion of Dialogues, and some other Books of that kind, had not been too
Guilty of this fault.

I do remember when Ben. Johnson made his Play of the Alchymist, wherein he
brings in Anartas in derision of the persons then called Puritans, with many of
their Phrases in use among them, taken out of the Scriptures; with a design to
render that sort of persons ridiculous, and to gain applause to his wit and
fancy. But although those persons were not in very good esteem among the Great
Ones and Gallants, yet the Play was disliked, and indeed abhorred, because it
seemed to reproach Religion it self, though intended only to render the
Puritans ridiculous. That which was uncomely and unseemly in a Poet, who made
it his business to make Plays, certainly is much more fulsom and unsavory in
another; especially if the Author be a Clergy.-man, as I suppose he is: for of
all men in the world it becomes such prospicere honori Religionis Christianae,
and not to render it ridiculous and contemptible, by raillery and scurrilous
jeasting.

And yet I do not find in all Ben. Johnson's Alchymist one half of those
ridiculous and unseemly repetitions of Scripture Phrases and Expressions, as
well as mimical imitations and disdainful mockings of those Persons, and that
Party whom he designs to disparage: Scarce a Page but some unhandsom mention of
the Spirit, and Christ and Grace, and Saints, and some Scripture Expressions:
And if it shall be said that he does it but only in exprobration of such
persons as abused or misapplyed such expressions, and it is not with intent to
reproach the Scripture or those Phrases that are desumed from it, but to show
the boldness and mistakes of them that have misapplied or abused them.

I answer, That these Misapplications and inconsiderate Uses of
Scripture-phrases by them, though it be justly reprovable, yet it is far more
intolerable in him. Though their mistakes were weak and foolish, yet they were
serious in those very mistakes; but this man industriously and designedly makes
the Expression ridiculous and contemptible. 2. Their Abuses of Scriptures and
Scripturephrases will not at all justify the like in him, though in another
kind, and to another end; he might have learned to have avoided the folly and
inconsiderateness of the others, and not have multitiplied it in himself by a
worse Method of abuse.

Certainly, who ever he was that made these Conferences, I dare say he has no
such pattern of writing from the Apostles or Fathers. The nearest Copy that I
know of it, is the A -- and though he seems a man of Wit and Learning, and
possibly would be some body in the world, I dare say they that cherish him in
the main of his design are ashamed of his scurrility, and wish it had been
spared, and so perchance may he be when more years have better consideration.
The mischiefs that come by this manner of writing are very great and many.

1. It makes Differences irreconcilable. When Differences Civil or
Ecclesiastical in Judgment or Practice happen, gentleness, softness, mildness,
and personal respectfulness quiet the Passions and Spirits of the adverse
Party, gain upon him, get within him; and when the person is thus won, and
over-matched with Sweetness and Kindness, and personal Jealousies and
Prejudices removed, Persuasions and Arguments grow prevalent, come with their
full weight, are entertained calmly, and considerately, and insensibly gain
grounds even upon the judgment: But I yet knew any man converted by an angry,
passionate, railing Adversary, for such kind of behavior presently raises in
the Adversary the like Passions and Prejudice, and makes the Distance greater;
and the Passions being engaged in the quarrel, the Judgments of both sides are
lost, or blinded, or silenced with the dust and noise of passionate
digladiations; and indeed considering how apparently and evidently such kind of
dealing between Dissenters renders composures almost impossible; and yet
observing how much this course of reviling, and opprobrious, and unmanly as
well as unchristian Language, is in practice, I thought that it has been a
real design to render each Party odious and irreconcilable to the other, and
the hopes of composure desperate: For who can ever expect that any man, or any
sort of men, should be drawn over to that Party that shall publicly style him
brainsick, a fool, silly, hypocrite, fanatique, and a hundred such scornful
Appellations; or that men will be easily drawn to relinquish those Opinions or
Persuasions when they must thereby in effect subscribe to such Epithetes and
Appellations before all the world; and of all things in the world men can with
the least patience bear reflection upon their intellectuals, and are most
irreconcilable to them that traduce or abuse them therein.

2. It greatly disadvantageth the Cause, as well as the Persons of those that
use this method amongst sober indifferent Observers, who will be ready to
conclude them a parcel of people transported by passions, weak, and
prejudicated; and look upon such a Cause as is maintained by railing, scoffing,
raillery, and unproved Calumnies, as weak, and standing in need of such
rudenesses to support and maintain it.

3. It exposes Religion it self to the derision of Atheists, and confirms them
in their Atheisms, and gains them too many Proselytes; and that principally
upon these Reasons, 1. Because they find that Clergymen do tell them in the
Pulpits, that Christ himself and his Appostles condemned railing, scandalous
Appellation, as Raca, and Fool, Evil-speaking, foolish-jeasting, Mocking,
Reviling; This they tell men, and they tell them truly, and yet these very men
that call themselves Ministers of Christ, Messengers of the Gospel of Peace,
take that admirable liberty of reproaching, scoffing, and deriding one another
in their public Pamphlets and Discourses, that can scarce be exampled among
the most invective Ranks of Persons, whose trade it is to be Satirical, and
render people ridiculous: Nay so far has this Excellent manage prevailed among
Clergymen, that their Scoffs and Reproaches are not levelled at the Persons,
or Personal Defects of Dissenters, but rather than want supports for their
Party, will have ugly flings at Religion it self, at Scripture expressions; and
when men see such a course of Practice among the Preachers and Clergymen, they
are ready to conclude, that surely they believe not themselves what they preach
to others; therefore think they have a fair pretense not to believe them.

2. But principally these great Animosities and Transports of dissenting
Clergymen, confirms and promotes Atheism, upon this account, that the things
about which this wonderful hate is stricken between these Parties, are such as
both Parties agree to be none of the Fundamentals of the Religion professed by
both, but Accessaries and Accessions, and such indeed as Bystanders think are
of very small moment, and yet when men see so much heat and passion, so much
fervor and contention, such reproaches and revilings, such exasperations of
Authority on either Party, such mutual Prosecutions one of another, that more
could not possibly be done between Dissenters in those points which both agree
to be Fundamental, Atheistical spirits are apt to conclude, that probably those
points, that both sides supposed to be of greater moment, are ejusdem farinoe,
with those in Contest, since they are not, nor cannot be prosecuted with
greater fervor, than these which all men take to be small and inconsiderable,
and that it is Interest, Vainglory, and Applause, or some other Temporal
Concern, that gives this Fervor and Zeal in Matters of Religion, more than the
true Concerns of it self. The Conclusion therefore is, That men for their own
sakes, and for the sake and honor of the Christian Religion, would use more
Temperance, Prudence, and Moderation, in Contests about Circumstantials.

Sir. Francis Bacon Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albans and Lord Chancellor
after, in his Advertisement of the Controversies, of the Church of England,
page 138. of his Works.
THe wrongs of them who are possessed of the Government of the Church, toward
the other, may hardly be dissembled, or excused: They have charged them as though
they denied tribute to Coesar, and withdrew from the Civil Magistrate, the
obedience which they have ever performed and taught.

I have often transcribed Bishop Andrews Confident Assertion of the Loyalty of
those then called Puritans, against the Papists accusation, in his Tortura
Torti.

They have sorted and coupled them with the Family of Love, whose Heresy they
have labored to destroy and confute. They have been swift of Credit to receive
accusations against them, from those that have quarrelled with them, but for
speaking against sin and Vice. Their Accusations and Inquisitions have been
strict, Swearing men to Blanks and Generalities, not included within compass of
Matter certain; Which the Party which is to take the Oath, may Comprehend to be
a thing captious and streinable. Their urging Subscription to their own
Articles, is but Lacessere and irritare morbos Ecclesiae; Which otherwise would
spend themselves: Non Consensum quoerit sed dissidium, qui quod factis
proestatur, in verbis exigit. He seeks not Unity but Division, who exacteth
that in words, which we are content to yield in Action.

And it is true, that there are some, who (I am persuaded) will not easily
offend by inconformity, who notwithstanding make some Conscience to subscribe:
For they know this Note of Inconstancy and Defection from what they have long
held, shall dissable them to do that good, which otherwise they might do. For
such is the weakness of many, that their Ministry should be thereby discredited
I never met with any that have forborne subscription on no greater reason than
this.
. As for their easy silencing them in so great scarcity of Preachers, it is to
Punish the People, and not Them. Ought they not (I mean the Bishops) to keep
one eye open, to look upon the good that the men do, but to fix them both upon
the hurt that they suppose comes by them? Indeed such as are Intemperate and
Incorrigible, God forbid they should be permitted to preach: But shall every
inconsiderate word, sometimes captiously watched, and for the most part hardly
enforced, be as a forfeiture of their Voice and Gift in preaching?

As for sundry particular molestations, I take no pleasure to recite them. If a
Minister shall be troubled for saying in Baptism ( Do you believe) for ( Do
thou believe) If another shall be called in question, for praying for her
Majesty, without the additions of her Style. Whereas the very Form of Prayer in
the Common-prayerbook has ( Thy servant Elizabeth) and no more: If a third
shall be accused on these words uttered touching the Controversies, Tollatur
Lex ut fiat certamen, (whereby was meant that the prejudice of the Law removed,
eithers reasons should be equally compared) of calling the people to Sedition
and Mutiny, as if he had said, Away with the Law, and try it out with Force; If
these and other like particulars be true, which I have but by Rumor, and cannot
affirm; it is to be lamented that they should labor among us with so little
Comfort -- The wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God.

Thus far this conformable Learned Lawyer.

The said Lord Verulam in his Considerations for the better Pacification and
Edification of the Church of England, Page 180. etc. of his Works.

He first answers the Objection that [ It is against good Policy to Innovate
any thing in Church Matters: And praising the Church, adds, page 182. But for
the Discipline and Orders of the Church; as many, and the Chief of them, are
Holy and Good; so yet if Saint John were to indite an Epistle to the Church of
England, as he did to them of Asia, it would sure have the Clause, Habeo
adversus te pauca.

And he says, page 183. That there should be one Form of Discipline in all
Churches, and that imposed by necessity of a commandment and prescript out of
the word of God; It is a matter Volumes have been compiled of, and therefore
cannot receive a brief redargution; I for my part do confess that in revolving
the Scriptures, I could never find any such thing; but that God had left the
like liberty to the Church Government, to be varied according to the Time, and
Place, and Accidents; which nevertheless his high and Divine Providence does
Order and dispose. For all Civil Governments are restrained from God, unto the
General Grounds of Justice and Manners. But the Policies and Forms of them are
left free; So that Monarchies and Kingdoms, Senates and Seigniories, Popular
States and Communalties, are lawful; and where they are planted ought to be
maintained inviolate.

So likewise in Church matters, the Substance of Doctrine is immutable: And so
are the General Rules of Government: But for Rites and Ceremonies, and for the
particular Hierarchies, Policies, and Discipline of Churches, they be left at
large.

And therefore it is good that we return to the ancient bounds of Unity in the
Church of God: which was, One Faith, One Baptism; and not One Hierarchy, One
Discipline: And that we observe the League of Christians as it is penned by our
Savior; which is, in substance of Doctrine this, [ He that is not withus is
against us.] But in things Indifferent and of Circumstance, this [ He that is
not against us is with us.]

In these things, so as the General rule be observed, [ That Christ's flock be
fed: That there be a succession in Bishops and Ministers, which are the
Prophets of the New Testament; That there be a due and reverent use of the
Power of the Keys; That those that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel; That
all things tend to Edification; That all things be done in order, and with
decency, and the like,] The rest is left to Holy Wisdom, and spiritual
discretion of the Master Builder, and Inferior Builders in Christ's Church. As
it is excellently alluded by that Father that noted that Christ's Garment was
without Seam; and yet the Churches Garment was of diverse Colors: And setsdown
as a rule: In vest varietas sit; scissura non sit.

Page 134. For the Government of Bishops, I for my part, not prejudging the
Presidents of other reformed Churches, do hold it warranted by the Word of God,
and by the Practice of the ancient Church in the better times; and much more
Convenient for Kingdoms than Parity of Ministers, and Government by Synods. But
there be two Circumstances in the Administration of Bishops, wherein I confess
I could never be satisfied: The One, The sole exercise of their Authority: The
other, The Deputation of their Authority.

For the first, The Bishop gives Orders-alone, Excommunicateth alone, Judges
alone: This seems to be a thing almost without Example in good Government,
and therefore not unlikely to have crept in in the degenerate and corrupt time:
We see the greatest Kings and Monarchs have their Councils: There is no
Temporal Court in England of the higher sort, where the Authority does rest in
one person. The King's Bench, the Common Pleas, and the Exchequer, are Benches
of a certain Number of Judges. The Chancellor of England, has the Assistance
of twelve Masters of the Chancery. etc. The like is to be found in all
well-governed Commonwealths abroad, where the Jurisdiction is more dispersed:
As in the Court of Parliament of France, and in other places.

No man will deny, but the Acts that pass the Bishops Jurisdiction, are of as
great importance as those that pass the Civil Courts: For men's Souls are more
precious than their Bodies or Goods: And so are their Good-names: Bishops have
their infirmities; and have no exception from that general Malediction,
pronounced against all Men living: Voe Soli, nam si occident, etc. Nay we see
that the first Warrant in Spiritual Causes is directed to a Number, Dic
Ecclesioe, which is not so in Temporal Matters, Ab initio non fuit sic.

For the second Point, which is the Deputation of their Authority, I see no
perfect nor sure ground for that neither. Being somewhat different from the
Examples and Rules of Government. The Bishop exercises his Jurisdiction by his
Chancellor and Commissary, Official, etc. We see in all Laws in the world,
Offices of Confidence and Skill cannot, be put over and exercised by Deputy,
except it be specially contained in the Original Grant. And in that Case it is
dutiful. And for experience, there was never any Chancellor of England made a
Deputy: There was never any Judge in any Court made a Deputy: The Bishop is a
Judge, and of a high nature: whence comes it that he should depute?
Considering that all Trust and Confidence is personal and inherent; and cannot,
nor ought not be transposed. Surely in this again Ab initio non fuit fic. But
it is probable, that Bishops when they gave themselves too much to the glory of
the world, and became Grandees in Kingdoms, and great Counselors to Princes,
then did they delegate their proper Jurisdictions, as things of too inferior
Nature for their Greatness; And then after the similitude of Kings and Count
Palatines, they would have their Chancellours and Judges.

But the Example of Kings and Potentates gives no good defense: For the Reason
why Kings administer by their Judges, though themselves are supreme Judges, are
two: The One, because the Offices of Kings are for the most part of
Inheritance. And it is a Rule in all Laws, that offices of inheritance, are
rather matters that ground in Interest than in Confidence, for as much as they
may fall upon Women, upon Infants, upon Lunaticks and Idiots, Persons incapable
to execute Judicature in person. And therefore such Offices, by all Laws, might
ever be exercised and administered by delegation. The second reason is, because
of the Amplitude of their Jurisdictions, etc. There is a third reason, though not
much to the present purpose, that Kings, either in respect of the
Commonwealth, or of the Greatness of their own Patrimonies, are usually
Parties in Suites: And then their Judges stand indifferent between them and
their Subjects. But in the Case of Bishops none of these Reasons hold: For
first, their Office elective and for life, and not patrimonial or hereditary:
An Office merely of Confidence, Science, and Qualification, etc. See the rest.

Page. 185, 186. The Cap and Surplice since they be things in their Nature
indifferent, and yet by some held Superstitious, and that the Question is
between Science and Conscience, it seems to fall within the compass of the
Apostles Rule, which is, that the stronger do descend and yield to the weaker,
etc. [ lege coetera] The rather because the silencing of Ministers on this
occasion, is in this scarcity of good Preachers, a punishment that lights on
the people, as well as on the party.

And for the Subscription, it seems to me in the Nature of a Confession, and
therefore more proper to bind in the Unity of Faith, and to be urged rather for
Articles of Doctrine, than for Rites and Ceremonies, and Points of outward
Government. For howsoever public Considerations and Reasons of State may
require Uniformity, yet Christian and Divine Grounds look chiefly upon Unity.

See what he says page 191. for A. Bishop Grindals way of Lectures to young
Ministers, to teach them to preach well. And p. 192 of the abuse of
Excommunication.

An Animadversion of the Transcriber.
Qu. Why was this great man so much against Bishops deputing their proper work
to Chancellours, Commissaries, Officials? etc.

Ans. It Is easy to conjecture,

I. Though he thought the accidental Modes of Church Government mutable and
humane, yet most Christians with him judge, that the Essentials of Church
Office are of Divine Institution, and therefore fixed on the proper Officers:
And that no Layman may by Deputation administer Sacraments, or the Church
Keys.

II. And so he would not have Laymen and the Clergy confounded, as if there
were nothing proper to the Pastoral Office, lest it teach the Laity
Sacrilegious Usurpation. The Office is nothing but a conjunction of Obligation
and Authority to do the works: And if a Layman have these two, he is a Bishop.

III. The very confounding of the Bishops Office and the Presbyters, seems so
ill to many, that they think even a Presbyter (Archdeacon or Chancellor) may
not be deputed to the work of the Bishop, because that makes him a Bishop,
much less may a Layman.

IV. Many would not have the King or Civil Magistrate made properly a Bishop,
and so the Offices Confounded: But say they, If commissioning another to Judge
by the Keys, or to administer Sacraments, be proper to a Bishop, then Kings
and Magistrates are Bishops; for they may send and Commission other men to do
all this.

V. The Bishops personal doing of all his own proper Officeworks, would answer
almost all that the moderate Nonconformists desire in Church Government: For
then,

1. The Keys we hope would be used in a Sacred serious manner, with due
Admonition, Instruction, Exhortation, Prayer, etc. which might melt a Sinner
into Repentance.

2. And then Experience would fully satisfy the Diocesans that they must needs
have Bishops under them, or besides them, at least in every great Town, with
the adjoining Parishes: For by that time they had duly Confirmed all before
Communicating, and had examined, exhorted, and judged the many hundred
Scandalous Persons that in a Diocese would be presented, I Will warrant you they
would be glad of the help of many: And though perhaps Churchwardens would not
present all that come not to Church, in the Parishes where many Score thousands
keep away for want of room, or on that pretense; yet good Ministers would
present more than now they do, when they saw it would tend to a sacred use of
the Keys, and men's repentance. Bucer's desire of Parish Discipline, would be
sure more performed, which would end most Church Controversies.

VI. And this would bring in many Nonconformists, who now stand out, because
they dare not make a Covenant, an Oath, never in their places to endeavor any
alteration of Church Government, because they think Lay Chancellours use of the
Keys decretively unlawful. And dare not swear Obedience to such Ordinances;
nor yet own the Omission of Discipline which the paucity of Bishops unavoidably
infers, while a Diocese has but one. (Experience would certainly cure that).

VII. And it moves some, that we yet meet with few Bishops that will defend
lay Chancellours decretive use of the Keys; but seem to wish it were reformed.

VIII. And the Chancellours and Civilians have little reason to be offended
with my Lord Verulam, and such men: For he would allow them the probate of
Wills, and Matrimonial Cases, and all that belongs to an Official Magistrate,
that has his Office from the King. And no doubt would consent that they have a
moderate Power by mulcts to constrain men to submit to their Courts, instead of
the use of Excommunications and Absolutions,

They say this is otherwise in Scotland now. And yet they are sworn not to
endeavor any alteration of Church Government.

And I hope none will be angry with this Learned great man, for the blame which
he lays on the Bishops usage of the Non-Conformists; even before the present
Canons were made. Since, 1. His Letters show him to have been a man
extraordinarily humbling himself both to the Queen and to the Bishops. 2. And
the most approved Historians tell us, to our great grief, that such things have
been no wonders and rarities, these thirteen hundred years. It is holy and
credible men that tell us, how St. Martin, notwithstanding all his Miracles and
holiness, was used by the Synods of Bishops in his time, for being so strict of
life, and so much against the using of the Sword against the Priscilian
Gnostick Heretics.

And it is as holy and credible men that tell us how St. Theophilus Alexander,
a Patriarch, envyed and used his Superior Patriarch, holy Chrysostom, and even
long studied his ruin: And how another called St. Epiphanius, seditiously came
out of Cyprus, and affronted him at Constantinople, in his own Church,
requiring him irregularly before all the People, to Curse Origin or his
Writings; as if the Bishop of the Isle of Man should come and magisterially
impose this on the Bishop of London or Canterbury, in the Congregation where he
preached. They tell us how readily the Synods of Bishops Condemned Chrysostom,
because the Emperor and Empress were against him: And if so excellent and holy
a man, whose language and life excelled them all, could not escape condemnation
twice over, and that in the Age of the Church which is predicated for the very
best and happiest that ever was since the days of Christ; If the Primacy among
all the four Eastern Patriarchs, and his own rare Parts, and holiness and
innocence, could not secure him from ejection and banishment from a famous
Christian Emperor, and the Convocations of Bishops that envyed his holiness
and parts; If when he was banished, his stable constant flock, that would not
renounce him, were made Conventiclers, and named Joannits, as a note of
Schifmatical Separatists, while those that turned to the next possessour were
called the Church. If another Saint of greatest Learning, Name and Power,
resisted the very restoring of his name when he was dead, saying the Canons
were not to be broken to satisfy the Schismatical Joannits, whom nothing will
satisfy, and that it would discourage the Conformists; I mean St. Cyril of
Alexandria; why should it be thought that men far inferior to Chrysostom,
that live not in so pure an Age, should by the Clergy stream and power, be
much like esteemed, and partly used.

And if in those Ages of the Churches greatest excellency (the 4 th. and 5 th.
Centuries) the great Patriarchs themselves of Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, etc. who are supposed by some to be the Pillars of the Church
for Government and Unity, did live almost in continual Conflict, Cursing, or
casting out each other as Heretics, or Schismatics, and often fighting it out
in Christian blood, (to say nothing of the following worser Ages) what wonder,
if still the old Causes succeeding produce many of the old Effects: Which a man
that was thought wise enough to be the Lord Chancellor of England, and the
famous restorer of Learning, might be allowed gently to touch, while the Clergy
themselves openly and greatly prefer those Ages, and the Theophilus's,
Epiphanius's, and Cyrils, and Episcopal Synods thereof, before our own, and
before themselves.

Let us hear what one more excellent person, and no Fanatic or Schismatic
says.

Dr. Isaac Barrow (a man, if ever this Age had any, that delivered digested
TRUTH in clear Expressions) vol. 2. p. 34.

Whoever indeed will consider the Nature of man, or will consult obvious
experience, shall find that in practical matters, our will or appetite has a
mighty influence on our Judgment of things, causing men with great attention to
regard that which they affect, and carefully to mark all reasons making for it;
but averting from that which they dislike, and making them to overlook the
arguments which persuade it: whence men generally do suit their opinions to
their inclinations; warping to that side where their INTEREST does lie; or to
which their Complexions, their Humor, their Passions, their Pleasure, their
ease does sway them; So that almost any Notion will seem true, which is
Profitable, which is Safe, which is Pleasant, or any way grateful to them; and
that Notion false, which in any such respect does cross them. Very few can
abstract their minds from such considerations, or embrace Pure Truth divested
of them. And those few who do so, must therein most employ their Will, by
strong effects of Voluntary resolution, and patience, and disengaging their
minds from those clogs and byasses.

This is particularly notorious in men's adhering to Parties, divided in
opinion, which is so regulated by that sort of causes, that if you do mark what
any man's Temper is, and where his INTEREST lies, you may easily prognosticate
on what side he will be; and with what degree of Seriousness, of Vigor, of
Zeal, he will cleave thereto. A timorous man you may be almost sure will be on
the safer side: A Covetous man will bend to that Party where Gain is to be had.
An Ambitious man will close with the opinion passing in Court. A careless man
will comply with the fashion: Affection arising from Education or Prejudice
will hold others stiff. Few follow the results of Impartial Contemplation.

And page 483. There is one Lawgiver who can save and destroy: Who art thou
that Judge another? That is, How intollerably Rash, Unjust and arrogant art
thou, who set thy self on Gods Tribunal, and thence do adventure to
pronounce Doom upon his People? Did we well consider Gods Judgment, we should
rather think it advisable to be mindful of our own Case, than to pass Sentence
on that of others: Observing how liable our selves are, we should scarce have a
Heart to Carp at others; finding what great need our actions will then have of
a Favorable Interpretation, we should sure be more candid and mild in
Censuring other men's Actions: Specially considering, that by harsh Judgment of
others, we make our own Case worse, and inflame our reckoning: We directly
thence incur Guilt, we aggravate our own Offenses, and render our selves
unexcusable; we expose our selves on that score to Condemnation. See Mat. 7. 2.
Luke 6. 37. Romans 2. 2, 3. Jam. 5. 9.

His two Sermons on To. 12. 18. well practiced, would heal England's Divisions.

Such also is his Sermon of Love to our Neighbor, that against Slander, and
that against Detraction: But that which I cite him for, is the very same
description of Religion which Judge Hale gives. Sermon. 1. p. 10.

The Principal advantage of Wisdom, is its acquainting us with the Nature and
Reason of true Religion, and affording Convictive Arguments to persuade the
Practice of it: Which is accompanied with the purest delight, and attended with
the most solid content imaginanable: I say, the Nature of Religion, wherein it
Consists, and what it requires: The mistake of which produces daily so many
mischiefs and inconveniences in the World, and exposes so good a Name to so
much Reproach. It shows it consists not in fair professions and glorious
pretenses, but in Real Practice; not in a pertinacious adherence to ANY Sect,
or Party, but in a sincere Love of Goodness, and dislike of Naughtiness
wherever discovering it self; not in Vain Ostentations and Flourishes of
outward performance, but in an inward good complexion of Mind, exerting it self
in Works of true Devotion and Charity, not in a Nice Orthodoxie, or Politic
Subjection of our Judgments to the peremptory dictates of Men; but in a sincere
Love of Truth, and hearty approbation and compliance with the Doctrines
Fundamentally Good and Necessary to be believed: Not in harsh censuring and
virulently inveighing against others, but in careful amending our own ways: Not
in a peevish crossness and obstinate Repugnancy to received Laws and Customs;
but in a quiet and Peaceable Submission to the express Laws of God, and Lawful
Commands of Men: Not in a furious Zeal FOR or AGAINST trivial Circumstances,
but in a conscionable practicing the substantial parts of Religion: Not in a
frequent talking, or contentious disputing about it; but in a ready observance
of the unquestionable Rules and Precepts of it. In a Word, True Religion
consists in nothing else, but doing what becomes our Relation to God, in a
Conformity or similitude to his Nature, and in a willing Obedience to his Holy
Will, to which by potent incentives it allures and persuades us, by
representing to us his transcendent glorious Attributes -- etc. See the rest,
too long to be transcribed.

If you say, A Papist will own all this. I answer, 1. So much the better: We
will not feign a new Christianity to differ from Papists. 2. But do they not
own too much more? How then come they to fill the World with Blood and
Division, for the Sake of their numerous humane Additionals?

I know no man that has more fully confuted that Sect than he has done in his
Treatise of Supremacy and Church Unity: And says the Publisher of his Life, [
He understood Popery both at home and abroad. He had narrowly observed it
Militant in England, triumphant in Italy, disguised in France; and had earlier
apprehensions of the Approaching Danger, and would have appeared with the
forwardest in a needful time.

Whoever will truly confute his Treatise of the Popes Supremacy, and that of
the Unity of the Church, against the Supremacy and Foreign Jurisdiction of
Councils called General, I here promise him shall make me a Papist (of the
Italian or the Galliance sort accordingly) if he will do it before I die, and
am Disabled from reading and considering it. But I doubt not but the Papists
will rather study to bury it in silence, (while they do their works by other
means than Reasoning) lest the notice of a Confutation should occasion more to
read it: And then, especially if all men in Power should read it, their Cause
with such is utterly undone.

Says Dr. Tillotson in his Preface to it, [I dare say that whoever shall
carefully peruse this Treatise, will find that this point of the Popes
Supremacy (on which Bellarmine has the confidence to say, The whole of
Christianity depends) is not only an indefensible, but an Impudent Cause, as
ever was undertaken by learned Pens: And nothing could have kept it so long
from becoming ridiculous in the judgment of Mankind, but its being so strongly
supported by a worldly interest: For there is not one tolerable argument for
it, and there are a thousand invincible Reasons against it.

IF these three Testimonies of the most Learned, Wise, and Impartial
Conformists, that these (or many) Ages have bred, be all born down by Interest
and Supercilious Confidence, and a Flood of Words (which may all be used for
the worst Cause in the World) the Lord be Judge, and justify his Truth, and
that Wisdom from above, Jam. 3. 17. which is justified of her Children. When
Satan has done his worst, Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they shall be
called the Children of God. Mat. 5. 9.

FINIS.

