CHECK: OR, INQUIRY into the Late ACT OF THE Roman-Inquisition: Busily, and
pressingly dispersed over all ENGLAND by the JESUITS.

JOS. 7.1. Praevaricati sunt mandatum, and usurpaverunt de Anathemate.

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord 1662.

Check: OR, Inquiry into the late Act of the Roman Inquisition.
ME thinks it should be time to speak out, with as little care as we have need
of apologizing, when the orderly Discipline of the Church, the just right of
the Civil Magistrate, the privilege of immediate Ecclesiastical Superiors,
and the common good of Catholics, now in hand are at once attaqu't. I only
declare this resolution at my first setting Pen to Paper (which really springs
from the conceit of my own unworthiness) that if, while I am writing this, I
understand any other bends his endeavors to prevent the mischiefs threatened, I
shall withdraw my hand, and wholly rely on his; But if I hear of none, it is my
hope, the Motives I have mentioned are abundantly sufficient to engage any
honest and courageous heart without any further conged'escrire, to attempt the
hinderance of such ruinous effects. To the point then:

Mr Thomas White, whose eminent learning may justly expect to be blustred at,
and overthrown too, if its Basis be not proportionably solid, and its structure
well compacted, had published diverse Treatises, attempting the rigorous
rationality of Philosophical and Theological Truths: The tenor of his Doctrine
ran thus.

For Faith, he endeavored to advance its growth by lopping off all
excrescencies of erroneous opinions, how general soever interest or mistakes of
Probablists had made them; and to render it not only defensible, but infallibly
victorious, by separating uncertain opinions, from the certain Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, pledged to us as such by Universal Tradition. This was
apt to anger those who drove a great trade in decrying all for Heretics, who
were not of their mind; that is, indeed who advanced not those Tenets which
made for their Politic Interest.

For Christian Practice, his way was to place no goodness in external actions,
but as they conduced to interior perfection, and advanced charity; which was
apt to spoil all Pharisaical cleansing the outside of the platter, as also all
superstitiousness, and superficial devotions; the gainful trade of too many.

Was not this enough think you to set on fire a world of byast men, and all
those weak (though good) persons too who were apt to be led by their cry? Or do
we wonder after all this, the general noise should be against him, and only
learned and unpassionate Examiners on his side? To proceed.

Subsuming under this method, he cast his eye on that point of Faith which
concerns the Churches government by the Hierarchy, and saw that under a
speciously-pious show of making the Pope infallible in defining, and omnipotent
in acting; all Episcopacie in the Church, but his, was destroyed, and only the
bare name left. He saw also that General Councils were all at once cast out of
doors; For to what end should those assemble with such trouble to themselves
and the whole Christian world, if the Pope alone could define Faith and appoint
Discipline as certainly and efficaciously as with them? Nay, be infallible even
in matters of fact; with which new mad Heresy, the Jesuits (whose flattering
Policy is now come to direct blasphemy) are endeavoring to possess all the
ignorant or timorous, or ambitious in France. Hereupon, to give the most
natural, that is, the most advantageous growth to the ordinary or true
Authority of the Pope, as constituted by our Savior, inherited from S. Peter,
and claimed by the Title and Tenor of Universal Tradition; and to make it more
defensible, he was obliged to separate it from the opinionative point of the
Pope's Extravagant Authority, lately introduced by flatterers or the human
policy of that Court; and also, that he might maintain dispersed Episcopacy, to
oppose the engros'd one, which was inconsistent with the former.

Beginning then at the root (as his way is) he confuted, and (in the quality of
a private Divine) censured that dangerous Principle of the Popes personal
Infallibility, as Heretical and Arch-heretical. Hence, his Sonus Buccin^ which
censured it, and his Tabulae Suffragiales, which proved at large the justness
of that censure, by all imaginable Arguments a Catholic Divine could use, were
both condemned indeed, but neither of them confuted, which done, the angry rod
of Condemnation was laid by a while till of late a Jesuit opposed his Middle
State. Mr. White answered the three years Labor (for so long I am sure it is at
least since the Jesuits began to write against that Book) of that Author, and
in likelihood of the whole Society, in three weeks. Must their credit sink, and
any one thrive that presumes to be learneder then they? No; If Reason refuse
them her Patronage, Authority shall step in and maintain them in despite of
Reason. And indeed it is well known they neither love nor care to defend
themselves by Evidence of Reason: Authority is their best weapon; and the more
blindly and confusedly it is carried, the better for their turn. If they with
any sleights can get some great Men, or a multitude of inferior folks to say as
they do; your Arguments are answered; and they protect themselves by crying up
those great Few, or small Many, for Infallible. Instead of Reason then, out
comes from the Roman Inquisition a Condemnation of all his Books together, good
and bad, Printed and Manuscript, examined and unexamin'd, seen and unseen: And
this, brought in huggar-muggar, into England, is pressed by the passionate men
for Faith to their weak Adherents; who are made believe that they are forbidden
under heavy Censures to read his books, nay perhaps bound to hold him an
Heretic, or what else they list to propose to their blindly-obedient Subjects.
This, (abstracting from the truth or falsehood of Mr. Woite's Doctrine) is the
subject of my present complaint: In preferring which to all Candid lovers of
Truth, and good Subjects to our English Laws, I make this

FIRST DEMAND.
SUpposing this Condemnation be no personal Act of the Pope's, as Bulls and
Breves are, but only an Act of the Roman Inquisition, which of course bears the
Popes name, as all other Acts of the Courts of Judicature in Rome do, where the
Pope is both Spiritual and Temporal Lord; whether it be not most absurd,
preposterous, and dissonant even to the distinctive procedure of the Roman
Court, to confound and equalize those two sorts of Actions, which it is known
the Church and that Court look upon with so great a difference?

SECOND DEMAND.
Were it indeed a Bull or Breve, or, (which is a thousand times more) a Decree
of a Council, belonging to Discipline, yet whether it at all obliges till
legally sent or brought into the Country where they pretend to bind; either by
the domestic Bishops, who assented to it, if it be a Councils Canon, or by
known officers of the Court of Rome appointed for such purposes? Certainly, if
in any cases, Order be to be observed, it should in those which are to be
obligatory, lest excuse of ignorance be left to cloak the Subjects
disobedience; and consequently we ought not to think any private Travailer, or
common Carrier, much less a Jesuit (who is not only a particular Enemy to
the party condemned, but has not the least Authority in the Church, nor can
have, as such, no not so much as of a Pastor of a Parish) we ought not I say to
think such a one a competent Officer to enjoin the duty of acceptance; no more
then the bare being of it in print, a sufficient promulgation. And what
speculation assures necessary, the practice of the Court of Rome confirms,
which has it is Nuncio's in several places to signify their Pleasure and
Commands in their respective Districts, where they think it prudent, that is,
where they hope they shall obtain to be obeyed. Let then the spreader or
presser of those Decrees, and much more of an Act of the Roman Inquisition, be
ask't by what Authority he promulgates them; demand his Patent or Order; and if
he know none, he is convinced to be a busy fellow, 16 Ric. 2.
and (his Action being opposite to our Catholic English Laws,) a deeply
punishable Offender to boot.

THIRD DEMAND.
WHether any of the three Decrees last mentioned, even though legally sent, be
held obligatory in any Catholic Province till accepted by the Civil and
Ecclesiastical State? Experience teaches us the contrary in the most
Authoritative of these three, Canons of Councils; since it is known those of the
Council of Ternt oblige not in some Catholic Counties, and the reason
constantly rendered, is because they were never received: We see also that
Roman Decrees are frequently disaccepted by Catholic Counties, and even
Nuncio's, if they too zealously press them, forced to fly and hide their
heads for acting against the just Right of the Civil Magistrate, as of late
years the busie-Jesuited Internunce of Brussels, was by the Senate of Brabant.
I presume then I may give a Negative Answer to this Demand: I am sure no French
Subject durst, nor truly Loyal English one ought to say the contrary.

FOVRTH DEMAND.
Whether the Ecclesiastical Governors either dare in prudence, or will in
Loyalty receive an Act of this Nature without leave of the civil Magstrate?
And whether it be ever likely such reception will be yielded to? This I know,
when the intollerably scandalous Apology of the Casuists put out by the
Jesuits, was about to be condemned by the Sorbon, and that the blow was judged
unavoidable, the Jesuits endeavored to get this Clause inserted against the
Provincial Letters, Quas non probat facultas, utpote quas audivit Romae
damnatas, Which the faculty approves not, because it heard they were condemned
at Rome: And though this were but an occasional glance, and imported only a
non-improvement, yet because they mentioned the Roman Inquisition Act as the
reason of their non-Approbation, see how tender the State of France were of it.
The Advocate General Men's. Talon sent for some prime Sorbon Doctors, ratled
them soundly, and told them that that Clause was contrary to the Custom of the
Kingdom, that it could not be used without acknowledging the Inquisition, and
that it would not be suffered: And can we think we owe less obedience to His
Sacred Majesty and our English Laws, than they in France to theirs? Or do we
conceive it less illegal to bring the Roman Inquisition into England, than it is
in France to bring it in thither? In France none, without the Princes leave,
may receive any Act of the Roman Inquisition upon this Motive, because it is
theirs, or express their non-approvement, because that Tribunal has done so. In
England quite contrary, these disloyal men tell their Adherents none dare
refuse such Acts, or hold them unobliging, and upon this sole Motive, because
they proceed from that Inquisition. The Laws of our Catholic Ancestors
strictly forbid the extolling the power of the Bishop of Rome, that is, debar
his extraordinary Authority; these men and their followers go farther, and
presume not only to extol beyond measure the Popes power, as Head of the
Church, but even that far lesser one of the Roman Inquisition, and make it
domineer over the English Subjects without the Magistrates license. Thus
incroachment would come in by inches, and invading the just rights of the Civil
Power, advance toward that proud and scandalous Doctrine of deposing Kings,
which the Roman Court of late times by its Decrees, has too much and too often
abetted; and hence is this busle of the Jesuits to preserve this principle
alive, though they see it not seasonable now to press it home to the
Conclusion. But they meet with honester and better principled spirits among all
but their own party, as the loyal-hearted Catholic Clergy, the ancient
Religious Order of S. Bennet, and other Regulars, whose perfect submission to
the Laws of their Country in what touches not Faith, is incapable of the least
blemish, other then what is imputed to them by occasion of the Society of such
false brethren, against whom they do not publicly enough declare, and so are
sometimes mistaken by strangers to hold their Opinions: Taking then the
Negative of this Demand for granted, I advance to my

FIFTH DEMAND.
Whether it appear not to be most unseasonably illegal, and even aiming at the
ruin of all the hopes of mitigation now endeavored, to attempt and press at
this time, as the Jesuited party does, the slavery of English Catholics to the
Roman Inquisition? I conceive the Fact and the terms evince it so plainly that
it needs no proof.

SIXTH DEMAND.
Whether it be not the height of Passion and Unchristianism to urge such
Decrees, as matters of Faith? It Is known some Divines, among whom is S. Austin,
place the Rule of Faith in the diffused body of Christians, and make their
acceptance the last and best Test of even a General Councils Infallibility in
Faith-Definitions: Many deny a Council without a Pope to be infallible; more a
Pope without a Council, or the Pope with an inferior Council; Almost all an
inferior Council without the Pope; but none till our unhappy days had ever
the audaciousness to say that an Inquisitions Decree touched faith, either as to
its constitution or dissolution, or had the knack of personal infallibility
annexed to it; nor, God be praised, dare they now say it, but in corners among
their abused Bigots, from whose mouths you hear the Echo of their deluding
Instructers.

It Is known that Inquisition goes to work like prudential men, he understands
very little of that Court, who imagines the Pope or Cardinals trouble
themselves with reading all those Books that are proposed to their Censures:
Their way is, to commit the Perusal of them to some Divines, who (as the world
has gone for these few late Years) are either Jesuits or Jesuited, that is,
inveterate enemies to the party we treat of; upon what score I told you
formerly. Their Information given, they trust it, and proceed upon it, but yet
very gingerly and abstractedly. In common, that Court sees that Mr White
opposes their Paramount Authority, by which they project the domineering over
both Princes and Hierarchy, this is enough to make them think fit to blemish
him; If then those good Divines tell them, that he has Erroneous or Heretical
Propositions in his Books, [and what will not they call so, if against their
Interest] all the branding words shall in; but you may sooner squeeze water out
of a Flint than get these Divines determine which are erroneous only, and which
heretical, for fear Mr White should prove the better Divine, and justify the
points to be both Catholic, and needful to be spoken, which would quite spoil
all.

SEVENTH DEMAND.
Whether it argue not that the passion and Interest of these men is above
their love of maintaining Catholic Religion to blast not only the name of an
Author who has written so advantagiously and solidly for Faith, but even those
very Books which so incomparably defend Faith and its Rule? Let Rushworths
Dialogues, Apology for Tradition and Controversie-Logick be examined (to omit
others) and see whether ever the Heterodox party were either so solidly
confuted, or Faith so radically stated; yet are these Books condemned too with
the rest, what more disgrace to our Cause could even a Prebyterians heart wish?

Consider how manfully the Catholic Controvertists, who have followed those
Principles, have defended Faith, and triumphed over opposite Errors; and then
judge whether it be consistent with these men's pretended zeal for Religion to
sacrifice the best champion and strongest fortresses of our Faith, as
controverted, to their politic Interest; and to endeavor the overthrowing
such rampires of the Popes Faith-taught, ordinary and lawful power, that they
may flatteringly advance his opinionative, unlawful and arbitrary one; On the
other side, look on the pitiful Defenses these men substitute in stead of
those solid ones; evidenced infallibility of Authority shall be beat down, and
all Faith finally resolved into a blind afflatus, a hole as dark as the worst
Fanatics private spirit. Solid reason shall be laid aside, and aierie
quibbling in a wordish Testimony taken up in its stead, which can conclude
nothing: What miserable tossing of words too and fro, to the extreme prejudice
of the Catholic cause, is found in Schism unmaskt; yet (considering their way)
we have reason to believe that the nerves of their whole Body were all swelled
by their most vigorous spirits, to advance so feeble a stroke. Nor can any see
how we may expect better helps from their Principles, which tend to the
disgrace of Universal Tradition, and fix their best hopes on personal
Infallibilities. Knots voluminous Encounter with Chilling-worth, and Fishers
with B. Land, remain sad Instances of the Catholic cause, left dangerously
exposed, not through want of grounds, but by a voluntary desertion of Catholic
Principles, to follow those of Interest and Flattery.

EIGHTH DEMAND.
What is to be said of those, who when they list get any thing condemned at
Rome, to blast Catholic Writers that oppose their trampling down the
Hierarchy, then press that Condemnation hotly, and advance it as highly as it
were a young point of Faith; and yet when it lights on themselves (which
happens sometimes, though not so often as they deserve) they slight and vilify
it, as nothing worth? Poza a Spanish Jesuit, that fine fellow, who made that
excellent Creed printed before the Mystery of Jesuitism was commanded both by
the Popes and his Generals Orders to appear at Rome, (which by the way Mr.
White never was yet) and legally cited too to answer there for some extravagant
Tenets; He flies for refuge to the Kings Council, and got his cause, already
overthrown in the Roman Inquisition, to be reveiwed by that of Madrid; and
there found Defense without either his or the State's, or the Madrids
Inquisition, scrupling at all to cast off the heavy burden of obedience to the
Roman Inquisition, which the Jesuits, when it is for their turn, use to lay
upon other men's shoulders. That abominable Apology for the Casuists, set out by
the Jesuits, after it had been most deeply and particularly censured by almost
each Bishop in France, and his Diocesan Assembly, was, for fear of too manifest
shame, condemned at Rome, and yet was printed by them afterward, and defended
both in France and England. Stubrochius, the disguised Jesuit, gives you the
full allowance of the force such Decrees are to have in these words. If nothing
(says he) be particularly condemned, but the Book only in general forbidden, no
wise man can deny, but that the only reason of its Prohibition is, that it was
published against the rules of the Council of Trent. Si nihil prorsus in ^o
singillatim configatur, sed prohibeatur generatim; nemo sapiens neget eo
duntaxat nomine prohibitum fuisse, quod contra Regulas a Concilio Tridentivo
praescriptas editus sit; which Rules (though in themselves excellent) are so
unsuitable to the present circumstances of England, that very few Catholic
writers can observe them: so that almost all the Catholic Books in English are
subject to the censure of the Roman Inquisition, as well as Mr. White's, were
there any peevish Informer uncharitable enough to prosecute 'em.

But you must think it was the Jesuits own case, else he had not been so
candid; so that you see they deal with their Believers, as men do with little
Babies, or Jack-dawes, they propose things for Bug-bears, or Scare-crows, which
themselves fear not at all, but only set up to fright others.

NINTH DEMAND.
Whether to press the obligatorinesse of this Inquisition's Act be not
Schismatical in those pressers. For, since where a legal order is not observed
in sending, accepting and enjoining observance of Decrees, it is not to be
expected all should act alike, it will follow that the more zealous and
credulous, who think every foppery Faith, will quickly take fire and accept it,
and discharge their zeal by spreading it to others, and railing at the Author
and the Readers of his Books; The more solid, discerning and intelligent
persons, who know how to distinguish things; will carry themselves as formerly
toward both the Author and the Books. Hence difference in actions and mutual
animosities are apt to arise, and fierce ones too; in regard one party is made
foolishly to believe all is Faith which their interessed Governors tell them:
the other party conceive as high an indignation to see the Sacredness of Faith
made ridiculous by such a blundering and confounding zeal in the simple
believers, and paltry interest in the Teachers. Now, who sees not that the
explication of this matter of Fact, and it is immediate consequences, speak
direct spiritual breach, distance, difference, and disunion of minds,
affections, words and actions, which sound schismaticalness enough in all
Conscience.

The Result of all hitherto is this, that since this Condemnation is neither
legally sent nor accepted, nor yet acceptable as the case stands; since it
neither concerns Faith in the least, nor ought to concern Englands since the
thus pressing it is illegal breaking Order, and so Seditious, Schismatical, and
disgraceful to our Faith, by rendering it ridiculous, it is evident that the
pressers of it (and according to the degree of their knowledge their Followers
who accept it) are neither good Christians, loyal Subjects, nor solidly Prudent
Men; But desperately pursuing their own ambition, by flattering the Roman
Courts in what ever precipices they engage themselves and others. And, if they
be such, and it be not like they will amend, unless they and the world be told
publicly they are such, I know no reason, why both Justice and Charity oblige
me not to do it.

All hitherto is spoken in case the Condemnation has indeed issued from the
Inquisition of Rome: But, what if any one should object that in all likelihood
it is none of Theirs, or at least a Surreptitious one. All I could say is, I
have yet heard it only from private hands; which though I am not bound to
credit, yet it breeds in me a suspicion of some such thing.

As for the Terms of the Decree it self should any except against them, that
because the two Phrases, Heretical and Erroneous in Faith, signify the same
thing, one of them must needs be superfluous, and so not likely to proceed from
that Court: I could answer, that, as among Scholars, Tautologies are blamable,
so among Lawyers (such as the Cardinals for the most part are) nothing more
ordinary then Sinonama's and Repetitions. Should he go on, and object the
inconveniences of a Dis-junctive censure, as that it neither condemns nor
absolves any point in particular, and so the world is never the wiser for it. I
could reply, that where the Judges have too much work (as they must needs have
who draw to their immediate cognizance almost all the spiritual business of the
world) it saves a great deal of labor to forbid a Book in general, without
undertaking the trouble of giving a particular reason for it, and though it
would be a great happiness to be determinately instructed in the points for
which an Author is censured; yet as to the common people, it suffices their
Governors say, there are Erroneous Opinions in him, and therefore, unless you
have permission to read prohibited Books, let him alone.

Should he again insist, That probably this Decree was not Authentic, because
(in the Copy printed at Rome) the Authors Name is mis-written, as Blachei and
Wilhi; I could excuse it with saying, Italians are not well acquainted with the
hard names of us Tramontani; Or should he urge the mis-spelling some Latin
words, as Quarela, Bucins, Aucthore, Texerae, I could think it might happen by
the hasty zeal of the Solicitor, without imagining the barbarous Goths had
sacked Rome again. But should he say, there is false Latin in it, and offer to
prove it by citing these suspicious words P^pe for Papa, Institutiones, for
institutionum, Joannem for Jona; and then produce Authority that false Latin
vitiates the Popes Letters. Literas Papae invalidat falsa Latinitas: De
Rescript. c. Ad audientians. Quia per tot manus trans^unt, ut nullus in iis, si
sint verae, debeat error superesse. I should be apt I confess to follow this
known Rule rather then an Extravagant Copy of an inquisitionary Sentence; For
though the Popes Letters and his Decrees in the Inquisition be not rigorously
the same thing, yet the same inconvenience rising from either, (that is, a
diminution of respect due to the Pope) the same Law is to govern both: Nothing
being more common among the Canon Lawyers then ubi cadem ratio, ibi idem jus.
In this mind therefore I shall presume to continue, till the all knowing and
all-commanding Society shall propose to the World, as another new Article of
Faith, that the holy Inquisition, (where the Popesits, and in a Chair too)
cannot err in points of Latin.

And yet all this is easyer to deal with, than one untoward objection that still
remains; For should any fall upon the last lines of the Decree, and say, It
cannot be believed by any who respects the Roman Inquisition, that it so
threatningly should command a Man to clear himself, and never tell him in
particular, what is his fault; I am sure I should be shrewdly put to it to find
an answer. And this is the clause I indeed fear may have been procured by the
importunity of some busy Jesuit; who, should he meet with Mr. White, would
scarce perhaps be able to bridle his headstrong zeal from running full drive
upon him, and with open mouth cry out against him, Mr. White, you are accused
and deeply censured, and that by no less than the Roman Inquisition; Clear your
self, why don't you clear your self? Of what? answers Mr. White; I say, clear
your self, says the Jesuit; it is sawciness to ask of what? or to question
Authority, you will chop logic with the holy Inquisition, will you? No, but I
would gladly be told my fault, replies Mr. White, that I may know how to mend;
and I hope you have so much charity as to wish it, and to put me in a way to
it; Say you are sorry for your fault, says the insulting Jesuit, and believe us
you are in fault: This is our way of governing both our boys and men too, and
it is against the best virtue, Obedience, to demand more. I but Sir (says Mr.
White) by showing me my fault, I may come to be made see the heinousness of
it, and so be more heartily penitent. The very Spirit of an Heretic! cries the
Jesuit amain; this man will not think he is in fault, except he be shown it:
Infallibility in matters of Faith and blind Obedience have no reverence with
him. Here now, were Mr. White one of their Bigots, he might be sorry, though
he knew not for what. But yet even that would not serve his turn, or relieve
his sad case a jot. He is bid clear himself, and heavily threatened if he do
not. Now, since clearing is an Action, and Actions use to light upon
particulars (for none can build an house or write a line in common) and in our
case this clearing must either be performed by denying the books to be his,
which were an open falsehood; or by justifying, or retracting those blameable
Propositions, both which are impossible without knowing first the particular
Propositions to be so justified or retracted, it is manifest he is commanded
impossibles, and yet he is threatened shrewdly unless he perform them. The
exacting brick without straw was mild to this. That was possible to be
performed by other combustible matter, this impossible to any but a Conjurer.
The nonperformance of that was threatened with only temporal penalties, this
with spiritual: That lighter, coming from the hand of an Heathen and Tyrant;
this a thousand times heavier, pretending to come from the Authority of
Governors, whose duty it is to put the erring into a way of amendment. What a
disrespect then is it, toward the Inquisition, and the Pope, in them, who dare
impute such an uncharitable procedure to those prudent personages.

After another fashion were the Jesuits Books, and that in true Latin too,
lately condemned; of which I doubt they speak very seldom, and very gingerly to
their Devotes: several Lists of particular errors were collected out of their
Authors, and diligently conferred with the books themselves, and this in almost
every Diocese of France, and at last the whole Apology, written by the Jesuits
in defense of those errors, not only condemned by the Bishops and Diocesan
Clergy there, but by the Roman Inquisition too, notwithstanding all their power
in that Court, which they stretched to the utmost. Some few of these kind of
Errors I have here, only to give a taste of the rest, transcribed; As

That I may kill a man to prevent his giving me a box on the ear, or a stroke
with a staff; and if he have struck me, I may kill him though he fly from me.

That an Ecclesiastic or Religious man may kill him who shall attempt or but
threaten to take away his honor by slanders or calumnies.

That it is no Simony to give or take any thing for a Benefice, if it be given
or taken as a motive, not as a price.

That an Astrologer, if he have only consulted the stars, is bound to restore
the money he has received; but not, if he have taken the pains to conjure, and
the thing be come to pass by the Devils Art.

That a man is neither by the Law of nature, nor any positive Law, obliged to
restore what he has received to give an unjust sentence, or to commit Murder,
or Adultery.

That to hear two halfs or four quarters of a Mass at once ( which is easy
where many Masses are saying at the same time) satisfies the Precept of the
Church.

That he who keeps a Concubine is not to be denied Absolution, though he will
not put her away; if he say, he pretends not to sin with her, and that the case
be so, that without her his life would be but melancholy.

That probably it is no mortal sin to impose on another a false crime indefence
of one's own honor; which of all the rest is in my opinion the most horrible,
as stubbing up by the roots all charity, and veracity out of the hearts of all
the world.

These, among many more of the same kind, were particularly condemned and
recondemn'd in France; and lest you should doubt their Apologies being
condemned at Rome too, wherein all these are defended, go on and read the Copy.

Thursday 21 August 1659. In the General Congregation of the Holy Roman, and
Universal Inquisition holden in the Apostolic Palace at St. Mary the Greater
before his Holiness Pope Alexander 7. and the most Eminent and most Reverend
Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, deputed by the Sea Apostolic Inquisitors
General against Heresy in the whole Christian Commonwealth.
His Holiness Pope Alexander 7. by this present Decree prohibits and condemns
the Book entitled Apology for the Casuists, etc. and wills that it be held for
condemned and prohibited. And his Holiness farther commands that none of what
degree or condition soever, though dignifyed with special or even most special
Qualfication keep or read the said book; nor presume to print, or cause to be
printed, as well under the Penalties and Censures contained in the Holy Council
of Trent, and in the Index of prohibited Books, as others to be inflicted at
the will of his Holiness: But whoever now has, or shall hereafter at any time
have the said Book, shall under the same penalties be bound to deliver it up to
the Ordinary, or the Inquisitors.

And now what Substantial difference do you find betwixt this Censure, and that
against Mr: White; all I can see, is only the precept to clear himself; which,
for want of a particular charge, seems to have little legal signification; so
that as to the general Censures of Rome, the Jesuits have tasted of them, as
well as Mr. White: and as to particular Ones of other places, far more in the
proportion that almost all France and Lovain, exceed in Learning and Authority
the single pitiful University of Doway; which clearly argues Evidence against
the Jesuits, and against Mr. White.

My last exception, and which makes me confident those words of accurate
examination mentioned in that paper, are either of course or falsifi'd, and so,
not arguing an Act of the Inquisition, is, that I see plainly they were so far
from accurately examining the Books that they never looked so much as into the
Titles; but have most strangely mistaken and Condemned for a Book of Mr.
White's, one that was writ against him by another Author; and has Authore I.
S. on the Title Page. Mr. White writ Statera Morum; Another writ against one
part of it, and entitled his book Statera Appensa; Mr. White replied, and
called his Reply Staterae Aequilibrium. Now, these accurate Examiners, which
this paper tells us of, examined so accurately, that they mistook one Book for
another; nor only disparate Books, but opposite ones; that is, the Objection
for the Answer; nor needed they look far to have avoided the mistake, had they
but used the patience to have read quite thorough the Title Page before they
condemned the whole Book, it had been sufficient to have prevented their
error. Is not this enough to disgrace the whole Process and Pretense. Nor can
they shelter the mistake by Aequilibrium's, being bound in the same with
Appensa; For had all the Treatises there been Mr. White's, or at least Mr.
White's the first which entitled the Book: it had been some color; but, when
it is known Appensa was writ by another Author, who showed it to diverse
Ecclesiastics of credit in the first foul Copy, constantly owned it himself,
and sent one of his Copies to the Internunce of Brussels before it was printed,
and had the two first Letters of his name put in the Title Page challenging it,
which Letters were no way competent to Mr. White, it is too evident the accurate
Examiners read not, nor cared to read the very Title Page thorough, but
condemned at a venture they knew not what. And was it not, think you, a
laudable piece of service in that zealous Promooter who thus misinformed the
Inquisition, if this Censure truly proceeded from It? Or, if it be counterfeit,
is it not an intolerable impudence to father such gross mistakes on so
diliberate and prudent a Tribunal?

These are my Reasons why I conceive no true respecter of that Inquisition will
blaze this Act for Theirs. Other Exceptions too perhaps might be made, but I
desire to publish no more than I hear already reflected on.

I only add this word, and conclude, were this truly the Roman Inquisition's
Act, were it legally sent, legally receivved and promulgated here in England,
and binding according to it is full Import; when all is done, it can only
command those Books to be looked on as prohibited, that is, not to be read
without License; which, who in England either needs, or at least may not easily
have; nay, to read even those written by professed Heretics, and that too
against Catholics. Yet this is all the wool got by this great Cry.

FINIS.

