To all who desire SATISFACTION IN THE Case of Oaths, SHOWING How far under
the LAW it was lawful To SWEAR; And how that in any case under the GOSPEL it is
Forbidden.

By William Holgate.

Micah 6.8. The Lord has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God? Acts 24.14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which
they call Heresy, so Worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets. Prove. 20.28. Mercy and Truth
preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by Mercy. Isa. 1.10. We to them
that decree Unrighteous Decrees, and write grieviousness, by a Law that they
have prescribed, etc. LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Sign of
the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, 1683.

To all who desire Satisfaction in the. Case of Oaths.
WHilst Israel stood in the Covenant with God, under the Dispensation of the
Law given forth by Moses his Servant, they were in some cases allowed or
commanded to Swear by the Lord their God, for performing some special thing to
the Lord, thereby binding their Souls by an Oath, or for Confirmation of a
matter, whereby Strife was to end; but they were not to swear by any thing
else, neither after the manner of the Egyptians or Heathen: And if at any time
they swore, it was to be done in Judgment, Mercy and Truth; for if they that
were under that Dispensation or Covenant, swore to do good, or to do evil
unadvisedly or rashly, or if any heard the Voice of any such Swearers, they,
and those that swear to do good or to do evil, were to bear their Iniquity and
be shut out of the Congregation of the Lords People for that Trespass, Lev.
5.1, 4 till the Priest had offered up a Sacrifice of Atonement for them, and
they having knowledge thereof, confessed they had sinned in so Swearing.

Nevertheless, this Moses, who gave forth the Law unto Israel, said unto them,
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you, of your Brethren, like unto
me, HIM shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you; And it
shall come to pass, that every Soul which shall not hear that Prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the People, Acts 3.22, 23.

And this Prophet was Christ, the end of the Law, who said, It is finished,
John 19.30. which the holy Voice, Mat. 17.5. said, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. And he commanded Israel, Mat. 5.37 Not to
Swear at all, but that their Yea should be Yea, and their Nay, Nay. And the
same Jesus Christ said, He was greater than Solomon, Mat. 12.41, 42. and was
David's Lord, who was and is to be heard and obeyed in all things; yea,
whosoever shall break one of the least of his Commandments, and teach men so,
shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever shall do and
teach them, shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 15.19.

And his Disciple James, in Confirmation of this Testimony, writing to the
twelve Tribes, among several Godly Salutations, Admonitions and Counsels, said,
James 5.12. But above all things my Brethren, SWEAR NOT, neither by Heaven,
neither by Earth, neither by ANY OTHER OATH: As if he should have said, Though
you may fall into Temptations, yet I would have you avoid SWEARING, for there
is no good comes by Swearing, because it expressly opposes Christ Jesus our
Lord and Savior his Command; and opposes the very end of his Coming, which
was to bring men unto Perfection and Unity with himself, as in the beginning,
that so having a regard (through his Power) to their Words and Promises, they
may become conformable to him in all things, rendering unto Caesar the Things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's, who keeping
themselves in the Love of God, look for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal Life, knowing that in the World they shall have Trouble, but in Christ
Jesus Peace, which no man can take from them.

But if any shall say, It was Swearing in ordinary Communication, that Christ
forbaid.

Such may as well say, that the better Hope did no more than the Law of Moses
did, which forbad rash and ordinary Communication-Oathes, as is mentioned, Lev.
5.1.4. and confirmed by the Prophets of the Lord, Jer. 5 7. How shall I parden
thee for this? Thy Children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no
gods; and Jer. 23.10 For because of Swearing the Land mourns; Hos. 4.2. By
Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they
break forth, and Blood touches Blood; therefore shall the Land Mourn: Zach.
5.3. Then said he unto me, This is the Curse that goes forth over the face of
the whole Earth; for every one that Steals shall be cut off, as on this side;
and every one that Swears shall be cut off, as on that side, according to it.
Which Texts sufficiently prove, that under the Dispensation of the Law of
Moses, all ordinary Communication-Oathes were forbidden; so it is hoped upon a
serious and weighty Consideration of these Texts, Christians, or such as would
be esteemed Christians, will not oppose the plain Command of Christ Jesus our
Savior, or have so low esteem of his Doctrine, who is the alone Savior, as to
allege or say, That he did no more than Moses did under the Law, lest it be
said, That Christians have changed their glory for that which does not profit,
and so bring a Reproach upon Christianity; for as it was the glory of the Jews
under the Law not to Forswear, neither Swear vainly, so it is and always was
the glory and perfection of true Christians not to Swear at all, as may be
proved by numerous Testimonies of the Ancient Christians, whose Answer to such
as persecuted them, and required them to Swear, was, They were Christians, and
could not deny Christ nor his Doctrine. A few Testimonies are here recited for
the Satisfaction of the honest hearted Enquirer in this Matter.

1. And first, Polycarpus, who was John's Disciple (who wrote the Revelations)
and Bishop in Smirna, about Anno 162. denied all Oaths, and said (when
examined before the Proconsul of Smirna) That he was a Christian, and was ready
to show forth the Doctrine of Christianity, if the Governor desired the same.
Who for refusing to Swear was committed to the Flames, being eighty six years
of Age; Eusebius. lib. 4. chapter 15.

2. Basilides, a Soldier, and of Authority in the Roman host, Anno Chr. 205.
refused to swear in a matter concerning his Fellow-Souldier, affirming, He was
a Christian.

3. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, upon Psalm. 110. Do not imitate him in Swearing,
whom you cannot imitate in following; therefore Swear not; for the Gospel Truth
does not receive an Oath, since every faithful Speech is for an Oath; and what
is more, is from the evil One.

4. Jerome, upon Mat. 5.34. James 5.12. says, The great Evangelist admits not
of an Oath, since every true Saying is equal thereunto, etc.

5. Chrysostom (about Anno 399.) blames them greatly that brought forth a Book
to swear upon; saying, It is a sin to Swear well, and not lawful to swear in a
just or unjust thing; With much more against Swearing.

6. Theophilus, an Ancient Father of the Church, says, Learn hence, that under
the Law it was not evil for one to Swear, but since the coming of Christ, it is
Evil, as is Circumcision, and in sum, whatever is Jewish.

7. Ambrose, on Mat 5. Therefore the Lord, who came to teach the little Ones,
to inspire Novices, to confirm the Perfect, says in the Gospel, Ye must not
Swear at all; he spoke not only to the Apostles, but to the Multitude; for he
would not have thee to Swear, lest thou should Forswear.

8. Cyprian, (about 249.) a famous Father in his day, and faithful Martyr, de
Mortalit. It is unlawful for any man to compel another to take an Oath.

9. Hiliary (about 305.) on Mat. 5. a Father very famous in the days of
Constantine; The Law set a Penalty for Perjury, but Faith does remove the
Custom of an Oath, making the business of our Life to be determined in Truth,
and laying aside the affecting to deceive, that the business of deceiving might
be apparent between [It is] and [It is Not] and what is more, is all of Evil.

10. Gregory Nyssenus, Brother to Basil, his Works are famous, said, He who by
Moses established the beginning of the Law, by himself fulfilled all the Law
and the Prophets; who taking away Anger, abolished Killing also, and together
with Lust took away Adultery; he also casts out of men's Lives accursed
Perjuries, whilst by the Prohibition of an Oath, he has put in his, since, as
it were, to security, commanding not to Swear at all.

11. Isidorus Pelusiota (who as is said, that on Earth he lived the Life of an
Angel) writes, Epist. 155. lib. 1. If thou art of our Flock, and art ordered
under a good Shepherd, deny the Nature of wild Beasts, and obey his Voice that
forbids to Swear at all, etc. Moreover, not to Swear, is not to require an
Oath of another: If a man speaks Truth usually, he will always speak Truth,
without an Oath; but if he be a Liar, he will Lie, though he Swear, etc.

12. Augustine, on Mat. 5 (about Anno 430.) It was the Righteousness of the
Pharisees not to forswear; this he confirms, who forbids to swear, which
belongs to the Righteousness of the Kingdom of Heaven; for as he that does not
speak cannot speak a Lie, so he cannot Forswear which does not Swear. That an
Oath is not among good things, but among evil things, and used for the
Infirmity of others, which is evil; from which we pray, that we may be
delivered.

13. Chromatius, a Bishop of Aquileia, on Mat. 5. But I say unto you, Swear not
at all. The Law (says he) given by Moses received a growth, proficiency or
perfection by the Grace of the Doctrine of the Gospel. In the Law it was
commanded, not to Forswear, but in the Gospel not to Swear; which very thing
heretofore the holy Ghost did premeditate, that Solomon should command or
teach, saying, Let not thy Mouth use to Swear.

14. Cassiodorus, on Psalm. 94. about the year 500. Hence it is that men are
forbidden to Swear, because by their own Power they cannot perform their
Promises.

15. Isidorus Hispaleusis, who lived in St. Gregory's time, about Anno 540.
Many are slow to believe, which are moved at the belief of the Word; but they
do grievously offend, who compel them to Swear that speak to them.

16. Beda, about Anno 700. an English man, and styled venerable; Before all
things, my Brethren, Swear not, says, Because he entirely desires to draw out
the deadly Poison of the Tongue in his Hearers; he forbad to detract or slander
any man, or to judge his Neighbor, who forbad to grieve in Adversities, which
are open sins; That he might take away the Custom of Swearing, said, I restrain
you from the fault of Swearing, etc.

17. Theophilact, Archbishop of the Bulgarins, about Anno 900. very famous, on
Mat. 5. says, To Swear, or adjure more to Yea or Nay, is of the Devil.
Moreover, (says he) if thou should say, That the Law of Moses was Evil,
because it commanded to Swear; learn, that then it was not Evil; but after
Christ, it is Evil, as also to be circumcised, and in brief, whatsoever is
Jewish.

18. Alphonsus de Avendano, out of Cajetan's Comment of Mat. 5. The Lord
perfected the command of not Forswearing, by taking away the occasion, because
without an Oath it is impossible to incur Perjury; for an Oath was not
necessary by the first intention of Nature; for if men had continued in the
Truth, they had not lied; and because Christ came that he might bring back men
to the first Innocence, an Oath is not necessary; and therefore not good, nor
of God, etc.

19. Thomas Aquinas, Glos. on Mat. 5. p. 22. The Lord had taught before, Wrong
is not to be done to our Neighbor, as in forbidding Anger, with Murder, Lust,
Adultery, putting away ones Wife; and now he teaches, that we must abstain
from wronging of God, when he does not only forbid Forswearing as Evil, but
also an Oath, as the occasion of Evil, whence he says, Hear thou again, etc.

20. Euthymius Zagabonus on Mat. 5. p. 43. says, Again, ye have heard its said
to them of old time, Thou shall not Forswear, etc. but I say unto you, SWEAR
NOT AT ALL, etc. Quest. What then is to be done, if any require an Oath, yea,
compel to Swear? Answ. Let the fear of God be more forcible than this
Compulsion or Necessity, and choose rather to suffer all things, than to
transgress the Command, since in every Precept, force and violent danger will
often meet with thee. And unless thou esteemest the command of God every where
more forcible, all things will depart from thee, void and unperformed.

21. Jo. Major Hadingtoni, on Mat. 5. Not to Swear at all, that Precept was
given to the Disciples (the Basis) of the first Church.

22. Peter Charron, Doctor of Law in Paris, in his Book of Wisdom, chap. 37. An
Oath, what is it, but a symptom and shameful Mark of Distrust, Infidelity,
Ignorance, humane Infirmity, both in him that requires it, and that gives it,
that ordains it; alluding to Christ's words, What is more than Yea, Yea, and
Nay, Nay, is of the Devil.

23. Oecumenius, a famous Greek writer, about Anno 1070. on James 5.12. writes
thus: But some will say, If any be forced to Swear, what must be done? We say,
the fear of God shall be stronger than the force of him that compels, seeing
that God sought not a Sacrifice by Beasts, but a broken Spirit, enflamed by the
fire of Love. He forbids to Swear by God, because of Perjury, by Heaven and
other Oaths, that men should not bring these things into the Honor of God; for
all that did Swear, did Swear by the greater.

24. Anselmus, Bishop of Canterbury, about Anno 1090. on Mat. 5. says, Moses
seeing that he could not take away Swearing, takes away Perjury; but the Lord
removes them more perfectly from Perjury, when he forbids them to Swear at all.

25. Michael Sadler, an eminent man, (called a Lord) was cruelly Tortured and
put to Death by the Papists, under the Emperor of Germany, whose Brethren were
also executed with the Sword, and his Wife and Sisters drowned for holding
opinion, That men should not Swear to or before the Magistrate. About Anno 1527.

26. Bible Notes, upon Mat. 5. Whatsoever you avouch, avouch it barely, and
whatsoever you deny, deny it barely, without any more words.

27. Beza on James 5. That which you have to say or affirm, speak it simply;
and that you have to deny, deny it simply and flatly.

28. H. Grotius (on Mat. 5.) a great and learned Man, excludes all Oaths, not
only such as are used in common Conversation, but such as relate to Trade or
pecuniary matters.

29. Bishop Sanderson, de juram praelict. 5. No need to forbid by a new
Commandment things that of themselves were always unlawful. So he, otherwise,
We must read Christ's words thus; Ye have heard by them of old time, Thou shall
not Forswear thy self, his shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say
unto you, Swear not at all, except in some cases. Which would be a wronging of
Christ's words.

Now they that love Christ will keep his Commandments, that so they may have
right to enter into the Joys of their Lord, where they will be preserved from
the Evil of that day, which will burn as an Oven, wherein all the Proud, yea,
and all that do Wickedly, or tempt God's People (by laying of Snares to catch
them in) shall be as Stubble; so that neither Root nor Branch shall be left to
the proud, wicked oppressing violent Men, who have filled the Earth with
Violence, and made the Land, by reason of Oaths to mourn. So it will be good
for all in this the day of God's Power, to consider what they are doing, and
whose hands they are strengthening; for it was the chief Priests that were the
chiefest Instruments, by stirring up the Rulers ( Luke 23.13, 18.) to murder
the innocent; and so brought innocent Blood upon their Heads, and upon their
Posterity: Oh! therefore let every one that fears the Lord pray for the Peace
of England, that the hearts of them that hate Peace may be converted, and
instead of seeking to cause Discord, Hatred and Heart-burnings amongst men, by
encourageing Evildoers, they may labor to preserve Peace, by doing that which
begets good Will amongst men, and so be true Christians, obeying Christ Jesus,
who commands to love Enemies, and to bless and not curse, that so their
Righteousness may exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees of this Age, or the
Egyptians of old, Exodus 1. who made Israel serve with Rigor, that their Lives
were made bitter unto them with hard Bondage, though they neither imprisoned
them, nor took their Goods or Cattle from them, for all their Cattle went out
of Egypt with them, as is recorded, Exodus 10.26. chap. 12.31, 32.

And we see by Experience, that an Oath will not bind ill mon, but is a Snare
and a stumbling block to the upright hearted, who need no s^aring
Asseverations, to awe them into Truth-speaking, knowing that what God dispensed
with under the Law, he resolved to remove under the Gospel, and to bring things
nearer to himself in Truth and Righteousness, from Adultery in the Act, to
Adultery in the Thought, from Revenge to Sufferance, from true Swearing to No
Swearing at all, whereby all abuse of Oaths and Perjury comes to be removed
with the Oaths themselves, by working out of men's hearts that Fraud and
Falsehood that brought them in, and implanting Evangelical Verity in Room
thereof, which speaks the Truth, the whole Truth, and Nothing but the Truth
to his Neighbor, and makes a like matter of Conscience to tell a Lie, as to
Forswear. And it is known to Almighty God, and we desire most heartily it may
be known and believed by all, that we have no other end or inducement to this
so general Refusal we are found in throughout the Nation.

Written, the 3d Month, 1683. William Holgate.
The Gospel was preached to Abraham before Oaths and Swearing were, and Christ
in his Gospel ends Swearing.



THE END.
BOOK (...) and Sold by, Andrew Soul at the Crooked ^ in Holloway-Lane in
Shareditch.

NO ^^^ss, No Crown: Or a Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the
holy Cross of Christ. Price 2 s. England's present Interest discovered, with
honor to the Prince and sa^y to the People. 5 d. A brief state and examination
of Liberty Spiritual. Price 2 d. An Address to Protestants upon the present
Conjuncture. 18 d. An Answer to a foolish Libel, called, The Quakers Opinions.
2 d. An Epistle, containing a solemn Farewell, etc. Price One half Penny. All
writ by William Penn. The Principles of Truth, or a dec^i^ation of our Faith,
who are called Quakers. Price bound 8 d. Isaac Pennington's Works Price 12 s
Humphery Smith's Books collected into one Volumn. 2 s. 6 d. The Collected
Labors of Samuel Fisher. 12 s. A Collection of the several Writings of William
Baily. 5 s. 6 d. James ^^^^els Collection. 3 s. 4 d. A Collection of the
Writings of that faithful Servant of the Lord Richard Hubborthorn. 2 s. The
Redemption of the Seed; being the several Writings of Richard Moore. 6 d. Dus
Order of Law and Justice pleaded, against Irregular and Arbitrary Proceedings.
By George Whithead. ^ d. The Quakers Religious Assemblies vindicates. One half
Penny. A legal Examination of Abuses of Law. Concerning 1. Forcible Entry; 2.
Imprisonment without War^^^, how contrary to Law; 3. Riots, Routs and Unlawful
Assemblies; 4. The public Peace and Breach of it; 5. Oppression and D^ess by
Goals and Goalers, and what Privilege the Law allows to Prisoners. 3 d. The
Prisoners Vindication, with a sober Expostulation and Reprehension of
Persecution. By (...) Gratton. 2 d. God's Mercies testified unto, and Man's
Cruelty witnessed against; or, A faithful Demonstration against the Cruelty of
Persecution. 1 d. (...) the Plain Man wrestling with God, for perfect Victory
(...) ^^^^ion over Esau, the Rough and Cunning Man. By (...) 2 d. (...)
Pathway opened to the simple heart^d, for the answer(...) and Objections, etc.
By S. Crisp. 1 d. (...) England, and faithful Warning to the In(...). 2 d.
(...) Bi^^ley. d.

