A DISCOURSE Touching PROVISION FOR The Poor.

Written by Sir Matthew Hale, late Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

LONDON: Printed by H. Hills, for John Leigh at Stationers Hall, and are to be
sold by the Booksellers in London. 1683

THE PREFACE.
A Due care for the Relief of the Poor is an act, 1. of great Piety toward
Almighty God, who requires it of us: He has left the Poor as his Pupils, and
the Rich as his Stewards to provide for them: It is one of those great Tributes
that he justly requires from the rest of Mankind; which, because they cannot
pay to him, he has scattered the Poor among the rest of Mankind as his
Substitutes and Receivers.

2. It is an act of greatest Humanity among men. Mercy and Benignity is due to
the very Beasts that serve us, much more to those that are partakers of the
same common nature with us.

3. It is an act of great Civil Prudence and Political Wisdom: for Poverty in
itself is apt to Emasculate the minds of men, or at least it makes men
tumultuous and unquiet. Where there are many very Poor, the Rich cannot long or
safely continue such; necessity renders men of Phlegmatique and dull natures
stupid and indisciplinable; And men of more fiery or active constitutions
rapacious and desperate.

At this day it seems to me that the English Nation is more deficient in their
prudent Provision for the Poor than any other cultivated and Christian State;
at least that have so many opportunities and advantages to supply them.

In some other Countries a Beggar is a rare sight; Those that are unable to
maintain themselves by Age or Impotency are relieved. And those that are able
to supply their wants by their Labor are furnished with Employments. suitable
to their condition.

And by this means there is not only a good and orderly Education and a decent
face of the public; But the more populous the State or Country is, the Richer
and the more wealthy it is.

But with us in England for want of a due regulation of things the more
Populous we are the Poorer we are; so that, that wherein the Strength and
Wealth, of a Kingdom consists, renders us the weaker and the poorer.

And which is yet worse, Poor Families which daily multiply in the Kingdom for
want of a due order for their Employment in an honest course of life whereby
they may gain subsistence for them and their Children do unavoidably bring up
their Children either in a Trade of Begging or Stealing, or such other Idle
course, which again they propagate over to their Children, and so there is a
successive multiplication of hurtful or at least unprofitable People, neither
capable of Discipline nor beneficial Employment.

It is true we have very severe Laws against Begging the very giver being in
some cases subject to a penalty by the Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 17. But it takes
little Effect. And indeed as the case stands with us it is no reason it should:
for what man that is of ability can have the conscience to deny an Alms, or to
bring a Wanderer to the punishment directed by that Statute, and the Statute of
39 Eliz. when he cannot choose but know that there is not that due course
provided, or at least used, that Persons necessitous, and able to work may have
it; Indeed were there a clear means practiced for the Employing of poor
Persons, It were an uncharitable action to relieve them in a course of
Idleness. But when I do not know that there is such a Provision, I dare not
deny my relief, because I know not whether without it he may be starved with
hunger, without his own default.

We have also very severe Laws against Theft, possibly more severe than most
other Nations, yea, and than the Offense in it self simply considered deserves;
And there is little to be said in the defense of the severity of the Law
herein, but the multitude of the Offenders and the design of the Law rather to
terrify than to punish ut metus in omnes, poena in paucos: But it is most
apparent that the Law i^ frustrated of its design therein; for although more
suffer at one Sessions a^ Newgate for Stealing and Breaking up Houses, and
Picking of Pockets, and such other Larcenies out of the protection of Clergy,
than suffer in some other Countries for all Offenses in three years, yet the
Goals are never the Emptier: Necessity, and Poverty, and want of a due
Provision for the Employment of Indigent Persons, and the custom of a loose and
Idle life, daily supply with advantage the number of those who are taken off by
the Sentence of the Law: And doubtless as the multitude of Poor, and
necessitous, and uneducated Persons, increase, the multitude of Malefactors
will increase, notwithstanding the Examples of Severity.

So that upon the whole account the prudence of prevention, as it is more
Christian, so it will be more Effectual than the Prudence of remedy: The
prevention of Poverty, Idleness and a loose and disorderly Education, Even of
poor Children, would do more good to this Kingdom than all the Gibbets, and
Cauterizations, and Whipping Posts, and Goals in this Kingdom, and would render
these kind of Disciplines less necessary and less frequent.

But hitherto I am in generals, which rarely prosper into Action or Conviction:
I therefore shall confider principally these things: 1. What Provisions there
are already settled by the Laws in force for the Relief and Employment of the
Poor. 2 Wherein the Defects are, in relation to those Laws, or Provisions, and
the Consequences thereof. 3. What may be thought a convenient Supply of those
Defects and the Consequences of such supplies.


CHAP. I. Touching the Laws at present in force for the Relief and Employment
of the Poor.
THe Laws relating to the Poor are of two kinds, viz. 1. Such as concern the
relief of the Aged, and Impotent, that are not able by their labor to maintain
themselves. 2. Such as concern the employment and setting of work, of such as
are able. And this latter as shall be shown, is the more comprehensive and
beneficial charity, although both are necessary and become us, both as men and
as Christians; much more Touching the former of these viz. the relief of the
impotent Poor, the Laws of England have provided a double remedy. First, by
giving great encouragement to voluntary undertakings of good and liberal minds
in this kind. 2. by Compulsary means upon all.

Again as touching the former of these, the Statute of 39. Eliz. Cap. 5. has
given a great encouragement to such as shall Erect Hospitals, Houses of
Correction and Maisons de Dieu. And the Statutes of 39. Eliz. Cap. 6. and 43.
Eliz. Cap. 4. have taken special care for the due employment of gifts to
charitable uses. And certainly such voluntary Assignations argue an Excellent
and Charitable mind in those that shall so voluntarily give; And the Statutes
have given a fair Encouragement to the Charityes of men in this kind. But this
provision does but little in order to relief: For 1. for the most part such
Hospitals, Extend but to a few aged Persons limited to some particular Town,
unless it be in the large Hospitals, in London, where there is some provision
more Extensive in respect both of number and age, as St. Thomas Hospital,
Christ-Church Hospital and some others. 2. But besides this those are but
Voluntary and not Compulsary; although there may be some that may be charitably
minded, yet for the most part men are backward in works of Charity; Self love,
Covetousness, distrust of the Truth and Providence of God keeps most from
overflowing Charity or Building or Endowing Hospitals.

Therefore there was a Compulsary laid upon men for the relief of the Poor
within their respective Parishes, viz. the Statute of 43. Eliz. Cap. 2. being
the first compulsary Law that I remember of that kind: And indeed it now became
necessary to be done by a Compulsary means which before that time was left more
arbitrary, because the Kingdom became then much more Populous than in former
time and with it the Poor also greatly increased, and besides many of those
methods of their voluntary relief was then much abated; which Statute Enables
the Churchwardens and Overseers, etc. to do these things: 1. To take order for
setting to work the Children of those whose Parents are not able to maintain
their Children. 2. To take order to set those to work as such, having no means
to maintain themselves, use no ordinary trade. But provides not sufficient
Compulsaries to make them work. 3. To raise weekly by Taxation a convenient
stock of Flax, Hemp, etc. to set the Poor on work: But no means at the first,
before the return of the Manufacture to pay them wages in Express words, but is
supplied by the latter general clause. (And to do and Execute all other things,
as well for the disposing of the said Stock, or otherwise concerning the
premises as to them shall seem convenient.) 4. To raise competent sums of Money
for the impotent Poor not able to work. 5. Also for the putting of Poor
Children Apprentices but no Compulsary for any to receive them:


Among all these Provisions the 4th concerns the relief of the Poor by
Taxation, and Contributions to such as are impotent, the four other particulars
concern their Employment, and of such as are able to work, which is the far
greater number. And although the relief of the Impotent Poor seems to be a
Charity of more immediate Exigence yet the Employment of the Poor is a Charity
of greater Extent, and of very great and important Consequence to the public
Wealth, and Peace of the Kingdom as also to the Benefit and Advantage of the
Poor.

I therefore come to that second Business relating to the Poor, viz. the
setting the Poor on Work.

The Laws that concern that Business of the Employment of the Poor are of two
kinds; viz. that which contains a Compulsary means of providing work for the
Poor which is the Statute of 43. Eliz. And secondly those Laws which are in
some kind Compulsary to force Persons to work; and these are of two kinds, viz.

1. Those that concern Children and the Binding of them Apprentices, viz. the
Clause of the Statute 43. Eliz. Cap. 4. before mentioned and the Statute 7.
Jac. Cap. 1. which makes fair Provision for the raising of Money to bind them,
and directs the manner of its Employment. But as before is observed, has not
any sufficient Compulsary for Persons to take them, and perchance there might
be fit to have some such qualifications in that Compulsary which might not
leave it too arbitrary in the Justices of Peace to compel whom they please, to
take whom they please: But this is not the Business, I drive at, perchance the
general Provision which I design may make this at least not so frequently
necessary.

2. In reference to Rogues, Vagabonds and Idle and disorderly Persons, the
Statute 7. Jac. Cap. 4. gives power to the Justices of Peace to send them to
the House of Correction, which they are thereby required to cause to be
Erected. 2. Power to the Master of such House of Correction to keep them to
work.

But even in this particular there are defects. 1. It is not general for all
Persons, but at most Idle and disorderly Persons. 2. That description is very
uncertain in reference to such Persons, and leaves the Justices either too
great or too little power. 3. For want of a convenient Stock to be raised for
such Houses of Correction, and advantageous ways for such work, it either
leaves such as are sent without an Employment or renders their Employment
ungrateful in respect of the sinalness of the wages, and rather makes People
hate Employment as a hell than to Entertain it as a means of a comfortable
support; which though it may be well enough as a punishment for disorderly
persons that refuse to work, yet it is not applicable to those that are only
idle, it work: 4. It is a difficult thing to determine who shall be said an
idle Person, it is a reasonable answer to that, they are Idle for want of such
work as they are able to do, or for want of such wages as might give them a
reasonable support; For there is no power given, nor is it reasonable it
should, to compel Persons, to set them on work, or to set them on work at
convenient wages. 5. And lastly, it is not universal; many Persons are not
within that Law which would work if they might: or if they might at reasonable
rates, whereby they might live. There is need, therefore of some such provision
that might be as ample as the occasion, and without which indeed all the Laws
already made are either weak and ineffectual to their Ends, and the generality
of the Poor left destitute of a convenient support and provision.

CHAP. II. Touching the Power by the Law settled for the general Provision for
the Poor, and their defect.
UPon the consideration of the Statutes for the Poor the only Statute that
provides universally is that of 43. Eliz. which generally makes two Provisions.

1. For the Impotent Poor, that are not able to work: And it is true is a good
and Effectual Provision for such, if duly Executed. But as I said before, the
Plaster is not so large as the sore, there are many Poor that are able to work
if they had it, and had it at reasonable wages, whereby they might support
themselves and their Families, which oftentimes are many. These are not within
the Provision of the Law and if they come for Exhibitions, they are denied, or
at least have but very small, and such as cannot support them and their
Families. And indeed if they should have sufficient Exhibition for the support
of them and their Families, the Parishes where they live were not able to
supply them in a proportion answerable to their necessities, or answerable to
that supply which a full Employment would afford them; For instance a Poor Man
and his Wife though able to work, may have four Children, two of them possibly
able to work, two not able: The Father and the Mother are not able to maintain
themselves and their Family in Meat, Drink, Clothing and Houserent under ten
Shillings per Week, and so much they might probably get if employed; This
amounts to 26. l. per Annum, if there were forty such Families in a great
Parish, and they lived upon this Exhibition colleited by rates, it would arise
to above 800. l. per Annum, which in many Parishes Exceeds the yearly Value of
their Lands or Rents, yet when these Persons are kept on work thus much must be
gotten by them, and without a supply Equivalent to this they must live by
Begging, or Stealing, or Starve: Therefore the second Provision is,

2. For those Poor that are able to work, and in reference to them it gives
power to raise Stocks by rateing the Parishioners, and setting the Poor on work.

The defects of this Provision are,

1. In the Execution of the Law already made; for let any man look over most of
the Populous Parishes in England, indeed there are rates made for the relief of
the Impotent Poor, and it may be the same relief is also given in a narrow
measure unto some others, that have great Families, and upon this they live
miserably and at best from Hand to Mouth, and if they cannot get work to make
out their livelihood they and their Children set up a trade of Begging at best.
But it is rare to see any Provision of a Stock in any Parish for the relief of
the Poor. And the reasons are principally these: 1. The Generality of People
that are able are yet unwilling to Exceed the present necessary charge, they do
choose to live for an hour rather than project for the future; and although
possibly trebling their Exhibition in one grofs sum at the beginning of the
year, to raise a Stock might in all probability render their future yearly
payments for seven years together less by half or two thirds, than what must be
without it, yet they had rather continue on their yearly Payments, year after
year, though it Exhaust them in time, and make the Poor nothing the better at
the years End. 2. Because those places, where there are most Poor, consist for
the most part of Tradesmen, whose Estates lie principally in their Stocks,
which they will not endure to be searched into to make them contributary to
raise any considerable Stock for the Poor, nor indeed so much as to the
ordinary Contributions: But they lay all the rates to the Poor upon the Rents
of Lands and Houses, which alone without the help of the Stocks are not able to
raise a Stock for the Poor, although it is very plain that Stocks are as well
by Law rateable as Lands, both to the relief, and raising a Stock for the Poor:
3. Because the Churchwardens and Overseers, to whom this power is given, are
Inhabitants of the same Parish, and are either unwilling to charge themselves,
or displease their Neighbors in Charging more than they needs must toward the
Poor: And although it were to be wished and hoped that the Justices of Peace
would be forwardly to Enforce them if they might, though it may concern them
also in point of present profit, yet if they would do any thing herein they are
not empowered to and Overseers to do it, who most certainly will never go about
it to burden as they think, themselves, and displease their Neighbors unless,
some Compulsary power were not only lodged by Law, but also executed in some
that may have a power over them to enforce it, or to do it, if they do it not,
and to do it effectually, if they do it either partially or too sparingly: 4.
Because People do not consider the inconvenience that will in time grow to
themselves by this neglect, and the benefit that would in a little time accrue
to them by putting it in practice if they would have but a little patience, as
shall be shown hereafter.

2. The second Defect is in the Law itself; which are these: 1. No power in the
Justices of Peace, or some Superintendent power to compel the raising of a
Stock where the Churchwardens and Overseers neglect it. 2. The act charge
every Parish apart where it may be they are able to do little toward it,
neither would it be so effectual as if three, four, five or more contiguous
Parishes did contribute toward the raising of a Stock proportionable to their
Poor respectively.

3. There is no power for hireing or erecting a common House, or place for
their common Workhouse, which may be in some respects, and upon some
occasions, useful and necessary, as shall be shown.

CHAP. III. The Remedy propounded.
1. THAT the Justices of the Peace at the Quarter Sessions do set out and
distribute the Parishes in their several Countiesinto several Divisions, in
Each of which there may be a Workhouse for the common use of the respective
Divisions, wherein they are respectively placed, viz. one, two, three, four,
five or six Parishes to a Workhouse, according to the greatness or sinalness,
and accommodation of the several Parishes.

2. That at that Sessions the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the
respective P Parishes, bring in their several rates for their relief of their
respective Poor upon Oath. And that the said Justices do assess three, four or
five yearly Pays to be levied and collected at one or two entire sums within
the time prefixed by them for the raising of a Stock to set the Poor within
those Precincts on work, and to build or procure a convenient Workhouse for
employing the Poor, if need be, in it, and for lodging Materials, and for
instructing Children in the Trade or Work.

3. That there be yearly Chose by the said Justices a Master for Each
Workhouse, with a convenient Salary out of the said Stock or the proceed
thereof to continue for 3 years, and two Overseers to see the Issuing and
return of the said Stock, and to take the accounts quarterly or monthly of the
Master as they shall think fit.

4. That the Stock be delivered to the Overseers, and by them Issued to the
Master, as there shall be occasion, and that they also from time to time
receive the proceed of the said Stock and the accounts for the same.

5. That at the End of every year the Master and Overseers give up their
accounts to the two next Justices of the Peace at times by them prefixed, and
publicly notifyed to the Inhabitants of Each Precinct, to the End that they
may take any Exceptions to such accounts, if there be cause.

6. That the Master and Overseers of every respective Workhouse stand, and be
incorporate by the name of Master and Overseers of their respective Precincts,
and capable to take in Succession by will or otherwise, Lands, Goods, or Money,
or other Legacies or Gifts for the Benefit of the Poor, within their respective
Precincts.

7. That they also be accomptable, as well to their respective Successors, and
also to the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions for the benefit and
proceed and Employment of such Gifts and Bequests.

8. That they be disabled to grant any Lands to them given or bequeathed for
any longer term then one Year, and at an improved Rent.

9. That if any Person that is able to work, and not able to maintain himself,
shall refuse to do so, he may be forced thereunto by Warrant of two Justices of
Peace by Imprisonment, and moderate correction in such Workhouse.

10. If any Person employed by the Master, shall imbezill or wilfully
prejudice, or spoil his work, he shall upon complaint and proof thereof by the
Party grieved to any Justice of Peace, and by Warrant from him receive
Imprisonment or moderate correction by Warrant of such Justice.

These be the heads of that Provision, I could wish for the setting the Poor on
work, which is but an Essay and may receive Alterations or Additions upon
consideration.

The Benefits, that would come by this Method would be very many and great: I
shall set down some of them that occur to me.

1. By Incorporating of these Workhouses, which are the best kind of
Hospitals, charitable minded Persons would have as it were a Pillar whereunto
to fasten their Charity, which would prevent many Difficulties in the faithful
Administrations thereof, and would invite Benefactors.

2. Whereas Hospitals provide for some few Poor Impotent People, this would
prevent Poverty and in a little tract of time bring up hundreds to be able to
gain their lively hoods.

3. Whereas in that State that things are, our Populousness, which is the
greatest blessing a Kingdom can have, becomes the burden of the Kingdom, by
breeding up whole Races and Families, and successive Generations in a mere
Trade of Idleness, Thieving, Begging, and a barbarous kind of life, which must
in time prodigiously increase and overgrow the whole face of the Kingdom, and
eat out the heart of it: This course within one seven Years alters the whole
State of this Disorder, and brings People and their Children after them into a
Regular, Orderly and Industrious course of life, which will be as natural to
them as now Idleness, and Begging, and Theeving is.

For no Person will have need to Beg or Steal, because he may gain his living
better by Working.

And no man will be so vain, and indeed hurtful to the Public as to give to
such as Beg, and thereby to encourage them, when he is sure they may gain their
living by Working. And all the Laws against Vagrants, Beggars and Wanderers,
will be then Effectually put in Execution, when we may be sure they may be
employed if they will: But till that the interdicting and punishing of the
Beggars and Givers seems to me a most unreasonable piece of Imprudence, as well
as Uncharitableness.

4 By this means the Wealth of the Nation will be increased, Manufactures
advanced and Every Body put into a capacity of Eating his own Bread; for upon
what imaginable account can we think, that we should not be as able to improve
our Populousness to our Wealth, as well as Holland, and Flanders, and
Berbadoes, if we had but their Industry and Orderly Management? If it be said,
their Disposition is more Industrious than ours: It is true in that condition
that matters are ordered; but if we had the same Industrious Education, we
should have the same Industrious Disposition: let a man, one that has been
bred up in the Trade of Begging, he will never, unless complelled, fall to
Industry; and on the other side, it is a wonderful Necessity indeed that shall
bring one bred up in Civility, and Industry, to Beg, as is Easily observable in
many poor Places and Families.

And were there no other Benefit to the Kingdom in general nor to the
particular Places, where such Workhouses shall be settled, but this, although
the Stock were wholly lost in four Years, it would be an abundant Recompense by
the accustoming the poor sort to a Civil and Industrious course of life,
whereby they would soon become, not only not burdensome, but profitable to the
Kingdom, and the Places where they live.

5. By this means there would soon be an Improvement of the several
Manufactures of the Kingdom, both for the necessary Consumption of the Kingdom,
and for Exportation, whereby our Trade Outward would exceed our Trade Inward,
which Outward Trade, as it is the Basis and Foundation of all our Trade Inward;
And the Excess and Overballance of our Trade Outward to our Trade Inward is the
only means not only to keep our Money at home, but to gain an increase of
Money, and so advances the true Intrinsique Wealth of the Kingdom; for as of
our Hand if our Trade Outward Exceed our Trade Inward the Excess must of
Necessity be returned in Money or Bullion, so if our Trade Inward Exceed our
Trade Outward, the Excess must be made good from hence in Money, which must
needs insensibly impoverish the Kingdom, and Experience makes us know it to be
true: Now the Advance of our Manufactures would be by this means plainly
Evident, for Woollen Manufactures or Cloth, the Staple Commodity of this
Kingdom, would be more, and these other Woollen Manufactures, as Kersyes,
Serges, Baize, which, though now confined to several parts of the Kingdom, as
Devonshire, Norfolk, Colchester, would be by this means diffused over the whole
Kingdom, and those Places which have little of Woollen Manufacture, as
Lincolnshire, Northamptonshire, and other Counties, would soon fall into it; So
likewise knitting of Stockings, Capps, Wast-Coats and the like. 2. Our Linen
Manufactures, as Linen Cloth, Laces of all forts, Nets, Sails, etc. would
become native, and supply the Want of the Kingdom, and prevent the necessity of
Importation of Linen Cloth from Holland and France, of Laces from Flanders:
And as this trade is in some degree used in Lancashire, Leicestershire, and
some other Places, so it would be communicated to other Places of the Kingdom.
And it is very considerable the numbers of Poor that would be by this means
employed in dressing of Hemp and Flax, Spinning, Weaving, Whitening and the
like. And if any shall say, we want the Materials terials, and we want those
that should instruct the Poor in the Ordering of them, The Answer is at hand;
If once the Manufacture were begun to be put into a Method by this way, all men
would quickly sow Hemp and Flax in some Parcels of their Tillage, and possibly
some Lands that were not so fit for other Tillage would be employed in this:
two Acres of Hemp and Flax in every Parish would employ multitudes, which now
People neglect to sow because they have no way to vent or employ it: And for
Instructors, when once the alarm is abroad of such a design, it will draw over
Workmen from other Foreign Parts; and by this means we gained, or at least
recovered the Skill of making Woollen Cloth from other Parts, as appears by
undeniable Evidence. And if it shall be said that this will defraud and
straiten us of Laborers in our Woollen Manufactures; there can be no fear of
that; for we have Poor enough to be employed in both, and it is most certain,
that the Populousness of the Kingdom still increases, notwithstanding its
great Exhaustings by Wars and Plagues, and Foreign Plantations, and
consequently the Poor will be proportionably increased, so that we may
reasonably suppose that in one seven Years, by the blessing of God, the very
proceeds, that will be able and fit to work, of poor Families, will be more
than double to what they are now, which will continually increase in a kind of
Geometrical Progression, whereby there will be enough for double the employment
that is now for them.

6. By the means of these Workhouses, there will be an Opportunity for One or
Two Persons, skilled in any Manufacture, to instruct Twenty in the Trades, by
common Resort, Meeting and daily Residence of Children and young People there;
and there may be Opportunity, to teach Children to read without any
interruption, in the Employments of them that are able to teach them, or of
them that are able to work.

7. By this means the yearly Contributions for the Necessary relief of Poor,
that are able to work, and their Families, and those kind of Contributions
which in time will be impossible to support the Poor, will be changed into a
supply Every way more easy for them that are to pay, though at first it may
require a more liberal assistance for the raising of the Stocks, and Every way
more beneficial and advantageous for the Poor; First, Because they will hereby
be educated and inured to a way of Civility and Industry. 2. They will gain a
Trade, which will go along with them as the constant support of their lives. 3.
The Wages that they will gain will be a greater and better support than they
can have by any Contributions that are able to be assessed for them for they
may be able to gain, Two, Three, Four, Five and Six Shillings a Week, for Every
Person able to work, which is five times more than their weekly or yearly
Contributions do or can amount unto, without Exhausting more than the Revenues
of the Parishes, wherein these Poor are in many places: And this shall be
demonstrated to the Eye of any that will consider this instance, which I have
Exactly tried, and Examined, and found to be true: The ordinary Process and
time, and charge of making a common Course medly Cloth of our Gloucester shire
Wool at this day is; 1. In Every such Cloth of about 32 Yards long there is
Ninety Pounds of Wool, which will cost at this day at 12 d. per Pound Four
Pounds 10 s. viz. ordinary in a gray Cloth.

54 l. of Abb. 4 l. 10 s. 34 l. of Warp. 4 l. 10 s. 2 l. of Mixture. 4 l. 10 s.
2. The Charge of making this Cloth:

l. s. d. 1 Parting and Picking 0 3 0 2 Coloring 0 16 0 3 Breaking and
Spinning the Abb at two pence farthing per l. 1 7 9 4 Breaking and Spinning the
Warp at 5 d. per l. 0 18 6 5 Cards and Oil 1 0 0 6 Weaving, Spooling and
Warping 1 1 3 7 Milling and Burling. 0 12 0 l. s. d. 8 Shearing and Dressing 0
18 0 9 Drawing 0 1 6 10 Carriage and Facturage 0 7 0

So the whole Charge comes to 11 l. 15 s.

Out of which deducting the Materials of Wool, and Cards, and Oil, viz. 5 l.
10 s.

Their remains Entirely for the Expense of work amount to 6 l. 5 s.

It is true at this day this Cloth yields not above 12 l. to be sold, which is
only 5 s. profit, but when Trade is quicker it may yield 13 l. or more.

The People that are employed in bringing about this Cloth to be ready are 14,
viz. 3 Weavers and Spoolers, 2 Breakers, six Spinners, one Fuller and Burler,
one Sheerman, one Parter and Picker: The Weavers supply the Office of Spooler
and Warper.

These will bring about the first Cloth in about two Months space: But being
continued in a constant tract the Cloth will be brought about in three weeks
time, for all the other Workmen are at work and fit the Cloth for the Weaver
in that space that he is Weaving the first Cloth.

5. Consequently this one Loom thus employed all the Year round allowing two
Months to the first Cloth, and three Weeks to every other, will make fourteen
returns the first Year of Cloth ready for sale and sixteen returns Every Year
after.

6. Consequently that which this yields for bare Wages to these 14 poor Workmen
for the first Year is Eighty seven Pounds ten Shillings, and for the following
Years is Ninety seven Pounds, and by this Computation it is Easy to see what
Every Workman can gain a Week being full employed.

7. About one hundred Pounds Stock will for ever keep this Looms work going,
and maintain these fourteen Workmen, and consequently a Stock of four hundred
Pounds will keep on foot four Looms work, and keep on Work fifty six Persons,
and be able to abide the ordinary delays of sale incident to the Markets.

8. But if it could be supposed that the Cloth could be sold as soon as made
(which is not I confess reasonably to be Expected) then a Stock of four and
twenty Pounds would by its continual return provide Materials, and pay the
Workmen for one Looms work in perpetuity: But because the returns by sale
cannot be as speedy as the work is'done, the Stock must be near 100 l. to abide
the delay of a Month, two, three, four or more, in point of sale, and likewise
to buy Wool seasonably for Work. And by this it appears that although one
hundred pounds Stock by its 16 returns yields but an inconsiderable advantage
to the Master at five Shillings per Cloth, viz. but four Pounds in the Year,
yet it yields a considerable advantage to the poor Workers, viz. near one
hundred Pounds per annum; and consequently a Stock of four hundred Pounds
yields near four hundred Pounds per annum. And conse sequently these fifty six
poor People that are kept on work with this Stock of four hundred Pounds could
not live better, if the Parish were at the yearly pension of four hundred
Pounds per annum, to relieve them, nor indeed so well, considering they are by
this means kept in a way of employment and honest industry; And yet without
some supply either by Wages or Contribution those fifty six poor People being
destitute of Wages or Contributions to this value or near it, must live by
stealing or begging, or starve.

And let it be also considered that this Stock thus raised and set going
maintains it self by a perpetual circulation and vicissitude, without any
considerable help by any farther supply, and yet perpetually countervails a
Contribution of near four hundred Pounds per annum for the relief of these
fifty six poor Persons.

By all which it will appear that the advantage of a Stock employed, and once
set on foot does countervail a great Contribution and indeed greater then can
be raised and yearly continued by most places, and will at least in time render
those yearly constant Contributions lower and less needful.

9. But yet farther, by this means there will be a reasonable gage set to Wages
of Workmen: It is not unknown how that some covetous Masters in hard times, if
they are well stocked and of abilities, will set on work many Poor, but they
must take such Wages as they are not able to live upon, and that also many
times paid in Corn, Wool, Cheese, and other things at rates high enough: And
indeed if they will work upon these terms they may, but if not they turn them
off, or not employ them, and thereupon the poor Workmen not being able to live
without work, and having no place to resort for any, are under a necessity of
working to them at inconsiderable rates. And such Masters make greater
advantage by this means when trade is low then when it is open: But by this
means there would be a refuge for the Poor to be employed at reasonable Wages;
and the reason is Evident, because this being but an Expedient, not so much for
gain to the Master as for Employment for the Poor, as long as the Stock makes
but good it self, or be managed without considerable loss, it attains its End,
and therefore may give competent Wages. But on the other hand the
Trading-Master looks for his profit, and if his Stock turns not to him for gain
he gives over, or reduces the Workman to inconsiderable Wages that his own
gain may be the greater. And although it may be there be some honest minded and
charitable Masters that will be content for some time to employ their Stock
though without gain, yet they are but rare to be found and such as commonly
hold not out long unless they find profit though perchance they suffer no loss:
These be some of those Considerations that show the usefulness of this
Expedient: I shall now consider some of the Objections that may be made against
it: 1. Ob. It is a great business to raise for the purpose four Years Pay at
once to make up a Stock, and yearly Contributions are more Easy.

I answer, It is true, and yet the advantage even to the objecters themselves
is even to their sense apparently great: If a man had a Rent of Inheritance
issuing out of his Land, he would not think much of giving sixteen Years
purchase to buy it in: And the charge that goes out for the Poor as it is as
much and as certain a Charge as a Rent, so it is evident to us that it has
increased yearly, and of necessity the longer things are continued in this
careless way it must increase in an Excessive Proportion, and to give four
Years Purchase to abate it, or if it were but to keep it at a Stay, were good
husbandry. 2. Besides this, let a man consider what other losses do accrue by
the want of a due Provision of Work, and an industrious Education for the Poor,
in thieving and stealing, and sending such Malefactors to Goals at the charges
of the Parish, in Prosecuting them at Assizes and Sessions, in cutting and
destroying of Woods, pulling of Hedges, and trespasses to Corn and Grass
thereby, in Alms giving at the door; these would be, if not altogether
prevented, yet, in a great measure they would, when that most unchristian and
indeed inhumane way of Living among most ordinary indigent People is remedied
by convenient Employment and Wages.

2. Obj. But there are a sort of Idle People, that will rather beg then work
though they may be employed, and so that trade of Begging and Idleness would be
still continued.

I Answer 1. That we do surmise a Compulsary Law to enforce Idle Persons to
work, which would prevent it. 2. By this means the Benefit of Working would
Exceed the Benefit of Begging which would cause Persons to leave it. 3. By the
Educating of Children in a way of Industry there would be gradually a
Disaccustomedness to that way which would in time quite remove it. But 4. When
men were once assured by a clear Evidence that the Poor might have Work upon
reasonable terms, no man would give, the Laws against Wanderers that were able
to work, and against the relievers of such, would be cheerfully put in
Execution, which now men even upon the account of common charity cannot bring
themselves to.

3. Obj. But what considerable advantage would such a Stock as four hundred
Pounds do when perchance in a time of trading four or five thousand Pounds
employed by Masters in a Parish is but enough to set their Poor on Work, where
it may be there are two or three hundred Persons that are thus employed.

I answer, It would be a great help to the Poor in a time of scarcity of Work,
although it should lie still in a time of plenty of Work. The supply of Work,
for a Month, or two, or three, in a Year, when Traders for Advantage give over,
keeps Industry on the Wheels, and yields a considerable supply. 2. In good
times, when there is no need of it, it is as capable of Increase and
Improvement, being employed as private men's Stocks are, which would enlarge it,
or at lest enable it to bear some loss in times of lowness of Trade. 3. If once
such a Stock were going it would not only increase by it self, but it would
have continual accession by Charitable Gifts, which would do five times the
good thus employed than employed as they are in Doles and little yearly
Pensions, which consume and come to nothing, but are swallowed up in the
present necessity of the Poor, and leave but small signs of Advantage behind
them: Whereas the following of the Method now propounded will at least leave
the Persons, to whom it is applied the Advantage of an Industrious Education
and Profession, which will abide by them.

4. Obj. But men, that are concerned for their own Benefit in the prosecution
of their Trade, as for instance of Clothing, and consequently more careful
than Persons employed for others, yet do lose by their Trading, and many times
impair their Stocks; and therefore this, that cannot be expected to be neither
so industriously nor successfully managed, may be in the same condition.

I Answer. 1. in general. In this way there must needs be one of these Events:
1. Either there will be Gain, and then it does improve the Stock, and lays up
an Advantage that may compensate a former loss and enable the bearing of a
future loss. And I know no reason but that in this management there may be some
times at least of Advantage as well as in private Trading. The times are not
always at a stand in Trade, but some times, and most ordinarily there is some
gains in it, though not so much as at other times; and then the good times make
amends for the bad.

2. Or else, though there be no gain, there will be no loss, but it stands at a
stay, and if it does so this design attains its End, which is the Employment of
the Poor. Though it yields not the Master or Trader any gain, yet it yields the
Poor a subsistence in their Wages and Work. It is true a private Tradesman
looks to gain so much as may at least maintain himself and his Family. And if
he does not he gives over his Trading, as not answering his end; and it may be
in some cases reasonable to do so: But though here be little or no gain, yet
the End is attained, because the Poor are employed and paid though the Stock
increase not.

3. Or else there is Loss. To this I say; 1. If there be Loss, yet it is but
gradual, not altogether. Suppose it be twenty, thirty, or forty Pounds in a
Year, in a Stock of four hundred Pounds, and by that account, yet this Stock
will not be wholly exhausted in five or six Years; and if it should be so, yet
the Loss to the Parish would not be more than it would be if its old course of
contribution at the height that it would have been during the spending of that
Stock which is thereby, as before is observed, in a great measure remedied: 2.
These decays may possibly be repaired by charitable Gifts and Bequests. 3. But
if it were not, yet such gradual decays may be supplied by the Parishes with
the same Ease that their contribution would have been, all things considered,
and possibly better times of Trade may happen at least once in two or three
Years which may repair the loss, or at least keep the Stock at its full gage
with small helps: 4. But suppose the worst and that in the Compass of three or
four Years the whole Stock were wholly drawn dry; I say confidently, that the
Advantage the Country would have by a course of industrious Education of the
Poor continued but one three or four Years, will more then countervail the loss
of a very considerable Stock, in preventing that Trade of Idleness which grows
up in Poor Families which will daily infinitely increase, and will receive a
very great check and possibly such as will for ever prevent the return of such
a course of life by the interruption of a tract of three or four Years of
Employment, and will put thousands in that tract of time into a course of trade
and livelihood which they will carry with them all their lives after. 5. And
besides all this, it is not likely the trade will suffer a perpetual
interruption, but Even while this Stock is in this wane and declination,
private men will be trading, and then in this decay and declination of the
Stock (if it should be unsupplyed) there will be Work at private hands, and
Persons instructed and fitted and able to do it, which may prevent a total
interruption of an industrious Education and may give some intervals of
relaxation of the Employment of the common Stock, at least in that fullness as
formerly, till it be recruited by new supplies. 6. But yet farther, the Method
of the proposed Employment though it be principally bottomed upon the trade of
Woollen Clothing yet it will have other supplies, as is propounded, as making
of Kersyes, Baize, Knitting of Stockings, dressing and ordering of Hemp and
Flax, and Spinning and Weaving it. And though there were no other but the
Woollen Manufacture yet if it should please our Superiors to interdict the
Wearing of foreign Manufactures, our own consumption at home and the necessity
that they have in foreign parts of our Woollen Manufactures would double the
Trade of Woollen Manufactures.

5. Obj. The Poor have Work already if they will work, and the setting up of
such a public Trade will but make Workmen the more independent, and decline
the Employment of private Traders which will tend to the decay of Trade.

I Answer I. It is true when Trading is quick possibly they may have Work
enough but upon any check in Trade they are oftentimes turned off unless they
will work at Extreme low Wages and ill paid. 2. When work is so plenteous at
private hands there may be an intermission or relaxation of the Employment of
the common Stock: Especially if they can have better Wages at private hands;
for it will be enough for this to be supplemental of the defects of work at
others hands, and it sufficiently attains its End if it may be a refuge at the
time of need for those that would work and cannot get it, and an Expedient to
enforce those to work that can and willnot.

6. Objection. Poor that do their work well, and are honest, and industrious,
cannot want work when any is to be had in the country, and those that are not
employed are either such as will not work, or cannot tell how to work, or will
steal and purloyn their Work: These will undo the Workhouse.

I answer 1. Some times there are when the honestest Workmen cannot get Work,
and this will be a reserve for them. 2. But as for others here will be an
Expedient to teach them to Work that cannot, and to compel them to Work, that
can, and to punish them, that are dishonest in their Work. 3. And if there were
no punishment, yet when a Workhouse and Stock is once settled, that would be
sufficient to make them Work: For when every man were once sure that they that
would honestly Work might have it, and reasonable Wages, every Wanderer and
Beggar would be esteemed such a Person as will not work, or will be dishonest
in it, and not fit to be relieved, but the Laws to be severely put in Execution
against them.

7. Obj. But where shall we have men that will undertake the employment and be
faithful and trusty in it?

I answer 1. There be many poor and honest men, who for a small Salary and a
Room or two to Work and lodge in the Workhouse would be fit enough to
undertake the Employment of a Master, and yet he would have no great trust upon
him, for the Stock would be lodged in the hands of the Overseers, and they to
deliver it out, and take weekly or monthly accounts: Which Overseers may be
substantial men and at no great trouble, and eligible either by the Justices of
Peace, or Parishioners, yearly or once in three Years, and their trouble would
be no greater than the trouble of Overseers of the Poor, or Churchwardens in
any Parish.

And thus I have hastily and cursorily gone through the Method, Reasons and
Objections of this Proposal, which I am sure if it can be brought to a due
accomplishment, is, 1. A Work of great Humanity and such as we owe to those of
our own Nature as we are men. The wise God did tell his ancient People that the
Poor should be always among them; which was, 1. To Exercise their Liberality
and Charity in supplying the wants of some by the abundance of others. And 2.
To Exercise their discretion and industry to think of and set on foot such
means as might put them in a course of honest Employment, and Encourage them in
it: they that are rich are Stewards of their Wealth, and they that are wise are
Stewards of their Wisdom, unto that great Master of the Family of Heaven and
Earth, to whom they must give an account of both; and one, I am sure, of the
best accounts they can give of both is to employ them in the Reformation and
Relief of those that want both or either. Am I my Brothers keeper was the
answer of one of the worst of men.

2. A Work that as well becomes a Christian as any, Christianity recommending
Charity as one of the principal Christian Virtues. And indeed the ill Provision
for the Poor in England is one of the greatest reproaches to us in relation to
our Christian Profession.

3. A Work for a good English man: The want of a due Provision for Education
and relief of the Poor in a way of Industry is that which fills the Goals with
Malefactors, and fills the Kingdom with idle and unprofitable Persons that
consume the Stock of the Kingdom without improving it, and that will daily
increase even to a desolation in time. And this Error in the first concoction
is never remediable but by Gibbets and whipping. But there must be a sound,
prudent and resolved Method for an Industrious Education of the Poor, and that
will give better remedy against these corruptions than the after gain of
penalties can.

FINIS.

