A LETTER written by Mr. Henry Holden Doctor of the faculty at Paris, touching
the prohibition at Rome of Mr. Blacklow's Book, entitled, Tabulae suffragiales.
To the Reader,
HAving had the advantage and honor of a long acquaintance with Mr. Blacklow,
whom I take to be one of the learned men of our Nation, I received some
scandal at the hearing his Book was condemned at Rome, in which I was the more
concerned through the censures given thereon by several of my acquaintance,
more knowing then my self in such matters; yet out of my love and esteem of his
person very unwilling to believe there was just cause for this censure, I
thought fit to enquire of Doctor Holden, from whom I received this following
Answer; which as it has rectified my ignorance, so may it perhaps do the like
of others, who as I are acquainted with Mr. Blacklow; and may be worth the
reading of all men who care to inform themselves of such prohibitions, and
actions of that nature, proceeding from the Inquisition at Rome, wherefore I
have caused it to be printed.

Sir,
I received your long Letter of the 10th. of October ^657. and whereas amongst
other things you ask me what do I now say to Mr. Blacklow's doctrine since the
Pope's last Decree against it? why, Sir I say, I am still of the same opinion I
was, specified in my last unto you of the first of Aug. And that you are
mistaken in the nature of these Decrees from Rome, I have seen the Prohibition,
and it is of several small treatises named in it, dated the 6. of September
last, by the way of an addition to the Index of forbidden books. And the very
last of those flying sheets there mentioned is the name of one of M. Blacklow's
works, entitled, Tabulae suffragiales.

Now Sir, That you may not be too easily carried away with the vulgar ignorant,
and take a Prohibition for a condemnation of heresy; And a Decree of the
Congregation of Cardinals and others, called, the Inquisition, for a Bull of
the Pope himself, I will tell you as a friend, and as (I suppose) not versed in
these businesses, what understanding and truly Learned men do think of these
Prohibitions. With this Caveat nevertheless, that however easy a thing it is
to get any private man's writings put into the Index of forbidden books amongst
others: Yet ought not any Catholic to contemn or slight these Decrees, since
they bear the name of a supreme Superior. I will therefore inform you in a
word what these Prohibitions are, and upon what grounds they are generally
given.

First, they are only acts of a particular Court or Congregation in Rome,
Though put out in the Pope's name, as all other acts of the several Courts of
that City usually are. And therefore do not oblige, nor are commonly held to be
of any force out of the Pope's territories; unless some other State or Bishop
receive and publish them. Nor are these kind of Decrees ever admitted in
France, but often rejected by the Parliament of this Town, the most famous and
learned Seat of Judicary in the Christian world.

Secondly, we see these Decrees proceed from two causes, or rather in two
cases. First, when the forbidden book contains any thing contrary to the
common, though only tolerated, custom of the Church; or to the ordinary
practice and pretentions of the Court of Rome. 2. When such books are of that
nature, as that the more ignorant or weaker sort of men; or the more
irreligious and looser lived, may there find, or thence easily gather whereat
to be much scandalized. Which to prevent belongs to the zealous solicitude of a
general Pastor and common Father. Not that such forbidden books do always
contain something contrary to our Catholic faith (which then are particularly
specified as such, and branded with the censure of heresy) but that they are
judged by the Inquisition to be obnoxious and apt to beget evil conceits and
opinions in the peoples fancies; or at least prejudicial to some greater good
then their divulging could produce.

Hence we see many books forbidden (as in this very Decree) nothing relating to
the revealed points of our Christian belief; Yea some undoubtedly containing
the true grounds of all Christianity, as the Bible it self in vulgar tongues.
So that the Inquisition does principally attend in these Prohibitions, what may
be the effect of such books through the ignorance or malice of their readers,
without examining what the particular doctrine of the book may be in it self.
And here I must confess, that M. Blacklow's unusual expressions and his exotic
opinions are not fit in my judgment to be exposed to the view of every ordinary
man, or envious malevolent. For his doctrine, being both profound and obscure,
is beyond the reach of every common reader. Who, if he chance to be proud and
self-conceited (as it often happens) and have a tooth against the Author, he
forgeth as many heresies in his own brain, as there be passages he understands
not. Experienced and learned men know how many famous books written by the R.
R. f. f. of the society of Jesus, of several Nations, have been forbidden in
this kind. And some of our French Jesuits volums highly condemned by the
Inquisition of heresy; others for maintaining the Gallican privileges
prejudicial to the Pope and Court of Rome's pretentions: which notwithstanding
the Authors themselves have caused to be reprinted in this Town the year
immediately following their Prohibition. And of the Spanish Jesuits books some
have been cleared and approved by the Inquisition of Spain, after they had been
censured and condemned by the Inquisition of Rome. This I say not, as either
disrespecting the Inquisition's Decrees, or disapproving these R. R. f. fa.
proceedings. Who am I? that I should do either? every man defends his own
right. I only aim to let you understand the nature of these Roman Prohibitions.
And not only they, but even the Pope's own personal Bulls are not held to be of
any obligation in France, until they be allowed of by the King, verified in
Parliament, received by our Bishops, and published by our Parish Churches. It
is true, we see that now and then some factious spirits make use of these
Decrees of the Inquisition to cry down with clamours their Adversary's
reputation amongst the credulous vnlgar, and procure them to this effect. Which
were it done out of pure zeal, though indiscreet and without knowledge, yet
were it pardonable. And therefore you must not always condemn such as may
perhaps out of an innocent respect to this Prohibition, blame Mr. Blacklow's
doctrine.

If you come to the sight of this Decree, you will clearly see the
Inquisition's intention is to take away an occasion of scandal to the weak and
ignorant. Thinking it better to suppress those bold and contentious, though
never so learned, pieces, then to expose many thousands of infirm and unlearned
men to the danger of being disedified.

First, you will see forbidden the 18 Provincials Letters (whereof I doubt not
but you have heard) in which there is not a word of any Doctrine proposed by
the Author himself, being mere citations of many licentious and scandalous
opinions, taught and published (as he says) by the R. R. f. f. of the society
of Jesus. And you may well think, the Inquisition might justly fear it would be
a scandal to the Church, if believed, that such a considerable member of it as
that company is, should maintain and practice such wicked Tenets. And therefore
thought fit to forbid those Letters.

In the next place there is forbidden a slight leaf of a sheet of paper,
called, Lettre d'un Advocat touchant la Bulle d' Allexandre 7. Which is only
concerning a political point of the Privileges and liberties of France,
against the Introducing of the Inquisition or other subjection into the
Kingdom: Which seemed offensive to the Court of Rome, and therefore forbidden.

In the third place there are forbidden diverse small scholastical Treatises of
the famous Monsieur Arnauld's. Whereof one is his Epistle to me. In all which
works his chief drift is to show that his opinion, concerning efficacious
Grace, is nothing different from the doctrine of the ancient Fathers,
particularly of St. Austin, and St. Thomas of Aquin. Renouncing what ever he
may seem to affirm dissonant from them. And sure it would be a scandal to have
it thought that the doctrine of those Fathers, honored and approved by the
Church for so many hundred years together, should now come to be censured and
condemned. And therefore the Inquisition judged it fit to suppress those
treatises as endeavoring to prove it.

In the last place is thrust into this Catalogue of these forbidden books, Mr.
Blacklow's treatise, called, Tabulae suffragiales, with it is Appendix, testerae
Romanae evulgatio. Wherein the Author's principal design is to prove that great
truth, and essential rule of all Christianity, to wit, that our Catholic faith
is to be resolved into universal tradition. As also to demonstrate the ancient
opinion of our faculty at Paris, That the Pope is not unerrable and infallible
in his own singular person. But indeed he goes somewhat farther, and condemns
the contrary opinion as improbable, Heretical and Archiheretical. And therefore
you need not wonder if the Inquisition have forbidden his book, without
specifying his doctrine, being so opposite to their pretentions, though the
opinion it self (not censuring the contrary) be a common Tenet of many both of
our ancient and modern Doctors of Paris.

In fine, the Decree forbids the keeping or reading of any of these or other
books written in defense of Jansenius. Yea and of printing any thing (without
the inquisition's leave) about the matter of Grace. Which I understand not how
they could ever imagine should be observed, at least beyond the limits of the
Ecclesiastical state. Can they think that all the learned Divines of Europe, as
well Readers and Professors, as others, shall daily study, write, discuss,
and teach publicly and privately the hard and ever-disputed Questions of Grace
and free will, and none shall print any of that subject? Believe it that will,
I am sure it will be otherwise.

There is one word, which perhaps unexperienced men may stumble at, And which
the Adversaries to these forbidden Authors will allege in an evil sense, That
is, damnat; Which is an usual word in the style and form of these Decrees, And
here signifies not, nor does the Inquisition intend it should, to condemn of
heresy the books they forbid. It were ridiculous to think it, being the
greater half of these prohibited books (though the word damnat be common to
them all) have nothing in them concerning any point of our Christian faith; but
are only matters of morality and discipline, and therefore it is to be taken,
for to disallow, disprove, and blame.

Now Sir, as we abroad, versed in the great continent, and living in the open
profession of our Catholic Religion, take no notice of these Decrees, I say,
in relation to the approving or disapproving of any point of our Christian and
Catholic faith; so I conceive the Catholics of your Island, though now hidden
and obscured, living under the yoke of persecution, will in time come to know
more exactly the several degrees of respect which may be due to the Sea and
Congregations of Rome. And then at least, they will forbear, as we do, to
censure, upon slight grounds, any particular learned man's singular opinion;
wherein if these lines may in the interim prevail with you, I shall obtain my
desire. Let others do as God shall inspire them; To whose heavenly Protection
I heartily commend both them and you, Resting as ever,

Your most humble and truly affectionate servant, H. HOLDEN.
Paris November. 19. 1657.
FINIS.

