SUPPLEMENT TO THE Philosophical Transactions Of JVLY, 1670. With some
Reflections on Dr. John Wallis, HIS LETTER There Inserted.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's, 1678.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Philosophical Transactions of July, 1670, etc.
THE Reader is requested to be at the Pains and Patience to consider and scan
well some matters of Fact, concerning which an Appeal is here made to him;
wherein the Author is not so much concerned to be righted to his Title against
an Invader, as to express his just Resentment of the subtle practices, which
have been contrived to abuse and mislead the Reader with false shows, somewhat
resembling Truth. Which, but nakedly exposed to light, if it seem severe, it
must be imputed to the matter it self.

IN the Year 1659/60, Dr. William Holder at Bletchington, near Oxford, taught
Alexander Popham Esquire being born Deaf and Dumb, to speak. Of which a larger
account is given in the following Paper.

Dr. John Wallis lived then in Oxford, saw and perfectly knew this; was
Conversant with Dr. Holder; was one of those many who resorted to Bletchington,
to see and hear Mr. Popham.

Yet the same Dr. Wallis, about two years after, having undertook Mr. Whalely,
who was then without speech, is seen pretending to enter into a long
Philosophical Consideration, whether it may not be possible in Nature, and
Morally possible, that is, possible to succeed in practice, to teach Mr.
Whalely to speak and understand a language; so to encourage himself to
undertake that difficult task, pretending also to be induced to it upon those
Considerations, which was a most pleasant piece of Pageantry.

For he then certainly knew, that it was possible to teach a Deaf and Dumb
person to speak; because he had seen it effected two years before upon Mr.
Popham. And for Mr. Whalely, he was not born Dumb, but had use of his Tongue
till five years of Age (as Dr. Wallis himself relates); And then, by reason of
his loss of Hearing, without any Detriment to the Organs of Speech, fell by
degrees into a Desuetude of speaking. And a less knowing person than Dr.
Wallis, could easily have pronounced (without filling a sheet of Paper with
Considerations) that it was possible for Mr. Whalely to be made to speak, he
having already given proof of it.

But there was more use of those Considerations, than to encourage himself (as
he pretends) to undertake so difficult a task. He had a long aking-tooth, to
join to his other Trophies, that which he saw performed by Dr. Holder, and
silently passed over, viz. The finding a successful way of teaching Dumb and
Deaf persons to speak. And seeing it was too late to be Author of that which
was found out already; and yet he was resolved to assume to himself this
experiment; he had recourse to subtle contrivances. He meets with a young
Gentleman two years after, who (as has been said) having been able to speak
till five years of Age, fell by Deafness into a disuse of speaking, it was no
such difficult task (as he pretends) to instruct him to recover somewhat of the
use of his Tongue.

But having done this in a happy hour, all possible noise is presently made of
it. It is showed at Court, and Gresham-College, and entered into the Journal of
the Royal Society. If Dr. Wallis had performed this experiment upon Mr. Popham,
(who was born Deaf and Dumb) the Court and Royal Society could not have escaped
the noise of it, as being more worthy of their notice, and his Vaunt.

However, the fame of it brings to him Mr. Popham, who being before returned
home to his Friends, began to lose what he had been taught by Dr. Holder. From
thenceforth Dr. Wallis practiced to assume Mr. Popham's speaking wholly to
himself; not that he dared to challenge it, but he contrived always to have it
believed; which he did with so much industry and effect, that there are at this
day very few in Oxford, who know or think otherwise, but that it was the effect
of the Doctors skill, as he has caused it to be published in the Transactions.

By these Considerations therefore, his design was to make the world believe
that he was the first who thought of it, which he could not then do whilst
things were fresh in memory and knowledge about Oxford. These Considerations did
not see the light till about eight years after, and were to usher in a
Postscript or Comment upon his Letter, which was to pass, as if written by the
Publisher of the Transactions, but was wholly penned by himself, as Mr.
Oldenburgh avowed to Dr. Holder, and after to the Right Honorable President,
and to others of the Society. Which is not the first nor the last effect of the
said Doctors skill, in thus penning and spreading his own fame. The Reader may
find and see in several Authors Works, who would suffer themselves to be so
imposed upon, the Fame and Praise of Dr. Wallis in large Characters engraven by
himself. For that purpose the Transactions were his common Market, and a new
Book upon the Anvil, if he could find way and leave to crowd himself in, was a
Fair for this Merchant of Glory. And when he got a hint (for which he always
lay in wait) of any considerable new Invention or Improvement, presently comes
out an Epistle or small Tractate of Dr. John Wallis upon that subject, to
entitle it to himself.

As to this particular, the Reader will find a summary account of it in this
ensuing Paper, which is set down as it was intended to be inserted in the
Transactions. And though this present Vindication appears so late, the
complaint and address to the Royal Society were more early, but met with
delays, which were also favored by the Remisness of Dr. Holder in pursuing so
unpleasant an affair. And possibly it had never seen the light, had not Dr.
Wallis very lately given a fresh occasion, in a Book lately published at Oxford
by Dr. Plot.

Preface by the Publisher of the Transactions, Mr. Oldenburgh.
IN the Transactions of July 1670. No. 61. p. 1087. an account is given of a
Dumb and Deaf person taught by Dr. Wallis to speak and underst and a language.
And the doing of the like to another person, a young Gentleman of a very good
Family, and fair Estate, (meaning Mr. Popham) who did from his Birth want his
Hearing, is attributed to the effect of Dr. Wallis's skill, as it was then
communicated to the publisher, without any mention of Dr. Holder; at which some
just exceptions being taken, the publisher to avoid partiality on his part,
(though but in appearance) has thought fit to publish this ensuing Narrative,
of what has been done in this kind by Dr. Holder, as it is handed to him by
the Author himself.

SOme years immediately before His Majesty's happy Restoration, diverse
ingenious persons in Oxford used to meet at the Lodgings of that excellent
Person, and zealous promoter of Learning, the late Bishop of Chester, Dr.
Wilkins, then Warden of Wadham College, where they diligently conferred about
Researches and Experiments in Nature, and indeed laid the first Ground and
Foundation of the Royal Society. In that time, viz. in the Year 1659, Alexander
Popham Esquire being deprived of Hearing from his Birth, and consequently of
Speaking, about the Tenth year of his Age, by the Instance of Dr. Ward, now
Lord Bishop of Sarum, and the said Bishop VVilkins, and Dr. Bathurst, the
Present Dean of Wells, was recommended to the care of Dr. William Holder,
then Rector of Bletchington near Oxford, and brought thither to him. Who
desirous to serve the Ends, and contribute something to the design of that
Worthy Company beforementioned, viz. Improvement of natural knowledge and
public benefit: and not doubting but that a Dumb person, Dumb only in
consequence of being Deaf, might be capable of being instructed to apply the
motions of his Tongue and other Instruments of Speech, so as to acquire a ready
and distinct pronunciation; and knowing it (as another might have done) to be
both possible and feasible, from an Example of that kind, seen and heard by His
late Majesty in Spain; did by means of such Considerations and Methods as are
since by him made public, in a short time, teach the said Mr. Popham to
pronounce plainly and distinctly, and with a good and graceful tone, whatsoever
words were shown him in Print or Writing, or represented to him by other
several ways; or as he had occasion to ask for, or repeat such things as he had
learned or understood.

This was publicly taken notice of, and known, not only to those eminent
persons abovenamed; but generally in Oxford, from whence very many Students
resorted to Bletchington on purpose to satisfy their curiosity, and have a
particular knowledge of that which they had received by report. Amongst these,
Dr. Wallis was one, with whom also Dr. Holder had discourse on that occasion
diverse times when they happened to meet in Oxford.

In March 1659/60, Mr. Popham (together with Dr. Holder) was sent for to his
Relations, then at Westminster. On which occasion, many persons of all degrees,
both there and in London, satisfied themselves in hearing Mr. Popham speak, and
particularly Sir Charles Scarborough, M.D. Who also in his public Lectures of
Anatomy at that time, thought fit to make an express Relation of it, naming
also the persons concerned in this experiment.

In the Summer following (Dr. Holder being upon removal to Ely) Mr. Popham
returned home to his Friends, and began to lose what he had learned; and about
two years after, upon the Fame that Dr. Wallis had raised concerning Mr.
VVhalely, was placed for some time with Dr. Wallis, who in 1662, (two years
after Mr. Popham had been by Dr Holder first taught to speak) had made trial
upon Mr. Whalely, who could once speak well, till he became Deaf about five
years of Age, (as Dr. Wallis relates) and then by degrees through occasion of
his Deafness, wholly disused himself to speak.

Having some success in making Mr. Whalely pronounce words, though with a harsh
ill tone; the Doctor (desirous it seems to entitle himself to this experiment)
brought him to London in May 1662, and showed this as a new wonder to the
Court, and to the Royal Society, where he reaped great praise, and had it
registered to perpetuate the memory of his Achievement.

Dr. Holder saw this, and could not but wonder, and almost pity to see a person
of so good Learning, endowed with so many excellent things to make him very
considerably reputed in the world; yet by too much greediness of Fame, suffer
himself to be tempted to the vanity of using such ways of begging and borrowing
Reputation.

Had Dr. Holder been so ambitious, or would he have been moved on this just
occasion to appear concerned to assert his own right; he could truly have let
the world then know, That he is the first that is remembered ever to have
succeeded in this attempt in England, or perhaps in the world, the person he
undertook, being Deaf from his Birth; whereas that so noised, but later attempt
of Dr. Wallis upon Mr. Whalely, was only to regain, in part, a decayed habit,
upon one who could have spoke till five years old. And the Constable of
Castiles Son (as is related by the Constables Secretary, Pablo Bonet) heard
till two years of Age, and it is likely in that time, (considering the Climate)
was forward in speaking. And Mr. Popham, when he was brought to Dr. Wallis, was
one also who could have spoke well above two years before, having been taught
by Dr. Holder.

The truth is, Dr. Holder then found this Essay so feasible, and still thinks
it so easily practicable, after that method he used, and has described in his
Appendix to the Elements of Speech, that he thought it no such great matter of
boast; and wonders that it has not been, and is not oftener attempted, being
certain not to fail upon any Dumb person that is docible (as most of them are)
rightly managed. And he could wish that more attempts might be made by such
ingenious persons as have leisure and opportunity, whom he assures of all
readiness in himself to encourage and assist them. And as for the industry that
Dr. Wallis used to celebrate the effects (as he speaks) of his skill, and
assume all to himself; Dr. Holder as unconcerned, suffered it to pass, and
permitted him quietly to enjoy it, satisfying himself with what he had done,
more in order to public benefit, than for Ostentation. And should have still
passed it over, had not Dr. Wallis in pursuance of his design, given further
occasion.

For it happened that about six or seven years after, on occasion of the loss
of some Papers on that subject, formerly communicated by Dr. Holder, to the
late Bishop of Chester, (mentioned in his Book of the Universal Character, p.)
which were lost in the Bishops study, together with all his own, in the
dreadful Fire of London; Dr. Holder was importuned by the said Bishop, and
diverse other Members of the Society, to renew those Papers, and to describe and
discover the Method he had used in bringing Mr. Popham to speak. He thereupon
in the year 1669, presented to the Royal Society, an account thereof in a
Treatise of the Elements of Speech, with an Appendix concerning persons Deaf
and Dumb, which they thought fit to order to be Printed. Wherein he having made
some slight mention of his success upon a Deaf and Dumb person, intending Mr.
Popham; Dr. Wallis, who thought he had put himself in sole possession of the
repute of this experiment, it should seem, was startled, and about a year after
contrived to be published in the Transactions of July 18. 1670, a Letter of his
to Mr. Boil of Date March 14. 1661/2. In which he pretends (for he could not
do it in earnest, the subject in reference to him not being capable) to
consider and debate about the Natural and Moral possibility and feasibleness of
making a Dumb person speak, so to encourage himself to undertake it. And all
this, after he had seen it performed two years before, and therefore to his
certain knowledge, it was both naturally possible, and morally feasible. And it
was a mockery in him to pretend to deliberate about it, and that Honorable
Gentleman was little obliged to him for being so treated.

But the Doctor had a further design in publishing it. For to this Letter he
added by way of Comment, in the Publishers name, but of his own penning, a more
particular account and boast about Mr. Whalely, and in three or four subtle
lines (which was his chief design,) hedged in what concerned Mr. Popham,
describing, but (wisely) not naming him. And concluded with magnifying a small
Treatise of his De Loquela, on confidence of which he durst undertake that
difficult task. And if Dr. Holden, or any other since that, have writ upon the
like subject, they are like to gain nothing upon him, for he resolves, Whether
any since him have with more judgment and accurateness performed the same, he
will not take upon him at all to determine. For all which the Reader is
referred to the said Transactions of July, 1670.

As to the last Challenge: Whether any since him, etc. Dr. Holder submits it
(so far as concerns him) to the intelligent impartial Reader. But as to the
considering Letter, and unseasonable boast of his success with Mr Whalely, and
principally his assuming Mr. Popham's speaking solely to himself; to which the
other were only subservient, and were to make a noise while this slipped in; Dr.
Holder declared then his dissatisfaction both to the Publisher, and to Dr.
Wallis himself, as being (all circumstances considered) injuriously and
disingenuously dealt withal. And now after several years expectation of some
ingenuous satisfaction from Dr. Wallis, for that his want of Candor, in
publishing at that time, and with that manner of contrivance, the
forementioned account in his Letter to Mr. Boil, with the Comment upon it; at
last he addresseth himself to the Publisher, thinking it just and requisite,
that this Memorial be also inserted in the Transactions, both to disabuse the
Reader, and to do some right unto himself.

THis foregoing Paper, or near the same, (the Title or Preface of which was of
Mr. Oldenburghs own penning) was put into Mr. Oldenburghs hand, and he thought
it reasonable and just to publish it in the Transactions, both to give Dr.
Holder some satisfaction, and to vindicate himself from seeming partial, having
been thought to be so; but in good measure excused himself in this particular,
by being so imposed upon by Dr. Wallis. But he met with difficulty in the
Licensing of it. They thinking it just and necessary that Dr. Holder should be
righted, but willing to have some passages softened: before which was done, Mr.
Oldenburgh deceased, and so Dr. Holder remains without any possibility of being
repaired by the same hand which unwittingly injured him.

Now whilst this affair lay before the Royal Society, and Dr. Wallis knew so
much; he could not forbear to act the same part over again. For the Ingenious
and Learned Dr. Robert Plot, L. L. D. designing a natural History of
Oxfordshire, Dr. Wallis thrust himself in, and contrived to be abundantly
praised in that work, making a great part of it a History of Dr. Wallis. He
imposes upon that worthy, honest, well meaning person, who suspected no
sinister design, to magnify again that small Treatise De Loquela, to renew the
challenge, and seem to prefer it before what Bishop VVilkins, or Dr. Holder
have since writ, even by the advantage of what Dr. Wallis did before. When As,
the truth is, Dr. Plot had never seen either Dr. Wallis, or Dr. Holder's
Treatises, and could not pretend to pass any Judgment upon them, but innocently
suffered Dr. Wallis to pass it into his Book. And if we may guess at the rest
by those three Paragraphs, p. 281, 282. n. 179. 180, 181. which were certainly
(or the greatest and material part of them) of Dr. VVallis's own penning, and
all of his supervising, it may be justly thought all the rest were so too. And
here Dr. Wallis is secure to gain this point, that in a Book which will come
into the hands of all curious persons, Dr. VVallis's fame is spread forth to
all; and but few will ever happen to know, that he imposed upon the good
Doctor, and penned it himself, as he had done before to the Publisher of the
Transactions; but it was the greater abute to Dr. Plot, to be referred to those
Transactions which Dr. Wallis knew to lie at that time under correction before
the Royal Society.

THere is no man will blame any ingenious person for making himself fairly
known to the world, by publishing the products of his Parts and Learning. And
for those many things which Dr. Wallis has performed, and gained reputation;
Dr. Holder wishes him much joy, and is as ready as any to give him his due
praise. He thinks Dr. Wallis had enough to commend him to the world, and might
have kept within the bounds of Fairness and Candor, and not have wanted due
estimation.

And in this particular he esteems it very considerable what Dr. Wallis
performed upon those two Deaf Gentlemen, and worthy to be known and valued, and
has not been wanting to do him that right on all occasions, and would say more
of it, if he should not seem to commend himself. But he thinks withal, that the
Doctors manner of publishing it so often, and so many ways, and with so much
boast and contrivance, was not fair in many respects; and that he had
manifestly a design by all possible noise and prepossession, to drown and
suppress the Claim of any who should with more modesty own a primier Title to
this experiment. Nor could the Doctor conceal his particular emulation, when he
compassed to have his Treatise De Loquela, or, Of the formation of Sounds to be
commended. Where though the Doctor could not abstain from that subject, nor
could find in his heart to determine against himself; yet it is odds, but the
impartial Reader will soon determine, Whether the same has not since been
performed with more accuracy and judgment.

He thinks further, that Dr. Wallis merited, and had a fair repute, and needed
not to be so hasty and greedy, as to use such indirect and sinister ways of
anticipating and enlarging his own fame; but might have been sufficed without
rifling his Neighbors, and adorning himself with their spoils.

But it seems he could not help what was either in his nature, or else habitual
to him; and hopes to bear it out with subtlety of contrivauce, speaking like
truth so artificially, that his Reader is to believe more than is true, and it
serves him to impose upon them whose names and credit he borrows to commend
him; and for a reserve to himself, if he be called to account. It is true that
Mr. Oldenburgh and Dr. Plot have put upon Record some great performances of Dr.
Wallis, and the Reader may seem obliged to rely upon their credit. But it is
not true that either of them knew or writ any thing of those matters, but what
was put into their hands by Dr. Wallis. It was no unlikely or incredible thing
to consider of the natural and moral possibility of making a Dumb person speak.
But it was not true that Dr. Wallis under those circumstances did, or could
deliberate about that possibility. It was like truth, but it was not true, what
he says in the Transactions, that he did the like for another, etc. Except by
doing the like, he means, making another speak, who could have spoke before.
But in the Not. Hist. of Oxfordshire, he tells a more demure truth, that he
taught Dumb persons; so he did, for two were his Scholars. But did either Mr.
Popham or Mr. Whalely ow^ their first speaking to him? Rather, one to his
Nurse, the other to Dr. Holder. But Dr. Wallis desires and designs the world
would be so kind as to be cajoled into such a belief concerning Mr. Popham; and
the rather, since he has drawn in Mr. Oldenburgh and Dr. Plot (till they were
better informed) to believe it, and prevailed with them, to say as from
themselves, what he imposed upon them. The later of these survives, and it is
not doubted has so much integrity, as no longer to Father those passages which
Dr. Wallis has crowded into his Book; but will do right to the Reader, and
himself and Dr. Holder on all occasions.

THe Reader need not be troubled with Dr. Wallis's whole Letter to Mr. Boil in
those Philosophical Transactions of July, 18. 1670. p. 1087. N. 61. But is here
presented with a touch of such passages as concern this affair.

And first, Pray Reader or Passenger, whatever you are about, leave it, and
listen.

The Contents. A Letter of Dr. John Wallis's to Robert Boil Esquire concerning the
said Doctor's Essay of teaching a person Dumb and Deaf to speak, and to
understand a Language; together with the success thereof, made apparent to His
Majesty, the Royal Society, and the University of Oxford, etc. Title of the
Letter in the same Page. A Letter of Dr. John Wallis's to Robert Boil Esquire
concerning the said Doctors-Essay of teaching a Dumb and Deaf person to speak,
and to understand a Language, together with the success thereof. Which Letter,
though written many years since, was but lately obtained to be inserted here,
it being esteemed very well worth to be preserved and communicated for public
use.
THe Reader may possibly reflect upon the Doctors vanity in penning this
outcry, but it was but part vanity, and part design. For now who can believe
that ever any one thought of this before Dr. Wallis made this Essay upon Mr.
VVhalely? and so confidently showed and boasted it; it must be presumed that
this was the first Essay. Especially considering what follows in the Letter,
Page 1088 -- I thought my self obliged to give you this brief account of that
whole affair, that you may at once perceive as well upon what considerations I
was induced to attempt that work, and what I did propose to my self as feasible
therein, as what success has hitherto attended that Essay.

Ibid. Now though I did not apprehend either of these impossible, [ viz. to
speak and to understand a language].

P. 1090. These difficulties (of which I was well aware) did not so far
discourage me from that undertaking, but that I did still conceive it possible
that both parts of this task might be effected.

P. 1092. To these fundamental grounds of possibility in nature, I am next to
add a Consideration which made me think it morally possible, that is, not
impossible to succeed in practice.

P. 1093. My next inducement to undertake it was the consideration of the
person -- represented to me as ingenious and apprehensive -- could have spoke
till five years of age.

P. 1094. Having thus acquainted you with those Considerations which induced me
to attempt it.

Ibid. Though I did believe that much more is to be effected, than is commonly
thought feasible; and that it was possible for him to speak, so as to be
understood.

Postsc. p. 1098. Oxford March 14. 1661/2.

The said Doctor was by the same Assembly [Royal Society] encouraged to pursue
what he had so ingeniously and successfully begun. [Modestly said of himself].



Ibid. Nor is this the only person, on whom the said Doctor has showed the
effect of his skill, but he has since done the like for another (a young
Gentleman of a very good Family, and a fair estate) who did from his Birth want
his Hearing, [meaning Mr. Popham]. By what has been said before, the Reader is
able to judge of the honesty of this last passage. Mr. Popham did indeed from
his Birth want his Hearing, but he did not from his Birth to the time that Dr.
Wallis began to teach him want his Speech; but this is contrived to make the
Reader think he did.

P. 1099. He commends his small Treatise De Loquela, On considence of which he
durst undertake that difficult task.

Ibid. Whether any since him [that is, whether Bishop VVilkins, or Dr. Holder,
as he explains himself in Dr. Plots Not. Hist. Oxfordshire, p. 282.] have with
more judgment and accurateness performed the same, I will not take upon me at
all to determine, [ very moderately expressed, but your meaning may be easily
guessed].

WIth some sort of men, simulation and dissimulation are no sins. These
Considerations induced him, and his Treatise De Loquela, gave him confidence to
dare to undertake that difficult task; but not a word of any inducement, or
encouragement, or thought of the possibility of it, from his having seen it
effected but two years before, within five Miles of him, his Reader must not
know of that; and possibly Mr. Oldenburgh did not, nor Dr. Plot: but the Doctor
knew it full well, when he sent that subtle Letter and Postscript to Mr.
Oldenburgh, and played the same game over again with Dr. Plot. And in the
Preface before the fourth Edition of his English-Grammar, tells the Reader that
it was from hence, from his more attentive perpension of his Treatise of the
Formation of sounds, [ postquam attentius perpenderam, hinc, etc.] that he
taught two Dumb persons [ plane mutos] to speak.

NOw after all, to compound this matter; though Dr. Holder is not willing to
allow Dr. Wallis to be any more than an Interloper in this experiment, and
refers to the Reader to judge whether the said Doctor did deal bona Fide in
those ^mnous accounts published on this affair: yet, because Dr. ^^is has
shown so much dexterity and fine contrivance in attempting to be sole Author of
this effect; Dr. Holder is content (if others be so), that Dr. Wallis may in
lieu of it possess and enjoy that glorious Title of our ENGLISH ARCHIMEDES,
Not. Hist. Oxf. p. 287.

And further, If Dr. Wallis shall think fit to publish suchlike grave
Considerations about the Natural and Moral possibility of contriving glasses to
help the eye to see at a distance, and to discern small bodies at hand: or of
setting in a frame, Characters so disposed and ordered under a Press, that by
them a thousand Books may be wrought off in the time that two or three can be
written, with many other advantages: or of making a Powder, which being fired,
shall have great force, and perform strange things. And if upon those
Considerations, got to be published in the Transactions with Postscripts, and
subtle Comments, and to be avouched in other Authors; dissembling his own
knowledge of any such matters before, but encouraged thereto, on confidence of
his Book of Mechanics: If with these and other like Artifices, he can attain
t^ be thought the first inventor of Telescopes, Microscopes, Printing, Guns and
Squibs, which he may better hope to effect, since the Authors of those
Inventions are dead, and will certainly be silent and quiet; Dr. Holder
promises not to concern himself to undeceive the world, or strip the Doctor of
any part of that Glory, provided he deal more fairly hereafter about the Deaf
and Dumb.


