A TREATISE OF THE Natural Grounds, AND PRINCIPLES OF HARMONY.

By WILLIAM HOLDER, D. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and late Sub-Dean of
their Majesty's Chappel-Royal.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, and sold by J. Carr at the
Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet, B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill,
W. Hensman, at the King's-Head in Westminster Hall, and L. Meredith at the Star
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

THE INDEX.
Chap. Page THE Introduction. Of Sound in General. I. 1 Of Sound Harmonick. II.
6 Appendix to Chap. 2d. 20 Of Consonancy and Dissonancy. III. 40 Of Concords.
IV. 50 Of Proportion. V. 88 Of Discords and Degrses. VI. 124 Digression,
concerning the Ancient Greek Music. 133 Of Discords. VII. 166 Of Differences.
VIII. 183 Conclusion. IX. 193

ERRATA, etc.
Page 1. lin. 13. read Medium. P. 20. l. 19. r. and Contrary. Quadruple. P. 23.
l. 15. for do, r. no. P. 28. l. 20. r. Snaphaunces. P. 42. l. 19. r. Ridged. P.
64. l. 14. for recourse, r. Course. P. 99. l. 24. for 28, r. 18. P. 108. l. 13.
for Rations, or if, r. Rations. Or if. P. 111. l. 21. after Progression, add
(Understanding, together with the Ratio's, the Intervals themselves, as is
before premised) P. 127. l. 10. for on, r. or. P. 132. l. 3. for ie, r. it. P.
139. l. 9. for that was to express it. r. that was supposed to be of the
deepest settled Pitch in Nature, and adapted freely to express it. P. 148. l. 2.
r. Degrees. P. 152. l. 3. r. gives. requires a Medium 8. for Proper, r. with a
Flat 6th. Ibid. l. 20. for the Fourth, r. the Second, Fourth. P. 157. l. 3. for
Minor r. Major. Ibid. l. 6. Dele. Third. P. 159. l. 19. for no one, r. but one.
P. 160. Under Scale IV. Degr. 4th, for Minor, r. Major. Ibid. Under Scale I.
Degr. 5th for Major, r. Minor. P. 162. l. 14, 15. Dele. between 6th. Major and
7th. Minor. P. 199. l. 11. r. Anomalous Phanomena.

The two Schemes engraved, are to be placed thus. That of the 4 Scales, against
Page 155. For Tuning an Organ, against Page 181.


THE Natural Grounds and Principles OF HARMONY.
The INTRODUCTION.
HArmony consists of Causes, Natural and Artificial, as of Matter and Form. The
Material Part of it, is Sound or Voice. The Formal Part is, The Disposition of
Sound or Voice into Harmony; which requires, as a preparative Cause, skillful
Composition: and, as an immediate Efficient, Artfull Performance.

The former Part, viz. The Matter, lies deep in Nature, and requires much
Research into Natural Philosophy to unfold it; to find how Sounds are made, and
how they are first fitted by Nature for Harmony, before they be disposed by
Art. Both together make Harmony complete.

Harmony, then, results from Practick Music, and is made by the Natural and
Artificial Agreement of different Sounds, ( viz. Grave and Acute,) by which the
Sense of Hearing is delighted.

This is properly in Symphony, i. e. Consent of more Voices in different Tones;
but is found also in solitary Music of one Voice, by the Observation and
Expectation of the Ear, comparing the Habitudes of the following Notes to those
which did precede.

Now the Theory in Natural Philosophy, of the Grounds and Reasons of this
Agreement of Sounds, and consequent Delight and Pleasure of the Ear, (leaving
the Management of these Sounds to the Masters of Harmonick Composure, and the
skillful Artists in Performance) is the Subject of this Discourse. The Design
whereof (for the Sake and Service of all Lovers of Music, and particularly the
Gentlemen of Their Majesty's Chapel Royal) is, to lay down these Principles as
short, and intelligible, as the Subject Matter will bear.

Where the first thing Necessary, is a Consideration of somewhat of the Nature
of Sound in General; and then, more particularly, of Harmonick Sounds, etc.

CHAP. I. Of Sound in General.
IN General (to pass by what is not pertinent to this Design) Sense and
Experience confirm these following Properties of Sound.

1. All Sound is made by Motion, viz. by Percussion with Collision of the Air.

2. That Sound may be propagated, and carried to Distance, it requires a Mdium
by which to pass.

3. This Medium (to our Purpose) is Air.

4. As far as Sound is propagated along the Medium; so far also the Motion
passes. For (if we may not say that the Motion and Sound are one and the same
thing, yet at least) it is necessarily consequent, that if the Motion cease,
the Sound must also cease.

5. Sound, where it meets with no Obstacle, passes in a Sphere of the Medium,
greater or less, according to the Force and Greatness of the Sound: Of which
Sphere the sonorous Body is as the Center.

6. Sound, so far as it reaches, passech the Medium, not in an Instant, but in
a certain uniform Degree of Velocity, calculated by Gassendus, to be about the
Rate of 276 Paces, in the space of a second Minute of an Hour. And where it
meets with any Obstacle, it is subject to the Laws of Reflection, which is the
Cause of Eccho's, Meliorations, and Augmentations of Sound.

7. Sound, i. e. the Motion of Sound, or sounding Motion, is carried through
the Medium or Sphere of Activity, with an Impetus or Force which shakes the
free Medium, and strikes and shakes every Obstacle it meets with, more or less,
according to the vehemence of the Sound, and Nature of the Obstacle, and
Nearness of it to the Center, or sonorous Body. Thus the impetuous Motions of
the Sound of Thunder, or of a Cannon, shake all before it, even to the breaking
of Glass Windows, etc.

8. The Parts of the sounding Body are moved with a Motion of Trembling, or
Vibration, as is evident in a Bell or Pipe, and most manifest in the string of
a musical Instrument.

9. This Trembling, or Vibration, is either equal and uniform, or else unequal
and irregular; and again, swifter or slower, according to the Constitution of
the sonorous Body, and Quality and Manner of Percussion; and from hence arise
Differences of Sounds.

10. The Trembling, or Vibration of the sonorous Body, by which the particular
Sound is constituted and discriminated, is impressed upon, and carried along
the Medium in the same Figure and Measure, otherwise it would not be the same
Sound, when it arrives at a more distant Ear, i. e. the Tremblings and
Vibrations (which may be called Undulations) of the Air or Medium, are all
along of the same Velocity and Figure, with those of the sonorous Body, by
which they are caused.

The Differences of Sounds, as of one Voice from another, etc. (besides the
Difference of Tune, which is caused by the Difference of Vibrations) arise from
the Constitution and Figure, and other Accidents of the sonorous Body.

11. If the sonorous Body be requisitely constituted, i. e. of Parts solid, or
tense, and regular, fit, being struck, to receive and express the Tremulous
Motions of Sound, equally and swiftly, then it will render a certain and even
Harmonical Tone or Tune, received with Pleasure, and judged and measured by the
Ear: Otherwise it will produce an obtuse or uneven Sound, not giving any
certain or discernable Tune.

Now this Tune, or Tuneable sound, (...), i. e. (...), An agreeable Cadence of
Voice, at one Pitch or Tension. This tuneable Sound (I say) as it is capable of
other Tensions toward Acuteness, or Gravity, i. e. the Tensions greater or
less, the Tune graver or more acute, i. e. lower or higher, is the first Matter
or Element of Music. And this Harmonick Sound comes next to be considered.

CHAP. II. Of Sound Harmonick.
THE first and great Principle upon which the Nature of Harmonical Sounds is to
be found out and discovered, is this: That the Tune of a Note (to speak in our
vulgar Phrase) is constituted by the Measure and Proportion of Vibrations of
the sonorous Body; I mean, of the Velocity of those Vibrations in their
Recourses.

For, the frequenter the Vibrations are, the more acute is the Tune; the slower
and fewer they are in the same Space of Time, by so much the more grave is the
Tune. So that any given Note of a Tune, is made by one certain Measure of
Velocity of Vibrations; viz. Such a certain Number of Courses and Recourses. e.
g. of a Chord or String, in such a certain Space of Time, does constitute such
a certain determinate Tune. And all such Sounds as are Unisons, or of the same
Tune with that given Note, though made upon whatsoever different Bodies, (as
String, Bell, Pipe, Larynx, etc.) are made with Vibrations or Tremblings of
those Bodies, all equal each to other. And whatsoever Tuneable Sound is more
acute, is made with Vibrations more swift; and whatsoever is more grave, is
made with more slow Vibrations: And this is universally agreed upon, as most
evident to Experience, and will be more manifest through the whole Theory.

And, That the Continuance of the Sound in the same Tune, to the last, (as may
be perceived in Wire-strings, which being once struck will hold their Sound
long) depends upon the Equality of Time of the Vibrations, from the greatest
Range till they come to cease: And this perfectly makes out the following
Theory of Consonancy, and Dissonancy.

Some of the Ancient Greek Authors of Music, took notice of Vibrations: And
that the swifter Vibrations caused acuter, and the slower, graver Tones. And
that the Mixture, or not Mixture of Motions creating several Intervals of Tune,
was the Reason of their being concord or discord. And likewise, they found out
the several Lengths of a Monochord, proportioned to the several Intervals of
Harmonick Sounds: But they did not make out the Equality of Measure of Time of
the Vibrations last spoken of, neither could be prepared to answer such
Objections, as might be made against the Continuity of the sameness of Tune,
during the Continuance of the Sound of a String, or a Bell, after it is struck.
Neither did any of them offer any Reasons for the Proportions assigned, only it
is said, that Pythagoras found them out by Chance.

But now, These (since the Acute Galileo has observed, and discovered the
Nature of Pendulums) are easy to be explained, which I shall do, premising
some Consideration of the Properties of the Motions of a Pendulum.



Hang a Plumbet C on a String or Wire, fixed at O. Bear C to A: Then let it
range freely, and it will move toward B, and from thence swing back toward A.
The Motion from A to B, I call the Course, and back from B to A, the Recourse
of the Pendulum, making almost a Semicircle, of which O is the Center. Then
suffering the Pendulum to move of it self forwards and backwards, the Range of
it will at every Course and Recourse abate, and diminish by degrees, till it
come to rest perpendicular at OC.

Now that which Galileo first observed, was, that all the Courses and Recourses
of the Pendulum, from the greatest Range through all Degrees till it came to
rest, were made in Equal Spaces of Time. That is, e. g. The Range between A and
B, is made in the same Space of Time, with the Range between D and E, the
Plumbet moving swifter between A and B, the greater Space; and slower between D
and E, the lesser; in such Proportions, that the Motions between the Terms AB
and DE, are performed in Equal space of time.

And here it is to be noted, that wherever in this Treatise, the swiftness or
slowness of Vibrations is spoke of, it must be always understood of the
Frequency of their Courses and Recourses, and not of the Motion by which it
passes from one side to another. For it is true, that the same Pendulum under
the same Velocity of Returns, moves from one side to the other, with greater or
less Velocity, according as the Range is greater or less.

And hence it is, that the Librations of a Pendulum are become so excellent,
and useful a Measure of Time; especially when a second Observation is added,
that, as you shorten the Pendulum, by bringing C nearer to its Center O, so the
Librations will be made proportionably in a shorter Measure of Time, and the
Contrary if you lengthen it. And this is found to hold in a Duplicate
Proportion of Length to Velocity. That is, the Length quadrupled, will subduple
the Velocity of Vibrations: And the Length subquadrupled, will duple the
Vibrations, for the Proportion holds reciprocally. As you add to the Length of
the Pendulum, so you diminish the Frequency of Vibrations, and increase them by
shortning it.

Now therefore to make the Courses of a Pendulum doubly swift, i. e. to move
twice in the same Space of Time, in which it did before move once; you must
subquadruple the Length of it, i. e. make the Pendulum but a Quarter so long as
it was before. And to make the Librations doubly slow, to pass once in the Time
they did pass twice; you must quadruple the Length; make the Pendulum four
Times as long as it was before, and so on in what Proportion you please.

Now to apply this to Music, make two Pendulums, AB and CD, fasten together
the Plumbets B and D, and Stretch them at Length, (fixing the Centers A and C.)
Then, being struck, and put into Motion; the Vibrations, which before were
Distinct, made by AB, and CD, will now be United (as of one Entire String) both
backward and forward, between E and F. Which Vibrations (retaining the
aforesaid Analogy to a Pendulum) will be made in equal Spaces of Time, from the
first to the last; i. e. from the greatest Range to the least, until they
cease. Now, this being a double Pendulum, to Subduple the Swiftness of the
Vibrations, you do but Double the Length from A to C, which will be Quadruple
to AB. The lower Figure is the same with that above, only the Plummets taken
off.

vibrating string patterns

And here you have the Nature of the String of a Musical Instrument, resembling
a double Pendulum moving upon two Centers, the Nut and the Bridge, and
vibrating with the greatest Range in the Middle of its Length; and the
Vibrations equal even to the last, which must make it keep the same Tune so
long as it sounds. And because it does manifestly keep the same Tune to the
last, it follows that the Vibrations are equal; Confirming one another by two
of our Senses: in that we see the Vibrations of a Pendulum move equally; and we
hear the Tune of a String, when it is struck, continue the same.

The Measure of Swiftness of Vibrations of the String or Chord, as has been
said, constitutes and determines the Tune, as to Acuteness and Gravity of the
Note which it sounds: And the Lengthning or Shortning of the String, under the
same Tension, determines the Measure of the Vibrations which it makes. And
thus, Harmony comes under Mathematical Calculations of Proportions, of the
Length of Chords; of the Measure of Time in Vibrations; of the Intervals of
tuned Sounds. As the Length of one Chord to another, Caeteris paribus, I mean,
being of the same Matter, Thickness and Tension; so is the Measure of the Time
of their Vibrations. As the Time of Vibrations of one String to another, so is
the Interval or Space of Acuteness or Gravity of the Tune of that one, to the
Tune of the other: And consequently, as the Length is ( Caeteris paribus) so is
the determinate Tune.

And upon these Proportions in the Differences, of Lengths, of Vibrations, and
of Acuteness and Gravity; I shall insist all along this Treatise, very largely
and particularly, for the full Information of all such ingenious Lovers of
Music, as shall have the Curiosity to inquire into the Natural Causes of
Harmony, and of the Phenomenon which occurr therein, though otherwise, to the
more learned in Music and Mathematical Proportions, all might be expressed
very much shorter, and still be more shortened by the help of Symbols.

And here we may fix our Foot: Concluding, that what is evident to Sense, of
these Phenomenon, in a Chord, is equally (though not so discernably) true of
the Motions of all other Bodies which render a tuneable Sound, as the Trembling
of a Bell or Trumpet, the forming of the Larynx in our selves, and other
Animals, the Throat of Pipes and of those of an Organ, etc. All of them in
several Proportions sensibly trembling and impressing the like Undulations of
the Medium, as is done by the several (more manifest) Vibrations of Strings or
Chords.

In these other Bodies, last spoken of, we manifestly see Reason of the
Difference of the Swiftness of their Vibrations (though we cannot so well
measure them) from their Shape, and other Accidents in their Constitution; and
chiefly from the Proportions of their Magnitudes; the Greater generally
vibrating slower, and the Less more swiftly, which give the Tunes accordingly.
We see it in the Greatness of a String. A greater and thicker Chord will give a
graver and lower Tone than one that is more slender, of the same Tension and
Length; but they may be made Unison by altering their Length and Tension.

Tension is proper to Chords or Strings (except you will account a Drumm for a
Musical Instrument, which has a Tension not in Length, but in the whole
Surface) as when we wind up, or let down the Strings, i. e. give them a greater
or less Tension, in tuning a Viol, Lute, or Harpsichord, and is of great
Concern, and may be measured by hanging Weights on the String to give it
Tension; but not easily, nor so certainly.

But the Lengths of Chords (because of their Analogy to a Pendulum) is chiefly
considered, in the Discovery of the Proportions which belong to Harmony, it
being most easy to measure and design the Parts of a Monochord, in relation to
the whole String; and therefore all Intervals in Harmony may first be
described, and understood, by the Proportions of the Length of Strings, and
consequently of their Vibrations. And it is for that reason, that in this
Treatise of the Grounds of Harmony, Chords come so much to be considered,
rather than other sounding Bodies, and those, chiefly in their Proportions of
Length. It is true, that in Wind-Instruments, there is a regard to the Length
of Pipes, but they are not so well accommodated (as are Chords) to be examined,
neither are their Vibrations, nor the Measure of themso manifest.

There are some Musical Sounds, which seem to be made, not by Vibrations but by
Pulses, as by whisking swiftly over some Silk or Cambletstuffs, or over the
Teeth of a Comb, which render a kind of Tune more Acute or Grave, according to
the Swiftness of the Motion. Here the Sound is made, not by Vibrations of the
same Body, but by Percussion of several Equal, and Equidistant Bodies; as
Threads of the Stuff, Teeth of the Comb, passing over them with the same
Velocity as Vibrations are made. It gives the same Modification to the Tune,
and to the Undulations of the Air, as is done by Vibrations of the same
Measure; the Multiplicity of Pulses or Percussions, answering the Multiplicity
of Vibrations. I take this notice of it, because others have done so; but I
think it to be of no use in Music.

APPENDIX. Before I conclude this Chapter, it may seem needful, better to
confirm the Foundation we have laid, and give the Reader some more ample
Satisfaction about the Motions and Measures of a Pendulum, and the Application
of it to Harmonick Motion.
FIrst then, it is manifest to Sense and Experience, and out of all dispute;
that the Courses and Recourses return sooner or later, i. e. more or less
frequently, according as the Pendulum is shortened, or made longer. And that the
Proportion by which the Frequency increases, is (at least) very near
duplicate, viz. of the Length of the Pendulum, to the Number of Vibrations, but
is in reverse, i. e. as the Length increases, so the Vibrations decrease; and
contrary, quadruple the Length, and the Vibrations will be subdupled.
Subquadruple the Length, and the Vibrations will be dupled. And lastly, that
the Librations, the Courses and Recourses of the same Pendulum, are all made in
equal Space of Time, or very near to it from the greatest Range to the least.
Now though the duplicate Proportion assigned, and the Equality of Time, are a
little called in question, as not perfectly exact, though very near it; yet in
a Monochord we find them perfectly agree, viz. as to the Length, Duple instead
of Duplicate, because a String fastened at both Ends is as a double Pendulum,
each of which is quadrupled by dupling the whole String. And on this duple
Proportion, depend all the Rations found in Harmony. And again, the Vibrations
of a String are exactly equal, because they continue to give the same Tune.

Supposing then some little Difference may sometime seem to be found in either
of these Motions of a Pendulum, yet the Nearness to Truth is enough to support
our Foundation, by showing what is intended by Nature, though it sometimes meet
with secret Obstacles in the Pendulum, which it does not in a well made String.
We may justly make some Allowance for the Accidents, and unseen Causes, which
happen to make some little Variations in Trials of Motion upon gross Matter,
and consequently the like for nicer Experiments made upon the Pendulum. It is
difficult to find exactly the determinate Point of the Plumbet, which regulates
the Motions of the Pendulum, and consigns its just Length. Then observe the
Varieties which happen through various Sorts of Matter, upon which Experiments
are made. Mersennus tells us, that heavier Weights of the same Length move
slower, so that whilst a Lead Plumbet makes 39 Vibrations, Cork or Wood will
make at least 40. Again, that a stiff Pendulum vibrates more frequently, than
that which hangs upon a Chord. So that a Bar of Iron, or Staff of Wood ought
to be half as long again as the other, to make the Vibrations equal. Yet in
each of these respectively to it self, you will find the duplicate Proportion
and Equality of Vibration, or as near as may be. And (as to Equality) though in
the Extremes of the Ranges of Librations, viz. the Greatest compared to the
Least, there may (from unseen Causes) appear some Difference, yet there is do
discernable Difference of the Time of Vibrations of a Pendulum in Ranges, that
are near to one another, whether greater or less; which is the Case of the
Ranges of the Vibration of a String being made in a very small Compass: And
therefore the Librations of a Pendulum, limited to a small Difference of
Ranges, do well correspond with the Vibrations of a String.

As to Strings, the Whole of Harmony depends upon this experimented and
unquestioned Truth, that Diapason is duple to its Unison, and consequently
Diapente is Sesquialterum, Diatesseron Sesquitertium, etc. Yet if you happen to
divide a faulty String of an Instrument, you will not find the Octave just in
the Middle, nor the other Intervals in their due Proportion, which is no
Default in Nature, but in the Matter we apply. A false String is that, which is
thicker in one Part of its Length, than in another. The thicker Part naturally
vibrates slower, and sounds graver; the more slender Part vibrates swifter, and
sounds more acute. Thus whilst two Sounds so near one another, are at once made
upon the same String, they make a rough discording Jarr, being a hoarse Tune
mixed of both, more or less, as the String is more or less unequal: And if the
thicker Part be next the Frets, then the Fret (for example D. F. H. etc. in a
Viol or Lute) will render the Tune of the Note too sharp; and the contrary, if
the slender Part of the String be next the Frets; because in the former, the
thicker Part is stopped, and the thinner sounds more of the acuter Part of this
unhappy Mixture: As in the latter, the thicker Part is left to sound the graver
Tune, and thus the Fret will give a wrong Tune, though the Fault be not in the
Fret, but in the String; which yet, by an unwary Experimenter, may happen to
cause the Sectio Canouis to be called in question, as well as the Measures of a
Pendulum are disputed.

But all this does not disprove the Measures found out, and assigned to
Harmonick Intervals, which are verified upon a true String or Wire as to their
Lengths, and as to the Equality of Recourses in their Vibrations, though
Pendulums are thought to move slower in their least Ranges; yet, as to Strings,
in the very small Ranges which they make, (which are much less in other
Instruments, or sounding Bodies) I need add no more than this, that the
Continuance of the same Tune to the last, after a Chord is struck, and the
continued Motion in less Vibrations of a sympathizing String, during the
Continuance of greater Vibrations of the String which is struck, do either of
them sufficiently demonstrate, that those greater or less Vibrations, are both
made in the same Measure of Time, according to their Proportions, keeping exact
Pace with each other. Otherwise; In the former, the Tune would sensibly alter,
and in the latter, the sympathizing String could not be continued in its
Motion. This was not so well concluded, till the late Discoveries of the
Pendulum gave light to it.

There is one thing more which I must not omit. That the Motions of a Pendulum,
may seem not so proper to explicate the Motions of a String, because the said
Motions depend upon differing Principles, viz. those of a Pendulum upon
Gravity; those of a String upon Elasticity. I shall therefore endeavor to
show, how the Motions of a Pendulum, agree with those of a Spring, and how
properly the Explication of the Vibrations of a String, is deduced from the
Properties of a Pendulum.

The Elastick power of a Spring, in a Body endued with Elasticity, seems to be
nothing else, but a natural Propension and Endeavor of that Body, forced out
of its own Place, or Posture, to restore it self again into its former more
easy and natural Posture of Rest. And this is found in several Sorts of
Bodies, and makes different Cases, of which I shall mention some.

If the Violence be by Compression, forcing a Body into less room than it
naturally requires; then the Endeavor of Restitution, is by Dilatation to gain
room enough. Thus Air may be compressed into a less Space, and then will have a
great Elasticity, and struggle to regain its room. Thus, if you squeeze a dry
Sponge, it will naturally, when you take off the Force, spread it self, and
fill its former Place. So, if you press with your Finger a blown Bladder, it
will spring and rise again to its Place. And to this may be reduced the Springs
of a Watch, and of a Spiral Wire, etc.

Again, a stiff, but pliable Body, fastened at one End, and drawn aside at the
other, will spring back to its former Place; this is the Case of Steelsprings
of Locks, Snaf-hances, etc. and Branches of Trees, when shaken with the Wind,
or pulled aside, return to their former Posture: As is said of the Palm,
Depressa Resurgo. And there are innumerable instances of this kind, where the
Force is by bending, and the Restitution by unbending or returning.

This kind is resembled by a Pendulum, or Plummet hanging on a String, whose
Gravity, like the Spring in those other Bodies, naturally carries it to its
place, which here is downward; all heavy Bodies naturally descending till they
meet with some Obstacle to rest upon. And the lowest that the Plummet can
descend in its Restraint by the String, is, when it is nearest to the
Horizontal Plane GH, and therefore lowest. Now, if you force the Plummet upward
(held at length upon the String) from B to C, and let it go; it will, by a
Spontaneous Motion, endeavor its Restitution to B: but, having nothing to stop
it but Air, the Impulse of its own Velocity will carry it beyond B, toward D;
and so backward and forward, decreasing at every Range, till it come to rest at
B.



Thus the Pendulum and Spring agree in Nature, if you consider the Force
against them, and their Endeavor of Restitution.

But further, if you take a thin stiff Lamina of Steel, like a Piece of
Two-penny Riband of some length, and nail it fast at one End, (the remainder of
it being free in the Air) then force the other End aside and let it go; it will
make Vibrations backward and forward, perfectly answering those of a Pendulum.
And much more, if you contrive it with a little Steel Button at the End of it,
both to help the Motion when once set on foot, and to bear it better against
the Resistance of the Air. There will be no difference between the Vibrations
of this Spring, and of a Pendulum, which in both, will be alike increased or
decreased in Proportion to their Lengths. The same End ( viz. Rest) being, in
the same manner, obtained by Gravity in one, and Elasticity in the other.

Further yet, if you nail the Spring above, and let it hang down perpendicular,
with a heavier Weight at the lower End, and then set it on moving, the
Vibrations will be continued and carried on both by Gravity and Elasticity, the
Pendulum and the Spring will be most friendly joined to cause a simple equal
Motion of Librations, I mean, an equal Measure of Time in the Recourses; only
the Spring answerably to its Strength, may cause the Librations tobe somewhat
swifter, as an Addition of Tension does to a String continued in the same
length.

I come now to consider a String of an Instrument, which is a Spring fastened at
both Ends. It acquireth a double Elasticity. The first by Tension, and the
Spring is stronger or weaker, according as the Tension is greater or less. And
by how much stronger the Spring is, so much more frequent are the Vibrations,
and by this Tension therefore, the Strings of an Instrument keeping the same
length are put in Tune, and this Spring draws length-ways, endeavoring a
Relaxation of the Tension.

But then, Secondly, the String being under a stated Tension, has another
Elastick Power side-ways, depending upon the former, by which it endeavors, if
it be drawn aside, to restore it self to the easiest Tension, in the shortest,
viz. streightest line.

In the former Case, Tension does the same with abatement of length, and
affects the String properly as a Spring, in that the String being forcibly
stretched, as forcibly draws back to regain the remiss Posture in which it was
before: And bears little Analogy with the Pendulum, except in general, in their
spontaneous Motions in order to their Restitution.

But there is great Correspondence in the second Case, between the Librations
of a Pendulum and the Vibrations of a String (for so, for distinctions sake, I
will now call them) in that they are both proportioned to their length, as has
been shown; and between the Elasticity which moves the String, and Gravity
which moves the Pendulum, both of them having the same Tendency to Restitution,
and by the same Method. As the Declivity of the Motion of a Pendulum, and
consequently the Impulse of its Gravity is still lessened in the Arch of its
Range from a Semicircle, till it come to rest perpendicular; the Descent
thereof being more downright at the first and greatest Ranges, and more
Horizontal at the last and shortest Ranges, as may be seen in the preceding
Figure CI IE EB; so the Impulse of a Spring is still gradually lessened as the
Ranges shorten, and as it gains of relaxation, till it come to be restored to
rest in its shortest Line. And this may be the Cause of the Equality of Time of
the Librations of a Pendulum, and also of the Vibrations of a String. Now, the
Proportions of Length, to the Velocity of Vibrations in one, and of Librations
in the other, we are sure of, and find by manifest Experience to be quadruple
in one, and duple in the other.

Now tack two equal Pendulums together (as before) being fastened at both Ends,
take away the Plumbets, and you make it a String, retaining still the same
Properties of Motion, only what was said before to be caused by Gravity, must
now be said to be done by Elasticity. You see what an easy Step here is out of
one into the other, and what Agreement there is between them. The Phenomenon
are the same, but difficultly experimented in a String, where the Vibrations
are too swift to fall under exact Measure; but most easy in a Pendulum, whose
slow Librations may be measured at pleasure, and numbered by distant Moments of
Time.

To bring it nearer, make your Tension of the String by Gravity, instead of
screwing it up with a Pegg or Pin: Hang weight upon a Pulley at one End of the
String, and as you increase the Weight, so you do increase the Tension, and as
you increase the Tension, so you increase the Velocity of Vibrations. So the
Vibrations are proportionably regulated immediately by Tension, and mediately
by Gravity. So that Gravity may claim a share in the Measures of these
Harmonick Motions.

But to come still nearer, and home to our purpose. Fasten a Gut or Wire-string
above, and hang a heavy Weight on it below, as the Weight is more or less, so
will be the Tension, and consequently the Vibrations. But let the same Weight
continue, and the String will have a stated settled Tension. Here you have both
in one, a Pendulum, and the Spring of a String, which resembles a double
Pendulum: Draw the Weight aside, and let it range, and it is properly a
Pendulum, librating after the Nature of a Pendulum. Again, when the Weight is
at rest, strike the String with a gentle Plectrum made of a Quill, on the upper
part, so as not to make the Weight move, and the String will vibrate, and give
its Tune, like other Strings fastened at both Ends, as this is also, in this
Case. So you have here both a Pendulum and a String, or either, which you
please. And (the Tension being supposed to be settled under the same Weight) the
common Measure and Regulator of the Proportions of them is the Length. And as
you alter the Length, so proportionably you alter at once the Velocity in the
Recourses of the Vibrations of the String, and of the Librations of the
Pendulum. And though the Vibratione be so much swifter, and more frequent than
the Librations, yet the Rations are altered alike. If you subduple the Length
of the String, then the Vibrations will be dupled. And if you subquadruple it,
then the Librations will be also dupled, allowing for so much of the Body of
the Weight as must be taken in, to determine the Length of the Pendulum.

The Vibrations are altered in duple Proportion to the Librations, because (as
has been shown) the String is as a double Pendulum, either one of which
supposed Pendulums is but half so long as the String, and is quadrupled by
dupling the whole String. Still therefore the Proportion of their Alterations
holds so certainly and regularly with the Proportion of every Change of their
common Length, that, if you have the Comparative Ration of either of these two,
viz. Vibrations or Librations to the Length, you have them both: The increase
of the Velocity of Librations being subduple to the increase of the Velocity of
Vibrations. And thus the Motions of a Pendulum do fully and properly discover
to us, the Motions of a String, by the manifest Correspondence of their
Properties and Nature. The Pendulum's Motion of Gravity, and the Strings of
Elasticity bearing so certain Proportions according to Length, that the
Principles of Harmony, may be very properly made out, and most easily
comprehended, as explained by the Pendulum. And we find, that in all Ages, this
part of Harmony was never so clearly understood, as since the late Discoveries
about the Pendulum.

And I choose to make this Illustration by the Pendulum, because it is so easy
for Experiment, and for our Comprehension; and the Elastick Power so difficult.

Having seen the Origin of Tuneable or Harmonick Sounds, and of their
Difference in respect of Acuteness and Gravity: It is next to be considered,
how they come to be affected with Consonancy and Dissonancy, and what these are.

CHAP. III. Of Consonancy and Dissonancy.
COnsonancy and Dissonancy are the Result of the Agreement, mixture or uniting
(or the contrary) of the undulated Motions of the Air or Medium, caused by the
Vibrations by which the Sounds of distinct Tunes are made. And those are more
or less capable of such Mixture or Co-incidence according to the Proportion of
the Measures of Velocity in which they are made, i.e. according as they are
more or less commensurate. This I might well set down as a Postulatum. But I
shall by several Instances endeavor to illustrate the undulating Motions or
Undulations of the Air; and confirm what is said of their Agreement and
Disagreements. And first the Undulations, by somewhat we see in other Liquids.

Let a Stone drop into the Middle of a small Pond of standing Water when it is
quiet, you shall see a Motion forthwith impressed upon the Water, passing and
dilating from that Center where the Stone fell, in circular Waves one within
another, still propagated from the Center, spreading till they reach and dash
against the Banks, and then returning, if the force of the Motion be
sufficient, and meeting those inner Circles which pursue the same Course,
without giving them any Check.

And if you drop a Stone in another place, from that Center will likewise
spread round Waves; which meeting the other, will quietly pass them, each
moving forwards in its own proper Figure.

The like is better experimented in Quicksilver, which being a more dense
Body, continues its Motions longer, and may be placed nearer your Eye. If you
try it in a pretty large round Vessel, suppose of a foot Diameter, the Waves
will keep their own Motion forward and backward, and quietly pass by one
another as they meet. Something of this may be seen in a long narrow Passage,
where there is not room to advance in Circles.

Make a wooden Trough or long Box, suppose of two Inches broad, and two deep,
and twenty long. Fill it three Quarters or half full of Quicksilver, and place
it Horizontally, when it is at quiet, give it with your Finger a little patt at
one End, and it will impress a Motion of a ridgid Wave across, which will pass
on to the other End, and dashing against it, return in the same Manner, and
dash against the hither End, and go back again, and thus backward and forward,
till the Motion cease. Now if after you have set this Motion on foot, you cause
such another, you shall see each Wave keep its regular Course; and when they
meet one another, pass on without any Reluctance.

I do not say these Experiments are full to my purpose, because these being
upon single Bodies, are not sufficient to express the Disagreements of
Disproportionate Motions caused by different Vibrations of different sounding
Bodies; but these may serve to illustrate those invisible Undulations of Air.
And how a Voice reflected by the Walls of a Room, or by Echo being of adequate
Vibrations, returns from the Wall, and meets the commensurate Undulations
passing forwards, without hindering one another.

But there are Instances which further confirm the Reasons of Consonancy and
Dissonancy, by the Manifest agreeing or disagreeing Measures of Motions already
spoken of.

It has been a common Practice to imitate a Tabour and Pipe upon an Organ.
Sound together two discording Keys (the base Keys will show it best, because
their Vibrations are slower) let them, for Example, be Gamut with Gamut sharp,
or F Faut sharp, or all three together. Though these of themselves should be
exceeding smooth and well voyced Pipes; yet, when struck together, there will
be such a Battle in the Air between their disproportioned Motions, such a
Clatter and Thumping, that it will be like the beating of a Drum, while a Jigg
is played to it with the other hand. If you cease this, and sound a full Close
of Concords, it will appear surprizingly smooth and sweet, which shows how
Discords well placed, set off Concords in Composition. But I bring this
Instance to show, how strong and vehement these undulating Motions are, and how
they correspond with the Vibrations by which they are made.

It may be worth the while, to relate an Experiment upon which I happened.
Being in an Arched sounding Room near a shrill Bell of a House Clock, when the
Alarm struck, I whistled to it, which I did with ease in the same Tune with the
Bell, but, endeavoring to whistle a Note higher or lower, the Sound of the
Bell and its cross Motions were so predominant, that my Breath and Lips were
checked so, that I could not whistle at all, nor make any Sound of it in that
discording Tune. After, I sounded a shrill whistling Pipe, which was out of
tune to the Bell, and their Motions so clashed, that they seemed to sound like
switching one another in the Air.

Galileo, from this Doctrine of Pendulums, easily and naturally explains the so
much admired sympathy of Consonant strings; one (though untouched) moving when
the other is struck. It is perceptible in Strings of the same, or another
Instrument, by trembling so as to shake off a Straw laid upon the other String:
But in the same Instrument, it may be made very visible, as in a Bass-viol.
Strike one of the lower Strings with the Bow, hard and strong, and if any of
the other Strings be Unison or Octave to it, you shall plainly see it vibrate,
and continue to do so, as long as you continue the Stroke of your Bow, and,
all the while, the other Strings which are dissonant, rest quiet.

The Reason hereof is this. When you strike your String, the Progressive sound
of it strikes and starts all the other Strings, and every of them makes a
Movement in its own proper Vibration. The Consonant string, keeping measure in
its Vibrations with those of the sounding String has its Motion continued, and
propagated by continual agreeing Pulses or Strokes of the other. Whereas the
Remainder of the Dissonant strings having no help, but being checked by the
cross Motions of the sounding String, are constrained to remain still and
quiet. Like as, if you stand before a Pendulum, and blow gently upon it as it
passes from you, and so again in its next Courses keeping exact time with it,
it is most easily continued in its Motion. But if you blow irregularly in
Measures different from the Measure of the Motion of the Pendulum, and so most
frequently blow against it, the Motion of it will be so checked, that it must
quickly cease.

And here we may take notice, (as has been hinted before) that this also
confirms the aforesaid Equality of the Time of Vibrations to the last, for that
the small and weak Vibrations of the sympathizing String are regulated and
continued by the Pulses of the greater and stronger Vibrations of the sounding
String, which proves, that notwithstanding that Disparity of Range, they are
commensurate in the Time of their Motion.

This Experiment is ancient: I find it in Aristides Quintilianus a Greek
Author, who is supposed to have been contemporary with Plutarch. But the
Reason of it deduced from the Pendulum, is new, and first discovered by Galileo.

It is an ordinary Trial, to find out the Tune of a Beer-glass without striking
it, by holding it near your Mouth, and humming loud to it, in several single
Tunes, and when you at last hitt upon the Tune of the Glass, it will tremble
and Echo to you. Which shows the Consent and Uniformity of Vibrations of the
same Tune, though in several Bodies.

To close this Chapter. I may conclude that Consonancy is the Passage of
several Tuneable sounds through the Medium, frequently mixing and uniting in
their undulated Motions, caused by the well proportioned commensurate
Vibrations of the sonorous Bodies, and consequently arriving smooth, and sweet,
and pleasant to the Ear. On the contrary, Dissonancy is from disproportionate
Motions of Sounds, not mixing, but jarring and clashing as they pass, and
arriving to the Ear Harsh, and Grating, and Offensive. And this, in the next
Chapter shall be more amply explained.

Now, what Concords and Discords are thus produced, and in use, in order to
Harmony, I shall next consider.

CHAP. IV. Of Concords.
COncords are Harmonic sounds, which being joined please and delight the Ear;
and Discords the Contrary. So that it is indeed the Judgment of the Ear that
determines which are Concords and which are Discords. And to that we must first
resort to find out their Number. And then we may after search and examine how
the natural Production of those Sounds, disposes them to be pleasing or
unpleasant. Like as the Palate is absolute Judge of Tastes, what is sweet, and
what is bitter, or sour, etc. though there may be also found out some natural
Causes of those Qualities. But the Ear being entertained with Motions which
fall under exact Demonstrations of their Measures, the Doctrine hereof is
capable of being more accurately discovered.

First then, (setting aside the Unison Concord, which is no Space or Interval,
but an Identity of Tune) the Ear allows and approves these following Intervals,
and only these for Concords to any given Note, viz. the Octave or Eighth, the
Fifth, then the Fourth, (though by later Masters of Music degraded from his
Place) then the Third Major, the Third Minor, the Sixth Major, and the Sixth
Minor. And also such, as in the Compass of any Voice or Instrument beyond the
Octave, may be compounded of these, for such those are, I mean compounded, and
only the former Seven are simple Concords; not but that they may seem to be
compounded, viz. the greater of the less within an Octave, and therefore may be
called Systems, but they are Originals. Whereas beyond an Octave, all is but
Repetition of these in Compound with the Eighth, as a Tenth is an Eighth and a
Third; a Twelfth is an Eighth and a Fifth; a Fifteenth is Disdiapason, i.e. two
Octaves, etc.

But notwithstanding this Distinction of Original and Compound Concords; and,
though these compounded Concords are found, and discerned by their Habitude to
the Original Concords comprehended in the System of Diapason; (as a Tenth
ascending is an Octave above the Third, or a Third above the Octave; a Twelfth
is an Octave to the Fifth, or a Fifth to the Eighth, a Fifteenth is an Eighth
above the Octave, i.e. Disdiapason two Eighths, etc.) yet they must be owned,
and are to be esteemed good and true Concords, and equally useful in Melody,
especially in that of Consort.

The System of an Eighth, containing seven Intervals, or Spaces, or Degrees,
and eight Notes reckoned inclusively, as expressed by eight Chords, is called
Diapason, i. e. a System of all intermediate Concords, which were anciently
reputed to be only the Fifth and the Fourth, and it comprehends them both, as
being compounded of them both: And now, that the Thirds and Sixths are admitted
for Concords, the Eighth contains them also: Viz. a Third Major and Sixth
Minor, and again a Third Minor and Sixth Major. The Octave being but a
Replication of the Unison, or given Note below it, and the same, as it were in
Minuture, it closes and terminates the first perfect System, and the next
Octave above ^ ascends by the same Intervals, and i^ in like manner compounded
of them, and so on, as far as you can proceed upwards or downwards with Voices
or Instruments, as may be seen in an Organ, or Harpsichord. It is therefore
most justly judged by the Ear, to be the Chief of all Concords, and is the only
Consonant System, which being added to it self, still makes Concords.

And to it all other Concords agree, and are Consonant, though they do not all
agree to each other; nor any of them make a Concord if added to it self, and
the Complement or Residue of any Concord to Diapason, is also Concord.

The next in Dignity is the Fifth, then the Fourth, Third Major, Third Minor,
Sixth Major, and lastly Sixth Minor; all taken by Ascent from the Unison or
given Note.

By Unison is meant, sometimes the Habitude or Ration of Equality of two Notes
compared together, being of the very same Tune. Sometimes (as here) for the
given single Note to which the Distance, or the Rations of other Intervals are
compared. As, if we consider the Relations to Gamut, to which A re is a Tone or
Second, B mi a Third, C a Fourth, D a Fifth, etc. We call Gamut the Unison, for
want of a more proper Word. Thus C fa ut, or any other Note to which other
Intervals are taken, may be called the Unison.

And the Reader may easily discern, in which Sense it is taken all along by the
Coherence of the Discourse.

I come now to consider the natural Reasons, why Concords please the Ear, by
examining the Motions by which all Concords are made, which having been
generally alleged in the beginning of the third Chapter, shall now more
particularly be discussed.

And here I hope the Reader will pardon some Repetition in a Subject, that
stands in need of all Light that may be, if, for his easy and more steady
Progress, before I proceed, I call him back to a Review and brief Summary of
some of those Notions, which have been premised and considered more at large. I
have showed,

1. That Harmonick Sound or Tune is made by equal Vibrations or Tremblings of a
Body fitly constituted.

2. That those Vibrations make their Courses and Recourses in the same Measure
of Time; from the greatest Range to the lesser, till they come to rest.

3. That those Vibrations are under a certain Measure of Frequency of Courses
and Recourses in a given Space of Time.

4. That if the Vibrations be more frequent, the Tune will be proportionably
more Acute: if less frequent, more Grave.

5. That the Librations of a Pendulum become doubly frequent, if the Pendulum
be made four times shorter; and twice flower, if the Pendulum be four times
longer.

6. That a Chord, or String of a Musical Instrument, is, as a double Pendulum,
or two Pendulums tacked together at length, and therefore has the same Effects
by dupling; as a Pendulum by quadrupling, i. e. by dupling the Length of the
Chord, the Vibrations will be subdupled, i. e. be half so many in a given Time.
And by subdupling the Length of the Chord, the Vibrations will be dupled, and
proportionably so in all other Measures of Length, the Vibrations bearing a
Reciprocal proportion to the Length.

7. That these Vibrations impress a Motion of Undulation or Trembling in the
Medium (as far as the Motion extends) of the same Measure with the Vibrations.

8. That if the Motions made by different Chords be so commensurate, that they
mix and unite; bear the same Course either altogether, or alternately, or
frequently: Then the Sounds of those different Chords, thus mixing, will calmly
pass the Medium, and arrive at the Ear as one Sound, or near the same, and so
will smoothly and evenly strike the Ear with Pleasure, and this is Consonancy,
and from the want of such Mixture is Dissonancy. I may add, that as the more
frequent Mixture or Coincidence of Vibrations, render the Concords generally so
much the more perfect: So, the less there is of Mixture, the greater and more
harsh will be the Discord.

From the Premises, it will be easy to comprehend the natural Reason, why the
Ear is delighted with those forenamed Concords: and that is, because they all
unite in their Motions often, and at the least at every sixth Course of
Vibration, which appears from the Rations by which they are constituted, which
are all contained within that Number, and all Rations contained within that
Space of Six, make Concords, because the Mixture of their Motions is answerable
to the Ration of them, and are made at or before every Sixth Course. This will
appear if we examine their Motions. First, how and why the Unisons agree so
perfectly; and then finding the reason of an Octave, and fixing that, all the
rest will follow.

To this purpose, strike a Chord of a sounding Instrument, and at the same
Time, another Chord supposed to be in all respects Equal, i. e. in Length,
Matter, Thickness, and Tension. Here then, both the Strings give their Sound;
each Sound is a certain Tune; each Tune is made by a certain Measure of
Vibrations: the same Vibrations are impressed upon, and carried every way along
the Medium, in Undulations of the same Measure with them, until the Sounds
arrive at the Ear. Now the Chords being supposed to be equal in all respects;
it follows, that their Vibrations must be also equal, and consequently move in
the same Measure, joining and uniting in every Course and Recourse, and keeping
still the same Equality, and Mixture of Motions of the String, and in the
Medium. Therefore the Habitude of these two Strings is called Unison, and is so
perfectly Consonant, that it is an Identity of Tune, there being no Interval or
Space between them. And the Ear can hardly judge, whether the Sound be made by
two Strings, or by one.

But Consonancy is more properly considered, as an Interval, or Space between
Tones of different Acuteness or Gravity. And amongst them, the most perfect is
that which comes nearest to Unison, (I do not mean betwixt which there is the
least Difference of Interval: but, in whose Motions there is the greatest
Mixture and Agreement next to Unison.) The Motions of two Unisons are in Ration
of 1 to 1, or of Equality. The next Ration in whole Numbers is 2 to 1, Duple.
Divide a Monochord in two Equal parts, half the Length compared to the whole,
being in Subduple Ration, will make double Vibrations, making two Recourses in
the same time that the other makes one, and so uniting and mixing alternately,
i. e. every other Motion. Then comparing the Sounds of these two, and the half
will be found to sound an Octave to the whole Chord. Now the Octave (ascending
from the Unison) being thus found and fixed to be in duple Proportion of
Vibrations, and subduple of Length; consequently the Proportions of all other
Intervals are easily found out.

They are found out by resolving or dividing the Octave into the mean Rations
which are contained in it. Euclid, in his Sectio Canonis, Theorem. 6. gives two
Demonstrations to prove, that Duple Ration contains, and is composed of the two
next Rations, viz. Sesquialtera and Sesquitertia. Therefore an Octave which is
in Duple Ration 2 to 1 is divided into, and composed of a Fifth, whose Ration
is found to be Sesquialtera 3 to 2; and a Fourth, whose Ration is Sesquitertia
4 to 3. In like manner, Sesquialtera is composed of Sesquiquarta and
Sesquiquinta. That is, a Fifth 3 to 2 may be divided into a Third Major 5 to 4,
and a Third Minor 6 to 5; etc.

There is an easy way to take a view of the Mean Rations, which may be
contained in any Ration given, by transferring the Prime or Radical Numbers of
the given Ration into greater Numbers of the same Ration, as 2 to 1 into 4 to
2, or 6 to 3, etc. which have the same Ration of Duple. Again, 3 to 2 into 6 to
4, which is still Sesquialtera. Now in 4 to 2. the Mediety is 3. So that 4 to 3
and 3 to 2 are comprehended in 4 to 2; that is, a Fourth and a Fifth are
comprehended in an Eighth. In 6 to 4 the Mediety is 5, so 6 to 4 contains 6 to
5 and 5 to 4; i. e. a Fifth contains the 2 Thirds. Let 6 to 3 be the Octave,
and it contains 6 to 5 Third less, 5 to 4 Third Major, and 4 to 3, a Fourth,
and has two Medieties, 5 and 4. Of this I shall say more in the next Chapter.

These Rations express the Difference of Length in several Strings which make
the Concords; and consequently the Difference of their Vibrations. Take two
Strings A B, in all other Respects equal, and compare their Lengths, which if
equal, make Unison or the same Tune. If A be double in Length to B, i. e. 2 to
1, the Vibrations of B will be duple to those of A, and unite alternately, viz.
at every Course, crossing at the Recourse, and give the Sound of an Octave to A.

If the Length of A be to that of B as 3 to 2, and consequently the Vibrations
as 2 to 3, their Sounds will consort in a Fifth, and their Motions unite after
every second Recourse, i. e. at every other or third Course.

If A to B, be as 4 to 3, they sound a Fourth, their Motions uniting after
every third Recourse, viz. at every fourth Course.

If A to B, be as 5 to 4, they sound a Ditone, or third Major, and unite after
every fourth Recourse, i. e. every fifth Recourse.

If A to B, be as 6 to 5, they sound a Trihemitone, or Third Minor, uniting
after every fifth Recourse, at every sixth Course.

Thus by the frequency of their being mixed and united, the Harmony of joined
Concords is found so very sweet and pleasing; the Remoter being also combined
by their Relation to other Concords besides the Unison. The greater Sixth, 5 to
3, is within the Compass of Rations between 1 and 6; but, I confess, the lesser
Sixth, 8 to 5, is beyond it: but is the Complement of 6 to 5 to an Octave, and
makes a better Concord by its Combinations with the Octave, and Fourth from the
Unison; having the Relation of a Third Minor to One, and of a Third Major to
the Other, and their Motions uniting accordingly. And the Sixth Major has the
same Advantage. Of these Combinations I shall have occasion to say somewhat
more, after I have made the Subject in hand as plain as I can.

I proposed the Collating of two several Strings, to express the Consort which
is made by them; but otherwise, these Rations are more certainly found upon the
Measures of a Monochord, taken, by being applied to the Section of a Canon, or
a Rule of the Strings length divided into parts, as occasion requires: because
there is no need so often to repeat Caeteris paribus, as is when several
Strings are collated. And if you take the Rations as Fractions, it will be more
easy to measure out the given Parts of a Monochord, or single String extended
on an Instrument: Those parts of the String divided by a Moveable Bridge or
Fret put under, and made to sound; That Sound, related to the Sound of the
Whole, will give the Interval sought after. Ex. gr. of the Chord gives an
Eighth, give a Fifth, sound a Fourth, sound a Third Major, a Third Minor, a
Sixth Major, a Sixth Minor: Now we thus express these Concords.

musical chords

I said, that all Concords are in Rations within the Number Six; and I may add,
that all Rations within the Number Six, are Concords: Of which, take the
following Scheme.

6 to 5 3d Minor. to 4 5th to 3 8th to 2 12th to 1 19th 5 to 4 3d Major. to 3
6th Major. to 2 10th Major. to 1 17th Major. 4 to 3 4th to 2 8th to 1 15th 3 to
2 5th to 1 12th 2 to 1 8th 6 to 5 3d Minor. 5 to 4 3d Major. 4 to 3 4th 3 to 2
5th 2 to 1 8th

All that are Concords to the Unison, are also Concords to the Octave, And all
that are Discords to the Unison, are Discords to the Octave. And some of the
Intermediate Concords, are Concords one to another; as the two Thirds to the
Fifth, and the Fourth to the two Sixths. So that the Unison, Third, Fifth, and
Octave; or the Unison, Fourth, Sixth, and Octave, may be sounded together to
make a complete Close of Harmony: I do not mean a Close to Conclude with, for
the Plagal is not such; but a complete Close, as it includes all Concords
within the Compass of Diapason. A Scheme of which I have set down at the End of
the foregoing Staff of five Lines, which contains the Notes by which the
aforesaid Concords are expressed. The former two which ascend from the Unison,
Gamut, by Third Major (or Minor) and Fifth, up to the Octave; are usually
called Authentic, as relating principally to the Unison, and best satisfying
the Ear to rest upon: The other two, which ascend by the Fonrth and Sixth
Minor, (or Major) up to the same Octave, are called Plagal, as more combining
with the Octave, seeming to require a more proper base Note, vzi. an Eighth
below the Fourth, and therefore not making a good concluding Close: And on the
continual shifting these, or often changing them, depends the Variety of
Harmony (as far as Consonancy reaches, which is but as the Body of Music) in
all Contrapunct chiefly, but indeed in all Kinds of Composition. I do not
exclude a Sprinkling of Discords; nor here meddle with Air, Measure, and
Rythmus, which are the Soul and Spirit of Music, and give it so great a
commanding Power. The Plagal Moods descend by the same Intervals, by which the
Authentic ascend; which is by Thirds and Fifths; and the Authentic descend
the same by which the Plagal ascend, viz. by Fourths and Sixths; one chiefly
relating to the Unison, the other to the Octave.

But that, for which I described these full Closes, was chiefly, to give (as I
promised) a larger account of the beforementioned Combinations of Concords,
which increase the Consonancies of each Note, and make a wonderful Variegation
and Delightfulness of the Harmony.

Cast your Eye upon the First of them in the Authentic Scale; you will see
that B mi has 3 Relations of Consonnacy, viz. To the Unison, or given Note G;
to the Fifth, and to the Octave: To the Unison as a Third Minor; to the Fifth
as a Third Major; to the Octave a Sixth Major; so that its Motions join after
every fifth Recourse, i. e. at every sixth Course, with the Unison; every fifth
with the Diapente or Fifth; every sixth Course with the Octave. Then consider
the Diapente, D sol re; as a Fifth to the Unison, it joins with it every third
Course; and as a Fourth to the Octave, they join every Fourth Course. Then, the
Octave with the Unison, joins after every second Vibration, i. e. at every
Course.

Now take a Review of the Variety of Consonancies in these four Notes. Here are
mixed together in one Consort the Rations of 2 to 1, 3 to 2, 4 to 3, 5 to 4, 6
to 5, 5 to 3. And just so it is in the other Closes, only changing alternately
the Sixths.

You may see here, within the Space of three Intervals from the Unison, viz.
3d, 5th, and 8th; what a Concourse there is of Consonant Rations, to Variegate
and give (as it were) a pleasant Purling to the Harmony within that Space. For
now, all this Variety is formed within one System of Diapason, justly bearing
that Name. But then, think what it will be, when the remote Compounded Concords
are joined to them; as when we make a full Close with both Hands upon an Organ,
or Harpsichord, or when the higher Part of a Consort of Music is reconciled to
the lower, by the middle Parts; viz. the Treble to the Base, by the Mean and
Tenor: And all this, refreshed by the Interchangings made between the Plagal
and Authentic Moods. Add to all this, the Infinite Variety of Movement of some
Parts, through all Spaces, while some Part moves slowly: And (as in Fuges) one
part chasing and pursuing another.

The whole Reason of Consonancy, being founded upon the Mixture, and Uniting of
the Vibrating Motions of several Chords or sounding Bodies; it is fit, it
should here be better explained and confirmed. That their Mixtures accord to
their Rations, it is easy to be computed: But it may be represented to your
Eye.

vibrating string patterns

Let VV be a Chord, and stand for the Unison: Let O O be a Chord half so long,
which will be an Octave to the Unison, and the Vibrations double: Then I say,
they will alternately, i. e. at every other Vibration unite: Let from A to B,
be the Course of the Vibration, and from B to A the Recourse. Observing by the
way, that (in relation to the Figures mentioned in this Paragraph and the next,
as also in the former Diagram of the Pendulum, Cap. 2. page 9.) When I say,
[from B to A] and, [overtakes V, in A, etc.] I do there endeavor to express
the matter brief and perspicuous, without perplexing the Figures with many
Lines: and avoiding the Encumbrance of so many Cautions, whereby to distract
the Reader: Yet I must always be understood to acknowledge the continual
Decrease of the Range of Vibrations between A and B, while the Motion
continues; and by A and B, mean only the Extremities of the Range of all those
Vibrations, both the First greatest, and also the Successive lessened, and
gradually contracted Extremities of their Range. And the following
Demonstration proceeds and holds equally in both, being applied to the Velocity
of Recourses, and not to the Compass of their Range, which is not at all here
considered. Such a kind of Equity, I must sometimes in other parts of this
Discourse, beg of the Candid Reader. To proceed therefore, I say, whilst V
being struck, makes his Course from A to B; O (struck likewise) will have his
Course from A to B, and Recourse from B to A. Next, whilst V makes Recourse
from B to A; O is making its Course contrary, from A to B, but recourseth and
overtakes V in A, and then they are united in A, and begin their Course
together. So you see, that the Vibrations of Diapason unite alternately,
joining at every Course of the Unison, and crossing at the Recourse.

Thus also Diapente or Fifth having the Ration of 3 to 2, unites in like manner
at every third Course of the Unison. Let the Chord DD be Diapente to the Unison
V; whilst V courseth from A to B, the Chord D courseth from A to B, and makes
half his Recourse as far as C; i. e. 3 to 2. Whilst V recourseth from B to A, D
passes from C to A, and back from A to B. Whilst V courseth again from A to B,
D passes from B to A, and back to C. Whilst V recourseth from B to A, D
passes from C to B, and back to A: And then they unite in A, beginning their
Courses together, at every third Course of V. In like manner the rest of the
Concords unite, at the 4th, 5th, 6th Course, according to their Rations, as
might this same way be shown; but it would take up too much room, and is
needless; being made evident enough from these Examples already given.

Thus far the Rates and Measures of Consonance lead us on, and give us the true
and demonstrable grounds of Harmony: But still it is not complete without
Discords and Degrees (of which I shall treat in another Chapter) intermixed
with the Concords, to give them a Foyl, and set them off the better. For, (to
use a homely resemblance) That our Food, taken alone, though proper, and
wholesome, and natural, may not cloy the Palate, and abate the Appetite; the
Cook finds such kinds and varieties of Sauce, as quicken and please the Palate,
and sharpen the Appetite, though not feed the Stomach: As Vinegar, Mustard,
Pepper, etc. which nourish not, nor are taken alone, but carry down the
Nourishment with better Relish, and assist it in Digestion. So the Practical
Masters and Skilful Composers make use of Discords, judiciously taken, to
relish the Consort, and make the Concords arrive much sweeter at the Ear, in
all sorts of Descant; but most frequently in Cadence to a Close. In all which,
the chief regard is to be had to what the Ear may expect in the Conduct of the
Composition, and must be performed with Moderation and Judgment; which I now
only mention, not intending to treat of Composing, which is out of my Design
and Sphere, and would be too large; but my design is, to make these Grounds as
plain as I can, thereby to gratify those, whose Philosophical Learning,
without previous Skill in Music, will easily render them capable of this
Theory: And also, those Masters in Practick Music, and Lovers of it, who,
though wanting Philosophy, and the Latin and other Foreign Tongues, to read
better Authors; yet, by the help of their knowledge in Music, may attain to
understand the depth of the Grounds and Reasons of Harmony, for whose sakes it
is done in this Language.

I shall conclude this Chapter with some Remarks, concerning the Names given to
the several Concords: We call them Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth. Of
these, the Third's being Two, and Sixth's being also Two, want better
distinguishing Names. To call them Flat and Sharp Thirds, and Flat and Sharp
Sixths is not enough, and lies under a mistake; I mean, it is not a sufficient
Distinction, to call the greater Third and Sixth, Sharp Third, and Sharp Sixth;
and the lesser, Flat. They are so, indeed, in ascending from the Unison; but in
descending they are contrary; for to the Octave, that greater Sixth is a lesser
Third, and the greater Third is a lesser Sixth; which lesser Third and Sixth
cannot well be called Flat, being in a Sharp Key; Flat and Sharp therefore do
not well distinguish them in General. The lesser Third from the Octave being
sharp, and the greater Sixth flat. So, from the Fifth descending by Thirds, if
the First be a Minor Third, it is Sharp, and the other being a Major Third,
cannot be said to be Flat.

The other Distinction of them, viz. by Major and Minor, is more proper, and
does well express which of them we mean. But still, the common and confused
name of Third, if the Distinction of Major and Minor be not always well
remembered, is apt to draw young Practitioners, who do not well consider, into
another Error. I would therefore call the greater Third (as the Greeks do)
Ditone, i. e. of two whole Tones; and the Third Minor, Trihemitone, or
Sesquitone, as consisting of three half Tones, (or rather of a Tone and half a
Tone) And this would avoid the mentioned Error which I am going to describe.

It is a Rule in composing Consort Music, that it is not lawful to make a
Movement of two Unisons, or two Eights, or two Fifths together; nor of two
Fourths, unless made good by the addition of Thirds in another Part: But we may
move as many Thirds or Sixths together as we please. Which last is false, if we
keep to the same sort of Thirds and Sixths; for the two Thirds differ one from
another in like manner as the Fourth differs from the Fifth. For in the same
manner as the Eighth is divided into a Fifth and Fourth: so is a Fifth into a
3d Major and 3d Minor. Now call them by their right names, and, I say, it is
not lawful to make a Movement of as many Ditones, or of as many Sesquitones as
you please; and therefore when you take the liberty spoken of, under the
general names of Thirds, it will be found, that you mix Ditones and
Trihemitones, and so are not concerned in the aforesaid Rule; and so the
Movements of Sixths will be made with mixture and interchanges of 6th Major and
6th Minor, which is safe enough.

Yet, I confess, there is a little more liberty in moving Trihemitones and
Ditones, as likewise, either of the Sixths, than there is in moving Fourths or
Fifths; and the Ear will bear it better. Nay, there is necessity, in a gradual
Movement of Thirds, to make one Movement by two Trihemitones together in every
Fourth, and Fifth, or Fourth disjunct: That is, twice in Diapason, or, at
least, in two Fifths; as in Gamut Key proper. The natural Ascent will be, Ut Re
Mi Fa Sol La: Now, to these join Thirds in Natural Ascent, and they will be, Mi
Fa Sol La Fa Sol. Mi Fa Sol La Fa Sol Us Re Mi Fa Sci La And thus it will be in
other Cliffs, but with some variation, according to the place of the Hemitone.
Here Fi (...) and (...) are two Trihemitones succeeding one another, and you
cannot well alter them without disordering the Ascent, and disturbing the
Harmony; because, where there is a Hemitone, the Tone below joined to it, makes
a Trihemitone, and the next Tone above it, joined to it, makes the same. Thus
you see the necessity of moving two Tribemitones together, twice in Diapason,
or a 9th, in progression of Thirds, in Diatonic Harmony, but you cannot well go
further.

Now, there is Reason, why two Trihemitones will better bear it, because of
their different Relations, by which one Trihemitone is better distinguished
from another, than one Octave, or one Fifth, or one Fourth from another.

In a third Minor, which has two Degrees or Intervals, consisting of a Tone
and Hemitone, the Hemitone may be placed either in the lower Space, and then
generally is united to his 3d Major (which makes the Complement of it to a
Fifth) downward, and makes a sharp Key; or else it may be placed in the upper
Space, and then generally takes his 3d Major above, to make up the 5th upward,
and constitute a Flat Key. And thus a Tritone is avoided both ways. I say, if
the Hemitone, in the 3d Minor be below, then the 3d Major lies below it, and
the Air is sharp. If the Hemitone be above, then the 3d Major lies above, and
the Air is Flat. And thus the two Minor Thirds joined in consequence of
Movement, are differenced in their Relations, consequent to the place of the
Hemitone; which variety takes off all Nauseousness from the Movement, and
renders it sweet and pleasant.

You cannot so well and regularly make a Movement of Ditones, though it may be
done sometimes, once or twice, or more, in a Bearing Passage (in like manner as
you may sometimes use Discords) to give, after a little grating, a better
Relish. The Skilful Artist may go farther in the use of Thirds and Discords,
than is ordinarily allowed.

I might enlarge this Chapter, by setting down Examples of the Lawful and
Unlawful Movements of Thirds Major and Minor, and of the Use of Discords; but,
as I said before, my design is not to treat of Composition: However you may
cast your Eye upon these following Instances; and your own Observation from the
best Masters will furnish you with the rest.

Lawful Movement of Thirds, Mixed.

Unlawful Movement of Thirds Major.

musical intervals

That the Reader may not incurr any Mistake or Confusion, by several Names of
the same Intervals, I have here set them down together, with their Rations.

8th. Octave, Diapason. 2 to 1 7th. Major. Heptachord Major. 15 8 7th Minor.
Heptachord Minor. 9 5 6th. Major. Hexachord Major. 5 3 6th. Minor. Hexachord
Minor. 8 5 5th. Diapente. Pentachord. 3 2 5th. False (in defect) Semidiapente.
64 45 4th. False (in excess) Tritone. 45 32 4th. Diatessaron. Tetrachord. 4 3
3d. Mayor. Ditone. 5 4 3d. Minor. Sesquitone 6 5 3d. Minor. Trihemitone. 6 5
3d. Minor. Semiditone. 6 5 2d. Maj or Whole note Major. Tone Major Degrees
Diatorin. Max. 9 8 2d. Min. or Whole note Minor. Tone Minor. Degrees Diatorin.
Min. 10 9 2d. Least. or Halfnote Greater. Hemitone May. Degrees Diatorin.
Minim. 16 15 2d. Least. or Halfnote Greater. Semitone May. Degrees Diatorin.
Minim. 16 15 Half note Les^. Hemitone Minor 25 24 Half note Les^. Semi- tone
Minor 25 24 Half note Les^. Diesis Chromatic. 25 24 Half note Les^. Diesis
Major. 25 24 Quarter Note. Diesis Enharmonic. 128 125 Quarter Note. Diesis
Minor. 128 125 Difference between Tone Major and Tone Minor. Comma Comma Maj^.
Schism. 81 80

Note, Whenever I mention Diesis without Distinction; I mean Diesis Minor, or
Enharmonic: and when I to mention Comma; I mean Comma Majus, or Schism.

I should next treat of Discords, but because there will intervene so much use
of Calculation, it is needful that (before I go further) I premise some account
of Proportion in General, and apply it to Harmony.

CHAP. V. Of Proportion; and Applied to Harmony.
WHereas it has been said before, That Harmonick Bodies and Motions fall under
Numerical Calculations, and the Rations of Concords have been already assigned:
It may seem necessary here (before we proceed to speak of Discords) to show the
manner how to calculate the Proportions appertaining to Harmonick Sounds: And
for this, I shall better prepare the Reader, by premising something concerning
Proportion in General.

We may compare ( i. e. amongst themselves) either (1.) Magnitudes, (so they be
of the same kind;) Or (2.) the Gravitations, Motions, Velocities, Durations,
Sounds, etc. from thence arising; or further, if you please, the Numbers
themselves, by which the things Compared, are Explicated. And if these shall be
Unequal, we may then consider, either, First, How much one of them Exceeds the
other; or Secondly, After what manner one of them stands related to the other,
as to the Quotient of the Antecedent (or former Term) divided by the Consequent
(or latter Term:) Which Quotient does Expound, Denominate, or show, how many
times, or how much of a time, or times, one of them does contain the other. And
this by the Greeks is called (...), Ratio; as they are wont to call the
Similitude, or Equality of Ratio's, (...), Analogic, Proportion, or
Proportionality. But Custom, and the Sense assisting, will render any
overcurious Application of these Terms unnecessary.

From these two Considerations last (...) there are wont to be de(...) sorts of
Proportion, Arith^l, Geometrical, and a mixed Pro^tion, resulting from these
two, called Harmonical.

1. Arithmetical, When three or more Numbers in Progression, have the same
Difference; as, 2, 4, 6, 8, etc. or discontinued, as 2, 4, 6; 14, 16, 18.

2. Geometrical, When three or more Numbers have the same Ration; as 2, 4, 8,
16, 32; or Discontinued; 2, 4; 64, 128.

Lastly, Harmonical, (partaking of both the other) When three Numbers are so
ordered, that there be the same Ration of the Greatest to the Least; as there
is of the Difference of the two Greater, to the Difference of the two less
Numbers. As in these three Terms; 3, 4, 6; the Ration of 6 to 3 (being the
greatest and least Terms) is Duple. So is 2, the Difference of 6 and 4 (the two
greater Numbers) to 1. the Difference of 4 and 3 (the two less Numbers) Duple
also. This is Proportion Harmonical, which Diapason 6 to 3, bears to Diapente 6
to 4, and Diatessaron 4 to 3; as its mean Proportionals.

Now for the kinds of Rations most properly so called; i. e. Geometrical; first
observe, that in all Rations, the former Term or Number (whether greater or
less) is always called the Antecedent; and the other following Number, is
called the Consequent. If therefore the Antecedent be the greater Term; then
the Ration is either Multiplex, Superparticular, Superpartient, or (what is
compounded of these) Multiplex Superparticular, or Multiplex Superpartient.

1. Multiplex; as Duple, 4 to 2; Triple, 6 to 2; Quadruple, 8 to 2.

2. Superparticular; as 3 to 2, 4 to 3, 5 to 4; Exceeding but by one aliquot
part, and in their Radical, or least Numbers, always but by one; and these
Rations are termed Sesquialtera, Sesquitertia, (or Supertertia) Sesquiquarta
(or Superquarta) etc. Note, that Numbers exceeding more than by one, and but by
one aliquot part, may yet be Superparticular, if they be not expressed in their
Radical, i. e. least Numbers; as 12 to 8 has the same Ration as 3 to 2; i. e.
Superparticular; though it seem not so, till it be reduced by the greatest
Common Divisor to its Radical Numbers 3 to 2. And the Common Divisor ( i. e.
the Number by which both the Terms may severally be divided) is often the
Difference between the two Numbers; as in 12 to 8, the Difference is 4, which
is the Common Divisor. Divide 12 by 4, the Quotient is 3; Divide 8 by 4, the
Quotient 2; so the Radical is 3 to 2. Thus also 15 to 10, divided by the
difference 5, gives 3 to 2; yet in 16 to 10, 2 is the common Divisor, and gives
8 to 5; being Superpartient. But in all Superparticular Rations, whose Terms
are thus made larger by being Multiplied: the Difference between the Terms is
always the greatest common Divisor; as in the foregoing Examples.

The Third kind of Ration, is Superpartient, exceeding by more than One; as 5
to 3, which is called, Superbipartiens Tertias (or Tria) containing 3 and; 8 to
5, Supertripartiens Quintas, 5 and.

The Fourth is Multiplex Superparticular, as 9 to 4, which is Duple, and
Sesquiquarta; 13 to 4, which is Triple, and Sesquiquarta.

The Fifth and last is Multiplex Superpartient, as 11 to 4; Duple, and
Supertripartiens Quartas.

When the Antecedent is less than the Consequent; viz. when a less is compared
to a greater; then the same Terms serve to express the Rations, only prefixing
Sub to them, as Submultiplex, Subsuperparticular (or Subparticular)
Subsuperpartient (or Subpartient) etc. 4 to 2 is Duple: 2 to 4 is Subduple. 4
to 3 is Sesquitertia; 3 to 4 is Subsesquitertia; 5 to 3 is Superbipartiens
Tertias; 3 to 5 is Subsuperbipartiens Tertias, etc.

This short account of Proportion was necessary, because almost all the
Philosophy of Harmony consists in Rations, Of the Bodies; Of the Motions; and
of the Intervals of Sound; by which Harmony is made.

And in searching, stating, and comparing the Rations of these, there is found
so much Variety, and Certainty, and Facility of Calculation, that the
Contemplation of them may seem not much less delightful, than the very hearing
the good Music it self, which springs from this Fountain. And those who have
already an affection for Music, cannot but find it improved and much inhansed
by this pleasant recreating Chase (as I may call it) in the Large Field of
Harmonic Rations and Proportions. where they will find, to their great Pleasure
and Satisfaction, the hidden causes of Harmony (hidden to most, even to
Practitioners themselves) so amply discovered and laid plain before them.

All the Habitudes of Rations to each other, are sound by Multiplication or
Division of their Terms; by which any Ration is Added to, or Subtracted from
another. And there may be use of Progression of Rations; or Proportions; and of
finding a Medium, or Mediety between the Terms of any Ration. But the main work
is done by Addition, and Substraction of Rations; which, though they are not
performed like Addition and Substraction of Simple Numbers in Arithmetic; but
upon Algebraic Grounds; yet the Praxis is most easy.

One Ration is added to another Ration, by Multiplying the two Antecedent Terms
together, i. e. the Antecedent of one of the Rations, by the Antecedent of the
other (for the more ease, they should be reduced into their least Numbers or
Terms) And then the two Consequent Terms in like manner. The Ration of the
Product of the Antecedents, to that of the Product of the Consequents, is equal
to the other Two added or joined together. Thus (for Example) Add the Ration of
8 to 6; i. e. (in Radical Numbers) 4 to 3, to the Ration of 12 to 10; i. e. 6.
to 5; the Product will be 24 and 15; i. e. 8 to 5; You may set them thus, 4 3 6
5 24. 15.
and multiply 4 by 6, they make 24, which set at the Bottom; then multiply 3 by
5, they make 15; which likewise set under, and you have 24 to 15; which is a
Ration compounded of the other two, and Equal to them both. Reduce these
Products, 24 and 15, to their least Radical Numbers, which is, by dividing as
far as you can find a Common Divisor to them both (which is here done by 3) and
that brings them to the Ration of 8 to 5. By this you see, that a Third Minor,
6 to 5; added to a Fourth, 4 to 3; makes a Sixth Minor, 8 to 5. If more Rations
are to be added, set them all under each other, and multiply the first
Antecedent by the Second, and that Product by the Third; and again, that
Product by the Fourth, and so on; and in like manner the Consequents.

This Operation depends upon the Fifth Proposition of the Eighth Book of
Euclid; where He shows, That the Ration of plain Numbers is compounded of their
sides. See these Diagrams. Now compound these Sides. Take for the Antecedents,
4 the greater Side of the greater Plane, and 3 the greater Side of the less
Plane, and they multiplied give 12; then take the remaining two Numbers 3 and
2, being the less Sides of the Planes (for Consequents) and they give 6. So,
the Sides of 4 and 3, and of 3 and 2 compounded (by multiplying the Antecedent
Terms by themselves, and the Consequents by themselves) make 12 to 6; i. e. 2
to 1. Which being applied, amounts to this; Ratio Sesquialtera, 3 to 2, added
to Ratio Sesquitertia 4 to 3; makes Duple Ration, 2 to 1. Therefore Diapente
added to Diatessaron, makes Diapason.

Substraction of One Ration from another greater, is performed in like manner,
by Multiplying the Terms; but this is done not Laterally, as in Addition, but
Crosswise; by Multiplying the Antecedent of the Former ( i. e. of the Greater)
by the Consequent of the Latter, which produces a new Antecedent; and the
Consequent of the Former by the Antecedent of the Latter; which gives a new
Consequent. And therefore it is usually done by an Oblique Decussation of the
Lines. For Example, If you would take 6 to 5 out of 4 to 3, you may set them
down thus. Then 4 multiplied by 5 makes 20; and 3 by 6 gives 18. So 20 to 18;
i. e. 10 to 9, 4 3 6 5 20. 28. 10. 9.
is the Remainder. That is, Substract a Third Minor out of a Fourth, and there
will remain a Tone Minor.

Multiplication of Rations is the same with their Addition; only it is not wont
to be of diverse Rations, but of the same, being taken twice, thrice, or
oftener, as you please. And as before, in Addition, you added diverse Rations by
Multiplying them: So here, in Multiplication, you add the same Ration to it
self, after the same manner, viz. by Multiplying the Terms of the same Ratio by
themselves; i. e. the Antecedent by it self, and the Consequent by it self
(which in other words is to Multiply the same by 2) and will, in the Operation,
be to Square the Ration first propounded (or give the Second Ordinal Power; the
Ration first given being the First Power or Side) And to this Product, if the
Simple Ration shall again be added (after the same manner as before) the
Aggregate will be the Triple of the Ration first given; or the Product of that
Ration Multiplied by 3; viz. the Cube, or Third Ordinal Power. Its Biquadrate,
or Fourth Power, proceeds from Multiplying it by 4; and so successively in
order as far as you please you may advance the Powers. For instance, The Duple
Ration 2 to 1, being added to it self, Dupled, or Multiplied by 2, produces 4
to 1 (the Ration Quadruple) and if to this, the first again be added (which is
equivalent to Multiplying that said first by 3) there will arise the Ration
Octuple, or 8 to 1. Whence the Ration 2 to 1, being taken for a Root, its Duple
4 to 1, will be the Square; its Triple 8 to 1, the Cube thereof, etc. as has
been said above. And to use another instance; To Duple the Ration of 3 to 2; it
must be thus Squared; 3 by 3 gives 9; 2 by 2 gives 4. So the Duple or Square of
3 to 2, is 9 to 4. Again, 9 by 3 is 27; and 4 by 2 is 8: So the Cubic Ration of
3 to 2 is 27 to 8. Again, to find the Fourth Power, or Biquadrate; ( i. e.
Squared Square) 27 by 3 is 81; 8 by 2 is 16: So 81 to 16 is the Ration of 3 to
2 Quadrupled; as it is Dupled by the Square, Tripled by by the Cube, etc. To
apply this Instance to our present purpose; 3 to 2 is the Ration of Diapente,
or a Fifth in Harmony; 9 to 4 is the Ration of twice Diapente, or a Ninth (
viz. Diapason with Tone Major) 27 to 8 is the Ration of thrice Diapente, or
three Fifths; which is Diapason with Six Major ( viz. 13th Major) The Ration of
81 to 16 makes four Fifths, i. e. Dis-diapason, with two Tones Major; i. e. a
Seventeenth Major, and a Comma of 81 to 80.

To Divide any Ration, you must take the contrary way; And by Extracting of
these Roots Respectively, Division by their Indices will be performed. E. gr.
To Divide it by 2, is to take the Square Root of it; by 3, the Cubic Root; by
4, the Biquadratick, etc. Thus to divide 9 to 4, by 2; The Square Root of 9, is
3; the Square Root of 4, is 2: Then 3 to 2 is a Ration just half so much as 9
to 4.

From hence it will be obvious to any to make this Inference; That Addition and
Multiplication of Rations are (in this Case) one and the same thing. And these
Hints will be sufficient to such as bend their Thoughts to these kinds of
Speculations, and no great Trespass upon those that do not.

The Advantage of proceeding by the Ordinal Powers, Square, Cube, etc. (as is
before mentioned) may be very useful where there is occasion of large
Progressions. As to find (for Example) how many Comma's are contained in a Tone
Major, or other Interval. Let it be, How many are in Diapason; Which must be
done by Multiplying Comma's; i. e. Adding them, till you arrive at a Ration
Equal to Octave (if that be sought) viz. Duple. Or else by Dividing the Ration
of Diapason, by that of a Comma, and finding the Quotient; which may be done by
Logarithms. And herein I meet with some Differences of Calculations.

Mersennus finds, by his Calculation, 58 1/^ Comma's, and somewhat more in an
Octave. But the late Nicholas Mercator, a Modest Person, and a Learned and
Judicious Mathematician, in a Manuscript of his, of which I have had a Sight;
makes this Remark upon it. In solvendo hoc Problemate aberrat Mersennus. And
He, working by the Logarithms, finds out but 55, and a little more. And from
thence has deduced an Ingenious Invention of finding and applying a least
Common Measure to all Harmonic Intervals; not precisely perfect, but very near
it.

Supposing a Comma to be 1/53 part of Diapason; for better Accommodation rather
than according to the true Partition 1/55; which 1/53 he calls an Artificial
Comma, not exact, but differing from the true Natural Comma about 1/20 part of
a Comma, and 1/1000 of Diapason (which is a Difference imperceptible) Then the
Intervals within Diapason will be measured by Comma's according to the
following Table. Which you may prove by adding two, or three, or more of these
Numbers of Comma's, to see how they agree to constitute those Intervals, which
they ought to make; and the like by substracting.

Intervals ^/53 Comma 1 Diesis 2 Semit. Minus 3 Semit. Medium 4 Semit. Majus 5
Semit. Max. 6 Tone Minor 8 Tone Major 9 3d Minor 14 3d Major 17 4th 22 Tritone
26 Semidiapente 27 5th 31 6th Minor 36 6th Major 39 7th Minor 45 7th Major 48
Octave 53

This I thought fit, on this occasion, to impart to the Reader, having leave so
to do from Mr. Mercator's Friend, to whom He presented the said Manuscript.

Here I may advertise the Reader; that it is indifferent whether you compare
the greater Term of an Harmonic Ration to the less, or the less to the greater;
i. e. whether of them you place as Antecedent. E.gr. 3 to 2, or 2 to 3. Because
in Harmonics, the proportions of Lengths of Chords, and of their Vibrations are
reciprocal or Counter-changed. As the Length is increased, so the Vibrations
are in the same proportion decreased; and e contra. If therefore (as in
Diapente) the length of the Unison String be 3, then the length ( caeteris
paribus) of the String which in ascent makes Diapente to that Unison must be 2,
or 2ds / 3. Thus the Ration of Diapente is 2 to 3 in respect of the length of
it, compared to the length of the Unison String.

Again, the String 2 vibrates thrice, in the same time that the String 3
vibrates twice. And thus the Ration of Diapente in respect of Vibrations is 3
to 2. So that where you find in Authors, sometimes the greater Number in the
Rations set before and made the Antecedent, sometimes set after and made the
Consequent; You must understand in the former, the Ration of their Vibrations;
and in the latter, the Ration of their Lengths; which comes all to one.

Or you may understand the Unison to be compared to Diapente above it, and the
Ration of Lengths is 3 to 2; of Vibrations 2 to 3: or else Diapente to be
compared to the Unison, and then the Ration of Lengths is 2 to 3; of Vibrations
3 to 2. This is true in single Rations, or if one Ration be compared to
another; then the two Greater Terms must be ranked as Antecedents: or
otherwise, the two Less Terms.

The Difference between Arithmetical and Geometrical Proportion is to be well
heeded. An Arithmetical mean Proportion is that which has Equal difference to
the Antecedent and Consequent Terms of those Numbers to which it is the
Mediety; and is found by adding the Terms and taking half the Sum. Thus between
9 and 1, which added together make 10, the Mediety is 5; being Equidifferent
from 9 and from 1; which Difference is 4: As 5 exceeds 1 by 4; so likewise 9
exceeds 5 by 4. And thus in Arithmetical Progression 2, 4, 6, 8; where the
Difference is only considered, there is the same Arithmetical Proportion
between 2 and 4, 4 and 6, 6 and 8; and between 2 and 6, and 4 and 8. But in
Geometrical Proportion where is considered, not the Numerical Difference, but
another Habitude of the Terms, viz. How many times, or how much of a time, or
times, one of them does contain the other (as has been explained at large in
the beginning of this Chapter.) There the Mean Proportional is not the same
with Arithmetical, but found another way; and Equidifferent Progressions make
different Rations. The Rations (taking them all in their least Terms) expressed
by less Numbers, being greater than those of greater Numbers, I mean in
Proportions Super-particular, etc. Where the Antecedents are Greater than the
Consequents: (as on the Contrary, where the Antecedents are Less than the
Consequents, the Ratio's of Less Numbers are Less than the Ratio's of Greater.)
The Mediety of 9 to 1, is not now 5, but 3; 3 having the same Ration to 1, as 9
has to 3 (as 9 to 3, so 3 to 1) viz. Triple. And so in Progression
Arithmetical, of Terms having the same Differences; if considered
Geometrically, the Terms will all be comprehended by unequal Rations. The
Differences of 2 to 4, 4 to 6, 6 to 8, are Equal; but the Rations are unequal:
2 to 4 is less than 4 to 6, and 4 to 6 less than 6 to 8. As on the Contrary; 4
to 2, is greater than 6 to 4; and ^ to 4 greater than 8 to 6. For 4 to 2 is
Duple; 6 to 4 but Sesquialtera (one and a half only, or 2/2) and 8 to 6 is no
more than Sesquitertia, (one and a Third part, or 4/3) which shows a
considerable Inequality of their Rations. In like manner, 6 to 2 is Triple; 8
to 4 is but Duple; and yet their Differences Equal. Thus the mean Rations
comprehended in any greater Ration divided Arichmetically; i. e. by Equal
Differences; are unequal to one another considered Geometrically. Thus 2, 3, 4,
5, 6; if you consider the Numbers, make an Arithmetical Progression: But if you
consider the Rations of those Numbers, as is done in Harmony, then they are
Unequal; every one being greater or less (according as you proceed by Ascent or
Descent) than the next to it. Thus in this progression, 2 to 3 is the greatest,
being Diapente; 3 to 4 the next, Diatessaron; 4 to 5 still less, viz. Ditone; 5
to 6 the least, being Sesquitone. Or, if you descend, 6 to 5 least; 5 to 4
next, etc. These are the mean Rations comprehended in the Ration of 6 to 2, by
which Diapason cum Diapente, or a 12th, is divided into the aforesaid
Intervals, and measured by them: viz. as is 6 to 2, ( viz. Triple.) So is the
Aggregate of all the mean Rations within that Number; 6 to 5, 5 to 4, 4 to 3,
and 3 to 2. Or 6 to 5, 5 to 2; or 6 to 4, 4 to 2; or 6 to 3, 3 to 2. The
Aggregates of these are Equal to 6 to 2, viz. Triple.

This is premised in order to proceed to what was intimated in the foregoing
Chapter.

Taking notice first of this procedure, peculiar to Harmonics; viz. To make
Progression or Division in Arithmetical Proportion in respect of the Numbers;
but to consider the things Numbered according to their Rations Geometrical. And
thus Harmonic proportion, is said to be compounded of Arithmetical and
Geometrical.

You may find them all in the Division of the Systeme of Diapason, into
Diapente and Diatessaron, i. e. 5th and 4th; ascending from the Unison.

If by Diapente first, Then by 2, 3, 4, Arithmetically: If first by
Diatessaron, Then by 3, 4, 6, Harmonically. And these Rations considered
Geometrically, in Relation to Sound; There is likewise found Geometrical
Proportions between the Numbers 6, 3, to 4, 2; and 6, 4, to 3, 2.

The Ancients therefore owning only 8th, 5th, and 4th, for Simple Consonant
Intervals; concluded them all within the Numbers of 12, 9, 8, 6, which
contained them all: viz. 12 to 6, Diapason; 12 to 8, Diapente; 12 to 9,
Diatessaron; 9 to 8, Tone. And which served to express the three Kinds of
Proportion; viz. Harmonical, between 12 to 8, and 8 to 6; Arithmetical, between
12 to 9, and 9 to 6; and Geometrical, between 12 to 9, and 8 to 6; and between
12 to 8, and 9 to 6. It was said therefore, That Mercurius his Lyre was strung
with four Chords, having those Proportions, 6, 8, 9, 12. Gassend.

I intimated that I would here more largely explain that ready and easy way of
finding and measuring the mean Rations contained in any of those Harmonick
Rations given, by transferring them out of their Prime or Radical Numbers, into
greater Numbers of the same Ration. By Dupling (not the Ration, but the Terms
of it: still continuing the same Ration) you will have one Mediety: as 2 to 1
Dupled is 4 to 2; and you have 3 the Mediety. By Tripling you will have two
Means; 2 to 1 Tripled is 6 to 3, containing 3 Rations; 6 to 5, 5 to 4, 4 to 3;
and so still more, the more you multiply it.

Now observe, First, That any Ration Multiplex or Superpartient (or by
transferring it out of its Radical Numbers made like Superpartient) contains so
many Superparticular Rations, as there are Units in the Difference between the
Antecedent and the Consequent. Thus in 8 to 4 (being 2 to 1 transferred by
Quadrupling) the Difference is 4, and it contains 4 Superparticular Rations;
viz. 8 to 7, 7 to 6, 6 to 5, and 5 to 4. Where though the Progression of
Numbers is Arithmetical, yet the Proportions of excess are Geometrical and
Unequal. The Superparticular Rations expressed by less Numbers, being Greater,
as has been said, than those that consist of Greater Numbers; 5 to 4 is a
Greater Ration than 6 to 5, and 6 to 5 Greater than 7 to 6, and 7 to 6 than 8
to 7; as a Fourth part is Greater than a Fifth, and a Fifth Greater than a
Sixth, etc. But in this Instance, there are two Rations not appertaining to
Harmonics; viz. 8 to 7, and 7 to 6.

Secondly therefore, you may make unequal Steps, and take none but Harmonick
Rations, by Selecting Greater and fewer intermediate Rations, though some of them
composed of several Superparticulars; provided you do not discontinue the
Rational Progression, but that you repeat still the last Consequent, making it
the next Antecedent. As if you measure the Ration of 8 to 4, by 8 to 6, and 6
to 4; or by 8 to 5, and 5 to 4; or by 8 to 6, and 6 to 5, and 5 to 4. In these
three ways the Rations are all Harmonical, and are respectively contained in,
and make up the Ration of 8 to 4. Thus you may measure, and divide, and
compound most Harmonick Rations without you Pen.

To that End, I would have my Reader to be very perfect in the Radical Numbers,
which express the Rations of the Seven first (or uncompounded) Consonants: viz.
Diapason, 2 to 1; Diapente, 3 to 2; Diatessaron, 4 to 3; Ditone, 5 to 4;
Trthemitone, 6 to 5; Hexachordon Majus, 5 to 3; Hexachordon Minus, 8 to 5. And
likewise of the Degrees in Diatonick Harmony, viz. Tone Major, 9 to 8; Tone
Minor, 10 to 9; Hemitone Major, 16 to 15. And the Differences of those Degrees;
Hemitone Greatest, 27 to 25; and Hemitone Minor, 25 to 24; Comma, or Schism, 81
to 80; Diesis Enharmonic, 128 to 125.

Of other Hemitones, I shall treat in the Eighth Chapter.

Now if you would divide any of the Consonants into two Parts, you may do it by
the Mean, or Mediety of the two Radical Numbers; if they have a Mean: And where
they have not (as when their Ratio's are Superparticular) you need but Duple
those Numbers, and you will have a Mean (one or more.) Thus Duple the Numbers
of the Ration of Diapason, 2 to 1; and you have 4 to 2; and then 3 is the Mean
by which it is divided into two Unequal, but Proper and Harmonical parts; viz.
4 to 3, and 3 to 2. After this manner Diapason, 4 to 2; comprehends 4 to 3, and
3 to 2. So Diapente, 6 to 4; is 6 to 5, and 5 to 4. Ditone, 10 to 8; is 10 to
9, and 9 to 8. So Sixth Major, 5 to 3; is 5 to 4, and 4 to 3.

Though, from what was now observed, you may divile any of the Consonants into
intermediate Parts; yet when you divide these three following, viz. Sixth
Minor, Diatessaron, and Trihemitone; you will find that those Parts into which
they are divided, are not all such Intervals as are Harmonical. The Sixth
Minor, whose Ration is 8 to 5, contains in it three Means; viz. 8 to 7, 7 to 6,
and 6 to 5; the last whereof only is one of the Harmonick Intervals, of which
the Sixth Minor consists; viz. Tribemitone: and to make up the other Interval,
viz. Diatessaron; you must take the other two, 8 to 7, and 7 to 6; which being
added (or, which is the same thing, taking the Ratio of their two Extreme
Terms, That being the Sum of all the Intermediate ones added) you have 8 to 6,
or (in the least Terms) 4 to 3. Again Diatessaron, in Radical Numbers, 4 to 3;
being (if those Numbers are dupled) 8 to 6, gives for his Parts, 8 to 7, and 7
to 6; which Ratio's agree with no Intervals that are Harmonick. Therefore you
must take the Ration of Diatessaron in other Terms, which may afford such
Harmonick Parts. And to do this, you must proceed farther than dupling (or
adding it once to it self) for to this Duple you must add the first Radical
Numbers once again (which in effect is the same with Tripling it at first) viz.
4 and 3, to 8 and 6; and the Aggregate will be a new, but Equivalent, Ration of
Diatessaron; viz. 12 to 9. And this gives you three Means, 12 to 11, and 11 to
10; both Unharmonical; but, which together are, as was showed before, the same
with 12 to 10 (or 6 to 5) Trihemitone; and 10 to 9, Tone Minor: and are the two
Harmonical Intervals of which Diatessaron consists, and which divide it into
the two nearest Equal Harmonick Parts. Lastly Trihemitone, or Third Minor, 6 to
5; or (those Numbers being dupled) 12 to 10, gives 12 to 11, and 11 to 10;
which are Unharmonical Rations: but Tripled (after the former manner) 6 to 5
gives 18 to 15; which divides it self (as before) into 18 to 16, Tone Major;
and 16 to 15, Hemitone Major.

Thus by a little Practice all Harmonick Intervals will be most easily
measured, by the lesser Intervals comprised in them. Now, (for exercise sake)
take the Measures of a greater Ration: Suppose that of 16 to 3 be given as an
Harmonick Systeme. To find what it is, and of what Parts it consists: First
find the gross Parts, and then the more Minute. You will presently judge, that
16 to 8 (being a Part of this Ration) is Diapason; and 8 to 4 is likewise
Diapason: then 16 to 4 is Disdiapason, or a Fifteenth; and the remaining 4 to
3, is a Fourth. So then, 16 to 3, is Disdiapason, and Diatessaron; i. e. an
Eighteenth: 16 to 8, 8 to 4, and 4 to 3.

But to find all the Harmonick Intervals within that Ration (for we now
consider Rations as relating to Harmony) take this Scheme.

16 to 3 contains, In Radicals. 16 to 15, Hemitone. 15 to 12, 5 to 4, Ditone.
12 to 10, 6 to 5, Trihemitone. 10 to 9, Tone Minor. 9 to 8, Tone Major. 8 to 6,
4 to 3, Diatessaron 6 to 5, Trihemitone. 5 to 4, Ditone. 4 to 3, Diatessaron.
Tot. 16 to 3. Disdiapason cum Diatessaron.

Or Thus, In Radicals. 16 to 10, 8 to 5, 6th Minor. 10 to 6, 5 to 3, 6th Major.
6 to 4, 3 to 2, 5th 4 to 3, 4th Tot. 16 to 3. Eighteenth.

All these Invervals thus put together are comprehended in, and make up the
Ration of 16 to 3; being taken in a Conjunct Series of Rations.

But otherwise, within this Compass of Numbers are contained many more
Expressions of Harmonick Ration. Ex. gr.

Radicals. 16 to 15. 16 to 12, 4 to 3. 16 to 10, 8 to 5. 16 to 8, 2 to 1. 16 to
6, 8 to 3. 16 to 4, 4 to 1. 16 to 3. 15 to 12, 5 to 4. 15 to 10, 3 to 2. 15 to
5, 3 to 1. 15 to 3, 5 to 1. 14 to 7, 2 to 1. 12 to 10, 6 to 5. 12 to 9, 4 to 3.
12 to 8, 3 to 2. 12 to 6, 2 to 1. 12 to 4, 3 to 1. 12 to 3, 4 to 1. 10 to 9. 10
to 8, 5 to 4. 10 to 6, 5 to 3. 10 to 5, 2 to 1. 9 to 8. 9 to 6, 3 to 2. 9 to 3,
3 to 1. 8 to 6, 4 to 3. 8 to 5, 8 to 4, 2 to 1. 6 to 5, etc. Vid. Page 67.

And now I suppose the Reader better prepared to proceed in the remainder of
this Discourse, where we shall treat of Discords.

CHAP. VI. Of Discords and Degrees.
ALL Habitudes of one Chord to another, that are not Concords (such as are
before described) are Discords; which are, or may be innumerable, as are the
minute Tensions by which one Chord may be made to vary from it self, or from
another. But here we are to consider only such Discords as are useful (and in
truth necessary) to Harmony, or at least relating to it, as are the Differences
found between Harmonick Intervals.

And these apt and useful Discords, are either Simple uncompounded Intervals,
such as immediately follow one another, ascending or descending in the Scale of
Music: As Ut Re Mi. Fa Sol La Fa Sol, and are called Degrees: Or else, greater
Spaces or Intervals compounded of Degrees including or skipping over some of
them, as all the Concords do, Ut Mi, Ut Fa, Ut Sol, etc. And such are the
Discords of which we now treat, as principally the Tritone, False Fifth, and
the two Sevenths; Major, and Minor, if they be not rather among the Degrees,
etc. For more perspicuity I shall treat of them severally; viz. of Degrees, of
Discords, and of Differences.

And First of Degrees.
Degrees, are uncompounded Intervals, which are found upon 8 Chords and in 7
Spaces, by which an immediate Ascent or Descent is made from the Unison to the
Octave or Diapason; and by the same progression to as many Octaves as there may
be occasion. These are different, according to the different Kinds of Music;
viz. Enharmonic, Chromatic, and Diatonic, and the several Colors of the two
Latter: (All which I shall more conveniently explain by and by.) But of these
now mentioned, the Diatonic is the most Proper and Natural Way: The other two,
if for Curiosities sake we consider them only by running the Notes of an Octave
up or down in these Scales, seem rather a force upon Nature; yet herein
probably might lie the Excellency of the Ancient Greeks. But we now use only
the Diatonic kind, intermixing here and there some of the Chromatic, (and more
rarely some of the Enharmonic:) And our Excellency seems to lie in most
artificial Composing, and joining several parts in Symphony or Consort; which
they cannot be supposed to have effected, at least in so many Parts as we
ordinarily make; because (as is generally affirmed of them) they owned no
Concords, besides Eighth, Fifth, and Fourth, and the Compounds of these.

F. Kircher (cited also by Gassendus without any Mark of Dissent) is of
Opinion, That the Anclent Greeks never (...) Consort Music, i. e. of different
parts at once; but only Solitary, for one single Voice, on Instrument. And that
Guido Aretinus first invented and throught in Music of Symphony or Consort both
for the one and the other. They applied Instruments to Voice, but how they were
managed, He must be wiser than I, that can tell.

This way of theirs seems to be more proper (by the Elaborate Curiosity and
Nicety of Contrivance of Degrees, and by Measures, rather than by Harmonious
Consonancy, and by long studied performance) to make great Impressions upon the
Fancy, and operate accordingly, as some Histories relate: Ours, more Sedately
affects the Understanding and Judgment from the judicious Contrivance, and
happy Composition of Melodious Consort. The One quietly, but powerfully affects
the Intellect by true Harmony: The Other, chiefly by the Rythmus, violently
attacks and hurries the Imagination. In fine, upon the Natural Grounds of
Harmony (of which I have hitherto been treating) is founded the Diatonic Music;
but not so, or not so regularly, the Chromatic and Enharmonic kinds. Take this
following view of them.

The Ancients ascended from the Unison to an Octave by two Systemes of
Tetrachords or Fourths. These were either Conjunct, when they began the Second
Tetrachord at the Fourth Chord; viz. with the last Note of the First
Tetrachord; and which being so joined, constituted but a Seventh: And therefore
they assumed a Tone beneath the Unison (which they therefore called
Proslambanomenos) to make a full Eighth.

Or else the two Tetrachords were disjunct; the Second taking its beginning at
the Fifth Chord; there being always a Tone Major between the Fourth and Fifth
Chords. So, the Degrees were immediately applied to the 4ths, and by them to
the Octave; and were different according to the different Kinds of Music. In
the common Diatonic Genus, the Degrees were Tone and Semitone; Intervals more
Equal and Easy, and Natural. In the common Chromatic, where the Degrees were
Hemitones and Trihemitones; the Difference of some of the Intervals was
Greater. But the Greatest Difference, and consequently Difficulty, was in the
Enharmonic Kind, using only Diesis, or Quarter of a Tone, and Ditone; as the
Degrees whereby they made the Tetrachord.

And to constitute these Degrees, some of them, viz. the Followers of
Aristoxenus, divided a Tone Major into 12 Equal Parts; i.e. Supposed it so
divided: Six of which being the Hemitone, ( viz. half of it,) made a Degree of
Chromatic Toniaeum. And Three of them, or a Quarter called Diesis; a Degree
Enharmonic. The Chromatic Fourth rose thus, viz. from the First Chord to the
Second was a Hemitone; from the Second to the Third, a Hemitone; from the Third
to the Fourth, a Trihemitone; or as much as would make up a just Fourth. And
this last Space (in this case) was accounted as well as either of the other,
but one Degree or undivided Interval. And they called them Spiss Intervals
((...)) when two of those other Degrees put together, made not so great an
Interval as one of these; as, in the Enharmonic Tetrachord, two Dieses were
less than the remaining Ditone, and in the common Chromatic, two Hemitone
Degrees were less than the remaining Trihemitone Degree.

Then for the Enharmonic Fourth, the first Degree was a Diesis, or Quarter of a
Tone; the Second also 3 of those 12 parts, viz. a Diesis; the Third a Ditone;
such as made up a just Fourth. And this Ditone, (though so large a Degree)
being considered as thus placed (in the Enharmonic Tetrachord) was likewise to
them but as one uncompounded or entire Interval.

These were the Degrees Chromatic, and Enharmonic. Though they also might be
placed otherwise, i. e. The greater Degree in these may change its place, as
the Hemitone, (the less Degree) does in the Diatonic Genus. And from this
change chiefly arose the several Moods, Dorian, Lydian, etc. From all which,
their Music no doubt (though it be hard to us to conceive) must afford
extraordinary delight and pleasure; if it did bear but a reasonable Proportion
to their infinite Curiosity and Labor. And as we may suppose ie to have
differed very much from that which now is, and for several Ages has been used:
So consequently we may look upon it as in a manner lost to us.

In prosecution of my Design I am only, or chiefly to insist on the other Kind
of Degrees; which are most proper to the Natural Explanation of Harmony; viz.
the Degrees Diatonic; which are so called; not because they are all Tones; but
because most of them, as many as can be, are such; viz. in every Diapason, 5
Tones, and two Hemitones. Upon these I say I am to insist, as being, of those
before mentioned, the most Natural and Rational.

Digression.
But before we proceed, it may perhaps be a satisfaction to the Reader, after
what has been said, to have a little better Prospect of the Ancient Greek
Music, by some general Account; not of their whole Doctrine, but of that which
relates to our present Subject, viz. their Degrees, and Scales of Harmony, and
Notes.

First then, take out of Euclid the Degrees according to the three Genera;
which were, Enharmonic, Chromatic, and Diatonic; which Kinds have six Colors
(as they called them.) Euclid, Introd. Harm. Page 10.

The Enharmonic Kind had but one Color; which made up its Tetrachord by these
Intervals; a Diesis (or Quarter of a Tone,) then such another Diesis; and also
a Ditone incomposit.

The Chromatic had three Colors; by which it was divided into Molle,
Sescuplum, and Toniaeum.

1st. Molle, in which the Tetrachord rose by a Triental Diesis (four of those
12 parts mentioned before) or third part of a Tone; and another such Diesis;
and an Incomposit Interval, containing a Tone, and half, and third part of a
Tone: and it was called Molle, because it has the least, and consequently most
Enervated Spiss Intervals within the Chromatic Genus.

2d. Sescuplum; by a Diesis which is Sesquialtera to the Enharmonic Diesis, and
another such Diesis, and an Incomposit Interval of 7 Dieses Quadrantal; viz.
Each being 3 Duodecimals of a Tone.

3d. Toniaeum; by a Hemitone, and Hemitone, and Trihemitone; and is called
Toniaeum, because the two Spiss Intervals make a Tone. And this is the ordinary
Chromatic.

The Diatonick had 2 Colors; it was Molle, and Syntonum.

1st. Molle; by a Hemitone, and an incomposit Interval of 3 Quadrantal Dieses,
and an Interval of 5 such Dieses.

2d. Syntonum, by a Hemitone, and a Tone, and a Tone. And this is the common
Diatonic.

To understand this better, I must reassume somewhat which I mentioned, but
not fully enough before. A Tone is supposed to be divided into 12 least parts,
and therefore a Hemitone contains 6 of those Duodecimal (or Twelfth) parts of a
Tone; a Diesis Trientalis 4; Diesis Quadrantalis 3; The whole Diatessaron 30.
And the Diatessaron in each of the 3 Kinds, was made and performed upon 4
Chords, having 3 mean Intervals of Degrees, according to the following Numbers
and Proportions of those 30 Duodecimal parts.

Enharmonic, by 3, and 3, and 24. Chromatic, Molle, by 4, and 4, and 22.
Chromatic, Hemiolion, or Sescuplum, by 4, and 4, and 21. Chromatic, Toniaeum.
by 6, and 6, and 18. Diatonic, Molle, by 6, and 9, and 15. Diatonic, Syntonum,
by 6, and 12, and 12.
To each of these Kinds, and the Moods of them, they fitted a perfect Systeme,
or Scale of Degrees to Disdiapason; as in the following Example taken out of
Nichomachus: To which I have prefixed our Modern Letters.

E. Nichomacho; Page 22. A Nete Hyperbolaeon. G Paranete Hyperbolaeon. Enh.
Chro. Diat. F Trite Hyperbolaeon. Enh. Chro. Diat. E Nete Diezeugmenon. D
Paranete Diezeugmenon. Enh. Chro. Diat. C Trite Diezeugmenon. Enh. Chro. Diat.
B Paramese. D Nete Synemmenon. C Paranete Synemmenon. Enh. Chro. Diat. B Trite
Synemmenon. Enh. Chro. Diat. A Mese. G Lichanos Meson. Enh. Chro. Diat. F
Parypate Meson. Enh. Chro. Diat. E Hypate Meson. D Lichanos Hypaton. Enh. Chro.
Diat. C Parypate Hypaton. Enh. Chro. Diat. B Hypate Hypaton. A
Proslambanomenos.

In this Scale of Disdiapason, you see the Mese is an Octave below the Nete
Hyperbolaeon, and an Octave above the Proslambanomenos: And the Lichanos,
Parypate, Paranete, and Trite, are changeable; as upon our Instruments are the
Seconds, and Thirds, and Sixths, and Sevenths: the Proslambanomenos, Hypate,
Mese, Paramese, and Nete, are Immutable; as are the Unison, Fourths, Fifths,
and Octaves.

Now from the several changes of these Mutable Chords, chiefly arise the
several Moods (some called them Tones) of Music, of which Euclid sets down
Thirteen; to which were joined two more, viz. Hyperaeolian and Hyperlydian; and
afterward Six more were added.

I shall give you for a Taste Euclid's Thirteen Moods. Euclid. Page 19.

Hypermixolydius, five Hyperphrygius. Mixolydius acutior, five Hyperiastius.
Mixolydius gravior, five Hyperdorius. Lydius acutior. Lydius gravior, five
Aeolius. Phrygius acutior. Phrygius gravior, five Iastius. Dorius. Hypolydius
acutior. Hypolydius gravior, five Hypoaeolius. Hypophrygius acutior.
Hypophrygius gravior, five Hypoiastius. Hypodorius.
Of these the most Grave, or Lowest, was the Hypodorian Mood; the
Proslambanomenos whereof was fixed upon the lowest clear and firm Note, of the
Voice or Instrument that was to express it; And then all along from Grave to
Acute the Moods took their Ascent by Hemitones, each Mood being a Hemitone
higher or more acute than the next under it. So that the Prostambanomenos of
the Hypermixolydian Mood, was just an Eighth higher than that of the
Hypodorian, and the rest accordingly.

Now each particular Chord in the preceding Scale had two Signs or Notes
[semeia] by which it was characterized or described in every one of these Moods
respectively, and also for all the Moods in the several Kinds of Music;
Enharmonic, Chromatic, and Diatonic; of which two Notes, the upper was for
reading [lxi] the lower for percussion [krosi] One for the Voice, the other for
the Hand. Consider then how many Notes they used; 18 Chords severally for 13
Moods (or rather 15, taking in the Hyperaeolian, and Hyperlydian, which are all
described by Alypius) and these suited to the three Kinds of Music. So many
Notes, and so appropriated, had the Scholar then to learn and conn, who studied
Music. Of these I will give you in part a View out of Alypius.

Notes of the Lydian Mood in the Diatonic Genus.
^. ^. ^. PH.. P.. I. TH. ^. G. ^. F.. ^. ^. ^. ^. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 G ^.. ^.
^. ^. ^.. I. N.. ^. ^.. e. ^. ^. ^. 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

1 Proslambanomenos. Zeta imperfect, and Tau jacent. 2 Hypate Hypaton. Gamma
averted, and Gamma right. 3 Parypate Hypaton. Beta imperfect, and Gamma
inverted. 4 Hypaton Diatonos. Phi, and Digamma. 5 Hypate Meson. Sigma, and
Sigma. 6 Parypate Meson. Rho, and Sigma inverted. 7 Meson Diatonos. My, and Pi
drawn out. 8 Mese. Iota, and Lambda jacent. 9 Trite Synemmenon. Theta, and
Lambda inverted. 10 Synemmenon Diatonos. Gamma, and Ny. 11 Nete Synemmenon. O
Squared, lying Supine upwards; and Zeta. 12 Paramese. Zeta, and Pi jacent. 13
Trite Diezeugmenon. E Squared, and Pi inverted. 14 Diezeugmenon Diatonos. O
Squared, Supine, and Zeta. 15 Nete Diezeugmenon. Phi jacent, and a careless Eta
(e) drawn out. 16 Trite Hyperbolaeon. Y looking downwards, and Alpha, left
half, looking upwards. 17 Hyperbolaeon Diatonos. My, and Pi lengthened, with an
Acute above. 18 Nete Hyperbolaeon. Iota, and Lambda jacent, with an Acute
above.
The Numeral Figures I have added under the Signs (or Marks) only for Reference
to the Names of the Notes signified by them, to save describing them twice.

Notes of the Aeolian Mood in the Diatonic Genus.
^. ^. ^.. T.. O. K. I. ^. ^. G. ^. ^.. K. l. ^ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9. A... A. ^.
^. O. K ^. \. ^. ^. \. ^. e. K. l. 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

1 Proslambanomenos. Eta (H) imperfect averted, and E Quadrate averted. 2
Hypate Hypaton, etc. Delta inverted, and Tau jacent, averted, etc.
Aristides (Page 91.) enumerates and describes all the Variations of every
Letter in the Greek Alphabet; by which the Signs or Notes above mentioned, and
those of the other Moods, were contrived out of them. They are in all 91;
including the Proper Letters; I shall not describe, but only number them.

Out of A were made 7 N were made 2 2 X 2 G 7 O 2 D 4 P 7 E 3 P 2 2 S 6 5 T 4
TH 2 Y 3 I 4 PH 4 K 3 4 L 5 PS 2 5 O 4 49 42 91

I shall only add a word or two concerning their Ancient use of the Words
Diastem and System. Diastem signifies an Interval or Space; System a
Conjunction or Composition of Intervals. So that generally speaking, an Octave,
or any other System, might be truly called a Diastem, and very frequently used
to be so called, where there was no occasion of Distinction. Though a Tone, or
Hemitone, could not be called a System: For when they spoke strictly, by a
Diastem they understood only an Incomposit Degree, whether Diesis, Hemitone,
Tone, Sesquitone, or Ditone; for the two last were sometimes but Degrees, one
Enharmonic, the other Chromatic. By System they meant, a Comprehensive
Interval, compounded of Degrees, or of less Systems, or of both. Thus a Tone
was a Diastem, and Diatessaron was a System, compounded of Degrees, or of a 3d.
and a Degree. Diapason was a System, compounded of the lesser Systems, 4th, and
5th; or 3d. and 6th; or of a Scale of Degrees: and the Scale of Notes which
they used, was their Greatest, or Perfect System. Thus with them, a 3d. Major,
and a 3d. Minor, in the Diatonic Genus, were (properly speaking) Systems; the
former being compounded of two Tones, and the latter of three Hemitones, or a
Tone and Hemitone: But in the Enharmonic Kind, a Ditone was not a System, but
an Incomposit Degree; which, added to two Dieses, made up the Diatessaron: And
in the Chromatic Kind, a Trihemitone was the like; being only an Incomposit
Diastem, and not a System.

But to return from this Digression (which is not so much to my purpose, as to
gratify the Reader's Curiosity) and continue our Discourse according to
Nature's Guidance, upon the Diatonic Degrees. It was said that there are 5
Tones and 2 Hemitones in every Diapason. Now the reason why there must be 2
Hemitones, is, because an Eighth is Naturally composed of, and divided into
5th. and 4th; and a Fifth is 3 Tones and a half; a Fourth 2 Tones and a half;
and the Ascent, by Degrees, must pass by Fourth and Fifth; which are always
unchangeable, and keep the same Distance from Unison; and a just Tone Major of
9 to 8 always between them. Therefore the Diapason has not an Ascent of 6
Tones; but of 5 Tones and 2 Hemitones, One Hemitone being placed in each Fourth
Disjunct; in either of which Fourths, the Degrees may be altered by placing the
Hemitone in the First, or Second, or Third Degree of either. As, MI, FA, Sol,
La. La, MI, FA, Sol. Sol, La, MI, FA. If this be done in the former Tetrachord,
then is changed the Second, or Third Chord; If in the other Disjunct
Tetrachord, then the Sixth, or Seventh is changed: The Fourth and Fifth being
Stable and Immutable. By them we Naturally divide the Diapason: The Second,
Third, Sixth, and Seventh, are alterable, as Minor, and Major, according to the
place of the Hemitone.

In Diatonic Music, there is but one Sort of Hemitone amongst the Degrees,
called Hemitone Major; whose Ration is 16 to 15: being the Difference, and
making a Degree between a Tone Major, and Third Minor; or between a Third
Major, and a Fourth.

There are two Sorts of Tones; viz. Major, and Minor. Tone Major (9 to 8) being
the Difference between a Fourth and Fifth: And Tone Minor (10 to 9) which is
the Difference between Third Minor and Fourth. But both the Tones arising (as
has been said) out of the Partion of a Third Major, in like manner as 5th. and
4th. do by the Partition of an Eighth: I may (with submission) make the
following Remark; wherein, if I be too bold, or be mistaken, I shall beg the
Reader's pardon.

The Ancient Greek Masters found out the Tone by the Difference of a Fourth and
Fifth, substracting one from the other. But had they found it also (and that
more Naturally) by the Division of a Fifth; first into a Ditone and Sesquitone,
and then by the like proper Division of a true Ditone (or Third Major) into its
proper parts; they must have found both Tone Major, and Tone Minor. Euclid
rests satisfied, That, Inter super-particulare non cadit Medium. A
super-particular Ration cannot have a Mediety; viz. in whole Number: which is
true in its Radical Numbers. But had he doubled the Radical Terms of a
Super-particular, he might have found Mediums most Naturally and Uniformly
dividing the Systems of Harmony. Ex. gr. The Duple Ration 2 to 1, as the Excess
is but by an Unity; has the Nature of Super-particular: but 2 to 1, the Terms
being dupled, is 4 to 2; where 3 is a Medium, which divides it into 4 to 3
(4th.) and 3 to 2 (5th.) Again, 3 to 2, dupling each Term, is 6 to 4; and in
the same Manner gives the 2 Thirds, viz. 6 to 5, (3d. Minor) and 5 to 4, (3d.
Major.) Likewise the 3d. Major, 5 to 4, dupled as before, 10 to 8, give the 2
Tones; i. e. 10 to 9, Tone Minor, and 9 to 8, Tone Major.

And it seems to be a reason why the Ancients did not discover and use the Tone
Minor, and consequently not own the Ditone for a Concord; because They did not
pursue this way of dividing the Systems. Although Euclid had a fair Hint to
search further, when he measured the Diapason by 6 Tones [ Major] and found
them to exceed the Interval of Diapason.

The Pythagoreans, not using Tone Minor, but two Equal Tones Major, in a
Fourth, were forced to take a lesser Interval for the Hemitone; which is called
their Limma, or Pythagorean Hemitone; and, which added to those two Tones,
makes up the Fourth: it is a Comma less than Hemitone Major, (16 to 15;) and
the Ration of it, is 256 to 243.

Yet we find the later Greek Masters, Ptolemy, to take Notice of Tone Minor;
and Aristides Quintilianus, to divide a Sesquioctave Tone (9 to 8) by dupling
the Terms of the Ration thereof, into 2 Hemitones; 18 to 17, and 17 to 16. And
those again, by the same way, each into two Dieses; 36 to 35, 35 to 34; the
Division of 18 to 17, the less Hemitone: And 34 to 33, and 33 to 32; the parts
of 17 to 16, the greater Hemitone. But yet, none of these were the Complement
of two Sesquioctave Tones to Diatessaron: but another Hemitone, whose Ratio is
about 20 to 19; not exactly, but so near it, that the Difference is only 1216
to 1215; both which together make the Limma Pythagoricum.

But I no where find, that they thus divided the 5th, and 3d. Major, but rather
seemed to dislike this way, because of the Inequality of the Hemitones and
Dieses thus found out; and chose rather organ tuning chart to Constitute their
Degrees by the Sesquioctave Tone, and those Duodecimal supposed Equal Divisions
of it. But to return.

There are, you see, 3 Degrees Diatonic; viz. Hemitone Major, Tone Minor, and
Tone Major. The First of these, some call Degree Minor; the Second, Degree
Major; and the Third, Degree Maxim. Now these three Sorts of Degrees are
properly to be intermixed, and ordered, in every Ascent to an Eighth, in
relation to the Key, or Unison given, and to the Affections of that Key, as to
Flat, and Sharp, in our Scale of Music; so, that the Concords may be all true,
and stand in their own settled Ration. Wherefore if you change the Key, they
must be changed too; which is the Reason why a Harpsichord, whose Degrees are
fixed; or a fretted Instrument, the fretts remaining fixed, cannot at once be
set in Tune for all Keys: For, if you change the Key, you withal change the
place of Tone Minor, and Tone Major, and fall into other Hemitones that are not
proper Diatonic Degrees, and consequently into false Intervals.

You may fully see this, if you draw Scales of Ascent fitted to several Keys
(as are here inserted) and compare them. For an Example of this, Take the First
Scale of Ascent to Diapason (I) viz. upon C Key Proper, by Diatonic Degrees;
(making the first to be Tone Minor, as convenient for this Instance)
intermixing the Chromatic and other Hemitones, as they are usually placed in
the Keys of an Organ; i. e. run up an Eighth upon an Organ (tuned as well as
you can) by half Notes, beginning at C Sol fa ut, and you will find these
Measures. The Proper Degrees standing right, as they ought to be, being
described by Breves; the other by Semibreves: The Breves representing the Tones
of the broad Gradual Keys of an Organ; the Semibreves representing the Narrow
Upper Keys, which are usually called Musics. And let this be the first Scale,
and a Standard to the rest.

Then draw a Second Scale (II) running up an Eighth in like manner; but let the
Key, or First Note, be D. Sol re Proper, on the same Organ standing tuned as
before; which Key is set a Note (or Tone Minor) higher than the former.

Draw also a Third Scale (III) for D Sol re Key with Sharps, viz. Third, and
Seventh, Major; i. e. F, and C, Sharp.

In the First of these Scales, the Degrees (expressed by Breves) are set in
good and natural Order.

In the Second Scale (changing the Key from C to D). you will find the Fourth,
and Sixth, a Comma (81 to 80) too much; but between the Fourth, and Fifth, a
Tone Minor, which should be always a Tone Major. So from the Fourth to the
Eighth, is a Comma short of Diapente; and from the Sixth, a Comma short of 3d.
Minor. And this, because in this Scale, the Degrees are misplaced.

The Third Scale makes the Second, Third, Fourth, and Sixth, from the Unison,
each a Comma too much; and from the Octave, as much too little. In it, the 3d.
Degree, between F and G, is not the Proper Hemitone, but the Greatest Hemitone,
27 to 25. And all this, because in this Scale also, the Degrees are misplaced;
and there happen (as you may see) three Tones Minor, and but two Major: the
Deficient Comma being added to the Hemitone.

I have added one Example more, of a Fourth Scale; (IV) viz. beginning at the
Key C; with the like Order of Degrees, as in the First Scale (from the Note C)
upon the same Instrument, as it stands tuned after the First Scale. And this
will raise the First Scale half a Note higher.

In this Scale, all the Hemitones are of the same Measure with those of the
First Scale respectively.

And the Intervals should be the same with those of the First Scale; which has
Third, Sixth, Seventh, Major.

But in this Fourth Scale, the 1st. Degree, from C to E, is Tone Major, and
Diesis; as being compounded of 16 to 15, and 27 to 25.

The 2d. Degree from E to F, is Tone Minor; therefore the Ditone, made by these
two Degrees, is too much by a Diesis, (128 to 125) and as much too little the
Trihemitone, from the Ditone to the Fifth.

The 3d. Degree, from F to F, is a Minor Hemitone, 25 to 24; which, (though a
wrong Degree) sets the Diatessaron right.

The 4th. Degree, from F to G, is Tone Major, and makes a true Fifth.

The 5th. Degree, from G to B, is Tone Major, and Diesis; setting the Hexachord
(or Sixth) a Diesis and Comma too much, or too High. It ought to have been Tone
Minor.

The 6th. from B to C, is Tone Minor; too little in that place by a Comma.

The 7th. from C to C, is Hemitone Minor; too little by a Diesis. And so, these
two last Degrees are deficient by a Diesis and Comma; which Diesis and Comma,
being Redundant (as before) in the 5th. Degree, are balanced by the Deficiency
of a Comma in the 6th. Degree; and of a Diesis in the 7th: And so the Octave is
set right.

These Disagreements may be better viewed, if we set together, and compare the
Degrees of this IV Scale, and those of the I: where we shall find, no one of
all the 7 Degrees, to be the same in both Scales.

Scale I. Scale IV. Degrees. 1st. Tone Minor. Tone Maj. and Diesis. 2d. Tone
Major. Tone Minor. 3d. Hemit. Major. Hemitone Minor. 4th. Tone Major. Tone
Minor. 5th. Tone Major. Tone Maj. and Diesis. 6th. Tone Major. Tone Minor. 7th.
Hemit. Major. Hemitone Minor.

And thus it will succeed in all Instruments, Tuned in order by Hemitones,
which are fixed upon Strings; as Harp, etc. Or Strings with Keys; as Organ,
Harpsichord, etc. Or distinguished by Fretts; as Lute, Viol; etc. For which
there is no Remedy, but by some alterations of the Tune of the Strings, in the
Two former; and of the Space of the Fretts in the latter; as your present Key
will require, when you change from one Key to another, in performing Musical
Compositions.

Though the Voice, in Singing, being Free, is naturally Guided to avoid and
correct those before described Anomalies, and to move in the true and proper
Intervals: It being much easier with the Voice to hit upon the Right, than upon
the Anomalous or Wrong Spaces.

Much more of this Nature may be found, if you make and compare more Scales
from other Keys. You will still find, that, by changing the Key, you do withal
change and displace the Degrees, and make use of Improper Degrees, and produce
Incongruous Intervals.

For instead of the Proper Hemitone, some of the Degrees will be made of other
sort of Hemitones; amongst which chiefly are these two: viz. Hemitone Maxim. 27
to 25; and Hemitone Minor, or Chromatic, 25 to 24. Which Hemitones constitute
and divide the two Tones; viz. Tone Major, 9 to 8: the Terms whereof Tripled,
are 27 to 24; and give 27 to 25, and 25 to 24. The Tone Minor likewise is
divided into two Hemitones: viz. Major, 16 to 15; and Minor, 25 to 24.

These two serve to measure the Tones, and are used also, when you Divert into
the Chromatic kind. But the Hemitone-Degree in the Diatonic Genus, ought always
to be Hemitone Major, 16 to 15; as being the Proper Degree and Difference
between Tone Major and Trihemitone, between Ditone and a Fourth, between Fifth
and Sixth Minor, between Sixth Major and Seventh Minor, and also between
Seventh Major and Octave.

Music would have seemed much Easier, if the Progression of Dividing had
reached the Hemitones: I mean, If, as by Dupling the Terms of Diapason, 4 to 2;
it Divides in 4 to 3, and 3 to 2; Diatessaron, and Diapente: And the Terms of
Diapente dupled, 6 to 4; fall into 6 to 5, and 5 to 4, Third Minor, and Third
Major; And Ditone, or Third Major, so Dupled, 10 to 8, falls into 10 to 9, and
9 to 8, Tone Minor, and Tone Major: If, I say, in like manner, the dupled Terms
of Tone Major 18 to 16, thus divided, had given Useful and Proper Hemitones 18
to 17, and 17 to 16. But there are no such Hemitones found in Harmony, and we
are put to seek the Hemitones out of the Differences of Other Intervals; as we
shall have more Occasion to see, when I come to treat of Differences, in Chap.
8.

I may conclude this Chapter, by showing, how All Consonants, and other
Concinnous Intervals, are Compounded of these three Degrees: Tone Major, Tone
Minor, and Hemitone Major; being severally placed, as the Key shall require.

Tone Major, and Hemitone Major, joined, make 3d. Minor. Tone Major, and Tone
Minor, joined, make 3d. Major. Tone Major, and Tone Minor, and Hemitone Major,
joined, make 4th. 2 Tones Major, joined, make 5th. 1 Tone Minor, joined, make
5th. 1 Hemitone Maj. joined, make 5th. 2 Tones Major, joined, make 6th. Minor.
1 Tone Minor, joined, make 6th. Minor. 2 Hemitones Maj. joined, make 6th.
Minor. 2 Tones Major, joined, make 6th. Major. 2 Tones Minor, joined, make 6th.
Major. 1 Hemitone Maj. joined, make 6th. Major. 3 Tones Major, joined, make
7th. Minor. 1 Tone Minor, and joined, make 7th. Minor. 2 Hemitones Maj. joined,
make 7th. Minor. 3 Tones Major, joined, make 7th. Major. 2 Tones Minor, joined,
make 7th. Major, 1 Hemitone Maj. joined, make 7th. Major, 3 Tones Major,
joined, make Diapason. 2 Tones Minor, joined, make Diapason. 2 Hemit. Major,
joined, make Diapason. 2 Tones Major, joined, make Tritone, or false 4th. 1
Tone Minor, joined, make Tritone, or false 4th. 1 Tone Major, joined, make
Semidiapente, or false 5th. 1 Tone Minor, joined, make Semidiapente, or false
5th. 2 Hemit. Major, joined, make Semidiapente, or false 5th.
CHAP. VII. Of Discords.
BEsides the Degrees, which, though they constitute and compound all Concords,
yet are reckoned amongst Discords; because every Degree is Discord to each
Chord, to, or from which it is a Degree, either Ascending, or Descending, as
being a Second to it: Besides these I say, there are other Discords, some
greater and some less. The less will be found amongst the Differences in the
next Chapter; and are fit, rather to be known as Differences, than to be used
as Intervals.

The greater Discords are generally made of such Concords, as, by reason of
misplaced Degrees, happen to have a Comma, or Diesis, or sometimes a Hemitone
too much, or too little: And so become Discords, most of them being of little
use; only to know them, for the better Measuring, and Rectifying the Systems.
Yet they are found amongst the Scales of our Music.

Sometimes a Tone Major being where a Tone Minor should have been placed, or a
Tone Minor instead of a Tone Major; sometime other Hemitones, getting the place
of the Diatonic Hemitone Major, and serving for a Degree, create unapt
Discording Intervals: amongst which may be found at least two more Seconds, two
more Thirds, two more Sixths, and two more Sevenths. In each of which, one is
less, and the other greater, than the true Legitimate Intervals, or Spaces of
those Denominations; as will be more explained in the ensuing Discourse.

But besides these (or rather amongst them, for I here treat of Degrees as
Discords) there are two Discords eminently considerable, viz. Tritone, and
Semidiapente. The Tritone, (or False Fourth) whose Ration is 45 to 32, consists
of 3 whole Notes; viz. 2 Tones Major, and 1 Minor. The Semidiapente, (or False
Fifth) 64 to 45; is compounded of a Fourth, and Hemitone Mijor.

And these two divide Diapason, 64 to 32, by the Mediety of 45; And they divide
it so near to Equality, that in Practice, they are hardly to be distinguished,
and may almost pass for one and the same: but in Nature, they are sufficiently
distinguished, as may be seen, both by their several Rations, and several
Compounding parts.

I think we may reckon Sevenths for Degrees, as well as among the greater
Discording Intervals; because they are but Seconds from the Octave, and are as
truly Degrees Descending, as the Seconds are in Ascent: though they be great
Intervals in respect of the Unison, and as such may be here regarded.

These Discords, the Tritone, and Semidiapente; as also, the Seconds, and
Sevenths, are of very great use in Music, and add a wonderful Ornament and
Pleasure to it, if they be judiciously managed. Without them, Music would be
much less grateful; like as Meat would be to the Palate without Salt or Sauce.
But, the further Consideration of this, and to give Directions when, and how to
use them; is not my Task, but must be left to the Masters of Composition.

Discords then, such as are more apt and useful, ( Intervalla Concinna) are
these which follow.

2d. Minor; or, Hemitone Major, 16 to 15. 2d. Major; Tone Minor, 10 to 9. 2d.
Greatest; Tone Major, 9 to 8. 7th. Minor; 5th. and 3d. Minor, 9 to 5. 7th.
Major; 5th. and 3d. Major, 15 to 8. Tritone; 3d. Maj. and Tone Maj. 45 to 32.
Semidiapente; 4th. and Hemit. Maj. 64 to 45.
These are the Simple Dissonant apt Intervals within Diapason; if you go a
further compass, you do but repeat the same Intervals added to Diapason, or
Dis-diapason, or Tris diapason, etc. as, Ex. gra. a 9th. is Diapason with a 2d.
10th. Diapason with a 3d. 11th. Diapason with a 4th. or, 11th. Diapason cum
Diatessaron. 12th. Diapason with a 5th. or, 12th. Diapason cum Diapente. 15th.
Dis-diapason. 19th. Dis-diapason cum Diapente. 22th. Tris-diapason. etc.


Here, by the way, the Reader may take a little Diversion, in practicing to
measure the Rations of some of those Intervals, in the foregoing Catalogue of
Discords, by comparing them with Diapason; as those of the Sevenths, which I
select, because they are the most distant Rations under Diapason: Viz. Seventh
Minor, 9 to 5; and Seventh Major, 15 to 8. Now to find what Degree or Interval
lies between these and Diapason.

First, 9 to 5 is 10 to 5, wanting 10 to 9 ( Tone Minor.) Next 15 to 8 is 16 to
8, wanting 16 to 15 ( Hemitone Major.) So the Degree between Seventh Minor and
Diapason, is Tone Minor; and between Seventh Major and Diapason, is Hemitone
Major.

Then he may exercise himself in a Survey of what Intervals are comprised in
those several Sevenths, and of which they are compounded.

First, 9 to 5 comprizeth 9 to 8, and 8 to 5: Or 9 to 8, 8 to 6, and 6 to 5.
Next, 15 to 8 contain 15 to 12, 12 to 10, 10 to 9, and 9 to 8: Or 15 to 12, and
12 to 8; Or 15 to 10, and 10 to 8, etc. I suppose, that the Reader, before
this, is so perfect in these Rations, that I need not lose time to name the
Intervals expressed by the Mean Rations, contained in the foregoing Rations of
the Sevenths, which show of what Intervals the several Sevenths are compounded.

Besides these, (by reason of Degrees wrong placed) there are two more 7ths.
[false 7ths] one, less than the true ones; and another greater. The least
compounded of two Fourths; whose Ration is 16 to 9, and wants a Comma of 7th.
Minor, and a Tone Major of Diapason: The other is the greatest, called
Semidiapason, whose Ration is 48 to 25; being a Diesis more than 7th. Major;
and wanting Hemitone Minor of Diapason.

Now first, 16 to 9, is 16 to 8 (2 to 1) wanting 9 to 8; i. e. wanting Tone
Major of Diapason; and contains 16 to 10 (8 to 5) and 10 to 9. Or, 16 to 15, 15
to 12 (5 to 4) 12 to 10 (6 to 5) and 10 to 9. Next, Semi-diapason 48 to 25, is
50 to 25, wanting 50 to 48; i. e. 25 to 24 (viz. Hemitone Minor) of Diapason.

And the like happens, as has been said, to the other Intervals, which admit
of Major and Minor; viz. 2ds, 3ds, and 6ths. The 4th, and 5th, and 8th, ought
always to remain immutable; though they may suffer too sometimes, and incline
to Discord, if we ascend to them by very wrong Degrees; as you may see in the
II Scale in the foregoing Chapter: where the Fourth having 2 Tones Major, is a
Comma too much.

All these Intervals may be subject to more Mutations, by more absurd placing
of Degrees, or of Differences of Degrees; but it is not worth the Curiosity to
search farther into them. The Reader may take pleasure, and sufficiently
Exercise himself in comparing and measuring these which are already laid before
him.

But to return from this Digression. There are many unapt Discords, which may
arise by continual Progression of the same Concords; i. e. by Adding (for
Example) a 4th. to a 4th, a 5th. to a 5th, etc. For it is observable, That,
only Diapason added (as often as you please) to Diapason, still makes Concord:
But any other Concord, added to it self, makes Discord.

You will see the Reason of it, when you have considered well the Anatomy (as I
may call it) of the Constitutive parts of Diapason; which contains, and is
composed of 7 Spaces of Degrees, or of 4th. and 5th, or of 3ds. and 6ths, or of
2ds. and 7ths; which must all keep their true Measures and Rations belonging to
them, and otherwise are easily and often disordered.

Then, consider Diapason as constituted of two Fourths Disjunct, and a Tone
Major between them. And this last is most needful to be very well considered;
as most plainly showing the Reasons of those Anomalies, or Irregular Intervals,
which are produced by Changing the Key; and consequently giving a new and wrong
place to this Odd Tone Major, which stands in the midst of Diapason, between
the two Fourths Disjunct.

Every 4th. must consist of one Tone Major, one Tone Minor, and one Hemitone
Major, as its Degrees, placing them in what Order you please; whose Rations,
added together, make the Ration of Diatessaron. And of these same Degrees
contained in the 4th, are made the two 3ds, which constitute the 5th. Tone
Major and Hemitone Major make the less 3d, or Trihemitone; Tone Major and Tone
Minor make the Greater 3d, or Ditone; Trihemitone and Ditone make Diapente;
Trihemitone and Tone Minor (as likewise Ditone and Hemitone Major) make
Diatessaron.

Now this Tone Major, that stands in the middle of Diapason, between the two
4ths, which it disjoins; and the Degrees required to the 4ths, will not in a
fixed Scale stand right, when you alter your Key, and begin your Scale of
Diapason from another Note. For that which was the 5th, will now be the 4th, or
6th, etc. And then the Degrees will be disordered, and create some discording
Intervals. If you continue conjunct Fourths, there will be a Defect of Tones
Major; if you continue conjunct Fifths, there will be too many Tones Major in
the Systems produced. And if a Tone Major be found, where it ought to have been
a Tone Minor; or a Minor instead of a Major; that Interval will have a Comma
too much, or too little. And so likewise will from a wrong Hemitone be found
the Difference of a Diesis. And these two, Comma and Diesis, are so often
Redundant, or Deficient, according as the Degrees happen to be disordered or
mis-placed; that thereby, the Difficulties of fixing half Notes of an Organ in
tune for all Keys, or giving the true Tune by Fretts, become so Insuperable.

You see, that in every Space of an Eighth, there are to be 3 Tones Major, and
2 Tones Minor, and 2 Hemitones Major: One Tone Major between the Diatessaron
and Diapente, and a Tone Major, a Tone Minor, and Hemitone Major in each of the
Disjunct Fourths.

These are the Proper Degrees by which you should always Ascend or Descend
through Diapason, in the Diatonic Kind; which Diapason, being the complete
System, containing all primary Simple Harmonic Intervals that are; (and for
that reason called Diapason;) You may multiply it, or add it to its self as often
as you please, as far as Voice or Instrument can reach; and it will still be
Concord, and cannot be disordered by such addition: because every of them will
contain (however placed) just 3 Tones Major, 2 Tones Minor, and 2 Hemitones
Major.

Whereas, if you add any other Interval to it self, the Degrees will not fall
right, and it will be Discord, because all Concords are compounded of unequal
Parts, as has been shown before; and if you carry them in Equal Progression,
they will mix with other Intervals by incongruous Degrees, and those Disordered
Degrees will create a Dissonant Interval. See the following Scheme of it.

2 3ds. Minor make 5th, wanting Hem. Min. 2 3ds. Major make 5th, and Hemit.
Minor. 2 4ths. make 8th, wanting Tone Maj. 2 5ths. make 8th, and Tone Major. 2
6ths. Minor make 8th, and Ditone, and Diesis. 2 6ths. Major make 8th, and 4th,
and Hem. Min.
To which may be added, That 2 Tones Min. make Ditone, wanting a Comma. 2 Tones
Maj. make Ditone, and a Comma.


It was said above, that Diapason may be added to it self as often as you please,
and there will be no disorder, because every one of them will still retain the
same Degrees of which the first was Composed: But it is not so in other
Concords; of which I will add one more Example, because of the use which may be
made of it.

Make a Progression of 4 Diapente's, and, as was showed in the 5th. Chapter, (
Page 102.) it will produce Dis-diapason, and 2 Tones Major, which is a 17th,
with a Comma too much. Because in that Space there ought to be just 7 Tones
Major, and 5 Tones Minor; Whereas in 4 Fifths continued, there will be found 8
Tones Major, and but 4 Tones Minor: So that a Tone Major, getting the place of
a Tone Minor, there will be in the whole System a Comma too much. One of these
Major Tones should have been a Tone Minor, to make the Excess above
Dis-diapason a just Ditone.

On the other side, if you (...) the Ration of 4 Diatessarons, t(...) be a Tone
Minor, instead of a (...) jor; and consequently a Comma (...) in constituting
Diapason and 6th (...) For since every Fourth must (...) the Degrees of Tone
Minor, (...) Major, one Hemitone Major; i(...) that if you continue 4 Fourth
(...) will be 4 Tones Minor, 4 Tone (...) and 4 Hemitones Major. Where (...)
Interval of Diapason with 6th (...) there ought to be 5 Tones Major, (...) 3
Minor.

By this you may see the Reas(...) to put an Organ or Harpsichc(...) more
general useful Tune, y(...) tune by 8ths, and 5ths; make(...) 8ths. perfect,
and the 5ths. a litt(...)ing downward; i. e. as much as (...)ter of a Comma,
which the Ear w(...) with in a 5th, though not in (...) For Example, begin at C
Fa ut (...) C Sol fa ut a perfect 8th. to i(...) musical scales Place this agt
Page 181.

re ut a bearing 5th; Then tune a perfect 8th. to G, and a bearing 5th. at D La
sol re; and from thence downwards (that you may keep toward the middle of the
Instrument) a perfect 8th. at D Sol re: and from thence a bearing 5th. up at A;
and from A, a perfect 8th. upwards, and bearing 5th. at E La mi. From E an 8th.
downwards; and so go on, as far as you are led by this Method, to tune all the
Middle part of the Instrument: and at last fill up all above, and below, by
8ths. from those which are settled in Tune; according to the Scheme annexed.
Observing (as was said) to Tune the Eighths perfect, and the Fifths a little
bearing Flat; except in the three last Bars of Fifths, where the Fifths begin
to be taken downward from C, as they were upwards in all before: Therefore, as
before, the Fifth above bore downward; so here, the Fifth below must bear
upward, to make a Bearing Fifth; but That being not so easy to be judged,
Alter the Note below, till you judge the Note above to be a Bearing Fifth to
it. This will rectify both those Anomalies of 5ths and 4ths. For the 5th. to
the Unison, is a 4th. to the Octave; and what the 5th. loses by Abatement,
the 4th. will gain: which does in a good Degree rectify the Scale of the
Instrument. Taking care withal, that what Anomalies will still be found in
this Hemitonic Scale, may, by the Judgment of your Ear, in Tuning, be thrown
upon such Chords as are least used for the Key: as G, E, etc. Even which the
Ear will bear with, as it does with other Discords in binding passages; if so,
you close not upon them. But the other Discords, so used, are most Elegant;
these only more Tolerable.

CHAP. VIII. Of Differences.
ALL Rations and Proportions of inequality, have a Difference between them,
when compared to one another; and consequently the Intervals, expressed by
those Rations, differ likewise. A Fifth is Different from a Fourth, by a Tone
Major; from a 3d. Minor, by a 3d. Major; so an 8th. from a 5th, by a 4th. Of
the Compounding parts of any Interval, one of them is the Difference between
the other part and the whole Interval.

But I treat now of such Differences as are generally less than a Tone, and
create the Difficulties, and Anomalies occurring in the two foregoing Chapters.
I have the less to say of them a part, because I could not avoid touching upon
them all along. It will only therefore be needful, to set before you an
orderly view of them. And first, taking an account of the true Harmonic
Intervals with their Differences, and the Degrees by which they arise; it will
be easier to judge of the false Intervals, and of what concern they are to
Harmony.

Table of true Diatonic Intervals within Diapason, with the Differences between
them.

Their Rations. Their Differences. Hemitone Major. 16 to 15 25 to 24 Tone
Minor. 10 to 9 81 to 80 Tone Major. 9 to 8 16 to 15 3d. Minor; Compounded of
Tone Maj. and Hemit. Maj. 6 to 5 25 to 24 3d. Major; Compounded of Tone Major
and Tone Minor. 5 to 4 10 to 9 4th. Compounded of 3d. Minor and Tone Min. or
3d. Major and Hemitone Major. 4 to 3 9 to 8 5th. Compounded of 4th, and Tone
Major; or of the two 3ds. 3 to 2 16 to 15 6th Minor; Compounded of 5th, and
Hemit. Major; or 4th, and 3d. Min 8 to 5 25 to 24 6th. Major; Compounded of
5th, and Tone Minor; or 4th, and 3d. Major. 5 to 3 27 to 25 7th. Minor;
Compounded of 6th. Maj. and Hem. Max. or 6th. Minor and Tone Major; or 5th, and
3d. Minor. 9 to 5 25 to 24 7th. Major; Compounded of 6th. Major, and Tone Maj.
or 5th, and 3d. Major. 15 to 8 16 to 15 Diapason; Compounded of 7th. and 2d. or
6th, and 3d. or 5th, and 4th. 2 to 1 Tritone; Compounded of 3d. Major, and Tone
Maj. 45 to 32 2048 Compounded of to Semidiapente; Compounded of 4th, and Hemit.
Major. 64 to 45 2025

Those which arise from the Differences of Consonant Intervals, are called
Intervalla Concinna, and properly appertain to Harmony: The rest are necessary
to be known, for making and understanding the Scales of Music.

Table of false Diatonic Intervals, caused by Improper Degrees; with their
Rations and Differences from the true Intervals.

This Mark + stands for More; - for Less.

Rations. Differences from the true. Trihemitone Least; Tone Minor, and Hemit.
Major. 32 to 27 81 to 80 - Trihemitone Greatest; Tone Major, and Hemit. Max.
243 to 200 81 to 80 + Ditone Least; 2 Tones Minor. 100 to 81 81 to 80 - Ditone
Greatest; 2 Tones Major. 81 to 64 81 to 80 + Fourth Less; 2 Tones Minor, and
Hemit. Major. 320 to 243 81 to 80 - Fourth Greater; 2 Tones Major, and Hemit.
Major. 27 to 20 81 to 80 + Fifth Less; Less 4th. and Tone Major. 40 to 27 81 to
80 - Fifth Greater; Greater 4th, and Tone Major. 243 to 160 81 to 80 + Sixth
Least; 5th, and Hemit. Minor. 25 to 16 81 to 80 - Sixth Greatest; 5th, and Tone
Major. 27 to 16 81 to 80 + Seventh Least; 6th. Major, and Hemit. Major. 16 to 9
81 to 80 - Seventh Greatest; 6th. Minor, and 3d. Minor. 43 to 25 128 to 125 +

Here in this account may be seen, how frequently the Comma, and the Diesis
Abounding, or Deficient, by reason of Mis-placed Degrees, occasion Discord in
Harmonic Intervals.

The Comma, by reason of a wrong Tone, i.e. too much; when a Tone Major happens
where there ought to be a Tone Minor: or too little, when the Tone Minor is
placed instead of the Major. And the Diesis is Redundant, or Deficient, by
reason of a wrong Hemitone; when the Major happens instead of the Minor, or the
Contrary: the Diesis being the Difference between them. And if Hemitonium
Maximum get in the place of Hemitonium Majus, the Excess will be a Comma; if in
the place of Hemitone Minor, the Excess will be Comma and Diesis.

And these Anomalies are not Imaginary, or only Possible, but are Real in an
Instrument fixed in Tune by Hemitones; as, Organ, Harpsichord, etc. And the
Reader may find some of them amongst those 4 Scales of Diapason, in the 6th.
Chapter; to which also more may be added: Out of the First of which, I have
Selected some Examples; using the common Marks, as before: viz. +, for More;
and - for Less, or Wanting.

From C, to E; Tone Major, + Diesis; or, 3d. Min. Hemit. Min. C, to F; 3d.
Major, + Diesis; or, 4th, - Hemit. Minor. D, to G; 4th, + Comma. E, to F; 3d
Min. - Dies. and Com. or Tone Min. + Hem. Min. E, to G; 4th, - Diesis; or, 3d.
Maj. + Hem. Min. F, to B; 3d. Maj. + Dies. and Com. or 4th, - Hem. Subminim. F,
to B; 4th, + Comma. G, to B; Tone Maj. + Diesis; or, 3d. Min. - Hemit. Min. G,
to C; 3d. Maj. + Diesis; or, 4th, - Hemit. Min. B, to D; 3d. Min. - Comma.


Next, take account of some Differences which constitute several Hemitones.

Difference between Tone Major, and Hemit. Minor. Hem. Maxim. 27 to 25 3d.
Major, and 4th. Hemit. Majus: 16 to 15 Tone Major, and Hemit. Major. Hemitone
Medium. 135 to 128 3d. Minor, and 3d. Maj. Hem Min. Diesis Chromat. 25 to 24 2
Tones Major, and 4th. Hemiton. (or Limma) Pythagor. 256 to 243 Tone Maj. and
Limma. Apotome 2187 to 2048; or Hemit. Med. with Comma.


To which may be added, out of Mersennus.

Differ. between Hemit. Maxim. and Hemit Minor. Hemitonium. Minimum. 648 to 625
Tone Minor, and Hemitone Maxim. or, Hemitone Minor, and Comma. Hemitonium.
Subminimum. 250 to 243


Next, take a farther View of Differences, most of which arise out of the
preceding Differences, by which you will better see how all Intervals are
Compounded, and Differenced; and more easily judge of their Measures.

Table of more Differences.

Difference between Tone Maj. and Tone Min. Comma. Tone Maj. and Hem. Greatest.
Hemitone Minor. Tone Maj and Hem. Medium. Hemitone Major. Tone Maj. and Hem.
Pythag. Apotome. Hem. Greatest, and Hem Maj Comma Hem. Greatest and Hem. Min.
Comma, and Diesis; viz. Hem. Minimum. Hemit. Major, and Minor. Diesis. Hemit.
Major, and Medium. 2048 to 2025. viz. Comma Minus. Hemit. Major, and Pythag.
Comma. Apotome, and Hemit. Majus. Diff. betw. Comma Majus, and Min. Apotome,
and Hemit. Med. Comma. Apotome, and Hem. Pythag. Comma, and the aforesaid
Differ. Apotome, and Hemit. Minus. 2 Comma's. Hemit. Medium, and Phythag.
Differ. of Comma Majus, and Minus. Hemit. Medium, and Minus. Comma. Hemit.
Pythag. and Minus. Comma Minus. Hemit. Minus, and Diesis. Somewhat more than
Comma, viz. 3125 to 3072. Hemit. Minus, and Comma. Hem Subminimum. Diesis, and
Comma. Comma Minus, viz. 2048 to 2025. Com. Majus, and Com. Minus. 32805 to
32768.


These Differences (with some more) are found between several other Intervals;
of which more Tables might be drawn, but I shall not trouble the Reader with
them. Having here shown what they are, he may (if he please) exercise himself
to examine These by Numbers, and also find out Them; and to some it may be
pleasant and delightful; And for that reason, I have the more largely insisted
on this part of my Subject, which concerns the Measures, Habitudes, and
Differences of Harmonic Intervals.

I shall add one Table more; of the Parts, of which these lesser Intervals are
Compounded; which will still give more Light to the former; and is, in Effect,
the same.

Tone Major contains, and is compounded of Tone Minor, and Comma. Hemitone
Maxim. and Hemitone Min. Tone Major contains, and is compounded of Hemitone
Maj. Hemitone Med. Limma, Apotome. 2 Hem. Min. Tone Major contains, and is
compounded of Hemitone Maj. Hemitone Med. Limma, Apotome. 1 Diesis, Tone Major
contains, and is compounded of Hemitone Maj. Hemitone Med. Limma, Apotome. 1
Comma. Tone Min. Hem. Maxim. Hem. Submin. Hemit. Major, Hemit. Min. 2 Hemit.
Min. Tone Min. Hem. Maxim. Hem. Submin. Hemit. Major, Hemit. Min. 1 Diesis.
Hem. Max. Hem. Maj. Comma. Hem. Med. Diesis. Hem. Pyth. 2 Comma's. Hem. Min.
Dies and Com. Hem. Maj. Hem. Med. Com. Min. Hem. Pyth. Comma. Hem. Min. Diesis.
Hem. Submi. Dies and Com. Hem. Med. Hem. Min. Comma. Hemitone Pythagoricum.
Difference between Comma Majus, and Minus, viz. 32805 to 32768. Hem. Pyth.
Hemitone Minus. Comma Minus. Hem. Min. Hemit. Submin. Comma. Diesis, and 3125
to 3072. Diesis. Comma, Comma Minus. Comma. Comma Minus, 32805 to 32768.
I think there scarce needs an Apology for some of these Appellations, in
respect of Grammar. That I call Hemitonium, and Hexachordon, Majus, and Minus;
sometimes Hemitone, and Hexachord, Major, and Minor. These two last Words are
so well adapted to our Language, that there is no Englishman, but knows them.
Therefore when I make Hemitone an English word, I take Major, and Minor, to be
so too; and fittest to be joined with it, without respect of Gender.

CHAP. IX. Conclusion.
TO Conclude all. Bodies by Motion make Sound; Sound, of fitly Constituted
bodies, makes Tune: Tune, by Swiftness of Motion is rendered more Acute; by
Slowness more Grave: in Proportion to the Measure of Courses and Recourses, of
Tremblings or Vibrations of Sonorous Bodies. Those Proportions are found out by
the Quantity and Affections of Sounding Bodies. Ex. gr. by the Length of
Chords. If the Proportion of Length ( Caeteris paribus,) and consequently of
Vibrations of several Chords, be commensurate within the Number 6; then those
Intervals of Tune are Consonant, and make Concord, the Motions mixing and
uniting as they pass: If incommensurate, they make Discord by the jarring and
clashing of the Motions. Concords are within a limited Number, Discords
innumerable. But of them, those only here considered, which are (as the Greeks
termed them) (...), Concinnous, apt and useful in Harmony: Or which, at least,
are necessary to be known, as being the Differences and Measures of the other;
and helping to discover the reason of Anomalies, found in the Degrees of
Instruments tuned by Hemitones.

All these I have endeavored to explain, with the manifest Reasons of
Consonancy and Dissonancy, (the Properties of a Pendulum giving much light to
it,) so as to render them easy to be understood by almost all sorts of
Readers; and to that end have enlarged, and repeated, where I might, to the
more intelligent Reader, have comprised it very much shorter. But I hope the
Reader will pardon that, which could not well be avoided, in order to a full,
and clear Explanation of that, which was my design, viz. the Philosophy of the
Natural Grounds of Harmony.

Upon the Whole; You see how Rationally, and Naturally, all the Simple
Concords, and the Two Tones, are found and demonstrated, by Sub-divisions of
Diapason.

2 to 1, i. e. 4 to 2; into 4 to 3, and 3 to 2. 2 to 1, i. e. 6 to 3; into 6 to
5, and 5 to 3. 2 to 1, i. e. 8 to 4; into 8 to 5, and 5 to 4. 2 to 1, i.e. 10
to 5; into 10 to 9, 9 to 8, and 8 to 5.
In which are the Rations (in Radical, or Least Numbers) of the Octave, Fifth,
Fourth, Third Major, Third Minor, Sixth Major, Sixth Minor, and Tone Major, and
Tone Minor.

And then, All the Hemitones, and Diesis, and Comma, are found by the
Differences of these, and of one another; as has been shown at large.

Now, certainly, this is much to be preferred before any Irrational Contrivance
of expressing the several Intervals. The Aristoxenian way of dividing a Tone
[Major] into 12 Parts, of which 3 made a Diesis, 6 made Hemitone, 30 made
Diatessaron; (as has been said) might be useful, as being easier for
Apprehension of the Intervals belonging to the three Kinds of Music; and might
serve for a least common Measure of all Intervals, (like Mr. Mercator's
artificial Comma) 72 of them being contained in Diapason.

But this way, and some other Methods of dividing Intervals equally, by Surd
Numbers and Fractions, attempted by some Modern Authors; could never constitute
true Intervals upon the Strings of an Instrument, nor afford any Reason for the
Causes of Harmony, as is done by the Rational Way, explaining Consonancy by
united Motions, and Coincidence of Vibrations. And though they supposed such
Divisions of Intervals; yet we may well believe, that they could not make them,
nor apply them in tuning a Musical Instrument; and if they could, the Intervals
would not be true nor exact. But yet, the Voice offering at those, might more
easily fall into the true Natural Intervals. Ex. gr. The Voice could hardly
express the Ancient Ditone of 2 Tones Major; but aiming at it, would readily
fall into the Rational Consonant Ditone of 5 to 4, consisting of Tone Major,
and Tone Minor. It may well be rejected as unreasonable, to measure Intervals
by Irrational Numbers, when we can so easily discover and assign their true
Rations in Numbers, that are Minute enough, and easy to be understood.

I did not intend to meddle with the Artificial part of Music: The Art of
Composing, and the Metric and Rhythmical parts, which give the infinite Variety
of Air and Humor, and indeed the very Life to Harmony; and which can make
Music, without Intervals of Acuteness and Gravity, even upon a Drum; and by
which chiefly the wonderful Effects of Music are performed, and the Kinds of
Air distingushed; As, Almand, Corant, Jigg, etc. which variously attack the
Fancy of the Hearers; some with Sprightfulness, some with Sadness, and others a
middle way. Which is also improved by the Differences of those we call Flat, or
Sharp Keys; The Sharp, which take the Greater Intervals within Diapason, as
3ds, 6ths, and 7ths. Major; are more Brisk and Airy; and being assisted with
Choice of Measures last spoken of, do Dilate the Spirits, and Rouse them up to
Gallantry, and Magnanimity. The Flat, consisting of all the less Intervals,
contract and damp the Spirits, and produce Sadness and Melancholy. Lastly, A
mixture of these, with a suitable Rhythmus, gently fix the Spirits, and compose
them in a middle Way: Wherefore the First of these is called by the Greeks
Diastaltic, Dilating the second, Systaltic, Contracting; the last,
Hesychiastic, App^sing.

I have done what I designed, searched into the Natural Reasons and Grounds,
the Materials of Harmony; not pretending to teach the Art and Skill of Music,
but to discover to the Reader the Foundations of it, and the Reasons of the
Anomolous Phoenomena, which occurr in the Scales of Degrees and Intervals:
Which though it be enough to my Purpose, yet is but a small (though indeed the
most certain, and, consequently most delightful) Part of the Philosophy of
Music; in which there remain Infinite Curious Disquisitions that may be made
about it: As what it is, that makes Humane Voices, even of the same Pitch, so
much to differ one from another? (For though the Differences of Humane
Countenances are visible; yet we cannot see the Differences of Instruments of
Voice, nor consequently of the Motions and Collisions of Air, by which the
Sound is made.) What it is that constitutes the different Sounds of the Sorts
of Musical Instruments, and even single Instruments? How the Trumpet, only by
the Impulse of Breath, falls into such variety of Notes, and in the Lower Scale
makes such Natural Leaps into Consonant Intervals of 3d, 4th, 5th, and 8th. But
this I find is very ingeniously explicated by an Honorable Member of the R. S.
and published in the Philosophical Transactions, No 195. Also how the
Tube-Marine, or Sea-Trumpet (a Monochord) so fully expresses the Trumpet; and
is also made to render other Varieties of Sounds; as, of a Violin, and
Flageolet, whereof I have been an Ear-witness? How the Sounds of Harmony are
received by the Ear; and why some persons do not love Music? etc.

As to this last; the incomparable Dr. Willis mentions a certain Nerve in
Brain, which some Persons have, and some have not. But further, it may be
considered, that all Nerves are composed of small Fibers; Of such in the Gutts
of of Sheep, Cats, etc. are made Lute-Strings: And of such are all the Nerves,
and amongst them, those of the Ear, composed. And, as such, the latter are
affected with the Regular Tremblings of Harmonic Sounds. If a false String
(such as I have before described) transmit its Sound to the best Ear; it
displeases. Now, if there be found falseness in those Fibers, of which Strings
are made; Why not the like in those of the Auditory Nerve in some Persons? And
then it is no wonder if such an Ear be not pleased with Music, whose Nerves
are not fitted to correspond with it, in commensurate Impressions and Motions.
I gave an Instance in Chap. 3d. how a Bell-Glass will Tremble and Echo to its
own Tune, if you hit upon it: And I may add, That if the Glass should be
irregularly framed, and give an uncertain Tune, it would not answer your Trial.
In fine, Bodies must be Regularly named to make Harmonic Sounds, and the Ear
Regularly constituted to receive them. But, this by the by; and only for a Hint
of Inquiry.

I was saying, that there remain Infinite Curiosities relating to the Nature of
Harmony, which may give the most Acute Philosopher business, more than enough,
to find out; and which perhaps will not appear so easy to demonstrate and
explain, as are the Natural Grounds of Consonancy and Dissonancy.

After all therefore, and above all, by what is already discovered, and by what
yet remains to be found out; we cannot but see sufficient cause to Rouse up our
best Thoughts, to Admire and Adore the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of Almighty
God. His Wisdom, in ordering the Nature of Harmony in so wonderful a manner,
that it surpasses our Understanding to make a through Search into it, though,
(as I said) we find so much by Searching, as does recompense our Pains with
Pleasure, and Admiration.

And his Goodness, in giving Music for the Refreshings and Rejoycings of
Mankind; so that it ought, even as it relates to common Use, to be an
Instrument of our great Creator's Praise, as he is the Founder and Donor of it.

But much more, as it is advanced and ordained to relate immediately to his
Holy Worship, when we Sing to the Honor and Praise of God. It is so Essential
a part of our Homage to the Divine Majesty, that there was never any Religion
in the World, Pagan, Jewish, Christian, or Mehumetan, that did not mix some
kind of Music with their Devotions; and with Divine Hymns, and Instruments of
Music, set forth the Honor of God, and celebrate his Praise. Not only, Te
decet Hymnus Deus in Sion. (Psalm. 65.) but also -- Sing unto the Lord all the
whole Earth. (Psalm. 96.)

And it is that, which is incessantly performed in Heaven before the Throne of
God, by a General Consort of all the Holy Angels and the Blessed.

In short, we are in Duty and Gratitude bound to bless God, for our Delightful
Refreshments by the use of Music; But especially in our public Devotions, we
are obliged by our Religion, with Sacred Hymns and Anthems, to magnify his
Holy Name; that we may at last find Admittance above, to bear a Part in that
Blessed Consort, and Eternally Sing Allelujahs, and Trisagions in Heaven.

(...)

FINIS.

