ELEMENTS OF SPEECH: AN ESSAY of INQUIRY INTO The Natural Production OF
LETTERS: WITH An APPENDIX Concerning Persons Deaf and Dumb

BY WILLIAM HOLDER D. D. Fellow of the R. Society.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for J. Martyn Printer to the R. Society, at the Bell
without Temple-Barr 1669.

March 4. 1668/9.
At a meeting of the Council of the R. Society.
Ordered,

THat a Discourse presented to the R. Society, Entitled, Elements of Speech;
or, An Essay of Inquiry into the Natural Production of Letters, with an
Appendix concerning Persons Deaf and Dumb, be Printed by John Martyn, Printer
to the said Society.

BROUNCKER Pres.

THE PREFACE.
IT has been to me a matter of Wonder, that in the Alphabets of all Languages
whereof I have any knowledge; there is not to be found either Order or
Perfection. The Characters (or written Letters) neither being adjusted to the
sounds of Letters pronounced; nor disposed in the Alphabet according to any
rational or Natural Order. The Consequences whereof have been, to render
Languages more difficult to be learnt, and needlessly to advance Orthography
into a troublesome and laborious Art; and to hide the Nature of Letters in
obscurity, so as not to be found without much searching; nor perhaps to be
sufficiently searched, by such as are moved to it only by Philosophical
Curiosity, and are not by any necessity engaged to a pertinacious diligence.
Though in this kind it must be acknowledged, that some excellent Persons
amongst us, who are above my Approbation or Elogy, have considered this Subject
with great Care and Felicity. And it having happened to me some years past, to
have been deeply engaged in this same consideration of the Alphabet, by a
Worthy Design of giving Relief to a Deaf and Dumb Person, in the year 1659.
recommended to my Care: and being at last prevailed with by diverse Persons, who
remember the success of that Enterprise, to Communicate the way and method I
then used; I have adventured to publish my thoughts concerning the Nature of
Letters; more in respect of the Appendix, or Application of them to that
excellent purpose, than that I esteem them worthy to trouble the World, or able
to produce any considerable addition to the discourses of this Subject already
extant: only in regard of the obscurity and subtilty of the difference of
Letters, by reason of which, several Persons are apt to make different guesses
and observations, and to be often unfixed, and change their thoughts upon
better Consideration, as I have experienced, and believe the same must have
happened to others; it were to be wished, that all who have considered this
Subject would Communicate their thoughts and ways of finding out those
differences, which being done, every Hypothesis would contribute some Light, as
I hope this of mine may do; wherein I have endeavored to abstract my self from
prepossession of Fancy, either by the Idea's of faulty Alphabets, or the
Notions of other Authors. And here I must entreat the Reader to do the like for
me; and withal, to read the Treatise of Letters once over, without staying to
dispute or examine particulars, which he will often find more plainly expressed
afterward; and then, if he shall think it worth his trouble, to go over it
again, and at his pleasure, stay to make trials and examinations.

The Obscurity of the Subject, and the Prejudice and Prepossession of most
Readers, may plead excuse for any Ampliations or Repetitions that may be found,
whilst I labor to express my self so plain and full, that the Nature of Speech
and Letters, so far as these present thoughts of mine reach to it, may be
understood by all.

ERRATA.
PAge 3, line 10. tion. l. 12. either, both to. p. 10. l. 2. designed to be. p.
11. l. 9. have their. p. 12. l. 18. bets of. p. 17. l. 7. the most apt. p, 19,
l. 11. and. p. 29. l. 1 which is. l. 4. of one Organ. p. 30. l. 1. of Motion.
p. 34. l. 9. Spirital, Ore-Vocal. p. 41. l 10. ed Original Letters. p. 42. l.
9. then the same. p. 49. l. 13. and Myleogloss. p. 53. l. 12. Ng Naso-Vocal.
[Obs. there was intended a Character for Ng, viz. n with a tail like that of g.
which must be understood where the Printer has imitated it by n or y.] p. 63.
l. 20. Characters. p. 73. l. 7. Larynx, cannot. p. 74. l. 15. improperly. p.
81. l. 5. [ Obs. the short Vowels should have been ranked thus; Folly under o,
Fat under a, Sell under e, Ill under i, Full under oo, the other spaces left
blank] p. 81. l. penult. Whispering, be. p. 93. l. 8. their subtle and. p. 97.
l. 12. 36 Vowels. p. 101. l. 19. Letter. the. p. 104. l. 7. of the same. p.
107. l. 16. as they speak. p. 110. l. 7. to that. p. 123. l. 21. nearer. p.
129. l. 7. these Persons. p. 130. l. 17. respectively Letter spoken or written;
p. 135. l. 19. out by being. p. 136. l. 1. Lips. Make him. p. 144. l. 7. show
him a. p. 152. l. 21. Pourtraitures. p. 154. l. 15. ckt. p, 157. l. 19. (not to
be thought on otherwise.)

ELEMENTS OF SPEECH: An Essay of Enquiry into the Natural Production of Letters.
OF the Five Senses, Two are usually, and most properly called the Senses of
Learning, as being most capable of receiving communication of Thoughts and
Notions by selected Signs; And these are Hearing and Seeing.

The Object of Hearing is Sound, whose variety is so great, and conveighance so
easy, that it brings in admirable store of intelligence and information to the
common sense. And like to it in the same respects is the Object of Seeing.

Either of these learned Senses have their peculiar Privileges: whereas Seeing
requires Light, and a free Medium, and a right Line to the objects; we can hear
in the dark, Immured, and by curve Lines, that is, Sound can pass to the Ears,
where visual Rays cannot to the Eye. But then, Sight takes in at a greater
distance, and more variety at once, comprehending also Quiescent objects, which
Hearing does not: and especially enjoying the delightful variety of forms, and
figures, which come not to the Hearing. As to the present purpose, both these
Senses embrace their Objects at greater distance, with more variety, and with a
more curious discrimination, than the other Senses, so that they are most
fitted to receive and distinguish Signs for Communication, and by their proper
advantages mutually supplying the defects of either. And both together serve
completely for the Reception and Communication of Learned Knowledge.

Now Signs for Communication may be contrived at pleasure from any variety of
Objects (especially of one kind) appertaining to either Sense. For example,
Four Bells admit Twenty four changes in Ringing, and Five Bells One hundred and
twenty: each change may, by agreement and consent, have a certain signification
imposed upon it, and so Communication may be performed at a distance by
Hearing. And for the Sight, Four or Five Torches held up at a Distance in the
Night, 1 or 2, or 3, or 4, and any, or more of them elevated, or depressed out
of their Order, either in Breadth, or Longways, may by agreement give great
variety of Notifications. And thus, Thousands of Signs may be invented and
agreed upon, and learnt, and practiced. Thus the Drum and Trumpet by their
several Sounds, serve for many kinds of Advertisements in Military affairs: and
Bells serve to proclaim a scare-fire, and (in some places) Water-Breaches; The
departure of a Man, Woman, or Child; time of Divine Service; The hour of the
day; day of the Month, etc. Common life is full of this kind of significant
Expressions, by Knocking, Beckoning, Frowning, Pointing and the like; and Dumb
persons are sagacious in the use of them. And even Brute Animals make use of
this artificial way of making diverse motions to have several significations, to
Call, Warn, Chide, Cherish, Threaten, etc. especially within their own kinds.
But of all other, there is none for this use comparable to the variety of
instructive Expressions by Speech, wherewith Man alone is endowed, as with an
Instrument suitable to the Excellency of his Soul, for the most easy, speedy,
certain, full communication of the Infinite variety of his Thoughts, by the
ready Commerce between the Tongue and the Ear. And if some Animals, as Parrots,
Magpies, etc. may seem to be capable of the same discriminations, yet we see,
that their souls are too narrow to use so great an Engine. The chief, I say, of
all signs, and which the Almighty's Providence, in the Creation of Man, endued
him withal, and destined to that use, is Humane voice and the several
modifications thereof by the Organs of Speech, viz. the Letters of the
Alphabet, formed by the several Motions of the Mouth; and the great variety of
Syllables composed of Letters, and formed with almost equal velocity; and the
endless number of words capable of being framed out of the Alphabet, either of
more syllables, or of one; or sometimes of a single Letter, according as, by
consent and institution, they are ordered to signify the several parts of
Speech or Language. And (which answers to the same end) the Characters or
Symbols of these Letters expressed by Writing, or Printing, or Graving, etc. so
as to remain visible, and discernable by the Eye; viz. to each Letter a proper
Character designed to signify the Power or Sound of the Letter, that when I
see Letters joined, I understand the sound, and am ready to pronounce it. And
this is Language in Counterfeit. Whereas Language, originally and properly (as
the Word imports) is that of the Tongue, directed to the Ear by Speaking.
Written Language is tralatitiously so called, because it is made to represent
to the Eye the same Letters and Words, which are pronounced.

And by these the Tongue and Pen do mutually correspond, and assist one
another, Writing what we speak, and Speaking what we write. And (as was said of
the Senses, to which they serve) they supply the defects of each other by the
peculiar privileges of either. Swift, and ready, and familiar Communication is
made by Speech, and when animated by Elocution, it acquires a greater life, and
energie, ravishing and captivating the Hearers. But then, Speech is confined to
the Living, and imparted to only those, that are in presence, and is transient
and gone. Written Language, as it is more Operous, so it is more digested, and
is permanent, and it reaches the absent, and posterity, and by it we speak
after we are dead.

Now, as I said, the Original of these Signs for Communication is found in
Viva voce, in spoken Language, and therefore it is Speech we now chiefly
consider, I mean the Principles thereof, which are Letters. Now these Letters
considered, as to their Genesis, i. e. as they are made and framed by several
Motions of the parts of the Mouth, are the natural Elements of Speech, but the
use of them is Artificial, viz. when they are composed, and designed by several
Signs of Respective Notions: And hence Languages arise, when by institution and
agreement, such a composure of Letters, i. e. such a Word is intended to
signify such a certain thing. And the Learning of a Language is (or at least
needs be) nothing else, but the informing our selves, and remembering what
Composures of Letters are, by consent and Institution, to signify such certain
Notions of things, with their Modalities and Accidents: I say, the Motions of
the Mouth (speaking largely) by which the voice is discriminated, and the Sound
thereof in distinct forms received by the Ear, according to the number of
their variety, are the Natural Elements of Speech; and the Application of them
in their several compositions, or Words made of them, to signify things or the
Modalities of things, and so serve for communication of Notions, is Artificial.

And the former of these, the Letters, as they have the natural Production by
the several checks or stops, or (as they are usually called) Articulations of
the Breath or Voice in their passage from the Larynx through the Mouth or Nose,
made by the instruments of Speech, are the subject of this present Essay.
Worthy indeed of better consideration, as being the first Elements of all
Humane Learning, (to say nothing of the Propagation and Conservation thereof;)
and by which having once surveyed the true and proper natural Alphabet, we may
easily discover the Deviations from it in the Characters thereof, in all the
Alphabets in use: Either by Defect of single Characters of Letters; or by
Confusion of them; or by expressing the Power of single Letters by unapt
Compositions; or by an absurd reception of double Letters, into the number of
the Elements, which ought to be only single and original; or lastly by the
incongruous pronunciations of several Letters, as they lie described to the Eye
by Symbols or Characters of the Alphabet of several Languages, which indeed
ought to be only one, or at least all to be perfectly correspondent each to
other, according to their Origin in nature, though expressed by several
Characters, after the humor and fancy of several Nations. Though it were much
to be wished, that, as there is but one single way (whereof we are now
treating) of the natural production of Letters, whereby to convey our thoughts
by the sound of Speech to the Ears of them that hear us; so there were
throughout the world but one sort of Character for each Letter, to express it
to the Eye, and that exactly proportioned to the Natural Alphabet formed in the
Mouth. This, though diversity of Languages continue, yet would render them much
more easy to be learned, as to reading and pronouncing of them, and especially
as to the Writing of them, which now, as they stand, we find to be troublesome
and difficult, and it is no small part of Grammar, which treats of Orthography
and right pronunciation.

And truly the Disorder, into which the Alphabet is put, by the several ways
forementioned, seems to me of the same kind, though not so great, as if
several Nations, using the same Characters, should apply them differently, and
that Sound, which one describes by B, another should do the same by C. etc.
which by private consent has been sometimes used in dangerous times, only to
obscure their writing, and make it hard to be read by others not acquainted
with the intrigue, but is quite contrary to any intention of advancing the
facility of Learning.

But the chief design here intended by this account of the Natural Alphabet,
is, to prepare a more easy and expedite way to instruct such as are Deaf and
Dumb, and Dumb only by consequence of their want of Hearing, (by showing them
the proper figures of the motions of the Organs, whereby Letters are framed) to
be able to pronounce all Letters, and Syllables, and Words, and in a good
measure to discern them by the Eye, when pronounced by another.

And although this cannot be directly and immediately taught, and learnt, as to
every particular Letter of the Alphabet (as will be sufficiently manifest in
the ensueing discourse) yet He, who has this exact knowledge of the Nature and
Difference of Letters, by knowing withal, what can be readily done, and what
cannot be immediately performed; will be able to pursue such an attempt with
steadiness; and having made his first progress in what is obvious and fesible;
will then (without expense of fruitless labor) proceed to seek out and invent
other ways to compass about and accomplish his designed effect.

And by these ways (as I my self have made some experiment) it is not
impossible, no nor very difficult to be done, even in those who were born Deaf
and Dumb.

By what has bin premised, we may define Language (if we consider it more
materially) to be An apt Connection of Letters, forming and producing Words and
Sentences. But if we consider it more according to the Reason and Design
thereof, then Language is the most excellent Instrument for Communication. Or,
a connection of the apt signs for Communication of our Thoughts and Notions.
And Speaking is nothing else, than A sensible Expression and Communication of
the Notions of the Mind by several Discriminations of utterance of voice, used
as Signs i. e. having, by Consent, several determinate significancies.

The Matter or Store, out of which these signs are framed, is the Alphabet,
that is, the variety of single different Letters, which Letters arise from the
first original discriminations of voice, by way of Articulation, whereby the
Ear is able to judge and observe the differences of vocal Sounds. And as many
such different sounds as can be made by single Articulations, so many Letters
there are in the storehouse of Nature, out of which to frame Signs for
Communication by way of Speech or Language.

I said, Articulation, because there may be other ways of discriminating the
voice, E. G. by Acuteness and Gravity, the several degrees of rising and
falling from one Tone or Note to another; and the several Kinds of Measures,
Passions, Moods, Air, etc. out of which it were easy to frame a kind of
Language, without Words, though not so Expedite nor Comprehensive as the other.

Now to describe accurately the differences, by which the Formal Reason of
every letter is constituted, however it seem at the first apprehension familiar
and easy, and no one but can say something toward it; yet upon better
consideration will be found very difficult: Because the Motions and Figures
within the mouth are abstruse, annd not easy to be distinguished, especially
those of the Tongue, and several parts of it, which is moved, through the help
of many Muscles, so easily, and Habitually, and variously, that we are scarce
able to give a judgment and description of diverse Motions and Figures thereby
framed in the Mouth: And also because most are apt to seek all the Differences
of Letters in those Articulating Motions, whereas several Combinations of
Letters are framed by the very same Motions of those Organs, which are commonly
observed, and are differenced (as shall be shown) by other concurrent causes.
And lastly, by reason of the Prepossession of the Judgment of most men from
their Infant-breeding, of which I have met with much Experience; and it may be
seen in the writings of some Learned men, who coming to treat of the Nature of
Letters, speak of them by Tradition, as of some remote exotic thing, whereof
we had no knowledge, but by uncertain fabulous relations. And although I have
bin told of some more accurate Authors, who take not the vulgar Alphabets and
Rudiments of Grammar for their Canon; yet I have refrained to look into them,
for fear of being led away by other men's fancies; whereas I rather chose to
consult Nature at Hand. And herein I cannot hope to have escaped all
prejudicies of fancy, but do willingly submit those mistakes, into which I may
have fallen, to the better consideration of others, who shall have made
research into this business with more felicity. And certainly the free thoughts
of many separate persons using diligence herein, compared together, select
choice being made of the most happy adventures in each of their several
Hypotheses, is the surest way to advance this kind of Essay to a good
perfection. To which, if any thing be contributed by this that I have done, I
shall not wholly have missed my end.

Of Letters the Material part is Breath and Voice; the Formal part is
constituted by the Motions and Figures of the Organs of Speech, affecting the
Breath or Voice with a peculiar sound, by which each Letter is discriminated.
For either of these there are proper Organs. For the Former, the Lungs, Aspera
Arteria, Larynx, Uvula, Nose, and the whole Arch of the Palate or Roof of the
Mouth. The Lungs are as Bellows, which supply a force of Breath: the Asphera
Arteria is as the nose of Bellows, or as a channel in the sound Board of an
Organ, to collect and conveigh the Breath, and somewhat more, by a power of
contracting and dilating it self, which those have not.

The Larynx both gives passage to the Breath, and also, as often as we please,
by the force of Muscles, to bear the sides of the Larynx stiff and near
together, as the Breath passes through the Rimula, makes a vibration of those
Cartilaginous Bodies which forms that Breath, into a Vocal sound or Voice,
which by the Palate, as a Chelis or shell of a Lute, is sweetened and
augmented. The Uvula, as a Valve, opens and shuts the passage of Breath or
Voice through the Nose. The Nose, sometimes giving passage to Breath or Voice,
in speaking alters their sound, and gives a Material discrimination, by which
the general sound of Breath or Voice may be distinguished into Oral, or Nasall,
or, (to speak more accurately) Ore-Nasal. And thus also the Whole mouth, as it
gives passage to Breath and Voice, and a distinct sound, from that of the Nose,
ought to be accounted one of the Organs of the Material part of Letters.

By the way observe, that Letters may be framed by Articulation of only
Breath, for secret communication near at hand, as in whispering. But the most
useful way of easy and free communication, being by the Voice, and the Motions
being the same in whispering and in speaking, it is intended here, to consider
vocal Speech alone, as that to which this Discourse refers. Though it be true
(and ought to be well heeded) that diverse letters have no Vocal sound, if
pronounced alone, but do immediately affect the vocal sound of other Letters,
to which they are joined in Spech, by affecting first the Breath in their own
proper Motions and Figures, such are F. S, and some others. The Organs of the
Later, the Formal part of Letters, are the Tongue, Palate, Goums, Jaw, Teeth,
Lips. Of which the Tongue and under-Lip, and nether-jaw are moveable. The rest
are immovable, viz. as to their use in speech. Articulations are made by the
Motions of the moveable Organs to, or toward the Immovable. As, the Tongue,
(which is the chief instrument of Speech) is every way moved in its parts to
and from all parts of the Palate, and Goums, and upper Teeth, except the very
cavity or Arch of the Palate, which is always kept open to help the sound. The
under lip is moved to the upper lip, or upper Teeth. And these motions are
attended by the motions of the nether-jaw.

Of Letters The Material Cause is Breath and Voice whole Organs are the Oral.
Nasal. Lungs. Aspera Arteria. Larynx. Palat's Arch, or Roof. Uvula. Nose.
Whole mouth.

The Formal Cause is Atticulation of Breath and Voice whose Organs are
Moveable. Tongue. Under Lip. Nether Jaw.
Immovable. Palate. Goums. Upper-Lip. Upper Teeth,



In the framing of every Letter, there is an Articulation (though not to every
Letter a several Articulation; for sometimes two or three have the same, and
are differenced only by their material causes.) By Articulation I mean a
peculiar Motion and Figure of some parts belonging to the Mouth between the
Throat and Lips, whereof some are more easy to be discerned and described; as
those made with the Lips, P. B. M: with the Lip and Teeth, F.V: with the Tongue
and Teeth, (...) i. e. th. dh. and those with the Tongue and Goums, and Tongue
and Palate, which are close stopped, as T. D. N; KG. NG. The rest are more
difficult, and most of all the Vowels, where there are peculiar Figures of the
Cavity of the Mouth, between the Tongue and the Arch of the Palate, whilst the
Tongue moves into a Posture required to each Vowel, which is made without the
Lips.

That I may be the easier understood, I do comply with the Ancients, in
distinguishing Letters into Vowels and Consonants; yet not wholly upon their
reason, viz. That a Vowel may be sounded alone, a Consonant not without a
Vowel; which if examined will not be found all true, for many of the Consonants
may be sounded alone, and some joined together, without a Vowel, as Bl, St; and
as we pronounce the later Syllable of People, Rifle, etc. though it be true of
some Consonants, as the Mutes, P. T. K. that they can make no sound alone: But
from another difference, which is, That in all Vowels the passage of the mouth
is open and free, without any appulse of an Organ of Speech to another: But in
all Consonants, there is an Appulse of the Organs, sometimes (if you abstract
the Consonants from the Vowels) wholly precluding all sound; and in all of
them, more or less, checking and abating it.

Now from hence arises the facility of joining a Consonant to a Vowel, because
from an Appulse to no Appulse (or an Apperture) is easier, (because the Motion
is not half so much,) than from one Appulse to another. And we find in the
Motions from one Appulse to another, in joining of Consonants, some (according
to their easier aptness of Notion, or nearness of Nature or situation) to be
readyer and easier joined in one syllable, than others: Which made that
observation of the Grammarians, of the easy pronunciation of a Mute before a
Liquid, which do not therefore necessarily make the Preceding Vowel, by
position, long in Quantity, as Patrem.

The Distinction of Articulation of Breath and the Articulation of Voice must
be well heeded, because in it consists the only difference of many Letters, as
shall be shown. For it is one thing, to Breath, or give an Impulse to breath
alone; another thing, to vocalize that breath, i. e. in its passage through the
Larynx to give it the sound of Humane Voice. As through a Horn or Cornet, or
Trumpet, you may, if you please, emit only Breath without any other sound than
of wind; or you may with the same Breath, regularly blown, raise the proper
voice or sound of those Instruments. Breath then must be understood distinctly
from Breath vocalized, or Humane voice, and either of them in their distinct
Beings and Sounds may be, and are Articulated by the Motions of the Organs.

Now, though several single Letters nakedly considered, are found to be
Articulations only of Spirit or Breath, and not of Breath vocalized (as
appears if you pronounce S. F. etc. abstracted from all vowels) yet there is
that property in all Letters, of Aptness to be conjoined in Syllables and
Words, through the voluble motions of the Organs from one stop or figure to
another, that they modify and discriminate the Voice without appearing to
discontinue it. And so Letters may well enough be termed Articulations of Voice
in respect of Speech, which yet in their own simple abstracted Nature are but
Articulations of Breath.

To come now nearer to our Inquiry into the Production of Letters, we are first
to investigate the variety of Motions, and Figures, made by the Organs, which
serve for Articulation. And then the Variety of Matter, to which those
Articulations are severally applied. For it will be found, that the same
Articulation makes Impressions of different sounds, or (which is the same)
Letters, according as the subject matter, which is to be Articulated, is
different: as one and the same Seal, imprinted upon several pieces of wax of
different colors, as Yellow, Red, Green, Black, will make so many distinct
signs (if significations be imposed upon them) to the Eye, as there are
different Colors in the Matter, or Wax, which receive the same Impression.
Thus the same Articulation; if of Breath, makes one letter; if of Breath
vocalized, or voice, another; If of voice Nasall (i.e. when the Uvula is
opened, and the voice passes into the Mouth, and is there Articulated, and at
the same time has a free passage through the Nose) then it makes another; and
lastly, if of Breath Nasal, then another. Thus the Matter of Sound, which is to
be discriminated by Articulation, if it be of four kinds, Spirital, Vocal,
Naso-spirital, Naso-vocal, (it is for shortness-sake, that I do not style them
more accurately, viz. Ore-Spirital, Ore-Nasal, Ore-Naso-Spirital,
Ore-Naso-Vocal;) then every Articulation may produce four Letters. But the
design of Speaking, being to Communicate our Thoughts, by ready, easy, and
graceful Pronunci-ation, all kind of Letters have been searched out, that were
serviceable for the purpose, as Commodious Elements of Speech, and such
discriminations as were not so, whereof many may be found, (all Articulations
not suiting with all matter) they were left out and laid aside.

All Articulation is made within the mouth, from the Throat to the Lips
inclusively, and is differenced partly by the Organs and several parts of
Organs (already described) used in it; and partly by the manner and degree of
Articulating: which later is, either by Appulse, i. e. when one of the moveable
Organs touches, and rests upon some of those, that are Immovable; Or else
only by inclination of the moveable Organ to the immovable, without Appulse,
the passage through the mouth remaining free and open. If there be no Appulse
of one Organ to another, the Letters by other several postures and inclinations
of the Organs are vowels. But when there is an Appulse of one Organ to another,
the Letters, which are so framed, are Consonants. Again, the Appulse is either
plenary and occluse, so as wholly to preclude all passage of Breath or Voice
through the mouth; or else partial and pervious, so as to give them some
passage out of the mouth: and this later affects the Sound diverse ways, giving
it a Lisping, or Hissing, or else emitting it smooth, or else jarring.

The nature of Consonants being framed by Appulse, is (as was said before) much
easier to be discerned, than that of the Vowels. I shall therefore endeavor,
first to describe their differences, and how they are framed; taking the number
of Consonants, not from the Grammatical Alphabets of any Language, but from the
diversity of Sounds framed by single Articulations with Appulse, which I find
in any usage; especially in our, and neighboring Nations, such as are most
needful for any among us, that are Deaf and Dumb, to learn. And thus they
ordinarily amount to 19. besides 2 or 3 more (to be spoken of in their place)
which will be found among the Vowels: omitting some other uneasy Letters,
which I shall after describe, and possibly may be in use with some Nations.

If a close Appulse be made by the Lips, viz. by the Under-Lip, to the
Upper-Lip, then is framed P, or B, or M; if it be made by the end of the Tongue
to the Goums, T. or. D. or N. If by the Bosse of the Tongue to the Palate, near
the Throat, then K. or G. or N. so there are 9 Consonants made by close
Appulse, and they evidently answer one another in their Properties; whether you
compare them in respect of the Organs, the 3 Labial B. P. M. are Parallel to
the 3 Gingival T. D. N, and to the 3 Palatick K. G. N; or whether in respect of
Sound; P. T. K. are Articulations of Breath; B. D. G. (if you compare B to P; D
to T; and G to K;) are made with the very same Appulse and Motion of the Organ;
and are differenced only by being Articulations of Voice, or Breath vocalized:
which is easily discerned, if you strive to pronounce P. abstracted without a
Vowel, then it will be wholly Mute, because it is nothing but Breath stopped: but
if you in the same manner go to pronounce B, there will be a murmuring sound of
the Voice, formed in the Larynx, and passing till it be stopped by the Appulse of
the Lips. And so of the rest.

M.is an Articulation of voice, by close Appulse of the Lips; so far perfectly
the same with B: but there is this difference added, that at the same time,
passage is opened for the Voice through the Nose. And the like is N. in the
Goums, and N in the Palate. Thus in respect of Appulse of Organ P. B. M. are the
same; and T. D. N. and K. G. N. In respect of matter of sound P. T. K. do
perfectly agree, and likewise B. D. G. and M. N. Ng'. And in respect of the
manner, viz. Closeness of the Appulse, they all agree. And these 3 properties
sufficiently discover the Nature of these 9 Consonants, and therewithal, how
properly N is ranged amongst Original letters.

See in a Scheme.
Mute Murmurmute Nasovocal. Letters framed by Appulse. Occluse, Labial P B M
Gingival. T D N Pervious. Palatick K G N

The other sort of Appulse is partial and pervious, giving some passage to
Breath and Voice: of which kind, Two are made to the upper Teeth, and cause a
Lisping sound, the Breath being streined through the Teeth. One whereof is of
the under Lip to the upper Teeth, which, if Breath only pass, makes F. but if
the Breath be vocalized, the same Appulse makes V. Another is of the Tongue to
the upper Teeth, and in like manner with the former, makes Th, and Dh. or th.,
which so justly correspond with F. and V. and are made by single proper motions
of the Organ, that they must needs be acknowledged Letters, and not to be
compounded of T and H, or D and H, but require to be described by single proper
Characters, as well as other Letters. I would describe them by th and.

And thus far the nature of these 13 Consonants lies fair to be perceived,
because the Appulse is so manifest, being either close, as in the former 9; or
Bold and forward to the Teeth, as the other 4.

Next, there is a Partial Pervious Appulse of the End of the Tongue to the
Goums, giving the Breath a straight pasiage there, by which a hissing sound is
made; the sides of the Tongue at the same time resting firmly on the
side-Teeth. And by this, if Breath alone pass, is made the Letter S; but if
Breath vocalized, then the posture and motion makes Z. Again, the end of the
Tongue born more downwards, and the middle of it born up nearer the Palate, the
sides resting on the Teeth, makes, if the Breath pass, Sh, or, if Breath
vocalized, Zh. which is properly that, which is designed by J consonant, as
Forreiners pronounce it. The Figures in the mouth of Zh. and the vowel I, are
much alike, which might give occasion of supplying Zh. by the character of J
Consonant: And the vowel I, partaking also of the nature of a Consonant, added
to Z, comes very near to the sound of Zh, as Zya; but this has something more
of Gingival Figure in it.

Thus we have 17 Consonants, which bear a certain Analogy; out of which, if
you take M. N. Ng, there remain seven pairs, of which each Letter has the very
same motion and Appulse of the Organs, with his compeer, and differ only in
relation to sound, one being an Articulation of Breath, the other of Voice, and
they stand thus And these p t k f th s sh b d g v dh z zh in Whispering, cannot
be distinguished, except by prejudice of Fancy; but every pair will be the same
without any difference, and consequently but one Letter. So that the Language
of Whispering is performed with 7 Consonants fewer, than the Language of
Speaking. And I might digress to tell, how some of the Ancients may be thought
sometime to have used a less number of Letters in their Languages; as may be
proved by the celebration of those, who added to their Alphabet, by inventing
or bringing other Letters, than they used.

And for the other 3 Letters M. N. Ng. though they make not such pairs as the
other 14, yet they are within the observation of not differing by Motion or
Posture from the other close Letters of the same Organs, but only by Sound;
the Voice passing through the Nose, as has been said. And it were easy to add
a Nasal Letter to each of the other pair of Lisping and Sibilant Letters, but
they are found not to be so gracefully pronounced, nor sufficiently
discriminated in Pervious Appulses, where the Breath has passage through the
Mouth and Nose both at once; but only in the Appulses, which are Occluse;
where the voice is stopped, and only murmures within the Mouth, and passes
freely by the Nose. And this is the reason, there are but 3 Nasal Letters
commonly in use, because there are but 3 occluse Appulses. And here it is
remarkable, that in the framing of these 17 Consonants, there are but 7
different Motions or Postures of the Organs; and consequently but 7
Discriminations arising from thence, which are between the 7 pairs before
spoken of, each pair from the other, in such order as they are there set down.

I shall add one Remark more concerning these Consonants, That, whereas I have
sometimes in discourse, put many several persons to consider what the
difference might be in any Pair of them, as between P, and B; T, and D, etc.
And upon trial they have been ready to fancy, (and I have met with it in the
Writings of some) that the difference lies in the manner of Appulse, one being
made by a Fuller or Ranker Appulse than the other, or, some such thing, which
they thought they perceived, but could not well express. The Truth is, There
may be some such little difference, but from another cause consequential to
that which is already assigned, which is this: All Tuneable Sounds, whereof
Humane voice is one, are made by a regular vibration of the sonorous body, and
Undulation of the Air, proportionable to the Acuteness or Gravity of the Tone.
Now Breath flowing in a smooth stream from the Lungs through the Mouth; and
Voice from the Larynx in a curled vibrated Figure, it may very well be, that
Breath vocalized, i. e. vibrated or undulated, may in a different manner affect
the Lips, or Tongue, or Palate (while they stop or check it) and impress a
swift tremulous motion, which Breath alone passing smooth, does not. And so we
may feel within our Mouth, some difference between P and B. which yet is not
sufficient to distinguish them to the Ear of another person; nor of it self to
constitute them distinct Letters of the Alphabet; but they are distinguished by
the Sound made by that Vibration.

There remain two odd Consonants, which have no fellows, nor stand in pairs,
and those are L and R; both of them Gingival in respect of the Appulse of the
Organs. L is made by the same Appulse of the end of the Tongue to the Goums, as
are T and D; but then the Sides or edges of the Tongue are drawn in, and leave
smooth and free lateral passage for the voice, i. e. by the sides of the mouth,
or one of them at least. You may easily perceive it, if you pronounce L. after,
or before T. Lt. Tl. where you keep the end of the Tongue still in the very
same posture in both Letters, and only move the sides of it.

R is made by a Pervious Appulse of the end of the Tongue, with its edge to the
Goums, the Tongue being held in that posture, only by the force of the
Geneoglosse, or Myleoglosse Muscles, and not resting any where upon the Teeth;
except only touching them loosely, so as to close the passage of Breath every
where by the sides, and conduct it to the end of the Tongue, And this with a
strong Impulse of Breath vocalized, so as to cause a trembling and vibration of
the whole Tongue; which vibration being slow, does not tune the voice, but make
it jarre; the Tongue not resting, but making a light Appulse in parts of the
end of it, and being born stiffely, as with a Spring, by the Muscles,
(especially by the Geneoglosse) and agitated by strong impulse of Breath. And
it is observable, that in all the other Consonants, the Moveable Organ rests
and bears somewhat strongly upon the Immovable; as is evident in all the 9
Letters made by close Appulse, and in the Four Dental Letters, and in L, and
lastly in the Four Sibilants; some of which last being of nearest Appulse to R,
will show this better by being compared together; e. g. Z. and R. In Z. the
Tongue bears firm upon the upper side-Teeth, and so the end of it being a
little flatted, is born steadily near the Goums, making a Rimula, by which the
hissing sound is produced, the steadiness of the posture of the Tongue
resisting that tremulous vibration, which it suffers in pronouncing R. But in
R. the Tongue does not rest or bear as aforesaid, but is held stiffly in its
whole length by the force of the Muscles, so as when the impulse of Breath
strikes upon the end of the Tongue, where it finds passage, it shakes and
agitates the whole Tongue, whereby the sound is affected with a trembling
jarre. And this is the cause, why they, whose Muscles are weak or flaccid, are
unapt to pronounce this Letter R.

Now, as before I gave a Scheme of the Occluse Consonants with their
differences, so I shall here add one of those, which are Pervious, and then all
together.

Blaese. Murmr Blaese Sibilant Murmr Semi-vocal Semi-vocal Letters framed
by Appulse Pervious. Labiodental F. V. Sibi Smcoth jart Letters framed by
Appulse Pervious. Lingua-dental Th Dh lant Or free ing Letters framed by
Appulse Pervious. Gingival S Z L R Letters framed by Appulse Pervious. Palatic.
Sh Zh APPULSE
SOUND ORGAN Or thus more properly by Sound or MATTER. Close P. Mute Labial p.
Spirital. Close B. Murmure-mute Labial b. Vocator Murmurant Close M. Naso-vocal
Labial m. Naso-vocal. Close T. Mute Gingival t. Spirital. Close D. Murm-mute
Gingival d. Vocal. Close N. Naso-vocal Gingival n. Naso-vocal. Close K. Mute
Palatic k. Spirital. Close G. Murm-mute Palatic g. Vocal. Close N. Naso-vocal
Palatic y. Naso-vocal. Pervious F. Blaese Labiodental f. Spirital. Pervious V.
Murm-Blaese. Labiodental v. Vocal. Pervious Th. Blaese Lingua-dental th.
Spirital. Pervious Dh. Murmut-Blaese Lingua-dental. Vocal. Pervious S. Sibilant
Gingival s. Spirital. Pervious Z. Murm-Sibilant Gingival z. Vocal. Pervious Sh.
Sibilant. Palatic sh. Spirital. Pervious Sh. Murm-Sibilant Palatic j. zh.
Vocal. Pervious L. Semi-voc. smooth Gingival l. Vocal-lateral. Pervious R
Semi-voc. jarring. Gingival r. Vocal-jarring.

Thus every of these Consonants may be differenced and defined by these three
respects, 1. Sound or Matter. 2. Appulse of Organ. 3. Manner of Appulse. e. g.
B. is Vocal, Labial, Occluse; T. is Spirital, Gingival, Occluse; F. is
Spirital, Labiodental, Pervious; ous; and the rest in like manner.

It will give much light to what has hitherto been spoken concerning
Consonants, to take a better view of what has been already hinted, and to lay
this Hypothesis; viz. That the number of Letters in Nature, is equal to the
number of Articulations, severally applied to every distinct matter of Sound.
The Articulations of Consonants, i. e. the different motions and postures of
the Organs of Speech, by which they are formed (though possibly more may be
found) I suppose to be 9, whereof I have described 7 in 17 Consonants, and
added those of L and R. Now let Breath alone, in the Mouth, be first
Articulated by these, there will be 9 Consonants, P. T. K. F. Th. S. Sh. L'.
R'. Secondly, vocalize the Breath, and make the same Articulations, there will
again be 9 more differences of sound, and will make the Consonants
B.D.G.V.Dh.Z.Zh.L.R. Thirdly, make the same Articulations again, and let the
voice pass through the Nose, and there will be 9 differences more, which will
make M. N. Ng. V. Dh. Z. Zh. L. R, if the last six be spoken through the Nose,
in such manner as we hear it done by those, who (through an ill habit, or by an
ill constitution or corrosion of the Uvula or Valve, which opens and shuts the
passage of Breath to the Nose) are said to speak in the Head, or Snoch. Lastly
let Breath only in like manner pass through the Nose, and have the same
Articulations, and there will be nine more different sounded Letters, which I
cannot discribe, but with Characters before used, viz. M'. N'. Ng'. F'. The.
S'. Sh'. L'. R'. Thus there will be by one Primary, joined severally with Four
Secondary differences, four times Nine Consonants, viz. 9. Spirital, 9. Vocal,
9 Naso-Spirital, and 9. Naso-Vocal; in all, 36.

But finding no necessity of so many, (since Languages are various enough, and
copious with those in use;) and withal, that the 6 Naso-Vocal Letters, which
are made by pervious Appulse, are not easy nor graceful to pronounce, we
reject them, and retein only the Use of the other 3. which are by close
Appulse, and are facile and graceful, viz. M. N. N. And for the same reason we
much more exclude 6 of the Naso-Spiritals, viz. those made by pervious Appulse.
And for the other 3. though some Nations possibly may take the pains to
pronounce them, (especially the last of them, formed in the Palate, N. which
perhaps may be the Genuin sound of the Hebrew) yet being found harsh and
troublesome, they are more generally disused, whilst most Nations rather study
to sweeten and soften their Pronunciation, and to that end are more ready to
change or leave out in their Compositions of words, and Conjugations, and
words, borrowed from other Languages, such Letters, as less suit with easy
Pronunciation.

Again, it falls out, that L. and R. being in extremes, one of Roughtness, the
other of Smoothness and freeness of Vocality, are not easy, in tract of Vocal
speech, to be pronounced spiritally, as are P. T. F. S. etc. but are apt to get
a tincture of Vocal sound, (which you will perceive, if you try to pronounce
L'a, or R'a, with L and R spirital;) or else with striving to avoid it to
become too Guttural; and therefore obtain not a distinct Character, and place
in the Alphabet, as Articulations of Breath: Though we meet possibly with
something of this nature in the Welsh pronunciation of L, and the Greek of R.
And when amongst them we find LL as in LLoyd, etc. or r renon we may conceive
one of each pronounced Spiritally, the other Vocally. But in attempting to
pronounce these two Consonants, as likewise the Nasals, and some of the vowels
Spiritally, the Throat is brought to labor, and it makes that which we call a
Guttural pronunciation.

Thus out of 4 times 9. i. e. 36. casting out as useless (or at best,
inconvenient and needless) 9 Naso-Spiritals, 6 Naso-Vocals, and 2 Spiritals,
there remain, as proper Elements of Language, 19 Consonants such as are before
described. And if they do not all go in equal and parallel Combinations, you
see the reason of it. And where some Nations may be found to have a peculiar
Guttural or Nasal smatch in their Language, it will be found also, that they
labor to retain in their pronunciation (though perhaps not expressed in their
Alphabets) some of those Letters, whose use is more generally rejected. And I,
not being able to know the distinct usages in all Languages, do not hold my
self obliged by the design of this Essay, to accomodate an Alphabet to them
all, but think it sufficient in this following Scheme, to lay down all possible
Consonants, that we know of in nature; (not to speak now of one stop, whichmay
be made in the Larynx, of Breath, before it comes to the Tongue and Palate;)
leaving it to every ones pleasure, upon their experience of foreign usages, to
select out of this common stock more Letters than I do, and remove the
Obelisks, which are intended for marks of rejection of those Letters, to which
they are prefixed. I have not in this Scheme of these 9 Quaternions of
Consonants, Distinct known Characters, whereby to express them, but must repeat
the same, presupposing those differences of Pronunciation already described.

Articulations Spirital Vocal NasoSpirital Nasovocal Appulse Close. Labial P B
+-M' M 3 Appulse Close. Gingival T D +-N N 3 Appulse Close. Palatick K G +-Ng'
Ng 3 Appulse Appulse Pervious. Labiadental F V +-F +-V 2 Appulse Pervious.
Linguadental Th Dh +-Th +-Dh 2 Appulse Pervious. Gingival-Sibilant S Z +-S +-Z
2 Appulse Pervious. Palatick-Sibilant Sh Zh +-Sh' +-Zh 2 Appulse Pervious.
Gingival-Free +-L' L +-L' L 1 Appulse Pervious. Gingivaljarring +-R' R +-R'
+-R' 1 Appulse Pervious. 7 9 0 3 19

In this minute devious subject, I have been necessitated to explain my self in
more words, than to some Few may seem needful: For their sakes therefore, I
will in a short review, sum up what has hitherto been said.

Language is a Connection of Audible signs, the most apt and excellent in whole
nature for Communication of our Thoughts and Notions by Speaking. Written
Language is a description of the said Audible Signs, by Signs Visible. The
Elements of Language are Letters, viz. Simple discriminations of Breath or
Voice, Articulated by the Organs of Speech.

The Alphabet consists of so many Letters, as there are to be found such simple
Discriminations. And the written Alphabet ought to be just so many single
proper Charactes, designed to signify the Sound or Power of each Letter. And
these are the storehouse of nature; the Elements, and Materials, out of which
all Languages are made. These Letters have their Material and their Formal
causes, and Organs proper to each. Their Matter is various; viz. Breath, or
voice, i. e. Breath vocalized by the operation of the Larynx. Their Form is
constituted by the Motions and Figures of the Organs of speech, affecting the
Breath or Voice with a peculiar sound, by which each Letter is discriminated.

Now to find out their just number, first find out the different kinds of
Matter, of which Letters are made; and these are in general, Breath when only
Spirit or Breath is Articulated; and Voice, when Articulation is of Breath
vocalized. And these again more particularly, are either (after they have
passed the Larynx) only in the Mouth, or else have passage at the same time
through the Nose. So there are 4 kinds of matter: Breath-Oral; Voice-Oral;
Breath Ore-nasal, and Voice Ore-nasal.

Next, examine how many different Articulations can be made by several Motions
and Postures of the Organs in the parts of the Mouth, which applied severally
to the kinds of Matter, may make several Discriminations of sound to the Ear,
i. e. several Letters. And of these (as to Consonants, viz. Letters made by
Appulse) I find and have described 9. And if possibly any more may be found
out, it is most likely, they will not recompense the Discoverers pains, by
being of ready and graceful use, but will be sitter to be cast out amongst
those, to which in the preceding Scheme, an obelisk is prefixed. Now by these 9
Articulations with Appulse, there will be framed, Consonants Spirital 9; Vocal
9; Naso-Spirital 9; Naso-Vocal 9; in all 36. Then rejecting those that prove
not graceful, nor easy to be pronounced, viz. 2 Spiritals, 9 Naso-Spiritals,
and 6 Naso-Vocals, in all 17; there will remain 19 Consonants, proper for use
according to the design of Letters. And if those, to whom only these 19
Consonants, (or about that number) appeared, and stood in such confused order,
some in Ternary's, some in Pairs, and some single, were themselves put into so
much confusion, and so puzzled to give a methodical and natural account of them,
it is no matter of wonder. But now looking upon them, as they lie in their
original Differences and Combinations, and as they are selected out of a
Natural stock of 9 Quaternions, or 4 Novenaries: I think (if I flatter not my
self) their Nature and Differences lie most plain and obvious to be understood.

In describing Letters framed by Articulation, and more particularly, by
Appulse, I have hitherto had no occasion to speak of H, since that H is only a
Guttural Aspiration, i. e. a more forcible impulse of Breath from the Lungs,
applied when we please, before or after other Letters. And if we will ascribe
any Articulation by Motion or Figure to it, it is only a more sudden and
forcible contraction of the Lungs, and collecting the Breath in the Pipe of the
Aspera Arteria, and possibly somewhat streitning it in the mouth of it, which
is the Larynx; and all the formation of it ends there: and thus applied to a
Vowel, or to some of the Consonants, it does indeed affect them with a
different sound, and therefore deserves to be considered in this place; though
not as a Consonant, having no Appulse; nor as a Vowel, being never Vocal, but
affecting only the Breath, and that by an addition only of force, but not by
any new Figure in the Mouth; and so cannot properly be called a Letter,
according to that description we have made of Letters; yet in that it causes a
sensible, and not incommodious Discrimination of Sound, it ought to be annexed
to the Alphabet, and to be expressed in the written Alphabet, by some
appropriate Character, or else (as in the Greek) mark of Aspiration.

The Use of it before and after Vowels, is familiarly known; but applied to
Consonants it needs to be more diligently considered, because to some of them
we find it very unfitly joined in our Alphabets and Writing; as when we express
the powers of F. V. th.. etc. by Ph, Bh, Th, Dh, in which Letters there is not
any such Guttural Aspiration as H, nor any proper sound of it, neither any
mixture of the Natural sounds of P. B. T. or D. But the other are Genuine
simple Letters formed, by different Figures of the Organs, from those of these
last, and ought to be altogether expressed by single proper Characters. The
mistake, I guess, lies in this, that Ph and those other, being made by Pervious
Appulse, there is some passage of Breath through the Mouth, which by addition
of H, (through prejudice taken in with our first A B C,) is thought to
difference them from P, and those other Close Letters of near resemblance. But
if better examined, there will be found another difference besides that of
Perviousness of Appulse, or passage of Breath; and that consists in the Figure
of their Articulation; P. and B. are Labial: Ph and Bh, (or F and V) are
Labio-dental; T. and D. are Gingival; Th. and Dh. are Lingua-dental. And for
their being Pervious, you may call them (if you please,) Perspirate; but yet
they are not Aspirate. i. e. with such an Aspiration as H. Nor can you well
join H. either before or after any of the 6 Oral Occluse Consonants, without an
Hiatus, if you retein the true figure of those Letters. As for Sh, which also
is an Original simple Letter, because our Alphabet wanted a more proper
character for it, and the figure of it gives a rounder passage of Breath than
S, ( this hissing in the Goums; that, in a larger space, in the Palate,) it was
unaptly supplied by adding H; and the same is Zh to Z: Gh. (as in Through) is
only an Aspirate, and G. ought to be left out. And Ch (as we pronounce it) is
a compound of T. and Sh. or at least T. and Y. As also J Consonant with us, or
G semblably pronounced, is compounded of D and Zh, or D and Y. In WHAT, WHICH,
and the like, H is pronounced before W. and so of right ought to be written.

Besides the 9 several Articulations by Appulse before described, I hinted and
passed by one, of which yet something may be said, viz. the Stop made by
closing the Larynx; though I thought it not worthy to be inserted amongst the
Letters, in that it is applied to Breath immediately as it passes through the
Aspera Arteria, and not to Breath or Voice Oral or Nasal, being stopped before it
arrives there, or at the Tongue; and, being a stop of that Instrument of Vocal
Sound, the Larynx cannot be vocalized: so that, if it should pass for an
Articulation, it could frame but one Letter, and that uneasy and unready to be
joined with the motions of other Letters in Speech. It is of some Affinity to
K, of a middle nature between K. and H. And this being relaxed may make by a
Pervions Appulse there, a shaking of the Larynx, as when we Gargarize: like as
snorting inwards does by shaking the Uvula, and as may be done with the Lips.
And this coming still nearer to an Aspiration, a Touch of it may perhaps be an
Ingredient in the rough Guttural pronunciation of the Welsh and Irish: And I
have heard some Critics pronounce the Greek x after that manner, but somewhat
softer, and our gh (as in Through) has something of it, being more than a bare
Aspiration, if strongly pronounced; and the describing it by a Composition of g
and h shows, that our Ancestors had that Notion of it, as a middle sound
between G and H, though G was properly put instead of K; for it can have
nothing of Vocal sound; Voice being raised by stiff tension of the Larynx, and
on the contrary this sound by a relaxed posture of the Muscles thereof.

There are other differences of Sound in Speaking, by which the Tone of several
Nations, and often of several persons in the same Nation, is rendered distinct,
which are partly to be referred to their Alphabets, and partly to their Words
and manner of Pronunciation, and Accent. As to their Alphabets, some may be
found to take in some Letters, as the Ore spirital L' R' and Naso-spirital M'
N' Ng'; which others use not, and which (as has been observed) give a Guttural
and Nasal smatch to their speaking. And in several Languages, sundry of the
more graceful Letters in the natural Alphabet, are wholly omitted and difused.
Again some being unapt to pronounce some Letters even in their own Language,
get a different Tone in speaking. They who have great and long Tongs, cannot so
well make that Pervious Appulse of the Tongue to the Goums, which S. requires;
but are apt to touch their Teeth, and pronounce Th instead of S, which is
called Lisping. On the contrary they, who have short Tongs, or are Tongue-tyed,
are apt to fall short of the Appulse of the Tongue to the Teeth, and oftener
place it on the Goums, and say T. and D. instead of Th and Dh, as Mother for
Mother.

They whose Palate is ill formed, (such as are said to want the Roof or Palate of
the Mouth) or the Muscles of their Tongue are weak and Flaccid, cannot
pronounce R. The former for want of sit surface of the Palate to conduct the
Breath even and strong to the Goums; the later, for want of strength of the
Tongue to sustain the jarre.

As to their Words, a great difference in the Sound of several Languages
arises from the sorting of Letters, whereof the Words are framed: some
affecting one sort of Letters, some another, to be the most frequent
Ingredients in their Words. Some Languages are sull of Consonants, as the
Polasque: some, as the Italian and French, avoid them: though the French write
some Consonants, which they do not pronounce, to be Indices of the Derivations
of their words: and generally more Emphasis and Accent is given to the vowels
by our neighboring Nations, than by us English.

I have observed a pretty affectaation in the Alleman and some others, which
gives their Speech a different Tang from ours: to soften the Occluse Gingival
Consonants, by a kind of Mixture or soft addition of a Spirital in the same
Articulation, to a Vocal producing the Vowel, and making the Consonant end
Spirital, which began Vocal, as D T. N N'. Stadt', Badt, Mann', etc. And whilst
the Italians strive, as it were, to cut a thread in their Pronunciation between
D and T, so to sweeten it; the Florentine comes nearer to T, the Venetian to D.
And generally, they make the Occluse Appulse, especially the Gingival, softer
than we do, giving a little of perviousness.

Many more Observations of these kinds might easily be made, and are to be
found in different Languages, all over the habitable world. And in general, the
Freedom or Apertness and vigor of pronuncing (as is particularly observed in
the Bocca Romana) and giving somewhat more of Aspiration; And on the other
side, the closeness and Mufling, and (as I may say) Laziness of speaking (which
varieties are found in several Nations comparatively, and by the different
natural shapes of the Mouth, and several conformations of the Organs of speech
in those of the same Language) render the sound of their Speech considerably
different, though they all should use the same Alphabet.

I come now to consider Letters made without Appulse, i. e. Vowels, among which
will be found two or three more to be added to the before described number of
Consonants.

The Vewels are made by a free passage of Breath Vocalized through the cavity
of the Mouth, without any appulse of the Organs; the said cavity's being
differently shaped by the postures of the Throat, Tongue and Lips, some or more
of them, but chiefly of the Tongue.

As to the Number of Vowels, they, being differenced by the shape of the cavity
of the mouth, may be reckoned very many, if small differences be allowed. But
those which are remarkably distinguished, and reasonably suffice to express the
pronunciations in use, that we know of, may be reduced to these Eight; a. a. e.
i. o. oo. u. ou; the sounds whereof, according to the vulgar pronunciation, are
thus.

Long, or accented in the Vowel. a a e i o oo u ou Fall. Fate. Seal. Eel. Cole.
Fool. Rule. Two. Short, or accented in the Consonant. Folly. Fat. Sell. Ill.
Full.

There is so much space between a and e, that there may be a vowel inserted
between them, and a fit character for it may be ae, and perhaps some Languages
may have a distinct use of such a vowel.

Whereas I make the Material part of Vowels in their Definition to be Breath
vocalized, or voice Oral, I am to be understood, as I treat of Vocal Speech;
otherwise the same Vowels may be whispered that is, in use of whispering by
Articulations of Breath; and, if there were any use of it, they may be
pronounced Nasal, both Spirital and Vocal; but in Vocal Speech they are all
Ore-vocals, as to common and ready use, and are to be accounted just so many,
as there are several Articulations, by which they are made.

The Articulations, that is, the Motions and Postures of the Organs in framing
the Vowels, are more difficultly discerned, than those of the Consonants;
because in the Consonants, the Appulse is more manifest to the sense of
Touching, but in the Vowels it is so hard to discern the Figures made by the
Motions of the Tongue, (inclining only toward the Palate, and not touching it)
especially about the more inward Bosse or unequal of it, that it is rendered no
less difficult to define the Articulations of the Vowels; and he that can
describe them accurately, erit mihi magnus Apollo.

Only he who shall adventure, has this advantage, that it is easier to affirm,
than to disprove. Neither are we obliged to seek, nor can expect to find any
exact method of nature in the Articulations of Vowels, (as e. g. to find them
equally sorted into Gutturals, Palatick, or Gingivals, and Labials) no more
than were found in those of the Consonants; where, of 9 Articulations, there
are Labial 1; Labiodental 1; Linguadental 1; Gingival 4; Palatic 2; and some of
these irregularly differing from the rest. I shall therefore take upon me no
more, than to set down, what I think may be perceived in examining those
Articulations.

But first, to discover how much the middle and inward Bosse of the upper
surface of the Tongue is used here, and how little the end of it (except only
to conduct and give way,) you will upon trial find your self able to pronounce
all the Vowels, holding the end of your Tongue, all the while steady against your
Teeth. And you may come very near, doing the same without altering the posture
of your Lips: which evinceth, that all vowels are formed by the Tongue, though in
some the Lips concur, and in some, the Throat. And whilst you make this
trial, the Motions of the Tongue by Contraction, Dilatation, etc. are so easy
and so subtle, that you can hardly conceive or distinguish them aright.

But we may imagine the Vowel (a) to be made by the freest and openest passage
of the Throat through the Mouth, and so to have a kind of natural Articulation
without Art, only by opening the Mouth: (a) to be a little streitned by the
Bosse of the Tongue near the Throat; and therefore if you try to pass from (a)
to (a) you will find that you thrust the end of your Tongue something forward to
raise the Boss of the Tongue toward the Palate to streiten the passage.

In (e) the middle of the Palate is streitned, by the breadth of the Tongue, and
therefore the end of the Tongue carried yet forwarder.

And in (i) still more after the same manner, but with a stronger and firmer
Tension of the Muscles of the Tongue bearing it stisly very near the Palate, and
resting the sides of the Tongue against the side-Teeth.

In (o) the Larynx is depressed, or rather drawn back by contraction of the
Aspera Arteria. And the Tongue likewise is drawn back and Curved; and the Throat
more open to make a round passage: and though the Lips be not of necessity, yet
the drawing them a little rounder, helps to accomplish the pronunciation of it,
which is not enough to denominate it a Labial Vowel, because it receives not
its Articulation from the Lips. (oo) seems to be made by a like posture of the
Tongue and Throat with (o) but the Larynx somewhat more depressed. And if the
Lips at the same time be contracted, and born stiffly near together, then is
made ou. (u) with the Tongue in the posture of (i) but not so stiff, and the Lip
born near the upper Lip by a strong Tension of the Muscles, and bearing upon it
at either corner of the mouth.

Thus, it seems, in oo and (o) the Throat; in (a) the Mouth is more opened: in
a. e. i. the streitnings of the cavity of the mouth between the Tongue and Palate,
are gradually both forwarder and nearer the Roof.

(ou) is made by the Throat, and Tongue, and Lip. (u) by the Tongue and Lip; in ou
the Tongue being in the posture, which makes (oo;) and in (u) in the same
posture, which makes (i.) And in this, ou and u are peculiar, that they are
framed by a double motion of Organs, that of the Lip, added to that of the
Tongue; and yet either of them is a single Letter, and not two, because the
motions are at the same time, and not successive, as are eu. pla. etc. Yet for
this reason they seem not to be absolutely so simple Vowels as the rest,
because the voice passes successively from the Throat to the Lips in ou, and
from the Palate to the Lips in u, being there first molded into the sigures of
oo and i, before it be fully Articulated by the Lips. And yet, ei there these
two, ou and u, are to be admitted for single Vowels, or else we must exclude
the Lips from being the Organs of any single Vowel since that the Mouth being
necessary to conduct the Voice to the Lips, will, according to the shape of its
cavity, necessarily give the Voice some particular affection of sound in its
passage, before it come to the Lips; which will seem to make some such
composition in any Vowel which is Labial. I have been inclined to think, there
is no Labial Vowel, but that the same affection from the Lips may, somewhat in
the nature of a Consonant, be added to every of the Vowels, but most subtely,
and aptly to two of them, whose Figures are in the extremes in respect of
Aperture and Situation, one being the closest and forwardest, which is i, and
the other being most open and backward; there being reason to allow a Vowel of
like sound in the Throat with ou, but distinct from it as not being Labial;
which will be more familiar to our Eye if it be written oo; as in Cut, Coot,
Full, Fool, Tut, Toot, in which the Lip does not concur; and this is that
other. Thus u will be only i Labial, and ou will be oo Labial, that is, by
adding that motion of the under-Lip, i will become u, and oo will become ou;
and then the Series of the Vowels according to their degrees of aperture, and
recess toward the Larynx, will be thus, i, e, ae, a, a, o, oo; to which may be
added u and ou, because of their general use, as being Labially affected more
subtlely than the rest.

Taking these then for Vowels, it is next observable, that i. u. ou. have
another peculiar property above the other Vowels, being made by a strong
Tension and firm posture of the Organ; the first, of the Tongue, the two
later, of the Lip, making almost an Appulse, that by reason thereof they serve
indifferently for Vowels in respect of the Aperture, and for Consonants in
respect of the pene-appulse, and so much the more verging either way, by the
liberty of managing the Organs, according to the respective Occasions.

And it is here observable, how excellently Nature has provided for the
Readiness and Easiness of Speech. For if Speech were to be made only by
Vowels, there would be an hiatus; we could not speak distinct enough, and the
Breath would spend too fast; therefore it is checked by the Appulses made in
Consonants; and if it should be all Consonants, the Voice would be too much
abated, and the passage would not be easy from one Syllable or collection of
Letters to another; but being both mixed together, one Vowel in every Syllable,
for varieties sake, sometimes preceding, sometimes following, and sometimes
interposed between the Consonants (by checking and reserving the Breath, and
letting it pass with a quick impulse at the Aperture of the Organs for the
Vowel) give a vigor and emphasis to the Sound: And the motions of the Organs
become more facile and ready by the mixture of Apertures with Appulses.

But in these three Vowels, of which I am now treating, there seems to be a
kind of Lusus Naturae; these are of a middle constitution between Vowels and
Consonants, partaking of both: and we see, how many disputes, their simple and
ambiguous nature has created among the Grammarians, and how it has begot the
mistake concerning Diphthongs; they being all, that are accounted properly
such, compounded either with i. u. or ou, and are, as I conceive, Syllables and
not Diphthongs (as it is intended to be signified by that word:) i. ou. and u.
then supplying the place and nature of Consonants by streitning the passage of
Breath, so as to check it not much less, than is done by some of the Pervious
Consonants, and by making a smart stroke at the Aperture in passage to another
Vowel, Vid. Append.
answerable to the Collision, or rather Divulsion of the Organs made by other
Consonants, as is evident in pronouncing ia, oua. id est ya. wa. For the same
reason, of the improper Diphthongs the most passable are those compounded with
e or o, as ea, oa, because of the nearness, that o has to ou, and e to i, and
having either of them a little of that Spring in the Muscles, which I have last
described.

Concerning ou and u, this may be observed, that in subjoyning them to another
vowel, ou is apter to follow a and o, because of their resemblance in the
posture of the Tongue, as has been said; and for the like reason u is apter to
follow a and e, as ouaoul, wawl. euge, etc. But generally if the Vowels follow,
then it is ou precedes, and not u.

Our vulgar (i.) as in (style) seems to be such a Dipthong (or rather syllable
or part of a syllable) composed of a. i. or e. i. and not a simple Original
Vowel.

I may now give you a Scheme of the whole Alphabet.

Letters, i. e. such simple Discriminations of Sound as may be Elements of
Signs for communication by Speech, are differenced by Matter of Sound,
prepared by the Lungs, Larynx, Mouth, Nose. Breath Oral (and may be styled)
Ore-spirital. Ore-Nasal. (and may be styled) Naso-spirital.

Voice. Oral (and may be styled) Ore-vocal. Ore-Nasal. (and may be styled)
Naso-vocal.


Form, Articulation by Appulse of one Organ to another, Consonants by degree
Plenary Close Lip to Lip. Labial, as B. Tongue to Gums. Gingival, D. Tongue to
Palate, Palatic, G.

Partial Pervious Lip to Teeth. Labiodental V. Tongue to Teeth, Linguadental Dh.
Tongue to Gums, Gingival Sibilant. Z. Jarring. R. Lateral. L.
Tongue to Palate, Palatic, Zh. or J.

Inclination of one Organ to another without Appulse. Vowels -- a. a. ae. e. i.
o. oo. u. ou.



Thus there are 9 Articulations with Appulse, which applied severally to four
sorts of matter, viz. Breath-Oral, Breath Ore-nasal, Voice-Oral,
Voice-Ore-nasal, may make 36 Consonants; whereof I have instanced in one to
each Articulation, having before described other three to each Articulation.
And likewise nine Articulations without Appulse so applied, may make 39 vowels.

Of these some are Commodious Consonants Ore-spirital, 7. p. t. k. f. th. s.
sh. Ore-vocal, 9. b. d. g. v. dh. z. zh. l. r. Naso-vocal, 3. M. N. Ng.
Vowels, Orevocal -- 9. a. a. ae. e. i. o. oo. u. ou.

Uneasy and unpleasant, or not sufficiently distinct. Consonants Ore-spirital
2. L^ Rc Naso-spirital 9. Naso-vocal 6.
Vowels Ore-spirital 9. viz. in vocal speech, (of which I am treating) but in
whispering they are commodious. Naso-spirital 9. viz. in vocal speech, (of
which I am treating) but in whispering they are commodious. Naso-vocal 9. viz.
in vocal speech, (of which I am treating) but in whispering they are
commodious. Of intermediare Figures without determinate number.




The Vowels, in respect of their Articulations, may seem not unfitly to be
sorted into Guttural -- oo. o.a. Palatic -- a. ae. e. i. Labio-Guttural -- ou.
Labio-Palatic -- u.


There are some other Accidents besides those spoken of before, which have an
Influence in varying the Sound of Languages, as Accent and Emphasis; which
though now much confounded, seem to have been formerly more distinguished.
Accent, as in the Greek names and usage, seems to have regarded the Tune of the
voice; the Acute accent raising the Voice in some certain Syllables, to a
higher, i. e. more acute Pitch or Tone, and the Grave depressing it lower, and
both having some Emphasis, i. e. more vigorous pronunciation. The Circumflex
keeps the voice in a middle Tune, and therefore in the Latin is compounded of
both the other, but withal adding an Emphasis and longer stay upon that
Syllable, expressed in Greek by a suitable character [] And therefore the
Syllable, which is circumflexed, is always accounted long. This Tuning of the
Voice by Accent, is of great concern to the gracefulness of pronunciation. And
although our Languages have not such accurate Rules for it as the Greek had,
yet it is much considered, and submitted to the judgment of more Critical
Ears, to direct and determine what is graceful, and what is not; and here
arises a difference in the Sound of Languages, by the different Use of Accent.
For example, the French and Greek run contrary one to the other: Whereas the
Greek in the end of a word changes the Acute accent to a Grave, and most
Languages have somewhat like (which is therefore called Cadence of their
voice;) the French conclude with an acute Accent, raising the Tune of their
Voice in the last Syllable.

Emphasis is of a larger consideration and extent, and not so much regards the
Tune (leaving that to Accent) as a certain Grandeur, whereby some Letter,
Syllable, Word, or Sentence is rendered more remarkable than the rest, by a more
vigorous pronunciation, and a longer stay upon it: As, in a Speech some
Sentences are made more remarkable, in a Sentence some one or two words; in a
Word, some one Syllable; and in a Syllable, some one Letter. And of these Two
last I am chiefly here concerned to take notice.

In a Poly-syllable word, it is first to be considered, to which Syllable the
Emphasis is to be given, and in each Syllable, to which Letter the former of
these is usually confounded with Accent; but in the later lies the greatest
difference of Pronunciation, the Consonants coming in for a share of Emphasis,
and making a Syllable long, where the Vowel is short: E. g. Altera, in respect
of the whole word, the Emphasis and Accent lies in the first Syllable, but then
that Syllable is again capable of a twofold Emphasis, viz. either in the Vowel
or in the Consonant. Most Foreigners pronounce their Vowels soft, as this they
pronounce Aaltera, or Aultera, staying upon the Vowel, and making a soft gentle
Appulse in the Consonant; We are apt to pronounce it Altera, making the Vowel
short and giving the Emphasis to the Consonant. And this kind of Emphasis, viz.
of the Consonant, is apt to gain too much place in our Speech, and I take it to
be a general vicious habit in our pronunciation, as they, who learn to sing,
will find; for their first attempt must be, to unlearn that habit. So also We
say Forma, they, Forma, or (as we would write it, if it were English) Forema.
We say, Mortem; they Moretem or Moortem. We say, Cosonat, they Consonant, or,
Conesonaunt. We say, Catt, they, Caut. Yet something may be said on our behalf,
that giving an Emphatical Sound to the Consonants, makes our Pronunciation more
distinct, and certain to the Ear. And here it may be proper to assert, that
there is no such thing in nature as a double Letter, either Consonant or Vowel,
in one and the same Syllable, and it is incongruous, to write them so. For
whereas every Letter written should have one and but one determinate
signification, to express the power of some one certain Sound made by the
Mouth; with more than Poetical License one sign is set for another, and the
same Letters in the same Alphabet in several words, are made to have several
powers. Thus in our English, ee, and ie, and e, for i, (as Feel, Field,
English:) oo for ou, etc. And frequently the Emphasis is incongruously supplied
by adding quiescent Letters (the Phrase confessing the absurdity) as Bate Batt,
Base Basse, Bare Bar. But I do not intend to pursue the many Pseudography's
in use, which are too numerous; but to show of how great concern the Emphasis
were, if rightly used; and how most of those Anomalies in writing might be
avoided, and better supplied by noting our Words or Syllables, that need it,
with some mark of Emphasis. This will show, when a Vowel is to be pronounced
long or short, and cut off superfluous Quiescent Letters, and double
Consonants: for, when there is a double Consonant written, though sometimes it
changes the Vowel, Ale, All, Cale, Call; yet generally it serves to transfer
the Emphasis from the Vowel to the Consonant.

This kind of Emphasis then, I mean not the Emphasis of a Syllable in reference
to a word, but the Emphasis of a Letter in respect of Syllables, as it is to
belong either to the Vowel, or to the later Consonant (if there be any) in the
same syllable, if it were better heeded, and noted by some mark, would conduce
much to Orthography; as for example, if an Accent were placed over the Vowel,
or else over the Consonant, as the case requires, al, al, or rather, leaving
the Accent to mark out the Syllable in a word, to which Emphasis is due, where
need is; make use of long and short Characters set over the Vowel, and to make
the least work, suppose every Vowel to be long, which is not marked, and mark
only those Vowels, which are to be pronounced short, and the Emphasis
transferred to the following Consonant. Thus instead of Ball Boll, Bale,
Ballad; Beal, Bell; Biele, or Beel, Bil; write Bal, Bal; Bal, Balad; Bell, Bl;
Bil, Bl: I say, if our pronunciation were written in proper Letters, and with
marks of Emphasis, it would restore Orthography, and cut off many superfluous
Letters that are written, not to be pronounced, but only to make an
incongruous supply of Emphasis, or to alter the power of some other Letters in
the same word; whereof in some Languages so many examples are found, that it
would be tedious to recount them. In the mean time we are apt very unjustly to
laugh at the uncouth Spelling in the writings of unlearned persons, who writing
as they please, that is, using such Letters, as justly express the power or
Sound of their Speech; yet, forsooth, we say write not true English, or true
French, etc. Whereas the Grammarians themselves, ought rather to be blamed, and
derided for accommodating Words so ill with Letters, and Letters with so faulty
Alphabets, that it requires almost as much pains to learn how to pronounce what
is written, and to write what is spoken, as would serve to learn the Language
it self, if Characters or Signs written were exactly accommodated to Speech.
But, though it be true, that this so needless and unprofitable encumbrance of
Learning might wholly be removed by rectified Alphabets, and settling a just
correspondence between the Signs Audible, and the Signs Visible, if such
Alphabets and a regular usage of them could take place; yet it is not to be
hoped or imagined, that the incongruous Alphabets, and Abuses of writing can
ever be justled out of their Possession of all Libraries and Books, and
universal habit and practice of Mankind. This were to imply, that all Books in
being should be destroyed and abolished, being first new Printed after such
rectified Alphabets; and that all the Age should be prevailed with, to take new
pains to unlearn those habits, which have cost them so much labor. Neither did
any such Hopes or Ambition set my thoughts on work, but partly the worthiness
and curiosity of this Subject in it self, and chiefly the great use of an
accurate knowledge of the Nature of Letters and Speech, in directing to a
steady and effectual way of Instructing Deaf and Dumb persons, to obtain a
reasonable perfection of utterance of Speech; and to discern (in some measure)
with their Eye, by observing the motions of their Mouth, what others speak. And
to that end I have added to this Essay an Appendix, relating that design; both
which I hope and promise my self, will find a Candid reception from those, who
shall consider these poor and slight Papers, as a work of Charity and
Compassion; and may be acceptable to them, as it is pleasing to my self, to
have studied some relief for the Calamitous and Deplorable Condition of persons
Deaf and Dumb.

APPENDIX Concerning Persons DEAF AND DUMB.
AMongst Dumb Persons, there are very sew, who are such through defect in the
Organs of Speech; but most commonly that Imperfection is the effect, or rather
consequence of want of Hearing, by some disorder or defect in the Organs
appertaining to that Sense. The Organs of Speech are many and large, and
managed by so great a number of Muscles, that Speech is not easily destroyed,
though often somewhat vitiated, as to some particular Letters, and as to ready
pronunciation in general; but they, who have such Imperfections, are not
thereby utterly deprived of the Use of Speech: whereas the Organs of Hearing
are few and small, and a little disorder or defect wholly overthrows the use of
that Sense. There are three very little Bones in the Ear, upon whose right
constitution, depends the due Tension of the Tympanum; and if the action of one
little Muscle, which serves to draw one of these Ossicles, fixed to the
Tympanum, be lost or abated, the tension of that Membrane ceasing, Sound is
hindered from coming into the Ear: And I am of opinion, that the most frequent
cause of Deafness is to be attributed to the Laxness of the Tympanum, when it
has lost its Brace or Tension by some irregularity in the Figure of those
Bones, or defect in that Muscle: Some instance whereof, I have formerly given
in a Paper presented to the Royal Society, See the end of this Discourse.
whereby Sound is, as it were, shut out of doors by the intervention of that
Laxe Membrane, and not suffered to pass into the inward Ear, and arrive at the
Auditory Nerve: Like as the Voice is sometimes intercluded by a hoarsness, or
viscous phlegm, cleaving to the Aspera Arteria, Larynx and Uvula; so that,
allhough there be no fault in the Organs of Articulation, yet there is no voice
to be Articulated.

Now as to the most general case of those who are Deaf and Dumb; I say, they
are Dumb by consequence from their Deasness, only because they are not taught
to speak. The Natural part of Speech, viz. Words made of Letters, by such
exquisite various Articulations, is learnt by much practile and imitation. And
much more the Artificial part, viz. Institution of Significancy of Language,
cannot be acquired without great help of Instruction. And to that end the Tongue
and the Ear, Speaking and Hearing, hold a correspondence, by which we learn to
imitate the Sound of Speech, and understand the meaning of it. But he that
never hears a word spoken, nor can be told what it signifies, it is no wonder
if such an one remain speechless: as out of question any one must do (though of
integral principles) who from an Infant should be bred up amongst Mutes, and
have no teaching. Such then is the case in hand, that they who want that Sense
of Discipline (Hearing) are also by consequence deprived of Speech, not by any
immediate Organical Indisposition, but for want of Discipline.

Finding then a Person in this condition, not capable of Hearing; if we would
endeavor to make use of the Organs of Speech (supposed to be of sufficient
constitution) there is no way, but to have recourse to the other Learned Sense,
which is Seeing; and to find out some means (though farther about and more
laborious) of instructing him by his Eyes, and showing him the visible motions
and figures of the Mouth, by which Speech is Articulated. And to apply the
Doctrine of Letters to this use and purpose, is the Design of this Appendix.
Where our first business had need be, to Animate the Undertaker, and consider,
whether it be possible or no: For it must be confessed, that there lie in the
way great Objections and Difficulties, which seem to discourage, and portend
such a design unfesible. But I doubt not to show you, how to overcome those
seeming demonstrable Impossibilities, and show, how truly it is said, Venit
miseris solertia rebus.

The First difficulty which occurs, is, that it will be painful and irksome to
a deaf Person to exercise his Voice, as even those, who have no defect, are apt
to be tired and spent with much speaking, and find a hoarsness in their Voice,
and weariness in the Lungs and Muscles of the Larynx; and it will be very hard
to prevail with him to submit himself to so troublesome a course of Learning,
being Deaf to all persuasions and arguments, by which we might excite him to
it. I confess, this Objection stands upon the threshold, as a great
discouragement. And except a great regard be had to it, who ever goes about
this design, will attempt it in vain, especially in the first progress in it.
Therefore the Deaf Person must be gently and discreetly treated, and by all
kind of pleasant usage wrought upon, to take some pains at it; watching your
seasons, and taking great care, that he may not hate his task, but do it
cheerfully. He must be allured by much sweetness, and encouraged, as often as you
have the least occasion, by applause and admiration; and must exercise often,
and a little at a time, so as not to vex and weary him; and in some time, habit
and custom, and the pleasure he will take in it, will make it easier to him.

2. Some of the Consonants, and most of the Vowels, being Articulated by so
obscure Motions and Figures, that the most Learned can hardly agree to describe
them, it may well be doubted how they can be described to the Eye of Deaf
Persons. And further, if all the 9 Articulations of the 19 Consonants were
understood and imitated by him; yet how can he discern the Material
Differences, which make up the number of Consonants, and consist only in
Sound, and cannot be represented to the Eye.

The former part of this objected difficulty is casily answered by saying, that
in Ascents, every step gained is a footing and help to the next: and in the
Elements of Geometry, the Definitions, and Axioms, and Postulata, and easier
propositions, serve to elucidate, and demonstrate harder Theorems and Problems.
Thus you will find, that when you have conducted him through the plainer part
of the Alphabet, he will begin so far to understand his task, that more
imperfect descriptions will serve to carry him on to the end of it.

As to the second part of this objection, it must be confessed a thing not
fesible to represent the Material Difference of Consonants to the Eye; Sound
being only the object of Hearing: Yet the Nasal Differences may be pointed at;
but those Seven pairs, before discoursed of, cannot be distinguished by Sight.
And in this case it is chiefly that I said, the design must be compassed by a
way further about; and such a way I shall direct in its proper place, which
shall easily and certainly effect it.

3. Supposing a Deaf person to have gained a perfect pronunciation of all
Letters and Words, and that all the Articulations were to be discerned by his
Eye, in the Mouth of one who speaks to him; yet this, as to Consonants, could
discover but 9 differences, and must leave 10 Letters and indeed all
undistinguished: so that it is impossible to discern certainly what Letter is
pronounced. And then it must likewise seem impossible (what is so frequently
spoken of and attested) for a Deaf Person, by observing the Motions of another
man's Mouth, to know what he says, and to uphold a current communication of
discourse with him.

This objection seems unanswerable, and the difficulty not to be conquered; and
it must be granted, that it is impossible to know infallibly by the Eye, what
another speaks. But yet there is an equity and relief in this Case, as I shall
make appear in cases not much different. As First, Any Equivocal word spoken
alone, cannot be determined to any one certain Sense and Signification by him
that hears it; of which there are numerous examples in every Language: Yet the
same word in Connection of Speech, as part of a sentence, is understood as
easily as any other; ex. gr. But: if I ask you, what I mean by that word, you
will answer, I may mean this or that thing, or something else, you cannot tell
which: you can distinguish, but you must leave me to determine; but if I join
it with other words in Construction and Sense, as ( But I will not. (a But of
Wine.) But and Boundary) the Ram will But) (Shoot at a But); the meaning of
it will be as ready to you, as any other word. In like manner if the Deaf
Person discern with his Eye one single Articulation, suppose by the Appulse of
the Lips, he cannot distinguish whether it be p. b. or m. But this same
Articulation joined with others, in Words and Sense, he having a general
perception of the subject, whereof you discourse, and a greater than ordinary
measure of Sagacity, will not be to seek, which of these three Labial
Consonants you used.

There is a common experiment, which will come still near to the case in hand;
in Whispering, we Articulate only Ore-spirital, and Naso-spirital Sounds, and
yet use words, which consist much of Ore-vocal, and Naso-vocal Consonants, and
have no other difference from other Consonants of the same Articulation, but
that they are Vocal. And these Vocal Letters in Whispering we make Spirital,
and so they come to be the very same, each with his compere, which is
Ore-spirital; of which I have given 7 pairs in the discourse foregoing. Now,
though b and p, t and d, k and g, f and v, th and dh, s and z, sh and zh, are
but in effect 7 Letters, and have no distinction at all, each from his Compere,
in Whispering, neither in respect of Organ, nor Articulation, nor Sound: and
therefore being singly pronounced, cannot be distinguished neither by the Eye
nor Ear; yet we are not at all perplexed with the confusion of these Letters in
whispering, but by our habit and knowledge of Language, can as readily
understand one another, when we whisper, as when we speak aloud: and yet these
Consonants are not much less confused to the Ear in Whispering, than in
Speaking they are to the Eye.

It is observable, that the Histories of those, who could discern Speech by
their Eye, are most of such, as having had knowledge of Language, and a
readiness in Speaking, falling afterward into Deafness, have lost the use of
Speech, but still retein the memory of it. Now if we can by Industry, make our
Deaf and Dumb Persons reasonably perfect in the Language and Pronunciation, he
may be also capable of the same privilege of understanding by the Eye what is
spoken, though the Letters singly pronounced are ambiguous and may deceive him.
In short, though it be impossible for a Deaf Person, by his Eye accurately and
certainly to distinguish Letters singly spoken, (as it is likewise in words
equivocal spoken, and Letters whispered, to those that hear;) Yet in tract of
Speech, as a dubious word is easily known by the Coherence with the rest; and a
dubious Letter by the whole Word; so may a Deaf Person, having attained a
competent knowledge of Language, and assisted by an acute Sagacity, by some
more evident word discerned by his Eye, know the Sense, and by the Sense other
Words, and by the Words the obscurer Letters; and so, notwithstanding this
difficulty objected, make good use of this Institution, not only to speak,
but, in a good measure (so far as to serve for converse) know what others say
to him: And the rather, because having learnt by his Eye, and being inured to
that kind of observation, he is quicker to perceive the Motions of
Articulation, and Conjunctures of Letters in Words, than we can easily imagine.

Having thus surmounted the difficulties, I shall mention some such things as
give encouragement to this enterprise. And First that, which was before hinted,
that in Deaf and Dumb Persons, their Necessity excites a great observation and
sagacity to supply their defects, and to bear up and maintain Converse with
others, who enjoy the benefit of all their Senses. And being denied
Communication by the Ear, their Eyes are the more vigilant, attent and heedful,
which renders them much more capable of being improved by directions and
instructions applied to that Sense, and gives a delight and encouragement to
those, who teach such apprehensive Scholars.

2. The only moveable Organs belonging to the Sense of Hearing, being Two of
those Three little Bones before mentioned, viz. the Incus and Malleus; and so
much depending upon the adequate motion of those Two Ossicles to give due
Tension to the Tympanum, their Motions being small, are easily subverted, and
from thence most frequently comes loss of Hearing. Now that which I would
infer, is, That in those generally the Auditory Nerve, is sound, and by a
branch of the same Nerve, that goes between the Ear and the Palate of the Mouth,
they can make a shift to hear themselves, though their outward Ear be stopped by
the Laxe Membrane to all Sounds, that come that way; and so they have some
little pleasure in speaking, and guide themselves by that little Hearing, to
retein, and improve a habit of Speaking whatsoever they have once been taught.

3. The Figures of some Articulations are most easy to be showed to the Eye,
as the Consonants Labial, Labiodental, Linguadental, and Gingival, and Palatic,
Occluse, and the Gingival-Lateral; so that whosoever makes trial, shall begin
to make some progress with great success and encouragement, and gain ground to
make the remaining part of the Alphabet more casie, by the habit and method of
prevailing so far onwards.

4. Language being defined, a Connection of the best Signs for Communication,
and Written Language, Visible signs of the signs Audible; And the Elements of
each respectively, and the correspondence and mutual assistance of each to
other, being such, as in the foregoing discourse is more fully shown; You have
a great help, by showing Letters and Words written, to conduct a Deaf person
on, in exercising him to express the same by pronunciation; and what soever you
gain upon him this way, will be retained, and made use of in the other. Add to
all this the admirable Curiosity and singular Excellency of this design, the
consideration whereof will sustein the Patience and animate the Industry of him
who shall undertake it.

Having thus considered what ground and encouragement there may be for such an
undertaking; I shall now in the plainest manner I can, lay down such Directions
and Rules, as I my self have made trial of, to instruct a Deaf person to make
use of his Organs of Speech, and cease to be Dumb, enjoying the great felicity
of that most expedite way of Communication: Which may serve, till some more
able Person shall be excited, by Improvements and Additions, to give a greater
Perfection to this design.

First make your own Alphabet according to the Number of Letters and their
Natural order. In respect of easiness, Consonants first (because their Appulses
are manifest) and then Vowels; and in ordering Consonants respect chiefly,
either Their Sound -- p. t. k. f. th. s. sh. b. d. g. v.. z. j. m. n. r. l. r.
Their Organ -- p. b. m. f. v. th.. t. d. n. s. z. l. r. sh. j. k. g. r. Their
Degree of Appulse. -- p. b. t. d. k. g. m. n. n. f. v. th.. s. z. sh. j. l. r.


The last of these I take to be much the best order, in which to teach a Deaf
Person. Then, add the Vowels, a. a. ae e. i. o. oo. u. ou: but so accurate a
distinction will not be necessary. The through-understanding of the nature of
this Alphabet, will direct you, what and how many are the Articulations of
Letters, which may be represented to the Eye; and what are the other
differences of Letters, that you may invent some other Artifices, besides
visible representation, to make a Deaf Person learn and apprehend them. This
Alphabet must be your own Clew to guide you; but the Deaf person is not to be
troubled with it, because he is also to learn to write and read as others do;
and therefore must be taught the common Alphabet of that Language, which he is
to learn, and must use those incongruous compositions, and other Anomalies of
vulgar writing; in which you must understand how to manage him, by Reduction of
them to the true Alphabet of Nature; in which practice, you will (to your cost)
discover the inconvenience of faulty Alphabets and Usages of writing.

Let him first learn to write after a Copy of all the Letters in the vulgar
Alphabet, till his Eye be well acquainted with their Figures, and he be able to
write them pretty well. When you begin to teach him to speak, you may use this
method. p. and b; and make signs to him to endeavor to pronounce, and guide
him by showing him the motion of your own Lips, to offer at one of those
Letters: which being the easiest of all, he will with a little endeavor
stumble upon one of them. Show him upon the Paper the Letter, which he hits
upon, and much applauding and encouraging him, make him repeat it often, till
he be very perfect both in the pronunciation and in the written Character of
that Letter: suppose it was P. p. which will be B, though he understand not,
wherein the difference lies, but finds it out; and being excluded from p, and
laboring to pronounce another Letter with the same Figure of his Lips, make
him perfect in B. And let him diligently practice these two Letters, pointing
sometimes at one, sometimes at the other in the paper, till he be perfect in
both.

T, or else D. Use the same method as before, and which soever he speaks, show
it him written, and having the other also written in the paper, show him that,
after he has con'd the First, and require it of him, still keeping the same
posture of the Mouth: which having obtained of him, make him perfect in them
both, before you carry him further. manner K and G calling them Ka and Ga; but
to show him the posture of these, you had need provide a Palate with the upper
jaw, of Plaster, and the shape of a Tongue of stuffed Leather, which will be
useful to you to describe to him, how the Bosse of the Tongue in these Letters is
born close in the inner part of the Palate near the Throat; and more useful,
when you would describe the Vowels: but yet both may be done without it. If you
find him stick at this Letter, put your finger to the outside of his Throat,
whilst he is offering to pronounce, and check his Breath there, and he will soon
perceive what he is to do, and can scarce choose but speak K. When he has got
one of these Letters perfect, gain the other by the same way of Exclusion, as
before.

Having thus gained of the Occluse Consonants, three Ore-spirital, p. t. k. and
three Ore-vocal, b. d. g; Naso-vocal, m. n. ng. which will be most easily
learnt by the same way of exclusion, requiring him to pronounce a Labial
Letter, that is, neither p. nor b. and pointing to his Nose, to breath that
way, he will soon pronounce m. and in like manner n and ng.

Dental Consonants are very easy, therefore let them be the next, and first
the Labiodentals, f, v, which, as also the Linguadentals, th, dh, he will soon
learn by the method before directed; though dh may be let alone, being never
written so in our Language. But since a Consonant, or at least some of the
Consonants, cannot well be pronounced alone, without a Vowel joined to them, it
may be considered here, whether in naming the Consonants, it is better that the
Vowel go before, or follow it? and what Vowel? In our vulgar Alphabet, it is
observable, that in all occluse Consonants, except the Nasals, the Vowel
follows, as be, ce, de, ge, ka, pe, qu, te; but in the pervious Consonants, and
the Nasals, because they have passage through the Nose, the Vowel precedes; as,
of, el, em, en, er, es: only z. has something peculiar; and in that it is
accounted a double Letter (which it is not in the Natural Alphabet, any more
than S,) we may imagine it to have been anciently pronounced, as it is now by
the Italians, Ds or Ts; and so to be called Zad from the Hebrew Tsadi: but yet
to make out my observation, we, who pronounce it as a single Letter, do as
often call it Yzard.

Now, as to our present purpose, we need not be curious, How, nor which Vowels
we join to the Consonants, since every way they serve to express the power of
the Consonant audibly, which is all that is intended: but only our regard must
be to choose the way, that may seem more easy; to which end, such a
pronunciation, as this that follows, may be suitable: be, ce, de, fa, ga, be,
ja, [zha] ka, la, ma, na, pe, qu, ra, sa, te, va, wa, eks, ya, za. The reason
why I place the Vowels after the Consonants, is, Because the opening of an
Appulse before a Vowel has a smart Spring and force of the Muscle, the motion
being assisted by the Impulse of Breath, and so is more sensible, and
consequently more easy to be observed and learnt, than the shutting of the
Organs to make an Appulse ( i. e. a Consonant) after a Vowel, because in this
the Motion is resisted and hindered by the force of Breath, as much as it was
assisted in the other.

This is eminently seen in the Vowel Consonants, Y, W. For when they precede,
as Ya, Wa, there is none but is easily persuaded, that they are as Consonants,
but when they follow, as Ay, Aw, their force is so abated, that they are
mistaken for mere Vowels. And so, as I conceive (but with submission to better
Judgments) came in the Notion of Diphthongs into the world; in all which, that
are accounted properly such, either Y or W, or (which is the same in effect) i
or u, follow the other Vowel, as ai, ei, oi, au, eu, ou: only the Greek has
ui, which if it is to be pronounced in one Syllable, and that pronunciation be
Genuine; it is no other than our Why, as io, Whios; where i is the Vowel, and u
in the nature of a Consonant.

But to return, we need not be tied to either way of naming the Consonants,
whether with the Vowel before or after; but in practicing to teach, try both
ways, especially in sonorous Consonants, l. m. n. r. s. z. and accept of that,
which is hit on first, with whatsoever Vowel, and whether before or after the
Consonant, because it equally serves our purpose to express the power of the
Consonant. But when you have brought him to pronounce all Syllables forward and
backward; you may then at pleasure bring him nearer to the vulgar pronunciation
of the Alphabet, by writing it again, as you would have him settled in
pronouncing it after this manner, a, be, ce, de, e, of, ga, he, i, ka, el, em,
en, o, pe, qu, ar, es, te, u, va, we, ex, ya, zad, adding dha, tha, sha, zha.

This being premised, let the next Letters he learns, be s and z. Your Scholar
by this time will be pretty perfect at finding out an Ore-voeal to an
Ore-spirital, or contrary, in the same posture of Organs, as he shall happen
first to hit, and you will have need of something of the same kind of Art,
though in another way, to teach him s or z. Show a Gingival Appulse, and withal
by holding your Mouth near to the back of his hand, bare, whilst you pronounce
one of these Letters before him, make him perceive that it is a pervious
Letter, i. e. that breath passes out of your Mouth to your Tongs end, whilst
you speak it: and show him that T. is close, but this lets breath pass; and
with often trial he will hit on it (though at first it may be lispingly or
imperfectly;) there being only L or R remaining, which are made by that kind
of posture and L so different, and R so difficult, that he will most likely by
this kind of exclusion find out S, and having gained that, he will soon have Z.

Then show him the posture of Sh. S to Sh, and making him understand by Signs,
that they resemble in manner of Sound, and differ in posture, he will perceive
and learn it; and consequently Zh. Syllables; teach him J. i. e. dzha, and cha.
i.e. tsha. He will soon learn L. by being showed to make a stop with the end of
his Tongue against his Goums, as in t on d. and let the Breath pass by the Cheeks
or sides of the Tongue; and if you write down tl, and put him to pronounce it, he
will perceive it the easier; and he can hardly choose but make it Vocal, if he
pronounce it with a Vowel either before or after. R, show him the Gingival
posture of the Tongue, and putting your Mouth close to his Hand or Cheek, while
you pronounce it, make him sensible of the jarre; which with often trial he
will be brought to imitate, though for a while it will be troublesome to him,
by reason of its roughness.

When you have thus made him Master of all the Consonants, and taught him also
to breath out H, that you do not tire nor vex him) settled him perfect in the
pronunciation of them, and in the knowledge of their Characters; then proceed
to the Vowels. And first, carefully observe, what Vowels he chanced to join
with the Consonants in naming them, which might be more than one, as a, e, at
least. Write that Vowel after the same Consonant, and let him speak it, as he
did before; after write the Vowel alone, and show him the open Figure of the
Vowel, and make him pronounce it, which he will readily do, having the sound of
it already familiar to him, in naming the Consonants as aforesaid: and thus
it is likely you will have a. and e. Vowels. Then show him the posture of i by
bearing your Artificial Tongue near the Palate, narrow passage, and he will
easily learn it; and when that is done, show him to add the Motion and Figure
of the Lip to it, and that will teach him u. o, show him, as well as you can,
the figure of the Mouth, and make him round his Lips and sound in his Throat.
And in like manner teach him ou oo. And when you come to Syllables, let him
understand some words, wherein u has the like sound, but without the Lips, as
But, Full, etc. wa, ya, describing them both wa, and ooa, ia; and au (which is
the natural a;) and then he will be sufficiently, for the present, instructed
in Vowels. And now he being acquainted with some Character of every sound, you
may at pleasure make him understand Anomalous pronunciations, by showing him
such other known Letters, or Compositions of Letters, which have those sounds,
as has already been done in che, tshe, j, dzhe, etc.

Whereas the Vowels are much more difficult to be taught; you will find, in
this method of falling upon them last, great help by the Apprehensiveness, he
will have already gained in learning the Consonants, and more forwardness in
attempting to pronounce; by which, when you require one Vowel of him, he will
sometimes stumble upon another, which you are presently to lay hold of, and
keep him to show him the Character of it, and it will be equal gain to you; and
still the more he has learnt the remainder will be so much easier, as there
remain fewer differences of pronunciation for him to wander in.

Now besides these directions already given, you will find when you come to
practice, that your own earnestness and contention to effect what you are
about, will continually, whilst you are at work with him, suggest to you
several Artifices, whereby to make him better apprehend, what you would have
him pronounce; which cannot so well be thought of before hand, nor Rules for it
set down in writing. Now when the labor and patience of getting the Alphabet
is over, the main difficulty is overcome.

Having thus made him learn the Alphabet and the Characters of it, next (or
together with the other) teach him an Alphabet upon his fingers, or leveral
parts of his hand, by placing the Letters there, which you may devise at
pleasure: for example; making the joints of his fingers of his left hand, both
on the inside, and also on the outside, to signify some Letter, when any of
them is pointed at by the forefinger of the right hand, or by any kind of
Fescue. Particularly, let the extremity of the Thumb and four fingers of the
Left hand, signify a. e. i. o. u. The middle of the insides of them, beginning
at the Thumb, b, c, d, f, g. The bending of the Fingers on the inside next the
Hand, h, k, l, m, n. The backside joints below the Nails, p, q, r, s, t. The
middle joints, v, w, j, y, z; any where toward the Wrist, or crossing the two
forefingers, x. And for those simple Letters, which are used in writing to be
expressed by Compositions, as th, sh, ug, etc. there is no help for it, but he
must be taught accordingly, to comply with that faulty way of writing, which
they call Orthography, and be directed to describe them so, and write them so
too, both that he may understand what others write, and they, what he. You may
draw two Portaitures, one of the inside, the other of the backside of the and
describe the Letters upon the places respectively, this way, or some other,
that you shall think better, and make him perfect in this Finger-language. And
then you will find a great pleasure and ease, by practicing with him that way,
readily at all times to pronounce what words you describe with your fingers,
and often exercise his Pen to write down what you dictate to him; letting him
know, when a word is finished, to leave some space between that and the next
word. And when you would gratify the Curiosity of others, who shall desire to
hear him speak, this way will be most useful and ready. And you may, when you
please, have the recreation of surprising those with admiration, who shall hear
the Deaf person pronounce whatsoever they (though with privacy) shall desire,
without your seeming at all to guide him with your Eye or Mouth, otherwise than
by beckoning to him to speak, whilst you secretly describe it with your fingers.

The next thing you are to do, is to write down (and it would do well, in a
pocket-paper-book, to be ready at hand) all kinds of Syllables, and practice
him to pronounce them. First syllables of two Letters, ba, be, by, bo, bu, boo;
kka, cse, csi, oko, cku; da, de, di, do, du, do; ad, ed, id, etc. And then of
more Letters, bla, bra, cla, kna, cra, dla, dna, fla, tra, gla, gna, gra, pla,
pra, qua, sca, sha, ska, sla, sma, sna, spa, squa, sta, sua, tla, tra, etc.
scra, sdna, sdra, spla, stra, etc. and all these backwards as, alb, arb, alk,
ank, ark, ald, etc. And when you have made him perfect at Syllables, then you
may reckon, that you have taught him all pronunciation of Language, since all
words are only some of these Syllables, or else Syllables compounded of these,
as strand, stra, and; or else being poly-syllables, are but a joining of more
of these Syllables, which is nothing else but pronouncing these Syllables one
after another, making a distinction between every word.

Next, you are to teach him the knowledge of Words, (but it would do well in
the mean time, to make him speak and write some Sentences, to inure him to
Connection of Speech.) And here you may easily show him Visible Bodies and
Colors, and tell him the names of them, and you may by signs make him
understand local Adverbs, and some others of Qualities, well, ill, etc. as also
such Adjectives, as represent sensible qualities, as bitter, sweet, etc. and
many other kinds. Every passage will give some occasion to make him understand
more of the Particles and Bands of Speech.

I had once in my thoughts to contrive a Method of Grammar, and Dictionary for
this use. Of Grammar, more than I can now comprize in short hints. And the
later, Alphabetically containing the words of the Language, which the Deaf
person is to learn; as suppose, English. And the Exposition, being a
representation of the Figure of so many words, as can be described, and of the
rest by such other signs, as might be thought of, referring the Synonyma's to
those, which have Expositions; by which he might help himself to know the
meaning of such Words as he should meet with, and by often looking on it, gain
the knowledge of Words: But the occasion of exciting and exercising my thoughts
being unhappily removed, I went no further; but hope to see them perfected by
those, who shall meet with such like occasions. And indeed, such a Work, as
this, is not to be perfected by study alone; but must and will receive many
hints and helps, and to be thought on otherwise, whilst the endeavor is
excited, being under experiment and practice. But so far as I had occasion to
study, and practice with happy success, I have faithfully imparted, and wish,
it may be useful to those who stand in need of it.

An Experiment concerning Deafness caused by want of due Tension of the
Membrane in the Ear called the Tympanum; see p. 113.
A Young Gentleman known to diverse of the R. Society, was born Deaf, and
continued Dumb till his age of 10. or 11 years. His Mother when she was great
with him, received a sudden fright; by occasion whereof, the Child's head and
face were a little distorted, the whole right side (as I remember) being
somewhat elevated, and the left depressed; so that the passage of his left Ear
was quite shut up, and that of the right Ear proportionally distended, and too
open. This Gentleman being for some time recommended to my Care, amongst other
things, I spent some thoughts in searching the cause of his Deafness in the
Ear, whose passage was open. And having found, that the Auditory Nerve was not
perished, but that he could hear the sound of a Lute-string, holding one end
thereof in his Teeth; and had some perception of any very vehement sound, I
supposed the defect to lie in the want of due Tension of the Tympanum of his
Ear; whose use I took to be, only to preserve the Auditory Nerve, and Brain,
and inward parts of the Ear from outward injury by Cold, Dust, etc. and to be
no more to Hearing, than glass in the window is in a Room to Seeing, i. e. as
the one intromits Light without Cold or offense to those in the room: so the
other permits sound to pass, and shuts out what else might offend the Organ; as
appears in the experiment of breaking the Tympanum of a Dog, who hears never
the worse for some few weeks, till other causes, as Cold, etc. vitiate the
Organ.

But for the free passage of the sound into the Ear, it is requisite, that the
Tympanum be tense and hard stretched; otherwise the laxness of that Membrane
will certainly dead and damp the sound, And because the Tympanum is fixed in
the circumference thereof to the Annulus Osseus, and so is not capable of
Tension that way, in such manner as a Drum is braced; there remains another
way, by drawing it at the Center into a Conoid form. And that is the principal
Office of the three Ossicles, viz. the Malleus, Incus, and Stapes, of which the
Stapes is fixed to the Inner-bone in the Foramen Ovale; the Malleus in the
extremity of that Process thereof, which is more direct (though somewhat
bowing) lies along fixed to the Tympanum; and on the other end is joined to the
Incus by a double or Gingly moid joint; such as in which the upper and lower
double Teeth meet one another. The Incus, situate between the two former, is
one way joined to the Malleus, by such a joint as last mentioned: the other
end, being a Process, is fixed with a ligament to the Stapes. In the Os
Petrosum is situate a Muscle from which a Tendon is fixed to the end of
another more perpendicula process of the Malleus, (some describe two Tendons
from the same Muscle, one fastened to the aforesaid Process, the other to the
neck of the Malleus) which drawing the Malleus inwards, the joined ends of that
Bone, and the Incus receding, make a more acute Angle at that joint, and give a
greater Curvity to the posture of the said three Ossicles; the ligament which
fastens the Incus to the Stapes (which is fixed to an immovable Bone)
complying with the recess of the other end, side-ways at the joint; and the
Malleus being fixed to an extensible Membrane, follows the Traction of the
Muscle, and is drawn inwards to bring the Terms of that line (which the new
posture of the bones makes) nearer, in proportion as it is Curved, and so gives
a Tension to the Tympanum, by drawing after it the Center of the Tympanum, and
so stretching the surface of it, from a Plain to a Conoid Figure within the
same Circumference.

And I conceive, the action of this Muscle does ordinarily and constantly draw
the Tympanum to a moderate Tension; but when we have occasion to listen, and
give a more particular attention to some sound, the action of that Muscle is
then more intense, and the Tympanum is drawn to a more then ordinary tension,
so to facilitate the passage of the sound.

Now as to the case of the young Gentleman before mentioned, I supposed either
the Muscle by that convulsive starting Motion in the Womb to be overstrained,
and to have lost its Action; or the Membrane by that greater aperture of the
Organ to be overstretched, and afterward to remain so flaccid, that it was
beyond the activity of the Muscle and Curviture of the Ossicles to give it a
due Tension; or peradventure there was a concurrence of both Causes. Which due
Tension, if by any remedy it might be restored, I assumed that he might recover
his hearing in that Ear: to which end I advised that excellent Lady his Mother,
to consult with Learned Physicians, if by some adstringement Fumes, or
otherwise he might find help.

And for Experiment, I thought of a Temporary way, by the impulse of any
vehement sound; as of a Drum beaten near him: which sound, during its
continuance, must needs give the Tympanum a Tension, by driving and swelling it
inwards, as a fresh gale of wind fills the sails of a ship; and the Experiment
succeeded according to my expectation: for so long as I beat a Drum fast and
loud by him, he could hear those who stood behind him, calling him gently by
his Name (which he understood, having learned to speak and pronounce it among
oother words;) and wen the Drum ceased, he did not hear the same Persons, when
they again very loud called him by his Name. And by this we tried several
times, by beating of the Drum again, and ceasing it; and he still heard them,
when the Drum beat, and heard them not, when it stopped.

Since that time, a Gentleman about Oxfordshire, sometimes Student in
Christ-Church, being in a great degree of Deafness, after I had told him of
this experiment, called to mind, that he never heard so well and easily, as
when he was discoursing with company in a Coach, whilst it went fast, and made
a great rumbling noise in London-streets: by which he was induced to believe,
that the Impediment of his Hearing was of the like nature with the other.

At the same time when this was read before the R. Society, a Person of Quality
of the Society remembered to have found in himself, (being at sometimes subject
to thicknes of Hearing) the like effect with this last mentioned, though he had
not before considered the reason of it; his acquaintance having often observed
to him, that at such times of his Deafness, he heard them very well, whilst
they talked together in a Coach in the paved Streets.

FINIS.

