SOME Considerations Upon the QUESTION, WHETHER The Parliament is Dissolved By
it is Prorogation for 15 Months?

The two Statutes upon which this Question depends are, 4. Edw. 3. Cap. 14.
Item it is accorded, That a Parliament shall be holden every year once, and
more often if need be. 36. Edw. 3. Cap. 10. Item for maintenance of the said
Articles and Statutes, and redress of diverse Mischiefs and Grievances which
daily happen, a Parliament shall be holden every year. As another time was
ordained by another Statute.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS Upon the QUESTION, Whether the Parliament is Dissolved by
its Prorogation for 15 Months?
The two Statutes upon which this Question depends are
4 Edw. 3. Cap 14. Item it is accorded that a Parliament shall be holden every
year once, and more often if need be. And, 36. Edw. 3. Cap. 10. Item for
maintenance of the said Articles, etc. a Parliament shall be holden every
year, etc.
I.
THE first Point in this Case is, Whether these two Statutes are still in
Force and not Repealed?

They are not Repealed by the Act that Repeals the Triennal Act: That being no
way contrary or inconsistent with the two former Laws, and therefore does not
derogate from them. If we have not a Parliament every year the King neglects
the two former Statutes. But if we have not a Parliament in three years the
king neglects not only them, but the last Statute of his own making.

There is a rule in Law, that if Laws and Statutes seem to be contrary, the one
to the other, yet if by interpretation they may stand together, they ought so
to do. In this case there is not so much as a seeming contrariety. Roll. Rep.
part. 1. fol. 91.

So likewise, fol. 91. If a Statute extend in words to Repeal another statute,
yet if the intent of it was not to repeal it, it shall not be repealed. And it
is evident, there was no intention to prejudice or weaken these Laws, both by
his Majesty's speech, made the 21 of March 1663, to the Parliament; as also Sir
Edward Turners speech (then Speaker of the House of Commons) made the 17 of
May 1664, at the conclusion of that Session. The offense taken was at the
manner and means in and by which the Act of King Charles the First did appoint
a Parliament to be assembled. And not only the Title of this Act declares they
intended a repeal, but of one Act, viz. that of King Charles the first,) but
also the very Act it self mentions and allows these Statutes of Edv. 3 to be
Laws in force, and approves them.

But if there were as there is not any color that these Statutes are hereby
repealed, yet it is plain that the Statute of the 16th. of Car. 2. Cap. 1.
(which should make the repeal) is not to take place till after the
determination of this Parliament. The words are, That hereafter the sitting and
holding of Parliaments shall not be intermitted or discontinued above three
years, but that within three years from and after the determination of this
present Parliament, etc. your Majesty, etc. do issue out your Writs, etc. Here
the enacting part of this Clause does not take place till after the
determination of this present Parliament. And the word ( hereafter) in the
beginning of the Clause, has clearly reference to that time; and with what
Grammar or sense does this redition ( But that, etc.) otherwise correspond to
the preceding words, which will be plainer, if you suppose it penned, But that
within three years from and after the end of twenty years, next ensuing;
shall not in that Case the word, hereafter, refer to the end of twenty years,
and if this Parliament survive this Progogation there may not be much odds in
point of Time, whether of the two ways the clause had been penned.

That the Kings of England have not duly nor constantly observed these
Statutes ever since their making, does not render them of less force; For the
Kings Omissions to fulfill a Law, or his personal Offenses, can never be drawn
into question Judicially, because the King is not under any compulsion, nor
accountable to any Court, and is so far, and in such respect Solutus legibus;
But all Acts of the king contrary to law, are adjudged to be in deceit of the
king, and the law voids and nullifiies all such Acts, Hobart. Page 154.

II.
The next point is, Whether the King is bound by these Statutes, and whether
it is in his power to suspend, supersede or dispense with them.

The king is the only person that can be meant or bound; For he it is that is
to summon or ^^ld Parliaments, and therefore the Statutes intend to oblige him,
or else they intend nothing, And the laws for Parliaments, that secure our
Religion, Properties, and Liberties, are become only Advices and Counsels to
the Prince, with no Obligation further then the Princes present thoughts of
their Expedience.

It is a Rule in law, when a thing is ordained that implies any act to be done
proper only to the king, The king shall be bound by a general Act.

Case of Warren and Smith. Rolls, 1. Rep. Fol 156.

These Statutes are in pursuance of the Common Law, and the king cannot
dispense with the Common Law. The Mirror of Justice, a very ancient and
authentic Book says, Cap. 1. Sect. 3. That it was a Law in King Alfred's
time, That Parliaments should be holden twice a year. And all our ancient
Histories testify that f^rmerly Parliaments were held at the three great
Festivals every year. Co. Lit. 110. 4.

It is a general rule in law, That the king cannot dispense with any Statute
made pro bono publico, Cook Rep. 5. 15. In the case of Ecclesiastical persons,
The Judges in parliament declare, That the king being the Head of the
Commonwealth, cannot be an Instrument to defeat an Act of Parliament made pro
bono publico. Plow. Com. 236, 237. 5. Co. rep. 14.

The king cannot dispense with, but is bound by Statutes made concerning Courts
of Judicature. Stat. 13. R. 2. Ca. 13. 15. R. 2. Cap. 5. and 2. H. 4. C. 11.
made for restraining the Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty. King J^mes, by
his Letters pattents granted to the Admiralty larger Authority and Judicature
than those Statutes did allow, with a clause of non obstante to those Statutes,
The Common-law-courts grounding themselves upon those Statutes granted
prohibitions contrary to the letters pattens, and thereupon the said Admiral
complained to the king And all the Judges then gave their opinions, That those
Statutes did oblige the king, and that the king could not by his letters
pattents go contrary to those Statutes. Co. Jurisdiction of Courts fol. 135.
136, 137. The Subjects have the same right in the Courts of Judicature, as they
have in the Laws, and the same right to the Laws as they have to their Estates.

The Statute 2. Edw. 3. Chap. 8. commands the Justices that they shall not
delay doing right in any point notwithstanding any command by greator privy
Seal, and the Statute of 14. Edw. 3. Cap. 14. is to the same purpose.

Fitzherbert has a writ upon these Statutes requiring the Judges to proceed
notwithstanding any such Command, Not. Brev. 240.

That those laws of Ed. 3. for Annual Parliaments are pro bono publico, and of
the greatest concern to the Nation, besides they are made concerning the
highest Court of Judicature, of the Dernier Resort, and which regulates and
keeps all the rest in order, needs not a proof to any reasonable man Nay, the
kings in parliament have very often owned it. One of these Statutes viz. 36.
Ed. 3. is express in this case; For that Statute begins with the confirmation
of Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta, has three other Articles for remedy
and redress of Mischiefs by the kings officers and purveyors; so comes to an
Article for relief of the Subject by original writ out of the Court of
Chancery; and then for mainteinance of the said Articles and Statutes, and
redress of Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, this Article that a
Parliament shall be holden once a year, was enacted. And this Atticle was held
of that consequence, that in the next Parliament following, 37. Ed. 3. Cap. 1.
Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta, are confirmed with the word Especially to
the Acts of the preceding Parliament; as if they thought those Charters would
be rendered ineffectual to them, if they were not secured by Annual Parliaments.

The king may as well discharge Magna Charta, as these Statutes that are made
for the maintenance of Magna Charta.

Reason will tell us, if we consider the nature and business of parliaments,
That we ought to be secured of them within a time certain, and the Law has
prescribed this of a year and no other to be that certain time.

The parliament Rolls 5 Ed. 2. No. 29. and the 1. R. 2. N. 59. are both express
in the Case, and that because the parliament is the only Court wherein the
Subjects can recover their right without the fear of delay, or the oppression
of great Men. And how could they answer any of those ends, if the time
prescribed by the Law, be not punctually observed*

An absolute and direct law, and not sub modo, as under forfeiture of such a
sum, or such a penalty, cannot be dispensed with by the king, but all his Acts
against it are nullities, nay this reason and rule is extended to Common
persons and cases; that when a Statute prohibits a thing to be done, it makes a
nullity of any thing done against it, if there be not a penalty limited in the
statute for the breach of it.

Our king in his answer to the House of Commons of the 24 of Feb. 1672
declares, that he does not pretend to the right of suspending any Laws wherein
the Properties, Rights and Liberties of any of his subjects are concerned. and
all our Properties, Rights and Liberties are bound up in those laws of annual
Parliaments.

But this Fancy of Dispensation, cannot take place with any man that considers
the first of these two statutes, viz. That a parliament shall be held every
year once, or more often if need be. Where the king is left only Judge of the
need of a Parliament oftener than once a year* but whether the king see need or
no, it is absolutely, positively and peremptorily ordained, That a parliament
shall be holden once a year. And to make any other interpretation of the said
law, is to suppose that the parliament did by that Act change the Common Law,
which gave us a right to annual frequent parliaments. and deliver it wholly
into the Will and pleasure of the king. And so the next statute of 36. Ed. 3.
is to be reduced to this sense, viz. For maintenance of the said Articles and
statutes an redress of diverse mischiefs and grievances which daily happen, a
parliament shall be holden every year, or once in 20 years, as the king please.
But admit the last words of the statute of the 4th Ed. 3. (if need be) runs to
the whole sentence, yet according to this sense, The king is obliged to call a
parliament within the year if there be need, and a prorogation for 15 mouths
puts it out of his power to call them what ever need there may be.

Neither will the preamble of the statute of the 27. Eltz. Chap. 8. help the
matter, it would be very hard, that a Preamble of an Act of Parliament should
repeal or enervate statutes of that consequence, especially when the enacting
part has not a word to that purpose: but in truth this preamble is far from an
allowance, for it is a complaint of Parliaments not being so often holden as in
ancient time, whereby the Subjects of this Realm are greatly hindered and
delayed of Justice.

It is worth the considering, how the King should have more power by the law to
deprive us of constant annual Parliaments, than he had to deprive us of the
four Terms in the year, or the four Quarterly Sessions of the Peace. In
Johnsons and Norton's Case, it is there said, That the King cannot adjourn the
Courts of Westminster Hall intermitting a Term, and that to do so would be a
breach of Magna Charta, ( nulli negabimus, nulli deferrimus Justitiam.) And is
it not as high a breach of the great Charter to intermit the greatest Court of
Judicature beyond the time appointed by law?

It is very true the king is trusted with the time when they shall sit, so it
be within the year, for that is positively prescribed by the law; so also is
the king trusted with the granting Commissions to the Judges and Justices of
the Peace, which he may as legally omit and frustrate those laws, as omit the
appointing a time within the year by his Writ for the Parliament to meet. And
it is evident, that it was the opinion of that great king, Edw. 3. That the
Law of the Realm is such, that upon mischifs and damages which happen to the
Realm, the King ought and is bound by his Oath, with the accord of his People
in Parliament, thereof to make remedy and law. And in truth there is great
reason that the king should be more especially obliged by his Oath to the laws
of Parliaments, that being of highest concern.

But to conclude this point with an Argument to the capacity of such as do
fancy the king can dispense with laws of so great moment and concern. Those
Worthies must allow that where the King can dispense he is not intended to
dispense, without a Clause of non obstante to the statute he does dispense
with. And there is no such clause in the Record of Prorogation.

III.
If these statutes do oblige the king, the next point is, Whether this
Prorogation be contrary to those two statutes of Edw. 3. and what the
Consequences are thereupon?

The statutes are, That a Parliament shall be holden every year. This
prorogation being for above twelve months, intermitts a whole year, for the
statutes say, There shall be a Parliament holden once every year, or oftener;
And the Prorogation says, there shall be no Parliament holden for 15 months,
then next to come.

It is a foolish fancy to imagine that the statutes are sufficiently answered,
since a Parliament was holden in 1675. and another Parliament shall be holden
in 1676; for in all cases where the Law speaks of a year, or a year and a day,
it is understood and reckoned for twelve Calendar months, to take its relation
and date from the subject matter that the Act treats of; If otherwise, the
sense of the statute will be, That a Parliament shall be holden once in two
years.

And it is plain that in Richard the second's time it was not so understood:
For his first Parliament dissolved the 18th of November, his next parliament
began the 20 of October following, where the Chancellor gives us the reason
for summoning the parliament then, That the king would keep well his Covenant
in holding annual parliaments. Cottons Abridg. fol. 173.

If this intermitting a parliament for above an year, be not contrary to these
statutes, what can be? There is no difference to be made of any measure of time
beyond a year, and there is no bounds to the time of a prorogation if it may
exceed that, it may be as well for ten or twenty years, and yet the Judges said
in Harrison's Case, That in every statute there is some bounds set that must be
kept.

Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti are dear in this case of annual parliaments,
neither will the single uncontested president, passed sub silentio, the 5th of
Eliz. alter the Law and custom of parliaments; There the parliament was
prorogued from the second of October, quinto Eliz. to the 5th of October, sexto
Eliz. being a year and three days, and let it be granted that this prorogation
for fifteen months, is as good and valid in Law as that: If they are both
illegal, the one cannot support the other, no more than her commiting of
Wentvvorth and another Member in October following, in that very parliament,
for what they said in the House, shall take away the Liberty and Freedom of
speech the Members in either house enjoy by Law and Custom of Parliament. In
the Case of Tithes, twenty years payment will not prejudice him that can
afterward prove a modus decimandi; In this Case we have the Common Law and
several statutes to prove a modus.

The Law Books tell us, Cook, 4. Rep. Slades Case.
That silent and sleeping Presidents, Leonard 2. p. 87. 29. 30.
never drawn into question, Crook. Eliz. 185.
shall not alter what is established by Law and Reason. Cook 9. Rep. fol. 16,
fully the Case.
Our annual Parliaments are established to us by Common Law, Co. 12. Rep. Fol.
65.
Statute Law, and the Reason even of the Government it self. Neither can the
Laws that were made in that Parliament be at all weakened by it now; Their
Validity depends not upon the lawfulness of that Parliament, wherein they were
made, but upon the distance of time since their making* during all which they
have been received without contradiction, and incorporated into our Laws. Time
and general reception, and multitude of Interests involved, creates an
authority to that which fresh and earlier pursuit would have rendered invalid,
as also highly criminal in those that made it. 'Twere a very hard case if one
single Act of the Crowns, contrary to law, because not observed or contested,
should be of force to repeal and set aside the Common Law, several
Statute-laws, and the constant course and usuage in all Ages. But if there be
any use to be made of this president, it is that it shows us the opinion of
that time, That a parliament in every year of the kings Reign did comply with
the old Statutes, but this will do no service in the present case, for as our
prorogation is contrived, the 28 year of this kings reign is without a
parliament, whereas Queen Elizabeth's prorogation began the second of October,
in the fifth year of her reign, and ended the 5th of October in the sixth year
of her reign.

The Reason of the Government in other cases, as all Courts of Judicature which
are settled by law, and can meet without the kings particular Commission, as the
Courts in Westminster Hall, the Sessions of the peace, the County-Courts, the
Hundred-Courts, the Court-Leets, etc. are either fixed to a day certain for
their beginning, or limited within a time certain, and all within a year.
Those that cannot begin without the kings particular Commission, ought, ex
debito Justitiae, to be granted whenever the Subject desires it; especially if
there be no other remedy for the Subject. So also parliaments are limited
within a time certain, which is within a year, for therein the law is positive,
but as to the particular day and place, and the duration of their sitting,
which could not be so well reduced into a fixed and positive Law, they were
trusted with the king, as the proper subject of his Prerogative.

By all this it will appear, that a prorogation for more than a year, is
contrary not only to these two Statutes, but also to the Reason of the
Government, the law and custom of the Parliament, and the Common Law it self,
and therefore illegal in all and every respect: And an illegal Act of the king
is void and null in law. My Lord Hobart speaks very fully to this Case, Hob.
page 154. upon a lapse devolved to the Bishop, and at last to the King. where
he says thus. A Lapse is an act and office of Trust reposed by Law in the
King, the end of which Trust is to provide the Church of a Rector, and
therefore tho the King may suffer the Church to stand void (which yet is
Culpa) yet he cannot bind himself that he will not fill the Church, for that
were Injuria, and malum in se, and therefore shall be judged in Law in deceit
of the King. For, Eadem men's presumitur Regis, quae est juris and esse debet.

When it is said, That the prorogation is void and null in Law, it is only to
be understood that it is so far void and null, as it is contrary to Law; for,
the prorogation does two things; First, It puts off the Parliament and all
business before them, and determins the Authority they at that time have, and
this part of a prorogation can never be illegal, for the King can dismiss a
Parliament and determine their Authority at his own pleasure.

Secondly, It appointed a time when they shall meet again, and their authority
revive. Now this part of a prorogation is bounded by the Law, which says, a
Parliament shall be holden once a year, and therefore, if the appointment to
meet again be not within a year, it is as if there had been no appointment at
all; and such a prorogation is only a dismission of a Parliment and a
determination, not a reviveing of their Authority.

To all this there are some Objections which ought to be considered.

Object. The King might have dissolved this Parliament and called a New
within the year, and therefore these Statutes might have been observed
notvvithstanding the Prorogation.

Ansv. This is a clear confession of the invalidity of the Prorogation, since
it is allowed those Statutes will not be pursued unless the prorogation be
annulled, and the Parliament that subsists by it, dissolved: Neither does the
kings power to remedy it by another Act, support the validity of this; for then
no Act of the kings, though never so much against Law, but may be as well
justified, he having power left in him to remedy it. if he thinks fit, which is
an excellent way of rendering our law Arbitrary, and the Power of the Crown
Absolute.

Object. The King has frequently by shorter Prorogations and adjournments
intermitted Parliaments for several years, which is the same as if he had
prorogued them at once for so long time.

Ans. The case is directly different between these two, the shorter prorogation
being within the letter of the Law, and those above a year directly contrary,
it is very true it is as much a part of the statute, that mischeifs and
grievances, should be redressed at the Parliament, as that a Parliament should
be holden; yet nevertheless, though a King hereafter or in times past, has or
shall, de facto, by short prorogations, evade the force and intent of those
Laws against his Duty and Oath, that does not argue or prove, that therefore he
may, de jure, make a prorogation above a year, which is to repeal those Laws:
the wisdom of the Law does in such cases put the king to renewing his Acts, and
to bring them under a fresh consideration, Year Book 39. H. 6. as in the case
of Pretections, where the kings protections for a year stand good, though
several times repeated, yet one and the same protection for more than a year is
utterly void. So the king can grant an exception to one single person from
serving in Juries, and so to as many single persons as he shall find cause, and
such exceptions shall be good in law, but the kings Charter to exempt all in
such a County is void, because of the inconveniences that ensue in such a
case. The kings prerogative extends only for the good of the people, never to
their prejudice or great inconveniences. In like case, the Judges have a power
to give a day to the parties pleading before them from one Term to another, and
may renew the giving of a day from Term to Term, as often as they see cause,
but they cannot give a day during life, or for term of years, the reason is,
that this power or lesser prerogative is entrusted with them for the better
dispatch, and not for the overthrow of Justice. Besides the Parliament does
really assemble and sit at the time of every adjournment or prorogation, and
the length or duration of their sitting does not at all concern the state of
this Question* They may as well say, the king need never call a Parliament,
because he can by law annually hold a Parliament for two or three days, and
then end them, not having suffered them to do any of the business of the
Nation. Which is to argue from the kings power abused, which power ought to be
exercised for the protection and better execution of the laws, to a nullity of
the law it self.

To conclude this point, It is no argument to say, the king is trusted, you
have no remedy against him, you cannot compel him, for that is the very reason
why all illegal Acts of the king are null and void* 5. Cok. 14. where there is
a contrariety between the Law and the kings single Act, so as they cannot stand
together, the kings Act cannot overruled and make void the Law but the law
makes void the kings Act; all the kings Acts are under the power, operation and
construction of the law, and the law makes them either valid or void, according
as they correspond or not with it, D, St. 22. 23.

IV.
Since the prorogation cannot revive or continue the parliament unto the 15th.
day of Feb. 1676. being in that particular contrary to law, and so void and
null: The next point will be. Whether the Parliament be still sitting, and has
been so ever since the prorogation?

To clear this point, it would be worth the asking, If the Parliament should
pass Acts in February or March next, to what day should they relate? Must the
members be allowed their privileges and their (...) during this time? and a
thousand more such like questions would arise.

But it is clear that a Parliament prorogued is a Parliament not dissolved, but
continued over to another day; and when the prorogation is legal* there is a
Parliament continuing, but not sitting. To express the matter clearer, it will
not be un-useful, either to the clearing this point or the better understanding
the whole question in general, to explain the law of Parliaments in this place.

If a Parliament meet, though afterward they be prorogued or dissolved before
they make any Act, yet this in law, while it was sitting, was a Parliament
holden. The Judgments that are affirmed or reversed in such Parliaments are
good in law, and so are all other their proceedings, and wages shall be paid. A
Writ of Error then brought, would have been returnable at presens Parliamentum,
and in pleading it is usually said, ad parliamentum incoat. such a day, and ab
inde per prorogationem continuat. etc.

Next, That a Session of parliament in law so called, is when there is an Act
passed, and takes in all that time, that is, from the time of the meeting
either by Summons or prorogation, until the time the parliament is prorogued or
dissolved, for during all that time, they are in law looked upon as sitting,
and all that sitting is called a Session.

Next, if a Parliament be summoned and meet, and then be prorogued either
before or after any Acts passed, that this is a Parliament continued.

Therefore it is Parliamett. continuat. per diversas Prorogatione usque ad such
a day, and tunc tent.

Therefore Parliament and Session of Parliament are different things; every
Parliament must be before it can make an Act, therefore it must be and must
have continance before it can make a Session, and all the while that it has
continuance it is a Parliament in being but when it is prorog'd it cannot be
said to be a Parliament sitting, or that it is then holden, but by the
prorogation is put off from sitting, or being holden, but continued.

Hence you may observe the mistake of the Judges in Huttons Rep. Fol. 61. in
not distinguishing between Parliament and Session of Parliament.

Next, In this case, de facto, there was no sitting, but all departed, and the
King has summoned them by his Proclamation, to Assemble upon the 15th of Feb.
So the king does not know they are now sitting. And though this Prorogation for
the Causes abovementioned, be not a legal prorogation, and consequently not
sufficient to perform the kings will to continue the parliament, and cause them
to meet again on the 15th of February, Yet the kings pleasure hereby declared
shall be so far effectual, as that they shall not be sitting in the mean time.
For though the king mistakes the Law, yet his Acts are not void in those parts
of them that are agreeable to Law. It would be a contradiction in Law to say,
That a Parliament cannot sit but by the good pleasure of the king, and yet be
sitting contrary to his pleasure and will declared.

V.
If the prorogation be void as to the continuing and reviving of the Parliament
and the Parliament be not sitting, The next point is, Whether it can subsist
sine die?

There is no president since the beginning of Parliaments, of any Parliament
that was once sine die, that ever came together again. So that Lex and
consuetudo Parliamenti is against it; and if we break through that, a
Parliament may be any thing, every thing, nothing as the king please, and no
man is wise enough to forsee what inconveniences and mischiefs may thereby
break in upon us. Whosoever will puruse the Rolls and Records of parliament,
shall find them very exact and curious in seting down the days and places from
which and to which they were adjourned or prorogued; And if a continuance to a
day certain be not so necessary that the king cannot dispense therewith, why
should the parliament meet merely to prorogue, as they have done in all times?
Why besides the prorogation are there always Commissions to continue them over?

And you shall find in the record of 13. E. 4. Number. 42. 43. the king and both
houses of parliament, though they had the assistance of Littleton and Hussy:
yet utterly ignorant of this point of learning, A parliament sine die; they
could find no other expedient, but Prorogation or adjourning the parliament to
a certain day, or enabling the king by a special Act of parliament to call them
(upon 20. days notice) soo^^r. And that with so much caution and legal
formalitie, That in the very Record of the prorogation, there is a salvo for
that Act, of parl* and the Act it self recited in Engilsh, (for so Acts began
then to be) and in hac verba, at the end of the latin record. In this
president there are several things remarkable, that they understood not a
prorogation or adjornment sine die, to be legal, That if a praliament be
prorogued or adjourned to a certain day, the king cannot call them sooner*
That, 40 days noties, being lex et con suetudo parliamenti* The king cannot
legally give them less notice unl^ss h^ be enabled by specall Act* of
parliament.

All ^^^rts and Commissions of like nature when all their procedings refer to
the first day, and are pro hac vice, viz* Court of High Steward of England.
Assizes, Nisi prius, Oyer and Terminer. Jail-delivery, etc. If they rise
without adjorning, they are determined, Bro. Comis. 12. Jones 420, 421. 3. Leo.
page 229.

For these Courts have not certain days and times, like Terms to sit, but only
a day to assemble, their Commission day, and then continne on by adjournment,
the reason of Law requires as much, if not more exactness in the highest Court
of Parliament, than in any of the inferior Courts; and the Consequences that
will ensue on a contrary way of proceeding, will be very fatal.

The parliament is like those other Courts, they are dissolved by
discontinuance, or by being put sine die, and the reason they are dissolved by
the death of the king, is because they are thereby discontinued.

The Statute of the 1. of E. 6. Chapter 7. provides in many Cases therein
particularly expressed, That the death of the king shall not be a
discontinuance; But the case of the Parliament and those other Courts and
Commission are not comprised in that Statute. So that in those Cases, the death
of the king remains to be a discontinuance.

And further, the Writs of summons empower the Members to act only in the
Parliament therein appointed to meet such a day, and also their power from the
People as they are representatives, relates only to the Parl* summoned by such
a Writ, on such a day, and all things in law relate to that day, and if there
be not a legal continuation from that day, to another certain day, their power
by virtue of those Wrirts expire.

Claus. ann. 5. H. 4. pt. 1. The king by Writs tested October. 20. 5. H. 4.
summons a parliament to meet the third of December following; but after judging
that day inconvenient, because of Christmas, by new writts tested 24. Nov. 5.
H. 4. he makes a new summons. This new summons did really make a new
parliament, for it made a new Election; The king having once issued out his
writs, could not support or continue that Parliament, but by their assembling
and meeting together, and being prorogued or adjourned to the day he intended,
which being at that time inconvenient, he was forced to issue out new Writs,
and cause the people to make new Elections. Dyer 203. So that the opinion, That
when a new parliament is summoned, a new day may be appointed without their
meeting, was not known to be Law in that Age. Neither does the president of 1.
Eliz. prove any thing to that purpose, for in that case the parliament did meet
the 23d of January, and did also appoint the Tryers and Receivers of Petitions,
and was prorogued by the Queens Commission to the 25 following.

If we should once depart from Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti, let this
following Instance amongst many be considered; A King, or a Protector, in the
Infancy of a king, shall prorogue a Parliament sine die, and when they are all
dispersed to their several habitations, he shall in three days notice summon
12 Lords, and 40 Commoners, well principled, well paid, and near at hand for
his purpose, he may in few days change the Religion, subvert the rights and
properries of the Nation, and enslave the people by authority of Parliament, or
the Protector (such as he may be) may alter the Succession, destroy our Priuce,
and place himself in his room. But to all this will be said, The law and custom
of Parliaments require 40 days notice, which secures us from such a mischief.

It is replied, That there is no stronger law and custom for the 40 days,
notice than there is against Prorogations above a year, or Parliaments, sine
die, and if the kings prerogative can extend to the more essential parts, it
may to the circumstance of the time of notice: The king that notwithstanding
our old Stautes supported by the Law and Custom of Parliaments, can prorogue a
Parliament to a time never so remote, or, sine die, (that is, to no time) which
is farther distant if he pleases, and has no end but with his Life, can by
the same prerogative make the time of notice as short as he please, that being
piescribed by no Statute, and only depending upon the law and custom of
parliaments, and has been invaded by a more dangerous president than any other
point of the law and custom of Parliament has been.

Hen. 4. the first day he came to the Crown, summons a parliament by writ to
the Sherffe, returnable the 7. day; he durst not venture upon a parliament
discontinued, and so disolved by the resignation of Ri. 2. though they
assembled but the same day that his writtes went out for a new, and
notwithstanding they were such men as he planly approved of, yet new writs of
Sumons and a new return of the Sherifs was thought Essential at that time.

To all this is objected that Ano. 33. of E. 1. the parliament was dismised the
21. of March without limiting any day certain, and it does appear, that an
order was made in pleno parliamento on the 6. of April following, so that the
same parliament dismissed, sine die. was recalled and sat again, Ryley, 240.
279. 282.

To this is answered that this record will not be of validity to change our
Laws, and constant practice of parliaments ever since they were settled. The
Original Book in the Tower (of which) Riley, is a copy) was but extracts out of
the close Rolls, and some parliament Rolls since lost, and a mistake in
trancscribing the date of the record may very easily happen for that the former
leave given was a disolution is eviedent, becase the members of the house of
Commons took out there Writ for Wages, whith in those times, was never taken
out till after the Parliament was dissolved. And, if to be dismissed, sine die,
be a disolution, the question is gained; and is matters not much, whether this
be an Order of the Prelates and Temporal Lords, with advise and assistance of
the privy Council and Judges, for these were all ordered in the dismision to
stay behind and attend. And the words, in pleno Parliamento, might be inserted,
to distinguish it from an Act of the privy Council alone; which is the more
probable, both because the nature of the Order is such, as the Kings Counsel
alone could have made, and the distance of time from the 21th, of March, to the
6th. of April, was too short for a recealing of the Members; and too long to
suppose them to have continued of themselves near the Court, and within call Or
whether the king did call the same Parliament after a dissolution, which the
same king had don in the 28, year of his reign, and his son Ed. 2. did in the
ninth year of his: Both which were upon a pretense to advise with him, and we
have no laws extent of their making; for this does but argue; That the (...)
parliaments were not yet fully settled, having suffered lately in the end of
H. 3. time a great alteration, and this vigorus and might prince Edw. 1st. was
attemping to extend his prerogative, so that we have other presidents of a like
nature, as the summoning of one Knight for every County, and one Citizen and
one Burgess for every City and Borough. But both these, and the former
prsidedents, have been long since condemned and fully settled on the peoples
side, this latter 21. Ed. 3. Number. 16, 17. confirmed 51. E. 3, N. 25. And the
former the 50. E. 3. Numb. 177.

Item pry lee commune que pleite Establier per Statute in ceste present
Parliament que chescun ann soit tenus un Parliament de fair correccions en
Royalme des errors and fauxetees; Si null y soynt troves and que les Chevaliers
des Countees pur celles Parliaments, soyent eslus per Commune Election de les
meilleur gents des dit Countees, Et nemy certify per le Viscount Soul sans diu
Election sur certain peine.

Res. Endroite diu Parliament chescun anne il y dyent Estatutes and Ordinances
faits les quex soyent dament gardes and tenus Et quant al article del Election
des chevalier qui vendroient a Parliament le Roy voit quils soynt Eslus per
commune assent de tout le Countee.

This Record is worth the Observing; it has not only settled the point, that our
Kings could not have the same Parliament after dissolution, or being sent home
returned again upon his Summons, or Writs to the Sheriffs, but settles that the
people of England ought not only to have a parliament every year, but a new
Choice.

To conclude this Objection, Let it be considered how weak a proof the date of
this Order is in so great a point, to prove a parliament recalled after a
dismission sine die, would require Journals of their sitting, Writs by which
they were summoned, or for wages, or Acts which were allowed to be in force,
and of such a nature, as none but a Parliament could do; none of which are in
this case.

VI.
If the Prorogation be void, the Parliament not sitting, nor can subsist sine
die, then the last point is, That it must be Dissolved.

It will be hard to find a president of a parliament that was neither Sitting,
Adjourned, Prorogued, or dissolved; this is none of the three former, and
therefore must be the latter, viz. Dissolved.

If the Parliament be not sitting nor can subsist, sine die, and the
prorogation be null and void, then what shall bring them together again the 15
of February? It is very true the king has issued his Proclamation for that
purpose, but proclamations are Acts of Grace, to notify and promulgate to the
Subjects, the Laws that are, that they may be kept and observed; but they
cannot alter the Law, or any proceedings in Law. When was there a parliament
prorogued by proclamation? was not that always done by Commission? and a
Proclamation served only to give the people notice o^ the Kings pleasure, to
order their occasions accordingly.

In the beginning of the late troubles, the king by proclamation adjourned the
Courts at Westminster to Oxford, without any Writ of adjournment; and since the
Return of his Majesty, in an Affize brought by Sir Edward Heath, against Mr.
Pagit for the Office of Custos Brevium, of the Court of Kings Bench; It was
declared in the Court of Kings Bench, That those Courts at Oxford were coram
non Judice, and all their proceedings void, and nothing has been legal of
their proceedings ever since.

At the time of the Chatham Invasion, the Parliament stood prorogued to the
tenth of October 1667, whereupon the king issued out a proclamation to summon
them to meet the 25th day of July, at their Meeting the king told them, That he
had summoned them when he was under an exigence, vverein he thought not fit
to rely on less Counsel than theirs. And the truth is they were universally
looked upon as a Council not a Parliament. And my Lord keeper in his Speech on
the 10th of Ostob. 1667 told them, It was a doubt by grave and wise men,
whether or no they could sit and act as a Parliament before that day.

Object. But notvvithst^nding it appcars by what is said, That this Parliament
is neither Sitting or Progogued, neither can it subsist, sine die, or by
Proclamation, yet there are some will tell us, That it is the King's
Prerogative alone to Prorogue or dissolve Parliaments, and they will urge the
opinion of chief Justice Lee, That a Parliament cannet be dissolved or
determined but ly matter of Record, and that by the King alone. Hutton Rep.
Fol. 62.

Ans. To this may be said, That no man or number of men (except the king) can
by matter of Record Dissolve a Parliament: It is the right and prerogative of
the king alone to do that. But there are several other ways by which a
parliament may naturally or violently come to its end, To make the expression
plainer, let this instance be offered; no man has authority to kill any of the
kings subjects without a lawful Commission derived from him; yet any of his
Subjects may die naturaly or be killed violently, and though the person that
did it be liable to punishment yet the subject is not alive. The death of the
king or the resignation of his Crown, are known and confessed to be the
natural, death of the parliament as well as of those other courts, As also the
return of the king from a foreign Country into England determines a parliament
summoned by his lieutenant in his absence, as appears expresely by the Act of
parliament 18. H. 5. Chapter 7.

The Duke of Gloucester, the kings uncle, told Richard the second of another
way. If the king shall (...) absent himself from his parliament then sitting
for the space of 40 Days. Histor. Angli. Fol. 2681.

If a parliament should continue as long as this, and the king should issue no
writs to fill their vacant places, it is more than probable, that would prove a
natural dissolution.

If the Gunpower treason had taken effect, or any such like wicked or sad
accident should happen it would prove a violent dissolution of the parliament;
So that chief Justice Lee in in Huttons Rep. Fo. 62. was as much out in point
of Law, that a parliament cannot be dissolved but by the king and by matter of
record, as he was in good sense when he spoke of discontinuance of Parliaments
by matter of Record:

Primo Mariae, was a great Question, whether the Parliament then summoned was
not void? Dyer, 98.
Because 26 H. 8. C. 1. and 35. H: 8. C. 3. did unite and annex the Title or
Style of Supremum Caput Eccleseae Anglicanae, to the Crown, and this Title or
Style was omitted in the then writs of Summons: Some of the Judges and Queens
Council thought this was not a necessary part of the Queens Style, others
thought otherwise, but it was admitted of all hands that supposing the Statutes
of Henry the Eighth had extended to have made this a necessary part of the
Queens Style, the force of the same Statutes had made void the parliament; so
that it appears evidently by this that it was their Opinion, that a parliament
might be dissolved by the force of former statutes, though the kings express
pleasure for the dissolving of it did not otherwise appear upon record.

Decimo. sept. Car. 1. was an Act made that the Parliament should not be
dissolved, prorogued, or adjorned, but by their own consent by Act of
parliament: Here the kings (...) of dissolving Parliaments is limited by an
Act, so that it is plainly subjected to former Statutes.

The Trienal Act it self, is an Instance beyond exception, this parliament
which repealed it, admitted it to have been a binding Law, else what need it to
have been repealed? By this Act the kings prerogative was limited both in
calling and dissolving parliaments.

Ex abundanti it might be said, That Acts of Parliament can bind, limit,
restrain and govern the Descent and Inheritance of the Crown it self, and all
rights and titles thereunto. This was practiced in Henry the Eighth's time, and
in the thirteenth of Eliz. The affirming, holding, or maintaining the contrary
was made Treason during her Life, and after her decease, forfeiture of all
Goods and Chattels.

Neither is there any form of words necessary for the king to use in the
Dissolving the Parliament: If he bids them go home; If he tells them he has no
further use of them; or if he say, They may be gone. So also if he Prorogue
them for a thousand years, it cannot be thought other than a Dissolution: The
same would be if he Prorogued them for a hundred or twenty years, or any time
above a year, which is the boundary the Law has set; for if you exceed that,
what shall the time be; or who shall have the authority to appoint it?

FINIS.

