Lord HOLLIS HIS REMAINS: BEING A Second Letter to a Friend, Concerning the
JUDICATURE OF THE BISHOPS IN PARLIAMENT, In the Vindication of what he wrote in
his First; and in Answer to a Book since published against it, Entitled, The
Rights of the Bishops to judge in Capital Cases in Parliament, cleared, etc. It
contains likewise part of his Intended Answer to a second Tractate, Entitled,
The Grand Question touching the Bishops Right to Vote in Parliament, Stated and
Argued. To which are added Considerations, in Answer to the Learned Author of
the Grand Question, etc. By another Hand. And Reflections upon some passages in
Mr. Hunt 's Argument upon that Subject, etc. By a Third.

London, Printed for R. Janeway, 1682.

The GENERAL PREFACE.
THE name of the Lord Hollis is so well known, both to the Active, and
Contemplative part of Mankind, that no more need be said to recommend any
Papers to the World, than to give Assurance that they were his, and by him
Designed for the Press.

I am persuaded that most who Read the first of these ensuing Treatises, and
have been conversant in that Great Man 's Writings, cannot but acknowledge
this, for the Genuine product of his large Soul, and close way of Reasoning.

But besides the inward testimony of the thing it self, we have other
sufficient proof of its being Authentic, from such as had the Honor of a
familiarity with that Extraordinary Person in his life time, to whom he
communicated his thoughts on this Subject, as he from time to time committed
them to Paper.

He lived not to finish any more of his Answer to the Grand Question, etc. than
what is now published; but often affirmed that he had Conquered all the
difficulties in it: Nature was spent, and all the Oil of his Vital Lamp was
consumed, before he could advance further with his Pen: And when we consider
that he had past the Age of Man, having arrived to his eighty first year, and
that he still continued Writing for Eternity, when he was upon quitting this
Mortal state, we may well say that his Life went not out in a Snuff, as most
very aged men expire; but that he ascended to Heaven in a bright flame, which
still continues to enlighten us that remain here below.

Surely I cannot be taxt of impertinence, if I here strew upon his Hearse some
of Cicero 's happy flowers, since one would think they sprung up now for this
very purpose,

Est etiam quietae, and purae, atque eleganter actae aetatis placida, ac lenis
Cicero de Senectute. ult. edit. tom. 4. f. 532.
senectus, qualem accepimus Platonis, qui uno and octagesimo aetatis anno
Scribens Mortuus est.

Let no Man say that it misbecame him to spend his time thus, when he was
posting to Eternity: He had found Truth to stand in need of his Defense, and
his own Reputation was called in question upon his appearing for it.

And next to Devotion, (which without doubt had a due share of his time,)
nothing perhaps can give a greater foretaste of the joys of Heaven, than the
sense of a Man's having fully vindicated Truth, and his own good name.

The Author of the Considerations is likewise a person of great Age, and well
known for his great Learning: Nor would his Name, if made public, give any
small Reputation to his Book: But he is so sincere a Lover of Truth, that I
dare say, he would not have any Man byast with a previous disposition to
believe, that there is more force in his Arguments than he finds, but leaves
them to their natural energy.

For me to pretend to give the Characters of such Authors as these two, would
he a presumption beyond what I am guilty of, in putting some Papers of mine in
the retinue of theirs.

But though my Character cannot do sufficient Right to either; yet a
Confutation of Mr. Hunt 's Errors may be a piece of Justice to the Lord Hollis,
who has been much undervalued by this warm Author. And as Mr. Hunt is a Man
justly in Reputation for his Parts and Literature, unless it be shown that his
Authority is of no great weight in this sort of Learning, he might wound by his
Censure where he does no great feats with his Argument.

I doubt not but he will pardon my freedom with him, since he has used as much,
or more, with what I have formerly published to the World. Indeed by his
Preface one would think, that he had wrote before I had set out any thing
relating to Antiquities: But then he must needs have understood by way of
Prophecy what I would say about the Curia Regis, great part of which he makes
use of, and concerning the explication of King John's Charter, and several
other things, which he opposes.

I am sensible that enough has been said by the Two learned Authors (on whose
Papers mine attend:) to clear the Question concerning the Bishops Voting in
Capital Cases in Parliament, from all the dust raised by Mr. Hunt.

But he having put things together in another manner than had been done before,
some might think it requisite that there should be a particular Answer given to
every thing of his that bears the face of an Argument, both upon the account of
the weight his Assertions may carry with many, and the want of Judgment in
others, to apply what may be found in these Treatises to silence all
Objections, in how different a manner soever they may be repeated. And truly
this I had done according to my Talent, but considering that those things are
wrote for the Learned, whose Judgments are too delicateisoon to relish the
same dish dressed over and over again; I thought it convenient to suspend the
publication of what has occurred to me upon that Subject.

Nor shall I at present interpose in that Controversy any further, than to
free my self from a two-horned Argument, which I were very dull not to perceive
my self to be concerned in, if not solely aimed at by it.

Having first taken a difference between the Great, or General Council of the
Nation, to which Proprietors of Lands, as such, had right to come, till 49 H.
3. And the Curia Regis composed of the Kings immediate Tenants, and Officers; I
had occasion to enquire into the nature of the Curia Regis, mentioned in the
Constitution of Clarendon, which obliges the Ecclesiastic Tenants in Capite,
interesse judiciis Curiae Regis quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum,
vel ad mortem. This I took to relate to Judgments in the Curia Regis, as such:
And the ground of coming to the Great, or General Council being different from
that of coming to the Curia; From thence I conceived might be gathered a
sufficient Reason, why the Bishops might have been allowed to vote in a
Legislative Capacity in cases of Blood: And yet that practice might no ways
Jani Angl. facies nova, p. 186.
extend to warrant their sitting as Judges upon such Causes, either when there
was a bare Curia de More, or when it sat within Habet Rex Curiam suam in
concilio suo in Parliamentis suis ubi terminatae sunt dubitationes judiciorum,
and novis injuriis emersis nova constituuntur remedia, and unicuique justitia
prout meruerit, retribuetur ibidem, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 2. The passage relating
to the constituting new remedies must needs here relate to the power of the
Magnum concilium, or curia in making Ordinances. Vid. Jus Angl. ab antiquo.
Addit. p. 40.
the General Ib. p. 39.
Council of the Kingdom, more than the Suitors at the Curia being Summoned.

The Legislative power they exercised as Members of the General Council or
Parliament: And the Judicial power, as Jan. Angl. p. 186, 189, 190.
Members of the Curia, and were Members of the Curia, as they held Lands of the
King in Chief: Whereas Men came to the Parliament generally upon the account of
property in Land, without consideration of tenure, so it were free. In short, a
Man may have that in an extraordinary capacity in Parliament, which he has not
there in an ordinary. I likewise held that Becket was tried for Misdemeanors
Jan. Angl. etc. p. 201.
only, though according to the Language of those days they were crimina Laesae
Majestatis, and that the Trial Ib. p. 199.
was in a bare Curia Regis, when no more Ib. p. 189.
than Suitors to that were summoned.

Mr. Hunt 's Argument upon this follows,

If it was the Curia Regis wherein the ordinary Justice of the Nation Mr.
Hunt's Argument, p. 17.
was administered, and not the Parliament was intended in the Assize of
Clarendon, in which the privilege and indulgence under the quosque was allowed
to Bishops, then the Assize of Clarendon is unduly urged against the Bishops
judging in Cases of Blood in Parliament, etc. And consequently by the Assize of
Clarendon the Bishops have no leave to withdraw. If the Court wherein Thomas
Becket was tried was the Curia Regis, then the Bishops judging in that Court in
that cause does most clearly declare (that being a case in point) that the
quousque was an indulgence which they might use or wave.

Now to my thinking, this seeming irrefragable Argument has no real force: For,
not to mention his wrong interpretation of Vid. p. 100. and 139 to 166.
the Constitution of Clarendon, nor yet Vid. p. 65 to 70, and 172 to 181.
his mistake of the Fact in relation to Becket 's Trial, as if he were Tried
for a Capital Offense: In both which I doubt not but he will receive Conviction
to the contrary from these two Learned Authors: I am bold to say, that there is
no manner of consequence in the first Branch of his Dilemma, which is the only
thing that can lie upon me to answer: And truly, I conceive, that it by no
means follows, that because the Curia Regis in the Constitution of Clarendon is
not the whole Parliament, but only that Court which (either when a Parliament
was held, or when only a Council of Tenants in Capite, or Lords, assembled) had
the sole exercise of the Judicial Power, that therefore Judgments in
Parliament before the Lords, such as were Members of the Curia, are not
affected by that Constitution, any more than we can now say, the House of Lords
cannot be concerned in any matter which does not belong to the whole Parliament.

I shall only add three Observations, which may go far to put an end to this
Controversy.

1. That part of the Constitution of Clarendon, which says of the Ecclesiastic
Tenants in Chief, Debent interesse Judiciis Curiae Regis quousque perveniatur
ad diminutionem membrorum vel Dr. Stillingfleet says, The King insisted on the
receiving the Ancient Customs of Clarendon. Answer to Cressy's Apol. p. 100.
ad mortem, was part of the avitae consuetudines ecclesiasticae.

If it had been a New Law, then indeed whatever was not expressly forbidden,
were matter of Liberty: But it being only in affirmance of the Ancient This
received over all the Western Church. Burnet's History of the Reformation. f.
101.
Law, their Liberty went no further than the usage, which was to be present
only till such Causes came to be tried.

2. If Precedents are as Mr. Hunt censures them, like an Oracle, that will
always Mr. Hunt's Arg p. 6.
give a Response agreeable to the Enquirer and Consulter; then we must, as I
formerly did, look to the Law in the Case, Jan. Angl. facies nova, a p. 186. to
219.
without entering into the large Field of Precedents.

3. If the Canons require the Bishops not to concern themselves in the Trials
of Capital Causes, and those Canons have been sufficiently received to become
the Law of the Land; which these Authors prove undeniably, then the Bishops
Vid. p. 87, 183, 184, etc.
must ever be supposed to have been absent when such matters came in question
in Parliament; unless they are mentioned there by name, and cannot be
comprehended under words common to them with the Temporal Lords, any more than
we can imagine that the Popish Lords, who are excluded the Lords House by Act
of Parliament (yet still are Peers) are Parties to any Judgment given by the
Peers there.

SIR,
THE former trouble I gave you upon this Subject, you pulled upon your self by
desiring my opinion in it; but for this I now give you, I must beg your pardon,
it being singly upon my own account, to do my self ^ht, and justify what I
then wrote to you, against several aspersions cast upon me in a Pamphlet
entitled, The Right of Bishops to judge in Capital Cases in Parliament, etc.
made it seems by the same person, who had set out the other Pamphlet entitled,
The Honors of the Spiritual Lords asserted, etc. Of which I gave you some
account in a Postscript to my former Letter, and I think, without any sharp
reflection either upon that Author or his work. The most I said was, When I had
instanced in three notorious falsifications of his: The first is, p. 112. where
he quotes Mr. Seldom to prove, That the Spiritualty made their Proxies in
Capital Causes in more Parliaments than the 21 R. 2. for that they did it
likewise in the 2 H. 4. and 2 H. 5. which I show was a mistake, and only said
he could not find it so in the Record it self, but that he took it upon trust
out of the Margin of Mr. Seldens book of the Privileges of the Baronage p.
125. where there is such a quotation of the 2 H. 4. and the 2 H. 5. but wholly
misapplyed by our Assertor of Honors; for Mr. Seldom alleges that Precedent
to show, that whereas 2 H. 5. it was by the then Earl of Salisbury assigned as
an error in the Attainder of his Father, (who was condemned of High Treason in
the 2 H. 4.) because it was done Sans Assent des Prelates, which are the words
of the Record, Without the Assent of the Prelates (by the way speaks nothing of
Proxies) it was then adjudged to be no error, and his Petition rejected, which
in truth is a strong Argument to prove that the Prelates had no right to be
present at such Trials and Judgments, which is the main Question between us.
And though he being of another mind, had maintained his opinion by so gross a
prevarication, I was so far from retorting it upon him with any bitterness,
saying, It was disingenious, and a suppressing of truth, and not setting things
down faithfully; which is his ordinary language concerning me: Or with insipid
jeers, saying, I wear a sharp Sword, a Trenchant Toledo, as one of the younger
house of great Alexander; and that he brings me to the Sun like Alexanders
Horse; and telling of the Magical combat in Apuleius; and a City of Birds in
Aristophanes, and such other scurralous passages as his Book is full of; which
shows the sweetness of the Gentleman's nature, and the goodness of his cause,
which he maintains only by railing and false assertions: Whereas I rather
lessened his fault, saying, only that he was mistaken, by being misled by the
Printers misplacing the quotation, so excusing him from any wilful error, and
purposely venting of untruths.

I do the like in another great falsehood of his in the page following, upon his
citing a Record 21 R. 2. In the case of the Earl of Arundel, which he makes to
be, That the Lord Steward by the assent of the King, Bishops and Lords,
adjudged the said Earl guilty of Treason; whereas the Record runs, That the
Lord Steward by the commandment of the King and all the Temporal Lords, and Sr.
Thomas Percy, empowered by the Prelates, and all the Clergy of the Kingdom,
judged him guilty, etc. This you see is a foul misrepresenting of his
Precedent, and imposing upon the Reader a falsehood instead of a true Record,
for it shows that no Bishop was personally present, and I make it out, That the
putting of a Layman in their steads, is a strong evidence of the incapacity of
all Clergy men to be any of them personally present at any of those Trials. Yet
in this I rather excuse our bold Assertor, showing how he was misled here
likewise by Sr. Robert Cottons Abridgment; and only add this, That methinks one
should not venture to quote a Record upon any man's allegation without
consulting the Record it self, which, I said, I am sure he had not done; which
I think was as gentle a reprimand as could be, and shows, That I supposed him
such a lover of truth, as that if he had known it a falsehood, he would not have
made use of it, only he was deceived, relying upon the authority of that
learned Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton; but in truth I am now of another mind,
and see my Gentleman has a large Conscience, and a mercenary Pen to publish
any thing right or wrong to please those that set him on work.

His third notorious falsehood is, The Precedent, which he cites of Richard Earl
of Cambridge, who he says, 3 H. 5. was tried in Parliament, upon an accusation
of Treason, and found guilty; the Lords Spiritual being personally present, and
bids us see the Record of it in the Tower: To which I only say, That he had not
done it himself, for he would have found it contrary to what he asserts; and
that the Earl of Cambridge was tried, condemned and executed at Southampton by
a special Commission; and that his Attainder was afterward brought into
Parliament, and there confirmed by Act of Parliament, at which the Bishops
might be present.

Now I pray you Sir, do you judge if I gave him any occasion for such a reply
as he has made to me throughout, from the beginning to the end of his
Pamphlet: and if he should not first have considered the Beam in his own eye,
and have purged himself, and given the world satisfaction for these gross
mistakes of his, rather than add more to them as he has done all along his
book, with language fitter for Billingsgate, than for the eyes or ears of any
sober man: But I see it is the nature of the Beast, as the Proverb is, which he
cannot help, therefore we must take him as he is,

Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret.

And now Sir I must beseech you to pardon the trouble I have given you with
this long Recapitulation of those his falsehoods in his former Pamphlet: In
which I have been the longer to set forth the advantage he gave to one that
would have fallen soul upon him, and how gently I dealt with him, thereby to
justify, or at least something excuse my sharpness with him now (which I
confess and am sorry for) for his base return of scoffings and railings against
me, not fit for a Gentleman, who deserved better at his hands, and gave him not
the least provocation for it: But tread upon a Worm, and it will turn again.
And so I shall apply my self to answer what he says as to his Arguments in the
maintenance of his Assertions, which I think will not prove very convincing,
and will follow him, as he says he would follow me, step by step, and I hope I
shall make it appear, that he has made many a false step, and will begin with
his Postulata's as he calls them, wherein he says we do agree, but he means I
think like Dogs and Cats.

His first Postulatum is concerning the Protestation of the Bishops 11 R. 2.
Wherein he says we both agree that it is a Law, But that I have not set it
down faithfully, leaving out the most considerable things in it, because they
make against me; which if I have done, I am a very bad man, and may pass not as
he styles me for, One of the younger house of great Alexander, but rather of
the house of this great Asserter himself, who is the chief of the family of the
Asserters of untruths. His charge against me is, for leaving out a passage in
my recital of this Protestation, which is, what they say in the beginning of
it, and likewise toward the end of it, claiming themselves to be Peers, and
that in right of their Peerage by the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom, they
ought to be personally present in all Parliaments. Then he subjoyns another
Protestation in the 28 H 6. which he says also I have not cited faithfully and
ingenuously, as I ought to have done. This is a great charge upon me if it be
true, that I have done any thing unfaithfully and disingenuously, of which I
hope I shall be able to purge my self.

And first give me leave to make a Protestation for my self in the general,
which I do upon the faith of a Christian and an honest Man, and it is this,
That neither in the citing of these Records, or any other throughout my Letter
to you, I have purposely and willingly left out or concealed any thing that I
thought material, because it made against my opinion: But what I have written
is the naked truth as I am fully persuaded in my Soul and Conscience, and all
that I have done in it has been singly and merely for the discovery of the
truth, and the satisfying of my self and others, of which I take the searcher
of all hearts to witness; and let our Asserter say so much if he dares, though
for venting falsehoods for truths, I find him a daring man.

And now to come to these particulars, I will first lay before you upon what
ground and to what end I urged that Protestation of the Bishops, 11 R. 2. It
was for two reasons, One to show, That it being at their desire enrolled in
full Parliament by the assent of the King, Lords Temporal and Commons, it came
to be the Law of the Land, though it had not been so before: The second thing
was to show that the Salvo of the Prelates in that Protestation extended only
to their Right of Sitting in Parliament in other cases, but not in Cases of
Blood; and that they did not therein at all pretend to that: which I think I
very clearly proved in that Letter, to which I refer my self. But for these
omissions which he makes so criminal: As for the first, concerning my not
expressing that they made their Peerage a ground of their Protestation: I
answer, That since what I conceived and maintained to have been their end in
their Protestation, which was, Only to assert and lay claim to their Right of
being present in Parliament in all other matters, but matters of Blood, was not
at all controverted by me, but that, to which I fully agreed in omnibus, I did
not think it at all necessary nor proper to insert what moved them to make such
a Protestation, but only so much as was to the purpose for what I alleged that
Precedent: The matter of their Peerage is another point, for which in truth
there is little ground, notwithstanding all their claim to it; and that it be
sometimes attributed unto them by such as desire to please them, and perhaps by
many ignorantly and mislead to it, in regard of their sitting in the Upper
House of Parliament, and having a Parity of Vote with the Temporal Lords in the
Legislative part, and likewise in the judicial part of that House, in all other
Cases but of Blood, from which they have been particularly debarred both by
their own Canon Law, and afterward by the Law of the Land, and the custom and
usage of Parliament, which may very well make many persons not considering the
true nature of Peerage, nor examining with care and diligence what in that
particular our Law says, and what has been the usage of Parliament, give them
that Appellation: But I have in my former Letter cleared also this point (I
think) very fully, and shall say more to it in this, when I come to answer that
Article hereafter in course, as our Assertor brings me to it, for this now is
but by the way upon occasion of this his first Postulatum.

And now for his other charge upon my unfaithful citing the Protestation in 28
H. 6. leaving out how the Lords Spiritual and Temporal joined in challenging
their Right of Judicature, and that the Judgment given by the King concerning
the Duke of Suffolk should not turn to their prejudice, but they and their
Successors should enjoy their liberties in case of their Peerage hereafter, as
freely and as largely as their Ancestors had before them: I shall give a like
answer to this as I did to the other, I concealed nothing that was necessary
and proper to be said, which may appear by my letting forth particularly the
whole proceeding in that Trial, step by step, how the Prelates joined in the
management of it, from the beginning to the end; therefore certainly it had
been no more a disadvantage to me to acknowledge that the Prelates claimed such
a Right in a verbal Protestation, than that they did actually exercise it, as I
say they did all along in the whole transaction of that business: Therefore if
it was designedly done, it was a weak design in me; my end was only to show the
palpable extravagances of that Trial, and of the Kings taking upon himself to
give the Judgment, and so mentioned the Lords Protesting against it, in which
the Prelates joined with the Temporal Lords, as well as they had in all the
foregoing passages of it: for the matter of their Peerage, I reserved it still
to be spoken to in a clause apart by it self, when it comes to be the proper
subject matter in question, I did it in my former Letter to you, and I shall do
the same in this.

His second Postulatum is concerning Attainders, in which he says we both
agree that Bishops may and ought to be present, and yet Attainders, says he,
are matters of Blood; and learnedly he adds, That it is not material in the
Judgment of any considering person, which way a man's life is taken away,
whether by way of Attainder, or by Impeachment; and infers further, That the
Canon Law, which by a jeer he says, I call the Law of Laws, is not so
indispensibly obliging. And our Asserter it seems puts himself into the rank of
those considering persons, that make an Attainder and an Impeachment two
distinct species or kinds of proceeding against a Criminal person to take away
Life, saying it is not material which of the two ways life is taken away,
whether by Attainder or Impeachment. Oh the Ignoramus, that wants a considering
Cap to judge aright and know what an Attainder is, which is what follows upon
the Conviction and Condemnation of the guilty Person, be it upon an Impeachment
in Parliament and Trial there in a judicial way, or by an Act of Parliament in
the Legislative way, or by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer under the
great Seal; the Attainder is the Result and Consequent of those three ways of
Trial and Condemnation, and not a distinct thing running in a different channel
from an Impeachment or from any of the other ways of Trial, being the end and
consequent as I say of all Trials, when the person is found Guilty. The Term
Attainder or Attainted implies so much, which our Etymologists derive from the
Latin Attingere, to Touch or Reach to a thing; Now a Criminal person is touched
or reached unto, and seized upon by the Law, upon an Impeachment and Trial in
Parliament, or by a Trial out of Parliament by Commission, as well as by an Act
of Parliament, so I think one may give it this Definition, That it is a Notion
in Law, whereby the Law reaches and seiseth upon a Condemned person, taints
his Blood and divesteth him of all his Privileges both in public and private
concerns, which he enjoyed before as a Free Man of England.

Besides, our confident Asserter does not consider the nature of the Question
in controversy, which is not, Whether a Bishop quatenus a Bishop, an
Ecclesiastical person in holy Orders, may be present as a Judge in any case
when matters of Blood are agitated? and whether the Canon Law be so obliging,
as that in no case he may, but whether by the Law of the Land, and the custom
and usage of Parliament, the Bishops be forbidden it, when the House of Peers
acts in a judicial capacity to condemn any body, and not when they pass an Act
of Parliament for it, and I think it is clearly made out, That they may in the
latter case, passing a Law for it, and not in the former, to act as Judges in a
judicial way.

His third Postulatum is concerning the Petition of the Commons 21 R. 2. That
in regard diverse Judgments in Parliament had been heretofore undone and
repealed, for that the Lords Spiritual were not present at them, the King would
command them to make some their common Procurator with sufficient authority
thereunto; which would put an end to all controversies: To this he says, That
for me to demand what in particular those Judgments were at this distance of
time, is neither equitable nor rational: And truly I made no such demand, for
I do very well know what judgments the Commons did then not intend, which were
all Judgments in Capital Cases; for it is most clear by all Records of
Parliament, and all the vestigia that remain with us of the usage and
proceedings of ancient Parliaments, that there is not the least color for so
much as a doubt or a suspicion that the Prelates or Lords Spiritual could have
any part in those Judgments. And we know on the other side, what judgments they
had their shares in, which were all Judgments in such Civil Causes as came into
the Parliament, and in Criminal Causes that were not Capital, and the Commons
then could intend none but these, which was enough to satisfy me, that this
Petition of theirs at that time was no ways contrary or repugnant to what I
maintained. And by the way, methinks it is worth observation, the reason they
give of their desire that the Bishops would make a Proctor, not so much for
that, that their presence there was of so absolute necessity, as that what was
done without them was in it self null and void, but to put an end to all
controversies; which shows the Prelates had expressed some dissatisfaction, and
had gotten some things which had been done in their absence to be undone and
Repealed, which considering their power at that time, and how all the Laity was
in awe of them, would have a great effect upon men's minds, and make them do
what else they would not have done, and perhaps strain a point a little to
satisfy them: And still it shows, that notwithstanding their absence they were
good and valid, till the same power that had made them did Repeal them. And to
show what an ascendant the Prelates had over King and Parliament and the whole
Kingdom at that time, see what they did but the year before 20 R. 2. They
declared unto the King in open Parliament, That they were sworn to the Pope and
See of Rome, and if any thing were in Parliament attempted in restraint of the
same, they would in no wise assent thereunto, but would utterly withstand the
same: and can we then wonder, if the Commons were not very loath to displease
them, and willing to comply with them much rather than have a controversy with
them, and perhaps be fain at last to undo what they had done?

His fourth Postulatum is upon the Protestation of Viscount Beaumont in the
name of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the Case of William de Pole Duke of
Suffolk, which has been touched upon before, wherein he now says I have left
out the most material words; but what they are he expresses not, nor can I
imagine what he means; As I have already said, I have been very particular in
setting down every circumstance of the whole proceeding, acknowledged the
actings of the Prelates in it thoroughout as far forth as the Temporal Lords,
and then I say, how upon the Kings giving Judgment upon the Duke, that Viscount
in the name of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal made that Protestation, That it
should not be nor turn in prejudice nor derogation of them, their heirs, ne of
their Successors in time to come. I think this was sufficient to show that I
did acknowledge all that could be pretended to for the Bishops Judicature in
that business, and what this Assertor would have more, and wherein I have
failed I can not imagine, only I see he is a quick-sighted Gentleman and can
see further into a Millstone, than another man, and spy a fault which another
cannot see.

He has a fifth Postulatum, to whichI can say nothing, for I understand not
what he would be at, he speaks of my accurateness in making a distinction
between the Matter andForm of a Law, and then says, He observes three things
(though he expresses but two) which he says, he shall have occasion to make
use of hereafter when he comes to speak of the particular Cases; and I must
refer my Answer to what I shall there find, when I believe I shall make it
appear that he makes no great use of them, nor of any other Argument that he
brings.

And now I come to the particular Cases, the first is 4 E. 3. of Roger Mortimer
Earl of March being then condemned for Treason. Here our Asserter says, That
by 28 E 3. upon his Cousin Roger of Wigmore's petitioning to have this Judgment
and Attainder reversed, I acknowledge it to be an Attainder, If I say truth, say
nothing to the purpose. This is gentile language, and which discovers my
Gentleman's ignorance, as well as his rudeness; his ignorance in conceiving an
Attainder to be only by a Law, by an Act of Parliament, in which Bishops may be
present, and if they were not so, but did withdraw, it was their own voluntary
act, and no diminution to their Rights: I have already upon his second
Postulatum handled this point so fully, and made I think both his error and
the truth so clear, as I need not say any thing more to it here.

Then it is a pretty Argument he brings against my saying, That the Record
being, Les queur Counts, Barons and Piers les Articles per eur eramine;
rebindrent, etc. Which Earls, Barons and Peers having examined the Articles
returned, etc. It must be inferred that the Bishops cannot be comprehended
under the word Peers, since the Barons are named first; To this his Answer is,
Well but I find the contrary, Peers many times put before Barons, particularly
in Mr. Selden's Baronage, p. 12. then he cites a Record of the Judgment against
John Mautravers, where it is said, For which the said Peers of the Land and
Judges of Parliament adjudge and award, etc. Does this at all contradict my
quotation of the Record in Roger of Mortimers Case, but that it is as I say,
That the general word Peers is there put after the Barons, and being so cannot
comprehend Bishops, because in some other Records that word is put before.

He talks of drawing arguments illogically, I am sure this is so. I would put
him a Case, he brings his Action of Slander against one, for that at such a
time in such a place he had spoken ill of him, and said he was a lying Knave,
and other words that will bear an Action, and proves it by witness; That man
proves by other Witnesses, That at another time and in another place he had
spoken very well of him, and said, He was a fine Gentleman; I ask now if he
would be satisfied with this, and not stand upon it, that he had proved his
Plaint, and expects a Verdict and Judgment upon it: So may I say, that my
Precedent stands good, and proves what I allege it for, and what he says, is
not to the purpose.

But I will go further, and make it appear that even his Precedents that he
alleges, make all for me, and against himself, and though he charges me with
not being so good as my word, saying, That I would run through all the Trials
upon Record, in that I have omitted four in that 4 E. 3. I shall give you an
account of those Trials in that Parliament, and you will see that I could have
no sinister end in not mentioning them, and that all of them proved and
confirmed my assertion, that the Bishops had no part in any of them. I
expressed as much as was necessary to prove they were not present at Roger de
Mortimers Earl of March, who was the chief and the principal of those
Delinquents, and whose Trial was the leading Case to all the rest. I give you
the words of the Record, how after the exhibiting of the Articles against him,
the King bespake the Judges, the Peers who were to judge him, and charged them
in these words, Don't le dit Sr. le Roy vous charge Counts, Barons, les Piers de
son Royalme, que de st come cest chooses touchent principalement, a lui a vous
and a tout le people, etc. Therefore our said Lord the King charges you the
Earls, Barons, Peers of his Realm, that as these things chiefly concern him and
you and all the people, etc. You give righteous Judgment. I ask now if this be
not as clear as the Sun at noonday, that by the words of this Record, I charge
you the Earls, Barons, Peers of the Realm, (which is the same as if he had
said, I charge you Earls and Barons who are the Peers of the Realm) can be no
otherwise understood, but that only the Earls and Barons are the Peers that are
there charged, and none else, to give this righteous Judgment: The Earls and
Barons are the two Species, particularly enumerated, and Peers is the genus
which comprehends both: And the same persons whom the King had so charged are
they who tried and gave Judgment upon the Earl of March, as the Record shows
it, saying, Les queux Countes, Barons and Piers, etc. did judge him guilty of
those Treasons. And the very same persons did give Judgment immediately in
that very Parliament upon the rest, viz. Sir Simon de Bereford, John
Mautravers, Boeges de Bayons, and the rest. Therefore my not mentioning their
Trials, which our Asserter lays to my charge as a Crime, and a not doing what I
had engaged my self to do, which was to run through all the Trials in those
Parliament Rolls, could not be designedly done, with an intention to conceal
any thing which made against me, as it is maliciously and very falsely
interpreted, for they all made for me, and it was a passing over sub silentio,
of so many Precedents that confirmed and fortified what I asserted. And should
you, Sir, ask me, why I omitted the mentioning of them? I profess I could give
you no good account of it, but that it was a mere inadvertency.

When the question first arose about the Judicature of the Bishops, I took some
short notes of some Copies of Records that I had; and then seeing that all
those particular Trials in 4 E. 3. hung all upon one string, and were managed
by the same persons, it seems I thought it then sufficient to set down the
proceedings in the first, which was the rule and foundation of the proceedings
in the rest, and afterward when I came upon your request, to take a little
more pains in making my enquiry into the usage of ancient Parliaments, I was
afterward more exact in it; but when I wrote my Letter to you, I made use of
my notes which I had taken of the first Parliament, and particularly of 4 E. 3.
where these other Trials as I say, were left out. But I shall now give you an
account what they are, and you will see it was not for my advantage to conceal
them, nor would it have been for our Asserters advantage if they had been
mentioned; but he quarrels at every thing.

Only give me leave before I come to that, to set it down as a general Rule,
and a very true one, That wherever there is an enumeration of particulars of
several ranks and degrees, which goes downwards, beginning with the higher and
ending with a lower, and in the close, a general expression is of Others to be
added to, and joined with them, those others must not be of a higher rank and a
superior degree to that particular which is last mentioned, but either of the
same degree, or of a lower. This is a judged Case even in the business of
Bishops in Cokes second Report in the Archbishop of Canterbury's Case, p. 46.
Ad este adjuge que Evesques ne sont include deins le Statute, 13 Eliz. c. 10.
It has been adjudged that Bishops are not included in the Statute 13 Eliz. c.
10. which says, That Colleges, Deans and Chapters, Parsons Vicars, and then
concludes, and Others having Spiritual Promotions, that these last words cannot
include Bishops, for reasons before given, which reasons are upon the Statute
of 31 H. 8. concerning the dissolution of Abbeys, which mentioning their coming
into the Kings hand, by Renouncing, Relinquishing, Forfeiture, Giving up, etc.
and concludes with general words, Or any other means; this cannot be understood
of an Act of Parliament, which is a higher way of conveyance, than any of those
specified. So Sir Edward Coke upon the Statute of Westminster the second, c.
41. which says, Si Abbates, Priores, Custodes Hospitalium and aliarum domorum
Religiosarum, etc. has this Comment, Seeing this Act begins with Abbots, etc.
and concludes with other Religious Houses, Bishops are not comprehended within
this Act, for they are superior to Abbots, etc. and these words, Other
Religious Houses, shall extend to Houses inferior to them that were mentioned
before. So I conclude, that the Record saying, Earls and Barons and Peers, etc.
the general words, And Peers, can comprehend none but some other Peers, equal
only, or inferior to Barons, and not any above them, as I am sure Bishops will
say they are. And I will tell you when those of a higher degree may, and must
be comprehended under a general expression, that is, when the Enumeration or
Climax (for so I may call it) goes upwards, beginning with a lower Rank, and
rising higher in those which they particularize: As if it be said, Barons,
Earls, and all other Peers; here Marquesses and Dukes will be comprehended, and
Bishops also would be, if they were Peers, which they are not; but still I say,
if the enumeration descend, none higher than the last mentioned, can be
understood to be meant by any general clause.

I think you are satisfied that the E. of March was Tried and Judged only by
the Temporal Lords to whom the K. had committed his Trial, and charged them
only with it. Sir Simon de Bereford was the next who was Tried, and by the same
Persons; the Record is Item en mesme le Parliament si chargea nostre Sur le Roy
les ditz Countes, Barons and Piers a donner droit and loyal Judgment come
affiert a Simon de Bereford, Chebalier, etc. Item, in the same Parliament our
Lord the King charged the said Earls, Barons and Peers to give a right and
loyal Judgment upon Sir Simon de Bereford, etc. It follows afterward, Si
agarderent and aviggerent les ditz Countes, Barons and Piers, come Iuges du
Parliament per assent du Roy que le dit Simon come treitre fast treisne and
pendu. So the said Earls, Barons and Peers, as Judges of Parliament, did with
the Kings assent, award and adjudge Sir Simon de Bereford to be Drawn and
Hanged. You see the same persons were his Judges, who had before Tried and
Condemned the Earl of March; yet I must observe a little difference in the
expressions: The King in giving the charge to the Peers in the Earls Case, the
words of the Record are, The King charges you Earls, Barons, Les Piers de son
Royalme, The Peers of his Realm, which must be construed, Who are the Peers, or
Being the Peers of his Realm: And then their Judgment comes to be set down,
the Record says, Les queux Countes, Barons and Piers, etc. The which Earls,
Barons, and Peers, did so and so, with a Conjunction Copulative [and] before
Peers, as if there were some other Peers after the Earls and Barons; which if
there were, we are sure it could not be the Bishops, which is all that we are
to enquire into: We know that heretofore the Kings of England did sometimes
send Writs of Summons to other persons, that were not Peers of the Realm, but
persons of Quality, as Bannerets, and some Officers, as the Warden of the
Cinque Ports, whom I find commonly to be the last set down in the List of those
who were summoned: And those persons so summoned, came and attended the
Parliament, and had Voice and Vote with the Peers, as Members of their House,
and as Peers pro tempore, and might be comprised under the general name of
Peers, and being Laymen, might act as Peers in all Trials, and in all other
Judgments of Parliament, both Civil and Criminal, even in Capital Causes; but
these could in no sort be esteemed to be Peers of the Realm, though they might
pass in a large acceptance, and a vulgar construction of the expression, be
termed Peers in Parliament. These now might be summoned to a Parliament, or two
or three Parliaments one after another, as pleased the King, and then be
summoned no more, if the King was otherwise minded; and they could not pretend
to have wrong done them, their former Summons having been Ex mera gratia,
without any right of theirs to them. So then I may conclude that it is all one,
whether you will take it as it is expressed in the Kings charge then, The
Earls, Barons, Peers of the Realm, etc. or as it is when they come to give
Judgment, and as it is likewise expressed in the Case of Sir Simon de
Bereford, The said Earls, Barons and Peers, etc. and whether that Conjunction
[and] before the word Peers, be of any signification or no, to mark out other
Peers subsequent to the Barons, is not material to what our Asserter would have
to be understood of my leaving out any thing, for it had all made for me, and
against him, making it clear enough, that the Bishops had no part in those
Judgments.

The next Precedent is the Judgment of John Mautravers, the Record says,
Trestouz les Piers, Countes and Barons, assemblez a ceste Parliament a
Westminster, (...) ont examine estroitement, and sur ce sont assentuz and
accordez que John Mautravers (...) est culpable, etc. All the Peers, Earls and
Barons, assembled in this Parliament at Westminster, have strictly examined,
and thereupon have agreed and accorded that John Mautravers is guilty, etc. I
appeal now to any man that has but common sense, if it can be imagined, that
the Prelates or Bishops can be thought to be meant by that expression of All
the Peers, and if it be not the same in signification, as when the King charged
them to give righteous Judgment upon the Earl of March, saying, Si vous charge
Countes, Barons, les Piers de mon Roialme, etc. And so I charge you Earls,
Barons, the Peers of my Realm, etc. There the several ranks of Peers are first
named, and the general word, which denotes their Quality, common to both, which
makes them competent Judges of those matters, that is, their being Peers is put
last: And here in this Record concerning Mau^avers it is put first. Which comes
all to one. And it is further observable, that at the time of that Parliament,
there were no Temporal Lords before Earls, neither Dukes nor Marquesses: So if
any others were to be understood to be comprised under that General Title of
Peers, it could be only the Lords Spiritual, which is a thing very ridiculous
to believe: Can it be thought, nay can our Asserter himself think, I trow not,
that when the other particular ranks and degrees of the Peerage are expressed
and set down nominatim by name (as one may say) by Tale and by Token, Earls and
Barons, that (I say) at the same time, and to be joined with them in the same
action, another rank of men, viz. Bishops must pass under a General Title, and
that put in the first place, as if Peerage were an Apellativum (...) to them,
or a Genus Imperfectum (...), to the two Species, the Lords Spiritual and Lords
Temporal, which Genus the Logicians define to be Quod speciebus suis non
communicatur ex aequo, sed alteri magis, alteri minus, uni speciei immediate
and proprie, alteri mediate and in ordine ad primariam: And that so the Lords
Spiritual should still be principally and chiefly meant, by the General Name of
Peers, they Primario, and the Temporal Lords Secundario. Those Logical
expressions I know our Asserter understands well, who blames others for
bringing Illogical arguments, therefore I put this to him. But that they are
not at all Peers of the Realm, to speak properly and truly, and as they are in
the eye of the Law, though they have sometimes been styled so, both by
themselves and others, I have in my former Letter I think made it clear, and
all that our Asserter says to the contrary, has not made me change my
opinion, and I shall say more to it, when I come in course to answer what is
there said by him.

In the mean time I shall only add this, which I lay for a ground, that I do
verily believe no instance can be given of an enumeration of some particulars
in an Universal Collective Proposition, and to leave out that particular which
is first in Rank, and ought to be first named, if any at all be named, and to
have that to be tacitly implied under the General Term, the Signum
Collectivum, As in this Proposition, All the Peers, Earls and Ba^ons, gave such
a Judgment: This I say, that if the Bishops did join in the Judgment, it
would have been so expressed, and they would have been first named, otherwise
it is like an Et caetera in the beginning of an Enumeration, which in the
close, and after an enumeration of some particulars, may intimate a joining of
some others that are not particularly specified and named, but is never put in
the beginning. And I think, I may with confidence affirm, That there is no
example in all the Rolls of Parliament, that any of the Benches of the House of
Lords has been particularly mentioned in any business, and if the Prelates did
likewise act in it, that they were not also particularly mentioned, and always
in the first place, nay, before any other, even before the Prince of Wales, and
the Princes of the Blood, as may be seen in the Roll 28 E. 5. upon Roger of
Wygmore's Petition, the Record says, Le Roy ^st venir devant lui and les
Prelatz and Edward son fitz eisne Prince de Gales, Henri Duc de Lancastre,
Countes, Barons and Piers le Judgment, etc. The King caused to be brought
before him, and the Prelates, and Edward Prince of Wales his eldest Son, and
Henry Duke of Lancaster, and the Earls, Barons and Peers, the Judgment, etc.
Now is it probable, or can it be believed, that the Decorum concerning the
Bishops being in those times still so punctually observed, and that respect
always given to the Prelacy, whenever they were concerned to mention them
particularly and in their due place, that they would in that Parliament of E.
3. be content to be comprised under a general notion, and pass as a man may say
Incognito, when others have more respect showed them, to have their names
recorded? I do not think that the Clerk of the Parliament durst have been
guilty of so great a disrespect to them: Therefore we may well conclude, that
in this Judgment upon Mautravers, the Prelates were not at all signified under
the general word of Trestouz les Piers, Countes and Barons: All the Peers,
Earls and Barons; nor were they at all present, or had any part in that Trial,
no more than in that of Roger de Mortimer, Earl of March.

The other persons judged that Parliament, had all the same Judges, and passed
under the same Judicature. The Record for Boeges de Bayons and John Deuerell
is, Item tieu Judgment est assentiez and accord que soit fait de Boeges de
Bayons, John Deuerell pur la cause sus^ite, etc. Item, The same Judgment was
agreed to, and accorded to be given upon Boeges de Bayons and John Deuerell,
for the cause aforesaid, etc. The very same words are likewise for the
Judgments upon Thomas de Gurney, and William de Ocle. And to prove it more
authentically that they were all Ejusdem farinae, of one and the same nature, I
will give you the Kings Writ that declares them to be so, to the Lord
Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer, commanding them so to inroll those
Judgments, and with them a kind of Protestation made by those Peers, styled a
Concordia ne trahatur in Consequentiam: An Agreement that it should not be
drawn into Consequence: That is, Not made a Precedent, to oblige and compel
them to judge hereafter any but their Peers, because of the Judgment they had
then given against Sir Simon de Bereford, John Mautravers, and the rest, who
were Commoners: For as for those who were their Peers, they could not avoid the
Trying of them, particularly in Parliament, where only a Peer of the Realm can
be tried in Parliament time, which has ever been the privilege of the Peers;
and from which I shall in due time and place, before I make an end, draw I
think, an Argument not to be answered, that the Bishops are not Peers, for if
they be Peers, and questioned in Parliament time, they must be Tried in
Parliament.

But 4 E. 3. Stephen, Bishop of London, having been complained of in Parliament
for saying, That if Edward the Second were still alive (as he was informed that
he was, and in Corfe-Castle) he would assist him with all his force, to
re-establish him in his Throne; was by the Parliament, referred for his Trial
to the Kings Counsel, and by them to the King's Bench, where putting himself
super Patriam, to be Tried as all Commoners do, a Jury was empannelled, and the
Trial went on there in the King's Bench, till at last he got the Kings Pardon:
This is Term. Pasc. 4 E. 3. rot. 53. Now had the Bishop been truly and really a
Peer of the Realm, neither could the House of Peers have avoided the Trying of
him themselves, nor would he have submitted to a Trial elsewhere out of
Parliament, the Parliament being once possessed of his Cause.

But this is by the by, the Writ for inrolling those Judgments, and the
Concordia is, In Memor and. Scaccarii inter Brevia directa Baronibus de Termino
Sancti Hillarii Rot. 33. 5 E. 3. In these words, Rex These. and Baronib. suis
salutem. Bittimus vobis sub pede Sigilli nostri quaedam Iudicia in Parliamento
nostro apud Westmon. nuper tento per Comites, Barons at alios Pares regni
nostri super Rogerum de Mortuo Mari and quosdam alios reddita, nec non quandam
Concordiam per nos and Pares praedictos, nec non Communitatem Regni nostri in
eodem Parliamento factam super praemissis, Mandantes quod Iudicia and
Concordiam praedicta in Scaccario nostro praedicto coram vobis legi and
publicari and ibidem seriatim irrotulari and de caetero ibidem obser^ari
faciatis, Test me ipso apud Wyndesor 15. die Februarii, Anno regni nostri 5.
Per ipsum Regem and Concilium. The King to the Treasurer and Barons greeting.
We send you under our Seal, certain Judgments given in our Parliament late at
Westminster, by the Earls, Barons, and other Peers of our Realm, upon Roger of
Mortimer, and some others; also an Agreement made in the same Parliament by Our
Selves, the foresaid Peers, and the whole Commonaliy, concerning the matters
aforesaid; commanding you, that the said Judgments and Agreement you cause to
be read in your presence in our Court of the Exchequer, and there to be
enrolled in course, and duly observed. Given under our Test at Windsor, Febr.
15. in the fifth year of our Reign. All this shows there was no variation in
any of those Trials, but all went on pari passu, in the same Method. And it is
not probable there could be any great change in their proceedings, the
Parliament continuing together so short a time, but fifteen days in all, as Mr.
Pryn observes by the Writs of wages in his fourth Part, which is concerning
Parliamentary Writs. And I think I may now say, that few will believe I
concealed these Precedents because they made against me. The Case of Sir Thomas
Berckley is of another nature, his Trial is said to be Inter Placita Coronae
tenta coram Domino E. Rege in pleno Parliamento suo, etc. Mem. Thomas de
Berkeley Miles venit coram Rege in pleno Parliamento suo, and allocutus de hoc,
etc. about the murder of Edward the Second, and asked how he would be tried,
Ponit se super Patriam: So twelve Knights were empannelled, who did acquit him.
I do not look upon this as a Trial by the House of Peers, acting in their
ordinary Judicial Capacity. There was some other Court in those times in time
of Parliament, where the Peers probably were the principal Judges, but then
were added to them some great Officers of the Crown, and of the Judges of
Westminster Hall, before whom those Pleas of the Crown were held; I confess
this is to me Terra incognita, a thing of which I can give no very good
account. But I think one may affirm with confidence that no Prelates were
amongst them, for they would have been mentioned, if they had been there; as in
all Criminal Causes which were Capital, or in any thing concerning such Causes,
I observe, they were: And even in this Case of Sir Thomas Berckley the next
Parliament, N. 18. it is said, ^tem en mesme le Parliament si prierent les
Prelatz, Countes (...) Barons, pout Mr. Thomas de Berkley a nostre Sur le Roy
^il lui voustst deliver de meynprise, etc. Item, in the same Parliament the
Prelates, Earls and Barons besought the King that he would set Sir Thomas
Berkley at liberty from his Mainprize. I do observe they are always named, and
never omitted if any else be named, which is my Postulatum to our Asserter, and
not as he injuriously would put it upon me, p. 56. of his Pamphlet, That I
should maintain, That the Prelates are in all Cases particularly named, or else
they cannot be thought to be there, and then to disprove it, quotes a Bill of
Subsidy, where the words are, Les Seigneurs and Communes si sont assentez: The
Lords and Commons have agreed: And Semble as Seigneurs du Parliament: It seems
to the Lords of Parliament; and a hundred such instances more, I know, he may
give: And the Trifler could not but know that I could intend it of no other but
of the matters in question, which were Judgments in Criminal Causes.

And I shall add but this more to show the improbability of the Prelates of
those times being at all employed in Trials of that nature, and least of all,
that we should imagine they could be comprised under general expressions, which
if it were, would argue an unquestionable right and title in them to such a
Judicature. Let us consider the Statute made but two years before, it is 2 E.
3. c. 2. which confirms a Statute formerly made 27 E. 1. c. 3. which Enacts,
That the Justices of Gaol delivery which are sent down into the several
Counties, when they enquire of Felonies and Murders, if one of them be a
Clerk, then some discreet Knight of that County shall be associate to him that
is the Layman, and shall deliver the Gaol. We see how careful they were then
that no Churchman should take Cognizance of Matters of Blood, Canon Law,
Common Law, and Statute Law did prohibit it.

And now to follow my Gentleman to the Parliament 5 E. 3. in which he tells me,
I have not been fortunate in the choice of my Topic, because that Parliament
being called for the redress of the Peace, and the Bishops saying, It did not
properly belong to them to give the King counsel for the keeping of the Peace
of the Kingdom, signified nothing. But had they said it did not all belong to
them, it had been somewhat to the purpose. But under this Gentleman's favor, I
think it is to the purpose, to show that the Bishops did then believe and
acknowledge that it did not properly belong to them to look to the keeping of
the Peace, that it was not their proper work, which implies that they conceived
their duty and employment to lie another way: And it is a strong argument a
minore, that if they might not do that, and advise the King in doing what was
necessary for the keeping of the Peace, and punishing the breakers of it, much
less could they be put upon it to judge in Matters of Blood. And for them to
say that It did not properly belong to them, was a little softer, and more
respectful to the King to excuse themselves from doing what he required of them
for giving their advice, than if they had bluntly said, That it was not at all
of their duty to give such advice; which had grated a little too much, and had
been a kind of retorting it upon the King for requiring a thing in it self
improper and unreasonable. And yet they did as strongly put it off from
themselves, saying, It did not properly belong to them; for no prudent and
sober man will do a thing that is not proper for him, nor can it be required of
him, that he should. So I think my Topic was very good; and I may say I am not
altogether unfortunate to have to deal with so weak and impertinent an
Adversary.

What he says in the Case of Sir John Gray, and Sir William de la Zouch, of
Bishops, that they are sometimes comprehended under the general word of Les
Grantz, I never denied it; but in that place where the King did charge, Toutz
les Countes, Barons, and autres Grantz en lour foies and ligeances, etc. All
the Earls, Barons, and other great men, etc. I say that Bishops cannot be
comprehended there, because in that place it can be understood but of such
great persons, whose Rank is after the Barons, where I am sure no Clerk of the
Parliament durst ever rank the Prelates. And another Rule which I stand upon
is, That if any one Bench of the House of Peers be named and specified, as that
of Earls or Barons, that of the Bishops (if the Bishops were present) is never
left out, but always first placed.

The next scratch he gives me, is upon the Case of Sir William Thorp 25 E. 3.
upon my inferring, that by the General Term of the Grantz in that Parliament,
who approved of the Judgment of death given upon Thorp, it cannot be supposed
that the Bishops are understood, because they tell the King, that if such a
Case should happen afterward, the King might call any of those Grantz whom he
pleased, and by their advice, give such a Judgment of himself, which I say
could not be meant of Bishops, because it was no employment for them to assist
in Judgments of death. Upon this, my Gentleman is pleased in good serious
earnest (as he scoffingly expresses it) to ask, if this be not petere
Principium, to beg what I am to prove. And I answer in true serious earnest,
that I do not petere Principium, not beg the Question; for the Question is
first general, Whether Bishops in Parliament can be employed in such
Judgments, and then particularly whether among the Grantz of that Parliament
of 25 E. 3. that affirmed that Judgment against Thorp, there were any Bishops?
And I infer there was none, because they tell the King, that hereafter even out
of Parliament, if any body else offend in like manner, he may take any of them,
that is, of those Grantz that now give him this advice, to join in condemning
him; and by the Law of the Land, a Bishop could not join, therefore there was
no Bishop amongst them: And that by the Law, Bishops and all Clergymen were
prohibited, appears by the Act of Parliament of the second of that King which I
mentioned before, confirming one to the same purpose made in Edward the First's
time, that No Clerk should be a Justice of Jail-deliver for Trial of Felons:
this, I think, is not petere Principium, to prove the true meaning of what was
done at that time in the House of Lords, by what the Law of the Land had
already established, which must regulate what the House of Lords then did, and
does show there could be no Bishops in the number of those Grantz.

Then for what he says of the Commons charging Michael de la Poole before the
King, Prelates and Lords, which was in 10 R. 2. and parallelling his crime to
that of Sir William Thorp, who for it was condemned to dye; upon which he will
infer that Michael de la Poole was charged with a Capital crime, and accused of
it by the Commons before the Prelates, as well as before the other Lords, who
gave their Judgments upon it. He may examine the Record, and he will find that
the Impeachment was only for Misdemeanors, cozening the King in an exchange of
Land, when he was Chancellor, and some other miscarriages of that nature: And
it is the Impeachment, which is in the nature of an Indictment, that governs
the Trial, be the crime what it will: As it is laid in the Impeachment or the
Indictment, it must be so found upon the Trial, at the least it can be found no
higher, less happily it may be: A man that is Indicted for a Misdemeanour, cannot
be found Capitally Guilty. And though by a comparison, by way of aggravation,
it was likened to Thorp's Case, Michael de la Poole made it appear there was no
resemblance between them: And who will take pains to read the Record of Thorp,
which I dare say this Trifler never did, nor scarce any Record; will see that
the ground of that Judgment, which made it Capital, was that himself had
submitted to such a condition, when he took upon him the Office of Chief
Justice; the words are, Si sembla a eur le Jugement sur ceo rendu reasonable
depuis qil se obligea mesmes per son serement a tiel penance fill feist
alencontre: The Judgment given upon it, seemed to them to be agreeing to
reason, since he had bound himself by his Oath unto such a punishment, if he
did contrary to his Oath. And I must say, it would go hard with a great many,
if every one should be hanged that cozens the King.

And it is a pretty remark of his upon Sir John Lee's Case 42 E. 3. that the
Record saying, That he was brought before the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons,
and some of the Commons, etc. He observes, that if at this Trial any thing had
been objected which had been Capital, the Bishops were present at it: And I say
he might have made a truer observation than that, which is, That they might be
well assured, that nothing Capital was to be objected, because then the Bishops
would not have been present. And one thing I am sure is observable, which is,
that the Bishops, that is, the Prelates are here recorded to be present, and to
be ranked before the Dukes, Earls, etc. We are sure, if any be specified, they
are, and still ranked in the first place.

What my Gentleman means, in what he says upon the Trials 50 E. 3. I
understand not; they are the Cases of Richard Lions, the Lord Latimer, William
Ellis, the Lord Nevill, and John Peach, all these were only charged with
Misdemeanors; he says their crimes were great and heinous, and reckons the
loss of Forts among them, which he says was a crime Capital in Gomenitz and
Weston, 1 R. 2. and that I acknowledge the Bishops to have been present at
those Trials. But still this learned Gentleman, who brags here that he will not
suffer the World to be longer amused and imposed upon by my Notions, does
himself still mistake the business, not well understanding the nature of the
thing he treats of. Otherwise he would consider that the Trial of a Criminal
person must always be pursuant to his Charge; which is a point I have already
spoken to, therefore I shall say little here, only this, that the Impeachment
of the Commons against those persons, was only for Misdemeanors, their Trial
was accordingly, and the Bishops were present. And for what he says of
Gomenitz and Weston was clean another Case; it was for betraying those Towns
which they had undertaken to keep, when the force upon them was not so great:
However, it is not material what their Crime would appear to be upon proof, but
what their Charge was, and that was Capital. Then for what he adds of the
Bishops being comprehended under the general Apellation of Les Seigneurs du
Parliament; The Lords of Parliament; in several Cases which he there cites,
which he beats upon over and over again, in so many several places of his
Pamphlet, and sets up like a Man of Straw of his own making, to make sport
with, is what I never denied: my Position is, That I have still observed in all
Trials of Crimes, when Bishops could be present, it is so expressed that they
were so, as in all Crimes not Capital; and I do not think one Instance can be
given to the contrary. And my other Position, which I affirm with more
confidence, is, That if any of the other ranks of the Lords be mentioned, the
Bishops are so likewise, or else it is a certain argument that they were not
there.

My Gentleman is a little put to his Trumps in the Case of Gomenitz and Weston,
1 R. 2. That is so plain, first, the Commons coming and desiring, That such as
had lost Towns and Castles by their own default, might be punished, Per agard
des Seigneurs and Baronage; By the Judgment of the Lords and Baronage:
whereupon those Lords commanded Gomenitz and Weston to be brought before them,
and upon a long hearing, condemned them both to death: And the Lords are
particularly named, the Duke of Lancaster first, and ten more Earls and Barons
by name, of whom Roger Lord Clifford was the last; and then a general clause,
Et plusours autres Setgneurs, Barons and Bannerettes; And many other Lords,
Barons and Bannerets. Now this is so plain, and exclusive of all Prelates, as
my Gentleman is forced to confess, that it seems doubtful to him who these
Lords were, whether the Prelates, or the Lords particularly named; and plusours
autres Seigneurs, under which (he says) very probably the Lords Spiritual
might be comprised. I see a truth cannot come clearly from him, a thing that is
most clear, he makes it doubtful: And one thing he says most falsely, of a
Petition commanded to be read, Numb. 29. En cest Parliament per les Prelates,
and Seigneurs, Piers du Parliament; By the Prelates, and Lords, Peers of
Parliament; which Petition he will have to be concerning this matter, which is
most false. For that which is said Numb. 29. is of a Petition, and Writ of
Error, presented by William de Montague, Earl of Salisbury, which was then
read, and nothing at all concerning Gomenitz and Weston; which is a horrible
falsehood, and imposture of our Asserter to abuse the world so, and impose upon
the Reader. The first request of the Commons concerning this business, and to
have this matter examined is Numb. 38. and then Numb. 39. there is mention of a
Schedule given in by Weston, and the Record says, Ueue and leave la dite cedule
en plein Parliament; The Schedule being seen and read in full Parliament; and
any thing concerning Weston or Gomenitz before this, there is not: But some
falsehood he must still add of his own, for the Jesuits Verse is very
applicable to him, Verba damus cum nostra damus, quia fallere nostrum est;
Et cum nostra damus, nil nisi verba damus.
And indeed throughout his whole Pamphlet he does but Verba dare, take Verba,
Words, as in opposition to reality and truth, for it is full of falsehoods; or
take Words in opposition to matter and good sense, for his whole Book is a very
bundle of words, without any good matter in it. But one thing more I cannot but
observe, it is his insisting so much upon a thing, which I am confident himself
does not believe, though I have known a teller of stories tell one of his own
invention so often, that at last himself has begun to believe it to be a
truth: It is, that after the naming several Lords, and ending with some Barons,
there is a general expression, ^t plusours autres Seigneurs, Barons and
Bannerettes; And many other Lords; Barons and Bannerets; my confident Gentleman
has the boldness to add, Under which probably the Lords Spiritual might be
comprised; which he knows the Prelates of those times, if they had been
concerned in it, would never have endured, and the Clerk of the Parliament
would as soon have eaten Fire, as have entered it so.

Then in the Case of the Murderers of John Imperial, a public Minister, 3 R.
2. because I observe, that it is expressed in the Parliament* Roll, that the
Bishops were not present at the framing of the Act to make it Treason in them,
which I grant, in other places of my Letter they might have been, being to pass
an Act of Parliament in a Legislative way, my Gentleman is pleased to say, That
I forget my self: In truth No, I did suppose it, and do suppose it to be a good
Argument a minore, to show that the Prelates were then so modest, as to
withdraw upon the passing of a Law for the greater punishment of such a Capital
Crime, which in strictness perhaps they did not need to have done, much more
then would they avoid the sitting as Judges to take away life in a judicial
way, which they could no ways pretend to: But my Gentleman loves to quarrel,
and scribble Paper, though to no purpose.

To the Case of Sir Ralph Ferrers, 4 R. 2. he only sings over his tedious plain
Song, That under the general word of Lords of Parliament, Bishops may be
comprehended, and therefore he will have it, That they must be so: And much
good may it do him with his Crambe bis cocta, I may say centies cocta, for I
think he serves up this same dish a hundred times in this his learned Treatise.

But I may not let pass what he says upon the Case of the Bishop of Norwich, 7
R. 2. how extreme falsely he recites things, taking all upon trust, how this man
or the other man cites a Record, but never seeing the Record it self, which
perhaps he cannot so much as read. He desires it may be taken notice of, that
for those Misdemeanors he was adjudged to make Fine and Ransom to the King,
and that the Judgment was passed upon him by the Lords by assent of
Parliament; where he says, he hopes I will not deny but that there were
Bishops present, and for this sends me to Cotton's Abridgement, 7 R. 2. n. 23.
but if he would have looked upon the Parliament Roll he would have found this,
Perquoy del a^ent des Countes, Barons and autres Seigneurs Temporelz presentz
en ce Parliament est assentuz and accordez que vous soiez en la mercile Roy, and
mis au fin and raunceon pur vostre malfait solonc la quantitee and qualitee
dicell: Therefore by the assent of the Earls, Barons, and other Lords Temporal
present in this Parliament, it is agreed and accorded, that you shall be at the
Kings mercy, and put to Fine and Ransom, for your misdeeds, according to its
quantity and quality. You see now how this man would impose upon us, and what
stuff he brings to make good his assertion: If I had been guilty of such a
falsehood, I should have heard of it to purpose, that both my ears would have
rung again; and no Ink this Gentleman could have got black enough to set it out
in its colors.

Then he comes to the Case of Michael d la Poole, 10 R. 2 where he says the
same things he did before, and which I have already answered, so to that I
refer you.

The next is the 11 R. 2. where the Prelates withdrawing from Parliament, by
reason of matters of blood, which were then to come into agitation, enter a
Protestation with a Salvo to their right of sitting in Parment, which my
Gentleman will have to be meant even of their being present at the agitation of
those matters, if they were so pleased. This has been treated of before at
large already, to which I refer you; I will only observe this further at
present, out of the words of their Protestation, first, they say, Quia in
praesenti Parliamento agitur de nonnullis materiis, in quibus non licet nobis
aut alicui eorum juxta Sacrorum Canonum instituta quomodolibet personaliter
interesse, ea propter pro nobis and eorum quolibet protestamur, and eorum
quilibet hic presens etiam protestatur, quod non intendimus nec volumus sicuti
de jure non possumus nec debemus, nec intendit, nec vult aliquis eorum dum de
hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur, quomodolibet interesse, sed nos and eorum
quemlibet in ea Part penitus absentaxe: This they declare, That it is not
lawful for them, nor any of them, by the institutions of the Holy Canons, to be
personally present, and that of Right they cannot, nor ought to be there, and
therefore they do not intend in any sort, quomodolibet, to be present, but
wholly to absent themselves, while those matters are handling. Can any man now
have the forehead to maintain, that they could have a thought of challenging
still a right, contrary to such prohibitions, and to say, that it was only the
Canon Law that did prohibit them: I say still that the Canon Law was to them
above all Laws, and the Prelates of those times conceived themselves to be
above all other Laws; even not to be subject to them, but what the Canon Law
did allow or forbid, was accordingly by them held to be most lawful or
unlawful. The Salvo they add, makes it clear, Iure paritatis nostrae and
cuju^ibet eorum interessendi in dicto Parliamento, quoad omnia and singula
inibi exercenda nostris and eorum cuju^ibet Statui and Ordini congruentia in
omnibus salbis; The right of our Parity, and of every one of them (that is, our
equal right in the general, and of every one of us in particular, with the rest
of the Lords) of being present and acting in the said Parliament, as to all
things and every thing befitting our State and Order, always remaining unto us
safe and entire. Now I would ask, if it can be imagined, that they would, by
way of Protestation, reserve to themselves a liberty (when they pleased) to do
what they said was not lawful for them to do, and that which of right, and
according to the Law to which they were subject and must obey, they could not,
nor ought to meddle with? And if such things can be thought to be Statui and
Ordini congruentia, for their Salvo extends only to such things as are
agreeable to their State and Order. Indeed, I think it a solecism to have such
a thought. And I know it will be excepted against, that I do take Paritas here
in such a sense, and not to be Nomen Apellativum, to signify Peerage, a rank
of men; but I consider how it is put, that it is Paritas interessendi in
Parliamento, which in my opinion is proper to render a Parity, or an equal
right with others, to be present in Parliament. But let them construe it
Peerage, it matters not to me, I have handled that point fully by it self in my
former Letter, and shall do it again in this before I make an end, to show I am
not afraid of that expression; and though in those times the Prelates gave
themselves sometimes that Character, that it did not at all belong unto them.
And he beats upon this again, That this was left out purposely by me in my
citing this Protestation, which I have sufficiently cleared already amongst his
Postulata's, therefore I shall not trouble you with it again in this place.

In the Case of Thomas Haxey, 20 R. 2. my Gentleman is so ingenious, as to say,
He believes the Bishops were not present, but then he tells you why; because it
was an erroneous Judgment, and an Irregular Condemnation, and so commends their
Prudence: And sure, he has been with some Witch to raise some of those
Prelates from the Grave, as the Witch of Endor did Samuel, to tell him the true
cause why they withdrew themselves, and did then forbear to use their Right, as
he says it is lawful for every man to do, else he could never have hit so pat
upon the true cause of their withdrawing, whereas otherwise a man might say it
was because they knew they had no right to be there; and if it had been their
right, they should the rather have made use of it, to prevent and hinder an
unrighteous Judgment, and have caused a righteous one to be given. And more
than that, if it was their Right, and that they had a calling to be there, they
were bound to attend the Service, and I think it would have been a breach of
Duty, and a Sin in them to withdraw themselves from it.

And now I come to a Bundle of Words indeed, it is what he says concerning
their Proxies, 21 R. 2. out of which one shall have much ado to pick some
sense, and what it is he would be at, I will do my endeavor in it. He first
puts us in mind of his fifth Postulatum, and of what he said there of the
difference between the Matter of a Law, and the Manner of its enacting, and
that a Law may be repealed for the Matter of it, and yet the Manner of making
it still hold good. This I suppose he says, because I except against the
authority which that Parliament, at the desire of the Commons, gave the Bishops
to make their Common Procurator, in regard that whole Parliament was afterward
repealed, and consequently all it did, made null and void. Yes, says he, the
Parliament was repealed by 1 H. 4. because it condemned those who were his
friends, as Traitors to the King and Government; yet the proceedings in that
Parliament were just and lawful. To which I answer, That what was done that
Parliament, agreeing with the practice and usage of other Parliaments, was
certainly just for the Manner of the doing, though the Matter might be
repealed, and made null: But what was never done before in any Parliament, nor
any thing like it, could not receive any stamp of Authority for its being done
in this Parliament, because the Parliament it self had no authority, a
subsequent Parliament repealing it, and making it as if it had never been: And
this of all the Bishops joining to make a Common Proctor was never done in any
Parliament before nor since.

If any should object, that Henry the Fourth was an Usurper, and had no right
nor Title to repeal former Parliaments, nor to make any Laws. This were an
Objection if it should be allowed, would have a long tail, and carry a very bad
consequence, for it would sweep away at once all the good Laws that were made
in three Kings raigns, and would make such a Hiatus in our Statute Laws, as
would put things into a very great disorder. We know that in Edward the
Fourth's time, which followed immediately after those three Henry's, in all the
Acts of Parliament which passed, when mention is made of any thing done in
those Kings Reigns, still what was done is allowed of, and confirmed, and to
their Persons and Government, the Parliament still gives this Character, that
they were Kings indeed, but not of right. Which implies the stamp of Sovereign
power and authority to be set upon all their actions, and so upon the
Parliaments that were summoned and held by them, and principally there, because
of the concurrence and conjunction of the whole Kingdom in all things there
done. Nay, in some Acts of Parliament we find care taken, that nothing should
clash with what had been done in Parliament by some of those Kings, as 14 E. 4.
c. 4. there is a Statute concerning Breakers of Truce, and a Proviso in it,
That this Act shall not extend to any Act or Ordinance made 2 H. 5. late
indeed, and not of right, King of England. But still he is acknowledged King of
England, de facto, which goes a great way to authorize any thing done under
their power. Therefore 11 H. 7. c. 1. A Law is provided to indemnifie all
persons that shall do service to the King in being, whether he have right or no.

As for what is said of the Bishops making their Common Proxy, at the prayer of
the House of Commons, That their Proceedings might be valid, and not questioned
in future Parliaments by reason of their absence, and that diverse Judgments
had been reversed, because they were not present. It is true, it is so
expressed in the Roll of that void Parliament, which as it has no authority
nor validity in it self, so it is very strange, that if there had been ground
for this apprehension, there should remain nothing upon Record in all the Rolls
of Parliament, that ever any Judgment, or any other act done in any Parliament
had been so repealed. We know it was once attempted 2 H. 5. by Thomas
Montacute, Earl of Salisbury (as I told you in my former Letter) who brought
his Writ of Error to reverse the Judgment given against his Father 2 H. 4.
because the Bishops (as he alleges there) being Peers of Parliament, were not
parties to that Judgment, but it was declared to be no Error, and his Petition
was rejected. And we know that in Edward the First's time, there was a
Parliament held at St. Edmonds-bury, Clero excluso, not a Prelate admitted to
it. And in Henry the Eighth's time all the Judges of England declared it for
Law, That the King might hold a Parliament with his Lords Temporal and Commons,
altogether without the Lords Spiritual. Tout sans les Spirituels Seigneurs, it
is in Keilwayes Reports, in Dr. Standish's Case. Therefore there is no reason
to think, that any Judgments were repealed upon the Bishops being absent,
seeing their presence is not of necessity for the constituting and sitting of a
Parliament. And especially not for the Judgments which we treat of in Capital
Cases, because by what appears upon Record, and by all the Laws, Canon, Common
and Statute Law, they never were present, I always except that Unparliamentary
Extravagant Proceeding and Judgment of Henry the Sixth, in the twenty eighth
of his Reign, upon William de la Pool.

Our Asserter tells us of some Judgments reversed 15 E. 2. particularly in the
Case of the Spencers, but he does not tell us where he finds it, nor I believe,
does he know himself, having only taken it up some where upon trust, as he does
other things. But in this 21 R. 2. upon the Petition of the Earl of Gloucester,
it appears by the Record of the proceedings against the two Spencers, Father
and Son, in that 15 E. 2. which are there repeated at large, that there was
nothing Capital in their Case, neither in the Charge nor in the Judgment, so
as this signifies nothing to the matter in question, which is all can be said
to it. And as little shall I say to his witty allusion of bringing me to a
sight of my self, as Alexander did his Horse to the Sun, that he might not
kick; only this I might say, if I were as foul-mouthed as he, that indeed such
a scoffing injurious Scribbler were fitter to be answered with a kick, than
with fair reasoning by way of Argument.

Next we come to the 1 H. 4. Sir William Rickhill's Case, where I think, I
should do well only to transcribe what he has written, to show it needs no
answer, but that I should waste too much Ink and Paper: I represented in my
Letter to you, that Rickill being sent for into Parliament, no formal charge
being against him, to give an account only by what order he had taken the Duke
of Gloucester's Confession at Calais, which he did, the Bishops present; but
when they came to consider what was to be done upon it, then only the Lords
Temporal were asked their opinion, which I allege to show, that the Bishops
there were not advised with, because it might be preparatory to a further
proceeding by way of Trial: And this our Asserter says, is to serve an
Hypothesis, and learnedly gives it us in Greek, and bids the Reader judge, and
so do I. Then for the Trial of Hall, who was one of the murderers of the Duke
of Gloucester, he has the condescension to acknowledge it probable that the
Bishops were not there, but then says, that they left it to the Temporal
Lords, without any Impeachment to their right, it being secured before by the
security of a confessed Act of Parliament, 11 R. 2. it is their Protestation he
harps at. And if I had as much Greek as he, I would say it in Greek, that he
now does serve an Hypothesis, or in good English, beg the Question, for that is
his meaning of serving an Hypothesis, for the Right which the Bishops there
saved, he will have to be, and has forty times repeated it, to judge Capitally
when they please; but I have clearly showed it was not of their assisting in
those Judgments, as he still will have it to be, but other Judgments and
proceedings in Parliament, where in truth they had a right to assist.

Then follows the Case of William Sautre, 2 H. 4. where he is pleased to give
me a wipe for stiling him the Protomartyr of England; and out of his great
reading informs, that St. Alban lived some hundreds of years before him; but he
must give me leave to inform him, that the common acceptance of Martyrs
amongst us Protestants now, is of such Orthodox persons as have suffered for
the truth, whom the Papists have put to death for Heretics, and this man was
the first of them in England. He has some other notable Remarks; one is, that
whereas I said that the Bishops and Clergy of those times were the chief
Promoters of bringing him to his end, which I meant of their declaring him an
Heretic, and then turning him over to the Secular Power, he observes upon it,
That then they acted in a Capital Case, which he says makes against me: And
that if it was the Lords Temporal who signed the Warrant for his execution,
that the Bishops had no hand in it, and so have escaped my lash, but who were
his Judges, nondum constat, I am sure it does not constare to me to what
purpose he says all this, which I do not find to make either for him, or
against me.

No more, than what he says of the Case of the Earls of Kent, Huntington, and
Salisbury, 2 H. 4. who he grants were declared and adjudged Traitors by the
Temporal Lords, and no Bishops present, and then says, he will give a Parallel
Case, it is of the Earl of Cambridge, and the Lord Scroope, 3 H. 5. where the
Bishops were present, and that I confess they might be so, because it was in
passing an Act of Parliament to confirm their Attainder. But my Gentleman is
mistaken, as he commonly is almost in all his Assertions, for the Cases are not
parallel, the Earls of Kent, Huntington and Salisbury had no Trial, had not
been legally condemned and attainted, but being taken in Circester by the
Townsmen rising upon them, were by them in a tumultuary manner put to death,
and the House of Peers afterward in a judicial way adjudged the fact of those
Lords Treason, and them Traitors; and this was done only by the Temporal Lords,
who are there particularly named. But the Earl of Cambridge and the Lord
Scroope had been Tried, Condemned and Executed at Southampton, and this
Judgment afterward was brought into Parliament, and there confirmed by Act of
Parliam. where the Bishops were, and might be present: but our Asserter has
ill luck in all his allegations.

And he will have as ill luck in what he says to the Earl of Northumberland's
Case, 5 H. 4. where I am sure he begs the Question, and does Disputare ex non
concesso, for wherever Lords, or Peers of Parliament are mentioned, he will
have the Bishops to be comprehended, whereas those general words, as all other
such, are to be understood Secundum subjectam materiam: If it be in a Case
where the Bishops are particularly by the Law of the Land, and the continual
practice in the execution of that Law excluded, and others are comprised under
the same general expression, it must be understood of them only, and not of
those upon whom there is such a bar. Now they who will have the Bishops to be
Peers, do not make them the sole and only Peers, but allow Earls and Barons to
be Peers with them. But I do not allow them to be Peers at all, our Asserter
will prove them to be Peers by two Records, Mautravers Case, 4 E. 3. and their
Protestation, 11 R. 2. I have already given an account of what is in Mautravers
Case, the words are, All the Peers, the Earls and Barons being met, etc. Is it
not ridiculous to expound this, that by All the Peers is meant only the
Bishops, as if the dignity of the Peerage did principally belong to them, that
they should be Peers Sans queue, as the French denominate a thing that belongs
to some particular person more properly, and in a more eminent degree, than it
does to any body else? Or is it not more rational, and indeed only so, to
understand this expression to import that the Earls and Barons were the Peers
who then met, and that saying, All the Peers, the Earls and Barons, etc. the
Earls and Barons are an Exegesis, an exposition of the foregoing general
denomination of Peers, so Mautravers Case makes nothing for him, but much
against him: And as to their own Protestation, 11 R. 2. indeed they call
themselves Peers there, but that does not make them so, I have spoken to this
point already very fully, and sorry I am that I am forced to do it again, and
to do it so often, but he leads me to it, who does as the Proverb says,
Reciprocare serram, go over and over the same thing, as much as ever any man
did, I think, and as often mistake. The force of my Argument to prove that by
the general appellation of the Lords who protested against the Kings delivering
the Earls Petition to the Judges, to have their opinion, and judged the fact
themselves not to be Treason, but a Trespass, could not be meant Bishops,
because the Record says, Sur quoy le dit Conte molt humblement remercia le
Roy, and les ditz Seigneurs ses Piers de lour droiturel Judgment: Whereupon the
said Earl very humbly thanked the King, and the said Lords his Peers, for their
right Judgment. Now the Bishops could not be Peers to the Earl, who could not
try him nor be tried by him, they being to be tried only by Commoners, and
Commoners to try them, if there be occasion, of which more shall be said
afterward in its proper place. I will here only observe one thing, that our
Asserter has it instead of Humbly thanked, Humbly reverenceth the King; which
he takes out of the Pamphlet that goes under the name of Mr. Seldens Baronage,
which I have ever looked upon as a spurious Book, not made by Mr. Seldom, who
would never have so translated Remercia, and being full of faults and
falsehoods, yet this Book, and Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgment, which has
likewise faults enough, are the chief Oracles that he consults, and which do
many times deceive him, as the ancient Oracles did those who resorted to them.
Of as little signification is what he adds of the Lords of Parliament declaring
the action of Henry Percy, who was killed at the Battle of Shrewsbury to be
Treason; where he does assure you the Bishops were present, and you shall have
his Oath for it, I dare say, if you will: And how does he prove it? Why, says
he, the Archbishop of Canterbury was present at the former Judgment, for in
express words he prayed the King, that forasmuch as he and other Bishops were
suspected to have been of confederacy with Henry Percy, that the Earl of
Northumberland would now publish the truth, whereupon the Earl, by the Kings
command upon his Oath, purged them all. And then learnedly argues, That here
was no departure of the Archbishop and of the other Bishops concerned: And I
believe him, for in truth here is a good proof that they were all present, but
to be purged themselves, that they should not be thought Criminal, not to act
as Judges, which is what our worthy Asserter does assert, and what he would
have us think that he fully proves, which he does more solito, that is Cujus
contrarium, etc. Then my Gentleman (for he is an active Gentleman) makes an
Alman leap to the very end of the last leaf of Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgement,
where he finds a marginal note of Mr. Prynn's to this purpose, That the three
Estates must concur to make a Parliament, or Richard the Third's title would
still be ambiguous; and this he thrusts in here by head and shoulders, I
understand not how to the present purpose, I think only to have the occasion to
say, that Mr. Prynn knew better of Records, and what Plein Parliament means
than I, and another whom he joins with me, and twenty more such as we are,
which I deny not, though he should add to the number, himself, and forty more
who were no wiser than he, who all of them would not make our balance two
grains the heavier.

Then he comes to the Case of the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord
Bardolph, 7 H. 4. which, he says, I say is like to that of the Earls of Kent,
Huntington and Salisbury, 2 H. 4. and that is true, for in both those Cases,
those Lords after their deaths (having had their lives taken from them in a
tumultuary way, without any formal Trial) the business being brought into
Parliament, were by the Temporal Lords, in a Judicial way of proceeding,
adjudged to be Traitors, and their fact to be Treason. But then he adds, that I
likewise make the Case of the Earl of Cambridge, 3 H. 5. like to these, which
is not true, being of a clean different nature, an Act of Parliament which had
its rise from a request of the House of Commons, who brought it up to the
Lords; here, I say, the Bishops were, and might be present.

That which he says to the Case of Sir John Oldcastle, 5 H. 5. is so
threadbare with rubbing it over and over again, and has been so often said,
and so often answered, as that it would too much trespass upon your patience,
Sir, to trouble you with any one word of it more; I think I have made it
exceeding clear, where under the general term of Lords of Parliament, Bishops
may be understood to be comprehended, and where not. Those particular Cases
which he now brings to prove his Assertion, are point blank against him, that
is the Case of Mautravers, 4 E. 3. and of Gomenitz and Weston, 1 R. 2. in that
of Gomenitz many particular Lords are named, several Earls and Barons, and then
a general clause, Et plusieurs autres Seigneurs, Barons and Bannerettes. Is it
possible to think that Bishops come in that fag end? Indeed I do observe one
thing in this Case of Sautre, which is not in any of the other; I cannot say
that I lay any great stress upon it, yet something it is, that the Record
expresses that the Bishops had done with him, declaring him a Heretic, and
then Relinquentes eum ex nunc Iudicio seculari: Leaving him from henceforward
to the Secular Judgment, as if they should say, They would have no more to do
with him.

And as convincingly he argues in the Case of Sir John Mortimer, 2 H. 6. He
confesses with me that the Indictment found against him at the Guild hall was
brought into Parliament, before the Duke of Gloucester, and the Lords Temporal,
Fuit liberatum, It was there delivered to them; and then he cites a Record (as
he makes it) De advisamento dictorum Dominorum auctoritate istius Parliamenti
ordinatum est and statutum quod ipse usque ad Turrim ducatur; By the advice of
the said Lords, it was ordained and enacted by authority of the said
Parliament, and by the advice of the said Lords Temporal, that he should be led
to the Tower: These are his words, and how he has mangled, and falsely rendered
and expounded the Record, you will judge by the words of the Record it self,
which I will here faithfully set down. It is this, Numb. 18. Memorand. quod 26.
die Februarii anno praesenti de advisamento Dominorum Temporalium ac ad
Supplicationem Communitatis Regni Angliae in praesenti Parliamento existentiam
redditum fuit quoddam Iudicium versus Johan. de Mortimer, de Bishops. Natfield
in Comitatu Nertford Chevalier, cujus quidem Iudicii recordum patet in Schedula
per Iohannem Hals unum Iusticiariorum Domini Regis de banco edita and praesenti
Rotulo consuta: Memor. That the 26th of February of this present year, by the
advice of the Lords Temporal, and at the Petition of the Commons in this
present Parliament, a certain Judgment was given upon Sir John Mortimer of
Bishops-Hatfield, in the County of Hertford, Knight; the Record of which
Judgment appears in a Schedule drawn by John Hals, one of the Justices of the
King's Bench, and fastened to this Roll. Then follows the Schedule it self,
where is set down what past at Guildhall upon the sinding of the Indictment,
and how that Indictment was brought into the Parliament, Coram duce Bedfordiae
ac aliis Dominis Temporalibus; Before the Duke of Bedford, and the other Lords
Temporal; and how Sir John Mortimer was brought before them by the Lieutenant
of the Tower, and how the Commons desired the Indictment might be affirmed, and
that Judgment might be given upon him: Then follows, Super hoc viso and
before intellecto Indictamento, per dictum Ducem de advisamento dictorum
Dominorum Temporalium ac ad requisitionem totius Communitatis authoritate
istius Parliamenti ordinatum est and statutum quod Indictamentum affirmetur,
and praedictus Johannes Mortimer de proditionibus praedictis sit convictus, ad
Turrim ducatur, usque ad furcas de Tyburn trahatur, and super eas suspendatur,
etc. Hereupon the Indictment being viewed and well understood, it was by the
foresaid Duke, by the advice of the said Lords Temporal, and at the request of
all the Commons, ordained and decreed that the Indictment should be affirmed,
and the foresaid John Mortimer stand convicted of his foresaid Treasons, should
be carried to the Tower, then drawn to the Gallows at Tyburn, and there hanged,
etc. This was a Judgment of the House of Peers in their Judicial capacity,
upon an Impeachment, and at the pursuit of the House of Commons, who prosecuted
and pressed the evidence before the Lords; the words of the Record are, Tota
Communitas praefatum Indictamentum illud in omnibus fuxta vim formam and
effectum efusoem pro vero and fideli Indictamento affirmat, ac praefatis Duci
ac aliis Dominis Temporalibus supplicat eadem Communitas quatenus iidem Dux and
Domini Indictamentum praedictum pro vero and fideli Indictamento affirmare
vellent, and quod executio dicti Iohannis Mortimer ut de proditionibus and
feloniis convicti fiat; The whole House of Commons do affirm the foresaid
Indictment to be in all points for the force, form and effect thereof, a true
and legal Indictment, and that execution of the said John Mortimer, as of one
convicted of the said Treasons and Felonies may follow. This you see was a
formal Trial in all points, and a Judgment upon it, and so it is entered upon
the Roll, such a day, 26 Februarii de advisamento Dominorum Temporalium ad
Supplicationem Communitatis redditum fuit quoddam Iudicium versus Iohannem de
Mortimer, etc. And our Asserter here tells us a tale of a Tub, that the matter
should be decreed after by Authority of Parliament, of which the Bishops are an
essential part, and therefore were present, which is an excellent Chimae^a, as
if the Advisamentum Dominorum Temporalium, and Authoritas Parliamenti, were two
distinct things, and the work of several persons, some actors in the one who
were not so in the other, and that the advice of the Lords Temporal had
produced some other things which had a greater authority, and that the Bishops
had joined in that, which shows his ignorance in the course of Parliaments, for
the Judgment which is given Judicially in the House of Lords has upon it the
stamp and the authority of the whole Parliament, and that Advisamentum of the
Lords Temporal here, was the Judgment, as is the advice and assent of the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in Parliament in the passing
of an Act of Parliament, for when a thing is said to be enacted, by the King,
with the advice and assent of the two Houses, that advice and assent of the two
Houses is their passing and enacting of it, as to their part in it: For any
thing that is done in either House, if the King be mentioned in it, is said
still to be done by him with the Advice and Consent of that House, so in a
Judgment judicially given by the House of Peers (where anciently the King was
often present, when they acted judicially) it is said to be given by the King,
by the advice of his Lords, and here the Duke of Gloucester represented the
Kings Person, and held the Parliament by Special Commission; so the Judgment
is said to be given by him, by the advice of the Lords Temporal. And so the
Lords 28H. 6. when the King of himself gave the Judgment upon the Duke of
Suffolk, the Lords protested against it, because it proceeded not by their
advice and counsel: For that is it which gives the form and being to the
Judgment, and stamps upon it the Authority of the Parliament.

Then he comes to a Precedent without debate, as he calls it, which is that of
28H. 6. the Duke of Suffolk's case, and confessed so by me, as he says, but
not truly. For I do not allow it to be a just and legal precedent. I do
acknowledge that the Bishops were present all along the whole transaction of
that business, but as I said in my first Letter to you, so I must and do say in
this, there was in it from the beginning to the end nothing regular, nor
according to the usage and practice of Parliaments: Then it cannot be said to
be a Precedent, no more than a Monster, that has no shape nor limb of a true
Child, can be said to be a Child. As for the particular deformities of this
Monster (for so I may term it) they are already so fully deciphered in my
former Letter, as I will not now trouble you with them again: So it shall pass
at this time as he will have it, for a Precedent without debate, for it shall
not be any further debated. Only I must say still, it is but a single
Precedent, and of what force that is, or can be, when the constant course and
practice of Parliaments has been to the contrary, I leave it to you to judge:
One single Precedent against all other Parliaments, is an unequal match one
would think. I have heard of a great conquering Prince, that gave it for his,
Motto, Souls contra omnes, but I have not heard it said so of a Parliament,
Solum contra omnia. The authority of any one Parliament I know to be very
great, yet it is a known Maxim in the Law, Parliament poit errer, A Parliament
may err; and another Parliament may mend what one does amiss; Parliament Men
are men, and may, and do sometimes mistake as well as other men; it is possible
they did so, 28H. 6. and more than probable they did so, because no other
Parliament before nor since, did ever do the like. And for his Recapitulation
of all the forementioned Records, in all twenty seven, which he makes to prove
that this was not a single Precedent, as I affirm it to be, all the rest (as he
says) concurring with it, to admit Bishops to be Judges in Capital Cases, I
will only say, Sit liber Iudex, resort to the Records themselves, and to what
is already said in my former Letter and this, and then judge if he says true.

Then he has a fling at me for what I say upon the Case of Nicholas de
Segrave, 33 E. 1. where he must give me leave to say with truth, what he says
falsely of me upon several occasions, which is this, That he has not set down
things Faithfully and Ingenuously. He says Segrave came into full Parliament
into the presence of the King, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and several
Bishops, Earls and Barons, acknowledged his offense, and submitted to the Kings
pleasure: Upon this he observes, That here was no Iudicatory of Parliament; and
then adds, that the King pardoned him, De advisamento Comitum, Baronum,
Magnatum, and aliorum: By the advice of the Earls, Barons, Nobles, and others.
You shall see now how faithful and ingenuous a dealer our Asserter is, but
certainly he takes all upon trust, and takes not the pains to see any thing
himself. First, I do acknowledge it was no formal Trial, for there was no
impeachment nor Indictment against him, but I must say it was Tantamount, for
he comes in upon Summons into the Parliament then sitting, where the Prelates
were among the rest of the Members of the House, and how long they continued
there, it appears not by the Record, but he being come, Nicholas de Warwick,
the Kings Council, charged him, and pressed matters against him. And then the
King, as the Record says, willing to have the advice of the Earls, Barons,
Nobles, and others of his Counsel, enjoined them upon the Homage, Fidelity and
Allegiance which they owed him, to give him faithful Counsel, what punishment
was fit to be inflicted upon such a fact so confessed: Who all of them upon a
serious debate, and advising upon the matter, and well weighing all the
particulars of it, and what was by the said Nicholas plainly and expressly
acknowledged, do say, That such a man deserved to lose his life. But afterward
the Record says, Dominus Rer tamen de gratia sua speciali pietate motus,
malens vitam quam mortem eorum, qui se voluntati suae submittunt, remittit
eidem Nicholao Iudicium vitae and membrorum. But the King moved by his special
grace and piety, desiring rather the life than the death of those that submit
to his will, did remit unto the said Nicholas the Judgment of loss of Life or
Member. Here you see the King advised not with his Prelates, but with the
Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and what did they advise? Not to pardon him,
as our Asserter will have it, but they say he deserved death, and then the King
of himself would not have it go to that extremity. Now whether this Judgment
would have been final, if they had pronounced sentence, and adjudged him to
death, as they only said such a man deserved death, or whether this was only to
be preparatory to a Trial, and to proceed afterward upon a formal Impeachment;
I confess it is not clear to me, nor is it greatly material to our purpose,
only it shows the Bishops were to give no advice in it one way or other; and it
is rather stronger to prove they are not to meddle in such matters, if it was
but preparatory: For it shows that in those Capital Cases they must have
nothing to do with them to determine and judge any thing concerning them, from
one end to the other, ab ovo usque ad mala, as the saying is, neither in the
Judgment it self, nor any thing leading to it.

So he comes to the Archbishop Becket's Case, where he notably spends his
mouth, but like an ill Hound, all upon false Hunting, and indeed runs riot so
far, as he is not to be lashed in: He fills several leaves of his Book with
Encomium's of the Popish Clergy, because some of them sometimes did what it was
their duty to do, which does not excuse them in the general current of their
proceedings, commonly to stand for the authority of the Pope, and the Sea of
Rome, against the Regal power, and the authority of Parliaments, as they did 20
R. 2. saying, They were sworn to the Pope, and to that See, and they would
oppose whatever the King, and the Temporal Lords should do. En restriaion del
Poair Apostolic ou derogagation de la libertoe de Saina Eglise; In restraint
of the Power Apostolic, or derogation of the Liberty of Holy Church.

So he takes much pains to assert the Kings natural right to command his
Subjects to serve him upon any emergency, and so to make Clergymen
Justitiaries, if he see cause for it: Which then gives them power of
Judicature, and I do acknowledge it, but it is to be understood of Judicature
in such Cases as the Law of the Land allows; we know they have been some of
them Lord Chancellours, Lord Treasurers, Lord Privy Seal; but can he show me,
that any of them judged in Cases of Blood? For this Case of Beckett's is
certainly misrepresented in Fitz-Stephens manuscript. We know there have been
heretofore in many Counties, Justices of Assize, which have been Clergymen,
joined with others in Commission, who were not Clergymen, to take Assizes in
the County: And the Act of Parliament, 27 E. 1. c. 3. coming to give power to
those Justices of Assize to deliver the Gaols, and so to be made Justices of
Jail-deliver, and try Felons and Murderers; it provides, that if one of them
be a Clerk, then one of the most discreet Knights of the Shire shall be
associated to him, that is a Layman, and be empowered by the Knights Writ to
deliver the Gaols of the Shires, and chasten and punish whom they shall find to
be guilty. And this Statute is confirmed, 2 E. 3. c. 2. which makes it manifest
what the intendment of the Law is in that particular, that Clerks must not
meddle to judge in Cases of Blood, and must hold good even for Bishops, who are
all of them Clerks.

As for this Case of Beckets, which only stands upon the credit of a
Manuscript, said to be made by Fitz-Stephens, a Monk, whom he characterizes for
a sober and grave Historian, and more solito, out of the sweetness of his
nature gives me a lash, saying, It is usual with me to let fall expressions to
vilify Testimonies and Precedents when they make against me; and this because
I style it a Blind Manuscript, and suspect the Author as partial, having been a
creature of Beckets, and consequently no friend to the King. And therefore I
give rather credit to the unanimous consent of the Historians of those times,
who do not relate the passages of that Trial to be as he makes them, than I do
to him and his Manuscript. I call it a Blind Manuscript, because it sees not
the light, lies obscure in some bodies Closet, Mr. Seldom does not tell where,
and I dare say our Asserter never saw it, though he terms the Author a grave
Historian. His tale is, how at that great Council at Northampton,
Archiepiscopus laesae Majestatis Coronae Regiae arguitur, quia est a Rege
citatus pro causa Iohannis, neque venerat, neque idonee se excusasset, etc. The
Archbishop is questioned for Treason against the Crown of the King, because he
was summoned by the King in the Cause of John (that is one John the Marshal,
who complained that the Archbishop had done him injustice in his Court) and he
neither came, nor had sifficiently excused himself upon sickness, or any other
just reason which might necessarily hinder him, whereupon he was condemned to
forfeit his personal estate, and the Bishops and Barons not agreeing who should
pronounce the sentence, they putting it off from one to another, at last the
King commanded the Bishop of Winchester to do it. This is his story, and one
may think it a strange piece of Treason, one not to come immediately upon a
Summons to attend the King, especially if it be true what all the Historians
that write of those times have related of this business. Gervasius
Dorobernensis is an Author, as Mr. Seldom observes, who lived in that age, and
one of whom Mr. Seldom, and all Antiquaries (we are sure) have a good opinion:
and though our Asserter is confident enough to affirm they all have so of
Fitz-Stephen, it is of what I do not find, that much has been said by them to
show that, nor do I think that any of our Antiquaries, but Mr. Seldom, does so
much as mention him: And from Gervasius Dorobernensis, we have this relation,
Rex praecepit praesules and Proceres regni apud Northamptoniam una cum ipso
Archiepiscopo convenire, etc. The King commanded the Prelates and Nobles of the
Kingdom, together with the Archbishop himself, to meet at Northampton, where
the Archbishop was accused of many things; first, that he had not fully done
justice to one John that had a suit before him; then that upon this occasion
being called into the Kings presence, he neglected to come. To this the
Archbishop made answer, That John had all the justice done him that was due to
him, that he had illegally defamed his Court, that he would not swear upon the
Evangelists, as the custom is, but upon an old Song-book which he brought with
him. But that being upon this summoned, he came not into the Kings presence,
was not upon any contempt, but that he was hindered by a great sickness, and
that he had excused himself by two competent witnesses whom he had sent for
that purpose; yet this served not his turn, but Curiali Iudicio and Episcoporum
consensu condemnatus est; He was condemned by the Judgment of the Court, the
Bishops consenting to it, that all his personal estate should be at the Kings
disposing. This now is delivered unto us by an unquestionable known Author, who
lived in that time. Fitz-Stephen and he agree in the matter of the Accusation,
and agree in the Judgment, but Fitz-Stephen lays it to be Crimen laesae
Majestatis Coronae Regiae, High Treason, which must be for not coming to the
King when he was summoned: Gervasius says, that he sent his excuse by two
witnesses, who testified that he was then very sick, and not able to come,
which we all know to be a Lawful Essoine, De malo lecti, which cannot be
disallowed, but must excuse, nay, justify any bodies absence. Now can any body
that is master of common sense, believe Fitz-Stephens relation, who will have
this to be a Capital crime, High Treason, and a Capital proceeding upon it? We
see the Sentence was far from Capital, and could not have been such as it was,
if the Crime had been laid in the Accusation to be High Treason. Roger de
Hoveden in his relation of this business, makes no mention of Treason, He
says, That the King calling a great Council at Northampton, Taedium magnum
fecit Archiepiscopo, did a thing which much vexed the Archbishop, which was,
that he caused his Horses to be put into the Arch bishops Inn, whereupon the
Archbishop sent the King word, that he would not come to the Council till his
Inn was cleared of those Horses; yet upon the second day of the meeting, the
Arch bishop came into the Chapel where the Council sat, and there desired the
Kings leave, that he might go over into France to visit Pope Alexander who was
then there, which the King denied him, and said he should first answer for the
injustice he had done to John the Marshal, in his Court: This John having
complained to the King, that he had had a long suit in the Arch bishops Court
for some Land he held of him, and could have no Justice, and that thereupon,
Curiam Archiepiscopi Sacramento falst ficaverat secundum consuetudinem Regni:
He had, according to the custom of the Kingdom, upon Oath charged the Court
with wrong doing (which I take to be a protesting against the proceeding of
that Court, and the Judgment there given, in the nature of a Writ of Error.)
The Archbishop answered to this, That John had no injustice done him, and that
he brought into the Court a certain strange Book, and would swear upon that;
how for want of Justice, he left my Court, which the Officers that kept my
Court, looked upon as an injury done to me, because it is the Law of the
Kingdom, Quod qui Curiam alterius falsificare voluerit, oportet eum jurare
super sacrosancta Evangelia: Whoever will so charge a Court with false dealing,
must take his Oath upon the Holy Evangelists. Notwithstanding this, the King
swore he would have Justice done upon him. Et Barons Curiae; And the Barons of
the Court gave Judgment on him to be at the Kings mercy: Which Judgment the
Archbishop going about to reverse, (Iudicium illud falsificare, is the
expression) He was persuaded by the Barons to submit himself to the Kings mercy
for a Fine of five hundred pounds. Here is nothing in all this that can
possibly infer any thing like Treason.

And it is something observable, what both these Authors say of the Judgment
given; Gervasius says, Curiali Iudicio and Episcoporum consensu condemnatus
est; as if the part of the Bishops in this judgment were something differing
from the Act of the Court, and not comprised in it: Hoveden says, Barons
Curiae Regis judicaverunt eum; as if the Bishops had no hand in it at all.
Radulphus de Diceto Decanus Londinensis, I suppose Dean of Paul's, who lived in
those times, mentions this business, he says, That the Archbishop was
questioned upon John the Marshals complaint, and fined 500 l. and that he was
questioned likewise for moneys received by him, when he was Chancellor, for
some Bishoprics and Abbeys, of which he had received the profits, during their
vacancies, and that not finding the Bishops to be his friends, he appealed from
their Judgment, but then the Proceres, the Nobles, though he appealed from
their Judgment likewise, yet they In eum nec confessum nec convictum,
sententiam intorserunt: They wrested a Judgment against him, though he
confessed nothing, nor was at all convicted. You see here is not a word of
Treason laid to his charge, nor nothing Capital, or any thing toward it.
Matthew Paris tells you the same story, and almost in the very same words. Now
let any man judge, whether all those Historians concurring, or single
Fitz-Stephen disagreeing, deserves more credit: And that which has greatest
weight with me, is the Argument drawn ex natura rei, the crime which all agree
that the Archbishop was charged with, was his not appearing upon the Kings
Summons, which without a great and a very false Multiplying-Glass, cannot
appear to be any thing like Treason: So I must conclude, that since the Charge
against him had nothing of Capital in it, the proceedings upon it was not as
against a Capital Offender, not brought to Trial as a Prisoner, but came in
upon a bare Summons, and tarried there, and returned at full liberty, the
Judgment neither of loss of Life nor Limb, but merely Pecuniary, and, as some
of the Authors say, compounded with for five hundred pounds: I must I say,
conclude, that this whole Case is nothing to our purpose, and neither the Law
nor usage of Parliament did bar the Bishops from being personally present at
such a Trial.

And now I come to the point of Peerage, which I have so fully handled in my
former Letter, as I think I need not say much in this. Our Asserter brings
three Arguments to prove them to be Peers: The first is, That it is the general
style of all Parliaments from the beginning, to be Generale Concilium Cleri and
Populi, even before the coming in of the Normans; which no man denies. The
businesses of the Church, as well as of the Civil State are there determined;
the Writ of Summons shows it, which says, That the King intending to call a
Parliament, Pro quibusdam arduis negotiis Nos Statum and defensionem Regni
Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus. Bishops and Temporal Lords are
summoned, and heretofore several others were summoned as Bannerets, and
sometimes other persons of Quality who likewise were not Peers, and yet were
called to the Parliaments as pleased the King; and the Judges are so summoned
at this day, Super dictis negotiis tractaturi consilium suum impensuri. Where
the Bishops act as Bishops, and what by the Law of the Land, and the practice
and usage of Parliaments they ought to do, that they do, and may do; the
Temporal Lords in like manner, and so likewise the Judges every one acts in his
Sphere; but this neither gives the Bishops power to judge in Capital Causes, if
otherwise it be prohibited them, nor does it make them Peers, no more than it
did formerly the Bannerets, and others, for their being summoned to sit and
vote in the House of Peers: We had the experience of this the last Parliament,
a Baron pretending to a much ancienter station among the Peers, by proving that
his Ancestor had been summoned by one of our former Kings, to sit more than
once in the House of Lords, yet not making it appear that that favor had been
still continued to him; and it being made appear on the other side, that
several Families in this Kingdom would have the same pretense upon the like
ground, it was the opinion of the House, that he had no Right to it; and
consequently that his Ancestor was never acknowledged to be a Peer os the
Realm, and his Blood enobled, which otherwise would have descended from him to
his Posterity, and to this present Baron, who is since enobled by a later
Creation, but takes nothing from that Ancestor. So then it is clear, that
sitting in the House of Peers, and having a parity of Vote, and enjoying many
of the same privileges with the Peers, does not in true and proper speaking,
make the Bishops Peers; no more than 21 R. 2. Sir Thomas Percy sitting with the
Peers, and Voting with them, as Procurator for the Bishops, was thereby a Peer.

His next Argument is, That in several Rolls of Parliament they are expressly
called Peers, which cannot be denied, nor does that make them Peers, if the
essential parts of Peerage, be wanting to them: We know that denominations are
many times taken up in a large and improper sense, for some circumstances, some
similitudes, something which is extraneous unto them, yet wherein they agree
with things of another nature: And so Bishops having place and vote in the
House of Peers, and joining with the Peers of the Realm, sitting in Parliament,
in all things, with equal power uno excepto, saving only in cases of Blood, it
is no wonder if they are often styled Peers of Parliament. But the Precedents
he cites, are falsely recited both in the Case of Mautravers, and that of
Gomenitz and Weston, as I have showed before.

His third Argument is, That they have judged as Peers, upon Peers of
Parliament. But I deny that they judge there as Peers, but as called to the
Parliament, to be Members of the House of Lords, as Bannerets were formerly,
and many principal Gentlemen who were still Commoners, and some Officers, as
the Warden of the Cinque Ports, who was no Peer sometimes, and yet summoned up
to the House of Lords, and all these judged such Peers as were tried in those
Parliaments in which they sat.

However, that Bishops are not Peers of the Realm, and so consequently not
properly and truly Peers of Parliament, though often called so, I think will be
clearly made out.

First, I must, as I have formerly done, insist upon the Great Charter, which
Sir Edward Cook says, is declaratory of the Principal grounds of the
Fundamental Laws of England, and which the Statute made 25 E. 3. Confirmatio
Chartarum, will have to be observed as the Common Law, and all Judgments given
against it, to be undone and holden for naught, this Law is certainly to be
obeyed, and what is done in observance of this Law, is most legal: And it
enjoining every man to be tried by his Peers, and Bishops being tried by a Jury
of Commoners, Commoners are their Peers, and they are Peers to Commoners, and
not Peers of the Realm: Peers per eminentiam, as I may call them, or else Magna
Charta is broken, and made a Law of no authority.

2. To be a Peer of the Realm, their Blood must be enobled, and their Persons
dignified; nor can they otherwise be put into the same rank with those who are
so, which would make but an ill accouplement, and they would never draw well
together. Now Bishops do not sit in Parliament ratione Nobilitatis, but ratione
Officii, as Stamford says in his Pleas of the Crown, p. 153. En respect de
lour possession se launcient Baronies anneres a lour dignitees: In respect of
their possessions, viz. the ancient Baronies annexed to their dignities.

3. If they were Peers, and their Persons enobled, their Wives would be noble,
and have the privileges of Peeresses, being Married or Widows, for Husband and
Wife are one person in Law; but we know they have no such privilege, which
shows their Husbands to be no Peers.

4. If Bishops were Peers of the Realm, and any of them questioned for a
Capital Crime in Parliament time, they could be tried and judged only by the
House of Peers, and by no other Court of Judicature. The Lords could not avoid
the trying of them themselves, indeed any but Peers they may refuse, except it
be upon an Impeachment by the House of Commons, for then they must retain it,
and proceed in it, but not otherwise, except they see some great cause for it,
Pro bono Publico, as it is 1 R. 2. when the Commons desired that no suit
between Party and Party should be undertaken, and determined by the Lords, or
the Officers of the Council, but that the Common Law might have its course,
except it be in such a business, and against so great a person as one cannot
else hope to have right done in it: The same is confirmed 1 H. 4. which I
allege to justify the Judicature of the House of Lords, upon those who are
not their Peers, upon special occasion: But for trying of their Peers is a duty
incumbent upon them, which they must perform; and any Peer who is questioned,
may challenge it as his right, and it cannot be denied him. And therefore 4 E.
3. when they had, upon the Kings earnest pressing them, Tried and Condemned Sir
Simon de Bereford, Sir John Mautravers, and other Commoners, they make a
Protestation, that they nor their Successors, Ne seroient mes tenus ne charges
a render Iugements sur autres, que sur lur Piers: Should not be bound nor
charged to give Judgment upon any but their Peers. But we know that they have
sometimes turned off Bishops to Inferior Courts, as appears by the Record of
it in the Exchequer, the same 4 E. 3. Stephen Gravesend, Bishop of London, was
complained of in Parliament, by one John de Wymburne, for saying, That if
Edward the Second was yet living, as he was informed he was in Corf-Castle, he
would assist him with all his power, to reestablish him in his Throne. Sir
Edward Cook says, that by order of Parliament the matter was referred to be
tried in the Kingsbench, but the Record says, that the Parliament referred it
to the Kings Council, and appointed him to appear before them at Woodstock upon
Sunday fortnight after Easter, and that they turned him over to the Kingsbench
to be Tried by the Chief Justice Scroope, and his fellow Judges. Whereas had
this Bishop been then accounted a Peer of the Realm, he must have been Tried in
Parliament; the Parliament being once possessed of his Cause, and they could
not have referred him to any other Judicature.

So here you have four Essential parts of Peerage all of them wanting in
Bishops, and the want but of one Essential part is enough to destroy the whole.
He can be no Peer of the Realm who is at the Kings suit Capitally Tried by a
Jury of Commoners, if Magna Charta be good Law, which is our All as we are
Freemen. Secondly, He who is not himself enobled, cannot be a Peer in equal
rank to one that is: For all Peers are equally Peers, as we may say, Peerage
does not recipere magis and minus. The meanest Baron is as much a Peer as the
greatest Duke, else they were not Peers, it would be Contradictio in adjecto,
an Imparity in a Parity. Thirdly, If the Husband be enobled, the Wife must be
so; but the Wife of a Bishop is not enobled, therefore the Person of her
Husband is not, for the Wife and the Husband are one. Fourthly, If a Bishop
were a Peer, he could in Parliament time be Tried no where but in the House of
Peers, but Matter of Fact we find to be otherwise. Therefore, I think, I may
safely conclude that Bishops are no Peers.

But before I leave this point, I must answer one thing which is said, They
say, they hold by Baronage, and therefore they are Barons, as Fitz Stephen
makes the Bishops in their altercation with the Temporal Lords about the
pronunciation of the Sentence against the Archbishop, saying, Non sedemus hic
Episcopi, sed Barons: Nos Barons, and vos Barons, Pares hic sumus: We sit
not here in Parliament as Bishops, but as Barons; we are Barons, and you are
Barons: Here we are Peers. Fitz-Stephen's authority signifies nothing to me;
but this I know is said, and believed by many, therefore it must be answered,
to disabuse many, who may think, that holding by Barony creates a Baron, which
it does no more, than holding by Knights service, makes a man a Knight, or
holding by Villanage makes a man a Villain, which many do to this day, even but
here at East-Barnet, and yet are good Freemen and no Villains, for it works
not upon the Person, as Fleta says, l. 3. c. 13. the service they do, is
ratione tenementi non personae. So the Bishops holding per Baronagium, are
thereby made subject to do the service of Barons, and to obey the Kings, Writ
of Summons to attend the Parliament, which makes them Lords of Parliament; but
affects not their person. The Bishop of the Isle of Man is a Bishop as well as
any of the rest, first instituted by Pope Gregory the Fourth, as Sir Edward
Cook says; but not holding by Baronage, has no place nor vote in Parliament.
We must know that this Tenure by Baronage was first created by William the
First, of all the Lands which held of the Crown in Capite, consisting of so
many Knights Fees, these Lands were divided, some to Laymen, some to
Ecclesiastical persons: And these were all bound to certain services, though
not all to the same, and among others, all to attend in Parliament, whenever
the King pleased to Summon them, and so became Lords of Parliament. This
continued so till King John's time, when the number of the Temporal Lords
growing so great and numerous, that King made some alteration, which certainly
was settled and confirmed by Parliament, but justly the time when this was done
is not known, the Record of it being lost. The alteration was, that none of the
Temporal Lords should come to Parliament but such as received the Kings Writ, a
particular Summons for it. These were called Barons Majores; those who were
not so summoned, and so did not come to Parliament were styled Barons Minores,
and were still Feodal Barons as before, and held their Lands per Baronagium,
but were not Lords of Parliament. Therefore it was not barely holding by
Barony, which made the person a Baron even in those times, there was an act of
the Kings requisite even in the Summoning of him to Parliament, to make that
Honor to affect and enoble the Person, and so to fix it, and make it
hereditary in the Family; which way of dignifying a Person continued till the
eleventh year of Richard the Second, when John de Beauchamp, Steward of the
Household, was first created by Patent, Baron of Kiderminster, since which time
it has still been practiced to make them all Barons by Patent. But the Bishops
have still continued upon the first Institution of being by their Tenures
obliged, and accordingly Summoned to attend in Parliament, which made them
Lords of Parliament, but not Peers of the Realm.

And now I come to his last point making them a Third Estate, for which he
cites the Bill presented to Richard the Third in his first Parliament where
they are made so, and to this I can oppose other passages in Parliament clean
contrary, as that 2 H. 4. where the Temporal Lords and they together, are made
to be one of the three Estates, and other instances may be given of the same
nature: But let us a little consider how that Bill was framed, 1 R. 3. it was
first devised by certain Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and other Nobles, and
notable Personages of the Commons, a Party picked out and chosen for that
purpose, who presented it in the behalf, and in the name of the Three Estates
of this Realm of England; and what was this to do, to declare Edward the Fourth
to have lived in adultery with Dame Elizabeth Gray, whom he had married, being
precontracted to Dame Ellianor Bottiler, daughter to the Earl of Shrewsbury,
and consequently all his Children, Bastards, Edward the Fifth a Bastard, and
Elizabeth his Sister, a Bastard, afterward married to Henry the Seventh, which
entitled him and his Posterity to the Crown, set an end to all the foregoing
competitions, and settled it as it is at this day, this Bill, as the Record
says, was first presented and delivered to their Sovereign Lord the King, that
was to R. 3. whom they made so in the name and on the behalf of the said Three
Estates, out of Parliament, and now by the said Three Estates assembled in
Parliament, ratified and confirmed. And truly, I must say, this is not an
authority to be bragged of, for making the Bishops a Third Estate.

But then let us see if the Bishops sitting in the House of Lords, have the
necessary and essential qualifications of being a Third Estate in Parliament,
without which they cannot be a Third Estate there: That the Clergy is one of
the three Estates of the Realm, and they the Principal and Chief of them, no
body denies: And that they are Summoned to Parliament as a Third Estate of the
Realm, the dignified Clergy personally, others of the Inferior sort by their
Procurators and Representatives, is likewise confessed; but not to have any
part in making of Laws for the good Government of the Kingdom, no not so much
as in matters merely concerning the Church; but they may offer and propose and
be consulted with, but whatever they agree upon must come to the two Houses of
Parliament, and receive the stamp of their Authority, before it can be
presented to the King to become a Law, and be binding to the People: This is
the work of the Convocation which meets at the same time with the Parliament,
and there is convened the Third Estate of the Realm; Where the Bishops make the
Upper House. and there sit as Bishops according to their Spirituality. But
their Summons gives them another capacity, which is to meet in the House of
Lords, and there Cum caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus regni de
arduis negotiis Statum regni and Ecclesiae specialiter tangentibus tractare and
consilium impendere; and thither they are obliged to come and attend by their
Tenure of their Baronies, where they sit in their Personal Capacity, to do the
service which they owe for the Lands they hold of the King.

Now we will consider, if being there upon such an account, it can any ways
stand with reason, and the nature of a Third Estate, to esteem them to be so.
1. To represent the body of the lesser Clergy, as our Asserter will have them
to do, who else, he says, would be in a worse condition than the meanest
Clown, having no body to represent them in giving Aids and Subsidies; first, I
say, that as Subsidies were heretofore given in Parliament, which was the
ancient Parliamentary way of supplying the necessities of the Crown and
Government, where the Convocation gave the Supply of the Clergy, the Bishops as
Members of the House of Lords, had nothing to do in it, but as Members of the
Convocation they had, and the Representatives of the lesser Clergy, who were
chosen by them, and made up the Lower House of the Convocation; they gave their
consents, and joined in that Gift for the whole body of the Clergy; the two
Houses of Parliament did only ratify and confirm what the Convocation had
done, and therefore only the beginning and the end of that Act of Subsidy given
by the Clergy, not the body of it, was openly read in the several Houses of the
Lords and Commons. So 4 R. 2. the Commons having offered to give an aid, so as
the Clergy, who enjoyed a third part of the Realm, would pay one third part of
the Sum; the Clergy answered, That they were not to grant any Aid by
Parliament, but of their own free wills, and therefore willed the Commons to do
their duties, and they would do theirs. This was the ancient way of granting
supplies in Parliament, where you see the lesser Clergy had their
Representatives, which it seems our Asserter did not understand, and so no
wonder if he did mistake, as he commonly does. And this I must say further, the
lesser Clergy, as he calls them, are little beholding to him, to have them to
be represented by Bishops, having no hand in the choice of them: This I am
sure, puts them into a meaner condition than the meanest Clown, who if he have
but 40 s. Freehold, gives his voice to whom he will to represent him in
Parliament, to give his assent to part with his Money, and to make any Law to
bind him. Of later times they have taken up another way of granting public
supplies, which is of so much in the Pound, which they call a Pound-rate, and
this brings in the Clergy to pay their proportion, who are now as busy as any
in electing of Members to Parliament. In a word, none can represent another in
Parliament, that is not chosen by him; every particular person that has right
of vote, being included in the majority of Vote: So the whole Clergy, being the
third Estate of the Realm, and the Bishops not being chosen by them, they
cannot represent that third Estate.

2. The Bishops sit not in the House of Lords Ratione Spiritualitatis, as was
the opinion of all the Judges of England, 7 H. 8. in Keilway's Reports, in Dr.
Standish's Case. Les Spiritual Seignieurs nont ascun place en ^e Parliament
chamber per reason de lour Spirituality mes solement per reason de lour
temporal possessions: The Lords Spiritual have no place in the Parliament
chamber by reason of their Spiritualty, but by reason of their Temporal
possessions. How then can they be said to be there a Third Estate, to represent
the Clergy of England, when they sit not there as Clergymen?

3. If they be a Third Estate, they must have a Negative voice to whatever is
proposed in the House, if the majority of their opinions be against it. And for
our Asserter to say, that the Custom, and so the Law of the Parliament is
otherwise, and that the two Estates of the Lords Temporal and Spiritual make
but one House, where they vote intermixedly. Why, this shows they are not two
Estates, because they do vote intermixedly, for if they were so, they must vote
severally, and not be twisted so together as they are, as I said before in my
former Letter, like a nest of Boxes one within another. And think what a
disparagement it would be to the House of Lords, that two Estates must be
clapped together, to make them equal to the one Estate of the House of Commons.

4. If the Bishops were a Third Estate, the Parliament could not act as a
Parliament without them, for a Parliament is composed, and must consist of
Three Estates, and nothing is binding but what is so passed. But we know that
in Edward the First's time, there was a Parliament called and held Clero
excluso, and Laws were there made, when none of them were present, and many
Acts have passed in several Parliaments, when the Bishops have all voted
against them. The Judges in that of 7 H. 8. deliver their opinions for Law: Due
nostre Sur le Roy poit assetz bien tener son Parliament per luy, and ses
Temporal Seigniors and per ses Commons, tout sans les Spirituals Seigniors: Our
Lord the King can hold his Parliament himself with his Temporal Lords, and his
Commons, wholly without the Lords Spiritual.

These, and many other Reasons, confirm me in my opinion, that Bishops are
neither Peers of the Realm, nor a Third Estate in Parliament, yet they might be
both, and not invalidate my Position, which I at first undertook to prove,
which was only this, that by the Practice and Custom of Parliament, and by the
Law of the Land, Bishops are prohibited from meddling in Parliament as Members
of the House of Lords in any Trial of a Criminal Person, where the Charge, the
Proceedings, and the Sentence upon it is Capital, and goes to the Loss of Life
or Members, only one Precedent excepted, that extravagant one of 28 H. 6. And
my good friend the Asserter who has almost as many Errata's as Lines in his
Book, must give me leave to sum up all my Corrections of them in one Distich,
as Martial did those of his Friend Fidentinus; such another Fidentinus, it
seems, as our Asserter; and it was this, Emendare tuos O Fidentine libellos
Multae non possunt, una litura potest.
And I must say the Verse does not better quadrare with the product of his
Brains, which has so many faults as can only be covered and put out of sight
with one rasure from the beginning to the end, than this one and the same Name
of Fidentinus deciphers the Confidence of them both, Nulla pallescere culpa.
And so I shall leave my Friend Fidentinus to learn better manners, if he be not
altogether incorrigible; and apply my self to peruse and answer (if I can) a
Treatise of a worthy Gentleman, who is, I see, of a differing opinion from me,
and has much more of reason, and something, though not much more of civility
and fairness in the maintaining of it, so as whether or no his reasons will
convince me, I know not; but if they do, I will certainly grant it, for my
Maxim is still, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica Veritas.

The Writer of this Treatise, entitled, The Grand Question concerning the
Bishops right to vote in Parliament in Cases Capital, Stated and Argued; does
state the Question right, that is, Whether the Bishops may be present and vote
Judicially in Capital Cases which come to be judged in Parliament, either in
giving the Judgment it self, or in resolving and determining any circumstance
preparatory, and leading to that Judgment. Then he sets down some things
granted on both sides, as 1. That Bishops do sit in Parliament by virtue of
their Baronies, and are bound to serve the King there. From this he infers they
have a Right of Judicature, which is not denied; but the question is, as he
says himself, what this Judicature is. 2 That they sit by the same kind of
Writ, that other Barons do. Upon which he would infer, that they are empowered
and required to confer and treat of all the weighty affairs that shall be
brought before them, the King having not limited nor restrained the one more
than the other. But it follows not, because all are called together by the same
authority, that therefore the same duty is incumbent upon all, if there be a
higher power that directs what every ones duty is to do, when they are come
together. Now the King acts in a higher Sphere by the Law of the Land, and the
law and practice of Parliament which prohibits Bishops from meddling with
judging of Capital Causes in Parliament, nor did they ever do it, but in one
extravagant proceeding in 28 H. 6. where nothing was regular nor Parliamentary
from the beginning to the end, which I look upon as altogether insignificant to
alter what is so settled by Law and constant Custom, therefore the Kings Writ
of Summons cannot dispense with that, to make that lawful, which in it self is
unlawful; as I have sufficiently proved it. And I will now go a little further
in it, than I did before, for hitherto I have only insisted upon the Law of
Parliaments, as a thing settled in Parliament by the Constituons of Clarendon in
Henry the Second's time, and the Protestation of the Bishops enrolled in
Parliament by the King, Lords and Commons, 11 R. 2. but now I will deliver my
opinion (which I submit to better Judgments) that they lie still under a
Restraint by the Canon Law, which by the Statute 25 H. 8. c. 12. which (was
repealed 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. but revived 1 Eliz.) is still of force, where
it is not repugnant to the Laws of the Realm, which we are sure this branch of
it, restraining Bishops from judging Capitally is not; so far from it, that it
is confirmed and strengthened by the Law of the Land. 3. The third Particular
in which he says all agree, is, That they have their Votes in Bills of
Attainder, acting in their Legislative capacity, which is as much a Case of
Blood as the other, and perhaps as much forbidden by the Canon. But I desire
this worthy Person to consider, that the Practice of Parliament is the Law of
Parliament, and is the commanding Law for regulating the Proceedings of
Parliament, and that has overruled this Point, that in the making of a Law,
every Freeman of the Kingdom does give his consent, either explicitly if he be
a Member of either House, or implicitly by his Representative, for every
Freeman of the Kingdom is there present, or represented. And it is the
Fundamental Constitution of our English Freedom, that no man can be bound by
any Law, but what himself has consented to; now a Bill of Attainder is as much
a Law as any Statute Law of the Kingdom. Therefore Bishops have acted in a
Legislative capacity to judge and condemn Capitally, as several Precedents we
have of it in Henry the Eight's time, but not in a judicial capacity. And to
say the Canon Law prohibits one as much as the other, the Statute of 25 H. 8.
clears that point, which takes away the force of the Canon in the one, not to
abridge Members of Parliament from voting in the Legislative way, and
strengthens it in the other, forbidding Bishops to vote Judicially in Cases of
Blood. Yet if you will have me deliver you freely my opinion in it, I think it
is an abuse crept in since Henry the Eight's time, for before none were judged
by Bill, but such as had been slain in open War, or Tried, Condemned and
Executed by Commission, and then the proceedings brought into Parliament, and
there approved of, and the Attainder confirmed, but under Henry the Eighth
several persons were condemned by Bill, and the Earl of Strafford lately in our
memories, which seems now to be authorized by the Practice of Parliament. Sir
Edw. Cook tells a story which he had from Sir Thomas Gaudy, one of the Judges
of the King's Bench, how the King had commanded Cromwell, and the Earl of Essex,
to attend the Justices, and know of them, if a man who was forth coming should
be condemned by Act of Parliament, without being heard; who after some fencing,
answered if it were so, it could not be afterward called into question; and
Cromwell himself was not long after so served; but this is by the way. Multa
quae fieri non debent, facta valent. I have been a little the longer in these
particulars, because it will much smooth our way in the following discourse.

And this worthy Gentleman must give me leave to say, That he needed not have
put himself to all that trouble of his first Chapter, in telling us of the
mighty power the Clergy had in the Primitive times in the ordering of Secular
affairs, which certainly was more by way of Counsel, than any thing of
Authority by way of Judgment, and in a Judicial way. And he will avow to me, I
doubt not, that the ministry of the word was a full employment for the
Apostles, and so for Bishops, who call themselves their Successors, as well as
serving of Tables, and other ministerial duties was a full employment for those
whom he calls the Treasurers of the Church; and therefore they said it for
themselves, and left it as a Rule for their Successors, even to Bishops, and
all other dispencers of the Word and Sacraments, that it was not reason they
should leave the Word of God, and serve Tables. Which it seems was a Non est
Consonum, by the Law of God, just as by the Common Law of the Kingdom, a Writ
was provided, declaring it to be likewise a Non est Consonum, and to be Contra
morem and Consuetudinem Regni, that Clergymen should be employed in Secular
affairs. This indeed I hinted at then, as I gave also some little touch at the
Government of the Church by the Imperial Law, but not that I put any stress
upon it, but merely to circumscribe the Question, and keeping it within limits,
by a Negative, declaring what it was not, and an Affirmative, expressing what
it was, how Bishops in Parliament could not Judicially act in Capital Cases.

Therefore were it all so as this learned Gentleman seems to infer, that in
France, Spain, Germany, and those Northern Kingdoms which he mentions, that
Bishops were joined with the Civil Magistrates in ordering the Public Affairs
of those Nations, and that they had a share not only in the Legislative, but in
the Judiciary part, as he alleges two Authors to prove it to have been in
France, it would not be of any signification to decide our Controversy, for
what is this to us to regulate our Parliaments, and to operate on our Laws? But
first for matter of Fact, as to France, to which I can speak a little, having
spent many years in that Kingdom, and I have, by way of discourse, informed my
self from the Ambassador who is here from that Crown, who does assure me, that
the Judges (whom they call Counselors, and not Judges, as we do) who are
Clergymen, as many there are joined with the others of the Laity, never sit in
that Chamber of Parliament, which trys Capital Causes, which they call the
Tournelle. I believe the same may be observed in those other Countries which
our Author mentions, and I do not see how it could be otherwise, the severity
of the Canon Law being so strict in the prohibition of it.

But as I said before, the Primitive Christians had that veneration for the
Clergy, and especially for the Bishops, that they were still joined with the
Civil Magistrate, in ordering the affairs both in Church and State. The matters
of the Church, they determined Judicially, in Secular affairs, whether Criminal
or other, only by way of Counsel, if the Civil Magistrate to whose Province
they belonged, did not do his part. I am sure it was so in England. Brompton in
his Chronicle, recites the Laws of King Athelstane in this particular: I cited
his very words in the original in my former Letter, I shall now repeat them
very faithfully in English. He says, It appertains of right to a Bishop to
promote that which is right, both concerning God and the World. A little after
he adds, He ought likewise diligently, together with the Secular Judges, to
promote Peace and Concord. And soon upon it, he has this passage, The Bishop
ought to be present in Judgment with the Secular Judges, not to suffer any
buds of wickedness to sprout, if he can hinder it. His Presence and his Counsel
was rather a check upon the Judge, than to determine any thing in Secular
affairs. Sir Henry Spelman is a little more particular in delivering unto us
the nature of that mixed Court, it is in his Glossary upon the word Comes. The
Earl, he says, did preside in that County Court, not alone, but joined with
the Bishop; he to deliver what was Gods Law, the other what was Man's Law, and
that the one should help and counsel the other: Especially the Bishop to do it
to the Earl, for it was lawful for him sometimes to reprove the other, and to
reduce him, bring him into order if he went astray. Then he tells us what the
work of that Court was, that it had cognizance but of petty matters, That the
Earl had not cognizance of great men's businesses, for such matters are to be
brought into the Kings Courts, he only judges poor men's Causes. Hence it is,
that by our Law, Actions for Debts and Trespasscs are not to be commenced in
the County Court, if it be for above the value of 40s. It seems that in ancient
times it was but one Court, but each Judge had his proper work, the
Ecclesiastical Judge to distribute and deliver to them what was Gods Law, the
Secular Judge, Man's Law. And so it continued till William the First's time, who
first separated the two Courts, as appears by his Charter to Bishop Remigius,
which Mr. Seldom relates in his Comment upon Eadmerus, p. 167. which he says
the King did Communi Concilio Archiepiscoporum suorum and raeterorum
Episcoporum, and Abbatum, and omnium Principum regni sui: In a Common Council,
by the advice of his Arch bishops, and the rest of the Bishops and Abbots, and
all the great men of the Kingdom: The words are, Wherefore I command you, and
enjoin you by my Royal authority, that no Bishop nor Arch deacon presume to
hold Plea in the Hundred Court any more upon the Episcopal Laws, nor bring any
Cause that pertains to the rule of Souls before the Judgment of Secular
persons, but that whoever is questioned according to the Episcopal Laws for any
misdemeanour or fault, shall come to that place which the Bishop shall choose
and nominate for that purpose, and there shall make answer for himself, and not
in the Hundred Court, but shall, according to the Canons, and the Episcopal
Laws, do that which is just and right both to God and to his Bishop. This was
again confirmed 2 R. 2. and so the Courts came to be divided, as they continue
to this day. But nothing can be concluded out of that large Enumeration, of the
Bishops being admitted in those ancient times to Public Councils, which was
more for their Advice, and Counsel and Direction, than to act any thing at all
Authoritatively and Juridically, and least of all to have any vote to determine
any thing in Cases of Blood, which the Canon Law made a Noli me tangere to
them: I deny not, but before there were Christian Magistrates, even in the
Apostles times, the Ministers of the Gospel did many times interpose and
reconcile differences and suits, which many times happened amongst believers;
as St. Paul says, Is there not a wise man among you, no not one that shall be
able to judge between his Brethren? Nor does he exclude the Bishops, that they
may not come in as one of those wise men: Yet 1 Cor. 6. 4. he seems to exclude
them: For he says, If then ye have judgment of things pertaining to this
life, set them to judge who are least esteemed in the Church. Which does seem
to intimate, as if he meant not the Bishops, for sure they are not least
esteemed. But does any man think, that they were by this authorized to compel
men to submit to their Judgment, to punish or imprison, or lay any corporal
punishment upon them, if they would not? Indeed I cannot think so. Nor do I
find that St. Augustine was of that opinion, the term he gives to those whom
the Author of that Treatise will have to be Ecclesiastical Judges, does not
imply so much, rather the contrary methinks: He calls them Cognitores, which
denotes rather one that took notice of such differences, and would endeavor to
compose them, than a Judge to determine them, which has made me examine that
passage more particularly. In his Comment upon the 118 Psalm he says, speaking
of those who interrupted them in their enquiry into the duty which they owed to
the Commandments of God, Non solum cum persequuntur, aut litigare nobiscum
volunt, verum etiam cum obsequuntur and honorant, and tamen cum suis vitiosis
and negotiosis cupiditatibus adiuvandis ut occupemur, and eis nostra tempore
impendamus, efflagitant, aut certe infirmos premunt, ut causas suas ad nos
defer compellant, quibus dicere non audemus, dic homo, quis me constituit
Iudicem aut divisorem inter vos? Constituit enim talibus causis Ecclesiasticos
Apostolus Cognitores, in foro prohibens jurgare Christianos. Here is nothing of
coercion in all this, they acted not as Judges, nay, he complains that the
Clergymen themselves were persecuted, and compelled to go to Law; or if they
seemed to show them some respect, and would be ruled by them, and drew them
from their occupations to compose things between them, they would not drive
them away, and say, who made me a Judge between you? For the Apostle who
forbids Christians going to Law, makes the Clergy to be Cognitores, Referees or
Umpires between which is the greatest act of Charity that can be, and most
befitting the calling of the Ministers of Gods Word. But what says St. Austin
a little after, Good men he says will hearken to us, and seldom trouble us
with their Secular affairs, but others, qui inter se pertinaciter agunt, and
quando bonos premunt, nostra Iudicata contemnunt, faciunt que nobis perire
tempora rebus eroganda divinis: Good men will hearken to him, he says, but
those who are perverse do Iudicata contemnere, despise his award of it; which
shows he took not upon him any authority of determining any thing. And so in
his 147th Epistle to Proculianus the Donatist, he has this passage, Et homines
quidem causas suas Seculares apud nos finire cupientes, quando eis necessarii
fuerimus sic nos Sanctos and Dei servos appellant ut negotia terrae suae
peragant, aliquando agamus and negotium salutis nostrae, and salutis ipsorum:
Non de auro, non de argento, non de fundis and pecoribus, pro quibus rebus
quotidie submisso capite salutamur, ut dissentiones hominum terminemus, etc.
Nothing plainer than that all this is purely out of good will a work of Charity
to those who desire him to determine their Secular differences, in which the
Clergy then had merely an eye upon Gods Glory, the good of their own Souls, and
of the Souls of those for whom they took that pains. But all this is Nihil ad
rem, let the Clergy have right or no right to judge of Secular Causes, it will
not decide our Controversy, Whether Bishops in Parliament can meddle in cases
of Blood: Hic Rodus, Hic Saltus, if we do all extravagate, I must come back to
this.

His next Chapter will be more to the purpose, it is concerning the
Constitutions of Clarendon, and the Protestation of the Bishops 11 R. 2. These
two particulars well cleared, and no disguise put upon them, will go a great
way: He begins with the Constitutions of Clarendon, which he conceives to be
that Bishops are thereby required to be present in the Kings Courts, as other
Barons are, till they come to give Sentence as to dismembring, or loss of life,
and his Method is to judge of them by these three ways: 1. The occasion. 2. The
plain sense of the words, according to their true reading. 3. By the subsequent
Practice upon this constitution in the Parliament at Northampton soon after.

1. For the occasion, this Author is pleased to say, he can hardly believe I
should betray so much unskilfulness in the affairs of those times, as to say,
that the Bishops did then affect such a power of Judicature in Secular Causes,
and I think I have good warrant to be of that opinion. Petrus Blesensis, whom
this Author cites, as living in Henry the Second's time, and knowing the whole
proceedings of those Constitutions, complains of it sufficiently. In the first
and genuine Edition of them, Printed at Mentz in Quarto, published by Busaeus
the Jesuit in 1600, in his Treatise De institutione Episcopi, p. 542. he has
this passage, Illud coelestem exasperat iram and plerisque discrimen
damnationis accumulat, quod quidam principes Sacerdotum and seniores populi
licet non dictent Iudicia Sanguinis, eadem tamen tractent disputando and
disceptando de illis, seque ideo immunes a culpa reputant, quod mortis aut
truncationis membrorum Iudicium discernentes, a prounciatione duntaxat and
executione poenalis sententiae se absentant. Sed quid hac simulatione
perniciosius est? Nunquid discutere and definire licitum est, quod pronunciare
non licet? This provokes Gods wrath, and heaps up upon many a danger of
damnation, that some of the prime of Churchmen, and Elders of the People,
though they do not dictate Judgments of Blood, yet they debate them, and
dispute of them, and therefore repute themselves free from fault, in regard
they have withdrawn themselves from being present, at the pronouncing and
giving order for the execution of the penal Judgment, though they had before
agreed to the punishment of Death, or loss of Limbs. But what can be more
pernicious than such dissembling? Can it be lawful to debate and to determine a
thing, which it is unlawful to pronounce? Then he compares them to King Saul,
that had resolved upon the destruction of David, but would not that his hand
should be upon him, but that he should fall by the hands of the Philistines; or
to the Scribes and Pharisees, that cried out against our Savior, Crucify him,
Crucify him, but said it was not lawful for them to put any man to death. Is
not this as good as Chaucer's Friar that this Author quips me with, p. 4.? I do
not say that Blesensis blamed all the Bishops for evading the Law in that
manner, he says they were quidam Principes Sacerdotum, some of the great
Bishops. But the Author would have it to be the Universal Practice and Opinion
of all the Bishops and Clergy to understand the Constitution of Clarendon, that
they might continue to sit in Judgment till the Sentence was to be pronounced;
and in the Edition of Blesensis, Printed at Paris in 1667. instead of quidam it
is Printed quidem, but by a manifest error which carries no sense with it, and
the Marginal Notes in both Editions show it, which is, Abusus Clericorum qui
causas sanguinis discutiunt; marking out the abuse of them that did so. This
was obvious enough to the Author in his quotation of Blesensis, therefore he
might have spared the censure of my unskilfulness in the affairs of these
times, since I had such a Leader to follow as Blesensis; and more have I cause
to complain of his want of Charity to me, p. 31. taxing me with representing
those constitutions very unfairly, which is an expression of one engaged in a
party, and not of one that only seeks for truth, but to show his Reading and
Learning, as I am afraid that Author does, who raises a great deal of dust
merely to blind men's eyes, and mis* lead them into errors; and thus he
commends himself for speaking mildly, and much good may his mildness do him.

It is apparent that the Clergy were then very high, having gotten a great head
by the favor they had found from the Usurper King Stephen, where on both sides
they served one another turns, and Henry the Second, to bring things again
into order, called that great Counsel at Clarendon, where, by the Advice of the
Prelates and the Nobility of the Realm, a recapitulation was made of part of
the ancient customs and privileges under the former King, and particularly
under his Grandfather Henry the First, which for the future he would have to
be observed in the Kingdom, and thus Propter dissentiones and discordias saepe
immergentes inter Clerum and Iusticiarios Domini Regis and Magnatum Regni.
There were sixteen of those Articles, the eleventh was, that they should hold
their possessions of the King in Capite, sicut Barcniam; and should be
answerable to the King for their Services; and should as Barons, interesse
Judiciis Curiae Regis, quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum, vel ad
Mortem. Here we see the occasion of that meeting at Clarendon, it was to remove
all causes of difference between the Great Bishops and the Civil Magistrates;
let us now see what was most likely to displease them, it is not probable it
should be for being reduced to stand upon even ground with the rest of the
Nobility, and great men of the Realm; but if in any thing they are made less,
and abridg'd of the powers which the others have, it stands most with reason
they should be troubled at that; and to be forced to walk out of the
Judgement-hall after they had cried Crucifige, is a great lessening of their
figure, I think more than if they had not at all meddled in it. But this Worthy
Author says, I have made use of the most Imperfect Copy of Matthew Paris, and
says in the Vatican Copy, and several MSS. it runs thus, Debent interesse
Judiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, donec perveniatur in Iudicio ad
diminutionem Membrorum vel ad Mortem. Now in my opinion, this makes more
against the sense he would put upon these words, which is, that they may stay
and have a hand in managing the debate upon the Evidence, and agreeing upon the
Sentence, but must be gone when it is pronounced, (which as I said before, I
look upon as a greater scorn put upon them, as Blesensis says, Quid hac
simulatione perniciosius est, nunquid discutere and definire licitum, quod non
licet pronunciare.) For I should think that mentioning in Iudicio in the second
part should not have a different constructionthan Iudiciis Curiae in the first
part. For there the Judicia Curiae which they may be present at, is to be
understood of the whole proceeding, from the bringing in of the Charge against
a Criminal person, to the pronouncing of the Sentence: And can it be rationally
thought that Iudicium in the second place should be meant only of the sentence
which is the principal part, and which the corruption of man's nature does
chiefly lead him unto. The Poet says, -- -- Qui nolunt occidere quenquam,
Posse volunt --
This power of killing and slaying, Potestas Iuvandi and Nocendi, is a pleasing
thing, and we are naturally angry with what abridgeth us of it. So I must
conclude this point, that it is most probable the Bishops were most scandalized
at this eleventh Article.

Secondly, Let us consider how to arrive at the true meaning of that
constitution, which must be by comparing the passages of these times together,
whereby we shall see how they understood it: Yoyu have already heard what
Petrus Blesensis judged of those who would retain that Image of Judicature, how
much he blamed them, and what menaces of Gods Judgments he denounced against
them, for the words of that Constitution were not so clear and positive that it
gave not Ansam disputandi to those whose Inclinations led them to turn it into
another sense, and content themselves to play at small Games rather than sit
out altogether. So the Wisdom of that time to make it yet more plain, and take
away all ambiguity, moved the King to call another Great Council at Westminster
in the year 1175. eleven years after, Ad Emendationem Anglicanae Ecclesiae ex
assensu Domini Regis and Primorum omnium Regni; where the third Article is, His
qui in Sacris ordinibus constituti sunt Iudicium Sanguinis agitare non licet
unde prohibemus ne aut per se membrorum truncationes faciant, aut inferendas
judicent. Quod siquis tale fecerit concessi ordinis privetur officio and loco,
Inhibemus etiam sub interminatione anathematis, ne quis Sacerdos habeat
vicecomitum aut praeposit^ secularis officium. It is not lawful for those who
are in Holy Orders to act at all in Judgments of Blood, wherefore we forbid
them to have any thing to do with taking off men's Limbs, or to judge of any
such thing. And if any do such a thing, he shall be deprived of the office and
dignity of his Orders: And we also forbid, under the pain of being
Anathematized, that no Priest shall take upon him the Office of a Sheriff, or
of a Secular Judge. This makes it out plain, what the sense of those times was;
that it was not lawful for them to act at all in cases of Blood; and this is as
much the Law of the Land, as the Constitutions of Clarendon, or as any other
Statute Law. But our Author, p. 42. quarrels at this, as only standing upon
Roger Hoveden's authority, and wishes he had produced the whole Canon entire
for it: Here you have two of our Ancient Historians that lived in these times,
and agree in Terminis upon the relation of what there passed: But our Author is
not satisfied, tells us the Council of Toledo makes an etc. and leaves out the
prohibition, which declares the meaning and extent of their Canon: He will have
this Prohibition, and Sanction of deprivation to attend only upon the latter
part, that is, if they do join in pronouncing the Sentence: But where does he
find that distinction allowed, it is what the Clergy have framed and imagined
to themselves to give them some Power: Admit we should allow them that, it
makes it not the more lawful for them; there is still a Non licet, which is
subject to punishment, and though the Ecclesiastical Law does not go to that
height to cut off a Member, deprive him ab Officio and Beneficio, yet it may go
less in a lower Sentence, however the Civil Sanction may impose what punishment
such a misdemeanour may deserve.

Caetera desiderantur.

FINIS.
CONSIDERATIONS Touching that QUESTION, Whether the PRELATES Have Right to sit
among the LORDS, And VOTE with them in PARLIAMENT IN Capital Cases, When the
Lords sit in their Judicial way of Proceeding upon the Trial of any of their
Peers? In which it is asserted, That they have no Right to Sit and Vote with
them in such Cases; Neither can it be made appear, they have ever practiced the
same. In Answer to the Reasons and Records urged by the Learned Author of the
Grand Question, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1682.

To the Reader.
THis Tractate which is now made public, was written soon after the
Publication of that Book entitled, The Grand Question concerning the Bishops
Right to vote in Parliament in Cases Capital, stated and argued, etc. It has
lain by the Author many Months, and should still have continued in the Dark had
not the unseasonable thrusting into the World of a Book, called, An Argument
for the Bishops Right in judging in Capital Cases in Parliament. For their
Right unalterable to that place in the Government they now enjoy (by one Thomas
Hunt Esquire) stirred up the Pens of others, and the desire of Friends, me among
them, to assert, as I believe, the contrary Truth. I assure the Reader; I did
not at all guess the Author of the Grand Question, when I took into my thoughts
the Consideration of his Book. Fame has since put it upon a Person of so great
Worth and Learning in all sorts of Literature, and for whom I have not only a
particular Honor my self, but the present and future Times will look upon as
one of the greatest Champions of the English Church against Popish Superstition
and Idolatry. I should difficultly have been engaged in this Contest, did I not
know the Modesty and Ingenuity of this Learned Person is so great, that he will
not take it ill to have his Reasons examined by a far less knowing Pen, which
shall be always ready to submit to better Judgments.

I have examined this Author, Chapter by Chapter, have given Answers to his
Reasons, and showed the Infirmity of those Records he has thought proper to
urge for his Opinion, and have given some other of my own, not taken notice of
by him, I hope material to that end for which they are alleged: I was not
willing to trust too much to Abridgments; nor had either the Time or
Convenience to search the Originals, and therefore had recourse for some to a
very near Relation of my own, who is well stored with that sort of Treasure,
and who never denied me the use of any thing in his well-furnish'd Library I
desired from him. Truth is but one; but Men may vary in their Apprehensions
concerning it. As to others which I could not be supplied with from him, I must
acknowledge my self deeply obliged to my much honored, and very learned Friend,
Mr. William Petyt, of the Inner Temple, who was not only pleased to read over
the ensuing Treatise, but to give me the sight of a rich Magazine of the
Transcripts of Records which he has fairly written by him, as also to give me
the Copies of some, necessary to my purpose, which I either had not, or not so
fully as from him. The Wrold has already seen something of his, and may in due
time expect more, in Reply to the learned Dr. Brady, in whom I find various and
useful Learning, but (if I may have leave to say so) one misled in some measure
by different Notions of Words, and Interpretations of them, contrary to their
known and common Acceptance. Some part of his Book has been already
considered by the Author of Jani Anglorum facies altera: But the entire Answer
to it we must expect from Mr. Petyt, who has favored me with the sight of a
short Specimen of a greater Work to follow. I must not here forget my very
deserving, and worthy Friend Mr. Atwood of Gray's Inn, whose Assistance I
received in transcribing some Records for me. He is a Person whom God has
endowed with a good Estate, and a large measure of Knowledge, for the few Years
he has hitherto spent in the World, and who (I speak it to the shame of most
of our young Men) spends his time in Studies useful to himself and to the
Kingdom in which he lives. Having already seen from his youthful Labors so
good Effects, we may well expect from his more mature Judgment things of
greater Advantage to the learned part of this Nation.

But let us now return to Mr. Hunt, a good Protestant he appears to be in his
Postscript, which in these unconstant times deserves Commendation; and in his
Book, he shows himself a Man of various reading and learning, with a competent
Knowledge in the Tongues, but otherwise, if I much mistake not, a Man of
confused, and undigested Notions, by which he forces things to serve his turn,
contrary to their true meaning, from mere Conjectures and Surmises of his own,
without any color of Demonstration. His whole Book consists of three Parts,
Argumentative, Invective, or Reproachful and Extravagant, or Conjectural. I
cannot compare his Argumentative Part better than to a gleaning after a full
Vintage. There is nothing in it which had not been soreseen by the Author of
the Grand Question, and pressed by him with much more Learning, Subtilty, and
Closeness of arguing, or else wholly left out as unconclusive to the matter he
had in hand; of whom it may be said, what was once of Hector in another Case,
Si Pergama dextra defendi possent, etiam and hac defensa fuissent. What is by
me said in answer to his Arguments in this Treatise, must be left to the
Judgment of such as shall read it. The second Part is invective, reproachful,
and unsavory, in which I would advise no Writer to follow his Steps. Soft
Words, and strong Arguments, may convince a Reader, whom railing Language will
but exasperate. I shall name some few of that sort, that he may not think I
accuse him falsely.

In his Preface he blames the Author of the Grand Question, for treating his
Adversaries Page 7.
too kindly who deserved sharper Reflections then he has given them. It Is
plain by the 25th Page of his Book, that he knew the Octavo Gentleman, as he
calls him, on whom he there ironically Page 25.
bestows the Title of discrect Gentleman, and instances in his Talk against
Bishops, when he was young, which he could not leave when he was Page 24.
old. This Person he charges with Falsehood, unrighteous dealing, imposing upon
the People, Self-Condemnation, undue Art, and such Stuff, Page 13. with a
design to shut the Bishops out of Page 13, and Page 37, etc.
the House; an Extravagant Surmise of his own, without any Color given by the
Author of the Leter, Page 37. want of Candor, Integrity, etc. Page 38.
Iniquity, Prevarication, Petulancy, Spite, inveterate Displeasure, Grinning,
Page 38.
whetting his Teeth, and squinting upon them with an evil Eye, with much other
such Language throughout his Book, which the Reader may observe, if he pleases.
He ought, with more Reason, to have considered the Age, the Quality, the Place,
this Octavo Gentleman beld at Court, the Service he had done his Country both
at home and abroad, rather than to have laden the Ashes of a dead Nobleman,
with Revilings railing Language and Reproaches, who was known to be a Person of
so great Worth, and Experience. The Reader will pardon this Warmth in me; when
I hear a Person, now at rest, so slighted, who, had he been alive, this little
Gown-man durst not have approached without marks of Reverence, and Submission.
But let us allow him to make up the shortness of his Reasoning by the length of
his Railing.

Thirdly, His Extravagancies are so numerous, that nigh every Leaf has
somewhat or other of that Nature, Conjectures, and Surmises, without any manner
of Proof, must pass for Demonstrations. One while the Bishops are Spiritual
Barons, a Title I never remember given to them; nay, not so much as Lords
Spiritual till the time of Rich. II. Another time Feudal Barons, and that there
was no other than Feudal Nobility: Sometimes they are Barons Majores; yet not
enobled in Blood, nor their Honor Page 129.
conferred upon them by any actual Ceremony, or otherwise esteemed than Barons
by Tenure; and that William the Conqueror intended that as an Honor, which
themselves, and all other Historians complain of as a Burden. That the Bishops
in Parliament are a full third Estate; and yet we know Acts are good when they
are either excluded absent, or oppose the passing them; and yet they never
represented any but themselves. Sometime he is troubled that the Nomination of
the Bishops is in the King. These things cursorily observed by me, makes his
whole Book appear an indigested Lump, fit to be licked over, if so it may be
brought into any form. It Is not unlike a Lottery, where after a hundred Blanks,
you may chance get a Prize: But I shall leave a further Examination of his
crude Notions to another Hand, who may be more concerned to detect his Errors
than I am: However, I cannot omit the taking notice of his pompous Title; ^tis
indeed a Titulus Sesquipetulcus; Their Right unalterable in that place in the
Government they now enjoy: which Fancy is confirmed by a Consequence of his own
making, Page 122, That the Bishops cannot be detruded from that Place they bear
in the Constitution of the Government: for that no Government can legally, or
by any lawful Power be changed, but must remain for ever once established, and
it cannot be less then Treason of State to attempt a Change. No Authority in
the World is competent to make any Alteration.

How false this Position is, he will find, if he consult the frequent Change of
Governments since the Creation, in the Jewish, Grecian, Roman, nay, in our
Britannick State, with many others in all parts of the World. Neither can I
imagine this Maxim can serve him to any other end, than to arraign those
Parliaments who have made Laws without them, or that in 17 Car. 1. Anno 1642,
which by Act took away their Seats in that House. And lastly, to accuse those
as Traitors to the State, if any hereafter shall attempt it. I am confident,
no Parliament will endeavor to take from them their just Right; but to say
they cannot, and that the Government cannot then subsist, is as absurd, as the
other is unlikely. I must further observe, that this Author does upon all
Occasions blame those Persons, who deny the Prelates that judicial Power in
Capital Cases he would place in them as Enemies to the Government; whereas he
ought to know, that Exceptio probat regulam, in non exceptis. He that gives
them Authority in all things that are clear, and denies it them in dubious,
does more asserttheir Right, then he that by giving it them in all things, does
rather perplex it. I have now done with this unwary Writer, who whilst he seems
so zealous for the Government, does himself in the main part of it unhinge, and
destroy it. Does he not, Page 144. endeavor to destroy the most ancient Court
of Chancery, which he calls both a Reproach, and Grievance to the Nation? Does
he not spend some Leaves to show how this may be effected? by setting up as
many Chancellours as there shall be Judges in Courts, which must in the end, be
either wholly useless, or run us upon an Arbitrary way of proceeding, and put
an end to all our ancient way of Trials by Iuries, and leave all in the Breast
of the Judge to determine. Let him not now think to take off the Envy of this by
a fawning commendation of our present Lord Chancellor. I am so well acquainted
with the great Abilities, and large Endowments of that Noble Person, that I
doubt not but his just Decrees in that Court will remain as perpetual
Testimonies of his Conscientious Justice, and Equitable Distribution of it in
that place in which he is now settled. Nor can I believe he will be pleased
with any, tho never so due Commendations, to the Disparagement of his worthy
Predecessors, or such as hereafter may succeed him in the most Honorable
Station in which he now is worthily placed.

DId the Author of this Treatise believe that the Lord Bishops voting as Judges
in Parliament, in Cases of Life and Member, could any way conduce either to
their Honor or Greatness, or the Good of the Church and Nation, he would never
have entered the List in this Quarrel, being himself wholly conformable; and in
his Judgment fully approving the Polity of the Church of England, as the best
reformed of any other he knows, having cleared herself from the Superstitious
Formalities of the Church of Rome on the one hand, and on the other, not
requiring from her Children, under Terms of Communion, any thing, in which she
may not lawfully as he thinks be obeyed. But being fully convinced, that their
asserting this Right in themselves, will bring forth no other Fruit, except
Envy to their Persons, and perhaps sometime or other, through the unequal
Affections of a headstrong People, Prejudice to their Functions, I have been
the more easily induced to make known my Thoughts herein.

I observe there have already been made public six elaborate Treatises upon
this Subject; four asserting a Right in them to vote in Parliament in matters
of Blood, and two against it. But because the last and most learned Tractate,
which goes under the name of the Grand Question, etc. is looked upon, and
indeed is the most material, I shall apply my self chiefly to the Examination
of his Arguments, and I hope discover the Errors, Fallacies, or Inconsequences
of them.

He tells us at first, that it is granted on both sides, that the Bishops sit in
Parliament Gr. Qu. p. 1.
by virtue of their Baronies. This I must take Liberty to question as doubtful,
still premising that Truth does not lie in what Men may say of themselves, or
passes under common Estimation of Men, but what upon serious Examinition of
the Question shall be found to be true, I shall endeavor to make it appear,
that many who held Lands in Cap per Baroniam, or, per servitium Baroniae, were
not enobled in Blood, nor had Right to demand their Writ of Summons as the
Noble Barons had, but were to expect the King's Will and Pleasure, and were
often left out: These were secundae Dignitatis Barons, or Barons by Tenure
only, of which some might probably be adopted into the Nobilitas Major,
afterward as Barons adscriptij, yet at first were not so; and this was to
them an Honor, but to the Bishops a Burden, who held their Lands free before,
and had no Honor conferred upon them as the rest had. For tho it be true that
all the great Noblemen held per Baroniam; yet was it not their Tenure which
gave them that Right, as I shall show by and by. These second sort of Barons
were called Barons Peers, because they held of the King in Capite, as his
immediate Freeholders, and were styled Barons Regis, for the Word imported
then no more but Men holding of the King's Person in Capite. These subdivided
their Lands to others, under the like Military Service; these were likewise
called Barons from their appearing at their Lord's Court, called the Court
Baron; and Baronagium became a Word of general Signification, comprehending
those libere Tenentes, or Suitors to the Court Baron, who together with the
King's immediate Tenants, who were the Barons Regis, that is, the Kings
immediate Freeholders, made up the Communitas Angliae, and comprehended all
Persons except such as held in Villenage. Besides these, thus made by the King,
there were others, some found here, some brought out of Normandy, of great
Nobility and Extraction, who had of their own, great Possessions, as Earldoms
and Counties in this Country, and others brought over with the Conqueror out
of Normandy, of an Inferior Rank, to whom he gave the like Honor, out of the
Lands of those adhered to Harold, which all held of him per Baroniam, but by
Creation were many of them afterward made of a higher Rank, and were called
Comites Regis, and Majores Barons Regni; they being possessed of the like
Honors in their several Countries before. The Bishops, I conceive, were not
under any of these Ranks, but were called to Parliaments ratione Episcopalis
Dignitatis, not ratione Tenurae, only, of which they complained as a Burden.
Creation they had none to any higher Honor than Episcopal; their Tenure could
not give them a greater Honor than to be Barons minores, or Barons, Peers.
Neither can I find in any Act of Parliament or Record, that they were called
Lords before the time of Rich. II. and then first called Lords Spiritual, to
show their Honor arose from their Spiritual Function, and not from any
Temporal Possessions; nor the name of Barons applied to them except by
themselves, who perhaps finding the Burden of their Service which before was
free, were willing that others should give them the Title, tho there was no
more reason that their Tenure by Baron Service should make them Barons, than
that Knight Service should make the Tenant a Knight. Having thus cleared my
way, I shall in the next place, show that these Barons Minores, or Barons
Peers, were sometimes summoned by Writs to Parliament, and sometimes left out.
The Abbot of Feversham (one under the Seld. Tit. hon. p. 730. I edit fol.
same Rule with the Bishops) was summoned to 12 Consecutive Parliaments as
Tenant in capite per Baroniam, and then left out, 19 Edw. 2. Rot. penes remem.
Dom. Regis 19 Edw. 2.
in Scall. Thomas de Furnival had been sumoned to 30 Parliaments, and yet upon
an Amerciment in the Exchequer, pleads he was no Baron: now except he had held
in Cap. per Baroniam, or part of a Barony, he could not have been summoned at
all as a Member of Parliament. Whether his Plea were allowed does not appear
upon the Record, but by this and some other Records in my hand to the same
purpose, it seems to me that many that held per Baroniam, were not Barons, but
at the best Bannerets, or Barons Peers.

I cannot find by my utmost search, that any thing hitherto has madeit
apparent, that Baronies were ever annexed to the Possessions of the Bishops;
but Men have generally taken it for granted, that they were so. They say that
William the first, soon after his Reception to the Crown of England, did
introduce new Tenures, and established Counties and Baronies, and did then
order that Bishops, and the Parliamentary Clergy should hold per Baroniam, or
sicut Baroniam, which the Learned Mr. Seldom says in the language of those
Times signified the same thing: For he says, that tenere de Rege in capite,
and habere possessiones sicut Baroniam; and to be a Baron according to the Laws
of those Times, are synonimous: Seld. Tit. Hon. part 2. page 704, Seld. Tit.
Hon. page 704.
Cook, Hakewell, and others say they hold per Baroniam. But the Proofs, any
that I have met with, offer to make good this Division by William, or that
Tenure per Baroniam, did infer more when a minor Baron in my Judgment, are not
cogent. What they urge is taken out of Wendover, and from him transcribed by
Matthew. Paris. Mat Par. p 7. ult. ed.
He first greatly blaming the Act of William, has these Words; Episcopatus,
and Abbatias, omnes quae Baronias tenebant, and catenus ab omni servitute
saeculari libertatem habuerant sub servitute statuit militars irrotulans
singulos Episcopatus, and Abbatias pro voluntate sua quot Milites sibi, and
successoribus suis Hostilitatis tempore voluit a singulis exhiberi. That is;

He established under Military Service all Bishoprics, and Abbeys which held
Baronies, and at that time had freedom from all Secular Service, inrolling them
all, and appointing according to his Pleasure what Soldiers in time of War
they should severally find unto him, and his Successors.

Mr. Seldom finding the contradiction in these Words, that their Baronies which
should have kept them, as he thought, free from Secular Service, as the words
import, were the only thing that bound them to it, thinks there ought to be a
Parenthesis after Baronias (in pura and perpetua eleemosina) and eatenus ab
omni servitio saeculari, etc. and makes the words run thus: All Bishops and
Abbeys that held Baronies in Frankalmoign, and in that respect freed from all
Secular Service, etc. And backs this Conjecture by the Authority of Mr.
Cambden, who he conceives might have seen some Copy where those words were. But
he need not have put himself to the trouble of that Conjecture, had he
translated (eatenus) at Ad id temporis.
that time, as the word signifies, and never that I know in that respect.
However, finding further, that this would not take away all doubt, because the
words refer not to all Bishoprics and Abbeys, but to such only as then
possessed Baronies, for ought appears of elder time, which he denies any did
before the time of William the first, (of which perhaps more anon) does believe
Mr. Hunt thinks that the Tenure made them Barons, and that Tenure and Barronies
were coincident. Seld Tit. Hon. p. 699. and 700.
that this Tenure was enacted by some Parliament in William's time preceding to
this, whose Journals, or Records are now lost; yet adds for a further Proof,
the Authority of an ancient Manuscript in his hand (belonging it seems to the
Abbey of Ramsey) of Matthew. Paris, where over the Year 1070, are inserted these
Words: In this Year the Servitium Baroniae, was imposed upon Ramsey. This
perhaps might equally concern other Abbeys; yet seems but a weak Proof of the
matter in question as to the Bishops, did not somewhat in Ingulphus, and the
subsequent Practice, give some Light to the Business. But neither Laws nor
Practice ought to be forced or stretched to a greater Latitude than the natural
Construction of the Words will bear.

It cannot reasonably be denied, but that in the Times of our Ancestors, when
Learning in Laymen was very rare; that the Clergy bare a great sway in the
Councils of Princes and Great Men, who busied themselves in little more then
Feats of Arms, and Hospitality. But the Clergy, a wary and vigilant sort of
People, guided by the subtle Heads of Rome, under whose Banner they always
fought; what under pretenses of Piety, Satisfaction for Sins committed,
Redemption of Souls out of Purgatory, and what not, captivated the Consciences,
and drained the Purses of most of the ignorant Multitude. Nay, so holy was
their Function, and so sacred their Persons, that no Secular Tribunal was by
them thought sanctified enough to question their Actions, but they still
pressed to be remitted to their own, or by their Appeals to Rome, frustrated
the Designs of the Civil Magistrate. William the first being desirous to put a
stop to this exorbitant Pride, and growing Power of these Men, and yet not
disgrace their Calling, did (as before is mentioned out of Mat. Paris) ordain
that the Clergy should not be wholly exempted from all Secular Service, and
probably might before that, have altered their Tenure, which mostwhat before
was in Frankalmoign, unto the Tenure in capite sicut Baroniam, or in the nature
of a Barony, by which they were made subject to such Services as Tenants in
cap. per Baroniam were tied unto, and were called to Parliaments, and sat
among the other Noblemen, and the Barons Peers, being first summoned thereunto
by the King's Writ. Most Men have considered the Nobilitas Major, or those who
constituted the House of Peers under a threefold Relation. First, as made
Earls, or Barons by Creation, and an actual Ceremony of This I take to be the
only true of enobling any body as to the Nobilitas Major.
investure of Robes, and a succeeding Charter, and Writ to attend in Parliament
when summoned. The Charter comprehended some Limitation how the Honor should
go; or else some Pension to the Barons to support their Dignity and Title, of
which you may see more Examples Seld. Tit. Hon. par. 2. cap. 5. cir. finem.
in Mr. Selden's Tit. of Hon. Part 2. Cap. 5.

Such I conceive was that Charter made by King Stephen to Mandevile Earl of
Essex, and renewed again by Maud the Empress: the like was that of Miles Earl
of Hertford, granted by Maud, and renewed by Hen. II. which Charter only served
to convey the Vid. Else (...) p. 33.
third penny of the County. Now these Charters being usual as to Earls, which
was the highest Degree at that time, and an actual Ceremony being also used in
the making See Mr. Seld. Jans Angl. facies altera ult. edit. p. 51.
of Knights, which was the lowest degree of Honor; I see no reason but to
believe that the same Ceremony of Invetisture was used to Barons which was the
middle Degree.

Some Light is given to this by considering the Charter granted to the Lord
John Beauchamp of Holt. where the words are; Ipsum Iohannem in unum Parium, and
Baronum Regni nostri Angliae praefecimus volentes quod idem Johannes, and
haeredes masculi de Corpore suo exeuntes statum Baronis obtineant, ac Domini de
Beauchamp, and Barons de Kiddermister nuncupenter. In cujus rei Testimonium,
etc. Here being in this Charter no words of Creation, but all in the
Praeterperfect Tense (we have promoted) must refer to some Act done before; and
this Charter served only to limit how the Estate should go: Mr. Seld. Tit. Hon.
Part 2. Cap. 5. p. 747. I edit. in fol. I know reckons this Seld. Tit. Hon.
page 747.
as the first Creation of a Baron by Patent, but does not observe the words,
nor his own Subsequent. Patents made to others where the words are in the
Present Tense, and constituent of the Honor granted, (viz.) Praficimus,
constituimus, creamus, we do create, promote, and appoint. Neither can I
imagine what Right those Ancient Barons, of which we have yet some left who
were so before Rich. II. have to come this day in Robes, had not their
Ancestors been invested with them in their Creation, and different from those
of Earls. Now this as it was the most ancient, so was it the most honorable
way of conferring Honors; so was it also the most noble, by which their Blood
was not only enobled, but also all other Rights and Privileges competible to
that Degree were given unto them; and certainly we must make some difference
between one made a Peer of the Kingdom by Charter, and one so called in
ordinary Speech, of which Name, no Man in the Kingdom, but is in some sense,
capable; we being all Peers to those of our own Degree. Now of these Peers thus
enobled by the Invetisture of Robes; some were called to Parliament by Writ
after the Ceremony of Invetisture had been performed, and had never any Patent
to limit the descent of the Honor. Such had their Honor in feesimple, and it
went to the Heirs general, of which we have many Examples, where the Sole
Daughter and Heir of such a Baron, has not only conveyed the Honor to her
Descendents, but enjoyed the Title herself during Life. Amongst many, I will
only instance in one; Charles Longuevile, Son and Heir to Susanna, Heir general
to the Barony de Gray of Ruthin, left only one Daughter named Susanna, Charles
her Father, was received in Parliament in his Robes in the latter end of King
Charles the first, his Reign; he dying, left the foresaid only Daughter, who
after his Death, married Sir Henry Yelverton of Easton. Manduit in
Northamptonshire Baronet; Sir Henry died, leaving Sir Charles Yelverton
Baronet, his Son and Heir then a Minor, Susanna enjoyed the Honor during her
Life; and at her Death, left Charles, still under Age, who immediately
possessed the Honor; and at his full Age, was called by Writ, sat in his
Robes in Parliament till he died, which happened soon after his Age of twenty
one, without any issue, leaving the Honor to Henry his Brother, and Heir, yet
alive, and under Age. See Sir William Dugdale's History of the Baronage, Title
Lord Gray, first Part, page 718, 719. Dugd. Baron.


The second way by which some have conceived Barons were made, has been by
Writ only, without any other Formality, or Ceremony whatsoever; and of this
Opinion have been some Heralds, and have contended, that by the Writ of
Summons, the Person was enobled, and if his Descendents were so called for
three Descents, the Blood was enobled, I conceive this Opinion to be erroneous:
For it is against a Maxim in Law, that the King should pass any thing by
Implication, and as unreasonable to believe he might not have Liberty to
require the Counsel of his Subjects without conferring an Honor upon them, he
did not intend. Besides it will hence follow, That during diverse Parliaments of
Edw. 1. almost all in Edw. 2. and many in Edw. 3. all the Judges, King's
Sergeants, and many other were enobled, for they had the same Writ the Barons
had, yet were never accounted such; nay, were often after such Summons omitted.
The known Case of Mounthermer is very pertinent to our purpose, who having
married the Relict of the Earl of Gloucester, who had a great part of the Earldom
in Jointure, her Husband was summoned as an Earl during the Minority of her
Son; but after he came of Age Mounthermer was summoned as a Query, Whether this
Summons gave him other Title than a Minor Baron.
Baron during his own Life, and after wholly omitted in his Descendents. If it
be said that his Summons enobled him, but in regard his Descendents were not
called, the Blood was not enobled; what will they then say to the Case of
Radulphus de Camois, who was summoned, and his Son after him in 7 Edw. 2. yet
in 7 Edw. 2. 7 Rich. 2.
7 Rich. 2. Claus. Memb. 32. in dors. Thomas Camois the Grandchild, was chosen
one of the Knights for Surrey, and discharged by the King's Writ, because he
and his Ancestors were Baronets: and the said Thomas was summoned, and served
in that Parliament, 7 Rich. 2.
not as a Baron, but as a Barons Peer, or Baronet, which was an inferior sort
of Honor, and signisied the same Vid. Cot. Post. ^ls. edit. page 344.
thing that Tenants in Cap. did in the time of King John. But that these sorts
of Peers were sometimes summoned, and sometimes omitted at the King's Pleasure.
The only difference being that which appeared when they came thither, the one
appearing, (viz.) The inheritable Barons in their Robes, the others not, but in
Habits different from the Barons. Now that there was this difference, is made
plain by those Authorities shall be produced under the next Head, which is,
that there were a sort of Persons called Barons, who were so by Tenure only,
that is to say, who held of the King in Cap. and had such a number of
Knights-fees, and upon that account were summoned as Barons, or rather as
Barons Peers; Mr. Seldom seems to Seld. Tit. Hon. page 690.
say in his Tit. Hon. Part 2. Sect. 17. page 690. That all Honorary Barons of
that time whereof he speaks, were for ought appears, Barons only by Tenure: The
words are cautelous, and his Expressions, as became a Learned Man, warily set
down. First, Honorary Barons, (viz.) Such as had the Honorary Name of Barons,
but not the Blood; for such I take his meaning to be, because he gives us no
Definition of Honorary Barons, nor why, if it be admitted, that Barons had
their beginning from the number of Knight's fees, which they held, why Earls
had not the like beginning, who held of the King in Cap. as well as the others.
Now that there was a clear distinction between Barons enobled in Blood, and
those that held only in Cap. the one we find called Barons Majores, the
greater Barons; the other Barons Minores, lesser Barons. The red Book in the
Exchequer, or Remembrancers Office, attributed to Gervasius, Tilburiensis,
speaks of it as an undoubted Truth, Quidam, etc. Some hold of the King in Cap.
things belonging to the Crown, to wit greater or lesser Barons. Quidam enim de
Rege tenent in Part 2. c. 13.
Capite quae ad Coronam pertinent, Barons, scil. majores, seu minores; by
which it appears they both held of the King in Cap. yet were distinguished into
greater or lesser. Fitstephens in the Life of Thomas of Becket, Fitstep. c. 11.
Chap. 11. mentions, Secundae Dignitatis Barons, Barons of a second Degree,
Matthew. Paris, Anno 1215, has these words: Matthew. Paris, Anno 1215.
Summoneri faciemus, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, and majores
Barons Regni sigillatim per Literas nostras. Et praeterea faciemus submoneri
in generali per Vicecomites, and Ballivos nostros omnes alios qui in Cap.
tenent de nobis, ad certum diem. Here we see two different sorts of Barons, the
one summoned by the King's Writ, the other by the Sheriff. The first sort by
Writs sealed by the Chancellor, the rest by Writs to the Sheriff; yet both held
in Capite: But certainly, omnes qui de Rege tenent in Capite, must be
understood with a reasonable Restriction. For it will be very evident to any
Man who shall examine the Inquisitions post Mortem, remaining in the Tower,
that much Land held per Baroniam, was in the Hands of private Men, who were
never reputed Barons; neither could these Inquisitions be understood of Tenures
from Mesne Lords, and not from the King, because all Tenures per Baroniam, were
Tenures in Capite, which must be from the King. Besides, if the Tenure of Land
made a Baron, Why were not the Purchasers of those Lands by the King's License
of Alienation, ever after the Stat. of quia emptores Terrarum, called to
Parliament as Barons? The Case of the Earl of Arundel, 11 Hen. 6. will not mend
the matter, for his Ancestor was created by Writ, and the Castle entailed upon
him; so that he was called to Parliament not by having the Land only, but by
virtue of the Creation of his Ancestor, and the Entail upon it. In so much,
that I still conceive that the ancient Nobility (from whatsoever beginning it
arose) was made inheritable by Creation, and Investiture of Robes; upon which
sometimes followed Cnarters which directed how it should descend; and the
Confusion in Historians has proceeded from their not distinguishing Barons
from Barons Peers, so called, not from their Parity in Honor, but in Estate
and Tenure, but wanting Investiture, were called, or left out, at the Pleasure
of the King. This Distinction is clearly mentioned in the old Modus tenendi
Parliamentorum, printed by Mr. Hakewell. Summoneri Hakewell page 4.
debent omnes, and singuli Comites, and Barons, and eorum Pares. All Earls,
and Barons ought to be summoned, as also their Peers. I know the Authority of
this Treatise has been questioned by some Learned Men, but by none with more
violence and less reason than by Mr. Prin in his fourth part of his Register of
Writs, P^in. 591, etc.
p. 591. To which, easy Answers may be given, if we consider the Translators
out Seld. Tit. Hon. part 2. p. 743
of the Saxon Tongue, might easily translate Words which they thought of an
equivalent Signification, by words in use at that time; as Wittena Gemot. for
Parliament, and the like. Others of as great Judgment, have as strenuously
defended the Authority of it. Sir Edward Cook in his Jurisdiction Cook's Iuris.
of Courts.
of the Court of Parliament, strongly defends its Antiquity, and Mr. Hakewell
page 135. testifies to have seen an Exemplification Hakew. Mod. p. 135.
of it under the Great Seal of Ireland, in the time of Henry the fourth;
testifying the same to have been sent into Ireland by Henry the second, for a
Form of holding Parliaments in that Kingdom: So that we must either admit the
Great Seal of Ireland to be forged, or confess the Modus as ancient as Henry
the second's Dan. Cron. Anno 1133.
time. Many admit that it was sent into Ireland as a Modus for that Country,
but was not so for England, which seems to me unreasonable, it not being likely
we should give them a Pattern different from our own, who now observe most of
the Rules there given. Daniel, Anno 1133, in the Life of Henry the first, will
tell you that in his time, the word Parliament began to be in use, after the
Convocation of his Parliament at Salisbury, in the 15th Year of his Reign. Nay,
much ancienter, even as old as Canutus, (if we believe the old Book of Sir
Edmundsbury) who in the fifth Year of his Reign, summoned all his Prelates,
Nobles and Great Men to his Parliament, as you may see more Rights of the
Crown, p. 100. Cook's Preface to his 9th Report sets it out at large.
fully, Rights of the Crown, p. 100. By all which of much more that might be
added, we may see how dangerous it is to judge of Books by the promiscuous use
of words: I have made this short Digression, to the end that what I shall say
hereafter, may be made clearer.

I shall now apply my self to the Case of the Clergy, and consider their Right
to sit in Parliament. This Right of theirs must grow since the Conquest, from
the Tenure of their Land in Capite, sicut Baroniam, and consequently, they
cannot be reckoned but amongst the Barons by Tenure, and are not properly
Barons, but Peers, no way enobled in Blood, nor of longer continuance than the
Foundation upon which the Tenure is built, continues. Thus we see in the
Dissolution of Monasteries, the Tenure was extinguished. The same in
Bishoprics, as that of Westminster, and others, where the Corporation being
dissolved, the Tenure, as to them, was extinguished. I know very well they
would not now be thought to sit Ratione Episcop. Dignitatis, as Bishops, but as
Barons. In that famous Wrangle at Northampton, touching Becket, who should
pronounce Sentence against him, The Bishops tell the Lords, Non sedemus hic
Episcopi, sed Barons; nos Barons, and vos Barons, pares hic sumus. Fitst.
Fitst. cap. 10, col. 2. Seld. Tit. Hon. cap. 5. page 706.
cap. 10. col. 2. Seld. Tit. Hon. part 2. cap. 5. page 706. We sit not here
Bishops, but Barons. N. B. their calling themselves Barons, did not make them
such who were at first summoned Ratione Episcopalis Dignitatis.
We Barons, and you Barons are here Peers, or Equals. Not meaning by these
words, that they were otherwise Peers than such as their Tenure made them,
which was only to hold in Cap. sicut Baroniam, or in the nature of a Barony;
for although that tenere per Baroniam, and sicut Baroniam, perhaps are all one,
neither of them imply a Barony, but only the Services of a Barony, which the
Bishops, by their Tenure, were bound to perform, as also the Abbots. And I am
the more confirmed in this Opinion, because I do not find that any Examination
was made what their Possessions were, nor of how many Knights Fees they
consisted; but were they more or less, the Tenure was the same; whereas it is
probable the Possessions of some were above twenty Knights Fees, the rate of an
Earl, others less than thirteen, yet still the Tenure and Peerage was the same.

Neither is any Record, or Patent produced, nor I think can be, where any
Barony was annexed to their Possessions. It Is evident that out of one
Bishopric, others have been taken, as Peterborough out of Lincoln, Oxford out
of Gloucester; yet these Bishops came to Parliament, and still under the same
Tenure and Service. In Edward the sixth's time, Cranmer had his Episcopal
Dignity during Pleasure, Was he then a Baron at will?

We may safely conclude from the Complaint of all Historians of those Times,
that Tenure in Capite, and their Services, which arose by it, was put upon them
Vid. Rot. Fin. 9. H. 3. me. 3. 12. E. 2. Funivals c. 18. E. 2. Nevils c.
as a Burden, not as an Honor, but imposed upon them to make them know they
were Subjects, which they could hardly be brought to believe, having such
Dependence upon Rome. Yet was it not thought fit wholly to exclude them from
all Councils, and therefore this expedient was found out, that they should hold
their Lands by doing such Services as Barons did, and sit amongst them in
Parliament in the nature of Barons, which they improved afterward to the
Appellation of themselves by the name of Barons, but never could to equal
Privileges with those Persons who were truly such. Petrus Blesensis, in his
Tractate de Institutione Episcopali, has these words, which I have occasion to
cite more at large toward the end of this Treatise, page 129.

Quidam Episcopi, Regum munificentias, and eleemosynas antiquorum, Pet.
Blesens. yy. 2. edit. in Quarto, or some Lines before, see after p. 58, and p.
129. b] wrongfully or contrary to the true use.
abusive Baronias, and Regalia vocant, and in occasion turpissimae Servitutis
se ipsos Barons vocant.

Some Bishops abusively call the Bounties of Princes, and the Alms of their
Ancestors, Baronies, and Royalties; and taking occasion from that base Slavery
(he means certainly the Slavery in performing those Services put upon them by
their Tenure) call themselves Barons. This he much, and largely inveighs
against, from all which, it may reasonably be collected that they gave
themselves that Title, rather than that it was given them by the King; who yet
sat in Parliament together with the other Barons, not as a distinct Estate
from them, but involved with them as part of a third Estate, which was entirely
represented in Convocation. For it seems to me very clearly, that they never
were a distinct Estate in Parliament; if Kelway, fol. 184. says, That the
Convocation is not a part of the higher House, neither the Bishops any part of
it, but sit there as they have Temporal Baronies. But he does not say the
Convocation is not one Estate, or part of the Parliament, which however, is but
the Opinion of a Sergeant at Law.
by Parliament you understand that part of it which consisted of Counts and
Barons; yet were they the chief and principal part of a third Estate in
Parliament in respect of the Convocation, which began, continued, and ended
with it; and where their Debates, Gifts to the King, and other Transactions
bind only their own Body. Neither is it reasonable to believe them a third
Estate here, otherwise than they are so accounted in other parts of the World,
to wit, a part of that Body the Clergy, who being a Select Portion, or Lot of
the Lords, and Ambassadors of Christ, looked upon themselves as not
accountable to any Secular Tribunal. Neither is it material whether they sat
mixed with the Laity, as perhaps they have sometimes done, for this cannot alter
their being a third Estate, as Clergymen, let their Votes be gathered
together, or apart. Indeed I cannot see how it is possible they should be a
third Estate in that House where they sit among the Lords; for besides their
Unwillingness to own that they sit as Bishops, but as Barons; I would fain have
any Man tell me, how it comes to be so. Dr. Heylin will tell you that Clerus
was never taken Dr. Heylin's Stumblingblock.
for the Bishops, distinct from the other Clergy: By what Title do they then
claim it? by any Grant from the King that should be produced by Usage or
Allowance? that is denied. Nay, the Impossibility is manifest: For I conceive by
Law, the King cannot make an Estate, for if he could, he might make a fourth, a
fifth, or a sixth Estate, and require consent from them all to the making any
Law which would alter the Frame of the Government. Mr. Prin has very well
proved them to be only a third Estate in Convocation, from the manner of
penning their Grants there, (to wit) By the name of Prelates, and Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury and York -- orderly assembled in a Provincial Synod, or
Convocation -- may be ratified, and confirmed in your Highness's Courn of
Parliament -- with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, not
Prelates, and Clergy, as in their Grant: Prin. fourth part of his Calendar, p.
594, 595. to these I might Prin. fourth p. Kal. p. 594, 595.
add many more Authorities Caudrey's Case Cook part 5. p. 8. Clerus and tota
Gens Laicalis; but these ear enough, and I take it a full Answer to his
several Records urged to that purpose, and for Explanation of the Author of the
Letter, who when he says they are a third Estate of the Kingdom, not of the
Parliament; that is to say, not in that House of Parliament where they sit mixed
with the Temporal Lords. But should I admit them a third Estate in the Lords
House, as this Author, and others contend they are, and so a distinct Estate
from the Lay-Lords, What color can they then have to judge a Peer upon an
Impeachment for Life, when themselves, tho they sit among them, are a distinct
Estate from them, and so no way their Peers, which I take to be a very strong
Argument ad Hominem. I have thus past his first Assertion; and given Answer to
his Conceit of their being a third Estate in the Lords House; if by it he mean
an entire third Estate, and not a part of it, as I said before. For when they
act in Convocation, they act with the rest of the Clergy, as an entire third
Estate, can they, that is, the Bishops in the Lords House, be more than part of
a third Estate; where they vote not as Bishops, but as Barons, as themselves
would have it? Certainly, we must not shut out the Convocation to represent the
Clergy: if then the Bishops in Convocation represent but a part of the Clergy,
how they should be an entire Representative of them in another place, whilst
both are in being, is to me a Riddle.

Let us now come to his argumentative part. After he has climbed a Ladder of
five Steps, he comes at last to this Conclusion: That to sit in Judgment with
the Lords is not against Magna Charta. What if this Gr. q. p. (...).
shall be granted him? Does it thence follow, that they are such Peers as are
enabled to try those in Capital Cases who are enobled in Blood, and have
inheritable Baronies in themselves by Creation? Magna Charta is a general
Charter, which directs the Proceedings in the Trial of all men by their Peers.
Who are Peers to one another, is not there the Question; neither does the
Author of the discourse of Peerage make any other use of it.

The ancient Canons forbid them to meddle at all in secular Affairs: if
therefore the Indulgence of Kings have admitted their Presence in Parliaments
in some Cases, does it thence follow, that they have Right to be there in all
Cases, or to try Peers for their Lives, to whom they are no way equal? The
Author proceeds, and, Gr. q. p. 3.
in the next place, insists upon the Forms of their Writs, which are of the
same kind with those of the other Barons, which being not limited nor
restrained, neither ought their Power so to be.

The Weakness of this Argument is very apparent; for, by this he may infer,
that the Judges and some others had the same Right: for, Mr. Elsing in his
Modus, page 11. has observed, that the Writs Else. p. (...).
were alike to the Lords, to the Judges, and some others, in diverse years of
Ed. 1. in most of Ed. 2. and many of Ed. 3. But the Words of these Writs,
though general, were to be interpreted by the Practice of the Court, and not
contrarily. Again, there is a great deal of difference between giving Counsel
in difficult matters, according to their Writ, and trying Men for their Lives;
an Employment no way proper for Messengers of Peace, and Preachers of glad
Tidings. Lastly, the Earls and Barons are Consiliarii nati, Counselors by
their Birth, and so have a natural Right to give Counsel in all Affairs being
once assembled in Parliament; and for that Reason, upon the Death of the King,
the Nobilitas Major have all equal Right to meet in Council, in order to a
Successor, so have not the Bishops; nay, though Privy Counselors, their
Commission ceasing, they have then no Right to come into Council with the other
Lords.

In the next place he says, Men as certainly dye by Bills of Attainder, where
Gr. q. p. 4.
the Bishops have an undoubted Right to vote in their Legislative Capacity, and
therefore to vote in Cases of Blood is not incompatible with their Function.

To this I answer, the Cases are very different, as well to the matter of the
Law as the Reason of it. For first, Custom or whoever gave them Right to sit in
the Lords House, in the Nature, or amongst the temporal Barons, though
Ecclesiastical Persons, did not restrain them as to their Concurrence in the
making new Laws, yet very well might as to their judging in some Laws already
made: so that the one is agreeable to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Laws of
Parliament, and the other not so: And if any thing in that Particular had been
contrary to the Holiness of their Calling or their Rules of Living, it had been
fit for them to have informed the King and Lords, and not for them to take
notice of it otherwise. Nay, in that very Case, when that Bill shall come to be
passed into a Law, by the King, the Lords Spiritual ought to absent themselves,
as it was held by Mr. Bagshaw, a Reader of the Middle Temple, in the time of
Archbishop Laud, by whose Power, he was then prohibited from farther
Proceedings in his said Lectures. Rush. Hist. Collect. part 2. page 990. Hist.
Coll. part. 2. page 990.
Secondly, the passing a new Law, be it what it will, does not immediately, but
by Consequence may concern Blood. Now the Bishops, who are always supposed to
incline to Mercy rather than Severity, may perpetually, with a good Conscience,
hinder the passing such a Bill as shall punish a Delinquent with Death who had
not capitally offended before. But, when once a Man is capitally impeached for
transgressing a known Law, and Issue joined thereupon, it is not now in their
Power, with a good Conscience, to acquit the Guilty, because they must there
opine according to the Proofs before them, which is a very strong Argument why
they might be permitted to be present in the one Case, and not in the other.
Lastly, if this way of arguing were good, it would follow, that the Commons
ought to have equal Power with the Lords in all other Cases, because they have
with them an equal Power in passing Bills.

The next Section consists in blaming Gr. q. p. 6.
the Insinuation of his Adversary, who says, their meddling with secular
Affairs was against the Apostles Practice, though in a matter concerning the
Church; mentions the Rescript of Honorius and Theodosius, and so passes that
point. In which, it appears he insinuates no more than William the First
ordained, who Vid. Dan. p. 35. 46. Baker p. 26. and 30.
appointed that they should meddle with nothing but what concerned the rule of
Souls, and govern themselves according to the Rules of the Church, so that you
see the Canons of the Church were considered in their Admission to sit.

What he says in Opposition to this, is, that it is a part of God's Service to
do Justice and Mercy, and to attend the public Affairs of the Kingdom, when
they Gr. q. p. 6.
shall be thereunto called: that the Bishops now are not under the same
Circumstances the Apostles were when the Christian Church was to be planted,
and now when it is constituted: that the Apostles traveled from Place to
Place, which the Bishops are not now bound to do: that the Clergy N. B. Here he
makes the whole Clergy to be one of the three Estates.
are one, yea, the chiefest of the three Estates, and therefore reasonable they
should be concerned in the Affairs which concern the whole Nation; and after
that, produces Examples out of the Practice of other Nations: (which at best
signifies nothing to ours) neither is what he says any way argumentative to
his Advantage, except he had first proved that he that first appointed them to
preach the Gospel, and attend the Affairs of the Church, did not think that
Employment enough to spend their whole time in. And although the Apostles, who
were Messengers, did go about their Errands to several Places whither they were
sent, it does not appear that St. James, who was a Bishop, and not an Apostle,
except we shall call him the Thirteenth, ever parted from Jerusalem, but
attended the business of the Church there. But, since this Author has thought
fit to put us upon this Question, let us examine it a little higher.

'Twill be undoubtedly agreed on all hands, that our Savior did not delegate
to others a greater Power than God had given him the Exercise of to himself.
But it is clear in the Case of the Young Man, Luke 12. 14. who would have had
him command his Brother to divide the Inheritance with him; Man, who made me a
Judge, and a Divider? That is, none has made me so, because his Kingdom was
not of this World; that is, consisted not in secular things. The next place I
shall remember, is 2 Ep. Tim. chap. 2. verse. 4. No man that warreth intangleth
himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him that has chosen
him to be a Soldier. Hugo Grotius upon this place will tell you, that this is
a Similitude taken from the Roman Law, which would not suffer any Soldier to
be employed in any Affairs, but Military, quotes the Law and the Practice;
tells you out of Florus, that Posthumous, a man of consular Dignity, was
punished for appointing his Soldiers to assist him in his Field. It Is true,
the Words are general, but being applied to Timothy, who was then employed in a
Spiritual course of Life, they cannot think to please him who set them on Work,
if they be engaged in secular Matters, which have not some immediate Reference
to the Church: And, I believe no temporal Prince would take it well that his
Ambassador should engage himself in the Affairs of any other Prince, without
his particular Commission. This Sense is generally embraced, though in our
Question we exclude not all secular Matters, but Blood only.

The third place I will mention, is the seventh and eightieth Apostolic
Canons, (...), Presbyter aut Diaconus nequaquam seculares curas adsumat, sin
aliter dejiciatur. Let no Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon, at any hand take upon
him the Care of Secular things; and he that does, let him be deposed.

I suppose here are some Testimonies more than a thousand years ancienter than
any Council of Toledo, against their meddling in Blood: for, Qui includit omne
excludit nihil. If all secular Employments be forbidden, then the meddling in
Blood is not excluded. It cannot seem to me reasonable, that we should use
those Arguments as Bishop Davenant and others do against the Usurpation of the
Pope, in things of this Nature, which may with as much force be retorted upon
our selves. I am not ignorant what is usually replied by men of a contrary
Judgment, and has been learnedly and heartily put together by the Author of
the Honor of the Lords Spiritual asserted, who has written with more
Clearness and equal Reason, I think, to those of that side who have come after
him.

Far be it from me to envy the Honor of the Clergy in their several Degrees
and Orders, or to think the Ambassadors of God should live basely or sordidly
and not be used with all due Respect among men. Neither is it any way
reasonable, that they who in an afflicted Church lived upon the general
Contribution of the Saints, should be put to such Streights in a flourishing
one: but all this is to be understood with that necessary Limitation, that no
Employment should take them off from their main Business, the Care of the
Churches committed to their Charge.

If they can satisfy themselves that their Spiritual Work is not enough to
take up their whole time, let them in God's name be engaged in secular Offices:
but I think if the greatest part of their Power were not transferred to their
Chancellors and Layofficers, there would be time little enough left them for
secular things. I remember to have read in a Book called Il Nipotismo, Il
Nipotismo de Roma. p. 37.
(the design whereof is to show the Corruption of the Church of Rome in the
matter of their Nephews) that about 226 years after Christ, when the Clergy
began to appropriate Lands to the use of the Church, they began to grow proud,
covetous, and negligent in their oversight of the Churches: to the same
Purpose you may peruse a Book of Father Paoles de materie ecclesi^. Pad. paolo
de materie ecclesiastiche.
And truly, this is the general complaint of Petrus Blesensis (an Author our
learned Adversary makes some use of) in many of his Epistles and Sermons,
insomuch, that I wish there were not Truth in that Report, that upon the too
great Splendor of the Churches, Poison was sowed among them.

Certainly this Kingdom has given them a great share in the Government, which
has not only allowed them the first Rank in the Estates of the Nation, but
has by Law made them appear to be so in the Convocation, where they have both
an upper and lower House; where they give Subsidies, make Laws for the Church,
and where a part of them sit among the Lords, not only to press the Allowance
of those Laws by the Civil Power, but also to have their share in making new
ones.

This, one would think were enough to content them without desiring to have a
Judicial Power in Cases of Blood, which I doubt not to prove is by Law
forbidden them.

But, I fear the charging this Desire upon Our Bishops Rights. page 61.
them is rather an Artifice of their Enemies, who by assixing this Calumny upon
them, which indeed is not their Design, labor to lessen them in the Estimation
of the World, and by that means bring into Contempt both their Persons and
Callings.

Many Examples I confess are given, where Christian Emperors and Princes have
made use of the Service of Bishops as Counselors, Chancellors, and Chief
Justices, and the like; but upon Examination it will appear, that as to our own
Kingdom, the Offices of these Persons were much mistaken. The Office of
Capitalis Justiciarius Angliae, was not to sit and judge Causes among
Associates, as at this day, but was the Chief Officer of the Nation, had the
Appellation of Prorex; and had Power, in the Absence of the King, to displace
any Officer of the Cinque Ports, and to do any thing as Viceroy and Protector
of the Kingdom; of which, see at large Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, in the
Word Capitalis Justiciarius. Upon Spel. Glos. verb. Cap. Justic. Co. 2. Inst.
p. 26.
Examination it will be manifest, that when they sat in any such places, their
Service rather was to direct the Conscience, to make amicable ends of
Controversies, to preach Peace to others, and pursue it themselves, till the
Subtilty of Rome turned Religion into Policy, and destroyed the Power of it.
How far the Edicts of Princes were binding, is not my Task to enquire, but only
how far that of their not meddling in Blood was a part of the Law and Custom of
this Kingdom, and observed here. But, what I have said in this Chapter,
especially as to the Baronies of Bishops, I have delivered by way of Proposal,
not Determination, and upon a clear Answer of my Reasons, shall be ready to
retract any thing I have written.

CHAP. II.
I Come now to the Examination of his second Chapter, in which, the
Recognitions made at the Parliament held at Clarendon, come under Examination,
together with the Protestation made 11 R. 2. I call it a Parliament, because I
find it generally so esteemed by our best Lawyers, and I think denied to be so
by very few. Mr. Seldom calls it that great Parliament Seld. tit. hon. part 2.
p. 703.
at Clarendon, Tit. Hon. part. 2. chapter 5. p. 703. the first Edit. in fol. Coo.
2. Instit. chapter 2. p. 6. and in many other places. Hoveden says, there met
Clerus and Populus Angliae. Where note, he makes Clerus comprehend Bishops,
Abbots, and all Ecclesiastical Persons, and Populus both Lords and Commons,
contrary to what Dr. Brady has asserted, but very weakly proved.

But before I enter into a more narrow Examination of this Statute, I think it
not amiss to give a short Account of the History of those times, from William
the First, to the tenth year of Hen. the Second, when this Meeting was, with
Relation only What Dr. Bradies Fancy is in that Particular, let him make good,
if he can.
to the King and the Church. It will not be denied, that William the First
disclaimed all Title to the Crown of England by Conquest, and swore to observe
the Laws of Edw. the Confessor, which were our Laws before: yet
notwithstanding, it is generally agreed, that he erected Tenures in Capite, and
Baronies, and that amongst others he obliged the Bishops who before held their
Lands in Frankalmoign, to do Service to his Courts, and to hold their Lands in
Cap. sicut Baroniam, and not to make their so frequent Appeals to Rome, and
Journeys thither, without his License, being a thing contrary to the known Laws
of his Kingdom; which is made evident by Sir Edward Cook in Cawdryes Coo.
Cawdreys Case. Twysden's Vind. of Schism.
Case, and Sir Roger Twysden in his Vindication of the Church of England, in
point of Schism. These were the Servitutes ecclesiasticae, and the Pessimae
consuetudines, so much complained of by Mat. Paris and other Monks of that Age.
But however, so it stood during the Times of Will. the First, Will. the Second,
and Hen. the First; after whose Death, Stephen, without any Right, (and
contrary to their Oaths made to Maud, Daughter to Henry the First then alive)
by the Aid of the Bishops gets into the Throne, and by their Power, was kept
there till a Composition was made with Maud. In Recompense of this their breach
of Oath, Stephen frees them and the rest of the Clergy, from answering in any
other Courts but Ecclesiastical: by which, In a Parliament held at Oxford, Anno
1136. he grants by his Charter, under his Hand, That all Persons and Causes
Ecclesiastical, should appertain only to Ecclesiastical Judges.
they now looked upon themselves as free from the secular Power, because they
were answerable for no Offenses, but in their Courts. In this State of things
Stephen dies, and Hen. the Second, Son to Maud, according to Capitulation, is
received to the Crown; who, after he had settled his Affairs in Normandy,
resolves to do the like in England: but, fearing some Opposition to his Designs
might arise from the Clergy, he first calls together an Assembly or Council at
Westminster, in the ninth year of his Reign; where he propounds, That all such
of the Clergy as should be taken, and convicted for any heinous Crime, should
lose the Privilege of the Church, and be delivered to the civil Magistrate, to
be punished for their Offenses, as other the Kings Subjects were. To this, the
Archbishop Becket, with the rest of his Brethren, refused to give their
Consent, as being against the Liberties of the Church, which were confirmed to
them by King Stephens Charter. This Answer put the King to a second Question;
Whether the Archbishops and Bishops would submit themselves to the Laws and
Customs observed by them in the time of his Grandfather, Henry the First? They
answered equivocally, They would; their Order, the Honor of God, and the Holy
Church in all things saved: with which Answer, the King was more enraged. But,
the News of this Breach coming to Rome, the Pope writes, and sends a Messenger
from Rome, charges the Archbishop to make Peace with his Lord the King, and to
promise to observe his Laws without Exception. The Archbishop thus humbled,
repairs to the King at Woodstock, and there promises to observe the King's Laws
so far forth as was required. Upon this Submission, the King, having before
broken up his Council at Westminster, summons this Parliament to meet at
Clarendon, in the tenth Year of his Reign, where he gives in Charge, that they
should call to Mind, and put in Execution and Writing the Laws of his
Grandfather, Henry the First. Of which, these following were the chief. First,
that there should be no Appeals to Rome without the Kings leave. That Laymen
might handle cases of Tithes. That no Archbishop or Bishop should
excommunicate any person who held of the King in Cap. or interdict any official
of his without his leave, etc. The eleventh of them was at large what we have
now under Consideration; which I shall repeat and translate as it ought to be,
by and by. But, by this short Relation I have made of the History of those
Times, it may appear plainly, that their yielding Obedience to the known Laws
of the Kingdom in matters of Appeal, appearing and answering in the King's
Courts, (though it were the ancient Usage and Custom of the Realm) was the
thing that most vexed them, and not how far their Presence was required in
cases of Blood, brought into Parliament, in which they were contented to be
limited by the Usage of that Court, and to afford or forbear their Presence,
according to that Obligation which was incumbent upon them from the Canons of
the Church, invigorated by the constant Usage of the Nation. If therefore, I
can make it good, that the Bishops had no Right to be present in the Debate,
and handling matters of Blood, and that that was the known Law, and the Sense
of this Act now before us, and of the subsequent Protestation in 11. of R. 2. I
shall think my self competently safe, though some seeming Precedents and
Records should be brought against me: for, it is the Law must be the Measure
and Standard of our Actions, and not always Records; the Reasons whereof, are
sometimes obscure, and the matter it self many times shortly rehearsed, and not
always legal. I must confess, this Author has much labored to fix a Sense
upon this Article subservient to his Purpose; but the more he struggles the
more he is entangled. It Is worth Observation, that four or five, I suppose,
different Persons, have written in the Defense of the Bishops Right to vote in
Capital Causes in Parliament; and having all of them a necessity to say
something to this Law of Clarendon, do all of them give different
Interpretations of the meaning of it: a great Argument of a weak Cause. The
first, whose Title is, The Honor of the Lords Spiritual, etc. I presume being
satisfied with the general Sense which was put upon these Constitutions from
all times, from which it is always unsafe to vary, and perceiving that those
illegal Privileges granted to them by King Stephen, were, by the reviving the
Laws of Henry the First, abolished, does ingeniously confess in three places,
page 26. at the end of the sixth Chapter, and in the same page at the beginning
of the seventh Chap. That at Clarendon their Wings were indeed much clipped, yet
the Privilege of sitting Hon. of the Lords. p. 26.
and voting in Parliament, is left entire to them; and though they never of late
voted in Capital Cases, yet they have ever made their Proxies, as he hopes to
make appear. In Chapter the seventh he has these words, We confess as before,
for that they were Spiritual Persons, they were not to sit in Capital Causes
and loss of Limb; but adds, that long before they had exercised this Power. By
which Words, it appears, that in the Judgment of that Author, whatever their
Power and Practice was before, yet that now by the Laws of Henry the First
recognized, at this Parliament at Clarendon, that Power was taken away, and not
since practiced. That they had such Power before, he endeavors to prove out of
Compton and Spelman, neither of which Authors, make good any more, than that
the Bishop was Assessor with the Earl in the County Court; which was only to
advise him in point of Conscience; not much unlike the Offices of our
Surrogates, who sit in consistory with the Bishops Chancellor, in whom we know
resides all the Power. That this is so, appears by the Laws of Edgar, put out
by Mr. Lambert, who in his fifth Chapter has these Words. Centuri^ comit^is
quisque^t antea praescribitur interesto -- Celeberrimus autem ex omni Sa^ia bis
quotannis conventus agitor: cui cuidem illius Diocesis Episcopus and senator
intersunto, quorum Laws of Edg. chapter 5.
alter jura divina, alter humana populum edoceto. By which, we see 'twas the
Office of the Bishop to direct the People in Divine Laws, as it was of the
Senator or Earl to teach them Humane: of the same Opinion is Sir Edward Coo. 2
Instit. p. 488. Coo. Mag. Cha. p. 488.
Stat circumspecte agatis. Lastly, Chap. 8. page 32. he mentions the Council at
Westminster, that in regard they might not Agitare judicium sanguinis, they had
many times forborne to meddle in such Matters. The whole Chapter is concerning
Bills of Attainder: now whether he meant that in such cases they did sometime
absent themselves, let himself explain. This Author not foreseeing the
Advantage would be made of these Constitutions, or else, hoping to help himself
upon the Power they had to make Proxies, does ingeniously confess the Truth,
but is deserted by all those of his Side who follow him. The Author of the
Rejoinder, p. 5. tells you, that Rejoin. p. 5.
the Constitutions of Clarendon permit the Bishops to be present, and vote till
it comes to loss of Life or Member, which is not till the passing of Sentence
upon the Prisoner. I believed the loss of Life and Member was the Execution,
and if they may be there, and vote till then, they may be present as long as
any other; for when that is given, all go away: but, if his Meaning be that
they should go away when the Sentence is to be pronounced, the precedent Words
will not bear that Construction: so that according to him, this is rather an
imping than clipping the Wings of the Bishops, as the former Author affirms.
Beside, this Exposition is contrary to the Votes of the Lords, who tell you,
they must go away when their Lordships proceed to voting Guilty or Not Guilty,
which is before the definitive Sentence, which is always given in the Presence
of the Prisoner, the other not. Vide Iournal of Parl. page 258. 15 Maii, 1679.
Jour. of ^arl p. 258.
in which, they explained a former Vote, made by their Lordships, 13 Maii,
1679. in which, they had voted that the Lords Spiritual had Right to stay in
Court in Capital Cases, till Sentence or Judgment of Death came to be
pronounced: by which, you see the House of Lords have disowned that Sense our
late Interpreters would put upon the Words of this Constitution, though
themselves before had given color to that Interpretation. Our third Author,
entitled, The Rights of the Bishops, fairly passes over this Law, only
Bishops Rights. p. 139. 141.
tells you, that a Bishop pronounced Sentence against Becket in case of
Treason, as Fitztephen, a grave Author, says; and farther tells you, That
though the Prince may indulge many Privileges to his Clergy, as this of not
compelling them to vote in Parliament in cases of Blood, where by the Canon Law
they are prohibited, yet that Law, must yield to the Law of the Land, (but how
if the Canon Law be part of the Law of the Land, what is then to be done?) which
cannot divest the King of his Right of using his Subjects, Clerks, or not, in
any Places or Employments he shall think fit to employ them in; or in which he
may think them capable of doing Him or the Public any Service. This I confess
is plain dealing, and I wish it were not too much the Sense of some of our
greatest Clerks, that let the Law be what it will, it cannot bind the King's
Hands from making use of any of his Subjects in what he pleases, though the
Employment be forbidden by Law. This is the Meaning our third Author gives of
this Constitution; and much good may it do him.

Our last Author, in his Grand Question, comes next to be examined, in which I
shall be more large, because in him is concentred what the rest have said, and
his Cause defended with much Learning, and variety of Reading.

He names the Constitutions of Clarendon, and the Protestation in 11 R. 2. as
Gr. q. p. 19.
the two main Laws against him. The Constitutions of Clarendon (which were no
more than a Recognition of the ancient Laws and Customs of England, not made,
but revived by Hen. the First, and now confirmed by his Grandson Hen. the
Second) he considers as the most material, and is content this Cause should
stand or fall by them. He tells you, the Constitution in Debate is the eleventh
in number; of which, the Words are,

Archiepiscopi Episcopi, and universae Personae regni qui de Rege tenent in
Capite, habeant Possessiones suas de Rege, sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant
Justiciariis and Ministris Regis, and faciant omnes consuetudines Regias: Et
ficut ceteri Barons debeant interesse Iudiciis curie Regis quousque
perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum vel ad Mortem.

After the Words, he gives us the Translation of them, made by the Author of
the Letter, in the following manner.

The Archbishops and Bishops, and all the dignified Clergy of the Land, that
hold of the King in Capite, shall hold their Possessions of the King, as a
Barony, and answer for their Estates unto the King's Justices and Ministers,
and shall observe and obey all the King's Laws: and, together with the other
Barons, they are to be present at all Judgments in the King's Courts, till it
comes to require either loss of Life or Member.

But, pray Sir, why did you not rather give us a Translation of these Words of
your own? If the Author of the Letter have made an imperfect Translation, why
did not you mend it? I believe, if this Author had found it would have
advantaged his Cause, some Exceptions would have been taken to the Translation.
I shall by and by give the Reader a full account of the true Sense of the whole
Period; but will first make appear the Unreasonableness of the Exposition he
makes of the last Clause of it.

Et sicut caeteri Barons debent interesse judiciis Curiae Regis quousque
perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum, vel ad Mortem.

The Meaning he conceives to be, That the Bishops are required to be present in
the King's Courts as other Barons are, till Gr. q. p. 20.
they come to give Sentence, as to dismembring or loss of Life.

Why he translates Curiae Regis in the plural Number, the Kings Courts, which
is in the singular the King's Court, and in this place, has always been
understood of the High Court of Parliament, in which, the other Barons had an
Interest to be present as Judges, and in which Sense, it is very often taken,
as is made clear by Mr. Petit, in his learned Discourse Petit* pr. p. 45. Ger.
Dorob. p. 1653.
of the ancient Rights of the Commons of England. Pref. page 45. out of
Gervasius Dorobornensis. page 1653. who speaking of the Election of Archbishop
Lanfrank, has these Words; Eligentibus eum Senioribus ejusdem ecclesiae cum
Episcopis ac principibus Clero and Populo Angliae in Curia Regis, in
assumptione Sanctae Mariae: and another Author says, it was Consensu and
Consilio omnium Baronum suorum, omniumque Episcoporum and Abbatum totiusque
Populi Angliae commisit ei Dorobornensem ecclesiam. That this was a Parliament,
we have little Reason to doubt, and that it was called Curia Regis. See also
Inter com. T. Hill. 17 E. 3. penes remem. in Scacc. 29. and 32 H. 3. mem. 12.
13. in dors. rot. claus. Consideratum (...) E. 3.
fuit in Cur. nostra and toto Parliamento nostro, etc. Wherein, Cur. Regis, and
totum Parl. are but expressive of the same thing, and not two Courts, as I
think: I very well know, that Curia Regis had various acceptations; sometime it
signified that Court of Justice that at those times followed the King's Person;
sometime it was taken for Aula Regis, where Entertainments and Feasts were
made, as we read often in our Historians; but, I take it here to be understood
of the High Court of Parliament, for the Reasons before touched, and many
others, if any shall seem to doubt of it.

Next, why does he leave out Judiciis, whereas the Words are, The Bishops, as
the other Barons, ought to be present Judiciis curiae Regis, in Trials in the
King's Court, (viz. the Parliament) he renders they are to be present in the
King's Courts. To help himself under the covert of an ill Translation, savours
not of that candor justly to be expected from so learned a Person, and one
that seeks after Truth, rather than Victory? but, since this Author is a
subtle and no loose Writer, give me leave to guess at the Reason of it. He saw
plainly, that had he fairly rendered the Words [The Bishops as other Barons,
have Right to be present in all Causes, Sentences, or Judgments in the King's
Court, or Parliament, till the Cause, Sentence, or Judgment come to concern
Life or Member; the Word Judiciis, in the plural Number, must have referred to
other Judgments in other cases, and then the latter clause [till Judgment, or
Sentence came to concern Life or Member] would have been clearly restrictive as
to cases of Blood; for, to be present at the Judgments of the Court till
Judgment, is Nonsense, except the Words be applied to different cases. Now,
this Interpretation would have quite destroyed his main Undertaking, who at
last gives a Sense of the Words, not only coincident with that given by the
Author of the Bishops Rights, to which I have before spoken, but contrary to
the Votes of the Lords in Parliament; who, though they seem to admit their
Presence in the hearing such a case, yet will not admit them to have any part
or voice in the judging of it. Beside, I must needs take notice, that it is a
strange Translation of the words, Quousque perveniatur, or, in judicio
perveniatur ad diminutionem Membrorum vel ad mortem. Till they come to give
Sentence; when the Words more naturally import, till Judgment may be fulfilled
in the cutting off of Member, or Life; which is Execution. But, I shall anon
give him a more proper Translation of the Words: in the mean time, will
consider all his Subterfuges and cunning Evasions, by which he would give
color to his Interpretation.

First, from the occasion the Author of Gr. q. p. 20.
the Letter, page 73. had said. The Prelates affected a kind of Omnipotency.
(he conceives the Author means in Judicature) and I conceive he made that
Supposition, because he judged it for his Advantage to suppose so: not that the
thing was true, or that the Author of the Letter gave him any cause to take up
that Fancy. Their Affectation of Omnipotency was not to be freed from that part
of the Law of the Land which was agreeable with the Laws of the Church, which
they were content to submit to; but their Desire was, to be freed from those
they thought were against them, to wit, to do Service to the King, for their
Lands, to answer to his Justices and Ministers, to be subject to the secular
Power for any crimes they should commit. These were the things they stormed at,
and were the Ecclesiastical Bondage and the wicked Constitutions Matt. Paris,
and other Historians of his Time so much exclaimed against, because they would
have had all their Affairs transacted in their own Courts; so that our Author
need not have spent ten Pages, to prove what no body affirms. Much of the
Contests between the King and Clergy arose from the Charter granted by K.
Stephen, Anno 1136. That all Persons and Causes ecclesiastical should appertain
only to ecclesiastical Judges; which Charter, whatever stir they made about it,
according to our Author's Logic, was void: (for Maud the Empress, Daughter to
Henry the First, third Son to William the First, and so right Heir to the
Crown, was then alive, to whom the Bishops and People had sworn Obedience; and
therefore King Stephen was as much an Usurper as Hen. the Fourth.) This Charter
was the Latis offendiculi, the stumbling Stone they could not escape, and the
mere restoring now at Clarendon the ancient Laws and Customs confirmed to the
People by Hen. 1. was what gave them the greatest Disturbance; not that they
affected any Omnipotency of Judicature, at least in cases of Blood: insomuch,
that our Author had no reason to pin a Sense upon the Words of the Author of
the Letter, to which, he had no Inducement from any Words of that Author.

Having done with the Occasion, we Gr. q. p. 30.
come now to his second Enforcement of his Opinion, viz. the plain meaning of
the Words. First, he quarrels with the copy, the Author of the Letter follows,
taken out of Matt. Paris and Wendover, who notwithstanding, in Mr. Selden's
Opinion, have best preserved the meaning of this Constitution. Seld. tit. hon.
part 2. pa. 703. Seld. tit. hon. p. 703.
704.

Though I do not grant his Vatican copy, following, as he says, Gerv.
Doroberniensis is better, yet for once I am content to follow his copy, and
admit the Words in Judicio to be inserted, which are left out by Matt. Paris,
yet I think necessarily employed; but shall never yield to his unwarrantable
construction of them, which in conclusion amounts to this.

That the Bishops were bound to be in the Kings Courts in all Judgments, till
it came to Sentence of loss of Life and Member, and then they might go out, in
obedience to the Canons of the Church, if Gr. q. p. 32.
they pleased, to which they pretended themselves bound in Conscience to give
Obedience; and that for this Reason, the Pope marked this Constitution with a
hoc tolerandum, the others with hoc improbandum. I confess, I think the
Interpretation of these Words contrary to their natural Sense, and contrary to
the Opinion and Practice of former times, who have always understood them to
import, that the Clergy ought to be present in all Trials in Parliament, except
in Trials of Blood.

But, before I proceed to make good the true Sense and Translation of these
words, it will be necessary to explain the Signification of some of them.
First, Quousque usque quo, dummodo, praeterquam, are often times indifferently
taken, as signifying the same thing, and are limiting, restraining Particles,
and used as Exceptions to something which went before, (...) till what time,
till when, so far forth, except when, or the like.

Secondly, Iudicium signifies properly a Trial at Law, a Case, a Suit, or
Process, and is not taken for a definitive Sentence, except when it is
delivered as the Opinion of the Court, resulting upon a precedent Trial had
before others; in which, he that pronounces Sentence has not, or very rarely,
more than a directive Power, and does not give his own single Opinion but the
Sense of others, in matters debated. Actiones quarum causa in jus quisque
vocatur quandoque dicuntur judicia. Ut in L. in bon. fid. 13. de Usuris L. 4.
C. tit. 32. L. Mora S. in bo. fid. Theophilus refert in S. 1. de Act. quas
Athenienses (...) dicebant and Budaeus notat. in communi Lingua Graeca per
(...) generali nomine dicebant litem, actionem, paenam, mulctam and judicium,
to wit, the whole Proceedings. Iudicium est legitima disceptatio duorum, aut
plurium coram judice Cale. Dict. Calv. Lex. juridcirca finem. to the same
purpose. By these Authorities and many more, it is plain, that Judicium,
Judgment, comprehends the whole Proceedings in any Cause, and not the Sentence
only.

Pervenio signifies to arrive at, or the Accomplishment, or Bounds of any
thing; as pervenire ad metam is to arrive at, or come to the Goal. Ovid
speaking of the Return made by the Echo, has these Words, Verba refert aures
non pervenientia nostras, Words that arrived not at our Ears, they came not to
the Terms or Bounds designed. So pervenior, in the Passive Voice, must signify
to be arrived at, or accomplished in.

That Judicium in our Case must be taken in the Sense I have given, I shall
evince from the general Opinion of Lawyers. I shall begin with Magna Charta:
The Words there are judicium Parium, and understood of a Trial by his Equals.
The Question which is asked the Prisoners after their Plea, is, not who shall
give Sentence upon thee? but how will thou be tried? and they that give
Sentence are not those that try them in criminal Cases: nay, their appealing to
a Trial by them, is accounted a standing Mute. The next Authority shall be from
the Council at Westminster, in the 22. year of Hen. 2. no more than twelve
years after the Assize of Clarendon, Hoveden f. 543. Ger. Dorob. fo. 1429. An.
1175.
and as Hoveden says, taken out of the 11. of Toledo, and summoned as Gervas
of Canterbury says; In hoc consilio ad emendationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, ex
assensu Domini Regis and primorum omnium Regni haec subscripta promulgata sunt
Capitula. Amongst which, this is one.

His qui in sacris ordinibus constituti sunt judicium sanguinis agitare non
licet: unde prohibemus ne aut Non licet ought not to be translated, it is not
convenient as Mr. Hunt would have it, and never has that Signification but
when a Law intervenes, which makes it as well unlawful as inconvenient; for,
every Law makes the Breach of it inconvenient.
per se Membrorum truncationes faciant, aut inferendas judicent. That such as
were in holy Orders should not agitate or meddle in Trials of Blood as a thing
unlawful: for which Reason, they are prohibited from cutting off any Member
themselves, or from giving their Opinions or Judgments that such Punishments
ought to be inflicted. This Synod we see was not only a Meeting of the Clergy,
but with them of the Primores Regni, and the Determinations promulgated by
their Assent and the Assent of the King: for the Laymen did usually meet with
the Clergy in their Councils, in those days. To which purpose, see a Tractate
of a late learned Writer, in his Iani Angl. fac. nov. page 213. which came not
to my hand till very lately. Now, whether this Agitation of the Clergy, in
matters of Blood, had reference to the ordinary Courts of Justice, in which
they might not be present, or to all in general, is not material, since it is
only produced to show the meaning of the Word; and certainly, if it be
inclusive as to those Courts, it is not exclusive to any other. And Agitation
in Trials being naturally before Sentence, Agitation in Trials must extend to
Preliminaries.

Let us now come to the Constitutions of Archbishop Langton in Linwood. It Is
first Linw. lib. 3. tit. 29. Ne qui Cler.
found, lib. 3. tit. 29.

Ne Clerici vel Mon. fo. 269. ult. edit. Praesenti statuimus decreto, etc. Nec
Jurisdictiones exerceant saeculares, praesertim illas quibus judicium sanguinis
est annexum. His quoque duximus adjungendum, ne scilicet judicium sanguinis in
locis sacris tractetur, in ecclesia videlicet, vel in caemeterio. Authoritate
quoque Concilii districtius inhibemus ne quis Clericus beneficiatus, vel in
sacris ordinibus constitutus literas pro paena sanguinis infligenda scribere,
vel dictare praesumat, vel ubi judicium sanguinis tractatur, vel exercetur
intersit. The Sum of all which is, that no Clergyman should exercise
Jurisdiction in any cause to which Sentence of Blood was annexed. That no
causes concerning Blood should be held in Churches or Churchyards: Lastly,
that they should not be interessed where causes of Blood were handled, nor
should presume to write, or dictate such Sentences to be inflicted. To the same
purpose are the Constit. of Othobon. Ne cler. advocat. tit. 7. p. 91. Let him
look upon his own Authority out of Hostiensis, Protestatio in judicio is meant
of a Protestation in a Suit, or Process. I am sure these are Testimonies more
than enough, to show the true meaning of judicium among Lawyers, which is the
only end for which I have produced them.

I shall now come to the true Translation of the Words, but shall not follow
Mr. Seldom; and after him, the Author of the Letter, in rendering Universae
personae Regni, all the dignified Clergy: nor shall I allow of his Criticism of
Persona or Personatus, because, for ought appears to me, some Clergymen, who
were not dignified might, by License from the King, purchase Lands held in
Capite sicut Baroniam, and thereupon, think themselves exempt from Vid. Treat.
of the Nobil. page 68. supposed to be by Doddridg.
this Law.

Having thus far cleared the way, I come now to the true Translation of the
Words themselves, which are,

Archiepiscopi Episcopi, and Universae Personae Regni, qui de Rege tenent in
Capite habeant possessiones suas de Rege sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant
Justiciariis, and Ministris Regis, and faciant omnes consuetudines regias. Et
sicut ceteri Barons debent interesse Judiciis Curie Regis, quousque
perveniatur [in Judicio] ad diminutionem Membrorum vel ad Mortem.

In English.

Let the Archbishops and Bishops, and all Persons whatsoever of the Kingdom,
who hold of the King in Capite, have their Possessions from the King in the
Nature of a Barony; and by reason thereof, let them answer the King's Justices
and Ministers, and perform all Royal Customs. And in like manner, as the rest
of the Barons it is their Duty to be present at all Debates, Process, or
Proceedings in the King's Court (viz. the Parliament) till what time, so far
forth, or except when in the Trial, Debate, or Process, the loss of Life or
Member may fall out to be the Upshot or Conclusion of the Case, or the matter
put in Issue.

In plain English, in all cases where the Issue or Conclusion may fall out to
be ended in loss of Life, or Member, they are by this Law to be absent. Now I
hope upon Issue joined, if the Impeachment be of a capital Crime, the
conclusion or upshot may happen to be found to concern Life or Member. And that
this is the true Sense and Construction of the Words, I dare appeal to any Man,
who is so far Master of the Language, as not to think fit to consound Moods,
Tenses, and Numbers, at Pleasure, as this Author seems to do, when he reads
Curiae Regis the King's Courts, which being in the singular Number, resers only
to the King's great Court, the Parliament, the King's Courts in the plural.
Perveniatur in the Potential Mood, when such a thing may be brought to pass,
with pervenitur in the Indicative Mood, when such a thing is brought to pass,
that is, as he erroneously translates, till Sentence comes to be given. And the
Authorities before-cited evidently show, that the Writers of those Ages
understood the Law in that sense. To which Authorities, I shall now add the
Opinions of Mr. Seldom, Sir Edward Cook, Mr. Hakewell, and Fitz-Stephens, a
Writer of good esteem with our Author. Mr. Seldom, Tit. Hon. part. 2. chapter 5.
Seld. tit. hon. p 704.
p. 704. explaining these Constitutions of Clarendon, says, that the meaning
of this in question is, That the Bishops were to sit in Judgment with the rest
of the Barons in all cases, save in cases of Blood. Now, I hope, every man will
admit it is a case of Blood before Sentence, and that the Barons sit in Judgment
when the Matter comes to be treated of before them. Sir Edward Coke, cap. de
Asportatis Relig. cites the Parliament of 11 R. 2. where, by their own Cook 2
Inst. page 587.
acknowledgment, they went out before any Debate; their presence being
prohibited by the Canon Law. Mr. Hakewel, in his Mod. ten. page 84. has these
words; Hakewell mod pa. 84.
Therefore we see the Presence of the Bishops in Parliament, in respect of
their Baronies, is, Duousque perveniatur ad diminutionem, etc. for so, even
unto our times, when Question is had of the Attainder of any Peer, or other, in
Parliament the Archbishops and Bishops depart the House, and make their
Proctors. Here you see they are to depart when Question is had, etc. As to
their making Proctors I shall speak more fully hereafter, as also shall show,
that the Canon Law both by these Constitutions and before them, was part of the
Consuetudines Regni: yet this, by the way, appears plainly, that the desire of
the Cominons in 21 R. 2. that they might make Proctors, must have reference to
the beginning, not the end of the Trial, when the naming them was useless. But
let me not do him wrong; for, page 33. he touches the Sense I have given, but
dislikes it; viz. That the last Clause is not to be understood of the Sentence,
but of the kind and quality of the Cause: that is, they are to be present in
the King's Courts, till they come to a Cause where Life and Member are
concerned. This Sense certainly is near the Truth, but that he confounds the
Potential with the Indicative Mood. The Words are, where Life or Member may be
concerned, which he reads, are concerned, and so seems to refer them to the
Sentence which ought to be referred to the whole Proceedings. In the last
place, let us hear the Sense his grave Author Fitz-Stephens puts upon this last
Clause. After the Appeal of the Archbishop Becket to Rome, the King
expostulates the matter with him; asks him why he would break his Oath, so
lately sworn at Clarendon? Amongst which, Hec una est ut Episcopi omnibus ejus
assint Adsint.
judiciis preterquam judicio sanguinis. That is, That the Bishops should be
present at all Trials, except when the Trial concerned Blood; where you see, he
renders Duousque by preterquam as indeed ^sque quo, quousque, usque dum,
praeterquam, have the same Sense all restrictive. Now Fitz-Stephen was
undoubtedly at the Parliament at Clarendon, which was not above seven months
before the Meeting at Northampton. Fitz. cap. 10. col. 12.
Fitz. ca. 10. col. 12.

Our Author proceeds, and tells you, there is a great deal of difference
between Duousque perveniatur ad judicium mutilationis Membrorum vel Mortis, and
quousque perveniatur in judicio, etc. I confess, I understand not this
Criticism, which however is not warranted by the Authority of any Copy; neither
can it be made capable of any good Sense, except one not different to what I
have given; for if it were quousque perveniatur ad judicium, etc. I ask to what
does perveniatur refer? I think most properly to Curia Regis. That is to say,
it is their Duty to be present at all Proceedings in Parliament, until such a
Case may fall out where Life or Member may be concerned. For, we must not be
permitted to fancy a Sense of Words, and then, contrary to all Rule, wrest them
to our own Biass, and against the Opinion of such as writ before us: neither
are we to expect from these old Monkish Writers, such polite Latin as Tully
writ, but take their meaning as others who lived nearer the time have done
before us. So that I have done with this Clause, when I have first told the
Reader, that I have translated debent interesse. It Is their Duty to be present,
because they would often take Liberty to go away, or protest, or be troublesome
upon several Pretenses: sometime the Canons allowed them not when the Law did;
sometime the Liberty of the Church was concerned, as appears by the Statute de
asportatis religiosorum, where they absented themselves. Co. 2. Inst. page 585.
All these Subterfuges were obviated by this Co. Ma. Chapter p. 585.
Statute, (although perhaps not by them well observed) which required their
Attendance in Parliament in all Causes where they were not prohibited by the
received Laws of the Nation. Now our Author acknowledges, that the Council of
Toledo was brought into England by Lanfrank, in William the First his time;
which Council, is put out in the second Tome of the English Councils, by Sir
Will. Dugdale and Mr. Spelman, as the Work of Sir Henry his Father. That
Council forbids their Presence in Cases of Blood, which being, as he admits,
received here as low as the Conquest, made it a Custom in Henry the First his
Time, and an ancient Custom in Hen. the Second, and now being allowed at the
Parliament at Clarendon, to which they all swore, makes that Custom or Canon as
much a part of the Law of England, as any affirmative Statute can, and so not
to be repealed, except by as equal Authority as that by which it first became a
Law, and was now affirmed as such.

By what has been hitherto said, I think it will appear competently plain to
any unbiassed Reader, that the word [in judicio] does not refer, as he
supposes, to that particular Trial then in Court, as if it had respect to one
Period in the Trial, and Gr. q. p. 33.
left them at liberty to be present at all other parts of it; but was
restrictive to all Trials whatsoever which might have their Conclusion in
Blood: and his Allusion in the same Page is as little solid. As suppose, says
he, Charles the Fifth had required the Protestant Princes to attend him to
Mass, as other Princes did, only when the Mass-Bell tinckled they might
withdraw; would not any reasonable man believe by this that they were obliged
to their Attendance till then: So here the King commands their Attendance till
it comes to such a Point; therefore before it comes to such a point, their
Presence is plainly required by this Constitution. This Allusion or Supposition
does no way answer our Case; except he had showed us that there were different
sorts of Masses, in some whereof, the tinckling-Bell sounded, in others not:
and then Charles the Fifth had required their Attendance at all Masses, until
such a Mass might sall out in which the tinckling-Bell was to sound; here their
Absence would have been allowed during every part of such a Mass. Our Case is
the same; some Trials there are in Parliament which may concern Life or Member,
others which cannot. Now the Statute says, it is their Duty to be present in
all Trials, until such a Trial happen in which Life or Member may be concerned.
I hope here this Restriction will have Reference to the whole Trial, and not
any particular Period of it. I had not said this, the matter being
sufficienttly cleared before, but out of Apprehension, that some unwary Reader
might be misled by this Author's Subtilty, and believe there was weight where
indeed there was none.

But however, the Words of Petrus Blesensis will give great light to the whole
Gr. q. p. 34.
matter. This Petrus Blesensis was Archdeacon of B^th, and the place cited is
That Edition in q^ (...) (...). (...) certainly the best, the latter ones being
printed from that Copy. Pet. Bl^n. Y y 2.
amongst his O^ula, in the Edition I have in Quarto, and precedent to that
other in Folio. It Is in his Tractate de institutione Episcopali. page 542. (or
rather, Y y 2 for the Pages are in my Copy falsely numbered; dedicated to the
then Bishop of Worcester. The Design of the whole Tractate is to show the duty
of a Bishop, and by the whole Scope seems to be addressed to all Bishops, and
not to the English only. He lived in the time of Hen. 2. for his 136. Epistle
is to Pope Alexander the Third, from K. Henry, about the Rebellion of his Son.

The Words are not in my Edition, as the Author recites them, Principes
Sacerdotum and seniores Populi. But, Quidam Principes Sacerdotum, and Seniores
Populi. Not the The critically learned Mr. Hunt, in his undigested Lump,
instead of a methodical Discourse, page 5^. endeavors to cure the Ignorance of
his Readers, by telling them, that by Principes Sacerdotum and Seniores Populi,
the Bishops are only meant; who from the Dignity and Worthiness of their Order,
are called Seniores, a note of Dignity, in all Countries. He should have done
well to have added Q^m Principes Sacerdotum, and S^es populi, as the first and
best Edition of Petrus Blesensis has it. That Senior is a name of Honor, he
might have learned at School: but that the Chief Priests and the Elders often
m^ned in Scripture were the same ^ns, he has taught no body nor learnt
himself; and certainly the Addition of Populus will do him little Service. But
this Author would be an excellent Man, were he as good at proving as
propounding.
chief Priest and Elders, but certain of the Chief Priests and Elders of the
People. By which, it seems to me, this could not be understood of an English
Parliament, because all the Bishops had equal right to be present in
Parliament, and this is restrained to certain of them. Secondly, I think
Seniores Populi never comprehends Abbots, Priors, with Lords and Commons
together: I know Baronagium, Clearus, and Populus, are sometime so taken; but I
believe Seniores populi never comprehends them all: so that our Question being
concerning their Rights in Parliament, if this be not meant of one, it will
neither advantage nor prejudice me, but only show how willing they were to
break through all Rubs when they could, in those times of their Power, and the
Blindness of the People. The whole Sentence by our Author abridged to his
purpose, is as follows.

Illud coelestem exasperat iram, and plerisque discrimen aeternae damnationis
accumulat quod Vide before p. 18. and after p. 129.
quidam principes sacerdotum, and seniores populi, licet non dictent judicia
sanguinis, eadem tamen tractant disputando, and disceptando de illis, seque
ideo immunes a culpa reputant, quod mortis and truncationis Membrorum Mortes
and truncationes melius ut videtur.
decernentes, a pronunciatione duntaxat, and executione paenalis sententiae se
absentent. Sed quid hac simulatione perniciosius est? Nunquid definire, and
discutere licitum est quod pronunciare non licet.

In English.

This does exasperate the Wrath of Heaven, that certain of the Chief Priests
(or Bishops) and Elders of the People, notwithstanding they do not dictate, or
pronounce Judgments of Death, yet they handle them in their Disputations, and
discussions of the same; yet notwithstanding think themselves free from Guilt,
because, though they Decree the Sentence of Death, or loss of Members, they
only absent themselves at the pronunciation of the Penal Sentence. But what is
more pernicious than this Simulation? Is it lawful to discuss and determine
what is unlawful to pronounce? And in the whole Treatise inveighs against the
general neglect of the Bishops in performing their Duty, not confining himself
to any place, and seems a prophetical description of the practice of the
Inquisition, afterward brought in by S. Dominick.

But if it were referred to the practice of some of the Bishops and Clergy of
England, probably it may be meant of such as were made Secular Judges, or sat
with the Earls in the County Court, where they perhaps were present at the
discussion, though not at the Sentence, which was left to be pronounced by the
Secular Judge, till after the time of Edw. 1. See 28 Edw. 1. c. 3. where it is
ordained, that the Justices appointed to take Assizes, in every County where
they do take as they be appointed Assizes, shall remain together, if they be
Laymen; but if one of them be a Clerk, then one of the most discreet Knights
of the Shire, being Associate to him that is a Layman, by our Writ shall
deliver the Goals of our Shires. Here we see their Power, though Justices, to
meddle in Capital Cases was prohibited; nay some Records are in the Tower, that
when two have been commissioned as Judges for the same Circuit, the Commission
of the Clerk has been restrained to common Pleas; that to the Layman
unlimited, see Iani Ang. facies nova. page 209. 210. Shall we Ian. Angl. fa.
nov. page 209. 210.
now believe, that what was prohibited to Clerks in Edward the First his Time,
was permitted to them in the High Court of Parliament in subsequent times?

I have given my Reasons why I think Seniores Populi could not comprehend the
Abbots, Priors, Lords, and Commons; yet if any man will contend this was a
Parliament, then must Seniores Populi comprehend, amongst others, the Commons
and their Proceedings to be in a legislative way, in which the Commons could
only meddle, and in which, we deny not the Clergy to have their part; so that
this doubty Precedent will no way serve our Author's Turn.

His second Instance to make good his Assertion, is taken from the Authority N.
B. Nothing urged by Mr. Hurt, p. 62. does prove that Meeting a Parliament, but
such a Council as was free for the King to call, of such Persons as he pleased.
I am sure here are neither Abbots nor Commons summoned. I presume this Author
never read Fitz-Stephens, whose words are considentibus, not consulentibus
Episcopis. We have seen such a Concilium magnum at York, called by King Charles
the First.
of Will. Fitz-Stephen, a Monk of Canterbury, in MSS. in Sir Rob. Cotton's
Library, and some other private hands, in which he relates what happened to
Archbishop Becket, in the Contest between the King and him in the great
Council at Northam ton, called soon after, Becket's obstinate Carriage at
Clarendon: in which Relation, among others, that Author has these Words.
Secunda die considentibus Episcopis comitibus Barenibus Angliae omnibus
Norpluribus Roffensis Episcopus, and quidam alius nondum venerat. Archiep.
lesae majestatis coronae regiae Arguitur; quia (se) ut supra narratum est a
rege citatus Arguitur I conceive does more properly ^gnifie to induce or argue
a thing to be so, as well as to blame or accuse, and is more properly applied
to Arguments or Disceptations.
to causa Johannis (to wit, John the Marshal) neque venerat neque idonee se
excusasset. Archiepiscopi depulsio nullum locum habuit. Allegata tamen Johannis
supradicti injuria, and jurisdictione hujus causae propria, and curiae suae
integritate; Rex exigit judicium. Archiepiscopi nulla ratio est approbata. Then
after much debate who should do it, Judgment was pronounced by the Bishop of
Winchester, which ended in the Confilcation of all his personal Estate. The Sum
of what Fitz-Stephen says (which is cap. 10. col. 2. p. 21. in that Copy I
have seen) is this, That Fitz. cap. 10. col. 2.
when the Bishops and Barons of England and many of Nor. Normandy (as Mr.
Seldom thinks) were met together, the Archbishop is there accused of Treason,
because having been cited by the King in the Cause of one John, he appeared
not, nor gave in a sufficient Excuse.

To let pass what is materially replied by the Author of the Letter, to this
Authority, I shall make some Observations of my own, not yet taken Notice of.
First, That this Assembly held at Northampon was not a Parliament, but a great
Counsel summoned by the King soon after Becket's stubborn carriage to his
Prince at Clarendon, to be advised by them how to humble that proud Man; where
it was lawful for him to use the Counfel of any of his Subjects, of Normandy or
others, as he thought good; who certainly, in an English Parliament could not
be admitted amongst the natural English. Secondly we hear nothing of the rest
of the Clergy nor the commons but of the Bishops, Earls and Barons; but that
the Commons had allways right to appear in Parliament, is learnedly made good
by Mr. Petit in his Tractate of the ancient Rights of the Commons. In the next
place, the relation of Fitz-Stephens is not only different from the relation of
other Historians, but in it self is subject to many Exceptions: For first it is
plain he was not accused of High Treason in the case of John the Marshal, as he
says, which appears, by the Judgment of that Council, which upon the whole
matter reac'hd only a Confiscation of his personal Estate, which shows clearly
the Accusation was not in that Case for Treason, because they here punished him
with a lesser Punishment than was due to Treason: now 'twas not in their Power
to change the nature of the Crime, but must have either found him guilty of
Treason, or N. B. In those times, Treason in common Speech was a general name
for all Offenses the King thought did ledere Majestatem regiam, till afterward
the matter was better explained in 25 E. 3. Vid. Jani Anglor. facies nova, p.
199.
have acquitted him. But the Truth is, there was a second Accusation by the
King, about the same time, and in the same Place, concerning Accounts to the
King of Receipts, during the Vacancy of the Sees of some Bishoprics, when he
was Chancellor, to which he refused to give other Answer, saying, He was not
cited in that Cause, and over and above, that he was fully discharged of all
Accounts whatsoever when he was made Archbishop: but the Heats and Animosities
occasioned hereupon, made him appeal to Rome; which being so immediately after,
and contrary to his Oath at Clarendon, might be called by the Name of Treason
in those Days: yet it appears plainly, that an Appeal to Rome was not in those
times looked upon as a Capital Crime. To this Purpose, see Spelman's Councils.
Tom. 2. fol. 119. Concilium Pan-Britan. apud Pipewell, Congregatis illic
Archiepiscopis Britanniae quibusdam. Norman. Galliae and Hiberniae Episcopis
Abat. etc. infra nominat. praesente etiam ipso Ricardo Rege, An. Dom. 1189. and
1 Ric. 1.

The King having given the Archbishopric of York, Gaufrido fratri suo quondam
Lincolniae electo. The Arch. of Canterb. Calumniatus est consecrationem illius,
and prohibuit ei ne ipse ab alio quam ab eo consecrationem seu sacerdotalem
ordinem susciperet. Super hoc appellant ad Dom. Papam. coram Rege and universis
Episcopis, and Clero and Populo chartam Willielmi Regis Bastardi in qua
continebatur controversia quae olim vertebatur inter Cantuariensem and
Eboracensem ecclesias protulit. Here you see an Appeal to Rome, publicly made,
and the Appellant not questioned for Treason or any other Misdemeanour; and
this done in 1 Rich. 1. who was the Son of Hen. 2. But admit this Appeal, or
rather Perjury, in that time had been a Capital Crime, his Appeal here hindered
the pronouncing any Judgment: So that Fitz-Stephen is mistaken in the first
Point; for he was neither accused nor condemned of Treason in the cause of John
the Marshal. Secondly, he tells you he was accused of Treason, because being
cited, he did neither appear, nor competently excuse himself, which must be
understood to be meant by some other Proctor or Advocate; for, if he did not
appear, it is impossible he should excuse himself any other way: for it is clear
he was at Northampton, Ipsa die venimus Northamptoniam, says Fitz-Stephen,
cap. 10. co. 1. Fitz. cap. 10. co. 1.
That the Court sat not till the second day after their coming, and he made an
Appearance on the third, is confessed by the same Author, who a little before
tells you, he sent quatuor Milites to give his Answer, and the King's These
Milites I conceive might be such as held in Capite, and were sometime called
Baronets or Barons minores.
Exception was, that he did not answer in his proper Person, which certainly by
Law he was not obliged to do, so that here was but a Contempt of one day;
however, they were resolved to proceed for the Archbishops Depulsio, or answer
for himself, took not place; for so I take the meaning of depulsio to be.
Archiepiscopi ratio nulla est habita. Whether you take ratio for an Account,
which probably he might give as to 300 l. prerended to be due to John the
Marshal, or in any other Sense, 'twas not allowed. Lastly, you have these
words, Archiepiscopus autem quia sententiae, vel recordationi Curia Regis non
licet contradicere sustinuit, Curia Regis was here the Kings Council then
summoned.
consilio Episcoporum, ad Acta, ad mitigandum, and honorandum Regem, solenni,
and manuum ipsius missione quasi concessionis Judicii uti moris est ibi. The
Archbishop, by the Counsel of the other Bishops, because he might not
contradict the Sentence, and memorial of the Kings court, submitted to their
Acts; to the end that by his Submission he might Manuum depressio, I take to be
Submission.
Honor the King, and mitigate his Anger; and yielded to the Judgment, and put
in for his Sureties, all the Bishops, except London, of which, notice was
taken. Can any thing now be clearer than this, that he both appeared, submitted
to the Judgment, and put in Sureties to perform it, and that here could not be
any formal accusation of Treason, whatsoever the Counselors might dispute
among themselves. So that Fitz-Stephen's Relation, as to this matter, is not
only contrary to the Judgment of the Court, which condemned him not for
Treason, and contradictory to himself, who making the Relation as an Historian
of what was done in that case where himself was present, must be supposed to
write what in truth was the matter of Fact, and not what was the Opinion or
Discourse of others; except he had told us so. But this proud Prelate being, as
the King thought, not sufficiently humbled by the Judgment aforesaid, nor by
many other Affronts put upon him by the King's Officers, a new Crime, as I
touched before, is found out against him, for Accounts, to the value of 3000
Marks, to which he is required to answer, and to which, says our Questionist,
he gave a dilatory Answer; Gr. q. p. 39.
so that the King requires him to stand to the Judgment of the Court: But the
Answer he gave was this, That the King knew well enough, that before his
Election to the Sea of Canterbury, he was discharged; and how the Prince, the
Barons of the Exchequer, and Sir Robert Lucy, Chief Justice, gave him a
Discharge for all Accounts and secular Receipts from the King, and so free and
clear, was chosen to the Sea, and would plead the same no more. Was this now a
dilatory Answer, and not a clear Discharge? What does any Accountant in the
Exchequer do more? Neither could the Court expect, being cited upon another
Business, he should bring his Discharge in his Pocket. But what if this
Accusation had been true? Was this Treason? If every Cheater had been a
Traitor, the King would have had enough to hang? But this Storm went higher, for
Becket finding himself overpowered by the King's Party, and menacing Words
from them, comes in his Archiepiscopal Robes, with a Cross in his hand, and
appeals to Rome; for which, he was blamed and sharply rebuked by his old Enemy
the Archbishop of York; and as Hoveden says, by London and others. But, by
his Appeal he avoided all Sentences could be pronounced against him, yet left
his Enemies and the King much incensed against him. Gervase of Canterbury tells
you, col. 1392. that the King sitting upon his Throne, it seems in a hurry, for
the Words are euntes discernite, said, going forth, Consider what this perjured
and contumacious Traitor ought to suffer Itur, judicatur. They went out and
gave their Opinion, for this could be no legal Judgment, because first it was
out of the place where the Council sat, and his Appeal prevented all farther
Proceedings, as it was then held. This is the Sum of the Story, taken out of
Daniel's History upon the Year 1164. as he says, particularly delivered
according to the Writers of those Times: who those were he tells you in his
Preface; Hoveden, Giraldus Cambrensis, Mat. Paris, Mat. Westminster. Rishanger, and
others. By this Relation you may see the Credit of this grave MSS. Author, who
has knit together so many Mistakes, and different from the Relation of others,
of, or near the same time. But the Bishop is now gone, though before his going
the King expostulates the matter with him; to whom he answered, That he was
summoned in the Cause of John, the Marshal, and would answer to no other,
having then made his Appeal. Neither, to speak my Mind freely, can I see how he
could be accused of Treason; for, Who was the Accuser? The King could not,
because by reason of the dignity of his Person no Averment could be made
against him; neither could any man be tried but by his Peers. Now we hear of no
Articles exhibited, no Jury summoned, nor no legal Proceedings in case it had
been a Parliament: for, though Mag. Charta was not so perfect as in Henry the
Third's Time, yet all Historians agree 'twas granted in Henry the First's Time;
of the chief Points whereof, Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury,
brought a Copy into Mat. Paris Anno 1213. pa. 240.
the Parliament in King John's Time (a worthy Prelate he was, though an
Italian) though it were the Law of the Land before; and though the Council of
the King might, in some Misdemeanors, proceed arbitrarily, yet in Treason they
could not, as is well observed by Mr. Seldom, Priv. of Bar. ca. 4. pa. 10. but
they Seld. Pr. Bar. cap. 4. page 10.
were in those Cases to be tried by their Equals. Co. 2. Inst. page 50. tells
you, 'twas as ancient as William the First, gives you an Example of Roger, Earl
of Hereford, so tried in his Time. But we have not yet done with Fitz-Stephens;
for, our Author tells you, that the King, upon the proud Gr. q. p. 40.
Answer of Becket, charges the Bishops, that together with the Barons, by
virtue of their Allegiance, they would give Judgment upon the Archbishop. They
excuse themselves. The King presses them. Fitz-Steph. Words are, Rex responso
Archiep. accepto instat Episcopis praecipiens, and obtestans per homagium, and
fidelitatem sibi debitam and juratam ut simul cum Baronibus de Archiepiscopo
sibi dictent sententiam, etc. This he translates, That the Bishops, together
with the Barons, would give Judgment upon the Archbishop. This appears to be
after his Appeal, when the giving of Judgment, or meddling farther in the
Business, was refused: beside the undue Translation of the Words, which
signify no more but the desire of the King that they would tell him their
Opinion touching the Archbishop, I wish he would give me any good Authority
where dictare Regi sententiam (for sibi here is the same) can signify giving
Judgment upon a Criminal, as he translates them. I know very well, that dictare
judicium may be taken to deliver any Sentence leisurely. Linw. lib. 3. Ne Cler.
vel Mon. where it is all one with dicere or suggerere sententiam. Beside, no
such Sense can be affixed to these Words; for, the King's Question refers to
them all in general, but certainly the King did not mean they should all
pronounce Sentence, but only privately tell him their Thoughts: yet from hence
would our Author infer, that this was a Parliament, and that the Bishops had
Power to give Judgment in Criminal Cases, when he has proved neither; because
in Truth, this was only an Attempt of the King's to draw them to his Party,
having then Intentions to send to Rome about this matter. The Words of the
Bishop of Chichester, which he spoke to Becket after his Appeal to Rome, will
do him as little Service; for they import no more, than that the Interdict laid
upon him and the rest from doing any thing against him during his Absence,
hindered them from being present at such Proceedings against him as the King
required from them. It Is not to be doubted, but the King would have pressed
them to deliver their Opinions, whither his Appeal were Treason or not: what
their Judgment would have been, no man knows. If it had been a Parliament, then
summons must have been sent out for his Appearance, and Proceedings by Bill of
Attainder, in a Legislative way, not arbitrary in Cases Capital. Seld. pri.
Bar. cap. 4. page 10. as before noted. He closes this Head of Discourse with a
pretended Confutation of the Author of the Tractate of Peerage, a Book by some
snarl'd at, but by none answered: but let us examine what they both say. The
Author of the Discourse of Peerage, tells you, page 14. and backs what he
says, by the Authority of Justice Doddridge, Sir Edward Cook, and Cook 2 Inst.
631. Seld. ubi supra.
Mr. Seldom, that these were only certain Recapitulations of the King's
Prerogative and the Peoples Right, then sought to be infringed by the Pope and
Clergy. That these Recapitulations were avite consuetudines, is confessed, and
that that Canon concerning Blood is as ancient in England, as the Conquest, our
Author acknowledges, that Gervasius Dorobernensis reckons this Article among
the Laws then established, from all which the Discourser of Peerage might very
well argue. That which was a Custom in Henry the First's Time, taken notice and
allowed in Henry the Second's Time, and of the beginning whereof there is no
Memorial extant, nor account to be given, ought reasonably to be esteemed as
part of the ancient Custom, which is the common Law of the Kingdom. All that
the grand Questionist Gr. q. p. 42
thinks fit to reply to this, is, that it is little to his Purpose, because
this Clause in Question is not a Limitation of their Power, but a Privilege
and Indulgence for their Absence. That this Fancy is erroneous, I have before
showed from the natural Sense of that Clause, as also, that long before these
Constitutions they were both by their own Canon Law, and Custom of the Nation,
prohibited from being present in Cases and Consultations of Blood, and that
themselves admitted not only the Liberty but the Obligation, by their constant
Obedience given to that Law, and Custom in absenting themselves in those Cases,
as the Author of the Letter has asserted, and shall by me be farther cleared
in my Answer to his Precedents. Now, I do not think that this Author believes
that these Constitutions gave them a greater Liberty than they had before; but
if it found them bound, that Statute left them so, and was as all affirmative
Statutes are, though not introductory of a new Law, yet are they corroborative
of the old, and, in their Oath, they swear Obedience to this Article as well as
to the rest; to wit, that they would, according to their Duty, be present in
all Proceedings in Parliament, with the rest of the Barons, except in Cases of
Blood, in which they tell us afterward, that it was not lawful for them to be
present at any hand; so that upon their Allowance, there was more than a
Liberty, for there was a Law against them. Beside, could this Sense be allowed,
it would no way serve to make good his main Hypothesis, that they might be
present till the definitive Sentence came to be given: for, if the Law were
obligatory as to any part, why not to every part of it?

Our Aurhor is as little fortunate in his Gr. q. p. 42.
attempt to evade the Authority of Roger Hoveden page 40. who says, That 'twas
agreed in the Synod at Westminster, that no Clergyman should agitare Iudicium
sanguints. He tells you this was part of a Canon agreed at Toledo, which Ricard,
Archbishop of Canterbury thought fit to have received here, and, I think would
infer, that here was no more done then a Proposal of this to be received, not
that itw as so. But if we will believe Gervas. Dorbernensis, in 22 H. 2 fo.
1429. An. 1175. Ger. Dor. An. 1175.
he will tell you, they went much farther. His Words are, Hoc concilio ad
emendationem ecclesiae Anglicanae Legis vigorem habeat quicquid de consilio and
de consensu Magn. and Reipubl. communi sponsione authoritate Regis sive
principis praecedente just fuerit definitum and approbatum. vid Bracton lib.
1. cap. 1.
assensu Domini Regis and Primorum omnium Regni haec promulgata sunt capitula.
Among which one is. His qui in sacris ordinibus constituti sunt judicium
sanguinis agitare non licet, unde prohibemus ne aut perse membrorum
truncationes faciant aut inferendas judicent. Here is not only a Proposition of
the Archbishop but an Assent and Promulgation of the same, by the King and
chief of the Kingdom. And, the true Sense of that Canon, which being so
confirmed, had the force of a Law, is, That Clergymen should not agitare, or
meddle in any Trial of Blood; which certainly extends to Preliminaries, but are
prohibited to make Amputations themselves, or give their Opinion, or Judgment
that such Amputations ought to be made by others. Their presence at such Trials
was unlawful (Non licet) and their Acting prohibited.

So at last I have done with this clause; and have showed that it is not
indulgent but restrictive; that it was a custom in H. 1. time, sworn to at
Clarendon, published at Westminster 12 years after, and, by all this, made part
of the Law of the Nation; have answered all his Subterfuges, and Evasions, have
showed the Interpretation I have given was always received. I expect now so
much Ingenuity in this Author, that he will either yield to my Sense, or give
another, agreeable to the Rules of Grammar, and the proper Signification of the
Words; and not take the Liberty to explain them at his Pleasure, and confound
Voices, Moods and Numbers: Insomuch, that this Statute will remain Testimonium
irrefragabile still; and I am sure, if he observes his due bounds he must give
an Interpretation equipollent to to what I have given. So hard it is for the
greatest Wits to maintain an ill Cause.

I come now to the Consideration of the Protestation made in the Parliament
held Gr. q. p. 44.
in 11. R. 2. which our Author says, much clears the whole Business,
especially the preface thereof; for the omission of which he blames the Author
of the Letter. I shall give it you in English, which our Author has not
thought fit to do, and by that means deprived many of his Readers of means to
make a true Judgment of it.

In the Name of God, Amen. For as much as by the Law and Custom of the Kingdom
of England, it belongs to the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the time being, as
also to the rest of his Suffragans, Fellow-Brethren, and Fellow-Bishops, with
the Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates whatever, who hold of the King by Barony,
as Peers of the foresaid Kingdom, to be personally present in the Parliaments
of the King whatsoever, and there, with the rest of the Peers, and others that
have right N. B. who were these others?
to be there present concerning the arduous Affairs of the Nation, and
concerning other things there usualy to be treated of to Consult Treat, Ordain,
Appoint and Define, and other things to do, which there in time of Parliament
are prepared, or fitted to be done. In all and singular of which, We, William
Archbishop of Canterbury Primate of England, and Legate Apostolical for our
selves, our Suffragans our Felow-Bishops, and Fellow-Brethren, as also for the
Abbots Priors and all the foresaid Prelates, do protest, and every one of them
does protest, who either by himself, or his Proctor shall be here Present at
this time publicly and expressly that we intend, and every one of us will in
this present Parliament, and others as Peers of the foresaid Kingdom after our
accustomed manner, be present to Consult, Treat, Ordain, and Define, and all
other things, to exercise together with the rest that have right to be present
in the same: The Condition, State, and Order of us, and every one of us, being
still saved. But, for as much as in this present Parliament, some matters are
to be treated of, in which it is not lawful for us, or any of them, according
to the Decrees of the Holy Church, and the Canons thereof, to be at any hand
personally present. For which Reason, we for our selves, and for every of them,
do protest, and every one of them here does also protest, That we intend not,
nor will, (because according to the Law we cannot nor ought not) be present in
this present Parliament whilst such matters are, or shall be treated of: but
that we, and every one of them, will upon that occasion all together absent our
selves, our right of Peerage, and of theirs, as to our, and their being present
in the said Parliament, and as to our, and every of their exercising, and doing
all and singular things, our, and their order in all things allways preserved.
And we farther protest, and every one of them protests, that by reason of
this our absence we do not intend, neither does any one of them intend, or
will, that the Trials, or Proceedings had, or to be had, in this present
Parliament, upon those aforesaid matters in which we cannot, nor ought not (as
is premised) be present, as much as in us lies, or any of them lies, shall in
times to come be any way impugned, weakened, or broken.

He tells you, that this Protestation, saving Gr. q. p. 47.
the legal Formalities consists of three parts.

First a declaration of their undoubted Right as Peers of the Realm, by virtue
of their Baronies, to sit, and Vote, in all Debates in Parliament. Where by the
way the words are de Regni negotiis not omnibus, of the affairs of the Kingdom,
not all of them, and aliquibus may as well be understood as omnibus: and this
appears soon after upon their own showing; for they tell you they intend to be
present in this and all other Parliaments, and presently after tell you it is
not lawful for them to be present in this Parliament while such matters were
handled to intend to be present, and then tell you that it is not lawful to be
present in this Parliament shows that their Power was limited, and not
universal: however upon this Protestation they went out at the Beginning, and
made no Proctor; for, they tell you, they ought not to be personally present at
any hand where such Affairs are or would be treated of, which certainly was
before the definitive sentence; so that the Canon required their absence at
Preliminaries, according to the sense of all times till these new expounders
came in place.

I will not here dispute whether this Protestation Mr. Hunt tells you, p. 87.
that if this be a Law it is a Law only for that case. It Is true, the
Protestation, as such, was personal to them but the Canons I hope that put them
upon a Non licet and de jure non possumus were not personal also; for here is a
Prohibition, both by the Canon, Common and Statute Law.
be an act of Parliament: with Submission to better Judgments, I think it hard
that what was intended as a Protestation should by Construction be advanced to
an Act, no more than his present Majesty's Concessions, upon the desire of the
Lords and Commons, in the case of some of the late Traitors, should have the
like construction; and the entering into the Roll by the Clerk, was no more then
entering into the Lords Journal now.

But, since our Author has made his Observations, let him give me leave also
to make mine. First, This protestation is cunningly worded by their own
Direction, therefore their calling themselves Peers of the Realm does not make
them such in any new sense; neither does entering in their Journal Book do more
than make it a Record, and render them liable to Punishment, if any thing unfit
in it shall be taken notice of An example of this we have in the Bishops
Protestation, 1641. That all Laws to be made in their forced Absence should be
void: which could not any way weaken them, or ours here, that they should be
good, any ways strengthen those Laws then made. The next thing observable is,
that he says, It Is their undoubted Right, as Peers of the Realm, by virtue of
their Baronies, to sit and vote in all Debates in Parliament. In which
Assertion, he begs two things: first, That they sit there by Virtue of their
Baronies, whereas he has not proved they ever had any, except tenere sicut, or
quasi per Baroniam, or per servitium Baroniae, be equivalent with esse Baronem,
which I cannot so easily admit, though they call themselves so, and in ordinary
Speech may be so called by others, that Question having never been determined
though admitted in Pleading by Counsel.) The Reasons of my Doubts I have given
in my first Chapter, and shall submit them to more learned Judgments. They say,
here they sit as Barons, but allow that they have no Right to judge in those
Cases then in Agitation: and notwithstanding, it should be true, that William
the First divided the Kingdom into Counties and Baronies, to hold of him in
Capite; a County to contain twenty Knights Fees, a Barony thirteen, or
thereabout: it does not appear that every Bishop had thirteen Knights Fees, or
that some of them had not above twenty, yet all of them held equally in Capite,
sicut Baroniam, and sat there among the Nobility, as Associates to them. I
shall farther observe, that their Right to sit and vote there was more solito,
as they had usually done, and this with a Salvo, or Saving to their State and
Order: so that except our Author had first proved that 'twas their usual manner
to vote and judge in matters of Blood; and that this was agreeable to their
State and Order which themselves deny, he has done nothing: for, they pretend
not to any other Right but what they usually enjoyed, and what was agreeable to
their State and Order. Let now our Author take what Advantage he can from the
Preface to the Protestation; for the Omission of which, he so much blames the
Penman of the Letter.

The second matter he affirms and attempts Gr. q. p. 49.
to prove, is, that their absenting themselves was merely in obedience to the
Canons of the Church, and not out of Respect to any other Law. Yet Sir William
Baker's Continuer, page 478. ult. Edit. says, their Absence was not from their
Obedience to the Canon Law only, but according to the Practice of the Kingdom
to this day: by which it seems, he looked upon it as the common Practice for
them to do so. For, he tells you, 'twas impossible they should claim such a
Right by virtue of their Baronies, or that the Lords should allow such a
Protestation if there were any other Law against them then in force: And that
if this Protestation were a Law, the Case was more strong on their side: for,
then it declares they had that Right they pretended to, by Law. Should I admit
this for once? Does it not also as solemnly declare, that in Cases of Blood
they are barred by the Canon Law, and so make that Bar a part of the matter
enacted. But for a fuller Answer and Discharge of what he urges, without
repeating what I have said before, as to the Protestation it self, let me put
him in mind, what I doubt not he knows, that all Arguments ab impossibili, or
Deductions ad impossible, are the weakest ways of Demonstration, and never
used where any other can be brought, which at best, in this Case, can only
argue a Neglect in the Lords.

But secondly, he may be advertised, that all protestations are entered
according to the desire of the Protestors, and not made an Act of the House.
Lastly all this is but what they usually did, and has not relation to any
other Matter than what was their Custom, and was agreeable to their State and
order, which was to absent themselves in cases of Blood.

His Digression afterward for for two or three Leaves, about the Power of Gr.
q. p. 51, 52, etc.
of the Pope, or his Legate to dispense with Irregularity, which here he calls
a Penalty; Gr. q. p. 68.
in another place, the Sanction it self, together with the mystery of the
Canon Law, serves in my Judgment to no other end, but to show, the Bishops were
generally Time-servers, and forced Polity and Religion to bend to their turns;
forgetting that nothing is profitable which is not first Just. However, we do
not hear of any Dispensation granted here either by the Pope or his Legate: and
I would be glad this Author did let us know that his Opinion is, that the Pope
or Legate, have a legal Power to to dispense with those Canons established in
Councils, and received by a Nation. I always did believe, that those that
attributed to the Pope a greater Power then I do, did not look upon him under
any other Notion than as one trusted to keep, and not to break the Canons.

Having thus cleared the Protestation from his Objections, let us examine the
clear meaning of it. This Author says that the very reading it is sufficient
to Gr. q. p. 41.
convince any man that the Canons were the only cause of their absence. I will
not deny but that it might him; but do not believe it has Reason to force
others to be of this mind: For, if two Laws were against them, to wit, the
Canon Law and the Common Law, confirmed in Parliament, 'twas not unusual for
those sort of men to express which of them they had most mind to. But beside
this, I find no Absurdity to affirm they took notice of both, though more
obscurely of the last: by a Non licet to the one, by a de jure non possumns. to
the other. It Is not lawful for us at any hand, by the first, viz. the Canons,
which are to us a greater Law than any other. Next, by the Law of the Land, de
jure non possunius. Not that in it self our Presence in all Cases were
unlawful, if the Canons were not in the way. But there is also another Law
which prohibits us from being present in those Cases in which otherwise we
might have thought it reasonable to have given our Assistance, who are no such
strict Observers of the Canons, when it is for our Advantage to break them.

I might now proceed to the Examination of his Iast Head; How far the Canon Law
is at this day binding. But, because I would not leave any thing untaken notice
of, he thinks fit to make use of for the strengthening his Cause, I shall speak
something to what he farther urges.

He tells you out of Knighton, That this Gr. q. p. 53.
Parliament was called Parliamentum sine Misericordia, and that many
Circumstances concurred, which might make the Lords willing to admit of their
Protestation, because their business might proceed better against the King's
Ministers. He need not have urged Inducements to persuade the Lords to admit of
their Protestation, except he had first showed they had Power to have refused
it. But by this Inducement he insinuates, that the Bishops would probably have
obstructed Justice against those wicked Ministers about the King. What the
Accusation was, for which some of them were executed, I shall let you seek in
the Historians of those times, being unwilling to rake into that Puddle any
deeper. I shall therefore leave this Parliament and the mysterious Canons, as
our Author well calls them, and come to the Anti-Parliament to this, held Gr.
q. p. 53.
in 21 R. 2. where, as he says, the King had a Mind to undo what was done in
Gr. q. p. 54.
the Parliament in 11 R. 2. which Intention, this Author says, he had kept in
his Mind ten Years, by being willing to let the Bishops be absent in 11. that
he might have that pretense to Question in this Anti-Parliament, the things
then done. An undecent Charge he lays upon the King, if it be well considered.

The Declaration, by help of the Bishops, that the King's Pardon granted in
Parliament, in 11. was revocable by the King, was the Labor of his Ministers
in (...) which those Ministers prevailed in (...) Measure; but their Actions,
with (...) ^cceeding Murder of the D. of Glo^, the King's Uncle, bred such a
Jealousy and Distrust between the King and his People, that I may call it the
first Stone which left not rolling till it ended in the Ruin of that poor
Prince, who continued not King much more than a Year after, and was soon after
the Deprivation of his Crown deprived of his Life also.

What Art was used to make that Parliament subservient to their ends, I need
not tell you. One of the first Attempts was (what I touched before) to make
Pardons granted by the King in Parliament, revocable at his Pleasure; in this
the Clergy were very instrumental. After this, the Commons come to do their
Parts, and they represent, that diverse Judgments had been undone heretofore,
for that the Clergy were not there present; and therefore pray they might
appoint some common Proctor, with sufficient Authority to that Purpose. From
hence he infers two things:

First, That the Commons thought their Presence necessary, because Judgments
had been undone for want of it: Therefore their Concurrence in Judgment was
thought necessary to make a Judgment valid.

Secondly, That they should therefore make a common Proctor. This is strange
Logic: Their Presence was thought necessary, and Judgments undone for want of
it; therefore, they ought to be present, I think, ought to have been the
Consequent: but the Commons pray that in that respect they should make a
Proctor. I should think now, the true Inference ought to have been, The Bishops
and Clergy ought not to be personally present in Cases of Blood, yet because it
is fit they should be represented, at least in some Cases, let them nominate a
common Proctor, to be in their stead; where their Concurrence is necessary.
This is Sense, the other is contradictory.

It Is evident by this Petition of the Commons, that matter of Blood was to be
treated of; for there needed no Proctor for any other use, since themselves
might have been present. And I think it very clear by the Year-book, in 10 E.
4. that when Issue was once joined, 'twas their (...) E 4. 3^.
Duty to absent themselves. For, that Book is, that the Peer questioned may
plead not guilty, and then the Bishops to depart; so that it is plain they were
not to vote after Issue joined, in matters of Blood. So Hakewell, in his Modus
Tenend. page 84. before cited, says, That to our days, when Question is had of
the Attainder of any Peer, the Bishops are to depart. Now I take the Law to be
all one, what ^ue is joined in a Capital Accusation, so as there be any upon
which the Court may proceed to Famination of the Cause, and to Judgment
accordingly.

As to our purpose in the case of the (...) of Danby, he pleads the King's
Pardon, the King's Counsel, or the Commons, demur. The matter then in Issue
upon the Demurrer, is, whether the Pardon is good in Law; upon which, the
Bishops, according to 10 E. 4. are to go out; because, if the Pardon be found
invalid, then must Sentence of Death be pronounced against the Criminal: for, I
take the Law to be, That the pleading a Pardon in Bar upon an Endictment or
Impeachment, is a Confession that all the matters contained in the Endictment
or Impeachment are true, and he shall never be admitted to plead Not Guilty
afterward. But this by the way. Our Question is about the Commons Petition,
that they would make a Proctor, which being in matter of Blood, the Author of
the Letter says, was the only time; whether this was Error temporis, as one
says, the Error of that time, or an inconsiderate rash Desire of the Commons,
as another, is not necessary to enquire: for, it does not appear, that any
Capital Judgments had been reversed by reason of their Absence, so that their
desire fails in the ground of it, if they meant of Capital ones: for, the first
Judgment against the Spencers was affirmed in 1 Ed. 3. and the Reversal made 15
Ed. 2. was made null; so that the Commons it seems were ignorant in that, and
might be unadvised 23 H. 6. no. 41. inter Petit conn^, and many others.
in the rest, as they sometime have been. Beside, if he consult Sir Edward Coke
in his 2 Instit. cap. de Asportatis religiosor. page 586. he does well excuse
the Commons Co. 2 Inst. page 286.
in showing that the Bishops were present at the Charge against the Spencers in
1 Ed. 2. so that the Commons might not know how far the Bishops were conusant
of the thing, and looking only on the outside, were ignorant of the Act in 1
E. 3. for the Discourser says, there were no more.

No, replies the Grand Questionist, not in his Study, but the Commons might
know of more, for we have not all the Rolls. What then? This at best is but a
Surmise, and the two Judgments against the two Spencers were enough to make
their Allegation true, that diverse Judgments had been reversed for that cause;
though it be not to excuse their Ignorance in not knowing that the first
Judgment against them was revived by the Statute of 1 Ed. 3. And it seems
strange to me, that he that had so much Reverence for the then House of
Commons, should have so little Respect to the Opinion of both Houses now: for,
the Commons unanimously voted, That the Bishops ought not to be present at any
Debate concerning the Earl of Danby, or the Lords in the Tower, by them
impeached of Treason. Journ. of Parl. page 258. and 267. The Lords, about the
same time, Iourn. of Parl. page 258. and 267.
voted, That the Bishops were to go out when their Lordships proceeded to
examine Guilty, or Not Guilty. This Author, with great Confidence, and little
Respect, affirms, they have right to stay till the definitive Sentence is to be
given.

But, let me now admit that it was reasonable in the House of Commons to move
that they might make a Proctor, and that the Bishops had also Right to nominate
one in Capital Cases, yet certainly, when they all absented themselves
together, 'twas in their Choice whether they would make any or no; and
consequently, their omitting it, as in 11 R. 2. could be no cause to reverse a
Judgment, as the Commons alleged. The Reason is, as I touched before, because
they take notice of the matter in Question, by hearing the Accusation read,
which is always done before they go away, which is enough to make any Act good,
and to be said to pass by their Consent, because they voluntarily absent
themselves, though with Allowance of the Lords, where their Presence is not
lawful. Vid. Co. 2. Inst. de Asport. Relig. page 586. So that the Reason of the
House of Commons Co. 2. Inst. page 586.
was every way weak and unsound.

In the next place, let me examine what the Office of a Proctor is, being made.

It is plain by the Imperial Law, that a Proctor is in the Nature of an
Attorney, to appear, and make Answer in the name of his Client, to such things
as the Court shall think fit to demand; but never, by that, or any other, had
he Power to overruled or contradict what was the sense of the Court.

I have seen some ancient Precedents of Persons under the degree of Noble men,
made Proctors by the Bishops; for which, consult Mr. Selden's Privil. of the
Seld. Priv. Bar. p. 5. Hon. of Bishops, p. 27. Else. Mod. p. 16.
Baron. page 5. Hon. of the Lords Spir. page 27. Else. Mod. page 16. But in all
Cases I have met with, the ancient form runs thus. At the Parliament at
Carlisle under Edward the First, the Words are, Ad consentiendum quod tunc
ibidem per dictos Prelatos and Proceres contigerit ordinari. Another in Edward
the First's time, in a Parliament at Westminster. runs thus. Ad comparendum and
audiendum pro nobis in hoc Parliamento tractanda and consentienda. So that
their Power was but to appear and hear for them what by others were to be
treated, and consented to. Accordingly Mr. Seldom says, that in Attainders
upon Appeal, they made their Proctors for assenting in Parliament: I hear
nothing of dissenting. Seld. Privil. Bar. Seld. Pr. o^ Bar. p. 5.
page 5.

Neither is it reasonable to believe; the Lords would suffer any Commoner to
sit, and vote among them as Judges; neither do we read of any place where such
a Proctor was to sit, having no right of his own to be there. If you will say
he was to sit upon the Bishops Bench, and there to give his Vote, you give the
Bishops Power, by their simple deed, to give place and vote in Parliament;
which is as much as the King can do by his Letters Patents, and by which, the
Patentee is enobled. Neither is it just to think they could any way transfer a
Right for others to judge for them, where themselves were prohibited to be
present or judge.

It appears, that in the Parliament in Petit's anc. Rights. p. 62. Prin's
Calender. p. 56. and 160.
49th. of Henry the Third, there were a hundred and twenty Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, and Deans: it is not like there were many fewer in 21 Richard the
Second, who was not long after him. Can any one now think the Lords would
suffer Thomas Percy to dispose of a hundred and twenty Votes? It had been much
safer to have let the Clergy to have been personally present, than to unite in
one man a power to overbalance them all. I think it probable, for the Reasons
before given, that their Proctor either sat among the mean Officers, or that
in those times the Lords and Commons sat together, and that this Percy was one
of those that served for his Country. But against this is urged, that in Edward
the Third's Time there were distinct Houses; though before that Time they might
sit together. Sir Ed. Coke, Prin, and Coo. 4. Inst. cap. 1. p. 2. Vid. Rot.
Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 5. dorso. Audley's Case judic. per Prelatos Comites Barons,
and totam communitatem Regni. yet no Act. Vid. hic p. 133. Vid. etiam Rot.
Parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 131. and 189. Cottoni Posth. f. 349. Eliz. Burgh's Case.
others, are of Opinion, they sat together far in Edward the Third's Time: why
may not that be extended to his Son Richard the Second, the exact time when
they divided being not so exactly agreed upon?

I have before showed out of Mr. Petit, Rot. Parl. 2 Henry the Fifth, pars 2.
n. 10. that the Commonalty have ever been accounted a part of the Parliament. I
have also showed out of Cambden, Seldom, and others, that Baronagium
comprehended both Lords and Commons, and in all Histories of those Times you
shall frequently meet with Concilium Baronum, Baronagium, and the like. Mr.
Seldom tells you, Tit. Hon. part 2. chap. 5. no. 16. page 689. that the
Burgesses of Seld. tit. hon. p. 689.
some good Towns, as well as the Cinque Ports, which still retain the same
name, were called Barons. In the seventeenth of King John, dors. claus. memb.
7. Baronib. Germuthae Gipswici Norwici, etc. Mat. Paris, Anno 1253. page 863.
speaking of the Citizens of London, has these Words, (being englished) Whom
for the Dignity of the City, and the ancient Liberties of the same, we usually
call Barons. Of this Identity of Names we can give no better account, than
because they were usually joined with the other Barons in great Councils, of
which there were also two sorts. Gervasius Tilburiensis Ger. Tilb. Fitz. Mat.
Paris.
part 2. cap. 13. speaks of Barons majores and mineres. Fitz-Steph. cap. 11.
mentions secunde dignitatis Barons. In the Mag. Char. of King John, Mat. Par.
Anno 1215. mentions a Summons to a Common Counsel of the greater Barons by the
King's Whether this was meant of a Parliament or other Council, not material to
this point, the Reason being the same as to meeting upon Summons to the one or
the other.
Writ, and of other Tenants in Cap. which were Barons minores by the Sheriff,
but all of them comprehended under the general Name of Barons or Baronagium;
under which general Name, all meeting who had any Right to come, either as
Barons or Freeholders, we have no reason to believe they did not all sit
together in the same Counsel, whereunto they were summoned under the same Name.
The old Modus, put out in English by Hakewell, with his seeming Approbation of
the Book, Hakewell. pa. 18.
says, in his Chapter concerning Cases and Judgments that are heard, that
every degree might go by it self, and consider of it; by which it appears, they
then sat together. 6 Edw. 3. Elsing. p. 96. and 99. says, in two Parliaments
they went apart, and in one gave Subsidies apart. The Case is in 50 Edward 3.
where the cause of Summons being showed, the Commons were willed to withdraw to
their ancient place, and consult among themselves, proves no more than that
they had a place to go to when 'twas fit they should consult apart, not that
they always did so; no more than it does that the Prelates sat not among the
Lords, because they sometimes went apart, and had a place to go to as well as
the Commons. We know, that 7 Iacobi, when Prince Henry was created Prince of
Wales, they all sat together in the Court of Requests, and may do again when
the King pleases.

I have now done with this rather curious than necessary Question, which I had
not touched upon, had not Percy's place in Parliament given me occasion a
little to search into it. Yet I think it not amiss here to insert the Prayer of
the Commons, and the form of the Proxy, made by the Clergy to Sir Thomas Percy,
in 21 Rich. 2. memb. 6. no. 9. as it is at large 21 R. 2. memb. 6.
upon the Record, that the Reader may be able to give a rational Judgment both
what his Power was, and how the Clergy were represented by him.

The Commons first pray the King, that whereas diverse Judgments and Ordinances
before time, made in the time of his Progenitors, had been recalled and made
null because the Estate of the Clergy were not present, Et N. B. It Is plain, by
Clergy here was more meant than the Bishops only; for the Abbots were reckoned
as part of the Clergy, I suppose.
pour ceo prierent au Roy que pour surety de sa person, and salvation de son
royaum les Prelates, and le Elergy ferroient un Procurateur avet povoir
sufficient pour consentir en leur nome, a toutes chooses, and ordonances a
justifier en cest present Parliament, and que sur ceo chacun seigneur spirituel
diront pleinment son avis. Sur quoy le dicts seigneurs spirituels commetterent
leur plein povoir generalment a un lay person, and nomerent en especial
Thomas Percy Chevalier, and sur ceo baillerent au Roy une schedule contenant
leur povoir, la quelle nostre seigneur le roy receust and commanda (le dit.
Mardy) estre enter de record, en roll de Parliament de quelle cedule la form
sensuit.

Nos Thomas Cantuariensis, and Robertus Ebor. Archiepiscopi ac praelati, and
Clerici utriusque provinciae Cantuar. and Eborac. jure ecclesiarum earundem
habentes jus inter essendi in singulis Parlamentis Domini nostri Regis, and
regni Angl. pro tempore celebrandis, nec non tractandi, and expediendi in
eisdem quantum ad singula in instanti Parlamento pro statu and honor Domini
nostri Regis nec non Regaliae suae, ac quiet, and pace, and tranquillitate
regni judicialiter justificand. Venerabili viro Domino Thomae de Percy Mil.
nostram plenarie committimus potestatem: ita ut singula per ipsum facta in
praemissis perpetuis temporibus habeantur.

It is observable in this Prayer, the Commons recite Ordinances as well as
Judgments, to have been made null by reason of the Bishops Absence, and
comprehended not Judgments alone. Now of what Latitude Ordinances were taken,
whether temporary, or otherwise looked upon as Laws, is not very certain.

Secondly, they desire such a Proctor as might have Power to confent to such
things as should be done.

Thirdly, they naming a Layman who had no Right of his own to sit there, and
giving the King a Schedule of their Procuration, was enough to make their Right
be preserved to them without any explicit Consent by their Proctor, or perhaps
his being so much as present at any Debate.

But I now proceed to observe how Gr. q. p. 57.
ready our Author is to pick what Advantage he can against the Author of the
Discourse of Peerage, from the words by him quoted out of the Manuscript
History written by the Abbot of Molros in Scotland, where the King of England
sent Bishop Fox, as I remember, to treat with the King of Scotland, James the
Fourth, Sir William Dromond 's Life of James the Fourth. page 200. ult. Edit.
in octavo. Discourse. page 20.
then there, touching a Match between the Children of those two Princes. It Is a
Book to be seen in some few hands, and writes of the Parliament in 21 R. 2. The
Author of the Discourse, page 20. tells you, that that Manuscript Author blames
the Prelates much for the Opinion they gave generally about the Revocation of
Pardons: but in this, as in many other Authorities that make against him, our
Author curtails the Words, and cites no more than makes for his turn. The Words
at large are these: Dederunt ergo locum judicio sanguinis in hoc facto. Ita
quod dubitabatur a pluribus si non incurrerent in poenam irregularitatis pro
negotio memorato; unde contigit quod propter istud minus peccatum inciderent in
aliud majus peccatum consequentur, ut laicam personam constituerent
procuratorem pro iisdem qui illorum vice consentirent ad judicium sanguinis
dandum in isto Parliamento si necesse foret and occasio emersisset.

The Prelates by this act of theirs gave Allowance or Countenance to Trials of
Blood; insomuch, that it was doubted by many, whether they did not fall under
the Penalty of Irregularity, by reason of the foresaid business: from whence it
happened, that instead of that lesser Offense they fell into a greater by
Consequence, in that they made a Layman their Proctor, who in their Room might
consent to a Judgment of Blood, to be given in that Parliament, if it were
needful, or occasion had happened.

I have translated dare locum fudicio sanguinis, to give way or Allowance to a
Judgment of Blood; because it appears by the subsequent Words, he meant them
so, The use the Author of the Discourse of Peerage makes of these Words, is to
show, that the Canons were not the only Cause that hindered their presence in II
Rich. 2. For then, when they had no Encouragement from the King or Lords, then
they ought not at any hand to be present in such Cases: but here in 21. when
they had any Allowance or Connivence as to the Laws against them, then the
Canons were neglected altogether.

His Inference seems to me rational and good. Oh! but says the Grand
Questionist, Gr. q. p. 57.
they were present in voting the Pardon to the Earl of Arundel revocable. Under
his Favor, I think he is mistaken, for the Book warrants no such matter, only
tells you, that they gave a general Vote, that Pardons granted in Parliament
were revocable by the King; by consequence whereof, some of those who were
pardoned in 11. were executed in 21. which Votes, I hope might pass, though the
Parties concerned were not present, and this meaning the book seems to enforce:
For, first that Author says, it was a doubt amongst many, whether that act did
not make them incur the Penalty of Irregularity, which would have been none,
had they personally by their Votes, revoked the Pardon granted to the Earl of
Arundel. Secondly, he says by making a Proctor in that Case of Blood, they
committed a greater Fault than the former; but certainly, the making a Lay
Proctor was not a greater Fault than actual Allowance, and personal voting in
Blood, which that Author charges them with. Lastly, they made a Proctor at the
beginning of the Trial, as is manifest, and agreed by all; therefore the Crime
charged upon the Clergy, could not but be before any Proceedings against any of
the Criminals, except that preliminary Vote which made them guilty of Blood in
that Chronicler's Sense. In Conclusion, there was no Act to revoke these
Pardons, but the King, it seems, caused Execution to be done upon his own
Authority, and those general Votes in which the Clergy were present: so that
after all this Attempt, the Authority of this MSS is against him.

But after all this, we have one help left, says the Author of the Letter, for
if this Action in this Parliament would do him any Service, the whole
Parliament was repealed in I Henry the Fourth, and so no Authority to be laid
upon it. I, but replies the Grand Questionist, the Author Gr. q. p. 58.
of the Letter admits that the three Henry's, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth, were
Usurpers, and therefore the Repeal of that Parliament void: I acknowledge the
Author of the Letter says so, but he is so to be understood as the Law is now
taken, not as it was then; for, we see Henry the Fourh in Parliament claimed
the Crown as his Right, as being Heir to John of Gaunt, fourth Son to Edward
the Third; whereas the Title of Mortimer who was by another Parliament declared
next Heir, arose by his Marriage with Philippa, Daughter and Heir to Lionel
Duke of Clarence, who was the third Son to Edward the Third: but it was never
before determined, that the Daughter of a third Brother should be preferred in
Succession to the Crown, to the Son of a Fourth. We see Maud the Empress,
Daughter to Henry the First, could not be received Queen, though she attempted,
and sought for it, neither ever had we a Queen since the Conquest till that
time. Nor can I divine how long it might have remained a Question, had not that
Controversy been determined by the happy Union of both Titles in Henry the
Seventh, who married the Daughter and Heir of the house of York.

The next Question will be, how far Laws made by an Usurper generally received,
and accepted by the People upon the resignation of the immediate precedent
Possessor shall be esteemed valid.

I fear, if we make such Laws void, we must find some new way to make many of
ours good till Henry the Second. Was not Robert eldest Son to William the
First, alive till toward the latter end of the Reign of Henry the First, who
about the eighth Year after he was King, deprived him of his Eyes; after which,
he lived a Prisoner twenty six Years? William Rufus had no better Title than
the Acceptance of the People, and his Composition with his Brother Robert, who
resigned his Title for 3000 Marks per an. Henry the First succeeds by Title no
better, till Robert's miserable Death, which happened in the thirty fifth year
of his Reign, and about a year before his death. After him, Stephen steps into
the Throne, helped by two powerful Friends, the Bishop of Winchester the Popes
Legate, his own Brother, and the Bishop of Salisbury his great Friend, and this
in the Life of Maud, Daughter to Henry the First, and his own Brother Theobald,
whose Title, though bad, was better than Stephen's, they being both
Grandchildren to William the first, by Adela his Daughter, married to the Earl
of Blois. But for this great favor, and their breach of Oath to Maud, he
promised great Immunities to the Church, and amongst other, that Clergymen
should not be bound to answer to secular Courts. But by our Author's Logic,
this Concession was void, and the Clergy had no reason to complain, because the
old Law was revived at Clarendon. At last, to sodder all, a Composition was
made, that Henry, Maud's Son, should have the Crown after Stephen's death;
which was performed by her Consent, Maud being then alive, who having strugled
for the Crown as much as she could, was at last contented with this
Composition, which was the only legal Title King Stephen had, and no more
voluntary in Maud than was that of Richard the Second. But at length Maud dies,
and Henry the Second and his Son Richard the first, enjoyed the Crown in their
just Rights.

After their Death, John comes upon the Stage, in the Life of Arthur his elder
Brother's Son, so that here we have another Usurper; after whose death, and the
death of Arthur, Henry the Third had a good Title, whose Descendents enjoy it
to our Time; for the Quarrels between York and Lancaster were not about the
Line, but the Persons; insomuch, that till Henry the Third, the best Title to
the Crown was the Acceptance of the People, and particular Compositions with
those who had the greater Right. Come we nearer home, to the time of Henry the
Seventh, who after the Death of his Mother, and his Marriage with the Daughter
and Heir of Edward the Fourth, was rightful King. His Eldest Daughter was
married into Scotland, from whom, our present King enjoys his Crowns, upon an
unquestionable Title. We will now come to his Son, Henry the Eighth: he had two
Daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, the first by Katharine, his elder Brother Arthur
his Relict; the second by Anne of Bullein, born in the Life of his first
repudiated Wife Queen Katharine. Mary was by Act of Parliament declared a
Bastard, as born within unlawful Espousals: Elizabeth after the Disgrace of her
Mother, was served in the same kind, yet we see both of them successively
enjoyed the Crown by virtue of another Act which entailed it upon them, with
the approbation of the people; whereas, otherwise the true Right would have
been in Mary Queen of Scots, our present Sovereigns great Grandmother. I might
pursue this Theme through France, in the case of Hugh Capet; See Sir Hen.
Wotton's Interest of the Princes of Christend. this Question touched upon.
through Spain, in the family of the D. of Medina Celi; and at present in
Portugal, but I will not go out of our own Kingdoms; and have said enough to
make it manifest, that Laws may be made or repealed by such Kings as are in
Possession, by Composition or Resignation, with the acceptance of the People,
else our unwary Author has laid a foundation to overthrow or weaken, not only
most of our Laws, but most of the Laws of Europe.

Over and above all this, if the Laws of Henry the fourth, fifth, and sixth,
were not good, why did not the Nobility made in that time, get new Charters of
Creation in Edward the fourth's time? Nay, what became of the whole Hierarchy?
Many of the Prelates and inferior Clergy, must of necessity be consecrated by
those that were no Bishops, and consequently, their Consecration and Orders by
them conferred, were void, and all our subsequent Clergy, who derive their
Authority from those who had no legal Right, extinguished; a thing, in my
Judgment, worth consideration to such as would avoid Laws made by actual Kings,
though their just Title might be disputed.

His mentioning Oliver rather deserves pity for his Inadvertence, than any
other Answer: for, he cannot but know, out late King chose rather to loose his
Life than resign his Power; that he never had quiet Possession, but a Prince
always struggling against him; nor had he the acceptance of the People, or any
thing but force to buoy him up, which after his Death failed in his next
Descendent. By what I have said, it may appear to any equal Judge, that the
Laws made 1 Henry 4. were good, notwithstanding his pretended Usurpation. And
as to the thing it self, that the Bishops Absence in cases of Blood does not
make a Judgment given, void, appears plainly by the Case of the Earl of
Salisbury, in 2 H. 5. who petitions that a Judgment given against the Father,
might be reversed, and assigns for Error, that the Bishops who were Peers of
the Realm, were not present; and upon full hearing and debate, it was adjudged
no Error. Now I appeal to this Author, whither he can think that my Lord and
his Counsel were so stupid, as not to urge what they could think of for the
advantage of the Earl, and the Clergy; for whatsoever other faults might be
laid to the charge of his Parent, the cause appears to be turned upon that
hinge: by all this we may well conclude, that the Lords in that Parliament did
not hold the Bishops such Peers as ought to be allowed Judges concerning the
Life and Death of Noblemen. This Judgment our Author has not thought fit to
take notice of, which might be equivalent to error temporis, for it was either
ignorantia or neglectus rei. But he tells you, Edward the fourth repealed all
again, in which he is mistaken; for, Edward the fourth repealed nothing but
what concerned the Title between York and Lancaster, with some Charters to
others.

I come now to his third head or point, Gr. q. p. 64.
Whether supposing that the Bishops absented, as he contends, only upon the
account of the Canon Law in the times of Popery, whether those Laws do continue
in force now since the Reformation: he thinks they do not. In this I shall be
very short, and against his Reasons, which are rather Surmises than other, I
shall return direct Authorities of Judges, and Lawyers in point.

First, he says the Canon Law was grounded upon a superstitious fancy, that to
be present in Cases of Blood brought upon them Irregularity, and has there a
large Digression upon the Unreasonableness of the Canon Law, in many
particulars. I shall easily yield, that many of the Rules brought upon the
Church by the Papacy, are full of Hypocrisy and self ends, but do not think
that our Bishops did first forbear from bloody Trials about Lanfranks time, as
if this Canon had been unknown in England till then, almost 700 years after the
first Council of Toledo, for Sir Henry Spelman reckons that Canon to be Anno
Christi, 400. and William the first came in Anno 1066. And Spel. Coun. tom. 2.
p. 8.
in this first Council, this Canon is cited: but it is more reasonably referred
to the eleventh Council of Toledo, and the sixth Canon, which expressly forbids
their Con. Tol. 11 Can. 6.
meddling in Blood; 'twill yet be about 500 years before Williams Time. It is
therefore more probable, that their forbearance in those Cases proceeded not
from any thing brought in by Laufrank, but was received here long before, from
their obedience to the Apostolic Canons, which did not only forbid their
meddling in Blood, but in all secular Employments; and were carefully observed
till Constantine's time, who flourished in the year of Christ 323. It Is likely
enough, that the Liberty then taken by the Clergy was restrained in Spain by
that Council. And if our Author please to observe it, till they came to be
corrupted by Covetousness and Ambition, their chiefest Employment was to make
Peace between their Neighbors, as Chancellors and Arbitrators, rather than as
Lawyers and Judges. In earnest, whoever shall consider the intricacy of the
Laws of England, as they are called the Common Law, will rather believe, when
they sat as Chief Justices, if ever they did so, their Seats were among others
better versed in the Common Laws than themselves, and they sat rather to
direct what was equal according to the rules of Mercy than according to the
rigorous balance of Justice. This certainly was their Office when they sat
with the Earl in the County Court. Mr. Lambert in his Laws of Edgar, cap. 5.
has these words:

Celeberrimus autem ex omni satrapia Lamb. Laws Edgar. cap. 5.
conventus bis quotannis agitor cui quidem illius diocesis Episcopus, and
Aldermannus intersunto quorum alter jura divina, alter jura humana populum
edoceto.

Here you see the Bishops Office was only to teach the People the Divine Law,
as the Earl or Alderman did those of the Land.

His next Suggestion is, rather a Conjecture than a Proof; to wit, that this
Gr. q. p. 67.
Canon was never received, (contrary to himself before) or that if it were
received it was in diminution of the King's Prerogative, and so repealed by the
Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 19. He might as See the Provisos in the Acts.
well have said, That all the Ecclesiastical Laws, as of Tithes, Marriages,
probate of Wills, and other Faculties now exercised in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, are against the King's Prerogative, and therefore void. What Success an
Attempt of that Nature lately had, he may easily call to mind.

But let me bring into his Remembrance, what the Statute made in the same
Parliament, 25 H. 8. cap. 21. has in the Preamble of it. 25 H. 8. cap. 21.


Whereas his Majesty's Realm recognizeth no Superior under God, but only his
Majesty, has been, and is free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only such
as have been devised, made, and ordained within this Realm for the Weal of the
same, or to such others as by the Sufferance of the King and his Progenitors
the People of this Realm have taken at their free Liberty by their own Consent,
to be used among them, and have bound themselves by long Custom to the
observance of the same; not as to the observance of the Laws of any foreign
Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as the ancient and accustomed Laws of the
same by the said Sufference, Consents, and Customs, and none otherwise.

We see here, the Sense of the whole Parliament, That such Laws as had been
used and accustomed, should be looked upon as the Laws of the Kingdom, and not
of any foreign Prince or Prelate. Now let him tell me, what Laws were common to
us with any foreign Prelate, except the Ecclesiastical and Canon Law, which
having been here used, are acknowledged a part of the Laws of the Land by Usage
and Sufferance of the People. So that we have now a whole Parliament, that they
did not look upon these as against the Kings Prerogative, and so null as this
Author would have it; but fully confirmed as part of the English Law. Agreeable
with this is my Lord Coke in Cawdrey's Case, lib. 5. 32. b. It is, says he,
Resolved and enacted by authority of Parliament, Co. lib. 2. 32 b.
that all Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances and Synodals provincial, that have
been by common Use allowed, shall be of force, and not to be taken away, but by
Act of Parliament.

Now himself confesses that the Canons are against him; then may I well
conclude, that the Law is against him, since all Canons then in use, are part
of the Law at present.

Page 68. He tells you, the Sanction Gr. q. p. 68.
of this Law, which was Irregularity, is now ceased, and that some of our most
learned Judges have declared, that is taken away by the Reformation.

First, I am to learn, that Irregularity was the Sanction of the Law: I always
understood, that the Sanction of a Law was the matter established by it,
obedience to which, was required under the Penalty of Irregularity; but I will
not stand upon that, which if true, would open a door to disanul all Laws made
under a Penalty, by pardoning that. But the foregoing Statute of 25 H. 8. cap.
21. clearly shows, that all Canons accustomably used, are still in force; Who
has then taken off the Penalty? If no body, then their forbearance in Cases of
Blood ought still to be observed in obedience to them. Of this opinion were the
Parliament, both Lords and Commons, in the Case of the Earl of Strafford; whom
this Author is pleased Gr. q. p. 57.
to honor with the name of a Cabal; as also, the Proclamation to call in my
Lord Keeper Finch, who was then fled; both which, were done in the Absence and
after the Bishops were withdrawn, and after William, Bishop of Lincoln, had
given his opinion they ought so to do, and are taken notice of by the Author of
the Letter, page 51, 52, 53. and by him very materially observed, that that
Proclamation against my Lord Finch, was drawn by the Judges, by order of the
Lords Temporal, after the old Parliamentary way: from whence it is easy to
infer, that it was the old Parliamentary way, for the Judges to draw up such
Proclamations, by Command of the Lords Temporal, and that the Clergy meddled not
in those matters. To all that has been said to this purpose, he has either
given no answer, or what makes against him. He tells you, that my Lord of
Canterbury was first named in Commission for the Trial of the Queen of Scots.
This signifies little; for here he was only a Commissioner, but no Judge in
Parliament. Secondly, That though the Queen could not dispense with the Law in
general as to all Individuals, yet to any one she might, and the express naming
him a Commissioner, might amount to a Dispensation. Thirdly, though the
Archbishop was named, yet he was not present at the Trial; Whitgift was then
Archbishop. Cambd. An. Anno 1586. and Baker, 391.
whose Names you may see in Cambden's Annals, anno 1586. and therefore the
Canon was observed: for, what other reason could be given for his refraining
that Service, but because by it he might have become irregular. I shall add one
or two Authorities more, and so conclude the point. Archbishop Abbot in King
James his time hunting in one of his own Parks, shooting at a Deer, by an
unfortunate Glance of his Arrow, killed his Keeper: much Debate there was,
whether this Act had made him irregular; and that it did so, was strongly
argued by Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, then Lord Keeper, who said, that by the
Canon Law then in force, he was ipso facto irregular. Here you see the
Canon Law was then deemed in Rush. hist. Col. part p. 61.
force, and Irregularity to be by it contracted. At last, Commissioners were
appointed to examine the business, whose Names you may see in Rushworth, both
Divines, Civilians, and Common Lawyers. After a full Debate, they agreed he was
not irregular; for this was no Crime, and therefore by Law could not contract
Irregularity; for, by Law the Archbishop was allowed to hunt: this accident
being only Chance Medley, could not bring any Guilt upon him. But there was not
the least Doubt made of the Canons being in force, and that Punishment might be
inflicted upon the Breakers of them. Baker's Chron. page 446. who being then a
man Baker. page 446.
of good Age, made this Relation upon his own knowledge.

This may serve in Answer to his Reflection upon Dr. Oats, that he has Gr. q.
p. 69.
incurred Irregularity by his Discovery of the Horrid Plot, not yet fully
examined, for this Discovery was but his Duty; so far was it from being a
Crime, that it deserved, and has already found some Reward from his Majesty.

Of the same Opinion was Archbishop Laud, with the rest in the Star Chamber,
in the Censure of Dr. Leighton; Rush. hist. Coll. part 2. page 56.
where Archbishop Laud would not suffer any corporal Punishment to be
inflicted upon him until he was first degraded, nor his Ears to be cropped in St.
Paul's Churchyard, because the Ground was consecrated; now Degradation and
Consecration of Places, are the Fruits of the Canon Law. Lastly, one Madie was
in the High Commission Court Pas. 4 Car. 1. Rush. com. 2. App. p. 15.
declared irregular, and deprived for the same, having first, as was alleged,
preached after Suspension. By all which it plainly appears, that Irregularity
may be incurred at this day; and therefore those Canons not against the King's
Prerogative, nor consequently, taken away by the Act of 25 Hen. 8. but that
Irregularity may still be contracted by the breach of them.

I have now done with his two first Chapters, which contain the substance of
his whole Book, and have showed;

First, that it is not clear that Bishops were Barons, otherwise than by
Appellation; that they were never enobled in Blood; that no Instrument can be
produced what Baronies were annexed to their several Possessions, whose
Bishoprics have the Title common to other Noblemen; as Lincoln, Carlisle,
Bath, Worcester, York, and others, which is not usual, that one should be Duke
or Earl, and another Baron of the same place, beside the superfetation of
Baronies, by dividing one Bishopric into several Baronies. But, that it is
much more reasonable to believe that their Tenure in Cap. by Baronage Service,
which was imposed upon them as a burden, not an honor, might cause them to be
called to Parliament as Barons minores, lesser Barons, but not left out at the
King's Pleasure, as the lesser Barons were, because they were to summon the
Clergy to Convocation.

Secondly, I have made it apparent, that the Convocation is properly the third
Estate in Parliament, of which they constitute the upper House, and not other
than a part of a third Estate among the Lords.

Thirdly, Admitting they were a third Estate in the Lords House, entire as some
think, there could be no color for their Trial of a Nobleman, who is a Member
of another Estate.

Fourthly, the Canons of the Council of Toledo, were not the first cause of
their absenting themselves in cases of Blood.

Fifthly, I have vindicated the Parliament at Clarendon from all his
Exceptions, and made it very plain by the natural construction of the Words, as
well as by the Interpretation of his own Author Fitz-Stephens, they are not to
be present at any Consultations or Debates, where the end may be Blood; and
that the Proceedings in the Council at Northampton make fully against him; as
also, his Fancy that the Bishops had Right to be present till the definitive
Sentence concerning Blood was to be given, is against the Opinion of both
Houses, in the last Parliament.

Sixthly, I have showed that the Protestation made 11 Richard the Second, if it
were not a Law, was a solemn Confession by themselves, that the Canon Law was
against them, and further given great Probability that there was in it respect
had to the established Law of the Kingdom.

Seventhly, I prove that the Canons are still in force, that they are a part of
the Law of England, and not to be annulled but by act of Parliament, and that
Irregularity is not taken away by the Reformation.

Lastly, I have given clear Answers to all his pretended Authorities and
Reasons urged in his second Chapter, and showed, that they are either not to
the Purpose, or misapplyed, or against him.

I should now come to examine his Precedents in his third Chapter, and assert
the manner of Trial of Bishops by common Juries, but that is fully done by the
learned Author of the Discourse of Peerage; and for Precedents, if there were
any, as I think there are not yet, the Law being against him, they would
signify little. Yet, least he should think himself neglected, I shall in the
next Chapter take them into Consideration.

CHAP. III.
I Will not be long in the Examination of his Precedents; because, in my
Opinion, the Lords in the last Parliament have determined the Controversy.
For, our Author contends, that the Bishops have Right to be present till the
definitive Sentence comes to be given, and longer if they please, for he sets
them at Liberty. Now the Lords in their explanatory Votes, Gr. q. p. 32.
made May 15. 1679. have declared, That the Bishops have Right to sit in Journ.
of Parl. page 258.
Court till the Court proceed to the Vote of Guilty or Not Guilty. Though this
their Lordships have now admitted be a Liberty greater than, I think, their
Predecessors ever enjoyed, who in Cases of Blood went out at the beginning, yet
this Vote takes from them Vid. Hakewell mod. p. 84.
all Power Judicature as Peers to the Lords, for it gives them no Liberty to
pass any Vote, but only allows them to sit as Spectators, but reserves the
Judgment to themselves.

I perceive this Author is not willing Gr. q. p. 70.
to give much credit to the Relation of Brompton, touching what he reports of
the King's appealing Earl God-win of the Death of his Brother. I will not
concern my self in this matter, it being before the Conquest, and a Story in
which the Relaters much differ; some say 'twas at the Table, others in Council
(why not in both?) next his Appeal is to the Earls and Barons. I wonder our
Author does not say that the Bishops were here meant by Barons. For if there
were then no Barons, some others must be comprehended under that name; and not
long after, our Author tells you, the Bishops were comprehended under that Name
in the case of Hamel. Vid. Leg. Quaere What that Word then meant.
Edvar. conf. cap. 8. and nono de decimis and apibus, where the Name Barons is
used before the Conquest. I will not give overmuch credit to this Relation of
Brompton, the rather, because William of Malmsbury looks upon it as a Romance;
for he says, Rumigeruli spargunt, Cronica tacent. Yet perhaps Brompton's
Authority may go hand in hand with Fitz-Stephen. But, admitting the Story had
some Truth in it, his Endeavor to prove the Bishops present, is not
unpleasant. Gr. q. p. 73.


He tells you, after the Conversion of Ethelbert, they were never absent in any
Councils of the Nation that were Public, and that there was then no Canon to
be afraid of; for the Council of Toledo was brought in by Lanfrank some time
after. First he assumes a Negative, they were never absent; which cannot be
proved, except by one who had lived all those times. Next he tells you, they
had no Canon to be afraid of: it seems they lived then without Rule; I do not
believe this Author would have them do so still. Thirdly, he says that Council
of Toledo (take the first or the Gr. q. p. 74.
eleventh, the last of them about five hundred years before) was first brought
in by Lanfrank. I think the substance of that Council was observed before, but
not established as a Canon till the Synod at Westminster, of which I have spoke
before.

The Story of the Archbishops condemning Queen Emma, might be as true as that
other of Godwin, and both Romantic: but however, he tells you, the Bishops did
certainly sit in the County-Courts at all Judgments. What their Office was in
those Courts, I have told you before out of the Laws of Alfred: as also you may
find the same in Sir Henry Spelman's Gloss. verb. Comes. page 140, 141. where
he at large discourses Spel. Gloss. word Comes. p. 140. 141.
of the Causes to be tried in those Courts, and tells you they were only for
the ease of the Poor, and things of small value; and that the great and
powerful men had their Trials in the Kings Courts; and more to the same
purpose, which the Reader may peruse if he see good: and in part are
transcribed by the Author of the Letter. page 108, 109, 110. Now let any man
judge whether the Opinion of Sir Henry Spelman, or his Conjecture of Capitalia
placita, and the Legend of Saint Cuthbert, be of most Credit. The Author of the
Letter tells you, that no Capital Crimes were triable in the County Court.

But our Author tells us out of the Laws of Edw. the Confess. set out by Henry
the first, mention is made of Capitalia placita, cap. 31. The Title of the
Chapter is, De Capitalibus Placitis. The words follow:

In summis and capitalibus placitis unus Hundredus, aut comitatus judicetur a
duobus, non unus duos judicet. Sic inter judices studia diversa sunt, ut alii
sic alii ali^er fuisse tendunt vincat sententia meliorum and cui justicia magis
acquieverit. Interesse comitatui debent Episcopi Comites, and caeterae
potestates qui dei leges, and seculi negotia justa consideratione diffiniant.
Recordatione curiae Regis nulli negare licet alias licebit per intelligibiles
homines placiti, and nemo de Capitalibus placitis testimonio convincatur, etc.
-- Unusquisque per pares suos judicandus est.

In this obscure Law there is nothing at all that sounds like a Trial in
Criminal Matters, except our Author will say, that in such Cases no man shall
be convicted by Witnesses, when there is no other way to try matter of Fact,
except his own Confession: for, the Words are, that no man may be convicted by
Testimony. Next, it is plain, Summa, and Capitalia placita are joined together,
one explaining the other; so that I conceive nothing more is meant than
considerable Cases, where the matter in Law was dubious to the Judges, who were
not one Bishop, and one Earl, but Bishops, Earls, and other great men, and the
Judgment was not to be given according to the major, but of the better Opinion
of such as were the Judges. The Records of the Court were not to be denied to
any man, (others it seems might) by understanding men concerned in the Cause.
The meaning of the Law I take to be, that Cases of Right might be tried here of
any Value, but criminal Cases were not meddled withal.

I remember not to have read any where, that Capitalia placita had that
Signification our Author suggests; Placita Coronae, Placita Parliamentaria, and
Placita Communia I have met with; but Capitalia Placita, for Placita Capitalium
criminum, is new to me. However the meaning of that be, yet the Manuscript Life
of Saint Cuthbert, as to the thing it self, will help us out. He tells you (it
may be with as much Truth as Brompton) that one Hamel the Son of Earl Godwin,
being imprisoned by the Earl of Northumberland, his Friends earnestly
interceded with the Earl, that he might not loose his Head. Here indeed we find
a man imprisoned by an Earl, Application made to the Earl in his behalf; no
mention of any Bishop, any Trial, or any farther Proceeding in the business:
but the Trial, and the Bishops Presence at it, are both supplied by our Author,
who has proved neither, or produced greater Proof than the Authority of a
loose Legend, and that lame too: and yet upon this he triumphs, as if Gr. q. p.
74.
the Point were clearly gained, when there is nothing of what he would have
made good by him. Is it not now a thousand Pities, that so well Gr. q. p. 77.
sounding Words, so well put together, should signify nothing?

The next Precedent our Author takes into Consideration, is that of Nicholas
Segrave, cited by the Author of the Letter, page 55. by this Author, Let.. p.
55. Gr. q. p. 76.
page 76. which he would evade, by supposing the Bishops might be comprehended
under the Name of Magnates, or Counselors, and shows, that some of the Bishops
were probably then of his Counsel. For a clear Answer to these Surmises, I
shall give you shortly the whole Case, as you shall find it at large, inter
placita Parlam. 33 Ed. 1. Riley, page 266. Pla. Parl. 33 Ed. 1.


Nicholas Segrave had Summons by the Sheriff, and the Command of the King, to
answer to such things as should be objected against him, and to hear, and stand
to what the Curia Domini Regis, to wit, the Parliament, consideraret in
praemissis.

Segrave upon this Summons, Venit in pleno Parliamento in praesentia ipsius
Domini Regis Arch. Cantuariensis, and plurimorum Episcopor. Comitum, Baronum,
and aliorum de This Consilium Regis I take to be that steady Counsel that
always attended the King at his Parliament, though perhaps not always Members.
Consilio Regis tunc ibidem existentium.

Nicholas de Warwick (perhaps the King's Attorney) accuses him of many and
great Crimes, which he offers to prove. Segrave confesses all, submits to the
King de alto. and basso, Et super hoc Dom. Rex volens habere avisamentum
Comitum Baronem, Magnatum and aliorum de consilio suo injunxit eisdem in
Homagio, fidelitate, and ligeantia quibus, ei tenentur quod ipsum fideliter
consulerent qualis poena pro tali facto sic cognito fueri infligenda. The
Comites Barons, Magnates, etc. adjudge him worthy of Death. After this, the
King pardons him, and orders him to put in seven Sureties, and to render
himself a Prisoner at the King's Command, and to be accountable to the King for
the Issues of his Land, held in his own or his Wifes Name: This, in short, is
the Case of Segrave, in which it is very clear, that at the Accusation the
Bishops were present, as of Right they might be, but at the Trial they are
omitted. Now to suppose them comprehended under a general Name, and out of
Order, who were particularly expressed when their Presence was lawful, is both
unusual and unreasonable: unusual, because it is against the Sea Coo. 2. Rep.
Arch. Cant. Case. Diverse Cases to that purpose.
Rule of Law, to comprehend the greater after the Nomination of the lesser; and
so to take the Bishops under the name of great Men who are constantly first
named, and were so here at the Beginning. Secondly, it is unreasonable to make a
different Construction of the same Words in different Cases or Laws: now we
know that in the Statute de Asportatis Religiosorum, the Words are Comites,
Barons, Magnates, where we know the Bishops were not comprehended under the
Name Magnates, nor ought to be here; and to suppose the contrary is against the
Current of all Acts of Parliament and Records. By the Magnates, and alii de
Consilio were meant the Judges and other Counselors at Law, whose Advice the
King required, as was very just and usual in those times. It Is likewise
observable, that the Word Consilio is written with an (s) which shows, those
Counselors he advised with were not necessarily Members of Parliament, for
then the Word would have been written with a (c) Concilio.

His remarkable Precedent of the D'Spencers, will stand him in as little Gr. q.
p. 79.
stead; in the Reign of Edward the Second they were both condemned, and the
Exilium Hugonis D'Spencer is to be seen in the old Natura brevium. Those
Judgments were afterward reversed at York, in 15 Edward the Second; but in 1
Edward the Third, the first Judgments were affirmed, and so they were looked
upon as condemned Persons, which continued (though themselves were dead) for
above seventy years; til by the prevailing Party, in 21 Richard the Second,
that Act was again called in question, as void, in regard the Bishops were
absent: and the Bishops desired to make a Proctor by the Commons, which they
accordingly did; but at last, through their exorbitant Proceedings, that whole
Parliament was repealed in 1 Henry the Fourth. To this I have largely spoken
before, to which I shall refer the Reader, with this farther Advertisement,
that in troublesome times things are not always carried as they ought to be;
wherefore, we are not always to look at what was, but what ought to have been
done: neither are we to be governed by seeming Precedents, such as sometimes,
as in the Case of Ship Money, may be produced against Law.

I have before made it manifest, that the Canons of the Church long before
Lanfrank's time forbad Clergymen to meddle either in Blood or secular
Employments; neither is it reasonable to believe the Laws of this Land were
different from the general Rule incumbent upon all Clergymen to observe,
especially when we see the Immunities granted them by King Stephen were so
early recalled by Henry the Second, and the Constitutions then made at
Clarendon, looked upon as the ancient Customs of the Nation; insomuch, that the
Discourser had very good reason to say 'twas the common Usage, which is the
common Law of England.

Page 88. Our Author comes to the Examination of those Records urged Gr. q. p.
88.
against him: and his Exceptions in general are:

First, That they are Negative, the Bishops were not present at Trials of
Blood, therefore they had no Right to be present.

Secondly, They were sometimes absent when they were not prohibited, therefore
their Absence was voluntary.

Thirdly, they are sometimes comprehended under the Name of Peers, or Grands,
and therefore may be comprehended under those Names when the Name Prelate is
not expressed.

If this Author can be driven out of these holds, I shall believe he may fairly
quit the Field, without any Dishonor.

I shall begin with the Trial of Roger Gr. q. p. 88.
Mortimer, in 4 Edward the Third, but we must fetch our Judgment from what was
done in 28 Edward the Third; where, upon the desire of Roger Wigmore, Cousin,
and Heir of Mortimer, that Attainder was examined, and all the Proceedings
repeated; and upon the whole matter, the King charges the Earls and Barons, the
Peers of the Realm, that for as much as these things principally concerned him,
and them, and all the People of his Realm, that they would do such Right and
loyal Judgment as was fit for such a Person to have. The Words upon the Record
are, Le Roy vous charge Counts, Barons, les Pieres de son Royaum que de si come
cestes chooses touchent principalment a luy, a vous, and a tout le peuple de son
Royaum que vous facies, au dit Roger droit, and loial Judgment come attient a
un tell d'avoir. Which said Counts, Barons, and Peers of the Realm, returned and
gave their Judgment, etc. The Words are, the King charges you Counts, Barons,
the Peers of his Realm, not as our Author renders the Words, Earls, Barons, and
Peers of the Realm, as if Peers were there distinct from Earls and Barons, when
the Words import no more than who were those Peers, to wit, the Earls and
Barons: therefore the Author of the Letter had reason to say the Bishops were
not there who were left out in the reference made by the King, whose Words are,
To the Earls and Barons, the Peers of the Realm. Now if the Question be asked
who are those, must not the Answer be, the Earls and Barons? So that the
Bishops must be comprehended under the Names of Earls and Barons, or not at
all. From whence it will follow, that this Negative is something more than a
bare Negative, we may at least call it Negativum praegnans, a Negative big with
an Affirmative: for it is first told, who were those Peers. Secondly, to whom
those Judgments belonged. Chiefly to the King and them, and consequentially, to
all the Kingdom: and whatever the Practice is now, I think it not hard, to
prove, that anciently no Judgment, or very rarely any by the Lords in
Parliament, was complete in criminal Cases, or Execution done till it was
ratified by the King; yet, that I may render all possible Right to the Bishops
the matter will bear, I would easily grant that (if they were at all summoned
to that Parliament) they might be present whilst the Proceedings against
Mortimer were in reading, but went away when the Lords proceeded to the
consideration of what Judgment was to be given against him, which was enough to
give them knowledge of the matter in Agitation, and as much as was requisite to
make them Parties, according to the Opinion of my Lord Coke before cited.

I said (if they were summoned) because in many ancient Parliaments I cannot
find they had any Summons at all, as in 49 Hen. 3. 23 Ed. 1. 28 Ed. 1. 1 Ed. 2.
16 Ed. 2. and 6 Ed. 3. but after that were never omitted: so that it is probable
enough, that they were not summoned in 4 Ed. 3. who were left out in the sixth
year of the same King. But, in this I will not be positive, because it may be
the Rolls have been lost.

Page 94. He takes a more exact view of Gr. q. p. 94.
the Case of Mortimer in 4 Ed. 3. and presses strongly to have it allowed,
that the Judgment against Mortimer, and some others, was by Act of Parliament,
because the Reversal of it in 28 E. 3. was by Act: and therefore, says he, we
may justly suppose, that the Judgment against them was ratified in Parliament:
beside, some Historians say, he was condemned Iudicio Parliamenti, and his own
Petition is, that the Statute and Judgment may be reversed and annulled; and
from this infers, that if the first Judgment was by Act of Parliament, and the
Bishops not there, then they might not be present in their Legislative Right;
and if they were there, then this Negative way of Argument proves nothing, that
is, they de facto were not there, therefore de jure they ought not to be there.
This I confess is subtle, but not solid; it is all grounded upon no greater
Authority than Supposition. First, the Reversal was by Act, therefore the
Judgment was so too; this does not follow, for many Judgments in Parliament may
be reversed by Act of Parliament which were not so pronounced. His second
Conjecture has as little weight, because some Historians say it was by
Judgment in Parliament, therefore by Act, because it is not a Parliament
without the King, and Lords, and Commons; for, except this be his Argument, it
is of no force at all; for it might be, and doubtless was, by Judgment in the
Lords House, which in ordinary Speech was called Judgment in Parliament; nay,
how often does himself infer the Presence of the Bishops from the Words, Full
Parliament, when the Commons were not concerned, and indeed, meant no more than
a full House. Lastly, Wigmore desiring the Statute and Judgment might be
reversed, proves as little: for, every thing ordained that is Statutum is not
presently an Act of Parliament though every Act be Statutum. Beside, I do not
find Statutum in the Record, but only the Word Judgment used; so that for ought
appears from our Author, the Bishops might well be absent at the first Judgment
against Mortimer, and not comprehended under the Name of Peers. They have less
reason to think themselves included under the Name of Barons, if we well
consider the words of Petrus Blesensis, who living in the time of Hen. 2. well
knew both what Honor they had, and what they pretended then to: whose Words
are;

Quidam Episcopi Regum munificientias, and See before p. 18. in the Edition in
Quarto. Pet. Bles. (...). edit. p. 551. col. 1, 2. in fol. Idem p. 552. col. 2.
Eleemosynas antiquorum abusive Baronias, and regalia vocant, and in occasion
turpissimae Servitutis seipsos Barons vocant. Vereor ne de illis quereretur
Dominus and dicat: Ipsi regnaverunt, and non ex me, Principes extiterunt, and
ego non cognovi scias te accepisse Pastoris officium, and non Baronis, etc.
Vacuum a secularibus oportet esse animum -- Modis omnibus cura ne secularibus
te involvas; Pet. Blesens, edit. ult. p. 551, 552. By this learned Archdeacon
in his Tractate de Institutione Episc. you may be satisfied that he did not
believe that Bishoprics which arose from the Bounty of the King, or Alms of
the People, were ever erected into Baronies by the King, but abusively or
wrongfully so called by themselves, who being charged with the Service by the
King, had a mind to attribute to themselves the Name, since they did the
Service. For, he says, they did abusively or wrongfully call their Possessions
Baronies, and Royalties, and themselves Barons, both blaming, and threating
them from God for so doing, and involving themselves in Secular Matters. This
Author flourished in the time of Hen. II. ancient enough to know the truth, and
how they were looked upon in those days. Moreover, I do not find it can be made
appear, except conjecturally, that they were ever present, where they were not
first named. The Honor of their Function makes them be called before Dukes and
Earls, and being by that reason Pralati, le^ no Man deprive them of their
Right, and by Post-Position make them post Lati. Lastly, This Person being
executed in Cot. p. 85.
4 Edw. 3. as appears by the Record in 28 E. 3. Cot. p. 85. without any
Accusation or Answer, makes me believe, the Bishops being Men of Piety, would
not by their Prefence countenance so illegal a thing, tho they had had Right,
without entering their Protestation, manifesting their dislike of it; neither do
I believe their Spirits so humble to suffer a Post-Position of their Titles.

But this whole matter, will I conceive, be better cleared, if I shall acquaint
the Reader with something more concerning this Roger Earl of March, than has
yet come to this learned Person's Knowledge. In 5 Edw. 3. the very next Year
after the summary Judgment was given against Mortimer and Matrevers, a
Commoner, at the Complaint of the King, we find inter 5 E. 3. m. 33.
Brevia Baronibus direct, 5 E. 3. m. 33. penes rememorat Dom. Regis in S^cio;
that those Judgments were per Comites, Barons, and alios Pares Regni, not a
Syllable of the Prelates; nor can the word alios take them in, since in the
whole current of Records, the Prelates were never placed after Earls and
Barons. And the alij Pares, were either such as might be extraordinarily
summoned (an usual Practice) at that time, or they were the Barons Peers, viz.
Barons Minores; besides, the succeeding words clear the Point. For there was
in 4 E. 3. an Agreement, and Concordia Rot. Parl. 4. E. 3. n. 6.
made by the Lords and Commons, that such Proceedings should not for the future
be drawn into Example, to judge Commoners to death upon Summary Articles,
without any Concurrence from them. Now this Concord was made by the Temporal
Lords, not by the Prelates, but per nos and Pares praedictos nec non
Communitatem Regni in eodem Parliamento. Now in 4 E. 3. the 5 E 3. ubi supra.
Reference was made to the Earls, and Barons; the Peers, to whom of right such
Judgments belonged, and no Prelates comprehended, and here they are called
Pares praedicti.

Add to this, Rot. Parl. 13 E. 3. Numb. 8. Le grant des Graunts, where an Aid
was N. B. Cotton Abridg. Counts and Barons by Lords, as (...) often does.
granted to the King, then in war with France. The Record says Les Countes and
Barouns esteantzen dit Parliament Granteront pour eiix and pour leur Peers de la
terre qui teignent per Baronie la desme garb, la disme tuzon, la disme Aignel
de touts leur demaignes Terres. Now if the Prelates were understood by the word
Peers in this place, then it must be granted that the Earls and Barons taxed
the Prelates, who always taxed themselves, and the inferior Clergy in
Convocation: But the succeeding words will clear the matter, which run thus in
the same Record: Et pour ceo quil fu aviis as Prelatez Countes Barouns and
autres Graunts que pour les ploite des besognes, etc. the Record is touching a
speedy Supply to the King. Here we see where the Bishops were concerned, they
were named, which shows they were no more comprehended under Peers before, than
under the word Magnates in this Clause. I could multiply Records to this
purpose, and am confident, no clear Example can be given where they were
necessarily comprehended after Counts and Barons.

The next Authority he quotes to weaken the Authority of those he calls
Negative Gr. Qu. p. 95.
Precedents, is the case of the Murder of John Imperial, a public Minister
sent from Genoa.

This Case I conceive, is not truly stated by the Author of the Letter, and
misapplied by the Grand Questionist. The Point in question in the Record was,
what Offense the Murder of this public Minister was? which matter was
referred to the Judges for their Advice, who agreed that it was Treason within
the Statute of 25 E. 3. This their Judgment was confirmed in Parliament, whilst
the Doubt was in Agitation among the Judges, 'twas not material who was there.
But after they had given their Sense, what was meant by this Confirmation in
Parliament, is the next Question: Whether more were meant than an approving of
the Opinion given by the Judges, by them drawn up in form? and this may well be
the meaning of that whole Proceeding, which Practice is usual in our days, but
cannot be called a Judgment in Parliament, tho it might be their Opinion. But
if you will rather believe it to be by Act of Parliament, then must the Commons
be Parties, of whom we hear no mention, nor any Statute to that purpose extant
that I can find; and in that Case the Bishops might have been present if they
would, and whether they were or not, is not material. Vid. Cot. 3. R. 2. N. 38.
p. 183. Yea in Acts of Parliament, when the Sentence comes to be given, they
are to withdraw, as it was held by Mr. Edward Bagshaw, a learned Reader of the
middle Temple, who for some Opinions by him held touching the Bishops, was by
the Power of Archbishop Laud suspended from proceeding in his reading. Rushw.
Hist. Coll. Tom. 2. p. 990.

The next Precedent is in 5 E. 3. Which Gr. Qu. p. 89.
in conclusion, will do him as little Service as the former. The Author of the
Letter page 7, 8. tells us, that that Parliament was summoned for redress of
the Breach of the Law, and the Peace of the Kingdom; and the Record says
further, that 'twas to consult touching Lands in Guienne, and the Marriage of
the King; in which the Bishops went away, and returned no more. I confess, I
know no reason but they might have staid, it seems they thought otherwise,
being in all likelihood privy to some Actions to be treated there, wherein
Sentence of Blood might be pronounced. But be their reason what you will, their
words are these. Et pour ceo que avisefust a les dits Prelates qu'il nattient
proprement a eux de Counseiller de la guard de la paix, and de chastiment de
tells malvois s'allerent mesmes les Prelates. Which words do not only import
that they voluntarily went away, but that it did properly behove them not to be
present in such matters, or to give Counsel for the Punishment of such Crimes.
The same word is used in 1 Hen. 4. Cot. p. 392. where the King by the mouth of
the Archbishop Cot. p. 392.
of Canterbury, declares that the Commons in that Case were only Petitioners,
and that all Judgments belonged to him and the Lords; belonged, that is, the
Commons had no Right thereto; so here nattient proprement is that properly they
had no Right thereto. That all Judgments belonged to the King and Lords, is
only an Affirmation of the Archbishop, but binds not the Commons: See Posthu.
Cottoni, p. 350. For I think it very plain, that anciently the Commons, as well
as the Lords, had their share in Judicature. I shall touch some Records which
the Reader may consult at leisure; Rot. claus. 12. E. 2. m. 5. in the Case of
Hugh Audley and his Wife Margaret, the Relict of Pierce Gaveston; they
petitioned to be restored to certain Lands given to Pierce, A nostre Signure le
Roy, and son Cons^l Prelatez, Countes and Barons del' sa terre: the Petition
was brought into full Parliament and debated, habito dilige^i tractatu in pleno
Parliamento, tam per Pr^latos quam per Comites, Barons, and totam Communitatem
Regni Concorda^, and Consideratum; 'twas ordained, considered, and agreed, per
Praelatos, Comites, and Barons, and tot^m Communitatem Regni, that all the
King's Grants to the said Pierce, Peter, and his Wife; should be revoked, and
the Deeds cancelled. Et quod istud Iudicrum intretur in Rot. Parliament, and in
Cancellari^, and exinde ^iur in scaccarium, and ad utrumque Bancum, to be
enrolled. Nothing can be plainer than that this was a Judgment, and no Act of
Parliament, and that not concerning Blood, the Prelates concurred, and that
probably both Houses sat, and voted together as one Body.

I shall add one Record more in a Capital Case, and that is entered, Rot.
Patent. 3 E. 3. pars prima me. 33. The Case of Adam Orleton, or Tarlton Bishop
of Hereford, and after of Worcester. This Bishop Rot. Claus. 1 E. 3. m. 13. pro
Episc. Hereford.
was about 17 E. 2. convicted of Treason before Sir Henry Staunton, and other
Justices. In 1 E. 3. he petitions that the Process and Record, in which there
was Error, might be brought into Parliament and examined, and he restored to
his Estate. Praetextu hujus petitionis mandatum fuit (by a Writ) Galfrido de
Scroop (who had the Record) quod venire faceret recordum, and processum
praedicta quae sunt in custodia sua in pleuo Parliamenio, where after he had
assigned several Errors, the Record concludes; Et quia videtur Dom. Regi
praefatis comitibus, Proceribus Concilio Dom. Regis, and toti Communitati Regni
convocatis ad Parliamentum quod praedictum recordum and processus omnino
erronea sunt rationibus praedictis concessum est quod eadem recorda, and
processus adnullentur, etc. This was clearly a Judgment in Parliament, in which
the Commons were certainly present: and that it was not an Act, appears
plainly, for the Record was certified, and Errors assigned; and it is worth
observation, that he did not assign for Error, that he was before convicted by
a common Jury, but admitted it legal. Next, I think the Prelates were not
Parties to the Reversal of the Judgment given in 17 E. 2. for it is coram
Praefatis comitibus Proceribus, etc. though they were at the recital of the
Errors; neither is it much material, for they might very well be Parties to the
Examination of a Judgment in a Capital Case; for whether they concurred either
in affirming, or reversing the Record, that made them no Parties to the first
Judgment, but is only a Concurrence in Opinion, that what before had been done
by others, was well or ill done by them. I could cite many other Records where
the Commons were present in Parliamentary Judgments, but let these suffice.

But this may seem too large a Digression, since I was upon the consideration
of 5 E. 3. in which I say,

Secondly, It does not appear that this was an Advice taken up by themselves;
for the words are not (fust avise par eux) or ils furent d'avis, it was thought
fit by themselves, but are (et pour ceo que avis feust a eux) that is, because
Advice was given them by others to go away, they absented themselves probably
in Obedience to those Laws which forbad their Presence: And they returned no
more, says the Author of the Letter, p. 8. and the Advice was given by the
Lords Temporal only: No, says the Grand Questionist, p. 102. The Bishops Gr.
Qu. p. 102.
and Proctors of the Clergy went only into another Room to consult therein,
which was usual in those times. I do not at all doubt but the Members of
Parliament have several Rooms to retire to upon occasion: but that in this
Case, they did go apart to consult, and give Advice in this Business, seems
very unreasonable for any one to believe, because N. B. The King's going to the
holy Land was then in debate, touching which, the Bishops might well consult.
they had but immediately before declared, that the Consideration of such
matters properly belonged not to them to meddle with, and accordingly withdrew:
certainly no considerate Man will think they went to consult about what they in
the same Breath said belonged not to them. Besides, we see the return of the
Lords and Commons, without any mention of the Bishops, and the Advice given by
them by the mouth of Sir Henry Beamont (their Speaker) which Advice was
afterward put into a Law, and then the Prelates might be present, tho they
were not at giving the Advice. For the Record says, It was enacted by the
King, Bishops, Lords, and Commons, which then became a Law, to which the
Prelates might justly give their Consent in their Legislative Capacity,
whatever it concerned. Where note, that Sir Robert Cotton translates Grands,
Commons, I think with good reason, though carp't at by Mr. Prin in the Margin,
for we heard nothing of them before, and Matthew. Paris p. 55. Magnates
comprehendit Comes, Baro, miles, seu aliqua alia notabiles Persona: Vid. Mr.
Petyt, p. 101, 94, 95.
soon after we find them named, and undoubtedly concerned in all Proceedings
before: See Matthew. Paris p. 55. Magnates, Grands, comprehends Counts, Barons,
Knights, or any other considerable Person, together with many others which
would be endless to quote.

Having before showed, that what our Author calls negative Precedents, were not
simply so, and that the Author of the Letter had great reason to believe them
absent where they were not named, and where the Laws forbad their Presence,
especially having on his side the Authorities of 4 E. 3. Numb. 1. of 1 H. 4.
Numb. 80. where the Temporal Lords assume unto themselves N. B. The Abridger
often translates Counts and Barons in the Record by the name of Lords, only
because when the Bishops were meant Lords Spiritual, or some word equivalent
was expressed. Rush. Hist. Col. part 2. p. 55.
the power of judging Peers, which Opinion is also made good by the late Votes
of the Lords in Parliament, May 15, 1679. By the Case of Dr. Leighton in the
Star Chamber 6 Car. 1. It is evident that the Prelates were not looked upon in
the same sort that the Temporal Peers were; for the Information against him was
for writing a scandalous Book against the King, Queen, Peers, and Prelates,
where Peers and Prelates are contra-distinguished, and not taken synonymously,
as may be gathered by the Sentence, and being another Body, were judged as
Peers to one another, not to the Temporal Lords.

I come now to the Consideration of what he says page 90. he there alleges
that many Gr. Qu. p. 90.
of those the Author of the Letter calls Negative Precedents, if they prove any
thing, prove too much: for some of them admit they were not present when they
might have been; others, that they were present, when by his own Rules, they
should have been excluded, either therefore the general words where they are
not mentioned, do not enforce their Absence, or that they oughtto have been
excluded at some other Trials, where the Author of the Letter admits they were,
or might have been present. The chief Case he instanceth in, is that of Michael
de la Pool Chancellor of England, who was accused of many Misdemeanors by the
House of Commons, and as (I think he would infer) such as Thorp Chief Justice,
was found guilty of, being Capital: where the Author of the Letter says, the
Bishops were not present, yet allows them to have been present in the Case of
this Chancellor, a parallel Case, as he says, with that of Thorp: either
therefore, says our Author, they might have been present in the Case of Thorp,
or they should have been absent in Trial of Pool. This is his Argument, as near
as I can gather out of his Words, put together something N. B. Though there
were no particular Impeachment against Weston and Gomenes by the Commons, yet
the general one being the delivering Forts and Castles, was Treason; at the
Examination of which, the Prelates ought to be absent. Vid. Gr. Qu. p. 92.
obscurely.

I need give no other Answer to this, than to lay before you the words of the
Record.

This Accusation was exhibited by the Commons in 10 R. 2. against Michael de la
Pool, Lord Chancellor, in full Parliament, before the King, Bishops and Lords,
and six Articles were objected by them against him. The first was, That he
purchased Lands of the King of great value, whilst he was Chancellor; the
other five, as the Record says, were only Quarrels, and of little concern.

To the first, and most considerable, the Chancellor put in a fair Answer; the
Commons reply, and urge things to the utmost, and amongst other things, say,
That whereas by the Popes Provisions, a Person was recommended to the Priory of
St. Anthonies; he, the said Chancellor, would not suffer him to be admitted
till the Grantee had contracted to pay to the Chancellor, and his Son 100 l.
yearly: and then parallel this with Thorp's Case, and would have had the
Chancellor in the same fault with Thorp, for Bribery as a Judge, and
consequently incur the same Judgment. The Chancellor replies, and shows great
difference between the Cases. Upon the whole matter, Judgment was given against
him, pursuant to the Accusation for Misdemeanors only, in which the Bishops
were, and might be present; and the parallelling it with Thorp's Case, was only
in the Management of the Cause by the Commons, and no part of the Accusation.

Neither is it reasonable to believe that which our Author asserts in the same
Page, Gr. Qu. p. 90.
that the Prelates were free Agents, and might withdraw at some times, and be
present at others, as they saw cause. For beside that, this is contrary to the
express Law of Clarendon, which expressly declares that it is their duty to be
present in all Proceedings in Curia Regis, which in that place must be
understood of the Parliament, because they were to be present with the other
Lords, tho I know that Curia Regis, is sometimes taken in a more laxe Sense;
for all the Courts in Westminster are the King's Courts, and unto which they
were to give Obedience and Attendance in Cases not prohibited. I say, over and
above, this Act at Clarendon, it seems to me very unreasonable to suppose, that
such a Body of Men had liberty to give their Attendance when they pleased,
without leave of the House, or cause showed why 'twas fit they should be
absent, or that the Author of the Letter meant more when he says, they might
have been present, than that they were not prohibited by the Law of Clarendon,
which only had Relation to Matters of Blood. But these Men had other Canons to
go by, when they thought fit, as well as those of Toledo, and it is probable
enough, that the rest of the Noblemen, finding them most constant Factors for
the Pope, were willing enough to let them be absent upon any colorable
Pretense when they desired it. Is not one clear Precedent against them in point
of greater weight, than many dubious, and equivocal ones; which cannot without
great Art, be wire-drawn to speak to their advantage? Let him consult the
Discourse of Peerage, page 17. The Case of the Earl of Northumberland, 7 Hen.
4. Rot. processus Rot. Process in Parl.
cor Dom. Rege in Parl. in 5 Hen. 4. This Nobleman came into Parliament, and
confessed before the King and Lords, that he had done against his Allegiance,
in gathering Power and giving Liveries; this Fact by the Lords, was adjudged no
Treason, for which he gives Thanks to the Lords his Judges, and a day after,
the Commons do the like, where the Prelates are named, as our Author affirms,
and to which I shall speak by and by. But in 7 Hen. 4 the same Earl was in
actual Rebellion in the Gr. Qu. p. 117.
North, and his Forces dispersed by the Earl of Westmarland; but he, and the
Lord Bardolf fled into Scotland, the rest were most of them taken Prisoners.
This Case came into Parliament, where the King commands the Lords Temporal,
Peers of the Realm, to advise what Process to make, and what Judgment to render
against the Earl of Northumberland and Lord Bardolf. Nothing can be plainer
than that the King looked upon the Lords Temporal as those Peers who were
proper to give Judgment touching their Fellow Peers, who had fled from Trial in
a case of Blood: The Record goes on; the said Lords advised thereupon, and gave
Counsel to the King: Then the said Lords, Peers of the Realm, by assent of the
King, order summoning the said Lords to appear at a day given, or to stand
convicted by Award of the Peers in Parliament. The King farther demanded the
Opinion of the Lords Temporal touching the Archbishop of York, who was in the
same Treason. The Lords Temporal, by the Assent of the King, and by their
Authority, declared, and awarded the said Earl, and Lord, to stand convict of
Treason, for not appearing upon Summons. It Is very clear, that this whole
Business was transacted by the Lords Temporal without the Bishops, and with the
Concurrence of the King. It Is not to be believed that the Bishops would have
sat quiet, had they thought themselves wronged in these Proceedings: See the
Discourse of Peerage, page 17, 18. I think it hardly possible to find a more
clear Record in the Point than this is. First, here were two Noble Lords
defeated in actual Rebellion, and fled from Justice into Scotland. The King
upon this, would not so much as consult with his Prelates, knowing them by Law
no proper Counselors against Peers in matters of Blood, applies himself to
his Lords Temporal, they order Proclamations by order of the King, enjoining
the said Lords to appear at a day certain, or to stand convict; they not
appearing, are by Award of the Lords Temporal convicted of Treason; and a Year
after, one is slain, the other mortally wounded at Bramham-moor in Yorkshire.
Can any thing be more agreeable to the Practice at this day against Men that fly
from Justice, and are convicted for nonappearance? He must have a new way of
reasoning, who considering that in 4 E. 3. the Earls and Barons are declared
those Peers, to whom such Judgments belong; that in 5 E. 3. the Prelates
declared, that in a Case where Blood might be, it belonged not to them to be
present; that in 7 R. 2. the Temporal Lords were only concerned in a Case where
the Accusation was Treason, with many other Cases, that in 1 Hen. 4. the Lords
are declared Judges in such matters; that in 2 Hen. 4. in a like Trial or
Judgment, the Temporal Lords are all named, who were the Judges; that now in 7
Hen. 4. the Temporal Lords are again declared Judges, and after all this, that
the Prelates should be deemed proper Judges in Cases of Blood upon bare
Surmises, and no direct Proof, seems to me to savor of a Man wedded to an
Opinion which he resolves to maintain; when at last, tho Precedents confirm
what the Law is, it is that must determine the Controversy. This I say in
Relation to what Mr. Hunt objects. This Precedent may in Gr. Qu. p. 95.
part, serve to give answer to those Arguments drawn from the Identity of
Names, to the Identity of Right. The Bishops says the Grand Questionist are
sometimes comprehended under the name of Grands, Seigneurs, and Peers;
therefore their Right is equal to all others who enjoy those Names: How he
attempts to make this good, we shall see anon. But first, let him consider how
weak a way of arguing this is; we know nothing is more equivocal than Names.
Many are called Lords, who had once that Name, as Ambassadors, Chief Justice,
etc. or such whose Fathers are Dukes; so Earls Eldest Sons, yet are indeed but
Commoners: so Baronagium comprehends all the whole Parliament; Barons there are
of the Cinque Ports, of the Exchequer, and of some chief Towns, as I have noted
before from Mr. Seldom: so we are not to judge the Right from the Appellation,
but govern the Appellation by the Right.

The first Precedent he urges is, page 96. where in 4 E. 3. an Act passed for
Trial by Peers, Cotton, Numb. 6. It Is agreed unto by the King, and all the
Grands in full Parliament, that tho the Lords had tried some, who were not
their Peers, upon Accusation by the King in a summary way against Law, it
should be so no more. If the Bishops were here comprehended under the Name of
Grands, so were the Commons too, if it should be an Act of Parliament; will he
hence infer, See before p. 131. the Records there cited,
that the Commons have an equal Right with the Lords because they all are
called Grands?

Who were esteemed Grands or Magnates, see Matthew. Paris, in Anno Dom. 1100.
Matthew. Paris Anno 1100. Rot. cl. 3. E. 2. m. 16. in dorso.
Inhibitio ne qui Magnates, viz. Comes, Baro, Miles seu aliqua alia notabilis
Persona, etc. Here you see under Magnates, are taken Earls, Barons, Knights, or
any other Person of Rank. So Milites Comitatuum, and Barons quinque portuum,
are called Magnates inter com. brevia de term. sctae. trin. Sct. Mich. An. 34.
E. 1. penes rentem. Dom. 34 Edw. 1.
thesaurarij in Scaccario; he that desires more, let him consult Mr. Petyt's
Learned Discourse of the ancient Rights of the Commons, page 93, 94. and in
sundry other places. I think therefore I may safely conclude this Point: That
where Grands are named alone, there not only the Bishops, but the Earls,
Barons, Judges, and Commons might be comprehended, but where the Grands are
mentioned after the Earls, and Barons, there the Bishops who ought first to be
named, shall never be taken in secondarily, and by Implication. Neither is it
any thing to our Question, whether it were for their Honor to be absent in
some Cases, as he intimates, page 100. in the Case of Roger Mortimer, Gr. Qu,
p. 100.
but what the matter of Fact was.

Page 112. He would comprehend the Prelates among the Peers, because in 4 E. 3.
N. 3. The words are, All the Peers, Counts and Barons assembled in Parliament,
upon strict Examination, do assent, and agree, that John Mautrevers is guilty
of the Death of Edmund Earl of Kent. Here he would infer that the Prelates were
present at the Examination of that Capital Crime, under the name of Peers,
because at that time, there were no Dukes, nor others of Superior Degree to
Earls; but See before p. 131.
he does not consider, that the word Peers, in this place, does only denote who
those Peers then mentioned were [Peers] viz. Earls and Barons, not Bishops, as
before Magnates, viz. Comes, Baro, Miles, etc. As when we say a Nobleman is to
be tried by his Peers, we understand only those that are truly so, and not
others that sometimes may be called so; this is much cleared by the Record 2
Hen. 4. N. 30. The Lords Temporal by the Assent of the King, N. B. The Judgment
may well be given after the Parties are dead, an hundred Examples may be given,
where their Bones have bin burned, their Bodies hanged, etc. contrary to what
Mr. Hunt thinks.
adjudged Thomas Holland late Earl of Kent, John Holland late Earl of
Huntington, 2 H. 4. N. 30
and others, Traitors; this Judgment was after the Parties were dead, and but
the second Successor after Edward the third. Why did not now the Prelates come
in and claim their Right? Certainly they would have done it, but that they knew
the Law and Practice was against them; what else is material in this Chapter,
has been taken notice of by the Author of the Letter, and others; so that it
needs no further Examination: and I may safely conclude, that where the
Prelates are not named, they are not understood. Now that in this case, the
Bishops could not be meant by the word Peers, is very plain from the Record it
self: For the forenamed John Mautrevers being not in hold, the said Peers do
pray our Lord the King, that search should be made for him throughout the
Realm; and a Reward promised. Now if the Bishops were meant by the word Peers
alone, for Earls and Barons are named, witness the Peers, Earls and Barons;
then by Parity of Reason the said Peers should be meant only of the Bishops, as
if they alone had made the desire for the Apprehension of the said Matrevers,
and the Earls and Barons had been unconcerned, which is absurd: See 4 E. 3.
Mem. 3. N. 3. Seld. Baron. p. 13. 4 Edw. 3.


Our Author concludes his third Chapter with the Case of Henry Hotspur, the
eldest Son of the Earl of Northumberland, who for having levied War with others
against the King, was declared a Traitor (being before slain in Battle) by the
King and Lords in full Parliament: this was upon Friday the 18th of February;
upon the same Friday, upon that Case, and the Petition of the Earl Father to
Henry, and Examination of his Cause by the Lords as Peers of Parliament, to
whom such Judgment belonged (for the King would then have referred the whole
matter to the Judges) he was declared innocent of Treason, or Felony, but only
finable for Trespass at the King's Pleasure: for which the said Earl gave
Thanks to the King and Lords, for their rightful Judgment, and also at the same
time purged upon his Oath the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Duke of York, and
other Lords, who were suspected to be of the Confederacy with the said Henry
Hotspur, alias Percy. This was the work of Friday the 18th of February; on
Saturday the 19th, the Commons give Thanks to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
for the rightful Judgment they had given as Peers of Parliament, 5 H. 4 from N.
12, to N. 17. This is the whole Case as to Father and Son. Now 5 H. 4. N. 12.
to 17.
whether the Bishops were present at all these Proceedings, and how far, is the
Question. The Grand Questionist contends they were present at the Proceedings
both against the Father and the Son; at that against the Son from the word,
full Parliament, which he seems to infer, must include the Bishops; and at
that against the Father, from the Thanks made by the House of Commons the next
day after the acquittal of the Earl.

First, as to the Son: It appears plainly by the Historians of those times that
he was slain in the fourth Year of the King, in the lifetime of the Father,
who soon after broke out into Rebellion, so that at the time of Henry's Death
he was only a Commoner, and consequently not to receive any Judgment in the
Lord's House alone, nor could he be made a Traitor otherwise than by Act of
Parliament; so that the word full Parliament, must either refer to some
particular Act of Parliament made in his Case, in which the Bishops might be
present, and the Commons concur, or else the Proceedings were wholly irregular
and contrary to their own Agreement, in 4 E. 3. Now from an illegal Act, no
Right can be concluded.

As to the Earl himself, we find him suddenly after in open Rebellion,
defeated, and escaped into Scotland with Lord Bardolf, and convicted of Treason
by the Temporal Lords, for not appearing upon Summons, and all this within two
Years after. Now can it be reasonable to think that the Bishops were present at
the acquittal of this very Lord in 5 H. 4. who were not present in 7 H. 4.
which was but two Years after, nor were present at a like Case in 2 H. 4. N.
30. against the Earl of Holland, and others, which was not three Years before?
Neither can any weight be laid upon the Thanks of the House of Commons, which
was only matter of Complement, and performed at another time when the House was
assembled upon other matters, but seeing them there, might extend their Thanks
to them also, who though they could not contribute, did nothing to hinder the
Clemency of the Temporal Lords toward the Earl; besides, at the same time it
was accorded by the King, and Lords, upon the Desire of the Commons, that
certain ill Officers about the King should be discharged, in which the Bishops
might be Instrumental, and very well deserve Gr. Qu. p. 119.
the Thanks of the Commons, at which Desire of the Commons, they might assist,
and be absent at the rest.

The Precedent of John Lord Talbot will not avail him; he exhibited an
Accusation against the Earl of Ormond for certain Treasons by him committed;
this Accusation was in the Marshalsea before the Earl of Bedford, Constable of
England. The King, to put an end to this matter, does by Act of Parliament make
an Abolition, and Discharge of the said Accusation, and Discovery. The words
are, That the King by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons, made an Abolition of the said Detection. Whoever
denied the Bishops Consent in a Legislative way? and had it been otherwise, the
Commons could not have been, I think, regularly concerned. 2. H. 6. N. 9. 2 H.
6. N. 9.


The Precedent of the Duke of Suffolk in 28 H. 6. I thought to have passed
over, being a Case as irregular in the Proceedings, as unjust in those that put
to death that unfortunate Man. Much Art was used by the Court to have preserved
him from the Envy of the People. A Parliament assembled at Westminster, after
dismissed into London, then prorogued to Leicester; that dissolved, and another
called at Westminister, in which the Duke appeared, which exasperated the
Commons against him. But upon the whole Record it appears that no Issue was
joined; for after Articles exhibited by the Commons, and his denial of them,
March 14, at the least of the eight first, and giving some Answers to others on
the 17th, he was sent for again, and the Chancellor acquainted him, that he
had not put himself upon his Peerage, and now asks him how he would be tried;
who instead of pleading, put himself upon the King's Order, who caused him to
be banished for five Years. By all this it appears, here were no judicial
Proceedings, which could not be before Issue joined: so that although the
Bishops were present at the reading of the Articles; yet this can be no
Precedent to entitle them to be present in judicial Proceedings in Capital
Causes, for here were none at all in this Case, and till Issue joined, the
Bishops are not bound to withdraw. Neither ought it to seem strange that the
Viscount Beaumont should make Protestation in the name of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal against these Proceedings, which they finding to be extra-judicial
in very many Particulars, they did not know, I mean the Bishops, as well as
some of the Lords, what Construction might be made to their Prejudice: for
sometimes they met in one place, sometimes in another, and not always in the
Parliament House, to consult of this Business. Besides, many things pass sub
silentio, which being questioned, would not have been allowed: these
Observations being added to what has been said by the Author of the Letter,
seems to me a full Answer to this Precedent, in which the Protestatio is only
Protestatio Viz. The Fact was not by their Advice, which they desired to have
entered.
facti, not Iuris. I have thus put an end to the Examination of this third
Chapter, and fully considered all his Arguments, and Precedents, and come now
to a view of his fourth and last Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter our Author has employed Gr. Qu. p. 121.
all his Art to assert the Peerage of the Bishops, and that they make a third
Estate in Parliament, in what sense they are called Peers; as also that the
entire Clergy, met in Convocation, make a third Estate, I have largely showed
before, and shall not now repeat. I admit they are sometimes called Lords
Spiritual, tho not so before Rich. II. but Prelates or the like, Peers of the
Realm, Peers in Parliament. If by that Appellation you would make them Equals
to the Nobilitas Major, I think they never were, yet have they many Privtledges
in respect of their Seats and Episcopal Dignity in the Lords House; and, by
reason of their most honorable Profession, have all of them Precedence to
Barons. I admit also that the Clergy is really a third Estate; and that the
Bishops, in respect that they are the Head of the Clergy, may sometimes in
ordinary Discourse be called so, but are in truth never so exclusively to the
rest of the Clergy, they all making but one Body, or third Estate, fully
represented in Convocation, as I have sufficiently, I hope, made appear, page
19, 20, etc. of this Discourse. As also that they had the Appellation of Barons
and Peers, not that they really were so, which must have enobled their Blood,
but in respect of their Tenure in Capite sicut Baroniam, or, per Servitium
Baroniae, and for the most part so called by themseves only. Our Author's
Suggestion, p. 151. that they sit in Parliament in a double Capacity, Gr. Qu:
p. 151.
as it is new, so is it not solid. He says, when they sit in the House in a
judicial way, they sit only in the Capacity of Temporal Barons; and that this
appears by the Constitution of Clarendon, where the King requires their
Attendance as his Barons: But that in their Legislative Way, they have a
farther Capacity, as representing a third Estate in Parliament, I say this
Fancy is new; for I do not believe any before him looked upon them as
representing a third Estate in Parliament: and not representing it, I know they
have been said to sit in respect of their Possessions, which are Temporal in
their own nature, but not so when given Deo and Ecclesiae; but that they sat
in any other Quality than Spiritual Persons, I never heard, nor can conceive.
Methinks if they have a Capacity to sit in the Quality of Temporal Barons, they
should also have a Capacity to change their Spiritual Robes, and put on
Temporal. The Constitutions of Clarendon, he says, require their Attendance in
Judicature as his Barons; and from thence would infer they sit in the Quality
of Temporal Barons. But how does this follow? I hope they may sit as Spiritual
Barons. But when all is done, this Allegation of his is not sincere, for the
words are, Debent interesse judiciis curiae Regis sicut caeteri Barons; or,
cum caeteris Baronibus; that is to say, it is their Duty to be present in Trials
in the King's Court with the other Barons, or as the other Barons are there
present; which words are far from inferring that they sit there in the Quality
of Temporal Barons (no more than the Judges) rather that they sit not as Barons
at all, but only amongst them who are so. It is evident therefore that his
first Argument, drawn from the Constitutions of Clarendon, is not solid. His
next Gr. Qu. p. 151.
Suggestion, that they are a third Estate in Parliament (if by Parliament he
mean their Convention in Convocation) from the issuing out of Writs to the
Guardian of the Spiritualties in the Vacancy of the Episcopal See, I shall not
contend with him; only I think it from hence plain, that they have Right to sit
as Members of the Convocation properly, where, with the rest of the Brethren,
they make up a third Estate, in which Writs there is generally a Clause of
Praemunientes added, to show that other Clerks are to be chosen to sit in
Convocation, for which reason the Guardians in their Vacancy have their Writs
directed to them, lest the Convocation should not be full. Now how this can
prove them a third Estate in the Lords House, I should be glad this Author
would instruct me? so that his Conceit of their sitting there in a double
Capacity, is of no weight, and all his Precedents cited to that purpose, might
have been spared, which do not in the least measure prove that the Bishops sit
in the Lords House as a third Estate; because Clerks shall be chosen to sit in
Convocation, by Writs directed to the Guardians of the Spiritualties, where
there are no Bishops, or when they are beyond Sea, rather evinces the necessity
of a Convocation to meet in Consultation as to Ecclesiastical Matters, which
are only proper for their Function.

Lastly, Let it be observed that his Quotations out of the Author of the
Letter, page 93. as to Doctor Standish his Case, are mistaken; the Author's
words are, the Judges said -- The Lords Spiritual have no Place in 7 H. 8. p.
184.
Parliament by reason of their Spiritualties (in which respect, in truth their
place is in Convocation) but by reason of their Temporal Possessions; that is,
holding their Tempoporal Possessions in nature of Baronies. The Scope of that
Book is to show that a Parliament might be held without them, who indeed were
no Barons, but had liberty to sit among them by an Indulgence in respect of
their Possessions. And at last, I am persuaded our Author will hardly be bound
by that Opinion; for if that be true, how can they sit there as a third Estate,
if their Right to sit there be only as Temporal Barons? This Authority is only
from Kelway, 7 Hen. 8. 184. See the Case at large in Burnet.

Our Grand Questionist goes on, and endeavors Grand Quest. p. 260.
to prove, and clear that intricate matter (as it has been made) touching the
Interest the Clergy then had in Parliaments, as well as Convocations: but
chiefly to prove, that all the Interest they had in Parliaments, was not merely
upon the account of their Temporal Baronies, which the Bishops and many of the
Abbots then had; this he says, is the great, but common mistake of the Author
of the Letter.

It Is first to be observed, that he has not proved, that to hold Land by
Baron-Service, and to be a Baron, is all one, which by me is left doubtful, as
appears by what is said in the first Chapter of this Treatise. Neither see I
any reason why tenere per Baroniam, should make a Baron more than Tenere per
Militare Servitium, should make a Knight.

Secondly, That what he now says, is only a Pursuit of his precedent Conceit,
that the Bishops sit in the Lord's House in a double Capacity, because, as he
says, there is a Distinction made, even in Parliament, between the several
Estates of the Clergy and Laity. How far this is argumentative, and how far his
Precedents warrant what he affirms, I shall examine by and by; only in the mean
time, would desire him to tell me, whether they could come to Parliament at all
without first receiving the King's Writ? and in the next place, Whether the
King's Writ imply any other Capacity, than as Spiritual Persons, holding their
Possessions per Servitium Baroniae, and voting among the Lords, in respect of
their Lands, which are in their own nature, Temporal Estates in the Hands of
Spiritual Persons, but by their Dedication to God, made spiritual also; which
is as much as can be drawn from what Mr. Seldom says in the place quoted by
our Author, page 151. That they met as Counselors in the Saxon's time in their
Wittena Gemot, I will not deny, but whether by virtue of any Writ, Summons, or
rather by general Allowance as Counselors, or what other way, he cannot prove:
Records there are none, or very few; and Historians give but a dark account of
those Times, and things then one: but which way soever they then sat,
certainly by William I. their right of sitting was much altered, the Frame of
things being in some measure altered also, in so much that they must now meet
under such Qualifications, and no other, as were by him allowed them, which by
all Men is agreed to be as Tenants to the King in Capite, for their
Possessions, which they held in the Nature, and by the Service of Baronies.
This being so, I see not what use he can make of the Distinction made in
Parliament between the several Estates of the Clergy and Laity. The Question is
not, Whether the Clergy and Laity are distinct Estates? which no Man ever
denied: but, whether the Bishops, distinct from the other Clergy in
Convocation, be an entire third Estate in the Lord's House: that they are so,
no Man has yet proved. His Authority out of Eadmerus, speaking of what was
done in Parliament in 3 Hen. 1. says, it was done Utriusque ordinis concordi
Cura, and sollicitudine, by the unanimous care and trouble of both Orders,
Ranks, or Degrees: Why must [Ordo] signify an Estate, rather than a Degree or
Rank? Now I hope Men of different Degrees may sit together without being
different Estates. Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, Viscounts, Barons, now sit
together, yet may make but one Estate. But let [Ordo] signify that Estate as he
would have it, and as he thinks it does; why must it signify an entire Estate?
or what does it more import, than that it was done by the Joint-Consent of the
Lords and Commons? who might then sit together, and were not at any time left
out, as is sufficiently proved by Mr. Petyt. Matthew. Paris his Clerus and
Populus, and the other Cases by him there mentioned, comprehended the whole
Body of the Clergy and Laity met together in Parliament, including as well the
Inferior Clergy as the Superior, sitting in their due Ranks. All the rest of
his Precedents made use of by him, seem rather to enforce that the King is not
a third Estate, than that the Bishops are more than a part of a third Estate
among the Lords. But this Point, whether the King be one Estate or not in
Parliament; and how an Head can be considered as no part of the Body, I leave
to others to dispute, but must rest in this undeniable Conclusion, that there
can be no legal coordinate Power however the case stands: for as in the Body
natural, nothing can be done without the concurrence of the Head: So in the
Body Politic, nothing can justly be done without the concurrence of the King
in matters of public concern in Parliament, except their Proceedings deviate
Vid. Dier fol. 60. Cromp. Jurisd. Courts, p. 2.
from the ordinary Rules of the known Laws of England.

I have put off the Examination of the first part of his fourth Chapter, that I
might conclude this Discourse with an Answer to the Matters he there alleges.

He finds himself pressed with that strong Argument, drawn as well from Magna
Charta, as from diverse Precedents, that the Bishops were not Peers to
Noblemen, but were themselves tried by a common Jury in Matters Capital; and
therefore were not of Condition to try Noblemen, who had in themselves
Inheritable Noble Blood.

To this Argument he opposes two things. First, That the matter of Fact Grand
Quest. p. 124.
cannot be made out that a Bishop has always been tried by Commoners.
Secondly, That if it could, it does not overthrow their Peerage in Parliament.

This second Assertion I will easily grant, if by Peerage in Parliament, be no
more meant than a Community of Appellation by reason of their sitting amongst
the Lords, and their Precedence in place, with some other Privileges as to
Amerciaments, days of Grace, and the like. But certainly if it can be cleared,
that they have of right been tried by common Juries, and that as well before,
as after the time of Henry the 8th: Nay, that they have not looked upon the
Lords in Parliament as their Peers, and proper Judges: I may then rationally
conclude that they are not Peers in Parliament to that end to try, or be tried
by Noblemen there.

It is plain by all our Law Books, that out of Parliament no such Privilege
belongs to them. For first, out of Parliament, over and above the express
Authority of Stanford, a Judge in Queen Mary's time, Sir Edward Coke, a great
Judge in our time, Mr. Seldom a great Lawyer, and Antiquary; Stanf lib. 1. cap.
3. Cook. 3d Instit. ^ol. 30. Seld. Priv. of Bar. p. 45. and others.
Mr. Cambden, an Herald, great Scholar, and Historian; all agree that Bishops
shall not be tried by Noblemen, and that manner of Trial has never been put
in use as to them. Now if this be confessed to be the Law out of Parliament,
let the Author give me one Example, that a Man of right ought for a like
Offense to be tried by one sort of Jury out of Parliament, and another in it.
The Case of Appeals, under which Covert he endeavors to hide himself, I shall
discuss anon. The Privilege they claimed as Clerks, was common to all other
Clerks as well as to them, but there are many Cases of Clerks tried in Secular
Courts, and the Trial allowed to be good, to which purpose, see Cook's second
Instit. 638; but never any Exception of theirs allowed of, as if those Trials
were illegal. As to the Case of Bishops, and their Trials by common Juries, Mr.
Seldom is very clear, and gives many Examples both before, and after Hen. 8th's
time, which are not so to be slighted, as this Author seems to do. That of John
de Isle, the Bishop of Ely's Gr. Q. p. 146.
Brother, is full to the point; where the Bishop was arraigned, and upon
Question how he would be tried, stood upon his Privilege as Clerk, that he was
a Member of the Pope's, and therefore ought to be brought to his Answer before
his Ordinary the Archbishop of Canterbury, who was there ready to demand him,
affirming that he ought not to answer before a Lay-Judg; this Plea was
rejected, and a day given to the Bishop, and a Jury impannelled, sworn, and
tried, (which shows he had his Challenge). The Jury bring in their Verdict, and
find that the Bishop was not guilty of the Felony laid to the Charge of John
de Isle his Brother, and his Companions; but they find that after the Felony
committed, the said Bishop knowing that these Persons had committed Felony, did
receive and harbor them: upon which, a Writ was directed to enquire what Goods
and Chattels he had, and his Person, upon request of the Archbishop, delivered
him to be kept as it behoved him to do. Now let any Man judge whether here were
not in every respect a legal proceeding. The matter of Fact tried by the
Verdict of twelve Men: Inquisition made concerning his Goods, Lands, and
Chattels, himself (the Crime being only receiving of Felons) delivered to the
Archbishop, either to make his Purgation, or to be kept in due manner. Was
here now any Willingness in the Court to break the Law? as our Author says,
page 146. or not rather a perfect Observation of it. Gr. Qu p. 146.
Is not this perfectly agreeable to what Dr. Ridley, in his view of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Laws, says page 86. If a Clerk be first arrested by a
Spiritual Judge, and Ridley, p. 86.
found guilty, he shall be degraded, and delivered over to the Temporal Power.
But if he be first arrested by (...) Secular Magistrate, and tried, and found
guilty, he shall be delivered to the Bishop to be deprived, and then delivered
back to Punishment.

The Precedent of Thomas Merks Bishop of Carlisle, our Author allows to be
against him: but asks whether one Precedent before Gr. Qu. p. 147.
the time of Hen. 8th, be sufficient to expound Magna Charta: for in this Case,
the Immunities of the Church were considered, and a Declaration by them, that
their Privileges extended not to Treason. But for a full Answer, I say first,
that there are more Precedents than one: but if there were not, would not one,
with the constant Opinion of all Lawyers, and Judges, be enough to prevail with
a dis-interested Man, to believe that the Peers in Magna Charta, and the Lex
Terrae, do not intend Bishops to be such Peers as are to receive their Trial by
Noblemen? But what Exception can be taken to those Cases after, and in the
time of Hen. 8th? Did he not continue the Roman Religion all his time? was it
more against his Prerogative, than of any of his Predecessors? It Is clear
enough that the Proceedings before, as well as after, were according to Law,
notwithstanding the Clamor of the Clergy, as is plain by Mr. Seldom.

I shall now consider the Case of Adam de Orlton, alias Tarlton, Bishop of
Hereford.

All Historians of those times, as well as other later ones, set sorth the
violent Proceedings of the Clergy in that matter, who Walling. p. 109. Baker p.
1^4 Dan. p. 214 An 1323. Seld. pri. Bar. p. 147.
took him twice out of the Hands of Justice. But it appears by Mr. Seldom, by
the Record Hill. 17. E. 2. Rot. 87. Dors coram Rege, that he was arraigned in
the King's Bench, and upon question how he would be tried, refuses to answer
there: Day is given, and the Indictment brought into the Parliament, where he
makes the same Plea, that he is by the Will of God, and the Pope, Bishop of
Hereford; and that he ought not to answer before that Court. Here you see
whatever the Carriage of the Clergy was, and whatever Judgment was given
against him: His Exceptions were as much against any Trial in Parliament by the
Lay-Lords, as elsewhere. And that consequently the Injury they conceived done
to them, was, that they should be tried in any Secular Court whatsoever. This
you may see in Du Fresnes Glossary Verbo (Par.) The Trial he required was, per
Episcopos Pares suos, By the Bishops his Peers. This appears also by the
Complaint of the Bishop of Ely, that he was brought to be tried coram Laico
Iudice, before a Secular Judge. By this our Author's Mistake may appear, who
says, page 144. That they looked upon Gr. Qu. p. 144.
themselves out of Parliament as having no Peers in Judgment but Bishops; when
it is evident by the Case of these Bishops, that they made the same Exception
as to their Trials before the Lords in Parliament, that they did before the
Secular Judges out of it, and pretended they ought not to be tried before any
Lay-Judges whatsoever. Neither did they look upon themselves under the same
Condition that Laymen were; but being a distinct Body among themselves,
thought it reasonable to be judged by themselves only, and in their own Courts:
an Innovation the Law never allowed, or gave any Countenance unto. I confess, I
cannot but wonder that any one Person, of how great Parts soever, should go
about to contradict the Opinion of very many learned Judges, who have all
asserted the contrary, to wit, that Bishops ought to be tried by Commoners; and
no one Lawyer of any note, that I know of, has hitherto maintained the
contrary. Methinks those of the Long-Robe should be tender in opposing the
Judgments of Stanford, Cook, Doddridg, and Seldom, except their Opinions were
backed by the Authority of Judges equal in Ability and Learning to those before
named.

Having thus cleared the Precedents urged by Mr. Seldom, and others, from the
Exceptions of this Author; let us now see what is alleged by him to prove that
it was not always so, but that sometimes they were tried by the Noblemen as
their Peers in Parliament. And to that purpose he propounds the Case of
Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, out of Archbishop Parker's Antiq.
Ecclesiae Britan. who tells you that Stratford was at the King's Suit accused
of Capital Crimes in the Exchequer, that he Gr. Qu. p. 126.
put himself upon his Trial in Parliament; that a Parliament was called, and
he, after some Opposition, admitted into the House; and there, as our Author
says, put himself upon the Trial of his Peers: this it seems is the Relation
of Matthew. Parker. (By the way, whom he meant by his Peers, does not yet appear)
whether the Clergy only, or the Lay-Lords.

But let us have recourse to the Record, as it is abridged by Sir Robert
Cotton, 15 E. 3. Numb. 8. 15. E. 3. N. 8


The same day the King came into St. Edward's Chamber, commonly called the
Chamber de Pinct, (the painted Chamber) before whom, all the Lords and Commons,
the Archbishop of Canterbury humbled himself, and required his Favor, which
he granted. Afterward the Archbishop desired that where he was defamed
through the Realm, he might be arraigned in open Parliament before his Peers:
probably by his Peers, he understood the Bishops, as others had done, and not
the Lay-Lords: Besides, this seems to be a Desire of his at a Conference before
the King and Lords; for it was in the painted Chamber, whereas the Commons
usually sat in the great Refectory, now called Westminster Hall. Let us
observe the King's Answer, which was, that he would attend the common Affairs,
and after hear others; where we see the King did not grant his Desire, but gave
only a Dilatory Answer. Lastly, it does not appear that he was ever arraigned
in Parliament; for the Record says, Numb. 49. And it is to be remembered, that
all things touching the Arraignment of the Archbishop of Canterbury should
remain with Sir William de Kedelsby, Keeper of the Privy Seal. By which it is
evident, that these things were not then put into the Hands of Sir William de
Kedelsby, but to remain there, where probably they were before, and were only
some Papers relating to what was before done in the Chequer; for I find no
Arraignment recorded about that time. Two Yearsafter, viz. 17 Edw. 3. Numb. 22.
All the Proceedings against the Archbishop were cancelled by order from the
King; so that nothing appears to have been done against him to any purpose,
either in Parliament, or elsewhere.

It Is true, there was a continuance of the Parliament in 15o, from day to day,
for a Week, about the Trial of Noblemen, that they should not be put to
answer, but in open Parliament by their Peers, to which purpose, there are
named four Bishops, four Earls, and four Barons as a Committee to draw up the
Plot.

These Persons being in their Device, assigned, as hereafter does ensue. Under
the Name of which Peers, they bring in the Chancellor, and Treasurer, and such
like Officers, and that all Estates should enjoy their Liberties, 15 E. 3. N.
6, 7, 8. Here was indeed a Matter concerning Trials of Noblemen had under
Consideration, but never reduced to any Law, as the Practice of subsequent
Times, and the late Bill of the Lords about Trials, do enough manifest.

But does it not appear by this Record, that the Bishops, were not reckoned
Nobles of the Land, when he finds the Chancellor, and Treasurer, and such like
Officers, attempted to be brought in at that time, and so not to have had any
Right before? But says our Author, it after follows, that they may not lose
their Temporalities, Lands, Goods, and Chattels. Now none were capable to lose
their Temporalities but Bishops, therefore this Law must have respect to them,
as well as other Nobles of the Land.

The Answer to this is very easy, that the Clergy, who had then all Power, did
endeavor to bring in their Fellows the other great Officers, who were almost
all Churchmen. Simon Langham Archbishop of Canterbury, was Chancellor,
William Molso Dean of St. Martins le Grand, Receiver, and Keeper of the Kings
Treasure and Jewels, with many others, as you may find Baker, p. 141. These had
Temporalities to lose, and such Officers, the Church always hoped to have had
of their own Tribe; but, as I said before, of this Attempt came no other Effect
than to show their aspiring Thoughts. And whatever Opinion the Author of the
Jurisdiction of Gr. Qu. p. 128.
the House of Peers, is of, as to the Roll of 4 Edw. 3. I believe the Law at
this day will not be so taken, that a Chancellor being no Peer, shall be so
tried by reason of his Office. I am sure, my Lord Keeper Bridgman being no
Peer, never voted in the House of Lords, and the present Lord Chancellor, when
he gives his Vote, goes to his place as a Baron. See Hakewell, p. 114. Ancient
Customs, how these great Officers are placed in Parliament when they are Peers,
and when not; and certainly if their placing be different, their Trials ought
to be so too. Neither can it seem reasonable to any considerate Man, that a
Person, though such an Officer, should not be capacited to give his Vote as a
Baron, and yet by virtue of his Office, should be tried by Noblemen. Therefore
I must take leave to deny what he affirms, that they are Peers by virtue of
their Office, or that they have Right to be present in Parliament in all Cases
of Judicature, so as to concur in Sentence with the Nobles of the Land, as our
Author affirms, page 132. The King may make Gr. Qu: p. 132.
whom he pleases Chancellor, and the Statute assigns his Place, but he cannot
vote there without the King's Letters Patents to that purpose, as I conceive:
See Old Modus, Hakewell, p. 14.

I have in the first Chapter of this Treatise spoken largely to that Point, and
showed in what sense a Bishop may be called, Peer of the Realm. And page 90,
and 91. have handled the matter of Proxies, therefore may pass over the Case of
Archbishop Arundel, which our Author proposes, page 128.

To the Case of William de la Pool, I have spoken before, only shall here
observe, that the submitting his Cause to the King, was no waver of his
Peerage, for the matter never came to any formal Issue; consider the Case of
Nicholas Segrave in 31 Edw. 1. 31 Edw: 1:
Ridley, p. 266. who being accused of many Crimes; Segrave being summoned
thereunto, appears in full Parliament, confesses the Fact, and submits to the
King. This was no Waver of any Legal Trial by his Peers, nor any disrespect to
the Lords, who might otherwise have ordered the summoning a Jury to try the
Fact, but by the King's Pardon that labor was saved.

The like may be taken notice of in that famous Case between the Earl of
Hereford and Essex, against the Earl of Glovester and Hertford, in 20 Edw. 1.
Riley p. 74. Where, upon a very long pleading, the Case in effect proves to be
but this: The Earl of Hereford complains to the King, of great Robberies,
Depredations, and Murders committed by the Earl of Gloucester, in his Lands in
Brecknock, after the King's Inhibition. The King, for Remedy of this, appoints
the Bishop of Ely, William of Valence his Uncle, John Mettingham, and Robert
Hertford, to hear the Complaints of the said Earl, and also the Answer of the
said Earl of Gloucester, and his Servants, to the Complaint of the Earl of
Hereford, and to summon a Jury for the Trial of the same, and also commanded
Robert Tiptoft, Iusticiario suo de Westwell, to be there present, and to summon
the said Delinquents to be before the said Commissioners, and that Enquiry
should be made per Sacramentum tam Magnatnm, quam aliorum proborum Hominum, and
Legalium de partibus Walliae, and comitat Glocest. They, that is, the Magnates
(which it seems were Noblemen) excepted against the taking an Oath, and said
'twas unheard of, and that they would do nothing sine consideratione Parium
suorum. The Jury give in their Verdict against Gloucester, the Parties all
submit to the N. B. the Submission of the matter to the K. without any
Exception by the Lords, makes the King sole Judge, and so the Case can no longer
go on in any Parliamentary Way.
King, who by the Advice of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and the rest
of those who were of his Counsel, declare that the Earl of Gloucester had
forfeited his Liberties, etc. The words are, Videtur tam ipsi Dom. Regi quam
caeteris Praelatis, Magnatibus, and reliquis de Consilio ejus quoad Comitem
Glocestriae quod Libertas sua praedicta, viz. totum Regale in Terris suis
praedictis de Mergannon cum pertinentiis pro se, and haeredibus suis foris
facta est ratione delicti praedicti, etc.

In this Record there are many things Observable; First, The Bishop of Ely here
mentioned, was not a Judge in this Case between the two Earls, but joined in
Commission with others, who were empowered to summon a Jury to enquire of the
matter of Fact, not to condemn either Party, but was only in the nature of an
Inquest, or Grand Jury, in order to a Trial. 2. That Noblemen [Magnates] such
as refused to take an Oath, were returned of the Jury. 3. That the Verdict was
given in to the Commissioners, notwithstanding some of the Jury were not sworn.
4. That the Jury was summoned out of several Counties, viz. Glocestershire and
Wales. Lastly, and that for which I have chiefly produced it, that this
Submission of both Parties to the King was no waver of their Peerage. Neither
does it appear, that this Award made by the King with the Consent of those
Prelates, Earls, etc. was made in Parliament, tho it be inter Placita
Parliamentaria, but only by such private Counselors as the King thought fit
to make use of in that Affair. That it was no Parliamentary Judgment; is
evident from these two Reasons: First, The putting themselves to the Reference
of the King, was no putting themselves upon any Trial by their Peers, because
that should have been done only by the Earl of Gloucester, against whom the Bill
was found; whereas here the Reference is made by both, The reason I conceive
why the Reference to the King, was made by them both, was because no
Proceedings could be in Parliament, in regard the V^* dict was n^ returned upon
Oath, and so in it self null:
and to the Kingalone. Next we find the King here was present with the rest,
which was not usual; if the Lords had proceeded judicially wherever the matter
was heard, whether in Parliament, or elsewhere. Besides, it is observable that
the word Consilium, is twice written with an [s]; whereas, if it had been a
Parliament, the word would have been written with a [c], as was generally
observed by the Writers of those Times. In Conclusion, this Record makes
nothing either to the Bishops Power of judging in Criminal Cases, or that
Submission of a matter to the King should be a waver of Peerage, but was a
making the King an Arbitrator, for they knew the Verdict was void, being not
upon Oath.

I have before denied that such Persons as sat in the Lord's House by virtue
of their Office, had any Right to be tried by Noblemen, except they had an
inheritable Right of their own, as well as their Office. I am not therefore
concerned to examine as to Predial Feudal, or Personal Right, what is urged by
our Author, or Disc. of Peerage, p. 4. Gr. Qu. p. 132.
any other, because I have throughout this Discourse, maintained that no Man
can have any Privilege, or Right of Trial, but according to the nature of his
Peerage, which seems to me, not only reasonable, but within the plain meaning
of Magna Charta: that the Triers and Party tried, ought to be of the same
Condition, and capable to undergo the same Penalties in like Case. That what
the Discourser has said as to the Regradation of their Peerage when their
Office shall be taken away, means no more, than that Officers shall no longer
sit among the Peers, not that they had any Right of Peerage during the
continuance thereof, tho they were placed among them by a particular Law, or
Usage. Neither is our Author's Reason of any force, that because Persons
enobled in Blood in a Foreign Country, shall not try Gr. Qu. p. 134.
a Peer of England; therefore the Parity is not of Blood, but of Privilege in
Parliament: For he cannot but know that all Laws are originally made for the
benefit of those who are born subject to them, or adopted into them by
Naturalization, and such shall have the full benefit of all things appliable to
their English Condition, as if they were natural born-Subjects. Others that are
Strangers, tho of equal, or greater Quality, shall not enjoy the Rights
invested in the Natives by their Birth, but only the Protection, and Privilege
of the Laws of that Country where they are, during their abode there.

Another Argument is drawn by our Author from the Proceedings in Cases of
Appeal against a Nobleman at the Suit of the Party: He argues thus. If in
Appeal of Murder, or the like, at the suit of the Party, a Nobleman shall be
tried by a Jury of good Freeholders, then their Exemption from being always so
tried, proceeds from their sitting in Parliament, and not from Nobility of
Blood, and therefore all those who have Right to sit in that House, have Right
to the same Privilege: But the Bishops have Right to sit in the same House, and
are called Barons, therefore they ought to enjoy the same Privilege other
Barons have.

This Argument, how specious soever it may appear, is unconclusive in many
respects. First, It does not follow, that those that have Privilege to sit in
the same House, have the same Privileges to all Intents, and Purposes. My
Lords the Judges, and all Justices of the Peace, sit upon the same Bench, and
by the same Commission, yet are not equal in all Circumstances. Nay; my Lords
the Bishops themselves, though they are of the same Order and Quality, yet are
not equal in Privileges. I have before showed that there were Barons Minores,
who were not properly Barons, but so called, and might be left out at the
King's Pleasure: But such as are enobled in Blood may demand their Writs, which
the Barons Minores could not. And if now the Bishops have that Right (which is
not certain) it is because they are to summon the Clergy, without which the
Parliament would not be complete as to the Convocation. And were it not for
that Reason, the Bishops might be now wholly left out, for they being only
Barons by Tenure, cannot be in any other Rank than were the Barons Minores,
who were left out at the King's Pleasure. I have before asserted, they hold
their Possessions, per Servitium Baroniae, as a Burden, not Honor to them;
and their sitting among the Lords was only indulged to the Dignity of their
Function as Bishops, they being indeed no more than Commoners. Neither
secondly, does it any way follow, that because Peers in some Cases shall be
tried by a Common Jury, therefore those who are properly Commoners, and only
privileged to sit among the Lords, should participate of the same Honor with
them.

To examine farther into the Reason, why in all Criminal Cases at the Suit of
the King, the Trial shall be by Peers, not so in an Appeal for the same Crime,
Sir Edw. Coke will tell you, One reason is because the Trial, if it ought to be
so, must be before a Lord Steward, and no Appeal can be brought before a Lord
Steward, who is but only Temporary, but ought to be brought before the Judges
in the King's ordinary Courts of Justice. We are likewise further to consider,
that Inequality of Persons, is not of the Law of Nature, but of Human
Constitution; and that the Statute of Magna Charta, is but a Confirmation of
our ancient Rights, in which all Subjects were Pares. But since it is apparent,
that ever since Magna Charta, and perhaps long before, the Trials at the Suit
of the Party have been as they now are: we must look upon them as a Branch of
the common Law of England, never taken away from the Commoners; but that the
King, and Noblemen, as to what concerned the Crown, were contented to
introduce that manner of Trial as to the Nobles, and long use and Custom has
now made it to be received as the Law of England; yet the poor Commoner never
received that way of Trial as to his own Right, who looked upon the Verdict of
twelve substantial Men of his Neighborhood, as much better Security for them
and their Heirs, than a Trial upon Honor: When upon their Appeal it would
always have been in the Power of the King to name again the same Lords for
Triers, which they had before, and by that means defeat them of the benefit of
their Appeal, to which the Law gives so great respect, that upon an Appeal
brought, all Proceedings at the King's Suit should (as has been taken for Law)
stay till the Appeal were determined, because a particular wrong to a private
Person in the Murder of an Husband, or very near Relation, is of greater
Consideration to the Party, than the general loss of a Subject is to the King.

I shall not pursue this Author in his Digression touching the ground, and
reason Gr. Qu. p. 135.
of the Trial by Peers, since our Question is not, what the Law may be in other
Countries; but what the Practice of our own is, and of what sort of People
those Peers are to be composed. That is to say, Whether the Jury for the Trial
of Bishops shall be composed of Noblemen, or of Commoners? In this he
confesses that the Lawyers, and those of them who have Gr Qu. p. 14^.
most searched into Antiquity, are of a different Opinion to what he maintains
as to this Particular. A shrewd Objection I take it this is! for every one
ought to be credited in his own Art, and it is ten to one the Generality of the
Lawyers are rather in the right, than Strangers to the Profession, or Lawyers
of a lower Rank, than those great Masters have been. But that he may say
something, he tells you Gr. Qu. p. 142.
that Mr. Seldom not only in that confused Rapsody goes under his name, but in
his more elaborate second Edition of his Titles of Honor, admits the Bishops
to be Peers, in which he has corrected, and left out the false or doubtful
Passages of his first Edition, and among the rest, that Passage; A Bishop shall
not be tried by Peers in Capital Crimes. What then? does this Omission
supersede those Precedents laid down by him in that Rapsody, as he calls it,
which was as much his as the other? The leaving out that Passage might be a
Neglect in the Printer: I am sure, it is no Retractation of what he had said
before. Neither need I tell this Author, how Books come sometimes to be
corrupted. Secondly, He says, some things Gr. Qu. p. 143.
have been affirmed about this matter with as great Assurance as this is, which
have not been the constant Practice; Coke, he says, is positive in his third
Instit. p. 30. Cook 3 Inst p. 30.
That a Bishop should not be tried by Peers, and in the same Page, that a
Nobleman cannot wave his Trial by his Peers, and put himself upon the Trial of
the Country. And does this Author think the Law to be otherwise? Yes, he says
in the Record of 4. Edw. 3. That Thomas Lord Berkley put himself upon his
Country.

I have a Transcript of the Record by me, which I received from my learned and
worthy Friend, Mr. Atwood of Greys-Inn; but because it is in Latin, and agrees
with the Abridgment by Sir Robert Cotton, and review ed by Mr. Prin, I shall
not transcribe except two or three Lines.

Thomas de Barkele Miles venit coram Domino Rege in pleno Parliamento suo, etc.
4 E 3. N. 16, 17.


Cotton 4 E. 3. Numb. 16, 17. In a Plea of the Crown holden before the King
this Parliament. Thomas of Berkley Knight, was arraigned for the Death of Edw.
II. for that the said King was committed to the keeping of the said Thomas, and
John Mautrevers at the Castle of Thomas at Berkley in Glocestershire, where he
was murdered.

Thomas pleads that he was sick at Beudl^y without the said Castle, at the
Death of the said King, and put himself upon the Trial of 12 Knights, (named in
the Record) by whom he was acquitted. Here Milites.
we have an Arraignment of Thomas de Berkele Knight in 4 Edw. 3. but none of
Thomas Lord Berkele as this Author supposes. In 5 Edw. 3. Numb. 15. I find the
5 E. 3. N. 15. Cotton.
same Person at the request of the whole Estate, discharged by the name of Sir
Thomas Berkley; so that it seems plain, he was then no Peer, and consequently
no waver of Peerage, in 14 Edw. 3. and in 4 Rich. 2. Cot. p. 187. I find him
summoned to Parliament, not before 14 Edw. 3.

When any Noble Man had the Addition of Miles, the name of his Barony, was
generally expressed; and the word Dominus annexed, John de Beauchamp Militi
Domino de Beauchamp 27 Hen. 6. Rob. de Hungerford Mil. Dom. de Moleyns, and
many others; Insomuch that I am confident, that in 4 E. 3. Thomas de Berkley
had never been summoned, and so not inter Barons Majores. And the Milites were
Tenants in Capite.

I have at last examined all the parts of this elaborate Treatise, in which the
Author has endeavored with all Art and Industry imaginable, to support a
declining Cause. I have not to my Knowledge, left any Argument unconsidered,
which has been thought material by this Writer to be urged in defense of that
Cause, the Maintenance whereof he had undertaken. I have been longer I confess,
in this Discourse than at first I thought to have been, but this must be
attributed to the Subtilty of my Adversary, who by learned Digressions, and
cunning Insinuations, has indeed clouded the Truth, and rendered it less
visible to the Eyes of common Readers.

Notwithstanding, what I have said, if this Drudgery of being present as Judges
in Criminal Cases, or in the Trials of Noblemen in Parliament, be the Right of
the Lords Spiritual in Parliament: If the Ambassadors of Christ, the
Messengers of Peace, and the Preachers of Mercy and Reconciliation to God in
Christ, have more mind to be Executioners of God's strange Work, than in what
he delights? If they delight rather to make Wounds, than to bind them up, let
them enjoy that Burden according to their Desire. But their Pretenses to it
hitherto, have been ineffectual, and of late, all Power of Judicature in Cases
of Blood, has been denied them in several Parliaments by both Houses. Neither
has this Author been yet so happy, as to have produced any one clear
Precedent, where they have been present at the Trial, and have given Votes for
the acquittal, or Condemnation of any Nobleman brought to Judgment in
Parliament in Cases of Blood: Or that any of their Order have been in such
Cases tried by Noblemen, or indeed have desired to be so tried.

Certainly this Nation, together with the most of other Christians in Europe,
lived under the Papal Communion till the times of Reformation; and therefore
the Bishops here cannot reasonably be supposed to have enjoyed Privileges
different, or greater than those enjoyed by their Fellows in other Places,
where they had the greatest, as well Power, as Honor. But I think I may with
Confidence affirm they were no where allowed to sit Inquisitors of Blood, and
not only to debate, but at their Pleasure to give Sentence in such Cases as
Secular Persons in Secular Courts. I very well remember that in the Parliament
begun here, 1640, it was at the beginning thereof hotly debated in the Lords
House, whether any Bishop might be so much as of a Committee in any
Parliamentary Examination in the Case of my Lord Strafford, because it was a
Case of Blood, in which, by Law they ought not to meddle; the Debate was put
off; and the Bishops were willing to absent themselves according to the Opinion
of one of their own Body, and agreeable to the Practice and Usage of the
Kingdom, being only allowed by the Lords to enter a Protestation, saving their
Rights in that, and other Cases. Now this very Question seems to me an
overruling ours: for if it were then a Question whether they might be of a
Committee in Cases of Blood, where the Judges were often joined with the Lords,
it can be no doubt, but that they ought not to be admitted to give their Votes
as Judges in the like Cases in their Persons.

REFLECTIONS UPON Antidotum Britannicum, AND Mr. Hunt's late Book and
Postscript, As far as concerns the Controversy between Doctor Brady and the
Authorof Jani Anglorum facies nova, and of Jus Anglorum ab Antiquo.

London, Printed Anno 1682.

CHAP. I.
The true and essential Difference between the General Council of the Kingdom,
and the Curia Regis, maintained against Dr. Brady, Mr. W. and Mr. Hunt; with a
short Account of some Reasons why Mr. Hunt might have spared his Censures upon
them, who apply themselves to the Study of Antiquities.

SInce Dr. Brady received a Reply, two of my Brethren of the Gown, Mr. W. and
Mr. Hunt, both of Greys-Inn, have appeared in print, in behalf of the King's
Tenants in Capite, and will needs have it that these ingrost the Right of
coming to Parliament, as one calls it, or the Magnum Concilium, as the other,
till 49 of Hen. 3.

One professes that he never read what Antid. Brittan. p. 56.
has been wrote upon this Subject either by Mr. Petyt or me.

The other slights it all, as a Dispute not worth the Cost and Pains spent
about it; Mr. Hunt, p. 156.
and grants many of Dr. Brady's Hypotheses, but denies his Consequences, and so
allows him to be a good Antiquary, but an ill Logician.

That there was a Curia Regis, or Common Council of the Tenants in Chief (such
especially as held of the King by Knights Service) distinct from the Great
Council of the Nation, or Parliament: In which Curia, Hunt, p. 133. and 166.
the King's Tenants granted to the King Auxilia, Aids; and did act many things
in relation to their Tenures: Both agree with me directly against Dr. Brady,
who will have it, that all the King's Tenants by Dr. Brady against Jani Angl.
etc. p. 26. c: 29.
Knights Service never met in any Council or Court, but thereby it became the
General Council of the Nation, or Parliament.

In which, since he is opposed by these two learned Authors, agreeing with me,
they have given so much Credit to my Notion, that they have prevented that
further trouble; which I might have given the inquisitive World upon that point.

If I can free my self from the force of these Gentlemen's Arguments, or
Objections upon those things wherein I differ from them, I think I need not
fear the empty Thunder of Men of other Professions; but may look upon my
Notions as sufficiently established.

Both Mr. W. and Mr. Hunt, are Men of much longer standing, and greater natural
and acquired Parts, then I can pretend to; yet if I have the good fortune to
fall into the Paths of ancient Truth, no modern Authorities ought to beat me
out of them. They both will have it, that the Tenants in Chief were the only
Members of the Curia Regis, which was held for Matters within the King's
ordinary Power, and of the Magnum Concilium, or Parliament, where the
extraordinary Power was exercised. Against them both, before I examine their
supposed grounds from Authority, this obvious Objection in reason may be urged.

If all the Tenants in Capite by Knights Service, were obliged to attend in the
Curia, either by virtue of their Tenure as Ant. Brit. p. 59.
one takes it, or of general Summons, as the Mr Hunt, p. 148.
other, and the consent of none but such Tenants were requisite for passing of
Laws in Parliament, what reason can be assigned, why Laws might not have been
made in the Curia, and so that have become a Parliament when ever the King
pleased to declare it so? Can a more particular Summons, and notice of Arduous
Affairs, which is Mr. Hunt's Notion, lay Mr. Hunt, p. 150.
a greater Obligation upon them to be present, who, however, were bound to
come? And if they were bound to come, can Absence be reasonably pleaded to free
any The King 's ordi^ry setl^d n^ established Court, was a different shing from
the Confluence of Ba^ons and Tenants in Capite at those three great Feasts,
which were set and appointed times for great and General Councils if there were
an Appearance sufficient. Brady against Jani Anglorum, etc. page 30.
from the Obligation of what was then agreed on? Indeed Dr. Brady, who will
have it that every full Confluence of the Tenants in Chief by Knights Service
to Counsel, was a General Council of the Nation; supposes that even before King
John's Charter, and while he thinks that they were to come to Parliament ex
More, without Summons, if but a few appeared, it was no General Council: which
is an absurd Supposal, unless there was before that a Law in being, that they
should not act without a certain number, as supposing that forty were to make a
full House, as now it is said to be with the Commons; for otherwise they who did
appear, did, according to the general Rule of making Laws, bind them who were
absent through their own default.

But if we consider how contrary it was to the Usage of those Times, to make
Laws, or insert Clauses, or Words, idle or unnecessary, we shall not easily
believe that they would, according to Mr. Hunt's Supposal, have made Provision
for the particular summoning of those for arduous Affairs, who were obliged to
attend at the Council without such Summons. Indeed I am aware that Dr. Brady
has charged me with putting such a sense upon King John's Charter, as would
imply a needless Provision.

The Doctor tells us that by King John's Charter the Cause of Summons was to be
expressed, and from thence he would infer that it was a Great Council there
intended; for, says he, such Provision were needless if there had been but one
Cause for which they were to be summoned, Dr Brady against Jani Angl. p. 30.
which he urges as the Consequence of my interpreting that Summons there
provided for, to have been only for raising such Aids in the Curia as could be
imposed upon the King's immediate Tenants; and none else. Now admit that this
had been to a Parliament, and had taken in all manner of Charges to be laid
upon the Subject, if the raising of Taxes were the only work of a Parliament,
the providing that they should have notice when a Tax had been required, would
have been as impertinent; and if the Parliament had any other Power, this
Provision had been as defective as he supposes 'twas, according to my rendering,
superfluous.

For that Summons mentioned in King John's Charter, is restrained, and limited
to the granting of Aids, but there is not one word, or syllable of making, or
enacting Laws, which is the main business of Parliaments, and therefore this
must be intended of some Inferior Counsel, and not of the General Council of
the Kingdom. But if the Charter be taken to be meant only of raising such Aids
as lay upon none but the King's Tenants, if those Aids branch themselves into
Escuage and Tallage, here were two Causes of Summons, as the one or the other
was required; or if only such Aid as Escuage was within the Provision, still
the Cause or the Occasion of raising the Escuage might be different; and
therefore the cause of Summons more than one; nay some might have been obliged
to attend upon one Cause of Summons expressed, which were not upon another; for
if the King had an Occasion of transporting an Army beyond Sea; in that case
only they that held by the Service of going into foreign Vid. 1. Instit. f.
69: b:
Parts, together with such as were tied to general Service, were obliged to
attend, and liable to pay Escuage, upon Escuage nest. q. penalty pu^ non se
sans de Service de Chivaler, Bruertons c. 6. Rep. f. 2. a.
their default, to be taxed by them who were present according to the
Obligation of their Tenure. If the Tenure were to go into Scotland or Wales,
they could not, by reason of their Tenure, be compelled to go elsewhere,
whereas the Attendance at the King's Court ex more, was what, I take it, lay
upon every Tenant in Chief, holding by Knights Service, Ratione Tenurae, and
was not superseded by King John's Charter, but still they that were not
present, were concluded, as to all Acts of the King's Court Baron, either in
Criminal, or Civil Causes; as much as in the Court Baron of an Inferior Lord,
the Suitors present may proceed to all Judgments within the Cognizance of their
respective Courts, where, through the common neglect of the Suitors, the
Steward for the most part gives Judgment by himself.

Mr. W. who was the first Author of a Lawyer that ran Counter to me, makes a
distinction between a Parliament and a Curia Regis, which I conceive to be
without any difference in Relation to the several Powers of the Curia, and the
Great Council of the Nation, except that 'twas less in that which is now called
the Parliament, than 'twas in the Curia; for he says that to the Curia the
Tenants were obliged to come Ratione Tenurae, but to the Ant. Brit. p. 59
other they could not come but ex Gratia Regis.

Upon which it is further observable:

1st, That he yields that the Commons, others beside the Tenants in Chief, had
as much right as the Tenants in Chief to come to the Parliament before the 49th
Hen. 3. for he grants that they too came sometimes Ibid. p. 57.
before that time ex Gratia.

2dly, Whereas he supposes that King John's Charter of Resignation was void,
not Ant. Brit. p. 59
being in Magno Concilio, though 'twas in Communi Concilio Faronum, he assigns
no reason in the World for it is being void; for admit that, to the Commune
Concilium Faronum, or Curia, the Tenants in Capite came Ratione Tenurae, and to
the General Council of the Kingdom ex Gratia, which he subjoyns as the Ground
for avoiding that ignominious Resignation, which he agrees with me, contrary to
Dr. Brady, to have been made in the Curia Regis, and not in the General Council
of the Kingdom; does it follow that because they had no Right to come to the
General Council, though they had to the Curia, that therefore a Resignation in
the Curia was not good? nay, does it not follow, that because they had no Right
to come to the General Council, therefore the King might exercise his absolute
Power in such a Counsel as he should think fit to call, and might oblige the
Nation in any Act of his done by such Advice or Consent?

Nay rather, if there were a Counsel where they might ex (...) be present,
which Mr. W. makes the same with Ratione Tenurae, does it not follow that there
would be less Obligation upon them from any Act done in the General Council of
the Kingdom, where they had no Right to be present, and so no consent of theirs
could be urged to enforce the Obligation, than from the Determinations of that
Counsel where they were necessary Members? But Mr. W. his Grounds for his
Belief that the Commons had no Right to come to the General Council of the
Kingdom before the 49th of Hen. 3. are two.

1st, That in the 45th of Hen. 3. only three were ordered to be Representatives
Anti Brit. p. 57.
for every County, the Year I take to have been mistaken by the Printer; for
the Settlement, and Reformation of the Government which he mentions, was in the
48th; and that he means that Settlement, and not one before in the 42d, is
evident, by his citing Si videatur Communitati Praelatorum and ^ronum, which is
in the Record of the 48th, and not in any of the 42d, that I have seen.

But it is evident by the Record that the three he mentions, were assigned for
the Rot. Pat. 48. H. 3. infra P. 30.
Electors of a standing Counsel to the King, which was to act out of Parliament
as well as in, but with no Authority in Legislation; besides, admit that they
were entrusted with all the Power of the Counties, I cannot find any force in
the Argument, that because a Representative was then agreed on, therefore they
had no Right to come before that time in their own Persons. But indeed in the
42d of that King, there was a Representive of the Commons, who were in those
times accounted only the Rot. Pat. 42. H 3. The Original Record is not now to
be found, but I have seen an Abridgment of it, done by Mr. Seldom.
Citizens and Burgesses; this was pur espargner les Costs des Communs; to spare
the Charges of the Commous, which I use not to show that all such came any
otherwise than two for a place; But that the settling a Representative is an
Argument, that before that time they came in greater Numbers. Mr. W. his second
Argument considered.


2dly. His second Argument is the Authority of Pollidore Virgil, which proves
wholly against him; for it says that the Populus rarely were consulted with
before Pol. Vir. lib. 11. fol. 188. 16 H. 1.
the time of Hen. I. Adeo ut ab Henrico primo id Institutum Iure Manasse di^i
possit.

Even he allows the Right of the Commons to be a constituent part of
Parliament, to have been an Institution, or a settled Right long before the
49th of Hen. 3. no less than one hundred forty nine Years. And in the Case of
Godsoll, and others against Sir Christopher Heydon, my Lord Cook affirmed that
he had seen a Record in the time of Hen. I. of the Commons Degrees, and Seats
in Parliament, his words are these, En Ancient temps tout le Parliament sea
insimul, 1 Rolls fol. 11.
and le Separation fuit Par le desire del Commons mes ^ent obstant ils font
forsque un mese, ieo aie veiw un Record 30 H. 1. de lour Degrees, and Seats.

That the Commons were Members of the General Councils of the Kingdom in the
time of Hen. I, I think is very plain, when we find even at Synods, Assemblies
for Ecclesiastical Affairs, Nobilitas Populusque Ead. lib. 3. f. 58.
minor, and Laici tam divices, quam Spelm. Co^c. vol. 2. f. 35.
mediocres. But that they then had any Order, and certain Seats there, I cannot
readily believe. And indeed we find that in the Reign of King Stephen, who
immediately succeed Hen. I. it is spoke of as customary for the Uulgus, or
Commons, which were Infinita Multituto Plebis, to Cron. Eliense. Vid. Jus Angl.
p. 211.
come as Members of the Great Council, and to intermix themselves with Men of
the greatest Quality, as it is usual in Crowds; Hist. Norm. gest. a Stepho Rege
f. 93:.
Uulgo etiam confuse and permixtum, ut solct se ingerente.

3dly. Mr. W. his third Argument is, that where a Record makes mention of
Archbishops, Antid. Brit. p. 59. Mr. W. his third Agument fully answered.
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Kingdom or
Land, etc. It does not from hence necessarily follow, that the Commons were
then present, for the word And may be taken Anti. Brit. p. 59.
exegetically, and expositive, and not introductive of any other Persons; and
the word Communitas, does many times extend to the Prelates, and Barons,
therefore it is said, Si videatur Communitati Praelatorum and Baronum. Here
lies the force of all the Cavils upon the Records, mentioning others besides
Tenants in Capite, and Mr. Hunt insists upon the same in effect, with the very
same Instance. I shall here chiefly This the Hinge of the Controversy as to the
Fact; Whether the Commons of England were introduced into Parliament, or had
any Share or Votes in making of Laws for the Government of the Kingdom, or had
any Communication in Affairs of State, otherwise than as represented by the
Tenants in Capite, before the 49th of Hen. 3. vid. Dr. Brady aagainst Mr.
Petyt, p. 1, 2.
apply my self to Mr. W. and I cannot but observe, that what I have here cited
out of his Book, either contains an Assertion without any manner of Proof
offered, or else the latter part is used for the Proof of the other; but surely
it is an odd kind of Proof that And may be used exegetically, because the word
Communitas may extend to several Particulars, and as well to Prelates, and
Barons as others, when particularly expressed along with it, which is no more
than that the other words are exegetical, or expositive of Communitas, not that
Com^as, or And joined with it, can be expositive of those other words.

Wherefore the Assertion that And may be used exegetically stands naked by it
self, without any colorable Cover or Support; and I would gladly see at least
some Color for the Belief, that the Conjunction And, was ever used as
expositive, or exegetical of any word or words foregoing; Indeed when it is
Husband and Wife, they may notionally be the same in Affections and Desires,
and become one Flesh, as Body and Soul make one Man: But I think no Man will
say that the Wife is exegetical of the Husband, and is no more than what was
mentioned before when the Husband was named, nor will any but such as believe
the Mortality of the Soul, and that it is nothing else but the Temperament of
the Body, or its animal Spirits, suppose the Soul and Body to be the same;
indeed if they were, the Body ought to stand by it self, without mention of the
Soul with a distinctive And.

Till some one Instance can be produced, in which Mr. W. can make it out to the
common reason of Mankind, that And ought to be used otherwise than as
introductive of something not expressly mentioned before, he must give me leave
to think that in the matter of our Dispute And is necessarily introductive of
some other Persons. But according to the Rule of making And exegetical, where
it is expressed in the Instance given in the Record 48 H. 3. Si videatur
Communitati Praelaturum and Baronum, Et must by plain Consequence be exegetical
of the Praelati; and so the Barons were only the Community of, or all, the
Praelates.

I take it to be obvious that And of it self can never be expositive: the
question then will be, what may or ought to be the Exposition of words, which
singly taken, are of more general, or more restrained Senses, and how far they
may or ought to be enlarged or restrained, according to their Position, or
according to the nature of the words which are used along with them.

And in my Opinion, it is contrary to the Laws of Interpretation, that a word
used in a general Sense, and as comprehending others, should explain those
others particularly set down, as that Communitas which here Mr. W. would have
taken in a general sense, as not confined to one Order, should explain what is
meant by Praelates, Peers, and Barons, before particularized: on the other
side, words of a particular explicit meaning, coming before or after, one of
more general import, shall explain and restrain the general Sense. Thus
Praelatorum and Baronum, either before or after Communitar, restrain that word
Communitas to the Community of the Prelates and Barons; and I dare say, no one
Record can be shown of the times, either before or after the 49th of Hen. 3.
which will warrant a contrary Exposition of such Words. And indeed there has no
Reason been pretended why Communitas or Populus, joined to some Orders of Men
expressed, should be the same with what went before, but what is a manifest
begging of the Question, and supposing that the Commons were not present in the
General Councils at the Times the Records mention, and therefore that the word
Communitas or Populus was superfluous, and referred to what was sufficiently
expressed before, was comprehensive of the foregoing Particulars, as Mr. Hunt
will have it: this illogical Petitio Mr. Hunt, p. 152.
principij is a Leaden Vein which runs through all Doctor Brady's Writings.

But let us a little observe the pennings of Records, which may give Light to
this matter; you shall there find words of a restrained Sense, following one of
more general, to be exegetical or explanatory of the general, as the Peers,
Earls, and Barons; Rot. Parl. 4. E. 3. N. 3. les Piers Counts and Barons.
there Earls and Barons denote what Peers are meant, because there might have
been Bannerets, an inferior Order of Peers.

Then you shall find words of a limited Sense going before to be restrictive of
a word following, which otherwise would have had a more general Sense, as Earls
and Barons [the Peers] there the Earls Counts and Barons les Piers, 4 E. 2.
Rot. Parl.
and Barons are the only Peers: But where it is Earls, Barons and Peers, there
neither the first nor the last words can be expositive, because And severs
them, and consequently makes them to be of different Senses; wherefore And is
necessarily introductive of other Persons; and the word Peers, which without
And might have been a Genus to the several Species of Earls and Barons, must
needs be an Inferior Species under a Genus not there mentioned. But still
Peers could not have explained the Earls and Barons, but Earls and Barons would
be expositive of Peers, which is more comprehensive in its Signification.

And thus where it is Communitas Praelatorum and Baronum, Communitas is the
Genus to these two Species, and the more particular words restrain the
Communitas to them; wherefore it is the whole Body of the Prelates and Barons,
and none else; but where it is Praelati, Comites, Barons, and Populus, or and
Communitas, there the Populus or Communitas must be inferior to the rest
particularly mentioned, being there is a descent from the higher Orders still
to the lower; if they begin at the bottom, they end with the highest, at least
that which is added at the last, must be something distinct, or different from,
or not paticularly expressed in what went before, which is enough for my purpose.
I shall close this with a few more Examples out of Records. In a General
Council of the Kingdom held in the fifth Year of King John's Reign, after he
had married his second Wife, having been divorced from the first: the new Queen
was solemnly crowned, unanimi consensu and concordi Voluntate Rot. Cart. 5. ^o.
m5. n. 33.
Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum Baronum, Cleri, et Populi totius Regni.
Magna Charta was confirmed in a General Council of the Kingdom, 9 H. 3. 39
Years before the 49th of that King per Rot. Sat. 25. E. 1. n. 38.
Common assent tout de le Reaum; and this in another Record, is said to be Per
le Rot. Iarl. 15 E. 3. a. 50. d.
Roy, Piers and Commune de la terre.

And the Statute of Westminster the first, Sta. Westminster. 1. 3E. 1. 2. Iusti. 156.
eleven Years after 49. H. 3. was ordained per Passentments de Archievesques,
Evesques, Abbeys, Priors, Countees, Barons, Et tout la Comminalty de la terre
illonques Summonees.

Now what Man of common Sense can believe that the Clerus and Populus cotius
Regni, after the Comites, and Barons 5 Io. the Commune de la terre, after the
Peers; 9. Hon. 3. and tout le Eomminalty de la terre, after Countees and
Barons, 3 Edw. 1. were no more than the Prelates, Earls and Barons; indeed
there being no Et between Baronum and Cleri, 5 Io. were it not for other
Records explanatory of the like, there might be some Color for Mr. Hunt's
supposal that Eleri and Populi were only comprehensive of the Orders foregoing,
and might be in the same sense with Communitas Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, and Baronum. But for the penning of Records, both Mr. Hunt and Mr. W.
know better, than to think the Clerks in those times stuffed them with
Tautologies. Mr. Hunt's way of expressing the same Notion, I shall soon
consider more particularly.

But admit that my Interpretation of Records is generally erroneous; yet it is
manifest that the Record which is cited and insisted on to warrant the
contrary, shows that there were other Persons at the General Council of the
Kingdom besides Prelates, Earls and Barons, and that these were such as are now
called Commons.

The Record was the form of Peace agreed on in the 48th Year of Hen. 3. it says.

Haec est forma Pacis a Domino Rege, and Rot. Pat. 48 H. 3. pa^s unica m. 8. d.
Domino Edwardo filio suo, Praelatis and Proceribus omnibus, and Communitate
Regni Angliae, communiter and concorditer approbata, etc.

Amongst other things 'twas agreed, ad Reformationem Status Regni Angliae, that
there should be chose in that Parliament three Men, who should have Power from
the King toname nine, that should be the King's standing Counsel; and if any of
the three displeased the Community of the Prelates Rot. Pat. 43 H. 3. pars
unica in 8. n. 10.
and Barons, or were by them thought unfitting for their Office; Si videatur
Communitati Praelatorum and Baronum, one or Vid. Jan. Angl. facies nova p. 246.
more should be placed in his or their Room, per Concilium Communitatis
Praelatorum and Baronum; and the Record concludes, Haec autem ordinatio facta
fuit apud London de Consensu Voluntate and Praecepto Domini Regis necnon
Praelatorum, Baronum, acetiam Communitatis tunc ibi presentium.

Upon this it is observable:

1. That et Communitas Regni, in the beginning of the Record, next after the
Praelates and all the Peers, must necessarily be the Commons of England, nor
can Et possibly be taken otherwise than as introductive of other Persons
besides the Prelates and all the Peers, before expressly mentioned; for that the
Record concludes, as it were with an Intention of preventing all manner of
expositive Cavils; for, having declared that the Ordinance then made, was by
the Consent, Will, and Authority of the King necnon, and as*well of the
Prelates and Barons; it adds, Ac etiam Communitatis tune ibt presentium, which
must necessarily be, and also of the Commons then and there present, as well as
the Prelates and Barons [presentium] being taking as relating to all that went
before; or and also of the Community of them that were then and there present,
that is, all that were present were Parties to the Ordinance; if the first,
then the Commens also were there by name; if the second, tho Communuas be not
taken as an Appellative for the Commons of England, yet that they were then and
there present, is as evident from the Record, since it shows that others were
present besides the King, Prelates, and all the Peers, that those others were
Parties to the Ordinance then made, and as they could not possibly be of an
higher Rank, than what were before expressed, but much less the same, being so
manifestly distinguished with an and also, from what went before, they must
needs have been inferior, that is, Commoners, unless there was another Rank of
Men, that were neither Lords nor Commons, but between both: wherefore it is a
demonstration that there was then present and acting in a Legislative Capacity,
a Body of Commons, over and above, or distinct from the Prelates and all the
Peers or Barons, above mentioned.

2. In this Parliament 48 H. 3. there was a particular matter referred by the
King, and that in a full Parliament of Prelates, Peers, or Barons, and also the
Commons, to the Disposition and Management of the Prelates and Barons only; and
surely 'twas no great thing for them to be empowered to remove, or put in
Electors of the King's standing Counsel, which was all that was referred to
them, without consulting the Commons upon every occasion. But I cannot discern
the least Consequence that because the word Communitas, does many times extend
to the Prelates and Barons, which, as Mr. W. rightly observes, it does; that
therefore it must be limited to them, and extend no further, whatever words
come between. And I would thank Both Mr W. and Mr. Hunt argue this may: Vid.
Mr. H. p. 152.
him that should satisfy my reason how it is possible it should be confined to
them, when there comes and, or and also to extend it farther.

If Mr. Hunt. had observed how distinctly all the Orders of Parliament are
mentioned in this Record, viz. Praelati and Proceres omnes, and Communitas
Regni Angliae, and again, Praelati, Barons, ac etiam Communitas, and had
further observed how full and clear the Evidence is, that all of them together
referred, or consented to the King's referring the matter before taken notice
of, to the Earls and Barons only, or to the Community or Generality of them,
(from whom another Community, the Communitas Regni Angliae then and there
present, was sufficiently distinguished in other parts of the Record) and that
that Affair was to be managed per Consilium Praelatorum, and Baronum, he would
never have insisted upon this as demonstration that Communitas Regni Angliae,
after Praelati and Proceres omnes, nay, tho with an ac etiam, has no other
Sense than Commune Concilium Regni, and was as a comprehensive Term of those
that made it, Mr. Hunt, p. 152.
or was used exegetically, as Mr. W. has it. If it had been Praelati and
Proceres, Commune Concilium Regni, or Communitas Regni, there, because there is
no discretive and, or and also, the latter might be comprehensive of the
former. But whatsoever may be said of the careless penning of Records or
Histories anciently; yet when there are numbers of Records or Histories
expressing the Parties present at general Assemblies of the Kingdom, some of
the like penning with the aforesaid form of Peace 48 H. 3. some more express
and particular, if possible; shall all the Clerks of Parliament, and learned
Monks, or other old Authors be taxed with heedless Impertinencies, nay even
want of understanding what they wrote?

Eadmerus, who was a very corrrect Writer, and lived in the time of which he
wrote, tells us, that at one General Convention, in the Reign of Hen. I. there
were Eademrus, f. 49. Vid. Ian. Angl. facies (...), p. 214. ^ad. f. 58.
tota Nobilitas cum Populi numerositate; at another, tho it was held only for
Ecclesistical Affairs, there were Nobilitas, Populusque minor.

The Election of King Stephen, as a Ricard Hagustaldens^; f. 312.
grave Prior of those Times tells us, was a primoribus Regni, cum favore Cleri
and Populi, Clericorum, and Laicorum universitate.

In that King's Reign there was adunatum Concilium Cleri and Populi, a General
Council of the Clergy and Laity together, which now one would say were a
Parliament and Convocation united; the Members Cronice^ Eliense.
of this Council follow, Episcoporum; atque Abbatum, Monachorum, and
Clericorum, Pl^bisque iufinita multitudo; the Authority for this is a Legier
Book of the Abbey of Ely, wrote as it should seem in the time of Hen. I. These
kind of Books were generally kept E^ vet. Regist. in Archivis Cant. Arch. Vid
Ian. Angl. etc. p. 221.
with great Exactness, and were in the nature of Records. From the like
Authority we have it that Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Comites atque alij omnes,
were consenting to the Election of King John.

But to mention a few undoubted Records to this purpose.

In the 15th of King John, there were Claus. 15. Jo p. 2. m. 7. vid. Ian. etc.
p. 231.
Precepts to all the Sheriffs of England to summon in every County Milites, who
were to come with Arms, Barons without Arms, and four Knights for every Shire,
and quatuor discretos Milites de comitatu, to a General Council at Oxford.

In the 38th of Hen. III. besides the Tenants Rot. Claus. 38. H. 3. m 7. c. 2.
Ian. Angl. etc. p. 245.
in Chief, two legales and discreti Milites were required to come for every
County, vice omutom and singulorum, to be chosen by the Milites and alij de
Comitatu.

And several Records before the 49th of H. 3. describing the Members of
Parliaments, Rot. Claus. 21. H. 3. m. 7. d.
mention besides the Clergy, Comites, Barons, Milites, liberi Homines, some,
and libere Tenentes, others, and omnes de Magna Charta 9. H. 3.
Regno.

Now can there be the least color to believe that all these were no more than
the Prelates and great Barons, or only the greater and less Nobility holding in
Chief, whatever Dr. Brady or others may obtrude upon the World?

That the Commune Concilium Baronum, may sometimes be used in the same sense
with Commune Consilium Regni, affords no help to Mr. Hunt; because where the
expressions Mr. Hunt p. 152.
are too lax and general, Barons shall be taken in it is utmost extent, and
consequently shall comprehend ordinary Freeholders, who were Nobiles, and
Barons minores long Vid. Jus Angl. ab antiquo c. 8.
before the 49th of Hen. 3. But the Question is, Whether when Records or
Histories make a Distinction between Barons, and others coming after, the
Distinction can be thought to be without any manner of Difference, and so vain
and idle, as that the Porulus minor, or Populi numerositas Eadm. supra.
after Nobilitas, is a Term comprehensive of the Nobility before mentioned; or
when there were Primores Regni cum Clero and Populo the Rich. Hagulst.
chief of the Kingdom with all the Clergy and People, the word People, was but
comprehensive of the Primores, so that the Primores were there together with
themselves. But surely I need not run over all these Instances, and many more
produceable to convince even Dr. Brady, Mr. Hunt, and Mr. W. of the absurdity
of interpreting Records after their manner.

But Mr. W. thinks to help out his Record by an Historian, and cites the
Additaments to Matthew Paris, mentioning the Ant. Brit. p. 60.
Letter wrote to the Pope in the Case of Adomar de Valens, which begins thus:

Communitas Procerum, Magnatum, aliorumque Matthew. Paris Addit. f. 217.
Regni Angliae, and was subscribed by some Earls and great Men, and Peter de
Monteforti vice totius Communitatis; this Mr. W. says was in the name of the
whole Baronage, not the House of Commons, or Commonalty of England, there being
mention of the universitas Baronagij, but not universitas Regni Popularis.

I take it to be manifest that all the Question which can arise upon these
words is not, as Mr. W. puts it, whether Simon Montfort subscribed in the names
of the Barons only, or of the Commons only: But whether some of the great
Barons having set their hands themselves, Montfort, being the last Man that
subscribed, did not do it in the name of the rest of the Great Barons not
subscribing, and of the Commons too, as part of the Baronage, or Communitas of
Earls, Barons and others. And I think nothing is more clear then that the
Commons were part of the Community here intended.

Matthew Paris tells us, that 'twas ex part Matthew. Pr^is, fol. 978.
Regni and totius Angliae universitate, and this he says was scriptum a
Farnagio, and that the Commons were part of the Kingdom Ibid.
at Parliaments, and went under the Denomination of the Faronage at that very
time, is evident beyond Contradiction from Record: for whereas the Title of the
Writ expressing some Matters agreed upon between the King and his People in
that very Parliament, is, pro Rege, and Faronagio Rot. Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 10.
An^liae, the body of the Writ runs, Rex omnibus etc. cum pro negotiis nostris
arduis Regnum nostrum tangentibus proceres, and Fideles Regni nostri ad nos
London in Quindena Pasche prox. praeterit faceremus convocari, etc.

And another Record explains, and reduces to a certainty the Proceres and
Fideles and the Faronage, and calls them Hanshomes Rot. Pat. 42 H. 3 m. 4.
(the high Men, the Prelates and great Barons) Prodes homes (the Magnates and
Grands of the Counties) and the Commune de Reaum (the Commons of the Cities and
Boroughs) and with this his own Instance out of Matthew Paris, exactly agrees,
for there were the Comites and Proceres (the great Barons) the Magnates, or
Grands of the Counties, and alij, who must needs be the Commons of the Cities
and Boroughs, as they were distinguished Stat. St. p 27 E. 3.
from the Grands of the Counties, even as late as the 27th E. 3.

This may serve for a full and clear Answer Dr. Brady against Mr. Petyt, p. 126.
to Dr. Brady's Exposition of the forementioned Letter, whom both Mr. Hunt and
Mr. W. may thank for misleading them in this Point; and this sufficiently shows
the Vanity and Falsehood of the Doctor's Assertion, that the Commons as at this
day Dr. Brady against Mr. Petyt, p. 130.
known, are not to be found amongst the Community of England in old Historians,
except he will place Matthew Paris amongst the Moderns.

This I think may suffice in answer to any thing wherein Mr. W. his Authority
may be used against me.

I cannot be so short in my Observations upon Mr. Hunt, because he aims many
Blows at me in the dark, and may be thought in many places to have wounded my
Arguments, or the Reputation of my Endeavors, which he represents as
impertinent, Mr. Hunt, p. 156.
or like a Contest de lana Caprina.

In opposition to my Notion of the Curia Regis, he produces another, which he
thinks he demonstrates, whereas Mr. W. takes the Curia to have been the only
Court where the Tenants could pretend to come ex debito, or Ratione Tenurae.
Mr. Hunt will have it that they, and they only, came both to the Curia, and to
Parliament ex debito whatever others might sometimes have been called ex
Gratia: But then he thinks that he has found a sure means to distinguish which
was a Parliament, and which was a Curia, by the nature of the Summons. If it
was to all Tenants in Chief by Knights Service generally, it made a Curia: If
the Great Barons had special Summons, 'twas a Parliament in his Judgment. To
convince Mr. Hunt, p 1^8.
him of his Mistakes in this and other Matters, which he might have rectified,
if he had not undervalued the Study of English Antiquities, will not be enough
to him, unless I likewise show how convenient it would have been for him, to
have had more regard to some of those Matters of Fact within that Learning,
which I conceive, I have made good against Dr. Brady, and which Mr. Hunt has
not yet vouchsafed to confute, otherwise than by an ipse dixit.

First, Wherefore I shall first show him some Mistakes which I am concerned to
represent to him; And that

(1.) As to the matter in Issue, in relation to what our Government was before
the 49th of Hen. 3. (2.) As to the manner of summoning the Parliament, or
General Council of the Kingdom, and the Curia, whereby he thinks he is able to
distinguish the one from the other.
Secondly, I shall show the Erroniousness of some Suppositions which may have
contributed to Mr. Hunt's belief, that the Tenants in Chief were the only
Members of the Parliament till the 49th Hen. 3. Or that Tenants in Capite only,
constituted both the Curia and the Parliament, according to the fancied
different Summons.

Thirdly, I shall show that he himself, in effect, grants that more than
Tenants in Chief had right to come to the Great Council of the Nation, in which
the Nation's Rights were involved.

Fourthly, That even according to his own Notion of Tenure in Capite, all
Proprietors of Land, as such, had, till the 49th of Hen. 3. right to come to
the General Council of the Kingdom.

Fifthly, That whereas he would set aside the Question of what the Government
was till the 49th of Hen. 3. as impertinent.

(1.) His own Notion, by which he would supplant the Labors of others,
destroy's it self, while mine maintains what he aims at. (2.) He puts such
matter in issue for asserting the present Government, as can never be
maintained. (3.) He yields so much of the Fact against me, as sets aside the
whole Foundation of his Postscript. And yet,
Admit he answers all Objections against his Postscript, the Grounds which I go
upon are of the most general use.

(1.) The first of his Mistakes, which I cannot but animadvert on, seems to be
wilful; for he renders the matter of late put in Mistakes.
Issue, as to what our Government was before the 49th of Hen. 3. to be whether
the Counties in all this time had their Representatives in Parliament by the
Formality Mr. Hunt, p. 155.
of a Choice? and, as if our Government was according to the Concessions of
them who have lately appeared in the defense of it, to take it is fate upon this
Issue, viz. Whether our present House of Commons, in the Ibid. p. 154.
same form as it is now constituted, was not in being ever after the Conquest?
and as if we should yield, that otherwise it were no essential part of our
Government.

I must confess, according to his Insinuation, that whoever puts it upon this
point, betrayeth the Cause of the Government, Mr. Hunt, p. 154.
but he would do well to name the Man who has done this Disservice.

This I must confess I have insisted upon, that Proprietors of Land, as such,
without consideration of Tenure, or collated Dignity, have from the time of
William the first, downwards to the 49th of H. 3. enjoyed a Right of coming to
the Great Councils of the Kingdom, and could not be bound by any Laws to which
they had not consented either in Person, or by Representation, yielded to
sometimes before, but not settled till the 49th of Hen. 3.

And Mr. Petyt has satisfied Mr. Hunt Mr. Hunt, p. 151, and 179.
himself, that the Cities and Boroughs were represented in Parliament from time
beyond the account of Records or History.

But this I desire may be considered, that admit there were no Representation
of the Freeholders of the Counties settled at any time within the Reign of
Hen. III, or in any other King's Reignnow appearing; and farther, that it
cannot be shown, that such Freeholders ever came to the General Councils of
the Kingdom in their own personal Interest; yet however, if it appear that such
as are now represented by the Knights of the respective Shires, gave their
Votes to Parliamentary Proceedings, by such as they particularly appointed to
that end before the 49th of Hen. 3. the present Constitution stands
sufficiently established without the least Imputation of Novelty, or Usurpation.

And this were enough for my purpose: Vid. Jus Anglorum ab antiquo, Addit. p.
20, to 32.
But since many Arguments induce the belief that before the 49th of Hen. 3.
such ordinary Freeholders often came to the General Councils of the Kindom
without special Election and Representation, I should have given too great
Advantage to the Underminers of Common Right, if I should have undertaken to
prove that the Counties, from the time of the reputed Conquest downwards,
always had their Representatives by the formality of a Choice, which Mr. Hunt,
I thank him, would put upon me to prove.

His second Mistake, as to the manner of summoning the Great Council and the
Curia, wherein he thinks that there lies an essential difference between the
two Courts, is nearly conjoined to the first, and if it were no mistake, would
overthrow my Notion: for if, as he holds, only Tenants in Chief made the
General Council, of the Kingdom, as well as the Curia, then my belief that
others besides such Tenants had right to come to the General Council, would be
groundless; and it might be probable that the different Mr. Hunt, p. 149.
Summons might distinguish the Courts.

But whereas he fancies it to have been a distinctive Mark, or certain
Diagnostick of a Parliament, where the Summons were personal to the Bishops,
Earls, and the Greater Barons; if he had been pleased to have taken the Pains
to consult the Records, he would have found the Summons to have been as
personal to the Wars, and consequently to the Curia (which besides other
Occasions for its sitting, was held at the place of Rendezvous, to charge
Escuage upon the Sea Escuage taxt at such a a Military Assembly, Inter Com. de
Termin. S^. Mich. 4^. H. 3. r. 4. ^id. Ian. Ang. p 240.
Defaulters) as 'twas to the General Council, which if I prove, I hope 'twill
be yielded that the essential Difference of those two Courts could not arise
from the nature of the Summons to the King's Tenants, whether all were called
in general, or some among the rest in particular, but from the Persons
summoned, whether only Tenants in Chief, or others besides them.

In the 47th of Hen. 3. which to be sure, was before the 49th there was an Army
to be sent against Llewelin Prince of Wales, who committed Hostilities against
the English; this it is certain was no General Council of the Kingdom, being
only a Summons to the Wars; and yet the Great Barons had personal Summons, as
appears by the Record.

Rex dilecto and fideli suo Rogero de Rigod Comiti Rot. Claus. 47. H. 3. m. 7.
do so.
Norff. Mares. Ang. Salutem; quia Llewellinus filius Griffini et cumplures
rebels nostri contra Homagum suum and fidelitatem nobis debit am terras
nostras and fidelium nostrorum in partibus Walliae dudum ut nostis hostiliter
sunt aggressi terras illas occupando and devastando in nostrum dedecus and in
nostrum et praedict. fidelium nostrorum exheredationem manifestam vobis
mandamus sub debito fidelitatis and homagij quibus nobis tenemini and sicut
eaquae de nobis tenetis diligitis quod in festo beati Petri ad vincula proximo
futuro sitis apud Wigorn cum Equis and Armis and cum Servitio vestro nobis
debito parati exinde nobiscum proficisci in expeditionem nostram contra
praefatum Llewellinum and accomplices suos Rebels nostros. Et it a de contentis
in hac necessitate nostra ibim veniatis ut dictorum Rebellium nostrorum
versutia adeo patenter reprimatur quod nobis et vobiscedat ad honorem and
exinde vobis ad grates teneamur speciales. Test Rege apud Westmin. 25o die
Maij.

Eodem modo mandatum est Phil. Basset, etc. And this Gentleman (if he had
thought Page 156.
fit to have trusted Mr. Seldom, without taking the impertinent Pains as he
terms it, Seld. Tit. Hon. fol. 592.
of searching the Records, might have known that about 130 Temporal Barons had
then their several Writs.

But this Author finding a Precept to a Mr. Hunt, p. 148.
Sheriff, Quod summoneri facias Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Comites, Barons,
Abbates, Priores, Milites, et Liberos Homines qui de nobis tenent in Capite,
etc. concludes that this must necessarily be a Curia Regis in distinction to a
Parliament, because of the general Writ of Summons: whereas a little insight
into Records would have acquainted him that the Sheriff was obliged to summon
all those by a General Proclamation, and then to deliver the particular Writs
to the Great Barons amongst them; this Record does not say how they were to be
summoned; but notwithstanding this, every one of those Ranks of Men might have
been summoned particularly: but to prevent all Mistakes, or Evasion we have a
Record which explains that very Instance which he insists upon, it being of
that very time.

Rex Vicecom. Devon salutem praecipimus tibi quod in fide qua nobis teneris
visis literis Rot. Claus. 26 H. 3. pars 1. m. 10.
istis scire facias omnibus de Com. tuo qui de nobis tenent in Capite per
Servitium Militare vel per Serjantiam and similiter illos qui terras Norman.
vel Brittan. tenent de Ballio Domini Regis Iohannis Patris nostri vel nostro
quod sicut tenementa sua quae de nobis tenent diligunt sint apud Winton. die
Clausi Paschae Parati cum Equis et Armis ad trasfretandum cum Corpore nostro in
Pictaviam Literas etiam ipsius certis Personis directas in Com. tuo mitti fac:
T. R. apud Windles 8o die Februarij.

Here was notice given to all, or general Summons, and particular Writs also to
be delivered to some of the Tenants, and thus, for ought appears to the
contrary, it always was.

This alone were enough to show that he has mistaken King John's Charter, which
he thinks has established this difference; but his own Explication of it will
make it more apparent.

Which I shall consider under this next Head.

CHAP. II.
Some erroneous Suppositions, which may have contributed to Mr. Hunt 's Belief,
that the Tenants in Chief, were the only Members of the General Council of the
Kingdom till 49 H. 3. or that Tenants in Capite only, constituted both the
Curia, and the Parliament, according to the imagined different Summons,
considered.

ALL the Grounds which Mr. Hunt can pretend for this, besides the matter of
Fact in relation to the Summons which I have already examined, must be either;

1. From the Interpretation of King John's Charter. 2. His Notion of Tenure in
Capite; or, 3. The belief that William the first, made an Absolute Conquest of
this Nation.
If King John's Charter requires that the Great Tenants in Chief should have
particular Summons to Parliament, then indeed there would be a reason why,
though all the Tenants in Chief were obliged to attend in the Curia upon
general notice, yet some might not be concluded by any Act of Legislation,
unless they had notice of Attendance to such end.

But if he knew not what was meant by Tenure in Capite, it is odds but he might
mistake the Sense of that part of King John's Charter which relates to the
Tenants in Chief. And if William the first did not make an absolute Conquest,
'twill be wonderful how those that derived from under his Grant, should be the
only Persons interested in the Government, exclusive of all others: but if he
did make such a Conquest, then a very little Evidence would be enough to make
one believe that none but Tenants in Chief were Cives, or any part of the Civil
Society.

To take away all Color from his Presumption; I shall show,

I. That he gains no help from King John's Charter. II. That he mistakes the
Nature of Tenure in Capite. III. That he would have done well, to have answered
the Objections against the supposed Conquest, before he concluded for it.
I. He can gain no help from King John's Charter; for his Interpretation of it
fights against its self. He himself acknowledges a difference between the Curia
Regis, and Parliament, and particularly that in the Curia the Suitors
assess^aids and Escuage, to which purposes he will have it, that they P. 131.
were summoned by General Writs; and yet P. 148.
contends, that by King John's Charter, the Contradictio in Terminis.
Great Tenants in Capite, who were Suitors at the Curia, were to be summoned in
particular de scutagiis assidendis, to assess Escuage; and that the Council
where this was assest, P. 165.
was a Parliament, according to his imaginary distinctive Mark.

But let us observe his way of demonstrating his Sense of this Charter: he
divides some of the Clause, in dispute, into two parts, and leaves out (as not
material to the Enquiry) what particularly relates to the Cities, Ports,
Buroughs, and Vill^e (Townships or Parishes) in which alone, according to his
own Division, the Liberties Page 160.
of sending Burgesses to Parliaments must have been confirmed and provided for;
and yet, notwithstanding such omission, will have it that the modus Parliamenti
in King John 's time, was in the said Charter declared.

His first Division is this.

Nullum scutagium vel auxilium ponam in Regno nostro, nisi per Commune
Concilium Regui nostri, nisi ad Corpus nostrum redimendum, et ad Primogenitum
Filium nostrum Militem faciendum, et ad primogenitam Filiam nostram semel
maritandam, et ad hoc non fiet nisi rationabile auxilium.

The Charter has further, which is omitmited by him.

Simili modo fiat de Civitate Londinensi, and Civitas Londinensis habeat omnes
antiquas Libertates, and Liberas Consuetudines suas tam per terras, quam per
aquas: praeterea volumus and concedimus quod omnes aliae Civitates, and Burgi,
and Villae, and Barons de quinque Portubus, and omnes Portus, habeant omnes
Libertates, and Liberas Consuetudines suas.

Here Mr. Hunt, to be sure, would have it divided; since he begins the other
part with Et ad habendum commune Concilium Regni. Wherefore it is manifest, that
even according to his rendering of this part of the Charter, the Modus of
Parliament is not declared; the right of the Buroughs amongst other places to
come to the Great Council being only implied, under the rest of their Liberties
and free Customs, whereas he himself confesses, That we have no History of the
Commencement of their Right, and that Mr. Hunt, p. 159.
it was an ancient Establishment in the Government before Magna Charta. As I
had formerly urged in Iani Anglorum facies nova, and in Ius Anglorum ab
antiquo. Et ad habendum commune Concilium de Scutagiis assidendis aliter quam
in tribus casibus praedictis, either ought to be read along with what relates
to the Cities, Buroughs, Ports, and Parishes or Townships, and so their Right
of coming to the Commen Council of the Kingdom is provided for in an especial
manner, as well as their other Liberties, and Free Customs. Or else, the right
of the Inhabitants of these places, the integral parts of the Kingdom, to send,
or come to the Common, or General Council of the Kingdom, must have been
included in the general Provision for their Liberties, and Free Customs, and no
otherwise taken care of.

And then H. the 3ds Charter, being in So Dr. Brady consesses out of Mat. Paris
against Jan. Ang. etc. p. 6:, 6;. Vid. Jus Ang. p 154.
nullo dissimilis, or the same in Substance with this of King John; and having
no express Provision for the manner of summoning the General Council of the
Kingdom, and only leaving Escuage to be raised, as 'twas in the time of H. the
2d, it shows that Escuage was to be raised in such a Council so summoned, as is
provided for in King John's Charter, with which H. the 3ds agreed in Substance:
wherefore to say Escuage should be raised, as 'twas in the time of H. the 2d,
was as much as to say, that for the assessing Escuage the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and all the Great Barons of the Kingdom Et de scutagiis
assidendis submoneri faciemus, etc. King John's Charter.
holding in Chief, were to be summoned by special Writs, the other Tenants in
Chief by general ones, and for this they should have forty days notice.

But let us see what is made of a contrary Exposition.

By the first commune Concilium, Mr. Hunt conceives the Curia Regis was meant,
Mr. Hunt. p. 166.
and that out of that Court the King would not impose Escuage, or Aid upon his
Tenants, except it were in those three Cases of Aid mentioned.

But then, Et ad habendum commune Concilium Regni aliter quam in tribus casibus
praedictis and de scutagiis assidendis he conceives to be meant of Parliament,
and that all matters other than those three mentioned, Aids, and Escuage, which
were due by Tenure, should be done by that commune Concilium, that is, his
Parliament.

Truly I know not how he will free himself from a contradiction upon this, when
he makes Et ad habendum commune Concilium Regni aliter quam in tribus casibus
praedictis, Et de Scutagiis assidendis to be meant of a Parliament, though
before he had exempted Escuage from the Court of Parliament and assigned it to
the Curia. And this shows clearly, that no other Council but the Curia Regis is
there mentioned, there being no Provision, except what was contained under
Liberties, and Free Customs, for any other matters besides Escuage, and Aids,
and these such as he confesses to have been due from the King's Tenants, for
where it is Nullum Scutagium vel auxilium ponam in Regno nostro, nisi per
commune Concilium Regni nostri. By this commune Concilium he owns the Curia
Regis was meant.

For the three Aids excepted in the Charter, to be sure there was no need of a
Council of Tenants, they being Incidents, and of course raised and returned
into the Exchequer, and the King expressly reserved unto himself a Power of
raising them without convening any Council at all; so that in short all the
Common Council that can be here found by him is only a Curia Regis for the
assessing of Escuage, so that where it is Nullum Scutagium vel auxilium,
auxilium is confined to such as lay upon the Tenants who were to be summoned to
the Curia, who were Tenants by Knights Service only; and therefore he rightly
observes (if he takes it of such as held not per servitium Militare) Page 151.
that the Burgesses were not Suitors to the Curia Regis, and where it is Commune
Concilium de Auxiliis, and de Scutagiis, if they ought to be joined together,
the Word Scutagium brought in with an and is exegetical, and explanatory of the
general Word Aid, and confines it to Aid upon Tenants by Knights Service: and
it is certain that the matters excepted were incident to Knights Service as
well as Socage Tenure. According to which, as London held in common Socage,
^ili modo fiat de Civitate London, must be meant, that as Escuage was raised in
the Common Council of the Tenants by Knights Service, in like manner Tallage in
London should be settled in its Common Council; for according to Mr. Hunt, the
City of London being a Borough, was no part of the Curia Regis, which he says
is the Commune Concilium just before mentioned, wherefore simili modo fiat can
have no other meaning; being it is manifest that their Aid was to be raised in a
Common Council.

After all it must be agreed, that this Charter is not carefully, and clearly
penned, however here is enough to show that it cannot possibly serve the
contrary side. Besides the uncontrollable Evidence of what was the modus of
General Councils both before, and after the making of this Charter, Vid. Jan.
Ang. Facies nova throughout.
till the 49th of H. the 3d.

But Mr. Hunt might well be out, in his Interpretation of King John's Provision
about the Tenants in Capite, since.

II. He mistakes the Nature of Tenure in Capite, which I shall evince by these
three particulars.

1. In that he supposes that none of the Tenants in Chief were Majores Barons,
but Bishops, and Earls. 2. That none were Barons Regni, but Tenants in Chief,
and none Barons Regis, but such as were called of Grace to Parliament. 3. In
imagining that if a Tenant in Ca^te, granted out to never so many, all the
Grantees were Tenants in Capite, and owed the same entire Service that the
first Grantee did.
1. His Errors upon his first and second Heads cannot be truly shown, unless
they be fully transcribed in their full Dimensions.

When the Conqueror (says he) did innovate his Tenures in Capite, and made all
Page 156.
Men of great Estates Barons, and by their Tenures and Estates Members of
Parliament, we then had such Laws, quas vulgus elegerit, and the nwe had
materially our three Estates, though not so well sized and sorted as since.

We had then I say many great Freeholders Mr. Hunt, p. 157.
in every County that by their Tenures were Members of Parliament, whereas now
we have but two, and tho the People did not not choose them, yet the Men of that
Order, seem chosen once for all interpretatively by the People in their consent
to the Government. In this Constitution, scarce any Man that was fit to be
chosen, but was without the Peoples choice a Member of Parliament, as there now
are more who are fit to be chosen than they can choose, so that the Barons
Minores were then instead of Knights of the Shire, and the Barons Majores,
Bishops and Earls did then, as now, make the Parliament.

Besides, Barons Majores and Minores there, was at this time a distinction
between the Barons Regis, and Barons Regni, which I will explain, to prevent
any Mistake that may grow thereupon: The Barons Regni, were Barons by Tenure,
and made part of the Government by the Constitution of the first William, and
so in process of Time, called Barons Regni, because they had by Continuance of
that Constitution, acquired a fixed Right to that Honor.

But because of the frequent Wars between Page 157.
the Barons and the Kings at that time, they did omit to summon, some who were
Barons by Tenure, and now duly called Barons Regni, to Parliament, and called
others, that had no Right to be called Ratione Tenurae, and those they called
Barons Regis. This was ill taken by the Lords, and was one of the occasions of
their War with King John, upon which they obtained his Charter for Remedy, as
follows. Barons Majores Regni sigillatim summoneri faceret; the truth of this
as to the Fact will appear by the History of those Times; and that this is the
reason of this distinction of Barons Regis and Barons Regni, does appear by
the recited Charter of King John, where the Majores Barons are called Barons
Regni; for the Barons were more concerned for the losing of their Honors, than
they were at the Communication of the like Honor to others, and with reason,
though all Honors are lessened by the numbers of those that participate of
them.

The Inconveniency and Mischiefs of this Mr. Hunt, p. 158:
Constitution were very great, and very sensible, by making the Government to
consist of one Order, there was no third to moderate and hold the Balance.

I shall not here enlarge upon his (...), of the Conquest, nor upon his
Conjecture of one of the Occasions of the Barons Wars, nor yet upon his notion
of three Estates materially the same when but one Order, and by the same
reason, if all were in one, by virtue of* his Spiritual and Temporal Power, and
he had by a Conquest all the property of the Nation, here the Government was
materially the same, with Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in his
Belly, as when he had disgorged, and scattered abroad the Property and Power.

But to the purpose of the abovementioned Heads.

1. Whereas he will have it, that only Bishops and Earls were Majores Barons,
it appears manifestly to the contrary from the words of King John's Charter,
which he mistakes, Submoneri faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates,
Comites and Majores Barons Regni, Sigillatim.

Here are Majores Barons Regni, after Bishops and Earls: And I need not here
remind him of the Vanity of the Notion of making Majores Barons exegetical, or
comprehensive of what went before. It Is certain if Bishops were Majores Barons
as well as Earls, here are others intended also; and why are not such as held
whole Baronies, as some did, Great Barons? Besides, you shall find numbers of
Barons to have received particular Summons, even to the Wars, according to the
Provision in King John's Charter for summoning the Majores Barons Sigillatim.

I will give him some Names, and see whether he makes Earls of them all.

Three Bassets. Claus. 47. H. 3. m. 7. d.


William de Harecourt. Roger de Somerey. John Forreigner, Extraneus. Richard de
Gray. Ern. de Bosco, etc.
But if all these were Earls, what thinks he of the nine hundred and odd, who
received special Summons, De veniendo ad Regem cum Equis and Armis usque
Berwicam super Twedam in the 29th of Edw. 1. Claus. 29. E. 1. m. 14 d.


2. Whereas he will have it that the Barons Regni were Barons by Tenure, and
the Mr. Hunt (...) p. 158.
Barons Regis by Call to Parliament, he might have known that every Baro Regis
was a Baron of the Kingdom, but every Baron of the Kingdom was not Baro Regis,
in a strict Sense. Wherefore accordingly King John's Charter confines the
special Summons, which as, I say, was to the Curia Regis, to such Great Barons
of the Kingdom as held in Capite. There being after Majores Barons Regni in a
different Provision, Et omnes alios qui de nobis tenent in Capite.

Wherefore when all the Barons of the Kingdom were summoned, it took in the
Majores and Minores, both those that held in Capite and otherwise. But when
they are used distinctly, it is wholly contrary to his Supposition; for the
Barons Regis were properly, and strictly, they who held immediately of the
King, as all manner of Authorities warrant.

Indeed I am almost ashamed here to bring Proof of a thing so evident: But he
may please to observe that Thanus and Baro were always of the same Acceptance.
Thanus Regis was strictly, he who held Lands of the King by any kind of Tenure;
and so was Baro Regis; tho sometimes appropriated to him that held by Knights
Service, and an ordinary Thane was no Vid. Jus Ang. ab antiquo, p. 108.
more than an honest Freeholder by any sort of Tenure, as appears by
Dooms-day-Book it self.

But I conceive the Difference between Baro Regni and Regis, is sufficiently
shown in this following Authority.

In the 23d of Hen. 2. Benedictus Abbas, Benedictus Abbas sub Effigy, Iulij A.
11. f. 72. in Bib. Cot.
tells us the King summoned Magnum Concilium de Statutis Regni sui coram
Episcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus Terrae, and coram eis per Concilium
Comitum, et Baronum, Militum, et hominum suorum; he made the famed Assize at
Northampton.

Here are Barons Terrae, or Regni, and Barons, Milites, et Homines sui. Here
either all the Barons Regni were Barons Regis, or sui: And then his
distinction between Baro Regni and Baro Regis falls to the ground; there being
no Difference; or else there is that very Difference I stand upon, viz. That
the Barons Regni were comprehensive of all sorts of Barons, the Barons Regis
were the King's Tenants in Capite. Amongst which, there were Knights at least:
And the Homines sui, I take it were his great Officers and Justices. These made
a Select Council, acting in Parliament, and out of it, either in a full Body,
or contracted by Agreement, as I could easily show.

But the Tenants in Capite, were the King's ordinary Council, and therefore
manifestly the Assize there was drawn up and advised by them in full
Parliament, with the Consent of all the Barons of the Kingdom: under which, in
those ancient Times omnes quodamodo ordines Regni continebantur, as Came:
Ordines Angl. p. 61. Quarto.
Mr. Cambden observes. But it is observable, that here it is Homines sui, or
Regis, to show that the Justices and others, who came not upon the account of
Freehold, but as the King's Servants, were not to be termed Barons sui.

A few Years before this, there was a Vid. Jan. Ang. facies nova, p. 189.
Summons for an Assembly at this very place; and 'twas manifestly no more than
a Curia Regis.

1. Whereas there were the Barons Tit. of Hon. f. 583.
Terrae at the last above named, to this were summoned only Tenants in Capite.

2. Whereas then they were to exercise a Legislative Power, de Statutis Regni;
this was only for a Judicial Power, such as Tenants in Capite exercised by
themselves, for 'twas only upon the Case of Becket.

3. Whereas the former was called, Magnum Concilium de Statutis Regni, this
Magnum Concilium, as some call it, was but Curia Regis: Barons Curiae Regis
adjudicaverunt eum esse in Misericordia: As Hoveden Hoveden, f. 494.
informs us.

Now the Question is, Whether those Tenants in Capite, the Barons Curiae, were
Barons Regis; which that they were, I think is very obvious, they being, by
reason of holding of the King, obliged to attend at his Court: And that these
were the King's Barons, or Barons of his Court, or owing Suit, and Service
there, must needs be synonimous.

But utterly to silence this Gentleman, Mr. Hunt, p. 153.
he grants that Hen. I. was crowned in an extraordinary Convention of the
People; that is more than Tenants in Chief consented to that Change in the
Succession.

Now that very King's Charter, says Magna Charta, H. 1.
'twas Communi Concilio Baronum Regni; when among these he comes to mention
such as held of him in Chief, he calls them his Barons, emphatically (not but
that all were his Barons in a remote sense) Si aliquis Baronum meorum, vel
Comitum, sive aliorum qui de me tenent mortuus fuerit, haeres suus non redimat
Terram suam sicut faciebat tempore Fratris mei.

This Relief, it seems, in his Brother's time was uncertain, and immoderate,
and was by him reduced to the old Standard, as 'twas in Canutus his time, as
appears by the Comparison of the Laws of both.

The Earls Relief was eight Horses, four with Furniture, four without, besides
Spelman's Glos. Tit. Here^tum.
Arms, and a certain quantity of Gold. The Thanus Regis primarius, as in King
Spelm. Glos. Tit. Heriot.
Canutus his Law, or qui ei proximus, as in Henry the 1st, paid for Hereot or
Relief, which there were synonimous, four Horses, two with Furniture, two
without, etc. The Mediocris Thanus paid one Horse with Furniture, and other
things more or less, according to the Custom of the Places under different Laws.

Here was Thanus, or Baro Regis primarius, the same with Baro Major, and Thanus
Mediocris, or Baro Minor, one of the alij qui de nobis tenent in Capite
mentioned in King John's Charter: And surely no Man will say that this Relief
was not payable because of tenure in Capite.

By the 17th of King John, it had become customary for the Relief to be paid in
Money; as appears by his Charter. Magna Charta Johannis Rs.


Siquis Comitum vel Baronum nostrorum, sive aliorum tenentium de nobis in
Capite per Servitium Militare mortuus fuerit and relevium debeat, habeat
hareditatem suam per antiquum relevium, scilicet haeres vel haeredes Comitis de
Baronia Comitis integra per centum libras, haeres vel haeredes Militis de
integro feudo, Militis per centum solidos ad plus, et qui minus debuerit minus,
vel secundum antiquam consuetudinem feudorum.

Here Baro noster was manifestly the same with Thanus Regis in the older Laws;
and Baro de Baronia integra, with Thanus primarius, or qui ei proximus. The
Mediocris Thanus Regis was the Miles, or libere tenens, one holding in Chief by
Knights Service, by whatsoever Proportion of a Knights Fee.

And by this time I think it is evident, that they whom Mr. Hunt supposes to
have been the only Barons Regni, were in a strict Sense the Barons Regis, and
but part of the Barons of the Kingdom.

3. Whereas he Imagines that if a Tenant in Capite by Knights Service granted
out to never so many, they all owed the same entire and indivisible Service to
the King, and were his Tenants in Capite; in this he must needs have been
mistaken: But that I may not seem to misrepresent his Sense, I shall transcribe
his Words, and then endeavor to bring them out of their Clouds.

The Feudal Baronage, says he, was as P. 163, and 164.
large and as numerous as the Tenures by Knights Service in Chief, which were
capable of being multiplied several ways, for every part of the Fee, however
divided, the Services reserved upon that Fee that were entire and indivisible,
were to be performed by the several Proprietors of the several parts of the
divided Fee.

In this Paragraph there are three postulata.

1. That Tenure by Knights Service in Chief, was Tenure by Barony. 2. That
every Tenure by Knights Service had some entire indivisible Service incident to
it. 3. That this entire indivisible Service was multiplied to the benefit of
the King, upon the Tenants aliening any part of the Fee.
The two first I agree to his Hands; but dispute the third, I conceive with
good reason: For upon the first view it is evident, that if the Grantee of the
King's Tenant in Chief by Knights Service would (before the After the Statute
of Qua Emptores entire Services, a^ Fealty, H^rsots, and the like, might ^e
multiolyed to the Lord, upon the Tenants parcelling out the Lands, but not
before. Vid. Talbot's c 8. R. f. 105 a. So Bruerton's c. 6. Rep. f 1. and 2. 1
Inst. f. 93. a. Mirror. p. 7.
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum) have been a Tenant in Chief, by reason of
the entire and indivisible Service incident to the Tenure of his Land, by the
same reason the Grantees of Land held of the King in Chief by Socage or other
Free Tenure would have been Tenants in Capite, because of Fealty, which is as
indivisible an incident to all other Free Tenures, as Homage or any thing else
belonging to Knights Service. And by Consequence upon this Notion, since the
King, even before the pretended Conquest, had ratione Coronae, the Supreme
Signiory of all the Land of the Kingdom, as the Mirror shows: All the Land of
the Kingdom would have been held of the King immediately before the Statute of
Quia Emptores terrarum. And then to be sure ever after, since that provided
that Lands shall be held as the Feoffor held over, which by this opinion must
always have been of the King immediately.

But I mnst needs say, this Error of Mr. Hunt's is the most excusable of any I
meet with in his Book, because the great Lord Cook leads him the way.

For he tells us, and refers to the Mirror 1 Inst. f. 58.
for Proof, That by the Laws and Ordinances of ancient Kings, and especially of
The Author of Antid: Brit. builds much upon this Authority. Antid. p. 10.
King Alfred, it appears that the first Kings of this Realin had all the
Lands of England in demesne, and les Grandes, Manors and Royalties, they
reserved to themselves: and of the Remnant they for the Defense of the Realm,
enfeoft the Barons of the Realm with such Jurisdiction as the Court Baron now
has, and instituted the Freeholders to be Judges of the Court Baron.

Then he tells us in his second Institutes, That till the Statute of 24. E. 3.
whereby 2 Inst. f. 65.
it is provided that Alienations of Lands made by Tenants, which held of H. 3.
or of other Kings before him, to hold of themselves, should stand in force,
saving to the King his Prerogative of the time of his Great Grandfather, his
Father, and his own: It was doubted, whether the King's Tenant, might have
given part of the Tenancy to hold of himself.

Which is in Effect the same with Mr. Hunt's Notion of all the Tenants holding
of the King in Chief.

1. But it is obvious that by what the Lord Cook said of the Laws of King Alfred
and others; whereby he supposes Tenures were erected not only of the King, but
of his Grantees, who had their Court Barons: His Opinion was that the King's
Tenant might have granted out to hold of himself, for otherwise how could he
have had his Court of Tenants?

2. Whereas he supposes that the Laws of King Alfred, show that the Kings had
all the Lands in Demesne, there is but one Law of King Alfred, mentioned in the
Mirror, and that is for the great Councils assembling at London twice a year,
or oftener, if 1 Inst. ibid.
need be; Not any thing of Tenures.

3. But amongst the Establishments made per cel estate per plusors Royes, by
several Kings in Parliament, the Mirror says, Assentus Mirror p. 11.
fuist que les chooses suivant serrent appendant aux Roys and al droit de la
corone, Sovereign jurisdiction, la Sovereign Signory, etc. come Franchises,
treasnre trove, etc. Then it goes on Ceux droits retiendrent les primers Roys
and delremnant de la terre enfefferont les Countees, Barons, etc.

Here it is plain that no more than the Rights aforesaid, amongst which Chief
Cities, Chief Ports, and Great Manors were named, not all the Lands, were
retained by the first Kings: And tho they are said to have Infeoff'd others of
the rest of the Land to hold of them, yet that does not necessarily imply that
they had all in them before: Nay, the Mirror shows the contrary; for it says,
That after God pleased to abate the Ibid. p. 7.
British Nobility, who used Force rather than Law, he left the Realm to the
most humble and simple of all the adjacent Countries, the Saxons, who came to
conquer it from Almain, de la quel gent il y eurent iesque quarant Sovereigns
que touts soy tiendrent a Companions. Amongst these forty Princes, being equal
and independent, here was no King, till they came to make a Choice. And so the
Mirror tells us they did, having felt the smart of their Competitions. Then
Eslierent de eux un Roy a reigner sur eux and Governer le People de dieu and a
Maintainer and Defendre les Persons and les Biens en quiet per les Rules de
droit.

This shows they did not resign their Properties to the King, for they chose
him to defend them, yet it seems they consented to take Grants from the King by
such Services as were in common agreed upon: And though they were principally
from him, as Vid. Spelman 's Councils, Vol. 1. f. 340. Rex non potuit
distrahere patrimonium Regni sine assensu procerum.
Head of the Body Politic, yet any Man that observes the Forms of the Saxon
Kings Grants, will not think it a vain Imagination, that such as I speak of,
should have been with universal Consent.

4. But I cannot find any Warrant to question the Tenants Power at the Common
Law to Grant out to hold of himself. And I am sure there is an express
Resolution for it in Dyer, the Words are thus in English;

A Man seized of a Manor in Fee, held Dyer (...). Eliz. f. 229. b.
of the King in Capite, before the Statute of Quia Emptores Enfeoffs J. S. of
part of the demeans in Fee, without saying more: the Feofee enfeoffs another to
hold of the Feoffor and his Heirs by 26 s. and 8 d. Rent for all Services. The
Land clearly is not held in Capite. And the first Mesnalty is not held of the
Feoffor as of the Manor by Knights Service.

The Statute of 34 E. 3. mentioned before by the Lord Cook, is not in the least
contrary to this: For whereas before Magna Charta, the King's Tenant might have
alien'd as he pleased, and Magna Charta's Provision (Quod nullus liber homo det
de caetero Magna Charta cap. 32.
amplius alicui, vel vendat alicui de terra sua, quam ut de residuo terrae suae
possit sufficienter fieri Domino feodi servitium ei debitum, quod pertinet ad
feodum illud) interpretatively gave a Fine to the King when his Tenant alien'd;
which was not due before that great Charter was made; The Statute 34. E. 3.
gave the King Fines for Alienations made in the time of any King, even before
the making of the Charter.

The Lord Cook cites an Answer to a Petition in Parliament, 18. E. 1. Rex non
vult aliquem medium, which is no more than that he would not grant his Tenant
who then petitioned, License to alien: However he had not forfeited his Land if
he had alien'd, but the King might have entered and 2 Inst. f. 66.
seized the Land in the Name of Distress for a reasonable Fine for the
Trespass: Which the Lord Cook takes for the better Opinion. And if the Land
were forfeited, to be sure the indivisible Service could not have been
multiplied, as Mr. Hunt imagines.

It Is certain, that tho at the Common Law the King, or any other Lord, might
have distrained for his Services, reserved upon the Original Grant, in the
Lands of any inferior Grantee as well as in the 1 Instit. f. 142.
Lands of his immediate Tenants; yet there was this Inconvenience, that the
Wardships and Marriages were not so considerable when the Lands were parcell'd
out, and the Lands of the immediate Tenant, (who only was to be in Ward, or to
be married by the first Grantor) were of less value.

Therefore was that Provision by Magna Charta, by the Interpretation of which,
the King was to have Fines upon Alienations. But tho the Inconvenience of
Tenants aliening to hold of themselves, was taken away by the Statute of Quia
emptores Terrarum, 18 Edw. 1. which gave Tenants free Power to alien their
Lands; and provided that the Alienees should hold of the Alienors immediate
Lords with an Apportionment of Services: Yet Licenses of Alienation being of
settled Prerogative, were not taken away from the King, he not being named in
the Statute. 2 Instit. f. 67.


By that Statute indeed, if a Tenant in Capite aliened with License, the
Alience became Tenant in Capite; for the Statute divided the Signiory. But how
it could be at the Common Law in any other Case than that of Copartners, who
are but as one Heir, and placed in the same Relation to the Lord, I cannot
imagine. I find in the Statute of Ireland this of Copartners is mentioned as
the Law of England.

In Regno nostro Angliae talis est Lex and 14 H. 3. Tit. Prerog. Stat. de
Hibernia 1 Inst. f. 67. a.
Consuetudo, quod siquis tenuerit de nobis in Capite, and habuerit Filias
heredes, ipso patre defuncto, antecessores nostri habuerunt, and semper nos
habuimus, and cepimus homagium de omnibus hujusmodi Filiabus, and singulae
earum tenerent de nobis in Capite in hoc Casu.

Which shows that the Case of Copartners (being a single Instance of the
continuance of the same immediate Service, notwithstanding the division of the
Fee,) was an Exception out of a general Rule.

But I dare say, no body that understands any thing of the Feudal Law, as it
has been received in this or other Nations, will be of Mr. Hunt's Opinion in
this particular.

3dly, Mr. H. would have done well to have answered the Objections against the
supposed Conquest before he concluded for it; and I shall take it for granted,
it is a Question heartily begged, 'till I find an Answer to these Arguments in
Ius Anglorum ab antiquo.

1. That the Histories of those Times Vid. Jus Ang. p. 34, to 58, and p. 139.
Mr. Petyt's Preface, p. 20. So Ro^. de temp. R's Jo. Lord Hales his Collections
in Lincoln's Inn, lib.
prove undeniably, that William the first came in upon Terms, which he swore to
at his Coronation, and solemnly confirmed afterward. This indeed was a
Conquest in the Language of those times, as 'twas distinguished from an
Hereditary Right, but no otherwise.

Thus in King John's time, a Man pleads, that his Father had such a thing de
Conquest^ suo, viz. by his own Purchase or Acquisition.

2. That Dooms-day-Book it self demonstrates that Men enjoyed their Lands under
Jus Angl. p. 80 to 100.
their old Titles, And those Laws of St. Edw. which the Histories assure us
were confirmed by Compact with William the first, without particular
Confirmation of their Estates.

3. That we have later Records of the allowance of Titles derived from before
the Norman Acquisition, nay, even of the Ibid. p. 112, to 117.
whole Palatinate of Chester, the Title to which was laid only in Descent, even
after King William's Confirmation.

4. That ancient Historians, and Dooms-day-Book confirm the Opinion of that
Addit. p. 90. Jus Angl. p. 99, to 106.
Judge in Edw. III. time, who informs us that William the first, disseized only
them that were in Arms against him, and forfeited by Mr. Hunt, p. 130.
opposing that Title which the Nation received.

Till Mr. Hunt has answered these Arguments amongst others in Ius Anglorum ab
antiquo; I hope he will not be angry that some are so critical that they will
not call the first William, Conqueror; especially since Conquestor and
Conquestus cannot now be reduced to their old peaceable Signification.

And therefore are by no means to be admitted, unless we take the sense of the
Judicious Lord Clarendon, who rebukes Mr. Hobbs for insisting upon William the
first his Title by Conquest, as being what he himself renounced and abdicated,
if he ever had it.

If Mr. Hobbs says that unhappy Great Survey of the Leviathan, p. 109.
Man,

Had taken the pains, and known where to have been informed of the Proceedings
and Transactions of William the Conqueror, he would have found Cause to believe
that that great King did ever dexterously endeavor from the time that he was
assured that his Possession would not be disturbed, to divest himself of the
Title of a Conqueror, and made his legal Claim to what he had got by the Will
of Edward the Confessor, whose Name was precious to the Nation, and who was
known to have a great Friendship for that Prince, who had now recovered what
had been his.

And he knew so well the ill Consequence which must attend the very imagination
that the Nation had lost its Propriety, that he made haste to grant them an
Assurance that they should still enjoy all the Benefits and Privileges which
were due to them by their own Laws and Customs: By which they should be still
governed as they were during that King's whole Reign, who had enough of the
unquestionable Demesnes, and Lands belonging to the Crown, of which he was then
possessed without a Rival, and belonging to those Great Men; who had perished
with their Posterity in the Battle with Harold, to distribute to those who had
born such Shares, and run such Hazards in his prosperous Adventure. And those
Laws and Customs, which were before the Conquest, are the same which the Nation
and Kingdom have been since governed by to this day; with the Addition of those
Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which are the Laws of the Successive Kings,
with which they have gratified their Subjects, in providing such new Security
for them, and Advantages to the Public, as upon the Experience and
Observation of the Ages and Times when they were made, contributed to the
Honor and Glory of the King, as well as Happiness of the People. Many of which
are but the Copies and Transcripts of ancient Landmarks, making the Characters
more plain and legible, of what had been practiced and understood in the
preceding Ages, and the Observations thereof are of the same Profit and
Convenience to the King and People.

And upon Mr. Hobbs his Supposition, that William the first, at his Reception
had dispensed with the Subjection of the Ecclesiastics, by the Oath he took
not to infringe the Liberty of the Church: The Lord Clarendon has to the same
purpose with the former, or rather as evidence that there was no color of a
Conquest, these words:

They who know any thing of that Survey of the Lev. p. 148.
time, know that the Oath he took, was the same, and without any Alteration,
that all the former Kings, since the Crown had rested on a single Head, had
taken, which was at his Coronation, after the Bishops and the Barons had taken
their Oath to be his true and faithful Subjects: The Archbishop who crowned
him, presented that Oath to him which he was to take himself, which he
willingly did, to defend the holy Church of God, and the Rectors of the same;
to govern the universal People subject to him, justly to establish equal Laws,
and to see them justly executed. Nor was he more wary in any thing, than, as
has been said before, that the People might imagine that he pretended any
other Title to the Government than by the Confessor; tho it is true, that he
did by degrees introduce many of the Norman Customs, which were found very
useful or convenient, and agreeable enough, if not the same, with what had been
formerly practiced. And the common Reproach of the Laws being from time to time
put into French, carries no weight with it: For there was before that time so
rude a Collection of the Laws, and in Languages so Forriegn to that of the
Nation, British, Saxon, Danish and Latin, almost as unintelligible as either
of the other, that if they had been all digested into the English, that was
then spoken, we should very little better have understood it, than we do the
French, in which the Laws were afterward rendered. And it is no wonder since a
Reduction into order was necessary, that the King who, was to look to the
Execution, took care to have them in that Language which himself best
understood, and from whence issued no Inconvenience, the former remaining still
in the Language in which they had been written.

CHAP. III.
That Mr. Hunt himself in Effect grants, that more than Tenants in Chief had
right to come to the Great Council of the Nation in which the Nation's Rights
were involved.

I Do not deny, (says he) but upon a Change in the Succession to the Mr. Hunt,
p. 153.
Crown, there might have been in this time extraordinary Conventions of the
People, to declare their universal Assent for better assuring such Successors,
discountenancing the real Prince, and preserving the Peace, as in the Case of
William the second, Henry the first, King Stephen, and King John, etc. with an
assent of such an Assembly as this; at least King John should only (if so) have
made his Kingdom Tributary to the Pope.

1. Here he grants that sometimes more than Tenants in Capite assembled at
Council.

2. That to some purposes such Assemblies were needful, not only to quiet the
Minds of the People, but to transfer over a National Right.

For, he says, if ever there were extraordinary Conventions, which he owns to
have been in some Cases, then King John could have made the Kingdom Tributary
only in such a Council, viz. an extraordinary Convention. Wherefore Government
being, Page 155.
as he says, Rei Publicae Communis Sponsio, he grants, that the Government
here, was not absolutely in the King and his Tenants in Chief: For if it had,
they might have disposed of all the Nation's Rights.

Wherefore in effect, he yields, That the Men of that Order were not chosen
once for all Ibid. page 157.
interpretatively by the People in their Consent to the Government.

But further, if he yields us those Authorities which show that the People of
the Land, the Freeholders, used to assemble for the declaring their Assent to
the Supreme Governor, with what color can he set aside those Authorities
which mention Assemblies to other purposes in as general Terms?

If an ordinary Freeholder was under the word Populus at an Election to the
Crown, or Recognition of a Title; how comes the Signification to be restrained
at other times? Will not Vulgus, Plebs, Populus minor, Laici mediocres, and the
like, denote Supra p. 212.
more than Tenants in Capite, as well at one public Assembly in the some
King's Reign, as at another? Unless a prior Law be shown, which excludes the
Commons from one Council, but admits them to the other? But I cannot find any
thing more in this Supposition than a downright begging the Question. Indeed if
William the first made a Conquest of England; so as that he divided out all the
Lands of the Kingdom to be held of him in Chief: And the Alienees of Tenants in
Chief still held immediately of the King; neither of which will readily be
proved: then indeed, but not till then, the Populus Minor at the Councils would
be taken for the Tenants in Chief only. But the admittance that the presence or
consent of more than Tenants in Chief, was at any time needful to any Act of
rightful Civil Power, wholly destroys the supposition of a Conquest; unless we
can believe that the conquered ought to give Laws to the Conqueror; or that,
notwithstanding any kind of Establishment, the dernier resort, and Supremacy of
Power, is always in the People. Which is a Notion that would unsetle all
Governments, making them precarious. Whereas he himself tells us, No Government
can be legally, or by any lawful Power changed, but Mr. Hunt p. 122.
must remain for ever, once established.

CHAP. IV.
That even according to Mr. Hunt's Notion of Tenure in Capite, all Proprietors
of Land, as such, had till the 49th of H. 3. right to come to Parliament.

THis, though never so strange, I think will be granted me, that he does, if he
makes all the Freeholders of the Kingdom Tenants in Capite per Baroniam.

He supposes, that the whole Kingdom was upon the matter turned into one great
Ibid. p. 131.
Manor by William the First (all Men made his Tenants) And that all the great
Possessions (by which he must mean the Manors, of which others held) were made
Baronies.

Now this, Feudal Baronage, he Page 129.
says, was capable of being multiplied several Page 163.
ways: For every part of the Fee, however divided, the Services reserved Page
164.
upon that Fee, that were entire and indivisible, were to be performed by the
several Proprietors of the several parts of the divided Fee.

Since he uses this as a Proof of the Multiplication of Baronies, according to
the Argument, Baron-Service was indivisible.

Thus every Proprietor, as he had part of the divided Fee, was part of the
Baronage, and consequently, If all the Baronage both Spiritual and Temporal de
jure, ought Page 173.
to have Summons now to Parliament, without respect to Estate or Tenure, there
would be a great many Pretenders.

But to be sure, when all the Baronage were summoned anciently, these inferior
Tenants came, by his own Rule, as owing the Service of Barons, and so ratione
Tenurae, were Barons Regni.

But the Baronage of England having been always, in his Opinion, the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal; and Nobility having been Page 2.
Foudal, or because of the Feud, the Burgesses, being all, according to him,
till about the time of H. 3. under Tenure by Baronage, were as good Lords as
the best; And why were not honest Freeholders so too, as well Page 179, and
180.
as Traders, most of them, then it is likely, Mechanics?

CHAP. V.
Whereas he would set aside the Questions of what the Government was, till 49th
of H. 3. as impertinent. (1.) His own Notion, by which he would supplant the
Labors of others, destroys it self, while mine maintains what he aims at. (2.)
He puts such matter in Issue for asserting the present Government, as can never
be maintained. (3.) He yields so much of the Fact against me as sets aside the
whole Foundation of his Postscript. And yet admit he answers all Objections
against his Postscript, the Grounds which I go upon are of the most General Use.

FOr preventing the Worlds being Page 156.
troubled with impertinent Labors, and to divert those that thus employ
themselves to Undertakings more useful to the Public, and advantageous to
themselves, he thought fit to tell us, that the Parliament was always
materially the same.

But we are at a loss to know what he means, by materially the same.

For it is manifest, that according to his Notion, if the Government were from
the time of our Dispute always in one, it would have been materially the same,
as it is now, and yet he will not allow the Legislative Power to be in one here.
Every Government, Vid. Postscript p. 28.
says he, is the Representative of the People in what they are to be governed
by it, by their consent to it, in the first erecting thereof, they do trust
their Governors Mr. Hunt, p. 155.
with the Rule and Order of their Lives and Estates for the Commonweal. This
seems to be his meaning of materially the same, as it is brought to show that
it is not needful, in order to the maintaining the present right of the Commons,
to show, That the Counties in all this time had their Representatives in
Parliament, by the formality of a Choice. Which no Man, that I know of, has of
late labored to prove.

But if this be his meaning of materially the same, then all Governments are
materially the same; Whereas they may be so formally, as founded in the consent
of the People, which he presupposes.

But if William the First was an absolute Conqueror, as he all along yields to
Dr. Brady, where was the consent of the People to his Government? And how can a
Government by consent, now of constituent parts, different from what he thinks
ours was at the first Erection by the Conquest, be either materially or
formally the same with such a Government by Conquest?

But we must seek further for his Page 148.
meaning in materially the same. He tells us, the Parliament and the Curia
Regis, were materially the same, that is, as one would think there, consisted
of the same Members, the only difference being laid to be in the nature of the
Summons. And yet he tells us, that the ancient Buroughs sent Members Page 151.
to Parliament, but that such were not Suitors to the Curia Regis: How then
were these materially the same?

Thus it is plain that he has laid no manner of Foundation for our Government by
King, Lords, and Commons, or by King, and three States (which he takes to have
been the E^entials of our Government from the Conquest) but what himself
undermines. Whereas what I go upon prevents all manner of Pretenses for
unhinging of it, and is the same in effect with what the Great Fortescue
observed in the time of H. 6.

Et in omnibus Nationum harum, and Regum Fortescue de laudibus Legum Ang. p.
38. b.
earum temporibus, regnum illud eisdem quibus jam regiter consuetudinibus
continue regulatum est, quae si non optimae extitissent, aliqui illorum
justitia, ratione, vel affectione concitati eas mut assent.

Indeed this Assertion, of that famous Chancellor, has been much exploded by
those, who think that the altering of some Laws, or Customs, is a change of the
Government; And therefore say, that he was greatly mistaken, because many old
Customs have been abolished: Whereas he certainly meant it of the Fundamental
Constitution. Which, as far as ever I could learn, was, and is, that every
Proprietor (of Land especially) should in the General Council of the Kingdom,
consent to the making those Laws under which they were to Live.

In the time of the Confessor, as appears in Vocatio and Congregatio Populorum
and Gentium omnium qui ibi omnes convenire debent, and universi qui sub
protectione and pace Domini Regis degunt and consistunt in Regno praedicto, and
ibi providere debent indemnitatibus coronae regni hujus per Commune Concilium
and ibi providendum est ad insolentiam malefactorum reprimendam, etc. Leges
Sanct. Ed. de Grove. Vid Ius Angl. ab Antiq. Cap. 7. Dr. Brady says, the
Controversy is concerning matter of Fact only. Against Jan. Angl. facies nova.
p. 1.
the Transcript of his Laws, there was a Folcmote, or General Assembly of the
People of all the Counties of England, which was to be held once a Year on the
Kalends of May, to treat of all Matters of State and Public Concern: the very
Law for such Assembly was received and confirmed in the 4th of William the
First. So that then by Law, and of Right, whatever was the Fact, the People of
all the Counties of England, that is, all the Members of the County Courts, the
Freeholders, were to meet in a Great Council, or Parliament, as we now call it.

Admit that this is to be taken of every County respectively, (which were to
make as many distinct Governments as Counties): still the Sym. Dunel. f. 243.
Anno 1121. So Mat. West. f. 352. 37. H. 3.
Adunatio Conciliorum, or, Calling Ego enim quando voluero faciam ea satis
summoneri propter mea dominica necessaria ad voluntatem meam Ian. Angl. p. 34.
Spelm. Glos. tit. Hund.
together of the Counties and Hundreds, as often as there was need, which H.
the ^st promised by his Charter, would come to the same thing.

And that all the Members of the several Vid. Additions to Ius Angl. ab antiquo
a p. 20. ^d p. 32.
County Courts, were Members of the Great or General Council, and came
accordingly if they pleased. Not to mention the several Authorities by me
formerly insisted on, I conceive may appear by comparing two Authors of
undoubted Credit and sufficient Antiquity, who show what the Great Council was
in the time of Henry the second.

In the 16 of Henry the second, that King held his Easter Court Baron at
Windsor, as Bromton shows us, Rer tenuit Curiam suam in solemnitate Paschali.
Thither indeed Brompton, f. 1060.
were flock't most of the Nobility, fere omnes Regni Anglae Episcopii, and
Magnates.

But this being a Curia de more, or an ordinary Court, which no more than
Tenants in Chief were obliged to take notice of, nothing of universal
Obligation could then be Established: Wherefore from hence the King went to
London, where, as that Historian says, de Coronatione Filij sui Brompton, An.
1170.
Henrici majores and Regui sui Statutis magnum celebravit Concilium. Gervasius,
who Gervasii Crobica, f. 1412.
lived in that very time, acquaints us particularly with the Summons, and
Appearance thereupon, Convenerunt die Statuto ex mandato Regis ad Londoniam
totius Angliae Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, Barons, Vice-comites, Praepositi,
Aldermanni, cum Fide-iussoribus suis.

There assembled at London, according to the King's Summons, the Bishops,
Abbots, Sheriffs, the Heads of Hundreds, and of Tythings, This Explanation is
warranted by St. Edward^ (...) Habent etiam
with all the Frank-pledges throughout England; unless the Fide-jussores Answer
to the Manucaptores, of which immediately. If this take not in all the
Freeholders Aldermanni in Civitatibus and in Burgis clausis and murae val
lat^, and in Castellis eandem Dignitatem and Potestacem, and modum qualem
habent praepositi Hundredorum and Wapentachiorum. Vid. Spel. Glos. Tit.
Aldermannus.
of England, I know not what will; for he that was within no free-pledge, or
was no Fide-jussor, was either an Outlaw, or not his own Man, but his that was
to be answerable for him: But every Master of a Family, or Jus Angl. ab antiq.
p. 192.
Freeholder, that was within the Protection of the Laws, was one of the
Frank-pledges. And indeed Bronton tells us in express Terms, that all the
Libere sui Regni tenentes all the Freeholders of the Kingdom were there, for
they all swore Allegiance to the young King, as well as to the Father.

Omnes Comites, Barons, and liberos Regni sui tenentes devenire homines novi
Regis Filij sui sibique super reliquias sanctorum Ligeantias Bromptor, f. 10^1.
and Fidelitates jurare, Fidelitate semper nihilominus sua salva.

But if the Fidejussores mentioned in Gervasius Ex Blundel Brev. penes Rem. R's
in socio, 23. E. 1. North Nomina duorum mil. Johannes Doyley de Stoke miles
Willus Murdake miles Manucaptores Johannis Doyley mil. Ris. Bird de Stoke
Wiliiel. Ellis de eadem. Many more of like nature.
were no more than the Manucaptores, which used to answer for the Appearance of
them that were chose to represent the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs in
Parliament, then here is positive proof of such Representation of the Commons
as was in the times of Edw. I. Edw. II. and so downwards. Yet it is not
improbable that the Pledges, or Manucaptors for the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses chose to parliament, were introduced long after this time instead of
the Fidejussors, or Frank-pledges, when that admirable ancient Polity about
Frank-pledges became impracticable, and was discontinued or broken through the
Francus, Plegius seu Fidejussor Spelm. Glos. Tit. Franc. pl.
general Corruption of Manners, which rendered it impossible for whole
Neighbourhoods to answer for one another, and through the Pride and Ambition of
some who thought themselves above that Law.

And when the numbers of Frank-pledges, (had that happy Combination still been
maintained) would through the vast Multiplication of Proprietors have been too
great to assemble together upon any Occasion requiring Counsel and serious
Debates.

There is one Difficulty which arises upon the examining this point of
Antiquity; that is, since we rarely meet with Authorities, So nono H. 3.
Milites and libere tenentes and omnes de Reg. Magna Charta cap. 38. 2 Inst. f.
76.
tho some there be, which particularly describe such as Citizens and Burgesses
as summoned to, or present at the General Councils of the Kingdom, What shall
we think of them.

To which I am bold to say, that even Citizens and Burgesses might have come
under the Consideration of Freeholders, inter liberos Regni tenentes, or,
Barons, Baronagium, Barnagium, or the like.

For either they were; 1. Corporations by Charter; Or, 2. Corporations by
Prescription. Spelm. Glos. Tit. lib. hom. ad Nobiles (...) lim s^tabunt (...)
(...) a majoribus ortos omniuo liberis.
And I think it will be probable at least, that Property in Land, the
continuance of which in any Family made Nobility, was the occasion of the
Privileges of them all. And in such respect the Freemen there were numbered
amongst the Nobles, tho afterward when Trade prevailed amongst them, the
Generality of them might be but quasi optimates, and yet by Custom, they
obtained the name of Barons, Vid. Can^den's Ordines Angl. f. 122.
as in London, Warwick, the five Ports, etc. And probably upon the account of
the first Erection.

But that I may not talk wholly at random, I shall offer a Scheme of the
ancient Polity, in relation to them which at least will not be disproved.

For the first, the Corporations by Charter, they were of two kinds.

(1.) Such as were incorporated by the King. (2.) Such as were incorporated by
the Subject.
1. Of those that were incorporated by 1 Inst. f. ^10. b.
the King there were Cities, that is, Boroughs, which had a Bishop's See, or
else Boroughs only. But the Episcopal See, making the only difference, they
fall not here under any different Consideration.

I conceive that though to these at the time of the Incorporation, the King
granted several Franchises, as Markets, Fairs, and the like: Yet he gave no
Right of sending Members to Parliament, to them who had it not before: but of
them that were so incorporated, some were Minores tenentes in Capite,
inferior. Tenants in Chief, such as by King John's Charter were (where not
incorporated) to be summoned in general to the Commune Concilium, or Curia
Regis. Many of these for the sake of such Immunities as belonged to free
Boroughs, consented to be incorporated: and thereupon they being one entire
Body, naturally fell into a Representation, and answered together by their
Head-boroughs, or any other that they chose, as one Tenant.

St. Albans I take it was of this kind, the Burgesses of which pleaded, that
they held the said Vill of the King in Capite, and ipsi sicut caeteri Burgenses
Regni ad Parliamenta Rot. Parl. 8. E. 2. N. 233.
Regis cum ea summoneri contigerit per duos comburgenses suos venire debeant
prout totis retroactis temporibus venire consueverunt pro omnibus Servitus Regi
faciendis, quae quidem Servitia iidem Burgenses and Antecessores sui Burgenses
Villae praedictae tam tempore Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Patris Regis
and Progenitorum, quam tempore Regis nunc semper ante instans. Parliamentum ut
p^ittatur (...) Nomina quorum Burgonsium sic praedicta Villa ad Parliamenta
Regis ve^entium in rotulis Cancellariae semper irrotulata fuerunt.

I before had occasion to examine Dr. Brady's Interpretation of the Answer to
the ^ea; here the Plea it self comes to be considered: And whereas he renders
p^o o^us Servitus, in lieu of all Services, Dr. Brady against Mr. Petyt, p. 78.
I conceive the Sense to be no more than thus:

That they held of the King in Chief, and that as other Burgesses of the
Kingdom, they were to be represented at the King's Parliaments, when they
happened to be summoned by two of their fellow-Burgesses, as ever since they
were incorporated, they had used to come, for the performing of any of their
Services. And that they So if summoned to attend the Justices in Eire, or the
like.
had not forfeited their Charter, nor ought their Corporation to be dissolved,
for that they had duly performed all their Services. And for proof that, to
Parliament especially, they had all along come by Representation, they appeal
to the Rolls of Chancery.

Certainly, no Man, before the Doctor, thought that the coming to Parliament
excused any Rent or other Service, which was incumbent upon them.

But thus much is obvious from this, that here were Minores Barons, Tenants in
Chief (whose Tenure must have been created by Charter) who were fallen into a
Representation: And that this was upon the account of Property in Land, which
occasioned their Services, and their being united as one Tenant.

But besides these, there were Tenants of Honors or Manors in the King's
Hands, or in the Subjects, which were incorporated by the King's Charter, and
sent their Representatives to Parliament.

I shall instance only in a Corporation holding of a Subject, but incorporated
by the King's Charter.

King John by his Charter to William Pro Burgensibus de Brugwater ut sit liber
Burgus per Chartam Regis Johan. factam Wi. Br. Cart. 11. Ed. 2. m. 5. n. ^0.
Cart. 11. E. 2. m. 5. n. 132. Vid. Prin. Regist. of Writs.
Brewer, who in all likelihood was Lord of the Manor of Brugwater or
Bridgwater, grants that Brugwater should be a free Borough, and that it should
have Markets and Fairs. And 26 of Edward the first, when the first Roll of
Burgesses begins, we find Burgesses for Bridgwater entered amongst the rest.

And it is observable, that there is not to be found any Charter giving them the
privilege of sending Burgesses, nor could such a Privilege arise by
Implication. Wherefore they must necessarily have come upon the account of
their Property in Land, with no other Alteration than that their divided
Interests were all conjoined in one.

2. But besides these, there were some incorporated by Subjects.

Of those who incorporated them, some had Regalia themselves, as the Counts
Palatine of Chester: One of which Leofrick, Brother to the Confessor, in his
lifetime, incorporated Coventry under the Prior and Monks of Chester.
Whereupon the Burghers of Coventry were represented in the General Councils of
the Kingdom as one entire Body. We find that it sent Burgesses to Parliament 26
Edw. 1. and from its first Corporation must needs have done so, according to
its Plea which was allowed 34 Edw. 1. For it pleads that it was neither
Civitas, Burgus, nor Dominicum Regis. That therefore it ought not to be Inter
Coima de term. St. Mich. An. 34. Edw. 1. vid. part of it enforced Jan. Angl. p.
241.
taxt or taliated as such, but was to be charged only when the whole County was
charged, or in the like Proportion: and they pray that the Taxors and
Collectors may not be suffered to distrain amongst them, otherwise than it had
been, totis retroactis temporibus in all times past, since they Vid. at the end
this inserted at large.
became one Body; that is, that ever since they were a Body, they used not to
be taxt as the King's Demesnes, whether Cities, Boroughs,
or Manors (which might be out of Parliament, and even when there was a
Parliament, they bore the heaviest Burdens): But as the County, as to the way
of charging, or at least as to the Proportion, but they having been at
Parliament 26 E. 1. which was but eight Years Vid. Prin's Regist.
before by Representatives of their own, not of the County in general, it shows
how they had been taxt, totis retroactis temporibus.

But besides the Charters of Counts Palatine erecting Corporations, there were
others granted by some, who were particularly empowered to that purpose, or
however they might have been confirmed by the King afterward.

But I shall give an Example of a Corporation raised by virtne of such a Power
given by the King, and confirmed afterward.

Thurstinus Dei Gratia sciatis me dedisse, and Charta Antiqua R. n. 18.
concessisse, and Concilio Capituli Eborac and Beverlac and Concilio meorum
Faronum mea Carta confirmasse hominibus de Beverlaco omnes libertates iisdem
legibus quibus ulli de Eborac habent in sua Civitate, praeterea enim non lateat
vos quod Dominus H. Rex noster concessit Hen. I.
nobis potestatem faciendi de bona voluntate sua, and sua Charta confirmavit
Statuta nostra and Leges nostras juxta formam Burgensium de Eborac. etc.

H. Rex Angliae, etc. Sciatis me concessisse, Carta Ant'q. R. n. 15.
and dedisse, and hac Charta mea confirmasse Hominibus de Beverlaco liberum
Burgagium secundum libertates, Leges, and Consuetudines Burgens. de Eboraco,
and suam gildam Mercatorum cum placitis suis, and Feloneo and cum omnibus
liberis consuetudinibus, and libertatibus suis, cum omnibus rebus sicut,
Thurstinus Archiepiscopus ea iis dedit, etc.

There is another Confirmation by King Henry of the Charter by Thurstan, and
also Ibid. n. 16.
William Archbishop of York, to the same free-Borough:

And also another of King Richard, Rich. I.
wherein he mentions the Confirmation of the Bishop's Charters by his
Grandfather.

Tenentes de Villa Beverlaci in auxiliis, tam Inter Bre. dir. Baron de Term. S.
Trin. 8 Ed 2. penes Rem. D. These. This like Coventry.
Regi, quam Primogenitoribus, cum Communitate praedict Comitatus semper
hactenus and non cum Communitate Civitatum and Burgorum taxari and contribuere
consuevisse.

I need not go to prove that these came by reason of their Property in Land,
they being either the Kings Tenants, or the Tenants of Subjects. And whatever
Privileges their Interest might prevail with them to suffer to Traders amongst
them, it is certain they were granted to the Freeholders.

2. But then there were Corporations by Prescription, where since now all the
Freemen choose, it may seem more difficult to prove that they came upon the
account of Property in Land.

Many of these received Charters in Confirmation of their Privileges, yet, if
they were taken away, would remain good Corporations at the Common Law. I may
instance in London; of which there is this memorable Passage in the Confessors
Laws.

Debet etiam in London quae caput est regni Leges Sanct. Ed. de Heretachiis.
and legum semper Curia Domini Regis singulis septimanis die Lunae Hustingis
sedere and teneri. And amongst other things quae huc usque consuetudines suas
una semper inviolabilitate conservat.

King John's Charter provides for the ancient Liberties, and free Customs of
the City of London in particular, and of all other Cities, Buroughs, Vills and
Ports, and some Charters of other Kings may seem more like new Grants than
Confirmations of the old Privileges: But thus much is certain, that those
Cities, Boroughs, and Vills which had their Liberties, and free Customs
confirmed by Magna Charta 9. H. 3. which was in the same Terms as to that part
with King John's, were Cities, Buroughs, and Vills at the Common Law. And that
we may frame an Idea of these, we must have recourse to the old Saxon Laws.

By them it should seem that there was a greater equality amongst the Masters
of Families, Habeat omnis Dominus familiam inplegio suo L. Canuti. c. 52.
than afterward, and the Law of Frank-pledges was well suited to such
equality; when no Man was above giving that Security to the Government, upon
which St. Edward's Law says, Est quaedam summa L. Sanct. Ed. de Friborgis.
and maxima Securitas, per quam omnes Statu firmissimo sustinentur ut
unusquisque stabiliet se sub fidejussionis Securitate.

And as every City, or Borough was a Vill, that being the Genus to both as
well as Vid. Jus Ang. ab antiquo, p. 13, 14, 15. L. de Friborg.
an inferior Species, the Law provided quod de omnibus Villis sub decimali
fidejussione debebant esse universi, of these Vills they that had special
Privileges, Markets, Fairs, and the like, were free Buroughs. And as the
Vills, so the Buroughs at the Common Law were made up of a certain number of
Freemen, whose Property might extend far into the Counties. These at first
were under Tythings. Afterward as in the time of H. 1. Property falling into
more Hands within Aldermannus novemdecimorum in the Laws of H. 1. Spelm. Glos.
Tit. Aldermannus.
the same Tract of Land or Precinct, we find them answering for one another by
Twentys, the Headburrough was Aldermannus, or Praepositus Villae, or Burgi.
Every one of these as a Fidejussor, I take it, came anciently to the General
Council of the Kingdom in his own Person if he pleased: But very frequently
they might entrust their Aldermannus, or Headburrough, to answer for them. But
the Franck-pledges discontinuing, they might accustom themselves to electing of
Members, sometimes one, sometimes more, upon every Summons to Parliament; And
thereupon in every Borough at the Common Law, the Elections are by all the
Freemen, which answer to the Franck-pledges formerly, except that it is likely
of Old all the Franck-pledges were very considerable Freeholders.

But still these Buroughs could not take in all the Freeholders, nor yet the
Vills, as anciently, consisting of clusters of Inhabitants. But if any Man grew
wealthy, he loved to live by himself in some Castle, or large Seat which he
might build abroad in the Country. Such looked upon themselves to be too great
to give Sureties for their good Behavior, as those that lived in Clusters did:
And by the time of Edw. the First Chivalers and their Children, (And I take it,
every considerable Freeholder, was a Chivaler or Britton e. 29. p. 72. b. Vid.
Stat. West. 1. c. 10. 3. E. 1. the Coroner to be des plus loialz and plus sages
Chivalers. Vid. etiam Ian. Ang. Facies nova p. 47. and 48.
Gentleman,) were exempted from the Law of Franck-pledges. Doubtless every one
of these, as the Possessionati in Poland, came to the General Councils in
Person.

As the Lands were further improved, and a free increase of Natures Stores made
Men luxurious, Great Men put themselves into Straits, and were often obliged to
sell their Inheritances, and to manumit their Et si Cheorlman^ romoveatur ut
habeat quinque hidas terrae, etc. Et si Filius Filii ejus hoc assequatur ut
tantum terrae habeat postea est qui nascetur ex cis sithercunde Generationis,
etc. Leges Aldestani Bromton f. 846.
Servants, or release Servile Tenures, and the Offspring of these who
themselves were Cheorls or Pesants, were, according to the Saxon Law, which
probably enough continued long after the Norman's Acquisition, enobled, or
became Gentlemen by the Descent of five Hides of Land to the third or fourth
Generation.

Thus, together with the divisions of Lands amongst the several Children of
great Proprietors, and subdivisions downwards, as the Families branched out,
the Numbers of Freeholders became by King John's time little less than
infinite, tota regni Nobilitas quasi sub numero non cadebat. And this sort of
Matthew. Paris Edit. Tig. f. 246.
Nobility, for the most part to be sure, looked upon themselves to be above
Citizens, or Burgers, and scorned to be within Frank-pledges, and be bound with
Sureties to their good Behavior. (Which Dr. Brady tells us Dr. Brady's Glos p.
31.
(and rightly enough, if he speak of the Time of Edw. 1.) was only for the
ordinary Freemen, or the Bulk and multitude of the Freemen, or small
Freeholders.) All that looked upon themselves as Gentlemen, at the least, were
without any manner of Representation; and wherever they were interested,
appeared in Person, and sometimes in very disorderly Multitudes. Some sensible
of the inconvenience of it, and expense and trouble to themselves, of their
free Choice became incorporated by Charter as aforesaid, being either the Kings
Tenants, or some inferior Lords, or it may be the Tenants of several Manors
joining together, and their coming to Parliament, or as the Borough of St.
Alban's pleads, pro omnibus serviciis faciendis, was a consequent upon their
Incorporation.

Freehold, I take it was the occasion of all this, though afterward Traders
might be admitted to Privileges amongst them. The Traders and Freeholders
within Cities or Boroughs sent their Delegates; whilst here, as in Poland, the
Possessionati, Men living Vid. supra.
upon their Lands in the Counties, came to the General Councils in their own
Persons. Vid. Jan. Ang. facies nova p. 66.
Thus it was here till the 49th of H. the 3d, as I think the Authorities
formerly insisted on by Mr. Petyt in behalf of the Citizens, and Burgesses, and
by me for the Possessionati in the Counties, sufficiently Warrant.

Wherefore the Alteration which was made in the Government in the 49th of H.
the 3d. if any were then made, was the calling out some of these Proprietors,
Earones Comitatus, to come in their own Persons, and putting a Representation
upon the rest, which was most likely to be done by the Persuasion and Influence
of the King, though with the consent of the People; And therefore Jan. Ang.
etc. p. 263.
I must say, it is most probable that what is by Mr. Cambden's Author
transmitted to us, as done a little before the Death Additions to Jus Ang. p.
20. Vid. Mr. Seldom Obj. against this answered. Jan. Ang. a p. 250. ad 256.
of H. the 3d, must have been some years afthe 49th, and the Kings Victory at
Evesham over the Great Barons, whom he curbed by the Less, the Commons; Which
prevailed on his side, by whose Assistance he deprived many great Men of a
judicial Power in Parliament, and of the right to special Summons, while the
Commons had their Power preserved in their Representatives, they were all
interested in the Legislature as before. But all the Great Barons had not their
former Interest in the Supreme Judicature, and yet this variation in respect of
the Great Lords, was no change of the outward frame of the Government, but only
a diminution of the Privileges of some particular Men. And though the bringing
in Representations, where no Representations were before, altered the Frame,
and Appearance of the Government; yet it did not the Constitution and
fundamental Interest of Proprietors of Land, with whom the Balance of Power
has ever been in this Nation; the Foundation is and was the same, like the same
Soul animating the same Body, when it is greater, and when by reason of Tumults
and Seditions, as we may call them, in the Spirits, it is wasted from its
Corpulency, and thereby often brought to a more assured state of Health than
ever before.

This more healthful State in a contracted Body of Proprietors of Land, I yield
to have been settled in the Reign of H. the 3d. It happening that there were
Writs to that Purpose, just in the 49th it is concluded that then it was first
begun; Whereas by the same Argument 'twas in the 38th, when two for every
County were summoned to Parliament Vice omnium and singulorum. But if Rot.
Claus. 38. H. 3. m 7. and 12.
I should confine my self to Authorities within the time of the first Edward,
immediate Successor to H. the 3d, I doubt not but Jani Angl. etc. p. 244
there were enough to satisfy any unbiased Reader, that the Commons, such as
are now represented by Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, had before the 49th of
H. the 3d, Shares or Votes in making of Laws for the Government of the Kingdom,
and had communication in Affairs of State, otherwise then as represented by the
Dr. Brady against Mr. Petyt. p. 1. and 2.
Tenants in Capite, notwithstanding Dr. Brady's Affirmation to the contrary.

In the 24th of E. 1. the Earls, Barons, Rot. Pat. 24. Ed. 1. N. 22. Jus Ang.
p. 160. Stat. Stap. 27. Ed. 3.
Knights, and others of the Kingdom, which others was then, and afterward,
meant of the Commons of the Cities and Boroughs, gave a Subsidy, Sicut alias
nobis and progenitoribus nostris Regibus Angliae.

And sure Hen. the 3d could be but one Progenitor, so that the Farones Minores,
the Freeholders of Land, (which ever since the 49th, or some other Year of
Hen. the 3ds Reign, were represented by the Knights of the Counties, (who were
not in those times to be sure confined to Knights by Tenure or Dubbing) And the
Commons of Cities, and Buroughs, at the least from within the Reign of King
John, to whom Hen. the 3d. immediately succeeded, were Members of Parliament,
being Parties to Grants there made. And omitting the Prescription of the
Borough of St. Albanes from Rot. Parl. 8. Edw. 2. n. 2^3. See that Record
vindicated from Dr. Brady's Misconstruction, Jus Ang. ab antiq. p. 28, 29, 30.
within the time of the Progenitors of Edward the first, to use but one
Authority not mentioned in either of my Tracts.

In the 28 of E. 1. the Knights, Citizens, Rot Claus. 28. E. 1. m. 12. dorso.
and Burgesses had been summoned to the Parliament at Westminster; Nobiscum de
diversis negotiis nos and Populum Regni specialiter tangentibus tractatur: and
Writs issued out for their reasonable Expenses, prout aliis consuevit in casu
consimili.

1. Upon which it is observable, that de quibusdam arduis, which is now in use
in the Writs of Summons, ought not to be restrained to a few great matters, but
extends to diverse, according to the different natures of matters brought
before, or appearing to them.

2. That the Commons had not only an Assent without power of dissenting; but
they were to treat as well as the Peers.

(3.) That their coming was not a new thing then, as if begun but 35 Years ago,
in the 49th of H. 3. but it was of Custom, and legal Prescription, so far that
it laid an Obligation upon the Subject to contribute to these Expenses; and
surely an Usage of 35 Years would not be a sufficient Charge in Law.

4. That though there is no Evidence that Representations for Counties were
settled before the 49th of Hen. 3. Yet the Freeholders were often at Parliament
by Representation, and thence there was ground in reason to occasion the Custom
that they should bear the Charges of them that they chose: Nay, if there were
no actual Choice, there was tacit Consent, (from which Custom may arise) that
those who were willing, and at leisure to be at Council, should answer for, and
have Contributions from the rest. But let both Dr. Brady and Mr. Hunt consider
the Precedents above Mr. Hunt, p. 149.
mentioned, of Coventry, and Bridgwater, which did not hold of the King, and
yet sent Burgesses to Parliament; and let them give a categorical Answer,
whether they believe that the Majores Barons Regni, and omnes alij holding in
Capite, mentioned in King John's Charter, made the Parliament till the 49th of
H. 3.

This I think may be enough to satisfy any reasonable Man, that the Government
was the same before the 49th of H. 3. that 'twas after, and that it had not its
Rise from Rebellion, nor yet from Conquest, Contrary to Dr. Brady, against Mr.
Petyt, p. 210.
or Usurpation; but from a Consent binding on both sides.

And thus I have shown (which Mr. Hunt does not) that our Government exactly
answers his Rule or Idea of a lawful Government, which he says, Is the
Representative of the People in what they are to be governed Page 155.
by it, and by their Consent to it^, in the first erecting thereof they do
trust their Governors with the Rule and Order of their Lives and Estates, etc.
But,

2. He puts such Matter in Issue, for asserting the present Government, as can
never be maintained.

That William the first made no Conquest of England, and that the Interest of
the Commons in Parliament did not begin by Rebellion in the 49th of H. 3. have
been thought good Mediums to settle the Foundations of our Government. Mr. Hunt
Page 156.
indeed looks upon all Labors to this purpose as impertinent: But this he says
is certain, That whatever thing of Government is introduced by the Consent of
the Prince, and Page 154, 155.
that Aleration assented to and embraced, avowed, and owned by every Man of the
Community, by Actions, and other open Declarations of a full consent; and this
continued for Centuries of Years, and in all that time applauded, and found
agreeable to the Interest of the Prince, and People, and the old Government
abolished and impracticable, the very matter of it ceasing, and it become a
thing impossible, as well as not desirable to restore it. I say, whatever
Constitution is thus introduced, and established, is as unmovable as
unalterable, (or no Government is) as if it had been ever so.

Wherefore, to show that our Government was so introduced and established, that
it ought not to be altered, according to him, we must prove every one of these
following Particulars.

1. That admitting a Conquest, and that the Commons came into Parliament. by
rebelling against the Heir of the Conqueror; yet theywere introduced by the
legal Consent of the Prince. 2. That this Constitution was assented to, and
embraced, avowid, and owned by every Man in the Community, by Actions, and
other open Declarations of a full Consent. 3. That for Centuries of Years this
has constantly been applauded, and found agreeable to the Interest of Prince
and People. 4. That though there were a Conquest, yet the Right of Conquest is
abolished. 5. That the exercise of a Government according to such a Right, is
become impracticable, impossible, and not desirable by any. 6. That the very
Matter of it ceases.
I may well without further enlarging, conclude this Head with his own words.

If our Government must take its Fate upon such Issues as these, I am sure we
shall not long Page 154.
hold it.

3dly. But then he yields so much of the Fact put in Issue by me, as sets aside
the Foundation of his whole Postscript; and yet admit he answers all
Objections against his Postscript, the Grounds which I go upon are of the most
general Use.

That there was an absolute Conquest of the Nation by William the first, and
that he admitted none to any Shares in the Government, but such as derived
their Interest from his Bounty, is contended for by many, Tanquam pro aris and
focis. And tho the History of King William the first his entering upon the
Government, is very strong against them, and may be the first thing
considerable: Yet from the supposition that the Tenants in Chief, such as were
the Suitors at the Curia, made the Parliament, where the absolute Government of
the Nation was placed, they very strongly may infer a Conquest. Whereas the
Proof of the difference of the Curia Regis, and the Concilium Pambritannicum,
or Parliament, shows that all the pretense of Conquest is out of doors, and
consequently the Government is such, as now it is by free Consent on all sides;
not founded on Usurpation upon the Rights of any, nor is there the least
pretense of unsettling what, as the great Fortescue observes, has not changed
Supra p. 271.
with the People, or Rulers.

Admit a Conquest, and the Inheritance which every one claims in the Laws will
be maintainable only as a naked Right, and naked Rights are thin and
metaphysical Notions, which few are Masters or Judges of.

But Conquest, or no Conquest, a Government derived from the Pleasure of one,
or consented to by all, are Questions which any ordinary Capacity is able to
judge of, when the Testimonies relied on by both sides are laid before them. And
though Matters depending upon Testimony, are not capable of Demonstration, so
far as they depend upon that; yet where Testimonies are made use of for the
laying a Foundation, upon which some Metaphysical Notions of Right are built;
it is possible to demonstrate that the Testimonies will not serve the purpose
for which they are brought, but are clearly on the otherside. And it that be
done, it wholly silences the Dispute, better than Mr. Hunt's Scheme of Mr.
Hunt, p. 205.
Probabilities, or his Metaphysical, nay, or Physical Notions of the Right of
Fatherhood.

If therefore it be shown that there is not the least shadow for pretense of a
Conquest, or that only such as derived what they had from the Bounty of the
Prince, were interested in the Government and Legislature, certainly the whole
Frame of Consequences built upon such Supposition easily falls to the ground.

I appeal to the World, Whether what Mr. Hunt thought fit to say for the
preventing Page 206. Page 156.
the World's being troubled with such impertinent Labors, and to divert those
that thus employ themselves to Undertakings more useful to the Public, can be
of such a general Use and Satisfaction, as the destroying those Foundations
which are laid for a Government not known to our Laws, nor owned in our so well
constituted, and so ancient Frame, the Admittance of which, would root up the
very Foundations.

He says our Government was always materially the same. When according to him
'twas neither materially nor formally the same it is now.

Whereas this Labor which he explodes, shows that 'twas always both materially
and formally the same, and therefore unalterable.

If there were a Conquest, that Conquest established a Government, or it did
not.

If it established a Government, then, according to him, no following Consent,
even of the Conqueror, can divest him of any part of that Right which was given
by the Conquest. For upon the Bishops account, he tells us, They cannot be
detruded Mr. Hunt, p. 122.
from that Place they bear in the Constitution of the Government, for that no
Government can be legally, or by any lawful Power, changed, but must remain for
ever, once established; and it can be no less than Treason of State to attempt
a Change: No Authority in the World Page 122.
is competent to make any Alteration.

If it be said, This is contrary to the Postscript, which affirms, That
nothing can be the Concerns of Men united in any Polity, but may be governed
and ordered Post-scrip, p. 33
by the Laws of their Legislature for their good;

At least this shows how in matters of Notion, and naked Rights, great Wits may
not only differ from others, but from themselves.

But let us give the Argument raised from Conquest, its full weight, and see
whether Mr. Hunt maintains our present Establishment upon clearer Grounds than
they do who search Antiquity about the Point.

The absolute Power and Government This is begged throughout Mr. Hobbs's
pernicious Dialogue between a Philosopher and Student of the Common Laws of
England.
of the Nation, was by the right of Conquest settled in William the First and
his Heirs: this being so, could not be parted with.

For it must be either voluntarily, or by Compulsion: For the first, Sir Robert
Filmer will tell you, No Man can bind himself in a matter depending of his own
Will, there can be no Obligation which takes State from the Power of Kings, f.
1.
mere Will of him that binds himself.

If by Compulsion, then they will tell you for the same Causes that a private
Man may be relieved from his unjust and unreasonable Promise, as that it was so
grievous; or, for he was Patriarcha p. 97.
by Deceit or Fraud circumvented, or induced thereunto by Terror or Force, or
just Fear, or by some great hurt; even for the same causes the Prince or
Princes may be restored in that which touches the diminishing of his or their
Majesty.

If it be said, That this would as well hold in relation to the Peoples parting
with that Right which was once in them: they will tell you that no Government
can be exercised but Monarchy; That no other Government is owned by God
Almighty, in the New, or Old Testament, but Monarchy: That while God's People
were without a King in Israel, there was Confusion, and Anarchy. If Adam was no
Monarch, at least God himself was, and 'twas a Theocracy. And therefore admit
Paternal Power was not Monarchical, yet a Man might as well seize upon a People
without a Government, as upon a piece of Land unoccupied. And when once he
became Conqueror, he was let into a Divine Right of ordering arbitrarily all
things within that district, and could not depart from it. And though every
Monarch was not absolute, (for the Jewish Kings were not) yet every Monarch by
Conquest must needs be so, being received without any Conditions, or
Limitations.

Now Mr. Hunt himself, going chiefly to show that Paternal Power was not, as
such, absolute, does not answer this Hypothesis, and the Examination of it
depends upon such searches into the bottom of things and the showing them naked
in their Metaphysical Existences, that very few Men can judge of the
Controversy, at least not so many, as may, of the meaning of Writers and
Records carefully compared together, and in many places freed from all possible
Ambiguity; but still the more ambiguous they are, the more evidently will they
overthrow all those Pretenses upon which these Notions are built. For if the
Records and Histories give such doubtful Responses, as Mr. Hunt imagines, then
indeed we must Mr. Hunt, p. 6.
look only to the present Government. Whereas if Dr. Brady, and his Friends,
could show those ancient Authorities to be plainly on their side, they would
have many that would improve their Notion of the House of Commons their
beginning by Rebellion, into an Argument that they ought to be cast off as
Usurpers upon the Divine Right of the Conqueror.

Or at least, yield but that one Point of the Conquest, they will tell you
agreeably to Mr. Hunt's Assertion, that a Government by Conquest is unalterable
by any lawful p. 122. supra.
Power; And, as that is wholly different from a Government by consent, whatever
implies, or admits of the consent of Subjects to the passing any Law, is
contrary to the Fundamentals of the Government, and is like a Superstructure of
Hay and Stubble, which ought to be consumed.

Others will tell you that the most free Concessions of a Conquering Prince, or
one claiming under that Title, and not departing with his Dominion, can no more
oblige himself or his Successors in any thing that may restrain his Sovereign
Will and Pleasure, than a Man can depart with the freedom of his Will.

And the most seeming Restraints can be no more than temporary Provisions, or
ordinary Methods of Ruling, which the Prince as he found occasion might remove,
notwithstanding the strictest Clauses of Perpetuity, they being of like
Interpretation with such Passages as related to the continuance of the Jewish
Law, or Economy, which was to have no place in the New Heavens, and new Earth.

But if they should yield that all Grants and Charters, etc. are binding to the
Prince who made them; yet Sir Robert Filmer tells Vid. Power of Kings, f. 1.
us expressly; The Laws, Ordinances, Letters, Patents, Privileges, and Grants
of Princes, have no Force but during their Life, if they be not ratified by the
express Consent, or at least by the sufferance of the Prince following, who had
knowledge thereof.

These Notions have more Favorers perhaps, than there are Men of Judgment or
Honesty enough to show the weakness of them. Nor has Mr. Hunt, that I know of,
directly encountered them with his twoedg'd Weapon; But if the supposed Fact
which they are built upon, be proved to be no more than Supposition, all the
most specious Superstructures are but Castles in the Air, which vanish like
Smoke.

Inter Communia brevia de Termino Michaelis, Anno 34. Edw^.
EX pacte eorundem hominum. Regi est ostensum quod cum Uilla praedicta Civitas,
Inter Record penes Re^ D^ These in sceio remanen pro hominibus Ville de Coventre.
Burgus, seu Dominicum Regis, non erictat, ut homin^ Uill^ predicte tanquam
Cives, Burgenses, seu Tenentes de Domino Regis in al^quibus auxilus, (...) seu
contributionil us Regi, seu progenitoril us suis concessis taxari consueberunt,
seu talliari, sed tantum cum Communitate Co^ War: Taxatores tamen and
Collectores XXX and XX in (...) praedicto homines praedictos tanquam Burgenses
tarari and XXX de bonis and rebus suis ad opus Regis levare nituntur, in
ipsorum hominum ^ampnum nori medicum, and gravamen, and depa^perationem
manifem. Et quia Rex non vult quod iidem homines indebi e pregraventur in lac
part ^andat (...) quod scruta^. Rotulis and Memorandis de consimilil us
^enibus factis in Uill^ prae^a tam tempore Regis, quam proge^orum suorum
praedictorum, and si eis constare poterit evidenter quod praedicta Willa de
Covent^, non si^ Civitas, Burgus, aut Manerium de antiquo Dominico Corone
Regis, ut praedictum est, and quod dicti homines simul cum aliis extra
Civitates Burgos, and Maneria praedicta manentes ad hu^usmodi prestationem Regi
faciendam ^ari debeant, and semper ha^enus ta^ri con^ueverunt, tunc ipsos
homines ad prestationem Regi ratione praedictae concessionis de XXX Regi
ratione faciendum per praedictos Tatatores and Collectores distringi non
permittant, aliter quam totis temporibus retroactis in hujusmodi casu fieri
consuevit. Test Rege apud Lancetost. 18. die Octobris, 34.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 113. line 3. in Marg. read true way. P. 117. l. 18. r. Bannerets. Ib. l.
21. r. Banneret. P. 122. l. 2. r. St. P. 144. l. 8. r. ingenuously, So P. 145.
l. 31. P. 160. l. 5 after the Word Barony add in the Margin, viz.
Ecclesiastical Persons. P. 174. or 274. T l. 18. r. done. P. 204. V l. 2. r.
Counsel. So l. 11. Ib. P. 212. X l. 22. r. permixtim, P. 217. X l. 26. r. de
tout le, etc. P. 220. l. 6. r. taken.

Other Literal Mistakes the Reader is desired to correct with his Pen.

A TABLE of the Principal CONTENTS.
The Number of the Page being often mistaken, through the Printers false
counting to one another, the Reader is desired, where the Figures are wrong, to
observe the Letter which begins the Sheet.

A
Page. Abbey of Molross, O 206, 207 Absence of the Bishops, not merely from the
Canon Law, 84, N 181, 182 Adam de Orlton's Case, R 267, T 180 Agitare Judicium
Sanguinis prohibited, H 101, and N 157, 183 Allusion made by the Questionist
not solid, 165 Appeal to Rome no capital Crime anciently M 173 Appeal of Earl
Godwin, Q 227 Appeals in Trial, V 191, 192, 193 Appellation ought to be
governed by the Right, S 278 Apostles their Rule, p. 89, how far their Practice
to be urged for Example now, 133 Apostolic Canons against Clergymen their
meddling in Secular Affairs, P 135, 216 Archbishop Stratford's Case, T 282,
283, 284 Arundel Earl, his Case, O 208 Assemby at Northampton, no Parliament,
p. 170, 171, 172. Matters carried there in great Heat, and no Judgment of
Treason given, M 172, 173 Attainders what they are, 9, 10 Augustine St. his
Opinion, 94, 95
B.
BArons, how made enobled in Blood, and how made, 107, to 120 Barons by Blood
and by Tenure, different 78, 118, 119, 120 Barons Majores who, 78, Z 245, 246
Barons Minores who, 7, 8 Barons Peer who,, 21, 107, 117 Barons Regis who,
107, Z 247, to 250 Barons Regni who, ibid. Baronagium, and how comprehensive,
107, P 202, 203, Y 226, S 278 Becket not impeached of Treason, from 65 to 70,
and from 172 to N 180 Berkeley, Sir Tho. his Case, 28, 29, V 196 Blesensis his
Words marked, 97, 98, 125, 167, 168, R 261 Bishops, whether they sit in
Parliament by virtue of any Baronies, p. 106, 108, and how 122, etc. T 174, or
274 Bishops not Barons, 77, 108, 19, 123, 124, 125 Bishops, how they sat with
the Earls, 91, 92, 93, 145 P 217 Bishops Service and Tenure a Burden, 106, 124
125, Their Tenure offects not their Persons, 77 Bishops if a third Estate, not
capable to try a Peer, 128 Bishops the form of their Writs no Argument of their
Power, 86, 129, 130 when present, always expressed that they were, 36 Bishops
meddling in Secular Affairs forbidden, 129, 135, P 216. Their Opposition to the
King at Clarendon, and from what Cause, 141 Bishops Power clipped at Clarendon,
99, O 144 when to go away in Criminal Cases, 161, 196, 197 even in Acts of
Parliament, R 265 Bishops Absence not merely from the Canons, 8, 84, N 181,
182, 183, 190 N 193 O Bishops Protestation, p. 5, 6, 7, translated and
explained, 41, 42, and N 185 to 194 Bishops not reckoned Nobles, T 184, or 284
not called Lords till the time of Rich. II. 108 Bishop of Norwich his Case, 40
Bishop of Carlisle tried by a common Jury, T 279 so Bishop of Ely, 278, ibid.
Bishops Absence no Error, 47 Bishops had no Right to be present in the Debate,
and handling matters of Blood, 143 Bishops not comprehended under the name of
Peers or Grands, if put after Earls and Barons, 14, 18, to 25, 32 Bishops, if
others named, always named where they are present, 24, 29, 32, 36 and that
before others, R 261 Bishops not Peers to Temporal Lords, 71, to 99, S 280
Bishops sit in respect of Temporal Possessions 83 yet in the quality of
Spiritual Persons, T 174 or 274, and S 289 Bishops cannot sit in a double
Capacity, S 288, 289, and T 174 Bishops contended to be tried by their own
Order, T 181, or 281, whence their pretense of Immunity proceeded 153 Bishops
to be tried by common Iuries T 277 to 282 Bishops their Equivocation, 141
Bishops Messengers of Peace, V 197 Bishops chief Employment to make Peace in
civil Affairs, anciently Counselors not Judges, p. 89, 91, their refusing to
give Advice about keeping the Peace, 30, 31, 266, and R 269 Bishops but part of
a third Estate, 80, to 85, and 126, 127, 137, S 290 Bishops in France never sit
in that Chamber of Parliament, which tries Capital Cases, 90 Bishops never
absent not proved, Q 228 Bishops no where allowed to sit Inquisitors of Blood,
V 198 Bishops not summoned to Parliament several times Q 238 Bishops a
Question, whether they might be even of a Committee in matters of Blood, V 199
Boeges de Bayon's Case, 25, 26 Brady Dr. his Assertions and Fancies condemned
Pref. to the 2d Part, and p. 189 in Marg. V, X, A a, 204, 205, 224, 227
Buroughs and Burgesses, Z 237, 238
C.
CAmbridg Earl, 50 Canons forbidding of Clergymen to meddle in Capital Causes
still in force, 87, 164, and P 217, to 222 Canons concerning Blood as anciently
in England, as the Conquest and part of the common Law, N 181, 182 Capitalis
Justiciarius Angliae, what Office, 137, 138 Capitalia placita, what, Q. 229,
230, 231 Chancellor when no Peer, how tried, T 285, 286 Charter of King John,
the Author's Interpretation of it asserted against Dr. Brady, X 206, 207,
against Mr. Hunt, Z 237, to 242 Clarendon the meeting there a Parliament, 139
Clarendon, and the Parliament there considered, 99, 100, and 142 Clarendon
Earl, his Arguments against the pretended Conquest, A a 260, to 263 Chivaler
who, B b 284 Clergy subjected to Baron-Service, 112, 140 Clergy their Power in
Primitive-times, 89 their Power in other Nations, 90 Clerus never taken for the
Bishops alone, 126 Commons and Commonalty of the Kingdom, where Records and
Histories manifestly show their Presence at Parliament before 49 Hen. 3^ X 211,
to Y 22^ Commons their Vote in Danby's Case, O 98, Commons sometimes meant by
Grands, R 270, S 279, and 226, 3d Part, anciently had their share in
Judicature, R 266, 267, 268 Commons always Members of Parliament, 172 O 202 s^
together with the Lords in the times of Hen. I: and King Stephen, X 212 and
long afterward, O 202, 203, 204 Mr. W's Grounds for the Belief, that they had
no Right to come to Parliament till 49 H. 3. answered, and turned against him,
X 210, to Y 227; so Mr. Hunt's p. 221, 222, 223, Y 235, and to A a 268 Commons
their Petition, 21 R. 2. p. 11. and O 195, 196 Community of Names no Argument
of Right, S 278 Concordia 4 E. 3. 27, R 263 Conquest disclaimed by William the
first, 139, A a 260, no Conquest, 258, to A a 263 wherefore the Point of
Conquest examined and what improvement, is made of the admittance of it, 293 to
300 Constitutions of Clarendon expounded, and the Bishops Wings clipped there,
144, to 166 Convocation of the Clergy, 81, 82, 127, 137, S 290 Corporations, an
account of them, and of their ancient Interest in Parliament, 276, to 286, 3d
part Coventry, its first Representation in Parliament, B b 279 Crimes some that
did laedere Majestatem Regiam not capital, 172, in marg* Curia Regis, of
various Acceptance, 150 Curia Regis how far Mr. W. and Mr. Hunt agree with the
Author against Dr. Brady, as to its being distinct from the General Council of
the Nation V 204 Objection against them where their Notion of it differs from
the Authors, 205 particular Objections against Mr. W's Notion of it, 209, and X
210 Mr. Hunt's mistake about it, 231 to Y 235
D.
DAnby's Plea, O 197 Demeasn, the Kings of England never had all the Lands of
the Kingdom in demeasn, 3d part, p. 253, to 255 Dictare Sententiam, how
understood, N 179 Doctor Oats vndicated, P 222 Doctor Standish his Case, 47,
and S 291
E.
EArls and Barons are the Peers of the Realm, 22, 23, 24, R. 263 Earls and
Barons consiliarij nati, 138 Earl of Arundel's Case O 208 Earl of Hereford and
Gloucester their Case, T 287, V 189 Earl Godwin his Appeal, Q 227 Earl of
Northumberland, 51, 54, and R 274, 275 Earl of Salisbury, Kent, Huntington,
their Case, 50 Ellis William's Case, 35 Errors none by the Bishops absence, 47
Estate Bishops, but part of a 3d Estate, 80 to 85 Exegetical where words used
exegetically 52, X 213 Explication of several words, quosque Judicium
pervenior, 155, 156 Exposition of words according to the standing, 18, to 25,
52, X 212, to Y 226 and Q 233, 234
F.
FErrer's Sir Ralph's Case, 39 Fitstephen's Authority examined, 77 Fortescu^
his Authority, B b 271 Form of Writs no Proof of Right 86 Franck-pledges at a
Great Council of the Kingdom, and who within them, B b 273, 274, 275, 283, 284
G.
GEntlemen how became so, C c 285 Gloucester Earl, and Hereford their Case, T
287, and V 189 Godwin Earl his Appeal, Q 227 Gomentez and Weston their Cases,
37 Grants, where the Bishops not comprehended under that word, itsextent, 32, S
278, 279, Government the same before 49 H. 3. as since, 3d part, 271, to 290
Gurney Thomas 26
H.
HAxy Thomas his Case; 43 Henry Hotspur's Case, S 281, 282, 283 Huntington's
Earl Case, 50, S 280 Hunt Mr. the Censure of his Book, Pref. to the second
Treatise, His wrong Translation of non licet, in mar. 157 His Mistakes Y 229,
etc. Reasons why he might have spared his Censures, Y 228, 229
I.
IMpeachment when by the Commons, the Lords obliged to to try a Commoner, 14
Interesse ubi judicium sanguinis tractatur vel exercetur prohibited, 158 John
Imperial's Case, 39, R 264 Irregularity, P 221, 222, 223 Judicial Power in
Capital Cases denied the Bishops in the Northern Kingdoms. 90 Judicial Power
denied them here by Canon, Common and Statute Law, Vid. Bishops Absence not
merely from the Canons. Judgments in which the Bishops had share, 11 Judicium a
word of various Acceptations, 155 Judgments alleged to be void for the Absence
of the Bishops, 11, 195, O 196 Judgments in Parliament and the Curia Regis how
reconciled, General Pref. V fin.
K.
KEnt Earl, S 280 King cannot make an Estate, 126, 127 King Stephen's Grants
reversed at Clarendon, 141, 142 King Rich. II. undecently reflected on, O 194
L.
LAwyers confessedly differ from the Questionist as to the Trial of Bishops, T
277, and V 194 Laws made upon a dubious Title good, 45, 46 P 209 to 214 Laws
concerning the matter and manner of their making, 44, 45 Laymen used to meet
with the Clergy in their Councils, 157 Lee Sir John's Case, 35 Legislative
Power in capital Matters allowed to Bishops, yet no judicial Power inferred,
Genesis Pref. 87, 88, 131, 132 and even that an Abuse crept in since Hen. VIII. 88
London a Corporation at the Common Law B b 282 Lord Latimer, Lions, Richard,
etc. 35 Lords of Parliament 36 Lords Temporal expressly named in the Record as
sole Judges, 40, 58, and R 276, S 280
M.
MAnucaptors, B b 274 March Earl, 22 Mautraver's Case, 20, 51, 279, S 280, 281,
ibid. Modus tenendi Parl. its Antiquity, 121 Molross the Abbey its Case, and the
Authority of that Book answered, G 206, 207 Mortimer Sir John's case whether
judged by Act of Parliament, 56, to 59, R 262 Mortimer Roger's Case 14, and R
262
N.
NAmes equivocal no good Argument from thence, P 227 Nevel Lord, 35 Nobilitas
Major, how made, 113 Bishops no part of such Nobility, S 287 Northumberland
Earl, R 51, 54, 274, 275
O.
OAts Dr. vindicated, P 222 Objections from Reason against Mr. W. and Mr. Hunt,
where they differ from the Autthor's Notion of the Curia Regis, 3d part, 205,
206 Ocle William, 26 Old-Castle Sir John, 55 Old Modus its Antiquity, 121
Omnipotency and the Bishop's Affectation of it, in what sense understood by
Lord H. 152 153 Orlton's Case, R 267
P.
PArdons made revocable at Pleasure, O 195 Parliament when the word first in
use, 121 Parliament at Clarendon, 139 Peace, of the Bishops refusing to give
Counsel about it, 30, 31, R 266, 269 Percy Henry's Case, 53 Peers of the Realm
who, 20, 21 Pessimae Consuetudines what, 140, 142 Petrus Blessensis his
Testimony, 97, 98, 125, 167, 168, R 261 Plain dealing, 147 Plea of the Earl of
Danby, O 197 Pool William Duke of Suffolk, 13, T 286 Pool Michael's Case, 33,
34, R 272 Presidents urged against Lord Hollis make for him 14 Proctors or
Proxies why the Bishops desire to make them, 12 concerning their making them,
46, 162, 197, 199, B 200, 201, 204, 205 Proprietors of Land as such, their
Interest in the Great Council of the Kingdom, Y 230, 231 and B b 273, to 291
Protestations of the Lord Hollis his Sincerity, 6 Protestation made by the
Bishops, 11, R 2 5, 6, 7, 8, 41, 42, 43, and O 185, to 194 Protestations in the
names of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, 8, 13 Protomartyr, 49
Q.
QUestion concerning the Bishops stated, 10, 11
R.
REcapitulation of Arguments against the Bishops being Judges in case of Blood,
N 184 Again more fully. P 223, 224. Q 225. S 277 Rickhil, Sir William's Case.
48 Reflections upon R. the 2d. undecent. O 194 Regradation of Peers. V 190
S.
SAlisbury Earl's Case. 50 Sautree William's Case. 49 Scheme of the Government
as it anciently stood, and now stands. B b 271 to 291 Scripture against the
Bishops their meddling in Secular Affairs. 134 Scroop Lord. 50 Segrave's Case.
61, 62, and Q 232, 233. T 287 Seniores Populi, who meant by them. 167, 170
Sinister ends in the Parliament, 21 R. 2. O 195 Spencer's their Case. 48 O 197,
198. and Q 234 Standish his Case. 47 and S 291 Statute 27. Ed. Is It. c. 3. and
2. Ed. 3. forbidding Churchmen to take Cognizance of Matters of Blood. 30, 33,
64. and 169 Statute of Clarendon a binding Law and only affirmative of the old
Law. 153 Statute of Westminster Anno 1175, forbidding all Persons in Holy
Orders Judicium Sanguinis agitare. 101, 102, 157 Stephen Bishop of London tried
by a Common Jury. 27 Stephen King his Charter to the Clergy. 140 153 Stratford
Archbishop his Case. T 283 Succession to the Crown. 209 to P 214 Suffolk Duke
his Case. 13, 60. S 284, 285
T.
TAlbot Lord his Case. S 285 Temporal Lords sole Judges of Peers. 40 56 R 276.
S 280 Tenants in Capite more than they Members of Parliament before 49th H. 3d.
yielded in Effect by Mr. Hunt. 264 to 268. 3d. Part. Tenure in Capite created.
78 A a 253 Tenure in Capite Mr. Hunt's Mistakes about it. 242 to A a 258 Tenure
by Barony inferred no more than a Minor Baron. 78 109 118 119 120 Thorp Sir
William. 32 33 Titles Vid. Succession to the Crown. Treason declared by the
Judges in Parliament. R 264 265 Trial of Bishops by a Common Jury. 26, 27 T
278, 279 Trials in Appeals and the reason thereof V 191, 192, 193
U.
UTriusque ordinis consensus explained. T 275, 276
W.
Waver of Peerage. T 286, 287 Westminster the Council there forbiding Churchmen
to meddle in matters of Blood 101, 102, 157

