MASTER HOLLIS HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Articles of high
Treason against himself, the Lord Kymbolton, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Mast. Pym,
Master Hampden, Master Strowd, Exhibited by his Majesty, on Wednesday the fifth
of Iannary 1641.

LONDON printed for Francis Coules and Thomas Banks, 1641.

Master Hollis his Speech.
Master Speaker,
THat Man is no true Christian, nor legal Subject that cannot willingly submit
himself, to undergo either the displeasure of his Sovereign, or any other
trouble or affliction imposed upon him in the defense of true Religion and the
Laws of this Country.

Master Speaker, My self with the rest of those Gentlemen accused, desires
under favor of this Honorable House, to speak something concerning these
Articles of our accusation; Master Speaker, Treason is the heynousest crime,
that can be alleged against any Subject; The name of a Traitor must needs be
odious to all true Protestants and obedient Subjects; you know the sentence
Master Speaker, of sacred writ Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
obedience is better then sacrifice, what can be more acceptable to God then
real performance of his Precepts and Commandments, What can be a truer sign
of faithful and willing subjection to a Prince then cheerful submitting to
His royal commands; Ever by suffering punishment for refusing the same, if
against our Religion and Country, or performance of the same, although to the
hazarding of our lives and fortunes, Give me leave, I beseech you, to add
something in my defense in clearing of my self touching those Articles
exhibited against me, to those learned Speeches of the other Gentlemen already
made concerning the same, which I hope is sufficient to clear us all; yet
notwithstanding I desire to speak something only touching my self.

I hope this Honorable House has taken sufficient notice of the manner of my
carriage in all businesses whatsoever the which I have had the honor to be one
employed in the same. It is a strange thing as I conceive under favor that any
member elected and admitted in a free Parliament, and in the same altogether
agreeing, both in debates and votes with the whole Councels of State should be
accused, not only as an ill-affected person to his King and Country, but as a
Traitor to the same.

If Members of a Parliament freely called by His Majesty's royal power and
Authority, freely chosen by the several Counties, Cities and Boroughes of His
Majesty's Kingdom; and met together only to consult, and consider of such
things that have been disordered in the Commonwealth, as well in Church as
State, to rectify and set in a right frame the distempers of the same; To
redress and releeve the manifold pressions and tyrannies exercised in this
Kingdom, by wicked and pernicious persons, To bring to deserved punishment,
such Miscreants and Caitiffes, troublers of the Israel of God, procurers of
discontent and dis-affection between a King and His Liege-people, innovators
of true Religion. If these Members, Master Speaker, may be reputed and taken,
nay charged and affirmed to be the betrayers of their King and native Country,
Then can I not discern that there can be any safety or security in
Parliamentary proceedings, which concern Master Speaker, is not agreeable to
the tenent and rules of Divine Scripture which possitively concludes, that in
the multitude of Counselors there is peace, If peace may be expected from a
multitude of Senators, wise and learned men; Then I must conclude peace and
security is to be hoped for, from the proceeding Counsels and Consultations of
this great and Numerous Assembly of judicious and learned persons, contracted
from all parts of His Majesty's Kingdom into one entire body.

Master Speaker, Can treachery or disloyalty be once thought or conceived to
be in the hearts of any of these, who are entrusted by their whole Country,
who have put themselves and all theirs, their judgments and wisdom, who are
resolved even with the loss of their lives and fortunes, to defend and
maintain such Statutes and Laws, as by them shall be enacted and made, with
the royal assent and confirmation of their Sovereign; for their good and
tranquillity in the common affairs of the State, for the defense and
maintemance of the true Religion; and their just rights and privileges; can
these I say Master Speaker, be suspected to be the betrayers and destroyers of
the Laws of the Kingdom, of the liberties of the Subjects, of Religion and
the true doctrine and discipline thereof.

Master Speaker, I do verily believe that his sacred Majesty of himself has
no thought or any way conceves any such opinion of any of the Members of this
house, I rather think it is only through the informations of ill minded
persons, buzzing in his Majesty's ears our secret aims and evil intentions
against his Majesty, and his Kingdom; but rather (as it has bin made apparent
to all men, (to prevent dangers, and the malicious designs, of the
adversaries, enemies of the State, that have set themselves withal the force
and power that might be, to bring to confusion and utter destruction his
Majesty and all his Realms, on which he has right full dominions to place
themselves in power and authority, in the same to make such Constitutions and
Ordinances, as to themselves shall seem meet; to establish and set up such
false and erroneous worshipping of Almighty God in his Church, as they
according to their own inventions, think most sutables to their own fancies
and desires, because we endeavor Master Speaker, to nullify and bring to
naught these their malignant and unlawful practices against God and his
Christ, against his sacred Majesty and the whole State, against all the
wholesome laws made by the same for the government thereof in righteousness
and holy obedience to God their Prince and their Country, therefore do they
work and endeavor what in them lies to cast aspersions upon our good
proceedings against themselves and other evil and perverse spirits leaning on
them, and altogether devoted to their cause, to insence and provoke as much as
they can his royal Majesty against us and our indevours, so that I confidently
believe unless we proceed with speed unannimously with one consent as well of
the Lords as our selves, to bring to trial, and judgment, these evil doers,
these molesters, troublers, and hinderours of our happy prosecution in
finishing and bringing to a blessed end our good designs, we must not expect
any conclusion or confirmation of any law or Act, tending to the perpetual
settlement of true Religion, or of this Kingdom in that blessed State of peace
and unity amongst our selves; traffic and society with foreign Princes and
States; that fame honor and glory of the King of this land, and all those
dominions under his Jurisdiction and royal subjection, as formerly we have
enjoyed.

And thus much Master Speaker, of that which I had to say concerning these
Articles, humbly desiring I may have speedy trial upon the same, and as I
shall be found guilty or innocent, I willingly shall submit my self and
Actions to the sentence and judgment of this great and High Court of
Parliament.

FINIS.

