An ANSWER without a QUESTION: Or, THE LATE SCHISMATICAL PETITION For a
Diabolical TOLERATION OF Several Religions EXPOVNDED. Being Presented to the
Juncto at Westminster, August 16. 1646. BY Colonel Pride, and Lieutenant
Colonel Goffe, and Others; by the Appointment of the Lord Fairfax their
General. With some OBSERVATIONS UPON The Mystery of their Iniquity; and the
Juncto's Answer thereto.

Written by that Reverend Divine, Doctor Holdisworth, a little before his
Death; and by him desired to be brought to Public view.

London, Printed in the blessed year of the Admission of the Turkish Alcaron
into this Kingdom, 1649.

AN ANSWER WITHOUT A QUESTION: OR, The Late Schismatical Petition Expounded.
WHen I first looked upon the simply profane Title of that impious Petition
which the two-horn'd Beast presented to the seven-headed Monster at
Westminster, I could do no less then deride their simplicity, and condemn their
insufferable Demand for a Diabolical TOLERATION: Certainly it was penned by
that Pragmatical fellow, Colonel PRIDE the Devils Secretary, who being diserted
by the other six deadly sins (who are gone with Cromwell) in a Melancholy,
proceeding from a Choleric rather then a suspicious Humor, wrote this
presumptious and damnable Command, disguising it with the Hackney Roabes of a
PETITION, and leading TOM indifferent by the Nose, let him see it through his
fingers, who, poor fool (being used to it) according to his breeding, Signed
it: But to speak truth, FAIRFAX that necessary evil was a fool, and PRIDE that
nominal and natural Devil, proved himself a Knave: the one for not looking on
it but with another man's Spectacles; the other for Cheating him and the world
by his Hypocritically humble PETITION, and pretended Spirit of Faith and
Supplication: But he does not only seek to Cheat men, but to mock God, he would
put a trick upon his Divine Majesty, by fathering that upon him, which he never
intended, as that the Victory (if they had one) was given by God to them in
Ireland, as The fruit of that Faith and Supplication which God has powered
forth on the hearts of the people, to the bringing down the common Enemy, etc.
when it is evident, that whatever they have done since these Wars, has
proceeded from our sins as the causa sine qua non, and not from their
Righteousness: I confess they be Gods Servants, but no otherwise then
Nebuchadnezzar was, to punish the Israelites, and then God will punish him: but
how impudently they persevere in their profane expressions! taking the Lords
Name in vain, by dissembling That they fight under his Banner, and that by the
same power and presence that has made bare his Arm in the late Victory,
wickedly intimating that God fought for them and their Ioshuah at Dublin, they
tender to this Conventicle their annexed Proposals as full of Heresy and
Blasphemy as this exordium is of Hypocrisy.

First they condemn those which sometimes they hold infallible, of a Crime, in
making Ordinances of Parliament (which indeed were the best that ever they
made) whereby many conscientious people are much molested, etc. meaning that by
those Ordinances Sectaries and Heretics, whom they term conscientious people,
were hindered from dispersing their damnable Tenants: but see how they sport
with God, engaging him in every business, That the Spirit of Christ flowing
forth in his Servants for the declaring his Name in the Nation, may not be
suppressed, but receive all due encouragement: What fair pretenses these
Impostures have? such as would deceive the very Elect if it were possible: but
their Actions are so contrary to their expressions, that any one may perceive
they make heaven their Pander, earth their Bawdy House, and the Devil their
Servant, who has endeavored such a Toleration in many Kingdoms, but could
never prevail till now he found how devoted the Whore of England was to him, he
has gotten what he looked for, which makes him not doubt of good success: for
having once sowed this seed, he shall ever after have a great Crop, besides he
is in hope that these his Servants by his help, may bring other Countries to it
in a year or two, which he in almost two thousand years could not do: But now
to their second Proposal.

Secondly, And because we are sensible, that through the subtilty of Satan,
etc. Surely the Devil gave them leave to abuse him, or else they durst not be
so dis-obediently wicked as to speak against their own Father: but if they
displease him in these, they please him in the following Lines: and make the
worst of it, they do but break his head, and presently give him a Plaster far
better then a Mountebancks Balsom, which comes in just as the Devil would have
it, We therefore from our hearts do humbly declare, That it is not our meaning,
that the Liberty before Desired by us should extend to the Toleration of
Popery, Prelacy, the Book of Common Prayer, etc. This Reconciles the Devil unto
them, for now he finds that all their intentions, words, and actions, tend to
the exaltation of his Kingdom: for although Popery be excluded, yet he is fully
Recompensed in the abolishing of Prelacy and Uniformity: Besides, one Heresy
is more profitable to him then a thousand Papistical Fopperies: For he will
suddenly bring in as many Heresies as houses, and as many Opinions as there be
people: to add to the number, he has got leave, that a servant of his, a
Saint of the last edition, should translate that Academy of Heresies, the
Turkish Alcoran, which in the days of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles of blessed Memory, was treason in any one to transport hither, much less
Translate: and that it might be more vendible and acceptable, all the gross
absurdities are left out, as a learned and holy man of this Kingdom has
observed.

The Turkish Alcaron says he is abroad, but that the Reader may not be abused,
let him know, That all the most gross, absurd, ridiculous Blasphemies, and
impossible Fictions which were wont to make that wicked volumn justly odious to
the world, are left out in the English Translation; for my part I know not how
to Construe it, but as done in too much favor to the Mahumetan mis-religion:
the pretense of the Error must be this, The English Translator follows the
Version of a Frenchman, too much it seems Interested in the Turkish Court, for
being employed from the French King as his Agent at Constantinople, was
likewise re-employed by the Turk into France, and taking upon him to Translate
this Worthy Work as he calls it, out of the Arabic, thought fit (for what ends
he knew best) to take the best, and leave the worst: Know this Reader, and
resolve that thou can not enough hate that pack of Mahumetan Fopperies, which
chiefly aim at the disparagement of thy Savior, and the de-crying of the
blessed Trinity.

Thus far the Observator gives his Censure of the Alcaron: Now I will leave
this to the impartial Reader to judge what a Medly of Religions we shall have;
Amsterdam must be beholding to us, as we have been formerly to them, for new
Opinions: we shall be as much cried up for Rarieties of Religion, as the
Frenchmen for Fashions; as for the Socinians, Nistorians, Arrians, etc. they
will look like old fashion Dublets: we must have the German Anabaptist, the
Scottish Presbyter, and the English Independent, the Epitomy of Heresy.

But now they stop up this gappe of Iniquity with some pretended spriggs of
Righteousness: Viz. We further desire, That through your Care and Zeal, all
open Acts of Profaneness, as Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness, etc. be
vigorously proceeded against and punished in all Persons whatsoever. But this
they do for their Profit and Recreation, and not out of any godly Principle,
for by this, the increase of the rich men's sins will be the augmentation of the
Saints wealth; and the misdemeanors of the Poor, will be the Recreation of the
rich; so that as heretofore they have prospered by the Devils help, by their
own wickedness, they shall hereafter grow rich by the sins of the People.

Now that they may seem to be as merciful as severe, they Desire that which the
other dare not Deny, and with their accustomed profaneness thus go on, That upon
the sense of this great Mercy lately received from God, your hearts will be
moved to extend your favor so far as may stand with the safety of this present
Government, to those who have formerly served you, etc. Still they reiterate
Monks Lie, the great Victory that the Annals of the Saints boasts of in
IRELAND, and therefore as a Manifestation of their joy, they should set free
the Spirit of Contradiction, Lilburn and his bastards the Levellers, which I
wish they may do, that those Firebrands may burn up all the Blocks and
Loggerheads of the Three Kingdoms: But I believe foolish Jack Presbyter may
wait long enough for this day of Deliverance; for they mean (by those that have
formerly served them) none but the generation of Vipers the Levellers: but
these drops of Mercy end in a shower of Cruelty, for after they have pleaded
for their Brethren in Iniquity, they furiously Demand, That for the future, all
Disturbers of the Public Peace be vigorously proceeded against: This
thundering sentence is like a Pedagogues menaces, you shall be whipped if you do
so any more: But I dare swear, if Jack Lilburn and his Confederates once get
loose, they will not fear to play Truant, and perhaps before Christmas will shut
their Masters out of the School, and vigorously proceed against them, as the
Disturbers of the Public peace: but now (that they may be the better thought
of by the Communalty) they like Public Persons Desire, That speedy
Considerations may be had of those great Oppressions which the people of this
Nation groan under by reason of the Multiplicity of unnecessary Laws, etc. This
were a good Request if Cordial, especially if they would stand to the
performance of it: For first, All those unnecessary waste Papers, Acts and
Ordinances made by this Heretical Parliament, should be Re-called, and then
these Catterpillers of the Kingdom (which be the greatest Oppressors that ever
people groaned under) should be taken away.

But now I come to the Junctoes Answer.

The Officers after the reading of the same, were called in, and Master Speaker
in the Name of the House gave them Thanks, and in particular for the Petition.

They durst not do otherwise: I Will undertake if they had demanded five of the
most innocent in the House to be delivered to them to suffer Condign
punishment, they should have them with all their hearts; and therefore in such
a thing as this is, they must needs consent; for they would if they durst, long
before this, have Voted not only diversity of Religions, but variety of Gods,
and Plurality of Wives.

Thus they combine with Hell to dis-enthrone
The King of Heaven, as they have done their own:
Nor ever will they quiet be, until
With Lucifer, they be flung down to Hell.
FINIS.

